JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA 
GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
VMATY CALE Do 
SHIVON BYAMUKAMA 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of 
Glasgow Caledonian University for the Degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy 
August 2008 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Declaration 
The research for this thesis was conducted at the department of Law in 
the School of Law and Social Sciences at Glasgow Caledonian 
University. 
The thesis has been composed by the candidate and is the independent 
work of the author. No part of this thesis has been submitted for any 
other degree or professional qualification. 
Shivon Byamukama 
S. ByAmUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Abstract 
This thesis considers the transitional justice process that followed the aftermath of the 
1994 Rwanda genocide. Because both the Rwandan Government and the international 
community through the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda opted for prosecution of 
alleged perpetrators responsible for the genocide, this thesis primarily considers this 
prosecution process, its achievements and hardships. 
The thesis considers prosecution of genocide, an international crime in domestic law 
and in particular, the role played by the Gacaca process. It analyses the Gacaca process, what 
it aims to achieve, how it proposes to achieve it and whether it has actually achieved these 
objectives. The Gacaca process particularly aims to disclose the truth of what happened in the 
1994 Rwanda genocide, speed up genocide trials in an inexpensive manner, eradicate the 
culture of impunity and lastly but by all means not least, reconcile and strengthen the 
Rwandan people. 
The Gacaca process seeks to achieve this through modified traditional courts which 
involve the whole population. These trials are held in the very community alleged 
perpetrators, survivors and their judges live. As such, the thesis, through empirical data 
collected for six months in 2006, considers how Gacaca trials impact on the very 
communities in which people live. 
Gacaca's main driving force is its confession process where the accused is given 
tremendously reduced sentences in exchange for a confession. In so doing, the accused 
provides important evidence for the prosecution, but also provides answers to survivors who 
want to know the truth of what happened to their loved ones. Through this process, the 
accused is also expected to make a public apology for the crimes he committed. In exchange 
for a confession, accused persons receive reduced sentences which also help to reduce prison 
population. 
The thesis is built on two major themes: justice and reconciliation. It analyses how 
these interrelated themes interact and, or conflict. Because the Gacaca process aims to 
achieve both objectives, this thesis considers whether these have indeed been achieved 
through transitional justice. 
The research draws on already existing literature on the subject and empirical data 
collected in Rwanda for a six month period between March and August 2006. Interviews 
were held with survivors of genocide, government officials, Gacaca judges and alleged 
perpetrators both in prisons and those living in the communities. In addition, the researcher 
conducted court observations in towns and villages. 
From the research methodology used, this thesis argues that a society going through a 
transition, especially after genocide on a scale like Rwanda's, not only needs to prosecute for 
the crimes committed, but also need to reconcile its people. It is only through justice and 
reconciliation that people can live together again in peaceful and stable communities. It 
concludes that although the Gacaca process has its difficulties, it is the only hope Rwanda has 
to achieve these objectives. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Acknowledgements 
My profound gratitude goes to Glasgow Caledonian University for providing me with 
a scholarship and funding this PhD thesis. 
I am most grateful to Professor John Huntley, initially my first supervisor, for taking a 
keen interest in this thesis and for his generous support, encouragement and advice. No 
amount of words can describe how much I appreciate his supervision, support and guidance. I 
would like to thank Dr Mahdi Zahra, my director of studies for all his support and advice. I 
would also like to thank my third supervisor Professor Hazel Croall for her invaluable 
supervision and advice. They are the best supervision team anyone could ask for. Their 
immense support, patience and generous advice cannot be quantified. 
My gratitude also goes out to Professor Pamela Abbott, who guided me particularly 
through the empirical data collection period. I would also like to thank her for giving me the 
opportunity to live with her and her lovely family when I initially came to Scotland. I will 
forever be grateful. 
I would like to thank everyone who granted my request for interviews. I would in 
particular like to thank Mr. Gerald Nyirimanzi, Uncle Frank Rusagara, Bayizi of African 
Rights and Thomson for their useful discussions. My ever-lasting thanks goes to Rosalind 
Raddatz for the generous time she offered to proof read and edit this thesis. 
Also to be acknowledged are my ftiends, whose support and encouragement meant so 
much to me, every step of the way, particularly Felix Woghiren, Hazel Cameroon Robertson, 
Dr Martha Chatziantoniou, Consolee Mbarushimana, Erica Nziza, Naome Karekaho, Agnes 
Kazaire, Claire Akamanzi, Christine Mutimura, Philippa Mbonye, Hilda and Charles 
Kayamba. Also to be acknowledged are my colleagues in the School of Law and Social 
Sciences, Nancy Lombard, Andrew Paterson, Dr Simon Carr, Dr Michael Smith, Dr Sue 
Morrison, Noreen McGrath and Maria Breslin. 
All my love goes to my mum Mrs Rose Kanyambo Byamukama and sisters; Camilla 
Barungi and Sharon Bamureebe for their support and constant encouragement. 
S. BYAMUKAMA IV 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Map of Rwanda 
ON G0 
UGANDA 
Ruhen, g, ori 
Gil s eny i 
V; k, 
a eyum, a 
KIGALI 
4(3c' 
Gitarama 
, 117 
Ovu CYO-170hic-I L; fjyJ 
Cyaoguqu Uw, 
P- wort) 
B, tare 
BURUNDI 
Kibungo 
[. ql Z, 
4fl km 
hllp: //www. appliedlanguage. com/maps of the world/map of rwanda. shtml (Accessed I Ith August 2008) 
S. BYANfUKAMA v 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Contents Page 
Acknowledgements 
CHAPTER 2: METHODOLOGY 
Preparation for fieldwork 
Alleged Perpetrators 
Alleged Perpetrators Interviewed 
Judges Interviewed 
Officials Interviewed 
S. BYAMUKAMA vi 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Building Rapport 
The Interviews 
CHAPTER 3: TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE 
Introduction 
Impunity 
Lustration 
Selective Prosecution 
Conclusion 
CHAPTER 4: THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND SENTENCING PROCESS 
Introduction 
Defining Reconciliation 
S. BYAMUKAMA Vil 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 5: PROSECUTION OF GENOCIDE AND TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE 
THEORY 
Penalties 
Conclusion 
S. BYAMUKAMA Vill 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Penalties 
Conclusion 
Introduction 
Timetable for trials 
S. BYAMUKAMA ix 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Remorse 
S. BYAMUKAMA x 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Truth 
Forgiveness 
Remorse 
Conclusion 
APPENDIX 2: MAJOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ORGANIC LAW 16/2004 AND 
10/2007 
S. BYAMUKAMA X1 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
"How a society deals with its past has a major determining influence on whether 
that society will achieve long term peace and stability. "I 
The 1994 Rwandan genocide saw approximately one million Tutsi and moderate Hutus 
killed in a space of just 100 days. 2 It was one of the most catastrophic events in human 
history. 3 Not only was this particular community decimated, but a significant portion of the 
population was implicated (to varying degrees) in the perpetration of the genocide. 
Furthermore, the State encouraged and facilitated participation in the killing and destruction 
of the Tutsi as well as those moderate Hutu who refused to participate. 
4 The sheer number of 
casualties and perpetrators place Rwanda in a fortunately rare category - genocide on a vast 
scale carried out with the complicity of the general population. 
The nature of the genocide also marks Rwanda as a 'special case. ' Alleged perpetrators 
were known to their victims as neighbours, fonner colleagues and even relatives. Because the 
people of Rwanda live in the same geographical areas, the 'victim' group continues to live in 
close proximity with the perpetrators of the genocide. Perpetrators butchered their victims 
using readily available tools such as machetes (pangas), spears, sticks, knives and anything 
else that could cause serious bodily harm. Rape, torture, looting and theft were commonplace. 
Sarkin J, "The Tension Between Justice and Reconciliation in Rwanda: Politics, Human Rights, Due Process 
and the Role of the Gacaca Courts in Dealing with the Genocide, " Journal ofAfrican Law, (2001) 143-172,143 
2 Different figures of how many people may have been killed have been advanced. A team of humanitarian 
organisations present in Kigali in May to June 1994 proposed an approximate figure of 500,000-800,000 
people killed. (This is the figure adopted by most western literature. ) The official census by the Rwandan 
government in 2001 suggests 1,074,017 people were killed. SenlUjanga suggests a figure of 1.5 million 
people killed and disputes the Tutsi/Hutu percentages at the time of the genocide. Semujanga, J. Origins of 
Rwandan Genocide (New York: Humanity Books, 2003), 45(hereafter Semujanga 2003). The official 
website of Gacaca courts approximates the number of people victims to be approximately one million, a 
figure I adopt for purposes of this research. See www. iiikiko-(-, acaca. (-, ov. nv (Accessed 6 th July 2008) 
3 Daly E, "Between Punitive and Reconstructive Justice: The Gacaca Courts in Rwanda, " Journal of 
International law and Politics, (2002) 355 
4 "The killings would never have claimed so many lives if the killers had not opted a strategy to involve as 
much of the population as possible, men, women and even children as young as eight. "Daly 363, quoting 
African Rights, Rwanda not so Innocent: When Women Become Killers (Kigali: African Rights, 1995), 3 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The genocide led to the collapse of the existing order and hence an urgent need for 
transitional arrangements. 5 This thesis analyses this transitional period and the mechanisms 
adopted to deal with the aftermath of the genocide. 
6 It is precisely through transitional justice 
that states emerging from conflict are able to move from a violent past to a democratic 
present that respects the rule of law. 
7 Rwanda opted to prosecute the crime of genocide using 
modified and specialised chambers of the existing domestic criminal courts, international 
tribunals such as The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, 
8 and modified traditional 
Gacaca courts. 9 
The thesis analyses these methods of prosecution, particularly the Gacaca process 
primarily as an element of transitional justice. Any attempt at transitional justice must address 
Rwanda's historical past, while making way for a peaceful future. The International 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocidelo places an 
obligation on member states to prosecute the crime of genocide of which Rwanda is a 
member. After the genocide, the International Community responded through the United 
Nations Security Council under Chapter VII of the UN Charter by establishing the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in Arusha, Tanzania. " So far, the 
tribunal has prosecuted 35 cases and has greatly contributed to the development of 
International Criminal Law. 12 
' See Chapters three and five 
6 Chapter three 
' Ibid 
8 "The decision to establish the Tribunal was made in response to a request by the government of Rwanda. " 
Erasmus Gerhard and Fourie, Nadine, "The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda: Are all Issues 
Addressed? How does it Compare to South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission?, International 
Review of the Red Cross, 321, (1997) 705-715 Available at 
littp: //www. icrc. or4/web/eng/siteen,, O. n, sf/htnil/57JN/-"`9 (Accessed 14 th July 2008) 
9 See meaning of Gacaca, Chapter six 
10 Hereafter, The Geneva Convention 
11 Warbrick C, "Referring an Indictment from the ICTY and ICTR to Another Court- Rule II bis and the 
Consequences for the Law of Extradition", International and Comparative Law Quarterly, 1 (2006), 219- 
226,219 
Chapter three 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
In keeping with its international obligation under the Geneva Convention, Rwanda 
insisted on holding all alleged perpetrators of the genocide accountable for their crimes. 13 
Nevertheless, it was clear from the beginning that effectively prosecuting so many cases 
would be difficult for a developing country with limited resources. These difficulties were 
confinned from the outset when the Government of Rwanda began to arrest and prosecute 
alleged perpetrators. 14 Although the criminal justice system had been adapted by establishing 
new specialised chambers of existing courts, separating the pnmary organisers of the 
genocide from the implementers, and encouraging accused persons to confess in exchange for 
tremendously reduced sentences, the number of trials in the first seven years indicated that it 
would take over 100 years to prosecute prisoners alone if Rwanda maintained the status 
Once it became apparent that both the national courts in Rwanda and the ICTR were 
failing to cope with these numbers, alternative measures had to be established and Gacaca 
courts were introduced. The Gacaca court system was therefore an alternative to the failing 
criminal justice system. The Rwandan Gacaca process is a fonn of transitional justice that 
aims to prosecute all alleged perpetrators through traditional courts. Although Gacaca courts 
existed in pre-colonial times, post-genocide courts were modified to deal with Rwanda's 
current requirements. Most notably, Rwanda seeks to prosecute all alleged perpetrators of 
international law crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity, in a speedy and cost- 
effective manner. 
The process is aimed at providing both justice and reconciliation for the people of 
Rwanda. 16 Although Gacaca courts are generally categorised as restorative in nature, 
13 Sarkin 143 
14 Chapter five 
15 lbid 
16 w", w. inkiko-. gacaca. gov. rw (accessed 6 th July 2008) 
S. BYAMUK"A 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
contemporary Gacaca courts also include both retributive and restorative elements in line 
with their newly acquired functions. According to the Official Gacaca website, the Gacaca 
process aims to disclose the truth of what happened in the 1994 Rwanda genocide and speed 
up the pace of genocide trials, while keeping them low-cost, which is consistent with the 
country's economic situation. Additionally, Gacaca's goals are to eradicate the culture of 
impunity which was greatly entrenched in Rwandan society and finally reconcile and 
strengthen the Rwandan people as a whole. 17 The objective of this thesis is to examine these 
claims within the context of transitional justice. 
Rwanda's Gaeaca is primarily based on a confession process and the categorisation of 
offences. Using these means, the accused are expected to confess to the crimes committed in 
exchange for tremendously reduced sentences. Furthermore, the confession process is a 
mechanism through which the accused perpetrators and the survivors of genocide are 
expected to reconcile and live together in peace. Because the Gacaca process aims to achieve 
its objectives of justice and reconciliation through the confession process, this thesis 
investigates the confession process while considering both ordinary criminal justice and 
through transitional justice; - Gacaca. 
Nevertheless, the Gacaca process comes with a few caveats and compromises which are 
explored herein. For instance, there is a conflict between some elements of restorative and 
retributive justice elements yet the Gacaca process is based on a combination of both. While 
Gacaca aims to reconcile people through remorse and forgiveness, the empirical data 
suggests that making requests for forgiveness a legal requirement to obtain reduced sentences 
makes survivors question the genuineness of such apologies, thereby reducing chances of 
reconciliation between parties. Secondly meeting fair trial standards is difficult, because 
adhering to one standard might compromise the other. One key example is that of the need 
17 www. inkiko-. gacaca. Rov. rw (accessed 3d July 2008) Also see Preamble of Organic Law, 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 4 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
for legal representation; the Gacaca process does not provide accused perpetrators with legal 
counsel. However, proponents of the process measure the inability to provide legal 
representation against the adage that 'justice delayed is justice denied. ' In addition to these 
challenges, the empirical data addresses the difficulties encountered by the Gacaca process in 
meeting its stated objectives. 
A BRIEF BACKGROUND TO THE GENOCIDE IN RWANDA 
The Rwandan genocide officially began on the 6th April 1994 when the plane 
carrying Rwandan President Juv6nal Habyarimana, and Cyprien Ntaryamira, the president of 
Burundi, was shot down killing both statesmen instantly. The responsibility of who shot 
down the presidential plane remains a complex, controversial and sensitive issue and has not 
been resolved. What is patently clear is that the shooting of the plane signified the start of one 
of the most brutal and 'effectively' planned and implemented genocides in history. What 
caused the genocide and why so many ordinary citizens with no previous criminal record 
took part in the genocide is a subject that has been exhaustively discussed by a significant 
number of researchers, and as such does not form a significant part of this thesis. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
In summary, the conflict in Rwanda is essentially one of identity, 
' 8 and economic 
ownership creating tensions that were exacerbated by colonial rule. 
19 Economic and 
demographic factors also exacerbated the post-colonial Hutu/Tutsi divide. 
18 Although they share a common language (Kinyarwanda) and culture, inhabit the same geographical areas and 
all belong to one of eighteen clans, they are essentially divided into Hutu, Tutsi or Twa. See generally 
Magnarella, P. J, Justice in Africa: Rwanda's Genocide, its Courts, and the UN Criminal Tribunal. 
(Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000), 2 (hereafter Magnarella (2000) 
Rwandans have strong personal identification with one of the three groupings, the origins of which lie, at 
least in part in the caste, or class system based on economic power that, although relatively fluid resulted in a 
political and economic system where the Tutsi held power. Semujanga (2003) 88; Shyaka, A. The Rwandan 
Conflict, Origin, Development, Exit Strategies, by the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, 
(Kigali: Select Graph Publishers, 2005) 9 (hereafter Shyaka 2005). These political and economic differences 
were discernible in the pre-colonial administration, most particularly and controversially in the feudal 
relationships of ubuhake and ubukonde. Portier, J. Re-Imagining Rwanda, Conflict, Survival and 
Disinformation in the Late 20th Century, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002) 13 (hereafter 
Pottier (2002). The ultimate expression of the Hutu/Tutsi divide was the hereditary Tutsi monarchy that 
survived into the 1950s. Yet, despite this 'segregated' structure, social order and cohesion appears to have 
been maintained through a triple chieftaincy in which Tutsi and Hutu were involved. This was equally true 
of the settlement of disputes. The Hutu/Tutsi divide became institutionally entrenched when during 1933-34 
the Belgians conducted a census and introduced an identity card system that indicated the Tutsi, Hutu, and 
Twa 'ethnicity' of each individual. Sellstrom, T. and Wohlgemuth, L. 'International Response to Conflict 
and Genocide, Lessons from the Rwandan Experience, Historical Perspective', Journal of Humanitarian 
Assistance, Study 1: Historical Perspective: Some Explanatory Facts, Steering committee of the Joint 
Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda, (1996), 27. Ownership of cows was the main criterion used 
to determine to which group an individual belonged. The census determined that 85% of the population were 
Hutu, 14% Tutsi and 1% Twa. Magnarella (2000), 11. The identity cards issued on the basis of that census 
firmly attached a sub-national identity to all Rwandans. These identity cards in the 1994 genocide had the 
unfortunate role of identifying who had a right to life and who did not. Shyaka disputes these figures as "not 
on the basis of adequately collected and periodically updated numerical data, but rather a repetition of the 
representation of the colonial view... " Shyaka (2005), 12. Semujanga suggests that no official ethnic 
proportions were ever given by the different censuses since 1978 and that the official statistics of the Tutsi 
was always estimated at 10% when the reality it was about 20%. "If the official proportion of Tutsi had not 
been higher than what the official discourse said, the exact figures would have been given, since 
discrimination against them had been practiced during the First and Second Republics. " Semujanga (2003) 
45. He further suggests that Rwanda's population had been inflated to 7.5 million in 1990 when according to 
all logic it was about 6 million. He explains that Rwanda and Burundi's population in 1950's was estimated 
to be 3 million. In 1978 (Rwanda) and 1979 (Burundi), the population was estimated at 4.5 million each. The 
two countries had the same demographic rate and that by 1990, Burundi's population was estimated at 5.8 
million people. It is difficult to see how from 1978 to 1990, Rwanda's population had exceeded that of 
Burundi by 2 million. Ibid. Fletcher however suggests that Rwanda's rural population skyrocketed between 
1950 and 1990 from around two million to eight million. Luke Fletcher, "Turning Interahamwe: Individual 
and Community Choices in the Rwandan Genocide", Journal qf Genocide Research, 9(l) (2007), 25-48,27 
S. BYAMUKAA4A 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
A landlocked country in East Africa 20 Rwanda is one of the smallest countries in 
Africa. Its area measures about 26,388 square kilometres, 
21 a size comparative to that of 
Belgium, its former colonial ruler. 22 With a population of approximately 9 million people, or 
about 337 people per square kilometre, it is also one of the most densely populated countries 
in Affica. 23 Land shortages and disputes arising from straightforward population pressure 
rather than from a complex political economy 
24 were undoubtedly factors in the genocide. 
Population constraints were exacerbated by the collapse of commodity prices in the late 
1980's and early 1990s. 26 Rising unemployment, poverty and land shortages caused unrest 
among people desperate for solutions . 
27 The concurrent invasion by the Rwanda Patriotic 
'9 Following the Anglo-German treaty of 1890, Germany was given present day Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania 
as colonies. The League of Nations in 1924 mandated Rwanda and Burundi to Belgium. Gasana, 
Comprehending and Mastering African Conflicts: The Search for Sustainable Peace and Good Governance 
(Great Britain: Zed Books, 1999), 146. Both the Germans and Belgians relied on the monarchy to administer 
their colony but such reliance exacerbated divisions. Magnarella (2000), 10. The Belgians' reliance on 
forced labor and inhuman punishment in their drive for profit similarly increased Hutu/Tutsi tensions. The 
colonizers, preoccupied by 19'h century anthropological attitudes to race favored the Tutsi over the Hutu, 
and inevitably replaced Hutu chiefs with Tutsi. Sellstrom (1996), 27. Admission to schools was strictly 
reserved for the Tutsi, inevitably increasing Hutu/Tutsi tension. 'Sixty years of such prejudicial 
fabrications 
ended up inflating the Tutsi cultural ego inordinately and crushing Hum feelings until they coalesced 
into an 
aggressively resentful inferiority complex. ' Magnarella (2000), 10. 
20 Rwanda only joined the East African Community in July 2007 but was previously part of Central Africa. Tim 
Cocks, 'Burundi, Rwanda, sign East African Community Deal', Mail and Guardian Online, (Kampala, 18 
June 2007) 
21 Prunier, Gerald, The Rwanda Crisis 1959-1994, History of a Genocide, (Kampala: Fountain Publishers, 
1995) 2 
22 Country Brief, Journal of Humanitarian Assistance, Available at 
http: //www. reliefweb. int., "Iibraiy/nordic/bookl/pbO2Oc. html (accessed 20th June 2008) 
23 Country Brief. History, http: //web. worldbank. orR (accessed 20'h June 2008). A number of authors have 
suggested that the density population was due to the fact Rwanda was not affected by the European and Arab 
slave trade due to its strong military structures and its highland landscape which shielded it from 
hostile 
intruders in the 19th Century. Prunier, G. The Rwanda Crisis 1959-1994. - History of a Genocide, (Kampala: 
Fountain Publishers, 1995) 2 Other authors, particularly African authors such as Semujanga (2003), have 
argued that the fact that Rwanda was not affected by slave trade indicates that there were no hatred ethnic 
divisions in Rwanda and that these divisions were introduced or at least exacerbated by colonial rule. 
24 Portier (2002), 10, Luke Fletcher, "Turning Interahamwe: Individual and Community Choices in the Rwandan 
Genocide", Journal of Genocide Research, 9(l) (2007), 254827, also see generally, Laurel Rose, "Land and 
Genocide: Exploring the Connection with Rwanda's Prisoners and Prison Officials", Journal of Genocide 
Research, 9(l) 2007,49-69 
25 'The decision to kill was of course made by the politicians for political reasons. But at least part of the reason 
it was carried out so thoroughly by the ordinary ranks and file peasants... was the feeling that there were too 
many people on too little land, and that with a few less, there would be more for survivors. ' Prunier (1995), 
4. and Magnarella (2000), 24. 
26 Magnarella (2000), 25. 
27 'It is not rare, even today, to hear Rwandans argue that a war is necessary to wipe out an excess of population 
to bring numbers into line with the available resources. ' Magnarella (2000), 24. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Front (RPF) against government forces resulted in the widespread massacre and torture of 
Tutsi living in Rwanda. 28 
The 1994 Rwandan genocide was not the first genocide in Rwanda. A Hutu mass 
revolt toppled the Tutsi monarchy in 1959 and resulted in bloody ethnic clashes. 29 In 1960, 
the colonial administration replaced Tutsi chiefs with Hutus. Full independence made the 
position of the Tutsi even more precarious. The 1960 general election was followed 
immediately by hostile campaigns against the Tutsi. By 1963, thousands of Tutsi had been 
massacred and about 130,000 had fled to neighbouring countries. 30 Persecution of the Tutsi 
recurred in 1973 and 1990-1993.31 In the aftennath of each of these atrocities, little was done 
to prosecute perpetrators and instigators. A pattern of impunity had commenced in colonial 
Rwanda and was continued in post-colonial Rwanda, which, coupled with a culture of 
obedience, facilitated participation in the genocide. Political leaders seeking to consolidate 
their power manipulated citizens to kill a portion of the population that they were mandated 
to protect. In the words of Lemarchand, one of the leading authorities on the history of 
Rwanda and Burundi, 
The recent history of Rwanda is punctuated by countless examples of 
bloodshed and violence ... the scale and method 
by which [it] was 
perpetrated suggest that it can only be regarded as an extreme 
example of pathological behaviour, as the blinding reaction of people 
traurnatised by a deep and lasting sense of inferiority. 32 
With such a history, it is not difficult to understand why the Rwandan govermnent sought to 
put this violent past behind them and hold accountable all those who committed crimes of 
genocide so as to make it a completely unacceptable crime. 
28 In Gisenyi province alone, at least 348 people were killed and 550 houses burned in 48 hours. At least 248 
people were accused and arrested, but released in less than one month. Melvern (2004), Conspiracy to 
Murder (New York: Zed Books, hereafter Melvern (2004). 
29 Approximately 2,000 Tutsi were killed and thousands more fled to neighbouring countries. It is believed that 
over 25,000 refugees set up camps in Uganda. Melvern (2004), 15. 
30 The World Council of Churches estimated deaths between 10,000- 14,000 people: Melvern (2004), 9. 
31 Melvern (2004), 15. 
32 Lemarchand, R. (1970) Rwanda and Burundi, (London: Praeger), 44. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 8 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
AimS AND OBJECTIVES 
The aim of the thesis is to analyse the Gacaca process, not simply as a criminal justice 
process that prosecutes international law crimes in a domestic context, and not only as a 
traditional justice mechanism that alms to reconcile parties to the conflict, but also as 
domestic legal system within the wider concept of transitional justice. The thesis therefore 
examines the objectives of the Gacaca process, notably the aims of reconciliation and 
impunity and whether it meets these objectives. The thesis also analyses the effectiveness of 
the Gacaca process as an avenue of transitional justice through which mass atrocities can be 
addressed. Never before, has a state in transition opted to prosecute all those who committed 
grave human rights abuses. As a result, I explore whether the Gacaca process feasibly acts 
towards breaking this culture of impunity. 
in analysing the new possibilities for prosecution of mass violence, this thesis aims to 
undertake a closer examination of the Gacaca process, the theories on which it is based and 
ultimately answer the question: Is the Gacaca court process fit for purpose? 
IMPORTANCE OF RESEARCH AND REASONS FOR CHOOSING IT 
There is a need for academic research that focuses on the prosecution of large 
numbers of persons who stand accused of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. 
In the aftermath of grave human rights abuses, many states in transition have opted to ignore 
the actions and responsibility of perpetrators, while others have provided amnesty to 
individuals who perpetrated crimes. 
33 Proponents of a laissez-faire strategy and of amnesty 
claim that these are practical and necessary means to ensure the reconciliation of people. 
Other nations have opted for selective prosecutions, while others have opted for truth and 
reconciliation commissions or a combination of these. Overall, most states shy away from 
33 See Chapter 3 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
prosecuting large numbers of individuals, accused of grave serious crimes, claiming that 
"some middle ground must be found in the interests of reconciliation and closure. -34 Yet it is 
precisely through the prosecution of perpetrators that impunity can be stopped. Additionally, 
transitional justice recognises the need for effective justice to take place, in order to make 
way for reconciliation. This study shows that when there is a collective political will to 
address human rights abuses and genocide, widespread prosecutions are not only possible, 
they are desirable. 
Although there is extensive literature on restorative justice, retributive justice as well 
as reconciliation, this thesis offers an in-depth analysis of empirical data that tests these 
theories in practice. The research analysis in Chapter seven evaluates a number of Gacaca 
court cases and their perceived effects on justice and reconciliation. Because the Gacaca 
process does not operate in a vacuum, but within real communities, the thesis analyses 
whether and how the dynamics of a community shift as a result of Gacaca. The strength of 
this thesis lies in this contextualisation of the prosecution of genocide. 
The study also recognises the importance and use of traditional justice systems to deal 
with crimes and crime prevention in society. The research encourages further debate on the 
potential of traditional courts to deal with crime, including international crimes. With the goal 
of deterring further violence and promoting reconciliation, the thesis suggests that the 
preferred judicial scenario for post-conflict states is to have international tribunals contend 
with the prosecution of the leaders and 'masterminds' of international crimes, while allowing 
domestic courts to prosecute a further number of cases, and pursue the option of using 
traditional courts to prosecute the 'rank and file' implementers of such crimes. 
34 Schabas, William. "Gacaca Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal of International Criminal Justice 3, (2005), 
879-895,882 
S. BYAMUKAMA 10 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
This research is particularly important to me; partly because I am a Rwandan 
National, but also because I believe that through assessing Rwanda's past and its collective 
actions following the 1994 genocide, future genocides may be avoided. Although precedent 
shows that the (few) masterminds of crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide can be 
prosecuted, until now, it has not been possible to hold the many who implement such heinous 
crimes individually responsible for their actions. For the first time, through the Gacaca courts, 
this is possible. This study of the Gacaca process provides a precedent for holding large 
numbers of persons individually responsible for international law crimes. Never again can a 
Government incite a large number of people to commit atrocities, such as genocide, with the 
hope that the numbers are simply too many to hold each of them individually accountable. 
And never again will people be so naYve as to expect impunity after committing such crimes. 
Although this study highlights the difficulties faced by the Gacaca process in 
achieving its stated objectives, it offers an important starting point that other systems can 
adapt and improve on, with the shared goal of eliminating a culture of impunity. It is through 
initiatives such as these that NEVER AGAIN can be made a reality. 
CONTRIBUTION To KNOWLEDGE 
The thesis draws on the Rwandan experience to provide an in-depth analysis of how 
the Gacaca process proposes to hold accountable all the alleged perpetrators responsible for 
the 1994 Rwandan genocide. The study was conducted at a time when the Gacaca courts 
were ongoing. The researcher observed how evidence was gathered and how the trials were 
conducted. She also interviewed all the key players in this process. As such, this thesis 
provides new insight into the practice of Gacaca courts. It also provides a fresh assessment of 
how transitional societies such as Rwanda use existing traditional courts to deal with 
international crimes drawing from existing theories of restorative and retributive justice. The 
S. BYAMUKAMA II 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
success of such a mechanism can only be explored through the kind of empirical data detailed 
in Chapter seven. 
SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS 
It is important to understand the history of Rwanda and the causes of the genocide so 
as to establish a context for the prosecution of crimes of genocide. Therefore a review of 
available literature on the history of the Rwandan genocide is used. History shows that the 
1994 Rwandan genocide was not the first of its kind in Rwanda, but that there had been 
previous genocides that went unrecognised and unpunished. This explains the magnitude of 
the problem at hand, and the deep-rooted culture of impunity that has existed in Rwanda 
since colonial times. Rwanda's choice to prosecute all alleged perpetrators was based, at least 
in part, on the need to break this culture of impunity. 
Although the researcher carried out extensive research on the history of Rwanda, 
within the thesis, she uses it purely for analytical purposes, and does not make a lot of 
reference to it. This is due to the thematic constraints of the thesis, which concentrates on the 
prosecution of genocide and does not directly address why it took place. However, she has 
previously published on this topic 35 and there is a great deal of literature available on the 
history of Rwanda and the Rwandan genocide. 36 The researcher in chapter two discusses the 
research methods used and justification for their use. 
35 Byamukama Shivon and John A. Kapranos Huntley, "Criminal Justice in the Aftermath of the 1994 Rwanda 
Genocide, " The Criminal Law of Genocide: International, Comparative and Contextual Aspects, edited by 
Ralph Henham and Paul Behrens, (London: Ashgate, 2007) 
36 Such as: Prunier, Gerald, The Rwanda Crisis 1959-1994, History of Genocide, (Kampala: Kampala 
Publishers, 1995), Pottier Johan, Re-Imagining Rwanda, Conflict, Survival and Disinformation in the 20'h 
Century, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2002), Hatzfelf Jean, Into the Quick of Life: The 
Rwandan Genocide: The Survivors Speak, (Paris: 2000), Melvern Linda, A People Betrayed, The Role of the 
West in Rwanda's Genocide, (London: Zed Books, 2000), Melvern Linda, Conspiracy to Murder, The 
Rwandan Genocide, (London: Zed books, 2004), Des Liebhafsky Forges, Leave None to Tell the Story: 
Genocide in Rwanda, (London: Human Rights Watch 
1999), Luke Fletcher, "Turning Interahamwe: 
Individual and Community Choices in the Rwandan Genocide", Journal of Genocide Research, 9(l) (2007), 
25-48 
S. BYAMUKAMA 12 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The thesis also considers literature on transitional justice, as this the theoretical 
underpinning on which the Gacaca process is based. Societies emerging from oppressive 
regimes undergo a period of transition with the hope of eradicating abusive systems. 
Transitional justice theory suggests that states in transition may adopt methods such as truth 
and reconciliation commissions, impunity, lustration and prosecutions (whether selective or 
otherwise) in dealing with past human rights abuses. The attractiveness of transitional justice 
is that the state in transition chooses the method it deems is required to create sustainable 
national peace and to develop some form of reconciliation between former enemies. This is 
precisely the objective of Gacaca courts. 
Rwanda chose to prosecute all persons responsible for the crime of genocide. Because 
Gacaca is a criminal justice system that aims at prosecuting the accused as well as at 
reconciliation, the theories of retributive and restorative justice will also be discussed. 
Furthen-nore, since they fonn part of the underlying concepts of the Gacaca process, elements 
of reconciliation are also analysed. For these reasons, I devote the entirety of chapter four to 
the analysis of criminal justice systems in other jurisdictions, as well as the theories of 
justice. 
Chapters five and six discuss the specific context in which the Gacaca courts operate. 
Chapter five discusses the prosecution of genocide by the national courts in Rwanda in the 
immediate aftermath of the genocide and the failures of the pure criminal justice system, as 
was the experience in Rwanda. Chapter six provides an in-depth analysis of the history of the 
Gacaca process and how it operates. It specifically deals with the Gacaca legislation, how this 
has evolved over the years and the impact of such evolution to the Gacaca process. 
37 Fenwick Mark, "Dilemmas of Transitional Justice, Criminal Prosecutions or Truth Commissions? " The 
Seinan Law Review, Vol. 35, No 3.4 (2003), 2 (hereafter Mark Fenwick, Dilemmas of Transitional Justice 
(2003) Available at: ht2: //www. scinanvu. ac. jp/jura/hoineO4/pdf`/3503.1'3503markfpd (accessed 6th July 
2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 13 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
An examination of the theory behind Gacaca makes way for the analysis of Gacaca 
courts in practice in chapter seven. In order to thoroughly examine the benefits and 
challenges of Gacaca, it was necessary to observe the Gacaca court process first-hand, and 
talk to the people affected by the Gacaca process. In so doing, the thesis considers people's 
perception of the process, how the process affects their everyday life, and most importantly, 
whether the Gacaca process achieves its objectives. By the end of this thesis, the reader 
should be able to deem whether the Gacaca process is fit for its purpose, whether it advances 
our knowledge of dealing with mass atrocities and whether other jurisdictions can learn 
anything from it. The thesis concludes with a series of recommendations to improve the 
operation and effectiveness of Gacaca courts. 
Because of time pressures and the specific objectives of this study, the research was 
unable to cover many interesting areas deserving of further research. For instance, although 
there has been extensive research on what caused the genocide in Rwanda, there has not been 
sufficient investigation (academic or otherwise) into who shot down the presidential plane on 
the 6 th of April 1994. This action is cited as being the spark to the genocide. The crimes 
committed by the Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA) at the time of the genocide have not been 
fully explored. Although it has been acknowledged that some officials of the RPA 
participated in 'acts of revenge', the extent of this has not been explored. Up until the 
submission of this thesis, only four senior army officers have been indicted for their criminal 
S. BYAMUKAMA 14 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
acts. 38 Crimes committed by the French government and its an-ned forces also need further 
investigation. 39 
The research also does not give special attention to the place of children and women 
during and after the genocide. This includes the women and children who participated in the 
genocide, how they were integrated back in the communities and the role they now play. This 
also includes survivors, widows (Tutsi or Hutu) of the genocide and children orphaned by the 
genocide. 
Although the research deals with community service as an alternative to incarceration, 
this is a subject that needs further investigation. There are a number of rehabilitation 
programmes run by the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, particularly in 
relation to reintegration of offenders back in the community that need further research. 
Although the research generally explains the compensation process adopted in 
Rwanda, further research in this area is necessary. The research discusses reparation to 
victims by alleged perpetrators on an individual level and also group reparation to the 
community or the country as provided by legislation. A deeper analysis of these processes is 
necessary, more so in transitional societies where compensation is made to a group of victims 
rather than on a case-by-case basis. 
38 Four senior Rwanda Patriotic Front RPF (ruling party) officers including one Brigadier General, one Major 
and two Captains were on the II th June 2008 arrested on the basis of command responsibility in connection 
to the death of 13 clergymen in Kabgayi diocese on the 5 th June 1994. The suspects who joined the RPF 
from within Rwanda arrived to find all members of their families who had taken refuge in Kabgayi had been 
killed and consequently "vented their anger on the clergymen7' New Times (The only English newspaper in 
Rwanda) 12 th June 2008, (Accessed 12th June 2008) 
39 Although the Rwandan Government has investigated these crimes through a commission, there has not been 
sufficient academic debate to this end. During the empirical research, 2 survivors of genocide said they were 
raped by French soldiers stationed at Cyangugu Stadium and one alleged perpetrator told me he had killed 
one girl in front of French soldiers when the soldiers who had raped the girl refused to give him tinned food 
as was agreed. These are allegations worthy of further investigation. Interviews conducted on the I" July 
2006 and 27 th June 2006 respectively. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 15 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 2: METHODOLOGY 
This chapter discusses the nature and justification of the research methodology used 
in conducting this research. The research primarily concentrates on the prosecution of 
genocide for the majority of alleged perpetrators who implemented the genocide. 40 Rwanda 
suggests that prosecution of this large number of accused persons is necessary to not only rid 
Rwanda of its culture of impunity but also provides ground for reconciliation. Rwanda's 
Gacaca process is a transitional justice process which endeavours to deal with the crime of 
genocide. This chapter explains the circumstances In which the Gacaca process operates, how 
the research was conducted, and justifies the methodology used. Interviewing alleged 
perpetrators and survivors of genocide inevitably requires dealing with sensitive issues and as 
such, raises a number of ethical issues which have been identified and carefully considered in 
the ethics section below. 
JUSTIFICATION AND LIMITATIONS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW 
Although this thesis is socio-legal in its approach, its structure is predominantly legal. 
This was influenced by the researcher's legal background and because Gacaca is essentially a 
legal process. This also inforins her decision to integrate current literature in the chapters 
leading up to chapter seven, instead of dedicating one single chapter to a literature review. 
The literature references forming chapters three through six are comprised of books, 
scholarly articles, case law, statutes, and annual reports of international non-governmental 
organisations, including Avocats Sans Frontires-Belgium ASF, Amnesty International, 
Human Rights Watch, and Penal Reform International who annually review the Gacaca 
40 Statistics from the National Service of the Gacaca indicate that 818,564 alleged perpetrators have been 
categorised. Of these, 77,269 were placed in Category one (prosecuted by the ordinary criminal trials in 
Rwanda), 432,557 in category two and 308,738 in category three (both categorises prosecuted by Gacaca 
courts). Parliament is discussing whether accused persons m category one can also be prosecuted by the 
Gacaca courts. www. inkiko-Gacaca. gov. (accessed 6' July 2008) The Gacaca courts have for example 
started prosecuting persons accused of rape. Chapter 6. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 16 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Process. 41 The researcher also used Rwandan press releases and newspaper articles as well as 
news materials from other international sources. She widely consulted the available Gacaca 
Organic laws from 1996 to 2007 as well as the Rwanda Code of Criminal Procedure and the 
Rwandan Constitution. In addition the thesis adopts a standard library research approach 
where databases such as west law, lexix nexis and material from the World Wide Web were 
used. She also referred to websites of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the 
International Criminal Court, The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 
ASF and the Gacaca websites which provide a wealth of infortriation. 
The thesis has also been guided by the various conferences the researcher has 
attended and presented at over the years, notably the International Conference on Genocide at 
Nottingham Trent University (September 2005), the conference hosted by the Social legal 
studies Association in Kent (April 2007), and most particularly, the bi-annual conference of 
the International Association of Genocide Scholars, in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina (July 
2007). 
Much of the literature on Rwanda, particularly works published prior to the genocide, 
was written in French. Although the researcher has very limited knowledge of French, her 
fluency in both English and the local language (Kinyarwanda) enabled her to deal with this 
set back. Rwanda became a tri-lingual nation with three official languages; English, French 
and Kinyarwanda only after the genocide. All official documentations are translated in the 
three languages. Although some documents, particularly those written in the late 1990's were 
poorly translated, the essential material could still be grasped . 
42 This was even easier for a 
native speaker who easily understood these translations. Further still, in the rare occasions 
where the researcher could not access translated scripts, particularly those written prior to the 
41 See Bibliography 
42 For example Report Of The Reflection Meetings Held By The Office Of The Office Of The President Of The 
Republic From May 1998- March 1999 
S. BYAMUKAMA 17 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
genocide, she was able to have unofficial translations made by colleagues. In addition, some 
reports are published in both English and French, including materials by the Penal Reform 
International (PRI). Althougjl PRI is not an academic organisation per se, but rather a non- 
governmental organisation that supports the understanding of Gacaca courts, their use of both 
French and English literature, and more importantly, their ability to verify secondary data 
with fieldwork investigated by Rwandan natives that understand the context in which the 
Gacaca courts operate gives their research great credibility. Nevertheless, despite the 
linguistic limitations, there has been sufficient literature written in English to provide a strong 
background to the thesis. Additionally, the researcher's ability to speak Kinyarwanda has 
allowed her first-hand access to people and infonnation that would have been nearly 
impossible for non-speakers. Everybody the researcher interviewed in Rwanda, whether 
Anglophone or Francophone spoke Kinyarwanda. As such, the research did not suffer in this 
respect. 
At the start of the doctoral studies, the researcher primarily considered literature on 
the history of genocide, particularly the causes of the genocide and the events leading up to 
the genocide. As a Rwandan, who was only beginning to understand her history and heritage, 
she found this mass of information overwhelming and sometimes emotionally challenging. 
As she gained more experience as a researcher, these sentiments lessened greatly. Moreover, 
she concretised the goal of the thesis to address the prosecution of genocide crimes and not 
write on its history. Instead, the thesis developed to inform part of the criminal law process in 
the context of transitional justice. 
PREPARATION FOR FIELDWORK 
As part of the MPhil/PhD programme, the researcher trained in legal research 
methods, qualitative research methods and studied the Statistical Package for Social Sciences 
S. BYAMUKAMA 18 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
(SPSS) for quantitative research. These provided her with the methodological knowledge and 
necessary skills to carry out this research. 
After careful consideration of the nature of the research to be conducted, the 
researcher opted for qualitative rather than quantitative research methods. The research is 
primarily based on understanding people's perceptions of the Gacaca process, and as such 
qualitative methodology was deemed appropriate. Bryman suggests that qualitative research 
concerns itself with understanding and interpreting people's views and their particular 
circumstances. 43 Qualitative interviewing involves the construction or reconstruction of 
knowledge. 44 
The basis of this research is to understand people's perception of the Gacaca process 
and its impact on their lives. What did they understand reconciliation to entail? Did they think 
that reconciliation was taking place? Did they feel that justice was done? These questions can 
only be answered by placing emphasis on the interviewee's point of view, which gives an 
insight into what the interviewee sees as relevant and important. 
45 This is even more 
important because the research was aimed at understanding peoples' experiences of the 
Gacaca process, which promotes intellectual understanding of the process and the people 
involved. 46 Bearing in mind that knowledge is situational and contextual, qualitative 
interviewing allows interviewees to relate to their experiences, their reasoning and 
judgements by focusing on events and situations in their lives. This is mainly because 
43 Alan Bryman, Social Research Methods, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000) 264 
44 Kathleen Gerson and Ruth Horowitz, "Observation and Interviewing: Options and Choices in Qualitative 
Research", in Tim May, Qualitative Research in Action, (London, Sage Publications, 2002)199; also see 
Jennifer Mason, Quantitative Research, (London: SAGE Publications, 2 nd edition, 2002) 62, and Kvale S 
Interviews: An Introduction to Qualitative Interviewing. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publication, 1996), 3 
45 Alan Bryman, 312, 
46 Kvale, S, 3 
S. BYAMUKAMA 19 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
qualitative interviewing is not only concerned with the facts, or events, but also with the way 
people construct, interpret and give meaning to their experiences. 
The Gaeaca process can be understood best in the context in which it operates. Mason 
suggests that the interviewer must ensure that the relevant contexts are brought into focus. 
She further suggests that meaning and understanding are created in an interaction, which is 
effectively a co-production involving researcher and interviewees . 
49 "Field research involves 
the researcher in a relationship with those who are studied; it is a social process in which a 
researcher plays a major part. , 50 Researching post-genocide Rwanda and making sense of 
both the prosecution of genocide offences and how people are dealing with the afterinath of 
the genocide means that people's knowledge, views, understanding, interpretations, 
experiences and interactions are integral to the research. 51 
As a result, the researcher decided that using a questionnaire comprised of a fixed set 
of questions was inappropriate for this kind of research. Not only would it be impossible to 
ascertain people's perceptions of the process, but it would also be insensitive and simply 
inappropriate in Rwanda's context. Considering the tragic experiences of genocide survivors, 
the researcher believes it insensitive to interview people who lost relatives or who are still 
struggling to understand their responsibility in the genocide by the use of a set questionnaire. 
These individuals need to explain their feelings, what they are going through, and develop 
their own interpretation of what is going on around them. Bryman suggests that semi- 
structured interviews allow 'rambling' which allows us to have an insight into what an 
interviewee sees as important and relevant. 52 A formal questionnaire would deny them the 
47 Gerson Kathleen and Ruth Horowitz, 199 
48 Mason Jennifer, Qualitative Research, 62 
49 Mason, 62 
50 Burgees, G. Robert, Field Research: A Sourcebook and Field Manual: Approaches to Field Research, 
Contemporary Social Research, (London: George Allen& Unwin, 1982) 4,9 
51 Mason, 63 
52 Alan Bryman, 265 
S. BYAMUKAMA 20 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
opportunity to express themselves. Besides, testing people's attitudes and perceptions of the 
process, can only be done one-on-one in a semi-structured interview. 
An additional constraint to a formal questionnaire stems from the fact that the 
majority of those interviewed were illiterate, and cannot read or write. Even those that can 
read, do so with difficulty. Only seven of the 28 alleged perpetrators interviewed had some 
form of secondary education, only II of the 36 survivors had attended secondary school, and 
only two people interviewed had a university degree. 
JUSTIFICATION FOR SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS 
Mason suggests that qualitative interviewing usually relies on in-depth semi 
structured or loosely structured interviewing. 53 Qualitative interviewing aims to discover and 
develop new concepts, rather than impose preconceived categories on the people and the 
events they observe. 54 As a result, semi-structured interviews were used which permit new 
information and perspectives to emerge. Although this interview technique allows for 
specific questions to be posed, keeping them semi-structured allows for an in-depth analysis 
of the interviewees' perspective. 55 Mason also suggests "the formulation of research 
questions should not be so specific that alternative avenues of inquiry that might arise dunng 
the collection of field work data are closed off. Such premature closure ... would 
inconsistent with the process of qualitative research.  56 
First, an agenda of themes grounded in the literature review was drafted. This agenda 
was based on the theoretical underpinning of the thesis and on the Gacaca process itself This 
was essential to ensure that all areas of interest were covered. The semi-structured forniat 
allows interviews to flow as ideas come along. This allowed the researcher to discover new 
53 Mason, 62 
54 Gerson Kathleen and Horowitz Ruth, 199 
55 Bryman Alan, 317 
Mason, 63 
S. BYAMUKAMA 21 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
ideas that had not been envisaged, and it allowed an in-depth understanding of these issues. 
For example, although she had an agenda with specific questions about reconciliation, the 
trial process, confessions and reintegration, it was only through this interview technique that 
she understood that 'silence' in Gacaca courts was one of the main hindrances of the Gaeaca 
process. Through semi-structured interviews, which emphasise what people view as 
important, it was also possible to understand why people opted not to testify in Gacaca 
courts. 
While the research is based purely on qualitative methods, it borrows quantitative 
statistical techniques because "the distinctiveness of qualitative research does not reside 
,, 57 solely in the absence of numbers. As such, in assessing and evaluating how many people 
were interviewed, how many research areas, how many courts were observed to mention but 
a few, quantitative methods were used . 
Limitations of Semi Structured Interviewing 
Although semi-structured interviewing is a prominent data collection strategy, " it is 
true that there is a heightened possibility of error in data collection that will eventually 
jeopardise the data analysis at the end if not well prepared . 
60 The advantage of structure 
interviews is consistency and the reduction of the margin of error; the danger of unstructured 
interviewing is the potential to introduce such margin of error. Organising a questionnaire or 
agenda allows for some form of structure, ensuring that all the research areas were covered. 
Although some form of structure was necessary for the research, treating it ngidly would 
have jeopardised the essence of the research. Qualitative interviewing is about testing nonns, 
beliefs, attitudes, discovering and learning through the process. This cannot be done with a 
57 Bryman, 265 
58 See below. 
59 Bryman, 107 
60 ibid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 22 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
rigid set of questions. Structured interviews give a limited number of possible answers which 
is inappropriate for testing attitudes of people. 
Although semi structured interviews allow the researcher to understand what is 
important for the interviewee, some of what is important for the interviewee is not necessarily 
as important for the interviewer and the objective of the study. Although the researcher 
should direct the interview to achieve the set objectives of the interview, in practice, this is 
sometimes difficult to achieve. For example, some interviewees, particularly survivors of 
genocide were more interested to explain in detail how they survived the genocide, where 
they hid, who saved them and who betrayed them. This although interesting in itself, was not 
as relevant for the researcher as it was for the interviewee. Although the researcher 
understands the importance of allowing interviewees to express themselves, either as a form 
of therapy or to establish a rapport and trust, it was sometimes difficult to divert the 
interviewee back to what was important for the research. As such, an interview which should 
ordinarily last one hour sometimes went on for as long as two hours. Although the 
interviewees usually provided sufficient time for the important part of the interview, the 
process was sometimes draining. 
CONDUCTING THE EMPIRICAL STUDY 
Geographic scope 
Rwanda is divided into five Provinces: East; West; North; South and Central 
Provinces. The empirical research is based on a study conducted in the Cyangugu- Rusizi 
district in the Western Province, and Kigali, the capital city in the Central Province. 
Research took place between March and August 2006. These two locations were specifically 
chosen because of their differences. Rwanda is made up of rural and urban populations. 
Kigali the capital city, situated in the Central Province is an urban, cosmopolitan city, while 
the rest of Rwanda is primarily rural. While the other provinces are mostly rural, the 
S. BYAMUKAMA 23 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
researcher chose to focus on Cyangugu in the Western province because it is geographically 
furthest from Kigali. It was essential that the research results came from a diverse population, 
in order to test a broad spread of attitudes in both rural and urban populations. 
Generally speaking, the majority of Rwandans are illiterate, especially in the rural 
countryside. This means that judges, who are elected among the population, also have 
minimal education. 61A comparison of the court proceedings and attitudes of the interviewees 
considering the different literacy levels was necessary. The researcher had previously 
proposed carrying out research in Butare and Kigali to allow such diversity. However, Butare 
is only one and a half hours drive from the capital, Kigali and is home to the National 
University of Butare. Achieving this comparison would have also been difficult considering 
that Butare is also arguably the second largest city in Rwanda. However, it must be 
understood that a large part of Kigali province, for example Busanza, where the researcher 
attended court sessions, is itself rural. Still, its proximity to the capital city made it necessary 
to carry out research in an area less influenced by the proximity of Kigali urban life. 
Kamembe town in Rusizi district (Cyangugu), which borders the Congo, is a trading 
centre between the two countries. It is very common to find Congolese tradesmen and women 
carrying foodstuffs such as maize, potatoes that they had bought from Rwanda to the Congo. 
Lake Kivu divides Congo from Rwanda and based on many of the interviews the researcher 
carried out, there appears to have been a close connection between the two countries during 
the genocide. Many survivors escaped the genocide by crossing the lake, while many alleged 
perpetrators said that they had "worked" on the border or guarded the lake to ensure that no 
Tutsis crossed over. Some said that they were paid by survivors to help them cross the border, 
others fled to the Congo after the genocide, while others still have relatives in the Congo. 
Because of the close proximity to the Congo where a significant number of alleged 
61 Organic law No 16/2004, Article 11, Education requirement for judges is they must know how to read and 
write Kinyarwanda. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 24 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
perpetrators had fled, the area was affected by insecurity and insurgencies in the late 1990's 
when exiled genocidaires crossed the border and committed more crimes. In this time, there 
were clashes between government forces and exiled genocidaires who caused insecurity in 
the area. 
In the Western Province, research was carried out in Rusizi district and Nyamasheke 
district. The researcher attended court sessions in Muhari Sector and Ntakanyinya Sector, 
both in Rusizi District. Interviews were carried out in Nyamasheke, Kamembe, Mururu, 
Muhari, Nyakanyinya and Cyangugu Prison. The researcher lived in Rusizi district for about 
three months where she was able to familiarise herself with victims, alleged perpetrators and 
the general public. In Kigali town, she mainly carried out research in Kabeza, Nyarugunga 
Sector Appeal and Buziga Sector. 
Access to Court Sessions and Interviewees 
Carrying out research on the Gacaca courts, particularly court observations, required 
the researcher to have written pennission from the authorities of the Gacaca Office. The 
researcher had to present her pennission fonn to the Gacaca judges before the proceedings 
began. This was inspected by the judges of the bench and handed back at the end of the court 
sessions. Sometimes, the president of the Gacaca court announced the presence of a 
researcher 62 and showed the public the written pen-nission to carry out the research in 
question. The forrn included the research questions, persons to be interviewed, and objectives 
of the study. The researcher was given a three months permission written form, which was 
renewable. 
This fonn was particularly important when she visited Cyangugu prison. She showed 
it to the Director of the prison who gave her access to interview prisoners. It was useful to 
62 In most Gacaca courts, researchers sit on a particular bench although it is sometimes shared with the local 
population. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 25 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
demonstrate that the researcher was legally allowed to conduct interviews and gather 
research. Uwe suggests that authorisation or support for the request by the higher authorities 
in the first instance may produce distrust in the people to be interviewed, (why is the higher 
authority in favour of this research), but also recognises that being endorsed by other people 
facilitates access. 63 
Getting written pennission took up to three weeks and for non-nationals, this probably 
meant three weeks of no access to Gacaca courts. Dunng this period, the researcher was 
allowed to attend the Gacaca court sessions, as a Rwandan national, but not to write notes or 
tape record without written permission. This set back is not usually something one would 
envisage and where one has limited time to do the necessary research, this may prove a 
difficulty. 
Access to the Gacaca courts, especially at the beginning of the research was an 
important means to access and secure interviewees. For example, some of the alleged 
perpetrators and survivors interviewed were those whose court sessions the researcher had 
attended. The researcher needed to merge her court observations with people's perceptions of 
the process, particularly those that were party to it. After a court session, the researcher 
approached the plaintiff in the case she had attended and asked if she could have an 
interview. She explained the intentions of her research and mentioned that she had permission 
to carry out interviews. From these initial conversations, she secured appointments and 
invitations to visit their homes where she usually conducted the interviews. 
Uwe suggests "the need to orient oneself in the field and to find ones way around it 
gives the researcher a glimpse into routines and self-evidence. , 64 Although the Rwandan 
population is comprised of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa, no one identifies themselves as such. 
63 Uwe Flick, An Introduction to Qualitative Research, (London: SAGE Publications, 2002)55 
64 Ibid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 26 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Following the genocide, it is difficult to ask people about their ethnic background as this 
might be seen as divisive. However, it is also clearly known that the genocide was committed 
against the Tutsi population by some of the members of the Hutu ethnic group. Knowing the 
ethnicity of the parties in the Gacaca session was important to identify the role played by 
each of the groups. Knowing a person's ethnicity could be adduced from understanding 
people's experience of the genocide. Almost all the accusers or victims of crimes were the 
survivors of genocide, and Tutsi. Most alleged perpetrators were Hutu, and most neutral 
parties were returnees who were not in Rwanda at the time of the genocide, or Hutu who 
were "not hunted, " but also did not participate in the genocide. There were exceptions, such 
as a case in which a Tutsi man was accused of genocide crimes. 
Typically, the researcher is a professional stranger in the field, and to gain further 
knowledge, Uwe advises the researcher to (at least temporarily) maintain a perspective of an 
outsider. However, collecting data in qualitative research requires that a researcher 
understands the outward presentation of the social setting, and considers things, as much as 
possible, from the perspective of the social group that is being researched . 
Without this 
perspective, there is a danger that 'reality' will be hidden from the researcher, even if the 
researcher has reintegrated in the community. Uwe suggests that this kind of information may 
be attained if the researcher conceals from part of the group his or her role as a researcher, 
but this would have ethical consequences; the researcher has a duty to disclose his or her full 
identity. 66 
As a Rwandan national, the researcher understands the Rwandan context while 
possessing knowledge of the communities in which people live and the language used. Part of 
the research was conducted in Kabeza where her family lives and as such, she identified 
easily with the research community. Although she did not live in Rwanda at the time of the 
Ibid. 
66 See Ethics section below 
S. BYAMUKAMA 27 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
genocide, and was an outsider in that respect, community life in many parts of Affica has 
great similarities. 
THE INTERVIEWEES 
Analysing the Gacaca, process required the researcher to conduct in-depth interviews 
of different groups of people in the Rwandan community who played a role in the operation 
and ftmctioning of the Gacaca, process. Below is a table of the different groups of people 
interviewed. 
Summary of Interviews Conducted 
Interviewees Total No Male female Western Central 
Province Province 
Alleged perpetrators 28 26 2 18 10 
Survivors 36 11 25 26 10 
Judges 15 9669 
Officials 20 16 44 16 
Total Number 97 72 41 54 45 
Alleged Perpetrators 
The researcher interviewed 28 alleged perpetrators in total, 16 of whom were 
prisoners and 12 who were residing in communities. All the 12 prisoners interviewed in the 
Western Province were men in Cyangugu Prison. The six female alleged perpetrators in 
Cyangugu prison declined to be interviewed. The prisoners interviewed in Kigali were 
interviewed at the court premises. These included two women from Kimironko prison and 
two men from the same prison. Below is a graph indicating the interviews conducted with 
alleged perpetrators. 
S. ByAmuKAmA 28 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Alleged Perpetrators Interviewed 
Interviewees Male Female Western Central Total 
Province 
Province Number 
in 12 12 
Prisoners 14 2 12 4 16 
Total 26 2 18 10 28 
Number 
The female population in prisons is relatively low, and the number of females 
imprisoned for genocide crimes is even smaller. The majority of prisoners alleged to have 
committed genocide crimes are men. This does not mean that women did not participate in 
the genocide. In an interview with a researcher from African Rights, Bayizi suggested that 
women played a much 'lighter' role in the genocide, such as pointing out where the Tutsi 
were hiding, looting, and encouraging their husbands to participate. 67 Although these women 
could be regarded as accomplices for the crimes, they were not imprisoned considering the 
huge numbers of those who actively participated in the crimes. However, Bayizi suggested 
that women who took an active role in the genocide committed very vicious and heinous 
crimes including torture and killing of children, the elderly and women. 
Nevertheless, the majority of those who participated in the genocide, who also belong 
to category two or three were provisionally released by different presidential decrees together 
with the elderly (over 70 years of age) and those who were below the age of 18 at the time of 
the genocide. Those that remain in custody are those who were placed in category one 
because of the heinous nature of the crimes they committed, or because they distinguished 
67 Interview 60' June 2006 
S. ByAmuKAmA 29 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
themselves from the rest because of the pure zeal and wickedness in which they committed 
these crimes, or because they were organisers of the genocide. Below is a chart of the 
composition of Cyangugu prison as of 3& June 2006. 
Prison Statistics on the 30th June 2006 
Category Male Female Total 
Ordinary Crimes 473 65 538 
Genocide Crimes 4130 6 4136 
Prison Population 4603 71 4674 
Survivors of Genocide 
o Ordinary crimes 
0 Genocide crimes 
m prison Population 
The researcher interviewed a total of 36 survivors of genocide, of whom 26 were from 
the Western Province and ten from the Central Province. On the 13'h and 14th of June 2006, 
she was asked by the Director of African Rights to provide translation for one of their 
researchers doing work on the genocide in Cyangugu. At the time, she had only interviewed 
alleged perpetrators in the region and in prison and had not yet interviewed survivors of 
genocide. She saw this as a window of opportunity to interact with survivors of genocide. All 
S. ByAmuKAmA 30 
male feniale total 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the nine women she interviewed were infected with HIV and AIDS as a result of the 
genocide. In return for her services, she asked if she would spend an additional ten minutes 
per interview asking questions related to her research. She found this experience very useful 
in developing a greater understanding of the genocide and contextualising the Gacaca 
process. The other advantage was that these interviews were conducted in association with 
the Association of Genocide Widows, AVEGA-AGAHOZO. 68 This allowed her to develop 
contacts and interview two officials in the association who work with survivors of genocide 
on a daily basis. She also created and worked with two focus groups, one made up of three 
young men and the other of two women and one man. As a result of these opportunities, the 
number of interviewees in the Western province is much higher than that in the Central 
Province. 
judges Interviewed 
The researcher interviewed a total of 15 judges. However, Muhari Sector judges 
preferred to be interviewed together. The focus group composed of 14 judges, five of whom 
were deputy judges and nine full judges, as stipulated by the Gacaca law. Of these, only three 
had some form of secondary education, including the president, vice president and a secretary 
of the Gacaca courts. Seven of the judges had completed primary four or primary five 
education, while three had primary six education, and one had primary eight education. 
Twelve of the judges were subsistence farmers, one was a painter, and the other was a local 
businessman. The judges' average age was 47. The President of the court and the second 
Vice President were female, while the rest were male. This was a typical gender 
representation between male and female judges on the Gacaca bench. The researcher noted 
that the few female judges elected were either more educated, or stood out in their 
communities in other fields. This indicates that the role of judges is still reserved for men, 
68 Hereafter AVEGA 
S. BYAMUKAMA 31 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
and women were only considered if they were "exceptional". Furthermore, fewer women 
volunteered for these roles, considering them to be more male-dominated roles. 
It would have been interesting to indicate their ethnicity, but as earlier mentioned, this 
is a rather inappropriate question to ask. However, two interviewees indicated that three were 
Tutsi and the rest Hutu. Below is a table indicating the composition of Mururu bench. 
Composition of Muhari Bench 
Total Male Female Farmers Other Primary Primary Secondary 
Number trade 4-5 6-8 Education 
Education Education 
0 male 
m fernale 
N farmers 
0 other profession 
0 P4-5 education 
P6-8 Education 
Secondary Education 
Total 
In addition, the researcher interviewed five other judges in the Western Province, and 
nine in the Central Province, Kigali capital city. 
Officials Interviewed 
The officials interviewed varied in rank and responsibilities, but all were chosen to be 
interviewed on the basis of their roles and responsibilities in their various organisations. From 
the Gacaca office, the researcher interviewed five officials including Executive Secretary of 
Gacaca courts, a legal advisor in the office of Gacaca, an official in charge of 
S. ByAmuKAmA 32 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
documentations, the Coordinator of Gacaca courts in Rusizi Distnct (Western Province) and 
another Gacaca coordinator in Kigali (Central Province). She also interviewed officials 
working in organisations that collaborate with Gacaca courts, for example two officials from 
IBUKA, an umbrella organisation in charge of genocide survivors in Kigali, two officials 
from AVEGA, an organisation which caters for women survivors of genocide in Rusizi 
District, three officials from National Unity and Reconciliation Commission in Kigali, and 
two officials from Traveaux dInteret Generaux TIG, including its Executive Secretary. She 
also interviewed the director of Cyangugu prison and the Chief Inspector of Police. Although 
not entirely relevant to the Gacaca process, she believed it was necessary to interview 
officials from the Ministry of Justice who are directly concerned with general prosecutions. 
These included the Prosecutor General, Minister of Justice, and two officials in the ministry. 
AcCESS TO INTERVIEVMES 
Of the three broad approaches to sample selection in qualitative research; convenience 
sample, judgement sample and theoretical sample, the researcher opted to use judgement 
sample. 69 In this approach, "the researcher actively selects the most productive sample to 
answer the research question ... 
based on the researcher's practical knowledge of the research 
area, the available literature and evidence from the study itself , 70 Marshall suggests that 
"this is a more intellectual strategy than the simple demographic stratification of 
epidemiological studies, though age, gender and social class might be important variables. , 71 
Access to officials was relatively straight-forward. The researcher went into an office 
and asked the official's secretary for an appointment. She explained the purpose of the 
interviews and showed her permission slip. Sometimes, she directly asked for an appointment 
69 As part of the judgement sample, the researcher opted for snowball sampling where the interviewees are able 
to recommend other useful potential interviewees for the research. Marshall N Martin, "Sampling for 
Qualitative Research", Family Practice (Oxford University Press 1996) 13,6: 522-525 
S. BYAMUKAMA 33 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
from an official if she found a way to directly contact him or her. Consulting judges of 
Gacaca courts was also relatively straight- forward. Because she attended most trials in their 
courts and had clearly indicated the purpose of her research, it was not difficult to secure an 
appointment with them. The researcher also contacted survivors of genocide directly and 
asked for an appointment after a Gacaca session. During the investigation stage, she attended 
meetings from different zones and asked survivors for an interview. The researcher identified 
them as survivors because of the kind of evidence they gave related to their experience of the 
genocide during the Gacaca investigation stage. 
Sampling, although traditionally associated with survey research '72 is essential 
social science research. It is a means by which a selection is made from a basic unit of study. 
Sampling is strategically done so that the study can provide a representative sample of the 
population. 73 
After a court session, the researcher would directly approach a survivor of genocide or 
the alleged perpetrator who was on trial. She would do this when she needed to follow up on 
the observations made in court, and sometimes to ask specific questions about the case at 
hand. Because she attended court sessions with no knowledge of who was on trial, the 
interviews conducted as a result of these trials although arguably random, yielded a general 
representation of trials countrywide. 74 Individuals interviewed through this method varied in 
age, sex, education level and came from different locations. Trials in Gacaca are conducted in 
7' Burgees G. Robert. Elements of Sampling in Field Research, Field Research: A Source Book and Field 
Manual, 75 
73 Ibid. 
74 In a random sample, the nature of the population is defined and all members have an equal chance of 
selection. Random sampling is complex because, for a true random sample to be selected, the characteristics 
under study of the whole population should be known. However, values, beliefs and attitudes are not usually 
evenly distributed. Besides, people do not have an equal understanding and interpretation of their own and 
other people's behaviour and attitudes. As such, some researchers may provide a better insight into a subject 
matter than others. Marshall argues that "Choosing someone at random to answer a qualitative question 
would be analogous to randomly asking a passer-by how to repair a broken down car, rather than asking a 
garage mechanic-the former might have a good stab, but asking the latter is likely to be more productive. " 
Martin N Marshall, "Sampling for Qualitative Research7, Family Practice (Oxford University Press 1996) 
13,6: 522-525 
S. BYAMUKAMA 34 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the place in which the crime was committed, 75 and as such, those interviewed (survivors, 
alleged perpetrators, witnesses, general public) do not necessarily live within the sector in 
which the trials are conducted. 
Initially, the researcher was rather unsuccessH in obtaining interviews from alleged 
perpetrators after their trials. Some were unwilling to speak, perhaps due to the fact that their 
trials were ongoing, or perhaps because they didn't quite know who the researcher was. After 
a number of court sessions, and after the president of the court announced to the court that 
she was a researcher, she was able to interview some of the alleged perpetrators who had 
been on trial. This could be because they got used to her, or were curious about her research. 
As she gained more experience and confidence in the course of the empirical research, she 
was able to approach interviewees in a more confident manner. 
Alleged perpetrators can be categorised in the following ways: Those who are in 
prison, those who were provisionally released, and those who have never been imprisoned. 
They can also be categorised according to those who confessed to genocide crimes and those 
who did not. There are alleged perpetrators who have been tried and those who are awaiting 
trial. The alleged perpetrators interviewed vaned in age, gender, location and education. 
Some of these were imprisoned or were residing in the community. Some had been tried or 
were still awaiting trial. 
Accessing interviewees is often more critical in qualitative research than in 
quantitative research. Interviewing according to qualitative research standards requires more 
personal involvement with an interviewee, rather than simply handling over a questionnaire. 
Uwe emphasises the need for the researcher to secure collaboration with the interviewees and 
ensure concrete data is collected. 76 
75 See Chapter six 
76 Uwe Flick, 53 
S. BYAMUKAMA 35 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The researcher's initial plan was to access survivors from organisations that represent 
them, such as IBUKA, 77 an umbrella organisation that represents the survivors of genocide in 
Rwanda, or AVEGA. She also considered approaching organisations representing newly 
released prisoners to secure economic benefits. The disadvantage of this was that the 
organisations could possibly pick and choose the individuals they wanted her to interview, 
and these would not be representative of all survivors or perpetrators of genocide. 
Additionally, interviewing survivors at these premises meant that the interviewees would be 
away from their natural environment and might feel obliged to give opinions that were 
representative of the organisations. 
According to the researcher's experience, the most productive method of accessing 
interviewees was through a 'gatekeeper' (infortner). Accessing interviewees can be 
particularly problematic, and this is a recognised challenge in a number of social science 
literature. Burgess recommends access through key gatekeepers 78 and sites a number of case 
studies that were conducted from the 1950's through the 1960's and notes how they gained 
access to interviewees. For example, Pons 79 gained access to the inhabitants of his slum 
district of Avenue 21 through a number of key gatekeepers. 
This method is an accepted forin of qualitative research sampling called Snowball or 
chain sampling. This method involves utilising well infonned people to identify cntical cases 
or informants who have a great deal of information about the subject. The researcher follows 
this chain of contacts in order to identify and access more interviewees. Although 
researchers suggest that this methodology does not lead to a representative sample, 80 they 
acknowledge that it is the best method for accessing interviewees who are particularly hard to 
77 Direct translation: Remember 
78 Robert. G. Burgees, Elements ofSampling in Field Research, 75 
79 Pons Valdo, "Launching a Neighbourhood Study in an African Town, " in Robert G Burgess, Field Research: 
A Soureebook and Field Manual, Contemporary Social Research (London; George Allen & Unwin, 1982) 4 
80 Marshall N Martin, "Sampling for Qualitative Research", Family Practice (Oxford University Press 1996) 
13,6: 522-525 
S. BYAMUKAMA 36 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
access. Because the methodology to access survivors of genocide was not as fruitful when 
accessing alleged perpetrators, this methodology proved to be very useful. 
The researcher used two gatekeepers in the course of this study. One was a researcher 
with Affican Rights who immediately told the researcher that she would face problems, 
particularly with access to alleged perpetrators. 81 From her Kinyarwanda accent, he was able 
to tell that although she was Rwandese, she did not speak it as a native, that she was 
Anglophone and probably a Tutsi. He said, "... for me the Hutu would not be scared of me 
because they identify me as one of them, and the Tutsi are not scared of me because I lived 
with him and so would the Tutsi, but that I would not have such luck. His introduction to 
alleged perpetrators opened a window of opportunity to access a number of alleged 
perpetrators who had previously been a difficult group to penetrate. 
One of these introductions was to a second gatekeeper who was convicted of genocide 
crimes, and had been released after he served a 10 year sentence. He proved to be the most 
important person for the research, in accessing prisoners and alleged perpetrators in the 
community. Gaining his trust in the community made it easy to gain the trust of other alleged 
perpetrators. In prison, the all-important interview was the first one, where the researcher 
gained the trust of the initial interviewees. It also appeared to be important that the first 
interviews were with two former mayors, who were seen as part of the "elite class. " In prison, 
overwhelming evidence suggested that alleged perpetrators waited for this "class" of people 
to act first, and then others would follow suit. As such, the ease with which she spoke to 
prisoners was in part born from the fact that the "elite" had trusted her. 
81 This gatekeeper, an employee of African Rights was a recommendation from Rakiya Omaar, The Director of 
African Rights. 
82 Interview Kigali, I't June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 37 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
In Rwanda, the majority of the local population is illiterate and looks to the elite, 
following their lead without question. This was a fact that was pointed out in her first 
interview in Cyangugu prison when explaining why some alleged perpetrators might not 
confess to their crimes. He said, "... when I confessed to genocide, 410 prisoners were 
recorded to have confessed to genocide in one month. , 83 In another prison interview, a 
perpetrator said, "the educated know what is best, they have a way of interpreting and 
understanding what is going on... in this confusion we wait to see what they do and we 
follow suit. " This culture of obedience was clearly expressed by a released prisoner in a 
Kinyarwanda proverb, "aho amazi aja, niho amabuye aja. " This literally means "Where the 
water flows is where its stones will flow. " It is therefore culturally accepted that the 'stones' 
(subordinates) are expected follow the water (masters). 84 
BUILDING RAPPORT 
The organisation of the agenda was in a fonn that ensured a rapport. The researcher 
began her interviews by introducing herself, what she was researching about, and made it 
clear that the research conducted was to be used for her PhD thesis. She also made sure that 
the interviewees understood that the interviews would be anonymous, 85 and underlined that 
she did not intend to establish whether or not crimes were committed, or whether the 
interviewees were guilty or innocent, as that is purely the function of the Gacaca court. She 
made it clear that the intention of the research is to understand the Gacaca process, how it 
works and how they perceive it. She asked interviewees to ask her any questions they might 
have before the start of the interview, which made them comfortable. Some of their questions 
related to the interview, such as the relevance of the research, but most seemed to be 
interested in knowing who she was. Some interviewees asked her questions such as, Why did 
83 Interview gth June 2006 
84 Chapter seven, for more a more elaborate discussion on the subject of "elites. " 
85 Refer to Ethics Section below 
S. BYAMUKAMA 38 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
you choose to do this research? What is life like in the United Kingdom? Are you married, or 
would you want to get married sometime? How old are you? These questions, although not 
related to the thesis, created a rapport with the interviewee. 
It is well known that in the Rwandan culture, people do not speak forthrightly. Being 
direct and blunt is not seen as a virtue. It was common for most interviews to begin with 
interviewees giving answers that they might expect the researcher to have wanted to hear, or 
answers in line with government sensitization programmes. However, she noticed that in 
some interviews, particularly in prison, the demeanour changed and people started speaking 
honestly after about a ten minute period where she talked about herself It was fascinating to 
discover that interviewees who had asked her questions and taken time to know her gave less 
"government sensitization" correct answers than those who preferred a more straightforward 
interview process. The ease with which she interacted with alleged perpetrators, particularly 
in prison, can also be explained by the fact that one of her prison gatekeepers had himself 
been incarcerated for about 10 years, and was released after his trial. He was popular among 
the inmates and in the community since he was part of one of the football teams in the 
district. 
After this initial interaction, interviews followed with questions relating to how 
accused perpetrators or survivors are coping with their current situation. The researcher found 
this helpful in creating rapport and in understanding the context of their perceptions. The 
interviewing process is a learning process. Adventuring into new data leads to more learning 
and acquiring more data, which eventually develops into themes that inform existing themes. 
Prisoners talked about their experiences in prison, how they keep in touch with their families 
and how they relate to other prisoners. 
Survivors of genocide were willing to talk to her with or without an introduction from 
a gate keeper. It was nearly impossible to interview a survivor of genocide, especially women 
S. BYAMUKAMA 39 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
who had been sexually assaulted, about the Gacaca process without dedicating at least 30 
minutes to the genocide itself and their personal experiences. Although her research was not 
in any way about uncovering the events of the genocide and establishing who did what, 
survivors found it hard to talk in depth about the Gacaca process without talking about their 
individual experiences of the genocide. She thus found it beneficial to listen to these stories 
because their experiences painted a bigger picture of what happened in the genocide and their 
individual experiences. For example, it became clear to me that the majority of the survivors 
consciously or unconsciously attribute their survival to those Hutu who saved their lives. 
Talking about these experiences not only helped to build a rapport with interviewees, 
but helped to establish trust as well. For the subject, the interview was not just about 
answering questions put to them, but a means to talk about their experiences. To them, the 
horrific events of the genocide, how they coped with the after effects and the Gacaca process 
is one big story that cannot not be segmented; discussing that story was important to them. 
The researcher found that some of these stories were overwhelming, especially when three of 
the interviewees said it was the first time they had spoken about their experiences. 
THE INTERVIEWS 
The first series of questions the researcher asked were factual questions such as name, 
age, where the person lives, and where the person lived before the genocide. She also asked 
alleged perpetrators whether they had confessed to genocide. If the alleged perpetrator had 
confessed to genocide, she asked when he had confessed. If a perpetrator was released from 
prison, she asked him when he had been released, and when they were imprisoned. These 
were factual questions which made the interviewees feel at ease, but were also relevant for 
her to understand more about the interviewees. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 40 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
These questions were followed by asking what words such as reconciliation, 
confessions and justice meant. Individuals attach different meaning to words, and their 
responses to some questions may differ depending on their understanding of the words. It 
became clear that their perception of the process was dependant on their understanding of the 
terms. For example, one survivor of genocide defined reconciliation to mean "... not mean 
love each other... but to tolerate each other. " He explained that 
You don't have to like someone, but you can't deny them the right to 
their country, to have their human rights, to enjoy themselves. 
Reconciliation in a home is different from reconciliation we expect of 
Gacaca. If you ask for forgiveness and I give it to you, it means you 
can have a drink together, attend the same parties, fetch water from 
the same well, we can greet each other, shake hands, but it does not 
mean to love each other... for reconciliation to take place, the 
perpetrator should make the first step to ask for forgiveness. The 
victim may first get scared, or not try, but on a second try, their hearts 
become lighter. The most important thing is that perpetrators should 
ask for forgiveness and be enthusiastic about it. 86 
Conversely, an alleged perpetrator defined reconciliation to mean "survivors and 
perpetrators ask forgiveness and the other forgives... Forgiveness should 'come from the 
heart' and the one that forgives 'gets it from the heart'. " 
Using the aforementioned interpretations of reconciliation, this survivor's 
understanding of reconciliation involved people living together in peace and sharing the same 
facilities but not more than that. However, he also defined it as a forward-looking process 
that can yield positive outcomes. The perpetrator, while recogmising his responsibility in the 
reconciliation process, expected a significant role to be performed by the victims of the 
conflict. As a result, the researcher understood people's expectations of the process and what 
each party expected of the other to achieve the stated objectives. Overall, while she had an 
agenda, with specific questions to be asked, these questions were not asked systematically. 
8"' Interview in Rusizi District, 19'h June 2006 
S. BYkMUKAMA 41 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Some questions arose from the answers given, which allowed for diversity, but she generally 
ensured that all the questions on the agenda were asked. 
Recording interviewers 
Most interviews were carried out at the residence of the interviewee or at an agreed 
location. The researcher used a tape recorder for most of the interviews. The interviews were 
carried out in Kinyarwanda, which she then translated into English. Sometimes there are 
words that cannot be easily translated from Kinyarwanda to English. Recording the interview 
allowed her to take time later to understand the context in which things were said. While 
transcribing these interviews, she sometimes asked friends and family to interpret a particular 
word or phrase. A meaning could sometimes only be derived if the phrase was kept in a 
particular context. Tape recording ensures that the interviewee's answers are captured in their 
own words. 
Burgess suggests that qualitative researchers are often interested not in just what 
people say, but also the way they say it. 88 Interviewees were sometimes eager to talk about 
pressing issues, even if these were unrelated to the question asked. Their expression showed 
the importance a topic had for them. These issues were sometimes explored further, and 
added to the agenda of questions to ask. Sometimes, these developed into themes or sub- 
themes which had not been previously envisaged. 
Transcribing recorded interviews also gives the interviewer a chance to revisit the 
interview anew. It pennitted the researcher to ensure that the interviewees' answers were 
captured in their own words, and also to reflect on how people said what they said. 
Transcribing tape recorded interviews allowed her to understand the layered depth of the 
interviews. Certain views were repeated a number of times, which made her understand how 
lbid, 317. 
lbid, 321. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 42 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
important certain perceptions were. For example, most interviewees repeatedly talked about 
their fi-ustrations about people not testifying in the Gacaca process. This showed that there 
was a web of issues surrounding people's non-willingness to participate in the Gacaca 
process. These ranged from fear of intimidation, even death, of would-be witnesses, to 
isolation of those who volunteer information in the Gacaca process. Understanding these 
concerns was a turning point in her understanding of how a society can be so divided yet so 
interconnected. 
Tape recording allows the interviewer to maintain eye contact with the interviewee, 
be highly alert, probe where necessary drawing attention to any inconsistencies if any which 
would have been otherwise more difficult with making notes. 89 However, tape recording was 
not possible in all circumstances. Although there was a disadvantage in losing the phrases 
and language used, when interviewees refused the use of the recorder, it was important to 
respect their wishes for obvious ethical reasons. Some alleged perpetrators and judges in 
particular did not wish to be tape-recorded. In this case, the researcher wrote down as much 
as possible of what they said. Although this slowed the process of the interview, which would 
ordinarily have taken 45 minutes to one hour, these would be extended to a two-hour 
interview. The advantage was that most interviewees allowed for time to write down as much 
as she could so that she did not lose a lot of the infon-nation that was said. She was also under 
no pressure to hurry the interview because interviewees were willing to spend as much time 
as they could to accommodate her. 
Additionally, tape recording was also not allowed in pnsons and in the Gacaca courts, 
in which case, the researcher wrote as much as she could. The advantage of written 
interviews is that transcribing them is much faster than transcribing tape-recorded interviews. 
It took her an average of ten hours or more to transcribe each tape-recorded interview. On the 
89 lbid, 322 
S. BYAMUKAMA 43 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
day, she made notes on court observations and also noted on her general perception of an 
interview. Subsequently, she took time during the course of her empirical data collection and 
shortly thereafter to transcribe the interviews. She did not find it necessary to transcribe some 
of the hand written interviews. Transcribing interviews in the course of the field-work 
allowed her to familiarise herself more rapidly with the research findings and helped identify 
emerging themes from the research. She found it particularly useful to read through her 
transcribed interviews and some handwritten interviews. This greatly helped her to prepare 
for the ensuing interview. She was able to reflect on emerging themes or issues that were 
unclear and included them on the agenda for the next interview. 
After compiling the empirical data, the researcher explored the collected material and 
placed it in thematic categories. The researcher chose to keep transcripts of the transcribed 
interviews in their original form but coded the different categories of themes that emerged. 
The researcher found that this was the best way of analysing the different themes while at the 
same time not losing the individual story of each interviewee. Because the number of 
interviews conducted is clearly large, leading to similar or saturated responses, some of this 
material was not included in the thesis except to indicate numbers of responses to particular 
questions. In this sense, these interviews infornied the discussions in the thesis and fonn part 
of the analysis. 
ETHICAL CONCERNS 
To establish the integrity and quality of her research and ensure that it met the 
required ethical standards, the researcher used the Research Ethics Framework guidelines 
specific to social science and the Glasgow Caledonian Research Ethics Principles and 
Procedures. The guidelines specify that the subjects must be informed fully about the purpose 
S. BYAMUKAMA 44 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
of the research, the methods and intended possible uses of the research, what their 
participation in the research entails and what risks if any are involved. 90 
Her research necessitated interviewing individuals who were affected by genocide. 
Although her research was not concerned with the specifics of who did what in the Rwandan 
genocide, or who was responsible for which crimes, she understood that interviewees could 
not be completely removed from these circumstances. As such, she is cognisant of the ethical 
considerations in carrying out research related to crimes of genocide. 
Codes of ethics insist on safeguarding persons, the identity of people's locations and 
the research locations. 91 The guidelines specify confidentiality of information given and note 
that the anonymity of respondents must be respected at all times. Furthennore, hann to the 
respondents must be avoided at all times. 92 , Confidentiality must be assured as a primary 
safeguard against unwanted exposure... all personal data ought to be concealed and made 
public only under the shield of anonymity "93 No one merits the harm or embarrassment that 
may result from insensitive research practices. 94 The most likely source of harm in social 
science inquiry is the disclosure of private knowledge considered damaging to any participant 
in the research. 
The research ethics framework guidelines also suggest that participation in the 
research should be voluntary and free from any form of coercion and that the independence 
of the research must be clear. 96 Consistent with individual autonomy, social scientists insist 
that participants have the right to be infon-ned about the nature and consequence of 
90 Research Ethics Framework, Economic and Social Research Council. Available at: 
littp:,,, "/'www. esrc. ac. uk-,, 'ESRCInfoCentre/Images/ESRC 
Ethics Yrame tcm6-11291. pdf (Accessed 6th 
July 2008) 
9' Clifford G. Christians, "Ethics and Politics in Qualitative Research, " in Norman k Denzin, Yvonna S Lincoln, 
Handbook of Qualitative Research, 2nd ed (Thousand Oaks; Sage Publications, 2000) 139 
92 Research Ethics Framework, Economic and Social Research Council 
93 Clifford G. Christians, 139 
95 lbid 
96 Research Ethics Framework 
S. BYAMUKAMA 45 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
experiments in which they are involved and that they must agree voluntarily to participate, 
without physical or psychological coercion. Their agreement must be based on full and open 
information. 97 Social science codes of ethics. uniformlv ODDOse deliberate 
misrepresentation. 98 Deception is "neither ethically justified nor practically necessary, nor in 
the best interest of sociology as an academic pursuit. "99 
In ensuring that the research met with ethical standards discussed above, the 
researcher showed interviewees who read Kinyarwanda the first page of the interview 
schedule that accounted for any ethical concerns. If she made an appointment with an 
interviewee for another time, she asked the interviewee to take the schedule with them. This 
ensured proper inforined consent. This paper included a clear introduction to who she was, 
the objectives of the study, how she intended to achieve those objectives, who she was 
interviewing and why. She also was explicit that the interview could only take place if they 
consented to it, and that they could withdraw their consent at any time during the interview. 
Also important was that interviewee identities would remain totally anonymous unless 
they expressed otherwise. The researcher also informed them that the data and information 
derived from the interviews would be kept confidential and would only be published in a 
completely anonymous form, and that such material would be used in this thesis, and for no 
other purpose. She asked interviewees if there was anything they would like to ask her before 
the interview began. The majority of the interviewees were concerned about their impending 
cases, while others asked her how she thought they had faired in their trial. Some 
interviewees, especially those in prison or those who had just stood trial, asked her to give 
them advice on how to go about their trial. They were also concerned about how the 
interview might benefit them. To this, she explained that the interviews would be of no direct 
97 Clifford G. Christians, 138. 
98 Christians, 139 "This has even gained more ground since the Stanley Milgram's experiments. " 
99 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 46 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
benefit to them or their cases. Survivors of genocide thought that if they expressed concerns 
or criticisms in the interviews, authorities would intervene. She was clear that she had no ties 
with government, or any agencies that could benefit or disadvantage them. This made her 
aware of the very real need for interviewee's voices to be heard. 
The majority of the interviewees opted for disclosure of their identities, although the 
researcher made it categorically clear that it was not necessary. Considered in the Rwandan 
context, this was an indication that they had nothing to hide. Nonetheless, her research does 
not reveal the true identity of the persons interviewed, save for government officials who 
were interviewed by virtue of their position. ' 00 
THE RESEARCHER 
The researcher is a Rwandan national whose family moved to Rwanda in 1995. She 
was born and grew up in neighbouring Uganda, the daughter of a refugee mother who fled 
Rwanda in 1961 after the mostly unknown genocide of 1959. According to family history, the 
genocide was more intense in certain areas and her family was affected two years later, at 
which time they fled to Uganda, as along with thousands of other Rwandan nationals. 
Researching aspects of the 1994 Rwandan genocide, particularly the Gacaca courts has been 
of particular interest to the researcher since 2002 when she studied for an LLB Dissertation 
on this subject. 
Because the researcher is a Rwandan national, it was impossible to completely 
divorce herself from the subject at hand. Members of her extended family were killed in the 
genocide, while others in her greater extended family may stand accused of genocide crimes. 
Because the researcher did not witness the genocide, this thesis does not contain first-hand 
100 Even then, she refers to their posts rather than their names. Almost all indicated that they did not mind 
disclosure of their identity. In her assessment, this form of disclosure would not in any way cause any 
embarrassment or harm to this group of interviewees. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 47 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
accounts of the genocide by the author. Nevertheless, the fact that she moved to Rwanda only 
after the genocide and did not experience it, gives the researcher an ability to stand back as an 
interested observer. Furthennore, as a result of this research experience, she has developed in 
her capacity to provide an objective analysis of the literature as well as the empirical data. 
Researching on genocide is sometimes an emotionally draining experience. It was 
gruelling to interview some survivors of genocide, particularly when these interviews evolved 
beyond a simple account of the Gacaca process. At times, individuals would pour out their 
emotions, fears, feelings and detailed experiences during the genocide. It was difficult to 
fathom how survivors endured such horrific events and still managed to move on, living in 
the same villages where those they knew and loved had been killed. However, after listening 
to so many horrific stories, from alleged perpetrators and survivors alike, a researcher 
becomes capable of removing him or herself from the event and can stand back as an 
objective observer. The first interviews were more emotionally draining than the later ones. 
The researcher became acclimatised to the environment and the material researched and was 
capable of concentrating on the important aspects of the research. Even so, there was no full 
escape from the painful reality and consequences of the genocide. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 48 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 3: TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE 
INTRODUCTION 
Transitional justice refers to a series of approaches that societies undertake to deal 
with past systematic human rights abuse. Societies ansing from oppressive regimes usually 
go through a transition with the hope of departing from a culture of impunity, oppressive and 
abusive regimes. 101 It is applied during the time when a nation or society shifts from a period 
of violent conflict or oppression towards peace, democracy, the rule of law, and respect for 
individual and collective rights. 102 At a minimum, Evenson asserts that the transitional justice 
regime must establish a historical record of past abuses which can carry the society forward 
in the process of healing and reconciliation, prevent future abuses through legal and 
institutional reforms, provide remedies to victims and punish perpetrators. 103 
Fenwick defines transitional justice as, "the choices made when democratically 
accountable leaders replace authoritarian predecessors who are presumed responsible for 
gross violations of human rights. " 104 This process is based on fundamental belief in universal 
human rights, and relies on international human rights and humanitarian law in demanding 
that states investigate, punish, repair, and prevent such abuses. 105 Transitional justice is an 
effective option for states in transition because it allows the state to deten-nine what steps 
should be taken to enable it move from its oppressive past to a democratic state that respects 
the rule of law. 
10 1 Fenwick, Mark. "Dilemmas of Transitional Justice, Criminal Prosecutions or Truth Commissions? " The 
Seinan Law Review, 35, no 3.4 (2003), 2 (hereafter Mark Fenwick, Dilemmas of Transitional Justice (2003). 
Available at: litip: /.,, "www. seinan_gu. ac. ip/jura,, homeO4/pdf/3503, /'3503markEDdf (Accessed 10th July 2008) 102 International Center for Transitional Justice. Available at: http: //www. ictj. org/en/tj/ (accessed 6 th February 
2008) 
103 Evenson, Elizabeth, "Truth and Justice in Sierra Leone: Coordination Between Commission and the Court" 
Columbia Law Review, 104, (2004) 730-767,730, (herein Evenson Elizabeth, "Truth and Justice in Sierra 
Leone, (2004 ) http: //www. columbialawreview. org/pdf, /EveiisoD-WebCopy. 12df (Accessed 5th February 
2008) 
104 Fenwick, Dilemmas of Transitional Justice, (2003) 1 
105 International Center for Transitional Justice. Available at: http: /, -www. icti. org/en/tili' (Accessed 12 th July 
2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 49 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
In the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan genocide, and following years of impunity for 
the perpetrators, the nation confronted the consequences of genocide through transitional 
justice. 106 The question in Rwanda was not whether a transition was necessary but what forni 
it should take. Rwanda opted to prosecute all those responsible for the crimes committed but 
at the same time provide measures that allowed for reconciliation of Rwandans. 107 
Transitional justice advocates that victims or survivors, perpetrators, and the rest of the 
population confront the reality and consequences of the abuse. 108 While the victims of the 
Rwandan genocide seek some forin of justice that will enable them to reconcile with the past, 
the entire society must find meaning in life anew. For peace to be lasting in Rwanda, justice 
must be done; 109 only justice will prevent further atrocities. 
This chapter discusses the importance of transitional justice and its relevance to the 
prosecution of genocide in Rwanda. It examines various transitional justice approaches and 
analyses Rwanda's choice of transition. Whether through prosecution by the International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) or national courts or a Gacaca-like process, a society's 
institutions have several ways to deal with the aftennath of genocide. Although Rwanda 
opted for prosecutions, the chapter also addressed other fonns of transitional justice. 
A basic tenet of transitional justice is that the state chooses what fonn of transitional 
justice best suits its circumstances. Transitional justice aims to "recreate a liveable space of 
national peace, build some form of reconciliation between former enemies and put these 
Chapter five 
107 lbid 
108 Kritz, Neil J. "Coming to Terms with Atrocities: A Review of Accountability Mechanisms for Mass 
Violations of Human Rights", Law and Contemporary Problems: 59,4, (1996) 
Accountability for International Crimes and Serious Violations of Fundamental Human Rights, (Duke 
University School of law), 127-152, p127 
109 Des Forges, Allison. Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda, (London: Human Rights Watch 
1999) Justice and Responsibility, I 
S. BYAMUKAMA 50 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
events in the past. "' 10 For this to happen, it is necessary for perpetrators to be accountable for 
the crimes that were committed. 
However, does accountability for the crimes committed and imprisonment of those 
responsible guarantee a long lasting and stable state that respects the rule of law? Forges 
argues that establishing individual responsibility is important to diminish the ascription of a 
collective guilt. "' Without a form of accountability, former victims and perpetrators simply 
cannot live together. One group would feel that their pain is not recognised, while the other 
group may actually feel that there was nothing wrong with what they did. Alternatively, even 
if a group were to recognise their crimes, nothing would prevent them from doing so again. 
The victims would live in permanent fear of the recurrence of the crimes committed against 
them. 
Kritz suggests that persons who have experienced gross human rights abuses and 
trauma should be encouraged to confront their past, since this facilitates closure rather than 
repression and ensures good mental health and stability. 112 The approach used varies 
according to the individual's specific needs, which are detennined in part, by the individual's 
background and the nature of the trauma suffered. ' 13 Kritz suggests that nations, like 
individuals, should also devise means to confront their past to enable them move on. 114 
Because abuses differ in nature, gravity and the willingness of the State to act, there 
cannot be a single systematic approach to the transitional justice that follows after human 
110 Oduro, Franklin. "Reconciling a Divided Nation through a Non- Retributive Justice Approach: Ghana's 
National Reconciliation Initiative, " International Journal of Human Rights, 9,3, (London: Routledge, 
(2005): 327-347,327 
111 Des Forges, Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda, (2005) 
112 Kritz, Neil J. "Coming to Terms with Atrocities: A Review of Accountability Mechanisms for Mass 
Violations of Human Rights", Law and Contemporary Problems: 59,4, (1996) 
Accountability for International Crimes and Serious Violations of Fundamental Human Rights, 127-152,127 
(herein after Kritz, "Coming to Terms with Atrocities"(1996)) 
113 Kritz, "Coming to Terms with Atrocities", 127 
114 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 51 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
rights violations. Transitional justice, whether judicial or non judicial, considers a society's 
cultural and historical context and realistically evaluates the post-conflict society accordingly. 
Although a relatively new phenomenon, this process has gained legitimacy and 
applicability in the recent past by states trying to deal with the aftermath of gross human 
rights violations. 1 15 In the immediate aftermath of the genocide, the Rwandan government 
determined that all those who were responsible for the commission of genocide should be 
held accountable for their actions. The government also sought to reconcile and reconstruct 
Rwandan society. This was a particular challenge since every community was made up of 
individuals who had either perpetrated crimes, were victims of crimes or who had witnessed 
the crimes committed. 
THE FORM OF TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE 
Transitional justice does not have one set of goals because appropriate mechanisms 
for dealing with human rights violations depend on the particular goals set by the society in 
transition. 116 Inevitably, different societies will have distinct goals. That said, evaluating the 
success of any process should be based on established goals. Fenwick lists some of the many 
goals of transitional justice as including; Discovering and publicising the truth about past 
human rights abuses, making a symbolic break with the past, promoting the rule of law and 
115 Fenwick asserts that transitional justice gained recognition in the aftermath of the cold war and the 'third 
wave' of democratisation for legal reformers, human rights activists, diplomats and researchers. Mark 
Fenwick, (2003) 1 
116 Any justice system aims at retribution, deterrence, rehabilitation, restoration and social solidarity or 
condemnation of the crimes committed. Lyn Graybill and Kimberly Lanegran, "Truth Justice and 
Reconciliation in Africa: Issues and Cases, " African Studies Quarterly, The Online Journal for African 
Studies, 8,1, (2004) ht p: //www. africa. ufl. edu/asq/Y8/v8ilal. htm - edn20 quoting Aukerman, Miriam, 
"Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime: A Framework for understanding Transitional Justice" Harvard Human 
Rights Journal, (2002), 45. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 52 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
strengthening democratic institutions, deterring future wrongdoing, punishing the perpetrators 
of crimes, healing victims and achieving social reconstruction and reconciliation. 
How then does a state determine what transitional approach to use? Is it political 
choice, legal or moral obligation? Oduro is of the view that a states' decision on the forrn 
transitional justice should take is dictated by the history of the state, the nature of transition, 
the particular needs of the state in transition (or at least that which they can afford), the 
political forum and the distribution of political power during and after the transition. 
118 He 
suggests that where transition to democracy is achieved by negotiation, Truth Commissions 
and amnesties are usually the preferred option and prosecution may prove impossible. 
119 This 
is because the 'new' and 'old order', still share power as has been the case in Chile, 
Argentina, Brazil and South Affica. 120 Orentlicher suggests that prosecution is impossible 
when the military hands over civil authority to the civilian regime, but still retains power by 
117 Fenwick, Mark (2003), 2. Hayner provides a criteria for Truth Commissions and argues that the process 
should be judged by the degree to which it engages the public in understanding the unknown, whether it 
gains full participation from all actors in the course of its investigations (including former perpetrators and 
victims), whether its work is positive and supportive to victims and survivors, whether the commission's 
final written report is evaluated according to the extent of truth that is revealed, as well as its proposals for 
reparations and reform. She also asserts that the degree to which the commission's work contributes to long- 
term reconciliation, healing, and reform will be determined largely by whether perpetrators or state officials 
acknowledge and apologize for wrongs, whether and how the commission's report is distributed and put to 
use, and whether its core recommendations are implemented. Lyn Graybill and Kimberly Lanegran (2002) 
quoting Pricilla Hayner, Unspeakable Truths: Confronting state Terror and Atrocity: How Truth 
Commissions Around the World are Challenging the Past and Shaping the Future", New York: Routledge 
(2001), 252 
This view is supported by Evenson (2004), 73 1, who also suggests that Truth Commissions generally aim to 
"establish a historical record of abuse and to investigate the causes and consequences of these abuses using a 
variety of methodologies, including holding public hearings, conducting fact finding missions, and taking 
statements from victims, witnesses, and even perpetrators. " 
118 Oduro, Franklin, (2005) 330 quoting Samuel P. Huntington, 'Third Wave: Democratisation in the late 201h 
Century in Niel J. Kritz (ed) Transitional Justice, Vol. I (Washington DC: USIP Press, 1995), 72 
119 lbid 
120 Quoting Skaar Elm, Graybill suggests that truth commission are usually chosen in states where the relative 
strength of the outgoing and new regime is equal. Lyn Graybill, quoting Skaar Elin, "Truth Commissions, 
Trials-or Nothing? Policy Options in Democratic Transitions, " Third World Quarterly, 20,6. (1999): 1109- 
1128,1110 
S. BYAMUKAMA 53 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
dictating the terrns and conditions of the state. 121 In these circumstances, states may opt to 
offer de facto impunity, total amnesty to ensure a total amnesia of their crimes. 
There can be no meaningful consolidation of democracy when a civilian government 
has to assure the military that human rights prosecutions will not be pursued. " 123 This begs 
the question; is transitional justice a "mere political compromise in which justice becomes a 
compromise of a political calculation? 
Orentlicher asserts that prosecution is possible where the transition was brought about 
by external conquest as was the case of Gennany and Japan. 125 Oduro is of the view that the 
choice is dependant on the relative strength of the demands of the outgoing regime and the 
general public. Trials are an obvious choice when the outgoing regime is weaker, or has very 
little influence on the new regime. 
The Rwandan genocide was halted by an incoming regime that had no ties with the 
"old order, " and as such, a political power struggle between the old and new order was non- 
existent. In determining the transitional justice approach to follow, the Rwandan government 
considered the nature of the Rwandan genocide, how it was perpetrated, the history of 
Rwanda and arguably why the genocide took place in the first place. It had to take into 
account the fact that alleged perpetrators and their victims live side by side, share the same 
geographical space and participate in everyday activities together. Perhaps most importantly, 
121 Orentlicher, Diane, "Settling Accounts: The Duty to Prosecute Human Rights Violations of a Prior Regime, " 
The Yale Law Journal, 100,8, Symposium: International law, (1991) 2539 ffi 24 (herein Diane Orentlicher, 
Settling Accounts) This was the case when in the 1980s, Chilean armed forces determined when, where and 
against whom the law would apply. After 16 years of military rule, General Pinochet prepared to come back 
to power under civilian rule and warned, "no one is going to touch my people. The day they do, the state of 
law will come to an end. " Ibid, 2544, fn2I and fn3 quoting America's Watch, Chile in Transition: Human 
Rights Since the Plebiscite 1988-1989 (1989) at 73 
122 Diana Orentlicher, 2539. In 1973, more than 348 people were killed and 550 houses burned in 48 hours in 
Gisenyi Province alone. At least 248 people were accused and arrested, but released in less than one month. 
Melvem (2004), 15 
123 Orentlicher, 2544, fn 21 
124 Graybill and Lanegran, Truth, Justice and Reconciliation in Africa, (2004), 2 
125 Orentlicher, 2544, EaN 
S. BYAMUKAMA 54 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
transitional justice in Rwanda had to ensure the ongoing peace and security of the state. As 
such, the Rwandan Government had to deten-nine what she aimed to achieve, how she would 
achieve it, and whether the choice or combination of transitional arrangements was feasible. 
in choosing a forin of transitional justice, Clerk asserts that the society has to 
determine whether it is necessary and feasible to punish the perpetrators of mass crimes. 126 
What is punishment designed to achieve; fulfilling a moral obligation to bring the guilty to 
account, to deter future perpetrators, or to contribute to the wider objectives such as 
reconciliation? 
Societies may intend to achieve the same objective but may choose different 
transitional justice forms depending on their feasibility. The Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission in South Africa, the Intemational Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the 
Gacaca courts in Rwanda for example all aimed at reconciliation. The Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission offered amnesty to apartheid leaders in exchange for the truth 
about the crimes committed against the black majority in South Aftica. Conversely, the 
preamble to the statute of the ICTR states that "prosecution... would... contribute to the 
process of national reconciliation and to the restoration and maintenance of peace. "' 27 
Consequently, the ICTR opted for the selective prosecution of the master-minders of the 
genocide. Like truth and reconciliation commissions and international courts, the Gacaca 
process also aims at reconciliation, but it provides neither amnesty nor selective 
prosecution. 1 28 
A society can have more than one goal for transitional justice. However, to achieve 
the multiple objectives, separate forms of transitional justice may be applied. 129 The 
126 Clerk, Phil. Justice Without Lawyers, Doctorial Thesis, University of Oxford, (2005) 
127 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Statute 
128 Chapters five, six and seven 
129Transitional justice can take the form of truth commissions, amnesty, lustration or prosecution, as discussed 
later in this chapter. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 55 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
international community may determine that some form of transitional justice should take 
place in a post-conflict state. However, while the international community may debate on 
what particular transitional justice fonn a country could take, (in effect discussing the 
alternatives) it cannot decide what form it should take. Aukerman asserts that "those who 
have not suffered cannot presume to determine for those who have, what should be attempted 
through transitional justice. " 130 Accordingly, the researcher intends to analyse the specific 
transitional goals Rwanda aimed to achieve, and the extent to which these have been 
achieved through transitional justice. 
The crimes in question; genocide and crimes against humanity, are international 
crimes that concern all of mankind. These crimes are usually committed with state complicity 
and therefore states may be unable or unwilling to hold accountable those responsible for 
such crimes. It is important to have agreed international legal standards for each transitional 
process, and for the international community to have a say in transitional justice especially in 
societies that cnmes against humanity have occurred. "Transitional justice must reflect the 
needs, desires, and political realities of the victimized society, while at the same time 
recognising the international community's right and responsibility to intervene. " 131 
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
The most common form of transitional justice embraced by the international 
community is prosecution. The obligation of successor regimes to hold accountable those 
responsible for human rights atrocities can be traced back to the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials 
for atrocities committed after World War 11.132 Interestingly, although the Nuremberg 
precedent and the Japanese War Crimes judgments followed defeat in an international war, an 
130Aukerman, Miriam. "Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime: A Framework for understanding Transitional 
Justice" Harvard Human Rights Journal, (2002), 46 
Ibid. 
132 Evenson, Truth and Justice in Sierra Leone, (2004), 748 
S. BYAMUKkMA 56 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
imposed peace, and then an externally constituted political-judicial authority, they remain the 
templates on which all similar issues- moral, legal, jurisprudential- are judged. 133 
Nevertheless, prosecutions post-Nuremberg have been the exception rather than the nonn. "In 
the wake of World War 11... states were more inclined to avoid pressing human rights 
concerns with other governments, in large because they feared that such actions would 
actually exacerbate international tensions. " 134 
However, the international community has demonstrated a renewed commitment of 
late to bring justice and healing to persons who have experienced gross human rights 
atrocities. This has been evidenced by the establishment of international tribunals in the 
former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, as well as truth commissions in South Affica, 
along with a revival of traditional courts, such as Rwanda's Gacaca. These bodies indicate 
that "leaming the truth about past human rights violations and punishing those responsible for 
them are prerequisites for the establishment of democracy and respect of the rule of law. " 135 
Assuming that individuals or groups who have been victims of hideous atrocities will simply 
forget about them or expunge their feelings, without some form of accounting and some 
semblance of justice, is to leave in place the seeds of future conflict, 136 Doing nothing only 
promotes impunity and adds injury to the parties involved. 
133 Stanley Cohen, "State Crimes and Previous Regimes: Knowledge, Accountability, and the Policing of the 
Past, " Law and Social Enquiry, 20,1, (1995, )7-50,8 
134 Orentlicher, Diane. "Settling Accounts: The Duty to Prosecute Human Rights Violations of a Prior Regime", 
The Yale Journal, 100,8, (1991) 253 7-2615,2558. 
Orentlicher also suggests that during the Cold War, human rights concerns were sidelined by both camps and 
the Commission on Human Rights of the United Nations faced strong opposition in its efforts to provide 
Human Rights guarantees. The Commission failed to finish drafting the International Convention on Civil 
and Political Rights, G. A Res 2200,21 UN GAOR Supp (No 16) at 52,999 U. N. T. S 171, Adopted 16 Dec 
1966 and the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights G. A res 2200A, 21 U. N 
GAOR Supp (No 16) at 49UN Doe A/6316 (1966) (entered into force 3 Jan 1976) that would be binding on 
states until the mid 50's and these conventions were only adapted by the General Assembly in 1966 and 
even then, only came into force in 1976 
135 Graybill and Lanegran, "Truth, Justice and Reconciliation in Africa, " (2004), 2 
136 y 
. ritZ, (1996), 127 
S. BYAMUKAMA 57 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Without some form of accountability, past atrocities inevitably fuel future ones. 137 
The genocide and the gross human rights violations that took place in Rwanda and the former 
Yugoslavia can be attributed, at least in part, to the state's failure to address previous 
atrocities. The only hope of breaking the cycle of violence is through a public 
acknowledgement of past violence, and exposing those responsible. "Victims have a deep 
need for acknowledgment, and they cannot get on with building the future until their calls for 
justice have been answered. " 138 For example, in 1967 some 20,000 Tutsi were killed and 
300,000 refugees had fled abroad in a wave of mass killings in Rwanda. 139 None of these 
crimes were ever investigated, or those responsible held accountable for their crimes. Blanket 
amnesties without any recognition of the past is simply not an option. "A nation's unity 
depends on a shared identity, which in turn depends largely on a shared memory. " 140 
There is clearly a "duty to prosecute gross violations of human rights under prevailing 
international nornis ... to 
facilitate a smoother political transition and the development of the 
rule of law. " 141 However, prosecution of alleged perpetrators can only be used in a limited 
number of cases, which is why it may sometimes be an unwise form of transitional justice. 
States must determine whether prosecution is not only feasible but also desirable. Bipolar 
nature of trials, in which prosecutions tend to make a clear distinction between the innocent 
and the guilty, makes them entirely inappropriate for redressing the systemic exploitation and 
violence which many transitioning societies have experienced. 142 
137 Aukerman, "Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime" (2002) 47 
138 Aukerman, Miriam. 47, quoting Richard Goldstone, the former Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal 
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda; Goldstone Richard, "Exposing Human Rights Abuses- A 
Help or Hindrance to Reconciliation? " Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly 22 (1995) 615 
139 Des Forges, Leave None to Tell the Story, 40 
140 Aukerman, "Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime, (2002) 47 
14 1 Fenwick Dilemmas of Transitional Justice, (2003) 4 
142 Graybill, Lyn and Kimberly Lanegran, "Truth Justice and Reconciliation in Africa. " African Studies 
Quarterly, 8(1) (2004) Available at: htti): //www. africa. ufl. edu/asg/vS/v8ilal. htm - -edn20 
(Accessed 10 
June 2008). Also refer to Chapter five. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 58 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Domestic criminal justice systems have sometimes been criticised for ignoring the 
needs and desires of victims, for 'stealing conflicts' from those involved. Similar problems 
can arise if transitional justice only reflects the priorities of the international community (or 
of the powerful states within it), and not those of the affected country. 143 Orentlicher suggests 
that just as an ordinary crime is not simply an offense against an individual victim but against 
the entire society, crimes against humanity are not merely crimes against the particular 
traumatised society, but are crimes against humanity as a whole. 144 There must be a balance 
between meeting internationally acceptable standards, which involves allowing the 
international community involvement within a state, at least in an overseeing capacity, but 
also leaving the primary duty to deal with the human rights violation to the country in 
transition. 
Once it had determined that it would adopt some form of transitional justice, Rwanda 
had to decide on the form that would best allow for peace, democracy, rule of law and 
reconciliation to take place. 145 Most importantly, the state wanted to ensure that transitional 
justice would be a means for finding the truth. Knowledge of what truly happened in the 
genocide would allow both for a historically accepted record of the events that took place, as 
well as for accountability and reconciliation. Cohen suggests that 'truth' can be an objective 
143 Aukerman, Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime, (2002) 46 
144 Ibid. 
14"'Although international law has struggled to provide a normative framework for the process, there is still 
enormous variation in terms of practice. Some countries have done simply nothing. Cambodia is an example. 
[The government has] prevaricated for years, publicly pledging commitment to a process yet constantly 
devising new obstacles, leaving few observers very confident about its sincerity. South Africa and Sierra 
Leone opted for truth commissions and amnesty. Sierra Leone subsequently reversed itself, agreeing to 
prosecution by an international tribunal of 'those who bear the greatest responsibility', a concept whose 
application seems to have more to do with the generosity of international donors in an institution dependent 
on voluntary contributions than any autonomous legal meaning. The 'international community' ostensibly 
supported Sierra Leone's efforts at criminal accountability, but actually contributed only enough money for a 
handful of trials. " Schabas William, "The Rwandan Courts in Quest of Accountability Genocide Trials and 
Gacaca Courts" Journal of International Criminal Justice 3 (Oxford University Press, 2005) 879-895,882, 
footnote II 
S. BYAMUKAMA 59 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
in itself that can be achieved through truth commissions, or "intrinsically tied to deciding 
what to do with individual offenders or wider social goals such as reconciliation. " 
Other than 'truth, ' the state hoped that the fonn of transition would take into account 
both the possibility of justice and holding accountable all those responsible for the crimes 
committed. This was especially relevant because the crimes in question were international 
law crimes. Additionally, the state believed that immunity, amnesty, indemnity were not an 
option in a society where impunity had been historically integrated in the society. 147 Finally, 
the form of transition had to take into account the possibility of reconciliation and 
reconstruction of the society. 
Transitional Justice in Rwanda could have taken the fonn of lustration, truth 
commission and even impunity. However, Rwanda from the onset opted for prosecution, 
promising to punish all those who participated in the genocide. 148 However worthy the 
intention, achieving this goal was an enormous undertaking. The statistics suggest that more 
than 800,000 people in the entire country have been accused of genocide crimes. As such, 
'traditional' prosecution was not sufficient. 149 It would take more than 100 years to prosecute 
the 120,000 people in prisons alone. In order to ensure that trials would proceed at a more 
acceptable rate, it was detennined that prosecutions would take place at three levels; the 
146 Stanley Cohen, "State Crimes and Previous Regimes" (1995), 11 
147 "Amnistie g6n6rale et inconditionnelle est accord6e pour toutes les infractions commises A loccasion de la 
R6volution Sociale pendant la p6riode du ler octobre 1959 au ler juillet 1962 et qui, en raison de leur 
nature, de leur mobile, des circonstances ou des motifs qui les ont inspir6es, rentrent dans le cadre de la 
participation A la lutte de lib&ration nationale et revetent ainsi un caract&e politique m8me si elles 
constituent des infractions de droit commun. >> Amnesty granted to killers of the Tutsi in 1959-63: Decree of 
30 Nov 1974 (J. 0,1974) 626 
148 "The Rwandan Government has always acknowledged that processes of justice, reconciliation and healing 
require that perpetrators are brought to account for their wrongdoing as quickly as possible. " Corey Allison 
and Joireman Sandra, "Retributive Justice: The Gacaca courts in Rwanda, " African Affairs, 103 (2004)73- 
89,82 
149 Available at: www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. rw. Also refer to chapter five. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 60 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
International Tribunal for Rwanda, ' 50 the domestic cnminal justice system 15 1 and through 
traditional Gacaca courts. 152 
IMPUNITY 
Impunity is exemption from punishment that can take the fon-n of immunity, 
indemnity or amnesty. Amnesty is defined as the abolition and forgetfulness of a crime. 153 it 
is an official act barring prosecution and accountability. Like 'amnesia, ' amnesty derives 
from the Greek word "amnesia" to mean "forgetfulness" or "oblivion"; an amnesty 
constitutes a declaration that the Government intends to obliterate a crime. ' S4 
Amnesty usually takes place as a means to protect national and general interests. It 
may be conditional or absolute. For example, Chilean amnesty occurred under General 
Pinochet, and in Argentina amnesty took place under General Bigone. In these cases of 
absolute amnesty, the state granted itself amnesty to protect itself from any forrn of 
accountability. 155 Conversely, the amnesty that took place in South Aftica was a discretionary 
kind of amnesty, granted only when an applicant had fulfilled conditions set up by the state 
courts. 
In 2006, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda offered total amnesty to 
Joseph Kony, head of the Lord Resistance Anny and his colleagues in exchange for 
"0 Discussed later in this Chapter 
15' See Chapter five, 
See Chapter six, 153 
Black's Law Dictionary 
154 Diane Orentlicher, 2543, fn 14 
155 Diana Orentlicher, 2539 
156 Freeman, M and Hayner, P, "The Truth Commissions of South Africa and Guatemala" International Centre 
for Transitional Justice, available at 
litp: //www. idea. int/publications'reconciliation/Upload/reconciliation chapO8cs-safrica. pd (accessed 10th 
July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 61 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
abandoning the civil war he (Kony) had waged in Northern Uganda for 20 years. 157 The 
International Criminal Court had on the 13 th October 2005 issued warrants of arrests for five 
senior members of the LRA movements for crimes against humanity and war crimes. 158 
From a human rights legal perspective, genocide and crimes against humanity lie beyond the 
realm of impunity. However, the Ugandan example suggests that when a state commits to 
transitional justice, sometimes a balance between accountability, rule of law, peace, security 
and national interests has to be struek. 
Impunity was not an option for Rwanda for a number of reasons. First, the crimes 
committed in Rwanda amounted to the crime of genocide, which obliges both the state 
(Rwanda) and the international community to act. Secondly, the state wanted to ensure that 
any transitional justice system it adopted would break the culture of impunity, not perpetuate 
it. As noted in chapter one, previous genocides had taken place in Rwanda and had gone 
unpunished. It can be argued that one of the reasons that many people responded to the call to 
kill their neighbours in the 1994 genocide was the belief that there would be no 
consequences. Genocide had been committed in Rwanda before and the perpetrators had 
gotten away with it. 159 For these reasons, the Rwandan government decided, this time, 
amnesia was not an option. 
157 Jeevan Vasagar, "Lord Resistance Army is offered Amnesty by Uganda", The Guardian, 5 July 2006. 
Available at: http: /,, "kv, Nw. guardian. co. uk,, 'ui4andaiStory/O,. 1812952,00. html. Accessed 05.02.2008 Also see 
Ssenyonjo Manisuli, "The International Criminal Court and the Lord Resistance Army Leaders: Prosecution 
or Amnesty? " International Criminal Law Review, 7,2-3,2007,361-389 (29) Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 
158 Ibid. The Government of Uganda and the Lord Resistance Army are currently in peace talks in which the 
LRA is expected to abandon the war. The government is entering negotiations with the International 
Criminal Court to drop the warrants of arrest against the warlords who would be prosecuted by the domestic 
law of Uganda. Prosecution for the rest of the LRA rebels will be through traditional reconciliation 
mechanism. Erin K Baines, "The Haunting of Alice: Local Approaches to Justice and Reconciliation in 
Northern Uganda", International Journal of Transitional Justice" (2007), 1,1,91-114. Available at: 
littp: //iiti. oxfordiournals. oriy. accessed 5/2/2008 
159 See Chapter I 
S. BYAMUKAMA 62 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
TRUTH COMMISSIONS 
South Aftica has become a contemporary standard example of truth commissions, 
based on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) established in 1995.160 The aim of 
a truth commission is to investigate human right abuses, while bringing to light the 
consequences of these abuses on the victims, and the community as a whole. The overriding 
objective is not to prosecute the perpetrators of these crimes but ultimately to create an 
opportunity to understand the past, so that members of the society can forgive and 
reconcile. 161 In the course of truth commissions, the victims may be compensated by the state 
in the form of free education, free medical and psychological treatment, and even monetary 
compensation. 1 62 Commissions often establish permanent reminders of the legacy of such 
abuses, such as monuments and ceremonies, with the aim of acknowledging the pain of the 
victims. 
Following the genocide, Rwanda aimed at reconciliation, but determined that truth 
without some form of accountability would not be an option. Members of the ruling party, the 
Rwandan Patriotic Front, saw justice both as a moral duty to the survivors and as a necessity 
for reconciliation. 164 "1 don't understand what reconciliation would mean unless some of 
those responsible were brought to justice. "' 65 Rwanda established a National Unity and 
160 "For all the criticisms against it, the TRC marked a decisive turning point in South African history by 
"narrowing the range of permissible lies". Like no other commission before it, the TRC had a truly 
international impact, leading to great interest in this kind of mechanism all around the world. Although the 
legacy of apartheid continues to haunt South Africa, this cannot be attributed to particular failures of the 
TRC. " Freeman, M and Hayner, P, "The Truth Commissions of South Africa and Guatemala" International 
Centre for Transitional Justice, available at 
http: //N, -ww. idea. int/publications/reconciliation/upload,, "reconciliation chapO8cs-safrica. pdf (accessed 10th 
July 2008) 
161 Oduro, 331 
162 lbid, 331 
163 Survivors of genocide in Rwanda have been compensated with free education, free housing (built estates), 
free medical and psychological treatment. However, many feel that more monetary compensation should be 
provided. Permanent reminders and memorials of the genocide have also been established. 
164 Harrell, Peter E., Rwanda's Gamble: Gacaca and a New Model Of Transitional Justice, (New York: Writers 
Club Press, 2003), 37 
165 lbid, 37, Quoting President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame 
S. BYAMUKAMA 63 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Reconciliation Commission (NURC) in accordance with its Constitution. 166 Although NURC 
aims at unity and reconciliation, it only provides a supportive role in dealing with the 
consequences of the genocide. 
The NURC seeks to encourage national unity and reconciliation through civic 
education to promote a culture of tolerance, unity and reconciliation. This is encouraged 
through training throughout all levels of Rwandan society, using seminars and workshops. 167 
The Commission provides civic education called ingando to university students, released 
prisoners, and the general public. In partnership with other organisations, the Commission 168 
provides vocational training to released prisoners as a means to reintegrate fon-ner inmates 
into society. Nevertheless, the commission is not a legal forum through which past human 
right abuses are resolved. 
LuSTRATION 
Some goveniments have opted for a form of redress called lustration, ' 69 where all 
individuals connected with the past regime are banned from holding public office or working 
in the civil service, the military, police, teachers and judges. This policy has been 
implemented predominantly in countries that were once part of the Soviet bloc, including 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and former East Germany. It was perceived that former 
Communists could not be trusted to carry out democratic reforins, therefore the new 
governments reacted by not only outlawing the party and prosecuting anyone deemed to have 
166 See Article 178 of the 2003 Rwanda Constitution. The NURC was created by law N': 03/99 of 12/03/1999. 
See http: //www. nurc. gov. rw/ (Accessed 10"' July 2008) 
167 http: //www. nurc. gov. rw/ (Accessed I Oh July 2008) 
168 European Union, Department For International Development (DFID), United Nations Develpoment 
Programme (UNDP), United States Development for International Development (USAID), German 
Technical Cooperation and the South African Embassy in Kigali, Rwanda. Available at: 
littp: //w-, &, w. iiurc. Rov. rw/index. pbp? Part, (accessed 5th February 2008) 
169 Lustration is a Latin word meaning "put light on or illuminate; purification by sacrifice or by purging" Mark 
S Ellis, Purging the Past: The Current State of Lustration laws in the Former Communist Bloc", Law and 
Contemporary Problems, 59,4, Accountability for International Crimes and Serious Violations of 
Fundamental Human Rights, (1996), 181-196 
S. BYAMUKAMA 64 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
connections with the party but also restricting those individuals from certain government and 
non government Posts. 170 Although lustration laws are controversial, they remain the main 
method used by these countries to screen former communist members for public office. Such 
information is generally obtained from secret police files to determine whether suspected 
individuals collaborated with the former state security service. 171 
Lustration was not an option for Rwanda because its means did not fulfil the 
objectives of justice that the state set out to achieve. In Rwanda, persons from the past regime 
who are not convicted of the crime of genocide or crimes against humanity are integrated in 
the Government structure. However, Article 76 of Organic law 16/2004 provides that persons 
convicted of genocide crimes classified in the first category are liable to the withdrawal of 
their civil rights, and the perpetual, total loss of these civil rights, in confortnity with the 
Penal Code. Those in category two who are accused of 'senous' crimes described in Article 
51 (1) of the organic law are liable to pennanent deprivation of the right to vote, to eligibility, 
to be an expert witness in rulings and trials, except in case of giving mere evidence in 
investigations, to possess and carry fire an-ns, to serve in the armed forces, to serve in the 
police, to be in the public service, to be a teacher, medical staff in public or private service. 
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION OF INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
States are legally obliged to prosecute or at least investigate repeated human rights 
violations. Failure to do so is considered to be a violation of customary international law. 172 
Transitional justice in the form of prosecutions has been undertaken on numerous occasions 
through international tribunals, such as the Nuremburg trials, the International Criminal 
Tribunals for Rwanda (ICTR) and Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Court 
(ICC), the Special Court for Sierra Leonc, as well as in national courts, such as the Greek 
IN Ellis, Mark S, Purging the Past, (1996)181 
171 Ibid. 
172 Orentlicher, Settling Accounts (1991) 2540 
S. BYAMUKAMA 65 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
trials of former military rulers, Argentina's junta trials, the prosee-ution of two foriner 
Presidents of South Korea, 173 and prosecution of genocide in Rwanda. There are good 
reasons for endorsing prosecution as a form of transitional justice. 
A key argument in favour of international prosecutions is that they can more 
effectively prosecute international crimes in circumstances where the state may be unable or 
unwilling to do so. Moreover, international courts are more technically skilled, have the 
finances, may be more impartial and are more visible to the media than would be national 
courts, making them better placed to prosecute cnmes of such magnitude. 174 
Whether international or domestic, prosecutions provide the victims with a sense that their 
suffering has been recognised and that justice has been done. When prosecutions are carried 
out by international tribunals, they serve as a means to acknowledge the global importance of 
the crime committed and provide a forum of international recognition of the pain suffered by 
the victims. At the same time, prosecutions break the cycle of impunity and serve to prevent 
the commission of future crimes. According to Orentlicher, "the first step on the road to total 
domination is to kill the buridicial] person in man, likewise, the first essential step towards 
liberty is the revival of the legal impulse in man. " 175 
One of the reasons why large numbers of people joined in the killing of Rwandan 
Tutsis was because previous similar abuses had taken place that had not only gone 
unpunished, but were even rewarded. 176 Prosecutions serve to bestow a judicial confin-nation 
of the facts, and provide clear evidence to the community that those who attempt to commit 
human right abuses will be held accountable. 177 
173 Fenwick, Dilemmas of Transitional Justice (2003), 6 
174 Zolo Danilo, "Peace through Criminal law? " Journal of International Criminal Justice, (2004)2 (3)727-234 
(Editorial), 727 
175 Orentlicher, 2542, fn 9 
176 See Chapter one 
177 Kritz, "Coming to Terms with Atrocities" (1996), 128 
S. BYAMUKAMA 66 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
As a result, prosecutions can serve as a powerful deterrent to future human rights abuses. It is 
vital that prosecutions ensure individual accountability for mines, avoiding a scenario where 
an entire ethnic, religious or political group would be regarded guilty of the human rights 
abuse. 
By holding individuals responsible for the crimes committed, it was 
hoped that particular ethnic or religious groups (or even a political 
organisation) would not be held responsible for such crimes by 
members of other ethnic or religious groups, and that the guilt of the 
few would not be shifted to the innocent. 178 
Individual prosecutions reject the dangerous culture of collective guilt and retribution that 
often produces further cycles of resentment and hostility. 179 
While Gacaca statistics show that as many as 800,000 people participated in the 
genocide, some Hutu remained innocent. Of the one million victims, it is estimated that 
approximately 30,000 of these were moderate Hutu. There are also unreported heroic acts of 
some Hutu who lost their lives trying to save others. 180 Many Tutsi attribute their survival to 
their Hutu neighbours and ftiends who risked their own lives by hiding and saving them. 
Furthermore, some of the individuals who participated in the genocide were forced or coerced 
into committing these crimes, and as such may not be charged with genocide since they 
lacked dolus specialis. Not only do such persons lack the criminal intent to commit the 
alleged crime, but they also lack the specific element of dolus specialis for the crime to 
amount to genocide. 181 
178 Mirko, n 5,218 quoting Prosecutor v Momir Nickolic [2003], ICTY (Trial Chamber), [58]-[60] 
179 Kritz, 128 
180 African Rights, Confessing to Genocide, Response to Rwanda's Genocide Law (Kigali: A Publication of 
African Rights, 2000). This piece of research is primarily based on empirical data collected in Rwanda in 
2000. 
18 'Cassese, A, International Criminal Law, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003j 103, "Genocide is a 
typical crime based on the depersonalisation of the victim... the victim is not targeted on account of his or 
her individual qualities or characteristics, but only that he or she is a member of a group... this intent 
amounts to dolus specialis. " 
S. BYAMUKAMA 67 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Rwanda has had a longstanding culture of obedience towards authority rather than 
towards the law. 182 One of the most important acts of the ICTR has been its message that 
cabinet ministers, high ranking officials and even a Prime minister are not above the law. 
Many people participated in the genocide because they were simply 'following orders'. 
Prosecutions by the ICTR and the national courts, which have concurrent jurisdiction over 
4 authority figures', have acted to assure the people of Rwanda that past, present and future 
abuses will be prosecuted by law. The prosecution of high-ranking government officials 
from the previous regime, as well as RPF soldiers from the current regime who killed 
suspected genocidaires in acts of revenge in the immediate aftermath of the genocide, 183 
indicate that no one is above the law. This is possibly one of the most important lessons in the 
Rwandan transitional justice. 
After the genocide, Rwandans were suspicious of one another, and the uncertainty and 
distrust that resulted from these suspicions made peaceful relations and good neighbourliness 
throughout the country impossible. The Gacaca process was embraced as a means to counter 
the lasting mistrust between individuals, and build a society that is reconciled with the past. 
As a result, the legitimacy of the Gacaca process depends on the principle of personal 
accountability. If the Gacaca prosecutions have achieved anything, they have prevented an 
entire group of people from being collectively criminalised. 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION 
If and when a society decides to undertake prosecution as a means of transitional 
justice, subsequent trials must meet acceptable standards of fair trial. Because transitional 
justice seeks to address human rights abuses, it is necessary that human rights be respected 
throughout, otherwise the legitimacy of the process will be in question. Due process not only 
Chapter one 
183 New Times, Rwanda's English Daily Newspaper, 
(Accessed 12'h June 2008) 
II th June 2008. Available at: www. newtimes. co. rw 
S. BYkMUKAMA 68 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
acts as a means to respect human rights, but ultimately gives legitimacy to trials and 
convictions. "The failure to adhere scrupulously to fair trial standards and apply laws equally 
may lead to the perception that trials are merely exercises in partisan politics or victor's 
justice. "' 84 The parameters of what defines a 'fair trial' have been universally agreed on; 
these include the right to be heard, the right to defense council, to be regarded innocent until 
proven guilty, the rights to a fair and impartial tribunal, and a right to be tried without undue 
delay. 185 
Ensuring that due process is followed is both tedious and expensive. In Rwanda, the 
office of the Gacaca courts estimates that the total number of persons implicated in the crime 
of genocide is 818,564.186 The international community opted to undertake only selective 
prosecutions of the key planners of the genocide. 
After the genocide, the United Nations Security Council, under Chapter VII of the UN 
Charter, established the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in Arusha 
Tanzania. 1 87 The tribunal decided to solely prosecute higb-ranking officials of the 
Goverm-nent. Over the years, the ICTR has had in its custody one former Prime Minister, II 
fonrier Cabinet Ministers, 13 senior military officers, 16 high-ranking government 
administrators, five religious leaders, and a variety of other government officials and 
businessmen. 1 88 As of May 2008, the ICTR had arrested a total of 74 persons and had 
completed 35 cases. There are 28 detainees currently on trial and six are still awaiting trial. 
There are currently a total of 62 detainees, 54 in Arusha and seven serving sentences in other 
jurisdictions. Five of the accused have been acquitted, four released, three transferred to 
national jurisdiction, and two are awaiting transfer to Arusha. 
Aukerman (2002) 49 
185 See Article 14, International Convention on Civil and Political Rights. Discussed further in Chapter 4. 
186 Available at: www. inkiko-Racaca. gov. rw (Accessed 16th July 2008) 
197 Warbrick, C. "Referring an Indictment from the ICTY and ICTR to Another Court- Rule II bis and the 
Consequences for the Law of Extradition", ICLQ, 55 (2006) 219-226 
Available at: http: //69.94.11.53/default. htm (last accessed 24th June 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 69 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The ICTR, in cooperation with the Rwandan Government, is in the process of transferring 
cases to Rwanda and other jurisdictions. ' 89 So far, the ICTR has transferred 30 case files to 
Rwandan jurisdiction and have entered into negotiations to transfer 15 other cases from the 
Tribunal to other jurisdictions. 
Although the ICTR has achieved many laudable successes, these have been 
overshadowed by the tribunal's slow pace. The tribunal is also dogged by accusation of 
meting out "expensive justice. "' 91 These criticisms have been exacerbated by the tribunal 
being based in Arusha, outside the jurisdiction in which the crimes were committed. 
Consequently, witnesses and evidence must be transported to the relevant tribunal at great 
expense. Furthermore, hiring the expert staff to enable such high-profile prosecutions has 
made the entire undertaking a costly venture. 
Because the expense of international trials is so high, selective prosecutions have 
become the norm in most transitional justice prosecutions. 192 The goal of limited 
prosecutions, therefore, is to use limited resources on the most culpable offenders. The 
prosecution of perpetrators of Rwandan genocide has been selective in scope within both the 
national and international courts. 
189 In its Resolution 1503 (2003), the Security Council urged the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to 
formalise a strategy in order to allow it to achieve its objective of completing investigations by the end of 
2004, all trial activities at first instance by the end of 2008, and all of its work in 2010 ("Completion 
Strategy"). Dennis Byron, Letter dated 12 May 2008 from the President of the International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda to the President of the Security Council, Report on the Completion Strategy of the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (as of Is, May 2008). See 
http: //69.94.11.53/ENGLISH/completionstrat/s-2008-322e. pdf (accessed 10th July 2008) 
90 See the "Twelfth Annual Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons 
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in 
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations 
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between I January and 31 December 1994. " Available at: 
littp: //69.94.11.53/default. hti-n Last updated, 5/5/2008. (accessed 21st May 2008) 
191 The Tribunal has a total workforce of over 1000 people from over 80 nationalities. The first bi-annual 
budget in 1994-1995 was $7.28 million, to reach $250 million in 2006-2007. At the end of 2007, the 
Tribunal will have cost $1,032,692,200. The cost of a trial, for an average duration of two years, has been 
estimated by some defence counsels at 500.000 US dollars, for a single accused. Fondation Hirondelle, Basic 
Facts on the ICTR, See ht p: //www. hirondelienews. conL, content/vieNv/19/101/ (Accessed 1 oth July 2008) 
Aukerman, (2002) 53 quoting Diane Orentlicher, Settling Accounts: The Duty to Prosecute Human Rights 
Violations of a Prior Regime, 100 Yale Law Journal, 2537,2548 (1991), 2601-02 
S. BYAMUKAMA 70 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
While acknowledging the cost and time of bringing so many accused to justice, Rwanda 
determined that selective prosecution was not an option. Because the crimes at hand were 
defined as genocide, the state deten-nined that one way or another, the individuals who had 
carried out crimes during genocide would be tried. Not prosecuting individuals in 
communities where neighbor killed neighbor would be a miscarriage of justice, as well as 
morally wrong and inconsiderate of the victims. 
In the aftermath of genocide, both the survivors and their aggressors must live and co- 
exist with one another. This is particularly noteworthy in Rwanda where people live in the 
same small geographical area, attend the same schools, hospitals, work together, share the 
same culture and language. "Never before in modem memory had a people who slaughtered 
another people, or in whose name the slaughter was carried out, been expected to live with 
the remainder of the people that was slaughtered, completely intermingled, in the same tiny 
communities, as one cohesive national society. "' 93 
To understand post-genocide Rwanda and the judicial systems adopted there, it is 
imperative to first understand the nature and extent of the genocide. 194 Throughout the 
interviews I carried out in Rwanda, both the perpetrators and victims were more concerned 
with the crimes they had witnessed with their own eyes, carried out by their neighbors. They 
were less concemed with the crimes committed by the 'big fish. ' When asked about the trials 
in Arusha, a prisoner in Cyangugu prison responded "the people in Arusha were high profile 
and I did not know them, save for hearing about them on the radio ... twebwe turi 
Rwanda 
rugufi... ", directly translated to mean " we are small Rwandans, " who had no idea who these 
193 Drumbl, M, A, "Sclerosis, Retributive Justice and the Rwanda Genocide, " International Journal of 
Penology, (London: Sage Publications, 2002,2) quoting Gourevitch, Philip, We Wish To Inform You That 
Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our Families: Stories From Rwanda, (New York: Farrar, Straut & 
Giroux) 302 
Chapter one 
S. BYAMUKAMA 71 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
'important' government officials were. As such, the Gacaca process Is especially important 
in Rwanda because it is justice that the people can see and participate in. 
The interviews suggested that although many of the 'rank-and-file' accused did not 
know those who were being tried in the ICTR, they all knew that 'important' people were 
being prosecuted by the Tribunal. Accused perpetrators in category one 195 specifically 
compared their trials with those happening at the ICTR, particularly in regard to sentences. 
For example, one mayor said 
We are from Cyangugu just as Prefect Bagambiki and Minister 
Ntagerura Andrew. They were acquitted meaning that their omission 
to stop the crime was not punished. That same omission to act has 
given me 25 years yet they are set free... Same crime, same place but 
different sentences? Cases based on the facts are judged differently in 
Arusha and in ordinary courts. There should not be a difference. 196 
Prosecutions undertaken by the ICTR have been further criticised for being poorly 
managed and for contributing little to the reconciliation process in Rwanda, particularly since 
they are far from the scene of the crime. 197 Nevertheless, "the ICTR enjoys international 
cooperation that no other country would have got. "198 As such, the ICTR has arrested and 
successfully prosecuted persons who would have otherwise been difficult to bring to 
justice. 199 They have also prosecuted landmark cases, made important decisions and 
advanced the development of intemational law of genocide. 200 Some of these decisions are 
particularly noteworthy and warrant additional perusal, as such, the next section discusses the 
cnme of genocide and some of the important decisions made by the Tribunal. 
195 Chapter six 
196 Cyangugu prison, Interview I Oh June 2006 Another mayor interviewed on the same day said, "Some people 
were acquitted yet we have evidence of having worked with them. I gave evidence against Babimbaki but 
they said it got lost. Why didn't they come back to me. I don't tire of writing, I could have given it again. " 
197 Interview with Prosecutor General of Rwanda, 21" July 2006 
198 Ibid 
'9" ibid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 72 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE 
Genocide is considered to be part of the range of cnmes committed against humanity. 
However, unlike other cnmes against humanity, it has been codified into an internationally 
accepted international instrument, the 1948 Geneva Convention. 201 " Emerging from the 
Holocaust, governments and human rights organisations have generally viewed genocide as 
,, 202 the most heinous "international criminal crime. 
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the Fortner Yugoslavia (ICTY) were established because the 
international community determined that that genocide and crimes against humanity would 
not to be tolerated and were to be punished. In establishing the Tribunals, the UN Security 
Council sought to bring perpetrators of such crimes to justice, thereby contributing to the 
restoration and maintenance of peace. 203 More importantly, the Security Council thought that 
these judicial bodies would be evidence that international violations of human rights, 
particularly the commission of genocide, would not be permitted or condoned . 
tribunals were also a chance for nations to make good on their obligations under International 
Human Rights law. 
201 Roper, 13 
202 Roper S. D and Barria L. A,, Designing Criminal Tribunals: Sovereignty and International Concerns in the 
Protection of Human Rights, (Hampshire: Ashgate, 2006), 9 
203 Bagaric, M and Morss, J, "International Sentencing Law: In Search of a Justification and Coherent 
Framework ", International Criminal Law Review, (2006) 6,2,191-225,217, 
Ibid. 
205 Ibid. Article I of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide Adopted by 
Resolution 260 (111) A of the U. N. General Assembly on 9 December 1948 and entry into force on the 12 th 
January 1951, stipulates, "The Contracting Parties confirm that genocide, whether committed in time of 
peace or in time of war, is a crime under international law which they undertake to prevent and to 
punish. Article V provides that the Contracting Parties undertake to enact, in accordance with their 
respective Constitutions, the necessary legislation to give effect to the provisions of the present Convention, 
and, in particular, to provide effective penalties for persons guilty of genocide or any of the other acts 
enumerated in Article 111. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 73 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The ICTR placed genocide at the apex of a hierarchy of crimes when it referred to it 
as the "crime of crimes .,, 
206 In ErdermoViC, 207 the ICTY noted that "crimes against humanity 
address the perpetrators conduct not only towards the immediate victim, but also towards the 
whole of mankind. " The tribunal went on to say 
Crimes against humanity are particularly odious forms of 
misbehaviour and in addition forrn part of a widespread and 
systematic practice or policy. Because of their heinousness and 
magnitude, they constitute egregious attacks on human dignity, on the 
very notion of [humaneness]. They consequently affect, or should 
affect, each and every member of mankind, whatever his or her 
nationality, ethnic group and location. 208 
Consequently, where genocide has been committed; the international community has 
an obligation to act, regardless of the sovereignty of the State. This explains why the term 
'genocide' is so sparingly used in international politics. Indeed, it has been argued that one of 
the reasons why the international community did not intervene to prevent or halt the 
Rwandan genocide was that it protracted from stating that the crimes that were taking place 
were indeed genocide. 
For an act to be considered as genocide, it must have been committed with the 
intention to destroy in whole or in part a national, ethnic racial or religious group as such. 
210 Article 11 of the 1948 Genocide Convention , reproduced verbatim 
in Article 2(2) of the 
ICTR Statute defines genocide as: 
Any of the following acts committed with the intent to destroy, in 
whole or in part, a national, ethnic[al] racial or religious group, as 
such: (a) killing member of a group; (b) causing serious bodily or 
mental harm to members of the group; (c) deliberately inflicting on 
206 Prosecutor v Akayesu (ICTR 96-4-T), Trial Chamber 1,2 September 1998,  16, Cassese, n 11,100. 
207 [1997] ICTY IT-96-22-A 
208 Mirko, 215-6 
209 When U. S. State Department spokeswoman Christine Shelley was asked whether what was happening in 
Rwanda was genocide, she responded . 
although it's not strictly a legal determination. There are other factors in there as well. " Available at: 
littp: //vi&-w. pbs. orp/w,, blVpa. acs/frontline//shows. /evil/etc/slaugliter. htiiil (Accessed 10th July 2008) 
210 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, Approved and Proposed for 
Signature and Ratification or Accession by General Assembly Resolution 260 A (111) of 9 December 1948, 
entry intoforce 12 January 1951. 
S. BYkMUKAMA 74 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the group, conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical 
destruction in whole or in part, (d)Imposing measures intended to 
prevent births within the group (e)forcibly transferring children of the 
group to another group. 
The actus reus for the crime is therefore narrowly defined. The mens rea is also 
narrowly defined. It must contain a dolus specialis to destroy in whole or in part the 
particular group. This principle was clearly explored in Akayesu. 211 The victims must belong 
to a specified group within the meaning of the 1948 Geneva Convention. Article 11 of the 
Convention specifies these groups to be national, racial, ethnic or religious groups. The 
notion of a protected "group" and the four groups themselves are not well defined. This 
notion was elucidated in Akayesu, thereby contributing greatly to international law. 212 
The crime of genocide was allegedly perceived as targeting only 
stable groups, constituted in a permanent fashion and members of 
which are determined by birth, with the exception of more 'mobile' 
groups which one joins through individual voluntary commitment 
such as political and economic groups. 213 
In Akayesu, the court defined ethnic group to mean a "group whose members share a 
,, 214 common language and culture. Although the Tutsi could not be defined as an ethic group 
as such, court said, "it is particularly important to respect the intention of the drafters of the 
Geneva convention which ... was patently to ensure the protection of any stable and 
211 (ICTR 96-4-T), Trial Chamber 1,2 September 1998. The Court held that for the offence of genocide to be 
committed, there must be a requirement of special intent (dolus specialis). Special intent was defined by the 
chamber as specific intention required as a constitutive element of the crime, which demands that the 
perpetrator clearly intends to produce the act charged. The Chamber explained dolus specialis to mean that 
the offender is culpable because he knew or should have known that the act committed would destroy, in 
whole or in part, a group. 
212 Ibid. Also see Cassese, 100. 
213 Schabas, W "Groups Protected by the Genocide Convention: Conflicting Interpretations from the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, " Journal ofInternational and Comparative Law. 2000,2 
214 Prosecutor v Akayesu, ICTR-96-4-T  513 
S. BYAMUKAMA 75 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
pen-nanent group. , 215 The court defined the Tutsi as an ethnic group for the purposes of 
genocide and made the test one of whether such group was stable and permanent by birth . 
Asserting the ICTR'S jurisdiction 
States generally exercise jurisdiction on the basis of territory. "Crimes are tried by the 
courts and punished by the laws of the nation on whose territory they are perpetrated, 
whatever may be the nationality of the actor, or of the injured. 217 This is based on the 
principle that "the locus deficti commissi (the place where the offence has allegedly been 
committed) is usually the place where it is easiest to collect evidence. It is therefore 
,, 218 considered the forum conveniens, or the appropriate place of trial . 
It is also the place 
where the rights of the accused are best safeguarded, since the accused would know the law 
in force in that state and hence the rights of the defendant. 219 Further still, it would best serve 
the interest of victims and the community, especially grave international crimes that affect the 
215 Akayesu 516, Cassese, 101 
216 While determining whether the Tutsi were protected under the Genocide Convention, the Tribunal said, 
"... prior to and during the colonial rule ... 
Rwanda was a complex and advanced monarchy ... that ruled the 
country through... official representatives drawn from the Tutsi nobility. The Trial Chamber observed that 
during that period, 'the distinction between the Tutsi and Hum was based on lineage rather than ethnicity. 
Indeed, the demarcation line was blurred: one could move from one status to another, as one became rich or 
poor, or even through marriage. Both European colonial authorities, the Germans from 1897-1917 and the 
Belgians from 1917-1962, relied on an elite essentially composed of people who referred to themselves as 
Tutsi, a choice which ... was 
born of racial or even racist considerations. In the minds of the colonisers, the 
Tutsis looked like them, because of their height and colour and were, therefore, more intelligent and better 
equipped to govern. It was in the 1930's that Belgian authorities introduced a permanent distinction by 
In line with this division, it 
became mandatory for every Rwandan to carry an identity card mentioning his or her ethnicity. This 
reference to ethnic affiliation on identity cards' was maintained, even after Rwanda's independence, and was 
at last abolished after the tragic events the country experienced in 1994. Thus the notion that the Hutu and 
the Tutsi- social group that spoke the same Bantu language, occupied the same geographical space, and 
frequently intermarried- were some how different 'tribes' or 'ethic' groups was born of racialist mythology, 
gradually assumed a social constructed reality, and ultimately defined the population slated for 
extermination. " Akayesu 513 Thus the identity cards that were mandatory at the time included a reference 
"ubwoko" or ethnicity, which defined who was Tutsi, Hutu and Twa. This means that the people of Rwanda 
also saw themselves as such. In Kayishema and Ruzindana, (ICTR-95-1-T) the Tribunal clearly contrasted 
the Akayesu case when the Trial Chamber held that an ethnic group could be a group identified as such by 
others including perpetrators of the crime. It held that the Tutsi were an ethnic group based on the existence 
of Government- issued official identity cards describing them as such. Schabas, W, Groups Protected by the 
Genocide Convention, 2 
217 Schabas W, Genocide in International law, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), In Rivard v 
United States, the court held that "all the nations of the world recognise the principle that a man who outside 
of a country wilfully puts in motion a force to take effect in it is answerable at the place in which the evil is 
done. " 375 F 2d 882 (5 th Cir. 1967) 278 
218 Cassese, A, International Criminal Law, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003) 278-9 
219 ibid; see also Schabas, W, Genocide in International law, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 76 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
community as a whole, to relay their tragedies and also be ware of what is happening and 
follow the proceedings. 220 Another advantage is that this affinns a State's authority of 
security within its boundaries and ensures deterrence of future occurrence. 221 
However, because genocide is usually committed by the state or with the state's 
complicity, trying genocide in domestic law alone would, in essence, provide grounds for 
impunity. States might be unwilling to prosecute the perpetrators because they remained in 
power or have influence, or because the political or social modus vivendi is built on forgiving 
the cnmes of the past. 222 The perpetrator may be a state official enjoying national immunity 
from prosecution, or the state may simply be unable to prosecute accused persons. 223 These 
concerns legitimise the need for functioning international tribunals, or the capacity for 
prosecution in other states under the universality principle. Article V of the Geneva 
Convention does not preclude other states from prosecuting perpetrators of an international 
cnme, regardless of the place of the commission of the crime, the nationality of the 
perpetrators or victim. This is the universality principle, the rationale of which is that 
prosecution of such crimes is undertaken on behalf of the whole international community as a 
means to safeguard universal values. 224 
In Eichmann, 225 the defendant objected to the jurisdiction of the Israeli court, claiming 
that Israeli law could not impose punishment for acts done outside the boundaries of the state, 
by persons not citizens of the State, as it would be contrary to International law. However, the 
court held that the crimes in question were not crimes unique to Israeli law. These crimes 
220 Cassese, International Criminal Law 279 
221 Ibid. 
222 Schabas, Genocide in International Law, 354 
223 International Tribunals assert primacy when a National Prosecutor classifies an international crime as an 
ordinary crime. For instance, if "genocide" was being treated as "multiple murder, " thereby reducing the 
seriousness of the crime. By this, the national court would be showing that it is not recognisant of the gravity 
of the offence in question. It may also assert primacy when the national court proves to be unreliable in the 
sense that there is lack of impartiality or independence thereby shielding the perpetrator from responsibility 
for the International Crime. Schabas, W, Genocide in International law, 349-350 
224 Cassese, 287 
225 (1961) 36 1. LR5 District Court of Jerusalem 
S. BYAMUKAMA 77 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
"struck at the whole of mankind and shocked the conscience of nations. " The court further 
held that Article VI imposes a duty of punishment, but did not impinge upon jurisdictional 
rules in criminal matters applicable within different states. 226 
The Security Council Resolution that established the ICTR stressed "the need for 
international co-operation to strengthen the courts and judicial system of Rwanda, having 
regard in particular to the necessity of those courts to deal with large numbers Of SUSPeCtS.,, 227 
There is no international customary law that obliges states to prosecute international crimes. 
States can only prosecute such international crimes if they ratify the provisions of the 
Genocide Convention, then proceed to provide provisions enabling them to try these crimes 
through their domestic laws. 228 
In Niyonteze, the Swiss court in 2000 held that it could not apply the rules on 
genocide because it had not yet ratified the Geneva Convention of 1948.229 In Reporters Sans 
Frontires v Collines, 230 the Court of Appeal held that it lacked jurisdiction over genocide 
because; 
In the absence of provisions of domestic law, international custom 
cannot have the effect of extending the extraterritorial jurisdiction of 
the French courts. In that respect, only the provisions of international 
treaties are applicable under the national legal system, provided they 
have been duly approved or ratified by France and on account of their 
contents and provisions of such treaties produce a direct effect. 231 
Prosecuting alleged perpetrators in Rwanda has only been possible because the 
leadership of the country changed after the genocide to one that was keen to prosecute all 
226 A-G Israel v Eichmann, (1968) 36 ILR (District Court, Jerusalem),  24-5. Article VI of the Geneva 
Convention stipulates, "Persons charged with genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in article III shall 
be tried by a competent tribunal of the State in the territory of which the act was committed, or by such 
international penal tribunal as may have jurisdiction with respect to those Contracting Parties which shall 
have accepted its jurisdiction. " 
227UN Doc. S/RES/955 (1994), Schabas W, Genocide in International law, (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004) 344, 
228 Ibid, 303 
229 Ibid, 304 
230 Court of Appeal of Paris, Judgement of 6th November 1995 
231 Schabas, 304 
S. BYAMUKAMA 78 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
alleged perpetrators. In accordance to Article V of the Geneva Convention which Rwanda 
ratified in 1975, the state through the 2003 Rwanda Constitution, Organic Law 08/1996, 
Organic Law 40/2000, Organic Law 16/2004 and Organic law 10/2007, set up domestic 
legislation necessary to give effect to the provisions of the Geneva Convention. In particular, 
it provided effective penalties for persons guilty of genocide and crimes against humanity. 232 
This has made it possible for Rwandan domestic courts to function alongside the ICTR. 233 
While the ICTR has concurrent Jurisdiction with national courts, it has primacy over national 
courts. Furthermore, the ICTR only prosecutes the "most severe" or serious cases while 
leaving the "minor cases" to the National Tribunals. 234 
CONCLUSION 
The strength of transitional justice lies in enabling the society in transition to 
determine what transitional justice path to follow. Transitional justice contextualises the 
nature and gravity of the crimes in question, while considering the historical, cultural and 
political context of the society in transition, as well as assessing the willingness and ability of 
the state to act. Transitional justice is unique for its consideration of the particular 
circumstances of the state in transition, and allows a state to decide what best suits its 
circumstances. 
Although states may choose impunity, truth commissions or lustration to deal with 
human rights abuses, the crime of genocide as clearly stipulated in the Geneva Convention 
arguably favours prosecutions over other forms of transitional justice. The crime of genocide 
232 Raphael Lemkin, who famously coined the word genocide, said, "An international multilateral treaty should 
provide for the introduction, not only in the constitution but also in the criminal codes for each country, of 
provisions protecting minority groups from protection because of their nationhood, religion or race. Each 
criminal code should have provisions inflicting penalties for the genocidal practice. " Lemkin, R, Axis Rules 
in Occupied Europe, Analysis of Government, Proposalsfor Redress (Washington: Camegie Endowment for 
World Peace, 1944) 93 -4, Also Schabas, Genocide in International Law, 346 233 There is, however, a danger for a "victors' justice" if all cases were tried entirely by domestic courts. This is 
the major reason why the Rwandan Government was keen for the establishment of the ICTR. 
234 Schabas, Genocide in International Law, 350 
S. BYAMUKAMA 79 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
is a crime that affects each and every member of mankind, whatever his or her nationality, 
ethnic group and location. The Geneva Convention, which is binding on state parties places 
an obligation on member states to prosecute such crimes. However, precedent has shown that 
such prosecutions are only possible for a limited number of accused persons. The full number 
of those responsible for the crime of genocide cannot be tried through international tribunals. 
Therefore, it can be argued, that it is up to the state to detennine what transitional justice 
mechanism to use to deal with the 'remaining perpetrators' not prosecuted by international 
tribunals or member states under universal jurisdiction. 
Indeed, Rwanda's decision to prosecute the 'remaining' alleged perpetrators is 
actually a legal obligation under the Geneva Convention. However, as discussed in this 
chapter, the obligation to prosecute is expensive and time-consuming, hence the justification 
for selective prosecutions by international tribunals and domestic courts. We see then that 
Rwanda's choice to prosecute all accused perpetrators was born from its legal obligations 
under the Geneva Convention, but was also a necessity for the nation to achieve its set 
objectives. Considering its commitment to eradicate the culture of impunity, while 
appreciating the great numbers of accused, Rwanda was forced to look for alternatives 
through transitional justice. Through the traditional Gacaca process, the many accused who 
previously might have been de facto exempted from prosecution or given amnesty now 
undergo trial. The Gacaca process will be thoroughly examined in the following chapters. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 80 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 4: THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND SENTENCING 
PROCESS 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter considers the theoretical framework on which the Gacaca process is 
based and Rwanda's choice of transitional justice. It rationalises the place of punishment in 
Gacaca courts within the context of retributive and deterrent justice systems, as well as 
restorative justice in transitional justice. In detennining Rwanda's choice of transitional 
justice, the chapter emphasises the need for both justice and reconciliation, principles on 
which the Gacaca process is based. The Gacaca process is primarily built on the confession 
process, partly because of its ability to speed up trials, but because confession is the 
cornerstone for reconciliation. As such, the chapter compares the plea-bargaining that takes 
place in other jurisdictions to confessions in Gacaca. Lastly, the chapter reflects on the need 
to meet international standards of fair trial amidst multiple challenges. 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
All criminal law systems have set goals that they hope to achieve. Using a retributive 
mechanism, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) aims to stop impunity, to 
help in the reconciliation process in Rwanda and generally contribute to a peaceful and stable 
world. 235 These were the clearly set objectives of both the Rwandan criminal court procesS236 
and the Gacaca process, 237 by means of the restorative justice concept. Since its 
establishment, 238 the ICTR has prosecuted a number of key figures of the Rwandan genocide, 
23' The ICTR preamble notes that it is determined to put an end to international law crimes by bringing to justice 
those responsible for such crimes and that prosecuting such persons would "contribute to the process of 
national reconciliation and to the restoration and maintenance of peace. " By prosecuting these crimes, the 
ICTR hopes to contribute to ensuring that such violations are halted and effectively redressed. Preamble of 
the ICTR Statute, Available at: http: Hwww. un. org/ictr/statute. litnil. (Accessed 10th July 2008) 236 
See Chapter five 
See Chapter six 
238 See Resolution 955 of the UN Security Council at http: //69.94.11.53,, ENGLISHi'basicdocs/statute/2007. pd 
(Accessed 17th July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 81 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
and has been a spectrum through which the international community has shown its 
intolerance of such crimes. 239 Nevertheless, although tribunals like the ICTR have an 
important place in today's transitional process, the number of trials conducted, the time and 
money spent to try few persons, and the effect of these trials on national unity and 
reconciliation efforts creates room for a concurrent system of national transitional justice. 240 
Indeed, one of the key reasons why the Rwandan national courts and the Gacaca courts were 
established was to cope with the large numbers of individuals accused of genocide. 241 
Aukerman suggests three ways to prevent the commission of crimes: Take away the 
physical power to violate the law by making the offender physically incapable of committing 
the offence; Take away the desire to offend, hence a moral reformation, and; Make the 
individual afraid of offending by intimidation or terror of the law. The offender may still wish 
to commit crime, but he no longer dares to do so. 242 In determining approaches to 
punishment, Aukerman also suggests that who should be punished, how much they should be 
punished and why they should be punished should all bear consideration. 243 Penologists have 
justified punishment using five main theoretical frameworks, including retribution, 
deterrence, rehabilitation, restorative justice, and condemnation or social solidarity. 244 These 
summarise the goals of criminal punishment in domestic law. 
However, criminal justice in domestic law is meant to punish deviant behaviour and 
this form of law cannot be completely adapted where commission of crimes was, in fact, not 
deviant but 'normal' behaviour. In Rwanda, individuals, with the state's approval, organised 
themselves in groups and committed crimes openly. The Rwandan genocide was committed 
by ordinary, usually law-abiding citizens, the majority of whom had no previous criminal 
See Chapter three 
See Chapter five 
Aukernian, 44 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
S. BY"UKAMA 82 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
record. It is estimated that 818,564 people are believed to have participated in committing 
crimes of genocide, in a country with a population of 7.7 million people at the time. 245 
The fact that the crimes in question are international law crimes of genocide and 
crimes against humanity, that these crimes were committed by ordinary people on a large 
scale, that the genocide was planned by a government that called upon its citizens to 
participate, that perpetrators of these crimes were known to their victims and at times 
belonged to the same families, that victims and perpetrators live in the same geographical 
areas, that the nature of community life dictates interdependency, and that these crimes would 
be prosecuted in one of the poorest countries in the world, indicates that reliance on a 
retributive criminal law trial process would be both simplistic and inadequate. 
RETRIBUTIVE AND DETERRENCE THEORIES 
The criminal justice system in Rwanda and most ad hoc tribunals including the ICTR 
are based on retributive and deterrence models. The retributive theory addresses punishment 
of the offender and considers whether or not that will prevent him from committing future 
crimes. It is a less forward-looking concept and more of a backward-looking one. All the 
same, it is a straightforward approach that suggests, "We are justified in punishing because 
and only because offenders deserve it.,, 246 Minor suggests that the retributive theory 
presupposes equal dignity of each individual in which the community reasserts the truth of 
the victims' value by inflicting a publicly visible defeat on the wrongdoer. 247 She suggests 
that the community corrects the wrongdoer's false message that the victim was less worthy or 
241 Available at: www. inkiko-Gacaca. gov. rw (Accessed I Oth July 2008) 
246 Aukerman, 53 
247 Minor, Martha, Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History after Genocide and Mass Violence 
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1998), 12 
S. BYAMUKAMA 83 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
valued than the wrongdoer. 248 The theory presupposes the existence of the rule of law in 
which the individual members of the society are protected by the law and its institutions. 249 
Retributive theory focuses on the offender rather than the victim. The victim is 
expected to benefit from the satisfaction that the perpetrator has been punished . 
250 Because 
crime is an offence against society as a whole, it is society, and not the victim, that 
determines the perpetrator's guilt and the appropriate level of punishment. 251 More so, 
decisions about the seriousness of the offence are determined by the "offender's moral 
culpability, not on the degree of hann suffered by the ViCtiM.,, 
252 Cassese argues that 
retributive justice promotes reconciliation by answering calls for revenge with legal 
accountability. 253 This may not apply to all victims some of whom forgive and reconcile with 
their perpetrators. In fact, Minor suggests that 
Reconciliation is not the goal of criminal trials except in the abstract 
sense; we reconcile with the murderer by imagining he or she is 
responsible to the same rules and commands that govem all of us. 254 
Although prosecution promises punishment, Aukerman suggests that there can never 
be true retribution in the sense of the word. 255 There is no punishment proportional to the 
crime of genocide without abusing human rights. The death penalty is clearly an abuse of 
human rights in international law, but even if it were not, the death of one individual cannot 
equate to the so many lives IoSt. 256 Furthermore, we cannot differentiate the death penalty for 
a perpetrator of genocide or grave human right abuses from that of an "ordinary" murderer. 
248 Ibid, 12 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
25 ' Aukerman, 54 
252 Ibid. See Auken-nan, 53-56 for an in-depth discussion of retributive justice 
253 Cassese, Antonio, "Reflections on International Criminal Justice", Modern Law Review 61,1(Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing, 1998) 
254 Minor, 26 
255 Aukerman, 57 
256 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 84 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
According to deterrence theory, offenders are terrified of committing crimes although 
they may have the desire and ability to do so. 257 They are inhibited from committing crime 
because of the intimidation and terror of the law. 258 This theory is based on the notion that if 
people fear punishment, they will rationally choose not to act criminally. 259 The theory is 
divided into personal and general deterrence. The punishments in individual deterrence are 
made heavy enough for the particular offender to be less likely to reoffend. General 
deterrence targets the general public to prevent them from committing crime for fear of the 
punishment it carries. 
This theory may be the most justifiable reason for selective prosecution of genocide 
suspects according to the domestic law in Rwanda and the ICTR. The theory does not 
necessarily aspire that all the guilty be punished, but that those who are punished will serve 
as an example to the rest. The fear of sanctions outweighs the potential benefit of committing 
the crime. 
The potential offender also weighs the severity of the punishment against the 
possibility of getting caught. This balance is based not on the "objective severity of sanctions 
or the real risk of apprehension, but on the potential offender's subjective assessment of these 
of possible sanctions, and his assessment of his ability to evade law enforcement. The actual 
severity or certainty of punishment is less important than its perceived severity or certainty. 
257 "A person is not deterred if he refrains because he is not tempted, or is tempted but is refrained by his code of 
manners or morals" Miriam Aukerman, 63 quoting Nigel Walker, Why Punish, (Oxford University Press 
1991) 
Ibid. 
259 Drumbl, Sclerosis: "Retributive Justice and the Rwandan Genocide", Punishment and Society, 2 (3), (London 
Sage Publications(2000) 289-308,299 
260 Aukerman, Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime, 64 
261 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 85 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
If people are to be deterred from engaging in criminal conduct by the 
punishment of those who have done so in the past, it is important that 
the imposition of punishment be as nearly certain as possible. 262 
Conversely, Aukerman argues that if only a limited number of persons are prosecuted, 
it does not tally with the measure of risk of being caught and punished. Given the track 
record of international law so far, even the risk of master minders being caught is very low. 263 
Further still, she argues "Those who 'merely' kill, rape, and plunder, but do not mastermind 
the carnage, have little to fear from prosecution. " 264 This was certainly a consideration when 
the Rwandan government deten-nined that prosecuting the master-minders of genocide in a 
foreign court (Arusha), with no accompanying fon-n of accountability for those who 
perpetrated these crimes at the grass roots level was unacceptable. 
It must also be considered whether the prosecution of orchestrators of human right 
abuses and genocide for deterrence purposes would cause more problems than not, when the 
"mischief they would produce would be greater than what they prevented. , 265 Unlike 
transitional justice, perpetrators of ordinary crimes in societies with functioning judicial 
systems may be deterred because they have weighted the options of the possibility of being 
caught against the seventy of the punishment. 266 For transitional societies such as Rwanda, 
the crimes were committed in broad day-light, with government endorsement and with no 
fear of eventual consequences. Prosecutions non-nally take place where there is 
overwhelming evidence of the grave human rights and for a cry of justice. Prosecutions for 
purposes of transitional justice may lead to additional information brought to light, but 
262 Orentlicher, 2544, fn 23 
263 Given that the Genocide in Rwanda took place in 1994, after the creation of the ICTY in 1993, this might 
indicate that the planners of the genocide did not worry about the potential of being caught and being 
brought to book. "If the International Criminal Tribunals at Nuremburg, Tokyo, and the recent additions at 
the Hague and Arusha are used as a gauge for deterring future violence, the international community must 
admit failure. " Aukerman, Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime fri 155 
264 Aukerman, 67 
265 Aukerman, 66 
266 There has been heated debate among scholars and practitioners about the effectiveness of the death penalty. It 
remains to be seen whether states that impose capital punishment have a lower crime rate of specifically the 
sort of crimes that would incur such penalty. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 86 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
generally are not used to determine who was responsible. 267 The fact that some of these 
perpetrators are released because of little adherence to due process does not help matters. 268 
Perpetrators of these crimes do not go to war with the intention of losing. 269 They do 
not at the time of the commission of the crime expect to be caught or held accountable for 
their actions. During the Rwandan genocide, it is hard to imagine that the "Hutu Power" 
would have committed crimes, if they had foreseen that they would lose power to their 
victims and their "collaborators. " Besides, perpetrators of these crimes were up until the 
commission of these crimes, law-abiding citizens. Aukerman suggests that when "ordinary" 
people commit these kinds of crimes, it implies that the normal restraints of law and 
deterrence are not working, or that they are no longer functioning rationally. 270 
Individuals who commit atrocities on the scale of genocide are 
unlikely to behave as 'rational actors, ' deterred by the risk of 
punishment ... more is required than the 
heavy hand of the law ... to deter those driven by the ideological factors that have either destroyed 
... nations or threatened to 
bring them to their knees. 271 
A person's decision to participate in human right violations on Rwanda's scale for 
example, will not be deterred from his actions for fear of eventual prosecution, for a decision 
to act violently may not be perceived as a legal or even moral wrong. 272 Drumbl suggests that 
a theory of rational choice is largely irrelevant to acts motivated by non-rational impulses. 273 
267 Aukerman, fh 156 
268 The ICTR in November 1999 dismissed Jean Bosco Barayagwiza's case, a well-know Rwandan media leader 
perpetrator on grounds that his fundamental human rights had been violated by prolonged detention without 
trial. 
269 Robert Jackson, the lead prosecutor at Nuremburg showing concern about the effect deterrence theory has in 
transitional justice noted that personal punishment is effected only when the war is lost. He argued that "... is 
probably not [enough] to be a sufficient deterrent to prevent a war where the law makers feel the chances of 
defeat to be negligible. " 
270 Aukerman 68 quoting Minor, 37 
27 1 Aukerman, fir 165 
272 Drumbl, 300 
273 lbid, 299 
S. BYAMUKAMA 87 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
It may even be too much to expect someone to make a calculated and rational choice when 
one is enveloped in a situation of mass hysteria, fear, prejudice and possibly coercion. 274 
Another argument put forward by Grant Niemann suggests that 
Deterrence has a better chance of working with these kinds of crimes 
than it does with ordinary domestic crimes, because the people who 
commit these crimes are not hardened criminals, they are politicians 
or leaders of the community who have up until now been law abiding 
people. 275 
Deterrence theory may work on some offenders who are politically manipulative or 
simply those who follow the "gang" and would be less effective to fanatics. 
Here, a distinction should be made between the different kinds of perpetrators in Rwanda. In 
the "leadership/authority" category, there were the hard-core criminals, the 'Hitler'S' of 
today, who in Kinyarwanda are called "nyirabayazana 276,, (directly translated as "the ones 
who brought it"), and there were those who might have instigated other people to kill but 
were themselves political manipulators rather than fanatics. There was yet another group in 
the leadership category who carried out their "administrative duties" among which was to 
oversee the killings and "work" done. In the category of so-called "ordinary" citizens, there 
were also fanatics, referred to in the Gacaca Organic law as the "overzealous murderers" who 
killed, tortured and distinguished themselves from others by the zeal in which they "worked, " 
while there were also those who implemented "orders" from above to kill their fellow 
citizens. 
Ibid. 
275 Aukerman 68, quoting Michael P Scharf "The case of a Permanent International Truth Commission, " 7 Duke 
Journal o Comparative and International Law 375,398,124 (1997) (Quoting interview by Michael P Scharf If 
with Grant Niemann, Prosecutor, International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia) 
276 In Gacaca law, Nyirabayazana represents those who planned and instigated the genocide. I do not believe that 
all those who organised and supervised the genocide can be categorised as such. The use of the term should 
be specific to the 'core architects' of the genocide and not so much those who carried out administrative 
duties of over seeing the genocide. This category should also include ordinary citizens, who had excessive 
genocide ideology that set them apart from the rest of the perpetrators. 
S. BYAN4UKAMA 88 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The fanatics and overzealous murderers may not have been deterred by fear of 
punishment, but Niemann's view may hold for the majority of those who organised and 
participated in the genocide. Most people participated in the genocide, in part, because the 
justice system and the state had collapsed and there was an absence of the rule of law. There 
was an implied promise that there would be no eventual consequences for criminal actions. If 
the criminal law system was operational, it is difficult to see how the genocide would be 
possible or even as "successful" as it was. People would have feared to participate in the 
genocide suggesting the importance of deterrence theory in such circumstances. Aukerman 
argues, 
If the international community sits by and watches while atrocities 
occur, demanding prosecution only after the violence has stopped, 
arguments about the deterrent effect of such trials will ring hollow ... 
the international community will lose its credibility unless 
international efforts to prevent the continuation of genocide acts and 
other acts of violence ... precede attempts at criminal accountability. 
But we cannot deter future crime without punishing past crimes. Orentlicher says "... 
it is precisely by imposing penalties after a crime has occurred-when it is too late to deter the 
sanctioned conduct- that criminal law attempts to ensure future lawful behavior. , 
278 The 
essence of the deterrence theory is indeed to deter the public from future repetition of the 
crime. 
]RETRIBUTIVE AND DETERRENCE THEORIES IN THE CONTEXT OF 
INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
The principles of retributive and deterrence theories are expressed in the preambles of 
the ICTR statute and the Gacaca Organic laws respectively, which call for a break in the 
culture of impunity. The Security Council was deten-nined to put an end to human rights 
violations in Rwanda because these threatened international peace, and the bid to bring to 
277 Aukerman, 70-71 
278 Orentlicher, Diane. 2542 fn 9, quoting Fingarette, Rethinking Criminal Law Excuses, 89, Yale LJ 1002, 
1013-16 (1980) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 89 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
justice persons responsible for these crimes set up the ICTR. The preamble specifically states 
that the ICTR was founded with the belief that prosecution of persons responsible for the 
genocide and crimes against humanity would contribute to ensuring that such violations were 
halted and effectively addressed. The preamble also notes in paragraph six that such 
prosecutions would contribute to the restoration and maintenance of peace. Paragraph 15 and 
16 of the preamble of Organic Law 16/2004 suggest that the ICTR was mindful that Rwanda 
ratified the Geneva Convention in 1975, but did not make the relevant provisions in its 
domestic law sanctioning these crimes and therefore bases its prosecutions on the Penal Code 
of Rwanda. 
It is clear from these passages that the legislators of the ICTR and the Gacaca laws 
intended to deter and discourage others from committing the same crimes by imposing 
punishments. Prosecution, as Minor correctly asserts, corrects the wrong image that the 
victim was in fact less worthy than the perpetrators of the crime. 
279 Prosecuting alleged 
perpetrators especially for crimes against humanity and genocide, which are characterized by 
the dehumanization of a victim, restores dignity to humanity as a whole. 
Bagaric and Morse define punishment as "a hardship or deprivation; the taking away 
of something of value for the wrong actually committed or perceived to have been 
committed ., 
280 Henharn suggests that retributive and deterrence theories continue to 
dominate the justification for international criminal trials and have thus influenced the design 
of the procedural norms that govern sentencing. 
28 1 He argues that the judiciary in ad hoc 
tribunals have individualised particular sentences and the retributive dynamic has continued 
to dominate the context in which the sentences are reached. "For the sentence to reflect the 
Minor, 12 
280 Bagaric, Mirko and John Morss, "International Sentencing Law: In Search of a Justification and Coherent 
Framework", International Criminal law Review, 6, (2006) 191-225,195 
29 1 Henham, Ralph. "The Normative Context of Sentencing for Genocide", The Criminal Law of Genocide, 
International Comparative and Contextual Aspects, Ralph Henham and Paul Behrens, Eds. (Hampshire: 
Ashgate (2007)) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 90 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
inherent gravity of the crime requires consideration and assessment of the seriousness of the 
offence and the conduct of the accused. 15282 Since the judges use their discretionary powers to 
influence how the relevant provisions of the founding documents are interpreted, "the 
dynamic of retributive justice and the predominant liberal political ideology which underpins 
this penal philosophy continues to prevail. , 283 
This is evidenced in the Kambanda case 284 where court held that in the deten-nination 
of sentence, the Tribunal must be directed, on the one hand, by retribution of the said 
accused, who must see their crimes punished, and on other hand, by deterrence, namely 
permanently dissuading those who might attempt in the future to perpetrate such atrocities by 
showing them that the international community was not ready to tolerate the serious 
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights. Of the two directives, the 
court noted that the deterrence factor took precedent. The Tribunal, noting the preamble of 
Organic law 1996 said 
The aim for the establishment of the Tribunal was to prosecute and 
punish the perpetrators of the atrocities in Rwanda in such a way as to 
put an end to impunity and thereby to promote national reconciliation 
and the restoration of peace. 285 
Although the accused pleaded guilty to all counts, he was nonetheless sentenced to 
life imprisonment. in the determination of the sentence, the court considered the gravity of 
the offence, the individual circumstances of the accused, including the substantial co- 
operation by the accused with the Prosecutor before or after his conviction. 
It is a matter, as it were, of individualising the penalty, for it is true 
that among the joint perpetrators of an offence or among the persons 
guilty of the same type of offence, there is only one common element: 
the target offence which they committed with its inherent gravity. 
282 Ibid. In reference to Prosecutor v Kupreskic, (Case No IT-95-16), Appeals Chamber, Judgement, 23 October 
2001, paras 443-444, and Prosecutor v Furundzija (Case No IT-95-17/1), Appeals Chamber, Judgement, 21 
July 2000, para 249. 
283 Henham, 247-248 
284 Prosecutor v Kambanda, Case No ICTR-97-23-S, 4 September 1998 (para 28) 
285 Ibid, para 26 
S. BYAMUKAMA 91 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Apart from this common trait, there are, of necessity, fundamental 
differences in their respective personalities and responsibilities: 286 
their age, their background, their education, their intelligence, their 
same intensity of punishment. 287 
It is clear in this case, that although the accused pleaded guilty to the alleged crimes, 
the court in sentencing the accused aimed at general deterrence, preventing the general public 
from committing the crimes in question for fear of the kind of punishment it carries. 
In Gacaca legislation, retributive and deterrence theory can be seen in the deferring 
categorisation and the sentences given. Article 51 of Organic law 16/2004, as well as Article 
II of Organic law 10/2007 as amended, provides that persons who instigated, planned and 
incited the genocide are prosecuted by national courts and are not under the jurisdiction of 
Gacaca courts. This category is incidentally the same category prosecuted by the ICTR that 
has concurrent jurisdiction with ordinary Rwanda courts. 288 Article 72 of Organic Law 
16/2004 provides that persons who "refused, to have recourse to confession, guilty plea... or 
whose confessions, guilty pleas are rejected ... 
incur a death penalty or life imprisonment. , 289 
With the removal of the death penalty, Article II of Organic law 10/2007 as amended 
286 The accused, who was the Prime Minister of the Interim Government of Rwanda from 8 April 1994 to 17 
July 1994, was head of the 20 member Council of Ministers and exercised dejure authority and control over 
the members of his government. The government determined and controlled national policy and had the 
administration and armed forces at its disposal. As Prime Minister, he also exercised dejure and defacto 
authority over senior civil servants and senior officers in the military. The accused acknowledged that he 
participated in meetings of the Council of Ministers, cabinet meetings and meetings of prefets where the 
course of massacres were actively followed, but no action was taken to stop them. He also acknowledged 
participation in the dismissal of the prefet of Butare because the latter had opposed the massacres and the 
appointment of a new prefet to ensure the spread of massacre of Tutsi in Butare. He acknowledged that on 3 
May 1994, he was personally asked to take steps to protect children who had survived the massacre at a 
hospital and he did not respond. On the same day, after the meeting, the children were killed. He 
acknowledges that he failed in his duty to ensure the safety of the children and the population of Rwanda. He 
also acknowledged that before 6 April 1994, political parties in concert with the Rwanda Armed Forces 
organised and began the military training of the youth wings of the MRND and CDR political parties 
(Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi respectively) with the intent to use them in the massacres that ensued. 
Furthermore, he acknowledged that the Government headed by him distributed arms and ammunition to 
these groups. Additionally, the accused acknowledged the use of the media as part of the plan to mobilise 
and incite the population to commit massacres of the civilian Tutsi population. As Prime Minister, he 
encouraged the RTLM to continue to incite the massacres of the Tutsi civilian population, specifically 
stating that this radio station was "an indispensable weapon in the fight against the enemy". ICTR-97-23-S, 
para 39 287 
Ibid, 29 
See Chapter three and five 
See Chapter five 
S. BYAMUKAMA 92 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
provides that this category would incur a sentence ranging from 30 years to life 
imprisonment. It can be argued that the legislators had in mind the retributive and deterrence 
theories by making the punishment heavy enough for the particular offender to be less likely 
to re-offend, and targeting the general public to prevent them from committing these crimes 
for the fear of the punishment it carries. 290 
The legislators had something else in mind in terms of addressing Rwanda's culture 
of obedience of authority and not the rule of law. This culture of obedience was best put in an 
interview I conducted with an evangelical pastor in Cyangugu, western province, who said, 
The government asked people to kill and they did so without 
went ahead and killed because they were told to. The same 
government has asked them to reconcile and forgive, and they will 
obey without question. 291 
By punishing this category of people kurugerero, (direct translation "as an example 
of, " or "to deter") the legislators made clear the case that no one was above the law. 292 
Furthermore, by insisting to prosecute all the alleged perpetrators of genocide, regardless of 
the hardships envisaged, the government aimed at deterring future commission of these 
crimes. The public nature of these prosecutions also suggests that the Gacaca process also 
aims at denunciation. 
290 It can also be argued that the fact that the Rwandan government insisted on prosecuting these crimes, 
regardless of the hardships envisaged, was in fact aimed at deterring future commission of these crimes. In 
prosecuting the accused in such a public manner is also an indication that these prosecution also aim at 
denunciation. 
291 Interview, 18'h June 2006 Cyangugu 
292 There are 77,269 people placed in Category one. www. inkik-o-Gacaca. gov. r (Accessed 17 th July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 93 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
RESTORATIVE JUSTICE AND RECONCILIATION IN THE CONTEXT OF 
INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
Liebmann suggests that the idea of having the offender put "things right and make 
good of the harm done" as an approach to responding to crime (restorative justice) has a 
much longer history than "punishing the offender approach. , 293 According to Liebmann, this 
approach to crime has drawn on the customs of Australian aboriginals, Maoris, Native 
Americans, as well as Asian and Affican nations. "Even Anglo-Saxon law was based on 
restorative justice, " he argues, but that from William the Conqueror's time, justification for 
the "new" approach is that "crime harms the state, and that the state should react by 
punishing the offender. , 294 Some authors attribute the origin of restorative justice to early 
Christianity and biblical texts. 295 The restorative justice paradigm, at least on the African 
continent, was the primary system of justice until colonisation. 296 After colonisation, the 
traditional restorative justice system did not disappear altogether but it lost its mainstream 
status. 297 Traditional practices were specific to petty offences within communities during the 
colonial and post-colonial era. Since then, there has been a shift in the functioning of such 
traditional practices to deal with mass violations of human rights. Rwanda is an obvious 
example and Uganda seems to have followed suit in an agreement between the government 
and the Lord's Resistance Anny, in which those responsible for "less severe" crimes will be 
dealt with using the Mato Oput Acholi traditional reconciliation mechaniSM. 298 Generally 
speaking, restorative justice theory seems to have gained momentum in recent years as an 
alternative to more traditional ways of responding to crime, but not without resistance. 299 
293 Liebmann, Marian, Restorative Justice: How it Works, (London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2007), 37 
294 lbid, 37 
295 Zehr, Howard. Changing Lenses: A New Focusfor Crime and Justice, (Scottdale, PA: Herald Press, 1990) 
296 See Chapter six 
297 See Chapter six 
298 , LRA, Government Sign Pact", The New Vision, 1910212008, Uganda's English Daily newspaper, Available 
at: at: www. newvision. co. ug. 
299 Johnson, Gerry and Daniel W. Van Ness, "The Meaning of Restorative Justice", in Handbook ofRestorative 
Justice, (Devon: Willian Publishers 2007) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 94 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Defining restorative justice and its values 
Restorative justice mainly concerns restoration, or bringing back to what something or 
someone once was; restoring the victim, restonng the offender to a law-abiding life, 
restoration of the damage of the crime to the community, and preventing further offenses. 300 
It is a process whereby parties having a stake to the specific offence collectively resolve how 
to deal with the aftermath of the offence and its implications for the future. 301 Rather than 
remain passive while professionals discuss their problem and decide what to do with it, 
victims, offenders and others affected by the crime meet face to face in a safe and supportive 
environment and play an active role in discussion and decision making. 302 They speak 
openly and respectfully to each other about what happened, express their feelings and have a 
say in what is to be done about the matter. 303 The basic idea of restorative justice is that it 
should include "attempts to put things right for the actual victims of the cnMe.,, 304 
Restorative justice is a criminal justice system in a more social context. It is 
considered to be a forward looking, problem-solving approach to crime, which involves the 
parties themselves and the community generally. The restorative justice approach 
presupposes dialogue between the parties to the crime; this is rare within typical criminal 
justice systems. 305 Dialogue ensures that the offender understands the harm he or she has 
caused. Holding the offender accountable and requiring him or her to make amends for the 
wrongs he has done is indeed greater than simple punishment. 306 
The current legal system does not concern itself centrally with the needs of the 
victims or the reintegration of the offender. As such, the legal system is distant from the 
300 Liebmann, 25 
30 1 Tony, Marshall. Restorative Justice: An Overview, (London: A Report by the Home Office: Research 
Development and Statistics Directorate, 1999), 5 
Johnson, Gerry and Daniel W. Van Ness, "The Idea of Restorative Justice, " Handbook ofRestorative Justice, 
(Devon: Willian Publishers 2007), 9 
Ibid. 
304 Liebmann, Marian. Restorative Justice: How it Works, (London: Jessica Kingsley Pub), 25 
305 Ibid. 
Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 95 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
community. It does not expect offenders to take an initiative in making good what they have 
done, but only to suffer the punishment. 307 Liebmann argues that offenders are used to 'taking 
punishment' but this does not imply that they have taken responsibility for what they have 
done. Taking responsibility, she argues, means saying, "Yes, I did it and I take responsibility 
for the harm I caused. , 308 The current legal system only deals with "what laws were broken?, 
who broke them?, and punishing the gUilty.,, 
The Gacaca process is based on this very notion; it aims to create a forum for debate 
of the crimes committed and not simply punish the accused. The goal is to make the accused 
acknowledge the pain they have caused to their victims. The Gacaca process takes place in 
the communities in which the crimes were committed, and both the accused and the victims 
get a chance to be heard. Accused persons who publicly ask for forgiveness and confess to 
their crimes are 'rewarded' with reduced sentences. The strength of the Gacaca process, and 
perhaps its greatest challenge, lies in the dual process of justice and accountability. The 
interviews I carried out in the course of my research suggest that survivors or victims of 
genocide expected the accused to make the initiative to ask for forgiveness, not because he 
would be awarded reduced sentences, but because he is remorseful for the crimes he 
committed. 
Restorative justice is defined as a process through which contrite offenders accept 
responsibility for their misconduct to those injured. In response, the community allows the 
offender to be reintegrated into the community. The emphasis is on restoration: restoration of 
307 Cavanagh, T., "Adopting New Values for the Courts: What is Restorative Justice? The Court Manager, " 
Restorative Justice in Prisons, A Guide to making it Happen, by Kimmett Edger and Tim Newell, 13 (2,3), 
24-27. (Williamsburg, VA: National Association for Court Management. 1998) 
308 Liebmann, 26 
309 Cavanagh, 24-27 
310 See Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 96 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the victim in ternis of his or her personal self- respect, restoration of the offender and the 
,, 311 
victim, as well as restoration of both offenders and victims within the community. 
The Gacaca laws emphasise the need for the alleged perpetrators to acknowledge their 
crimes and responsibilities through the confession process. Those that confess to the crimes 
committed before their trials are provisionally released and are urged to reintegrate back into 
their communities. Through the Gacaca process, alleged perpetrators, survivors of genocide 
and the community as a whole are encouraged to take an active role in the determination of 
responsibility of individuals' actions and to prevent re-offending by reintegrating people back 
into the community. 
The reintegration process is also made possible through the activities of the National 
Unity and Reconciliation Commission through a number of programmes. 312 Restorative 
justice, of which Gacaca forms a part, encourages the creation of a working community that 
supports the rehabilitation of these alleged perpetrators and victims in an active way. The 
sentences rendered include community service- Travaux dInteret Generaux (TIG), whereby 
the perpetrators take an active role in the reconstruction of the country they took part in 
destroying. 313 The Gacaca process offers atonement in the widest sense through community 
service. 
However, the empirical data suggests a clear distinction between collective and 
individual reparation. While the community as a whole, through the Gacaca process, 
determines the appropriate response to the crimes committed, the victims of these crimes 
crave an independent voice and individual recognition of the crimes committed against 
them. 314 The Gacaca process, allows for "collective reparation" of the victims through 
31 1 Haley John, "Crime Prevention through Restorative Justice: Lessons from Japan". In Restorative Justice. - An 
International Perspective, Burt Galaway and Joe Hudson, Eds. (Monsey, NY; Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
Criminal Justice Press and Kugler Publishers, 1996) 352 
312 See Chapter three. 
313 See Chapter six. 
314 Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 97 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
community service, the empirical data suggested a "better relationship" between accused 
persons and their victims where there has been individual reparation between the parties. 
The restorative justice concept is based on the assumption that crime has its origin in 
social conditions and relationships in the community; that crime prevention is dependent on 
the communities taking some responsibility for remedying those conditions that cause crime; 
that the aftermath of the crime cannot be fully resolved without the parties to it facilitating 
their personal involvements; that justice measures must be flexible enough to respond to the 
particular needs of the parties involved in each case; that partnership and common objective 
among justice agencies, and between them and the community, are essential to optimal 
effectiveness and efficiency; and that justice consists of a balanced approach in which a 
single objective is not allowed to dominate the others. 315 Additionally, restorative justice is 
affordable. In line with Rwanda's economic situation, the Gacaca process in undoubtedly a 
cheaper and quicker alternative to ordinary criminal trials. 
The Gacaca process, while based on restorative justice concepts, is statutory in nature. 
The perpetrator is required by law to ask for forgiveness and confess to their crimes in order 
to get reduced sentences. 316 The empirical data suggests that only a limited number of 
accused will ask for forgiveness because they truly acknowledge the hann they caused to 
their victims, or that they are truly remorseful for their crimes. All the survivors I interviewed 
questioned the motive of accused persons confessing to genocide. The majority suggested 
that alleged perpetrators ask for forgiveness and confess because they are legally obliged to 
do so if they are to benefit from the confession process. 317 As such, the legalistic approach 
that obliges accused persons to confess when measured against the restorative justice element 
315 Marshall, Tony. Restorative Justice, An Overview, 6. Available at: 
www. homeoffice. zov. uk,, "rdf,, "pdfs/occ-resjLi,,. duff, (last accessed, 04/03/2008) 
316 See Chapter seven 
317 See Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 98 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
that is based on personal initiative to make good what they have done creates a compromise 
of the process. 
Where however, the accused makes such an initiative of taking the extra step to 
confess their crimes and ask forgiveness of their survivors outside the Gacaca courts, 
reconciliation has been possible. 318 Restorative justice can only work with voluntary 
cooperation. Perpetrators are given the opportunity to deal with the crime by taking voluntary 
steps in making good what they have done to the victim. This goes further than mere 
compensation; it involves the offender working for the victim, or the community, or even 
financial compensation. This includes an apology and an explanation of how the crime came 
about, where the offender listens to the victims' side of the story and is given an opportunity 
to respond. 
This process may be therapeutic for the victim and has an impact on the perpetrator 
who has to face up to the realities of what they have done. Offenders can restore their 
reputations through reparation; this gives them a better opportunity to reintegrate into the 
community. Some victims also find it helpful to be able to forgive in return for the offenders' 
atonement. 319 Such meetings deal with the victims emotional and material needs. The victim 
also experiences satisfaction from influencing the offender away from the crime, 
transforming a negative experience into something positive. 320 The victims' needs are more 
comprehensively served, particularly the need to be consulted. Victims and offenders are also 
able to see each other as persons rather than stereotypes. Significantly, offenders are more 
affected by the experience than 'normal' prosecution and punishment, and there is a general 
sentiment that society is ready to re-accept them, which also gives them a positive motivation 
to refonn. 
Ibid. 
319 Marshall, Restorative Justice, An Overview, 11, Also see Chapter seven 
320 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 99 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Although it has strong foundations in restorative justice, contemporary Gacaca, has 
integrated retributive measures, a combination that was perhaps inevitable due to the grave 
nature of the crimes committed . 
32 1 Although early proponents considered restorative justice 
as an alternative to retributive justice, 322 Roche suggests that such definition has distorted the 
real meaning of retributive justice and what modem criminal justice systems do. 323 Roche 
notes that restorative justice is part of retributive justice and states that "punishment and 
retribution cannot be ruled out by any system of justice. , 324 He takes the discussion further 
when he suggests that retribution is a form of restoration, and that what makes a victim feel 
better is for the offender to suffer. 325 It is only retributive punishment that can help bring 
about restoration. 326 Duff argues that "restoration is not only compatible with retribution: it 
requires retribution. , 327 Punishment recognises the pain the victim has suffered and not to 
,, 328 condemn it would be implicitly to deny that it was wrong or that it wrongfully mattered . 
321 See Chapter 6 
322 Ayres, Ian and John Braithwaite, Responsive Regulation: Transcending the Deregulation Debate, (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2002) 10 
323 A retributive theory of justice presupposes that "wrongdoing must be punished simply because the wrongful 
act merits condemnation and punishment, " but this definition is not put forward by restorative justice 
proponents. Declan Roche, "Retribution and Restorative Justice", Handbook on Restorative Justice, Gerry 
Johnstone and Daniel W. Van Ness, Eds. (Devon: Willian Publishers, 2007), 77 
324 Roche, "Retribution and Restorative Justice", 83. Burnside suggests that the Bible upholds both retributive 
and restorative justice in equal fold, in which retribution aims at restoration and, as such, retribution cannot 
be neatly divorced from restorative justice. He gives a number of biblical examples. For example, he quotes 
Exodus 21: 18-9 "When men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or with his fist and the man does 
not die but keeps his bed, then if the man rises again and walks abroad with his staff, he that struck him shall 
be clear; only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall have him thoroughly healed. " The offender has a 
duty to make sure that his victim is "thoroughly healed. " He suggests that the retributive element in the 
passage is that the offender must "pay back" which is restoration in the fullest sense. The natural thing at the 
time would have been to send his son to farm his land or someone to look after him. He also suggests that an 
"eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth" reference in the bible was more restorative than retributive. The word 
'for" (tachat) can mean "in place of' meaning one thing given in place of another. Jonathan Burnside, 
"Retributive and Restoration in Biblical Texts, " Handbook on Restorative Justice, Gerry Johnstone and 
Daniel W. Van Ness, Eds. (Devon: Willian Publishers (2007), 139 
325 Roche, Declan. "Retribution and Restorative Justice", 82 
326 lbid, 83 
32'Duff, R. A, "Restoration and Retributioif', in Andrew Von Hirsch and Julian Roberts, Restorative Justice and 
Criminal Justice: Competing or Reconcilable paradigms? (Oxford and Portland: Hart Publishing, 2003), 43 
328 Roche, 83. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 100 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Roche states that restorative justice is not an alternative to punishment, but an alternative 
form of punishment. 
Contemporary Gacaca courts arguably represent a mix of both restorative and 
retributive justice, and support Roche's argument. In Rwanda, restorative justice has become 
an alternative form of law and punishment. This is not to suggest that restorative justice is not 
a justice theory in its own right. Traditional Affican justice system and indeed pre-genocide 
Gacaca represent a legitimate restorative justice system. However, in the aftermath of the 
Rwandan genocide, present-day Gacaca courts cannot be viewed as purely restorative. Today, 
while Gacaca thrives on some attributes of restorative justice, it cannot be entirely divorced 
from retributive justice. Not only was the Gacaca process revived for retributive and 
deterrence purposes, ensuring that all alleged perpetrators are called to account for their 
crimes, but also to send a strong message that these crimes were not to be tolerated. 
THE CONCEPT OF RECONCILIATION 
Reconciliation derives from the Latin word conciliatus, meaning "coming together, to 
11330 331 assemble... which, according to Lambourne, originates in religion. Reconciliation in 
Kinyarwanda; kwiyunga, directly translated to mean "to mend ourselves, " has been central to 
Gacaca and African justice systems generally. 332 
Ibid. 
330 Lambourne, Wendy. 'The Pursuit of Justice and Reconciliation: Responding to Genocide in Cambodia and 
Rwanda, ' International Studies Association 40th Annual Convention, (Washington, 1999) 
Ibid. 
332 See Chapter six. Mqeke describes pre-colonial African law characterised by ubuntu as a restoration of the 
disturbed social equilibrium within the community. R. B. Mqeke "Customary Law and Human Rights", The 
South African Law Journal 1995,364-365. The African concept of ubuntu is the philosophy of personhood 
underlying the traditional conception of justice. Ubuntu is commonly described through the saying "I am 
because you are" or "my humanity is tied up with your humanity. " The effect such a conception must have 
on one's understanding of justice is clear. If one's humanity is tied up with the humanity of all others, what 
makes others worse off also brings harm to oneself. Andrew Rwigamba, Justice And Reconciliation as 
Instruments Of Political Stability in Post Genocide Situations: A Case Study Of Rwanda, Thesis, 
(Nairobi, 2005), 14-15. Ubuntu, Villa-Vicencio explains, denotes a sense of humanity, of the natural 
connectedness of people. He explains that "... a traditional African understanding of ubuntu affirms an 
organic wholeness of humanity, a wholeness realised in and through other people. The notion is enshrined in 
the Xhosa proverb: umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu (a person is a person through persons). " Nshuti Villa- 
S. BYAMUKAMA 101 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Galtung suggests that reconciliation is a theme with "deep psychological, 
sociological, theoretical, philosophical and profoundly human roots- and no body really 
knows how to successfully achieve it.,, 333 There seems to be no consensus in the literature on 
the definition of reconciliation, but generally it involves coexistence, dialogue, justice, 
remorse, apology, truth, forgiveness and healing. 334 
Although forgiveness forms a part of reconciliation, there is a tendency to mix 
forgiveness and reconciliation. Forgiveness is not a necessary prerequisite for reconciliation, 
but this is not to suggest that forgiveness cannot take place in the process of reconciliation. 
Truth, on the other hand, is a prerequisite for reconciliation. Lederach explains, "Truth is the 
longing for knowledge of wrong and the validation of painful loss and experience, but that it 
is coupled with mercy, which articulates the need for acceptance, letting go and a new 
beginning. 
Justice represents a search for individual and group rights, for social restructuring and 
for restitution, but is linked with peace, which underscores the need for interdependence, 
well-being and security. , 335 Consequently, for reconciliation to take place, there needs to be a 
degree of truth, justice, mercy (forgiveness) and peace. 336 Reconciliation is subjective and as 
Vicencio "Identity, Culture, and Belonging: Religious and Cultural Rights" John Witte, Jr. and Johan D. van 
der Vyver eds., Religious Human Rights in Global Perspectives: Religious Perspectives The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1996) at 527. Also see: Gabriel Setiloane African Theology: An Introduction 
(Johannesburg: Skotaville Publishers, 1996); Valiant A. Clapper "Ubuntu and the Public Official" Publico 
December 1996 at 27; Lionel Abrahams, "Ubuntu or not to? " Sidelines June 1997,1 
333 Johan Galtung, "After Violence, Reconstruction, Reconciliation and Resolution: Coping with the Visible 
and Invisible Effects of War and Violence", in Mohammed Abu Nimer Reconciliation, Justice and 
Coexistence, 
(Lexington books, 2001), 4 
334 Naraghi Anderlim, Sanam et al., Transitional Justice and Reconciliation. Available at: 
http: //www. huntaltematives. org/download/49 
transitionaljustice. pdf (accessed 04/03/2008) 
335 John Paul Lederach, Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies, (Washington DC, 
United States Institute of Peace Press, 1997) 29 
336 Ibid, Explaining the concept of reconciliation, he quoted a biblical text, Psalms 8 5: 10, "Truth and mercy have 
met together, justice and peace have kissed" 
S. BYAMUKAMA 102 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
such, a successful reconciliation model in one country cannot be used or expected to be 
successful in another country where it has been imported in whole. 337 
Defining Reconciliation 
Galtung defines reconciliation as a process of healing the traumas of both victims and 
perpetrators after violence, providing closure of the bad relation. 338 The International Institute 
for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA) also defines reconciliation as a process 
through which a society moves from a divided past to a shared future. 339 It suggests that the 
essence of reconciliation is the voluntary initiative of the conflict parties to acknowledge their 
responsibility and guilt. 340 Lambourne states that reconciliation requires an acknowledgement 
of wrongs committed and a re-evaluation by their perpetrators of the morality which lay 
behind them. 34 1 Kriesberg defines reconciliation as "... the process, by which parties that have 
experienced an oppressive relationship or a destructive conflict with each other move to 
attain or to restore a relationship that they believe to be minimally acceptable. " 342 
Describing reconciliation as a process is to recognise that it is a long tenn aspiration. 
Rigby suggests that just as it takes time for wounds to heal and for people to work through 
their anger and bitterness so as to be in a position to offer forgiveness, so it takes time to 
achieve truth, peace, justice and ultimately reconciliation. 343 Broun&us believes that the 
process of the transformation of attitudes, beliefs and emotions regarding one's own group, 
337 Arthur Molenaar, Research Report on Gacaca Courts - PRI: Gacaca and Reconciliation: Kibuye Case 
Study With the Assistance of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDQ 2004, 
338 Galtung, Johan. "After Violence, Reconstruction, Reconciliation and Resolution: Coping with the Visible 
and Invisible Effects of War and Violence", in Mohammed Abu Nimer, Reconciliation, Justice and 
Coexistence, Ed. (Lexington books, 2001), 3 
339 Bloomfield, David. Reconciliation: An Introduction, in Reconciliation After Violent Conflict: A Handbook, 
(Stockholm: International IDEA) 
Ibid. 
34 ' Lambourn, Wendy. "The Pursuit of Justice and Reconciliation: Responding to Genocide in Cambodia and 
Rwanda", International Studies Association 40, h Annual Convention, (Washington DC, 1999) 
342 Kriesberg, Louis 'Changing forms of Coexistence, 'in Mohammed Abu- Nimer, Reconciliation, Justice and 
Coexistence: Theory and Practice, (Maryland: Lexington Books, 2001) 48. Also see Molenaar, 40 and 
Brouneus, 17 
343 Rigby, 13 
S. BYAMUKAMA 103 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the other group and the relationship between the groups may take decades. 344 This view is 
shared by the Executive Secretary of Gacaca Courts who suggested that reconciliation is a 
process that can only be achieved over time. 345 Kriesberg argues that "reconciliation is never 
total, never including all members of the former antagonistic parties, not including every 
,, 346 dimension of reconciliation completely, nor being fully reciprocal between parties. He 
notes that people may not necessarily totally put behind them the horrific violations of their 
human rights. These leave behind deep scars that probably never fully disappear. 347 
Lederach adds another ingredient when he defines reconciliation to include a "focus 
and locus". As a focus, Lederach says that reconciliation is building new and better 
relationships between fon-ner enemies. Relationships he argues, is the "root cause and long 
terni solution. 11348 However, he says reconciliation is a locus, by which he means 
"reconciliation represents a space, a place or a location of encounter, where parties to the 
conflict meet" and discuss issues of truth, forgiveness, justice and peace. 149 The Executive 
Secretary of Gacaca agrees with the concept of locus when she says that the Gacaca process 
offers a place, a forum of debate where people who would have ordinarily not spoken can 
speak . 
The process of reconciliation requires that the perpetrators take a voluntary initiative 
to acknowledge their responsibility and guilt, as well as to engage in self-reflection of their 
role and behaviour in the conflict. Rigby says, "At the core of any reconciliation process is 
344 Broun&us, Karen. "Reconciliation, Theory and Practice for Development Cooperation, " A Report for the 
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, Uppsala University, Department of Peace and 
Conflict research, (2003,15), quoting Daniel Bar-Tal, Personal Communication with Professor Daniel Bar- 
Tal, Dec. 1,2000 
345 Interview with Domitila, Executive Secretary of the Gacaca courts, 24 th June 2006 
346 Kriesberg, Louis, "Changing Forms of Coexistence", in Mohamed Abu Nimer, Reconciliation, Justice and 
Coexistence: Theory and Practice, (Lexington books, 2001), 60 See Chapter seven 
347 Molenaar, 42. See also Chapter seven 
348 Lederach, John Paul 
Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies, (Washington DC 
United Institute of Peace Press, 1997), 30 
Ibid. 
350 Interview with Domilila 24 th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 104 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
,, 351 the preparedness of people to anticipate a shared future. For this to occur, particularly in 
the aftermath of genocide, parties need not forget, but forgive the past, and those responsible 
must be remorseful for their actions, which is vital to the establishment of a new relationship 
based on mutual acceptance and reasonable trust. Hayner asked a Rwandan official who lost 
all members of his family in the 1994 genocide whether he would rather remember or forget. 
He replied, "We must remember what happened in order to keep it from happening again 
but we must forget the feelings that go with it. It is only by forgetting that we are able to go 
on. "352 
It is however difficult for people to forgive the past and look to a shared future if the 
past remains some "secret" and their present circumstances remind them of the violations 
they suffered. 353 As such, Hamber and Kelly advocate for a justice mechanism that provides 
healing, restitution or reparation and restoration, including apologies where necessary. 354 In 
line with this argument, Hamber and Kelly advocate that both parties not just get to know, but 
truly acknowledge what happened in the past, acknowledging the hurt and the losses 
caused. 355 Individuals who are party to it need to acknowledge their responsibility in the past 
conflict, to accept and leam from it in a positive and constructive way so as to avoid 
repetition of the same. It is only with justice, truth, people acknowledging their crimes, 
forgiveness and peace that allows for removal of a culture of suspicion, fear, mistrust and 
violence between the groups and an introduction of a culture of respect of human rights and a 
culture where parties to the conflict feel a sense of belonging to the community. 356 
35 'Rigby, Andrew. Justice and Reconciliation After the Violence, (London: Lynne Rienner Publishers 2001), 12 
352 Hayner, Pricilla. Unspeakable Truths: Confronting State Terror and Atrocity, (London: Routledge, 2002) 
353 Rigby, 12 
354 Hamber, Brandon and Grdinne Kelly, A Working Definition ofReconciliation, (Democratic Dialogue, Belfast 
2004J3 
355 Ibid. Also see Daniel Bar-Tal and Gemma H. Bennick, "The Nature of Reconciliation as an Outcome and as 
a Process", in Yaacov Bar Siman Tov, From Conflict Resolution to Reconciliation, (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004) 11-38. 
356 See Chapter seven. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 105 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Truth 
To achieve reconciliation, there ought to be a joint analysis of the history of the 
conflict, recognition of the injustices and resulting historic wounds and acceptance of moral 
responsibilities where due. This is important because collective memory of their past is 
necessary to understand what went wrong, the responsibility of the parties involved in the 
conflict and, ultimately, what needs to be done to benefit the future. This can only be 
achieved by truth, and in the Gacaca context, by the confession process. 
Discussing the importance of truth, Cohen argues "the primary drive behind truth- 
telling lies in the value of the truth itself 357 He suggests "many people have a powerful, 
almost obsessive desire to know what exactly happened. , 358 Quoting Weschler, Cohen 
explains "the demand for truth is often more urgently felt than the demand for justice. People 
do not necessarily want their fonner torturers to go to jail, but they do want to see the truth 
established. "359 He also adds that 
This is a mysterious, powerful, almost magical notion, because often 
everyone already knows the truth- everyone knows who the torturers 
were and what they did, the torturers know that everyone knows, and 
everyone knows that they know. 360 
Cohen suggests that this is because of the distinction between knowledge and 
acknowledgement. Acknowledgement is "what happens to knowledge when it becomes 
officially sanctioned and enters the public realm. , 361 
Truth is particularly important to survivors because it allows them know what 
happened to their friends and relatives. This need is especially acute for those victims who 
simply disappeared, or where there is no physical evidence of their death. Survivors have a 
desperate need to know what happened to their loved ones, even though they have given up 
357 Cohen, 18 
358 Ibid. 
3511 Cohen, 18 
360 Ibid. 
361 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 106 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
hope of finding them alive. Allowing for a logical sequence of the antecedents allows a deep 
understanding of what really happened and an understanding of how it can be avoided in the 
future. 362 Galtung suggests that telling the story together allows for dialogue and for parties to 
add to the story and to share views. It allows for deeper understanding of why some crimes 
were committed, exactly what happened and can help in the process of forgiving. 363 
Another theory on truth -telling is derived from deterrence theory where it is assumed 
that the exposure of the past will prevent it from happening again, making "never again" a 
reality. The claim is that "if unpunished, offenders are likely to repeat their past crimes 
(impunity), then they will even be more likely to repeat them if no one bothers even to find 
out and record what they did. , 
364 Cohen claims "truth telling will weaken potential support 
,, 365 for any future repetition of the same abuses. The perpetrator need not be imprisoned or 
killed, but naming and pointing a finger at them is sufficient deterrence. 366 Cohen, quoting 
Neier, highlights, 
By knowing what happened, a nation is able to debate honestly why 
and how dreadful crimes came to be committed. To identify those 
responsible and to show what they did, is to mark them with a public 
stigma and that it is punishment enough in itself and to identity the 
victims, and recall how they were tortured and killed, is a way of 
acknowledging their worth and dignity. 367 
This allows for individual accountability and for the respect of the rule of law. 
363 Galtung, 'After Violence, Reconstruction, Reconciliation and Resolution, Coping with Visible and Invisible 
effects of war and Violence', In Mohamend Abu Nimer, Reconciliation, Justice and Coexistence: Theory 
and Practice, (Lexington Books, 2001) 12. He however suggests that that getting the facts straight does not 
necessarily translate into forgiveness, but that revealing such details of heinous crimes committed may be 
tormenting to the victims and perpetrators alike. 364 
Cohen, 19 
365 Ibid, Adolf Hitler's infamous question, "Who after all, speaks today of the annihilation of the Armenians'? " 
supports the above argument. 
366 Cohen, 37, quoting Nadezhda Mandelstam, Hope Abandoned 572 (New York: Athenaeum, 1972) Therefore 
denunciation is in itself a form of deterrence and punishment. 
367 Cohen, 3 7, quoting Aryer Neier, "What Should be Done about the Guilty? " New York Review Books, 3 7,1 
(1990) 34 
S. BYAMUKAMA 107 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Justice, important in any orderly society, is arguably even more essential in a society 
that has suffered the trauma of genocide. The guilty must be found guilty and found guilty of 
crimes that they actually committed. Without justice, there is no psychological and material 
relief, for the victims and there is no hope of reconciliation for the society. 368 
Establishing individual responsibility is the only way of avoiding collective 
responsibility of one "group. " Karl Jaspers, a German philosopher and political theorist, said 
of the Nuremberg trials in 1946, "For us Germans, this trial has the advantage that it 
distinguished between the particular crimes of the leaders and that it does not condemn the 
Gen-nan collectively. , 369 Rigby suggests that the Serbs today might applaud the work of the 
ICTY for showing the rest of the world that the horrendous abuses perpetrated during the war 
in Bosnia were not committed by the Serbs as a people, but by individuals and identifiable 
concentration camp guards and paramilitary members who happened to be part of the Serbian 
community. 370 The same can be said of Rwanda; the genocide was committed by individuals 
of Hutu ethnicity against Tutsi and Moderate Hutu but was not committed by the Hutu as a 
whole. Although more than 800,000 people are suspected of having been involved in the 
commission of the genocide, over five million Hutu were not involved. Bad "eggs" must first 
be distinguished from the "good" ones so that those who committed crimes can be 
accountable for them, while the rest of the society cannot account for that which they have 
not done. 
RWANDA'S CHOICE OF TRANSITION 
The crimes committed in Rwanda were international crimes of genocide, which 
require the attention of all the international community. Article I of the Geneva Convention 
provides that "the contracting parties confinn that genocide, whether committed in times of 
Ibid. 
Rigby, 4 
Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 108 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
peace or in times of war, is a crime under international law which they undertake to prevent 
and punish. , 37 1 This was precisely the reasoning behind the foundation of the ICTR, as well 
as Gacaca law. 372 Human right abuses and crimes such as genocide are committed on a large 
scale with state complicity, however, precedence has shown that while the international 
community is committed to punishing these cnmes, international tribunals tend to concentrate 
on the "big fish". 
Undoubtedly, such instigators must be prosecuted to deter others from committing 
such crimes. 374 But selective prosecutions, popular with International Tribunals would on 
their own be insufficient if the rest of the alleged perpetrators were given amnesty or the 
popular Truth Commissions were applied. Prosecuting the "big" fish in Arusha, far from the 
scene of the crime is insufficient if those who actually raped, tortured, killed their neighbors, 
committed arson and looted property receive amnesty. 
Rwanda's decision to insist on the prosecution of all alleged perpetrators was bom, in 
part, from its historical and political situation. Insisting on prosecuting all alleged perpetrators 
was based, not only on Rwanda's legal requirement to hold accountable those who committed 
human rights abuses, but also the new regime was confident of its power and ability to pursue 
justice without risking political and social stability. 375 Arguably, there was no political 
pressure on the Government to negotiation or compromise as the "old order" was completely 
taken over by the "new". 
371 Article 1, Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide 
372 See Chapter three. 
Ibid. 
374 Rigby, 4, Rigby has suggested that even then, it is not the really big fish that get prosecuted. He said that "the 
"small fry" suffer the penalties for crimes committed while implementing the policies devised by persons 
with "clean hands" who sit behind desks, far from the scene where the blood was shed and the abuses 
perpetrated... " 
375 Ibid. Also see Chapter three on Selective Prosecutions. 
376 See Chapter three. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 109 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
It is clear from the above that justice was legally and morally necessary, and 
politically possible. However, an additional and equally important consideration was the fact 
that justice needed to be practical, feasible and fit within the wider umbrella of reconciliation. 
Precedence in the prosecution of human rights abuses suggests that there is a strict 
distinction between guilty and innocent, victim and perpetrators. Jaspers, however, reflecting 
on the holocaust distinguishes between four kinds of guilt. Criminal guilt for those who 
actually perpetrated the genocide, political guilt for those who helped such people to power, 
moral guilt for those who stood by, doing nothing while the crimes were being committed, 
and metaphysical guilt for those who survived while others were being killed thereby failing 
in their responsibility to do all that they might have done to preserve the standards of 
civilized humanity. 377 Trials might be valid for trying criminal guilt, but they are not well 
suited to coping with other types of guilt. Even so, among those guilty of serious human 
rights violations, many were themselves victims: victims of past oppressions; victims of 
colonial indoctrination; politically manipulated victims; victims of poverty and 
landlessness. 378 
For genocide to take place on the scale that it did, it was necessary for the fonner 
political leadership to manipulate perpetrators into finding "justification" for the actions they 
were about to commit. This was done through dehumanising their victims, 379 and politically 
manipulating perpetrators into thinking that such "work" was patriotic and defending the 
country. The criminal justice system provides limited suggestions for defeating such 
indoctrination. 
One cannot discuss the Rwandan genocide without talking about numbers. The 
Gacaca website gives an official figure of 818,564 persons suspected of having committed 
Rigby, 6 
Ibid. 
379 Referring to them as "cockroaches", "snakes", and "traitors" of the country. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 110 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
genocide. Of these, 77,269 have been placed in category one, 432,557 in category two and 
308,738 in category three. It is estimated that approximately one million people were killed 
during the genocide. Of the individuals who were attacked, 327,555 survived, (102,743 men, 
150,170 women and 74,642 orphans) . 
380 These are, by any measure, staggering statistics in a 
country that presently has a population of approximately 9 million people. 381 
Considering the hundreds of thousands of people accused of committing crimes of 
genocide, it is clear that even the best criminal law justice system could not cope with these 
numbers. Six years after the 1994 genocide, approximately 120,000 genocidaires remained in 
cramped prisons living in inhuman conditions. 382 Between 1996 and 2006, the Rwandan 
criminal justice courts only prosecuted approximately 10,000 alleged perpetrators. 383 At these 
rates, it would take 110 years to prosecute those in prison alone. 384 Adapting a typical 
criminal justice system in Rwanda to deal with crimes of genocide would mean that the 
majority of the alleged perpetrators and their victims would die without ever being tried or 
receiving justice. It would be the worst case example in history of 'justice delayed is justice 
denied. ' 
Having now lived in the 'west' for nearly four years, I realise that understanding the 
way of life in Aftica, especially rural Africa, might be difficult to comprehend. The adage 
that "no man is an island" aptly describes life in rural Aftica. Life without good relations with 
neighbors and the community is literally impossible. Take, for example, fanning; a fanner 
cannot work his land with one hoe alone, without the help of neighbors, and expect a descent 
harvest. The usual practice is for fiiends and neighbors to join hands and plough or harvest 
380 Available at: www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. rw 
381 See Chapter one 
382 Human Rights Watch, 2004. Struggling to Survive: Barriers to Justice for Rape Victims in Rwanda. New 
York: Human Rights Watch. Available at: http: //hrw. or. c/reports/2004/ rwandaq09O4/rwandaO9O4. pd 
(Accessed 30 th June 2008) 
383 Reyntjens, Filip and Stef Vandeginste, "Rwanda: A Typical Transition. " in Elin Skaar, Roads to 
Reconciliation, (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005) 
384 Available at: www. inkiko-. gacaca.. gov. rw (Accessed 17'h July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA III 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
one person's land, and another gets his turn on an agreed date. When a person falls sick, he or 
she needs able-bodied men to literally carry her on a stretcher from her home to a community 
dispensary that may be miles away- there is no luxury of an ambulance or, at times, even a 
road on which a vehicle could pass. Simple daily routines like lighting a fire arc far more 
challenging than simply switching on the gas or electricity. It is often easier to get an already 
lit charcoal from a neighbor to hasten the process. If you run out of water when cooking, you 
have no luxury of turning a tap; instead of eating half -cooked food, it is better to send a child 
to a neighbor's for a cup of water. Water is fetched in communal wells or boreholes and 
firewood is gathered in groups. Needless to say, luxury goods are not common and children 
share. These are only a few examples of how interdependent people in the rural areas are. 
Referring to this phenomenon, one female interviewee, in Cyangugu-Rwanda, who was 
infected with HIV/AIDS as a consequence of the genocide said, "Who will take me to 
hospital when I am sick? Who will repair my roof when it leaks? Who will play with my 
This reality is at the heart of every survivor and perpetrator of genocide who must 
learn to reintegrate him or herself into the community. Everybody recognises that once a 
human life is lost, it can never be retrieved. Even property, reparation and compensation does 
not mean you actually get your same property back. As Rigby rightly suggests, "Hatred and 
the quest for revenge can consume people, turning them into a mirror image of those they 
,, 386 hate. Somehow, people need be able to let go of the past, forgive for the sake of peace 
and move on. 
385 Interview Western Province, Rusizi District, 14 th June 2006 
396 Rigby, 12 
S. BYAMUKAMA 112 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Prosecuting alleged perpetrators of genocide requires that the courts fully adhere to 
fair trial standards. The fact that Gacaca legislation refers to the Geneva Convention 387 in its 
preamble suggests that legislators had in mind fulfilling international standards of fair trial. 
Rwanda is a state party 388 to both the International Convention of Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR)389 and the African Charter on Human and People's Rights (Banjul 
Charter). 390 
Both the Banjul and the ICCPR statutes are binding on Rwanda since it ratified 
these treaties. 
Article 7(l) of the African Charter on Human and People's Rights provides, 
Every individual shall have the right to have his cause heard. This 
comprises: (a) the right to an appeal in competent national organs 
against acts of violating his fundamental rights as recognised and 
guaranteed by conventions, laws, regulations and customs in force; 
(b) the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty by a 
competent court or tribunal; (c) the right to defence, including the 
right to be defended by counsel of his choice; (d) the right to be tried 
within a reasonable time by an impartial court or tribunal. 391 
The right to a fair trial is also guaranteed by the ICCPR, to which Rwanda is legally 
bound. Article 14(l) of the lCCPR states that, 
All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals. In the 
determination of any criminal charge against him, or of his rights and 
obligations in a suit at law, everyone shall be entitled to a fair and 
public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal 
established by law. 
387 Paragraph 13 of preamble states that "Considering that the crime of genocide and crimes against humanity 
are provided for by the International Convention of December 9,1948, related to repression and punishment 
of the crime of genocide", and paragraph 15 recognises that Rwanda ratified the convention in 1975, but did 
not make such necessary provisions in accordance to Article V of the Convention. " 
388 The principle of pacta sunt servanda requires that contracting states to a treaty are responsible for performing 
treaty obligations and ensuring their required effects, including the adoption or amendment of indispensable 
legislation to that end. More specifically, it was reaffirmed unequivocally in the third paragraph of the 
preamble to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) that the principles of free consent and of 
good faith and the pacta sunt servanda are universally recognized, "every treaty is binding upon the parties 
to it and must be performed in good faith. " (Article 25 of the Vienna Convention of the Law of Treaties) 
389 17 th January 1975. Rwanda has not made reservations to any provisions in the ICCPR. 
390Ratified May 5,2003. Available at: littp: //www. ri-ylit-to-education. or)-,, /content/ 
rights-and_reniediesl rWanda. htmI 
391 African [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, adopted June 27,198 1, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 
rev. 5,21 I. L. M. 58 (1982), entered intoforce Oct. 21,1986: [excerpts] 
S. BYAMUKAMA 113 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The next section, Article 14 (2) of the ICCPR statute provides that, "everyone charged 
with a criminal offence shall have the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty 
according to law. " 
While the right to be heard by a special court has not been objected to, 392 the most 
voiced concem of the Gacaca process is that due legal process will be compromised and the 
rights of the defendants ignored. 393 
Article 14(3, d) of the ICCPR provides that everyone has a right 
To be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person or 
through legal assistance of his own choosing; to be informed, if he 
does not have legal assistance, of this right; and to have legal 
assistance assigned to him, in any case where the interests of justice 
so require, and without payment by him in any such case if he does 
not have sufficient means to pay for it. 394 
Although the Gacaca law does not provide accused persons with legal representation, 
and does not advocate for free legal counsel, it recognises under Article 65(5b) of Organic 
law 16/2004 the right of a defendant to defend him or herself, in accordance with Article 14 
(3d) of the ICCPR. Rwanda is a poor country and cannot pay for legal representation for this 
many suspects. No existing criminal law process has had to deal with serious crimes such as 
392 The Human Rights Committee in General Comment 13(4) makes it clear that the ICCPR does not prohibit 
special courts, and that the trying of civilians by such courts should be exceptional and take place under 
conditions which genuinely afford the full guarantees stipulated in Article 14. General Comment No. 13: 
Equality before the courts and the right to a fair and public hearing by an independent court established by 
law (Art. 14), 13/04/84, lCCPR General Comment, 13 
393 Tully, Danielle. "Human Rights Compliance and the Gacaca Jurisdiction in Rwanda, " Boston College 
International and Comparative Law Review, 26: 385,2003, p386 
394 lCCPR, Article 14(3d). The Human Rights Committee in General Comment 13(9) in relation to an 
individual's right to defence observes that facilities must include access to documents and other evidence 
which the accused requires to prepare his case, as well as the opportunity to engage and communicate with 
counsel. Human Rights Committee, General Comment 13 
S. BYAMUKAMA 114 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
genocide on such a scale. The numbers are simply too many for legal representation to be 
possible, let alone, be free of charge. 395 
The Government of Rwanda has acknowledged that international human rights 
instruments apply to the Gacaca jurisdiction. 396 However, the challenge of adhering to some 
of these standards inevitably means undermining others. For example, Article 14 (3c) of the 
lCCPR states that in the determination of any criminal charge against him, everyone shall be 
entitled to be tried without undue delay. 
With over 100,000 pre-trial detainees languishing in over-crowded 
prisons... a compromise is unavoidable. Simply releasing pre-trial 
detainees, however, is not a feasible option for the government of 
Rwanda. 397 
Providing legal council would mean delaying trials by decades, if not a century. Delaying the 
trials to satisfy the requirement of legal representation would deny both the perpetrators their 
legal right to be heard and the victim the right to justice, making reconciliation between the 
two groups impossible and destabilising the country even further. 
Sarkin suggests that the best way to ensure that the Gacaca jurisdictions protect fair 
trial standards is for the international community to work with the government of Rwanda to 
further educate the populace, encourage transparent participation, monitor the impartiality of 
the proceedings, and foster reconciliation and reintegration into Rwandese society. Perhaps 
395 Article 14 (3) states that in the determination of any criminal charge against him, every person shall be 
entitled to guarantees stated in the Article in full equality. This suggests that both parties have equal position 
during trial and have equal position to make their case. Providing legal representation for the defence 
inevitably requires a legally trained prosecution team and qualified law judges. This is not practical and 
would perhaps only have a chance if more than a half of the Rwandan adult population went through legal 
training. 
396 Republic of Rwanda, Reply to Amnesty Internationals Report, Rwanda: The Troubled Course of Justice, " 30 
(2000) Avalable at: http: Hwww. Rwanda I. com/govemment/06_1 1_00newsai. htm (Accessed 10fl' November 
2007) 
397 See Moussalli Report 2000, note 170, at 27, also Sarkin, "The Tension Between Justice and Reconciliation in 
Rwanda: Politics, Human Rights, Due Process and the Role of the Gacaca Courts in Dealing with the 
Genocide", Journal ofAfrican Law, 45,2 (2001), 143-172. . 
S. BYAMUKAMA 115 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the Gacaca jurisdictions can be a first step toward greater observance of human rights in 
Rwanda. 398 
CONCLUSION 
Considering Rwanda's resources and the needs of both Justice and reconciliation, 
Gacaca provides a solid foundation for post-conflict justice. Indeed, Gacaca jurisdictions 
have emerged as Rwanda's most innovative hope for justice and reconciliation, while 
fostering a culture of protection for civil and political rights in a country that has long ignored 
them. 
This has been achieved through the country's recognition of its problems post- 
genocide and its decision to resolve them through transitional justice. In meeting the 
country's need for justice and reconciliation, the Gaeaca process combines both retributive 
and restorative elements to prosecute all the alleged perpetrators of the crime of genocide. 
The Gacaca process hopes to achieve its central objectives through its confession process. 
The confession process is especially important in Gacaca tnals, not only as a way to speed up 
trials, but as a means to reconcile Rwandans. In so doing, however, international standards of 
fair trial must be adhered to. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 116 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 5: PROSECUTION OF GENOCIDE AND 
TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE THEORY 
Chapters three and four have considered the theoretical framework on which the 
Gacaca process is based. They examine the Gacaca process within the broad context of 
transitional justice. Although Gacaca is rooted in Rwanda's traditional justice system, it's 
contemporary incarnation has been modified to meet the needs of a nation in transition. 
This chapter aims to provide readers with a clear understanding of challenges 
involved with prosecuting the crime of genocide in the domestic courts of Rwanda. The 
chapter will examine the transition and development of the cnminal. justice system in 
Rwanda, with regard to domestic genocide trials. The chapter will also show how the Gacaca 
process was adopted, considering how it evolved into what it is today, as well as its 
objectives and practices. 
RECOURSE TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
It can be argued that the basic requirements of transitional justice are served if the 
instigators and leaders of past abuses are held accountable for the crimes they committed. 399 
In Rwanda, the post-genocide regime stated that its primary objectives were to seek justice 
and fight impunity, both of which are prerequisites for reconciliation. Following the 
genocide, Rwanda desperately needed a functioning criminal justice system to maintain order 
and prevent further killings. In the absence of competent and accountable organs, soldiers and 
local authorities carried out most arrests, although these were not legally competent to do so, 
and typically pursued individuals on the basis of non-substantiated oral accusations. 
400 There 
was no judicial investigation into the accusations made against many of those arrested. 401 
There were virtually no arrest warrants; detainees were arrested and detained for long periods 
See Chapter three 
40OAmnesty Intemational, Gacaca. - A Question of Justice. Available at: hitp: //xv,, vw. aninestv. orp, /Iib[aU/index/ 
engafr470072002 (last accessed 27/06/2008) 401 
Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 117 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
in police custody, and most detainees did not have case files or, at a minimum, a prima facie 
case against them. 402 4c There could be no review of a detention order, because no detention 
order ever existed, there was no judge before whom to bring the review, and there were no 
actual courts in which proceedings could be held. 1403 Rwanda was unable to respect even the 
most basic provisions of its own criminal law, 
404 let alone meet its obligations under 
international law. 405 
As a result, Rwanda invoked Article 4(l) of the International Convention on Civil and 
Political Rights (ICCPR), which Rwanda became party to on the 16 th January 1975. The 
Article provides, 
In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and 
the existence of which is officially proclaimed, the States Parties to 
the present Covenant may take measures derogating from their 
obligations under the present Covenant to the extent strictly required 
by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not 
inconsistent with their other obligations under international law and 
do not involve discrimination solely on the ground of race, colour, 
sex, language, religion or social origin. 406 
By evoking Article 4 of the ICCPR, the government legitimised the situation on the 
ground. Mass arrests were justified as preventative; genocide suspects were being stopped 
from committing reprisals. Furthen-nore, the government insisted that the arrests were 
ensuring the eradication of the culture of impunity. Although the situation has seen massive 
403 Ferstman, C. "Domestic Trials for Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity: The Example of Rwanda" 
African Journal ofInternational and Comparative Law Vol. 9 (1997), 857. 
404 Schabas, William. "Gacaca Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal of International Criminal Justice 3, (2005), 
879-895,883-884. Articles 38 and 41 of the Rwanda Penal Code stipulate respectively, that the accused 
person could be detained pending trial if serious grounds could be shown suggesting his guilt and where the 
offence warranted a possible sentence of six months or more. The accused person would then be arrested by 
an official from the Prosecutor's office and appear before a judge within five days of issuance of the 
provisional arrest warrant. Any order of arrest would remain in force for 30 days and extended on a monthly 
basis. 
405 lbid, Article 14 of the lCCPR and Article 7 of the Banjul Charter 
406 Article 4(3) lCCPR, Where a state party to the convention seeks to derogate from its obligation under the 
Convention, he shall do so through an intermediary of the Secretary General of the United Nations and 
provide the reasons and the particular provisions it wishes to derogate from. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 118 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
improvement over the years, it was clear that the government was falling short of its 
international obligations. 
Subsequently, the Transitional National Assembly voted for the suspension of 
fundamental safeguards guaranteeing pre trial rights of individuals contained in the Rwanda 
Code of Criminal Procedure. 407 The Constitutional Court in July 1995 ruled that 
Abrogation of the procedural rules relating to remand in custody and 
release on bail was incompatible with the principle of presumption of 
innocence, that the duration of the four year suspension period was 
incompatible with an individuals right to a fair hearing within a 
reasonable period of time, and that the act undermined the 
independence of the judiciary. 408 
The government nonetheless amended the constitution , thereby amending 
Articles 
4,38 and 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure allowing a derogation of the time period 
prescribed for issuing an arrest record, provisional arrest warrants, the duration of 
th 410 
preventative detentions orders. This law was made retroactive to 6 April 1994 . 
As a consequence, most of the alleged perpetrators were kept in prisons since 1994 
awaiting trial and due process. There were over 120,000 prisoners 
411 and although the 
majority of perpetrators who pleaded guilty, minors and elderly alleged perpetrators were 
407 Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question of Justice, Available at: littp: //www. amnesty. or-Y/Iibrary/index/ 
engafr470072002 (last accessed 27/06/2008) 
408 Ibid. 
409 Constitutional Amendment, 18'b January 1996 
4 10 Amnesty International, 2002. This was against the principle of retroactivity, and gave the prosecution team 
18 months to draw up arrest reports, the issuing of arrest warrants and the issuing of pre-trial detention 
orders for suspects already in detention. For fresh arrests, the Judicial Police Officer had one month to issue 
an arrest order, as opposed to 48 hours provided in the Code of Civil Procedure. The Public Prosecutors 
Office (parquet) had four months to issue an arrest warrant, and the President of the court of first instance 
had three months following an arrest order to issue a pre- trial detention order, as opposed to five days 
provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure. Ibid. The Rwandan Government invoked Article 4 of the 
International Convention of Civil and Political Rights, ICCPR to establish a legal basis for the measures 
taken but legal experts noted that Rwanda would have been in position to cope with a proper pre-trial 
procedure by early 1995. Amnesty International also reported that domestic law could not override 
international obligation that Rwanda had undertaken and ratified in good faith. "Regardless of the Rwandese 
Governments capacity to meet the standards laid out in the Code of Criminal Procedure or its derogation of 
some of the legal obligations contained therein, it remained legally bound to international human rights 
obligations relating to the enforcement of criminal law. " See discussion on fair trial standards. Amnesty 
International, Gacaca: A Question of Justice. Available at: 
littp: //www. amnesty. org/libraty/index/engafr470072002 (last accessed, 27th June 2008) 
41 1 Number of prisoners as per 1999 Government Statistics, See Gacaca Process: Achievements, Problems and 
Future Prospects, littp:.,, "/www. inkiko-2acaca. f4ov. rw (Accessed 22 nd May 2008). Also see Sarkin 144 
S. BYAMUKAMA 119 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
released, 412 the number of alleged perpetrators has risen to 818,564 through the Gacaca 
confession process. 413 To this day, prisons designed to house 15,000 inmateS414 remain 
hopelessly overcrowded, while the majority of alleged perpetrators were never imprisoned. 
Under these circumstances, relying on the criminal justice system as a device for 
transitional justice, would only exacerbate pre-existing social tension. Suspicion was 
endemic, with Tutsi survivors viewing their community members as perpetrators responsible 
for genocide, while innocent Hutu feared that they might be wrongfully accused and 
imprisoned. Needless to say, the absence of a properly functioning judicial system increased 
tensions in Rwanda's small communities 415 and did not make for an environment conducive 
to reconciliation. 
The majority of inmates and those suspected of having participated in the genocide 
are between the ages of 20-50 years. These are a person's primary working years and these 
individuals represent a significant percentage of the country's work force. Rwanda is a male 
dominated society, where men traditionally have been the main providers. Following the 
genocide, many women and children have become heads of households. This has had 
devastating effects on the economy. Wives and children spend at least two days a week 
taking food to their husbands in overcrowded prisons and the rest of the week struggling to 
support their families. 416 In fact, the Government spends 5% of its budget feeding prisoners. 
It is clear that the economic cost of an exclusively criminal justice transition is prohibitive for 
Rwanda. 
412 http: //w-ww. inkiko-gacaca. gov. m., "En,, "Enlntroduction. htm (Accessed 14th July 2008) 
413 On 14 th January 2005, Domitilla Mukantagandwa the Executive Secretary of the National Service of Gacaca 
Jurisdictions announced that one million Rwandans were to be tried under the revised Gacaca system. 
Schabas, W, "Genocide Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal of International Criminal Justice, (Oxford 
University Press 2005), 1-17,3-4. Also see Summery of Persons Prosecuted for having Committed 
Genocide, www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. (Accessed 22 d May 2008) 
414 Drumbl, M, A. "Sclerosis: Retributive Justice and the Rwanda Genocide, " Punishment and Society: 
International Journal ofPenology (2000), 291 
415 Ferstman, C. Domestic Trials for Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity: The Example of Rwanda, 518 
416 Observations in Cyangugu Prisons in June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 120 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Cognisant of the poor pre-trial standards used in imprisoning the accused and due to 
the large number of prisoners, in late 1994 the government established a committee to screen 
and release prisoners against whom they had insufficient evidence. This committee met a lot 
of opposition particularly from survivor groups and collapsed soon thereafter. 417 The 
committee reopened in mid-1995 with a revised aim of separating ordinary offenders from 
genocide offenders, as well as to distinguish those with case files from those with incomplete 
case files. The committee concentrated on members of vulnerable groups, such as women, the 
elderly, sick and minors. As a result of the committee's work, 1,000 people were released 
inI 998.418 The Government had also planned to release another 10,000 prisoners by October 
1998, but due to protests from genocide survivor groups and Government hardliners only 
3,365 were released over a 10 month period .4 
19 However, over the years, thousands of 
prisoners have been provisionally released, including people who confessed to genocide 
cnmes. 
THE MACHINERY OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Despite the evident problems, the government felt that it had little eholee but to 
deploy the criminal law justice system, particularly when considering the deeply entrenched 
culture of impunity that had existed in Rwanda for over 40 years. The problem in doing so 
was that the "new govenunent had inherited a totally destroyed country, with a traumatised 
and impoverished population, a collapsed state and destroyed infrastructure. 420 The 
institution of the rule of law had been destroyed by the genocide. In the aftennath, as they 
fled to exile, the foriner government had vandalised and destroyed everything they could not 
417 Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question of Justice. Available at: http: //www. amnesty. org/library/index/ 
engafr470072002 (accessed 27th June 2008) 418 
420 Tully, D. 'Human Rights Compliance and the Gacaca jurisdictions in Rwanda', Boston College International 
and Comparative Law Review (2003) 385, quoting Uvin P, 'The Introduction of a Modernized Gacaca for 
Judging Suspects of Participation in the Genocide and the Massacres of 1994 in Rwanda' (Unpublished 
manuscript onfile with Boston College International and Comparative law Review, May 2004). 
S. BYAMUKAMA 121 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
transport, including telephones, typewriters, vehicles or anything that could be useful to the 
new regime. 
The lack of basic infrastructure was exacerbated by the absence of a proper judicial 
team to prosecute suspects of genocide. The pre-1994 judicial system comprised of 758 
judges 422 and 70423 prosecutors had mostly perished in the genocide, often at the hands of 
their colleagues. 424 The remainder had participated in the genocide and fled the country for 
fear of prosecution. By November 1994, a mere 244 judges, 12 prosecutors and 137 
supportive staff remained . 
Nearly all the members of the remaining prosecution team had 
suffered from the genocide in one way or other, and were unwilling to represent suspected 
genocidaires, while others were intimidated and abstained from intervening for fear of 
reprisals . 
With the help of United Nations agencies, the Rwandan government trained an additional 324 
magistrates, 100 deputy prosecutors and 298 Judicial Police Officers, (OPJ, Officier de Police 
Judiciare) . 
427 A total of 44 Rwandan university degree holders were admitted to the first-ever 
national bar association, established by law in April 1997.428 The law also provided for the 
creation of judicial defenders who did not have a university degree but who had undergone 
six months legal training. Even after the judicial training sessions in 1996, with about 600 
newly trained judges, 210 prosecutors and 9 10 supporting staff, resources could still not cope 
422 Schabas suggests that only 50 of these had any formal legal training. He also suggested that there were only 
about 20 lawyers with genuine legal qualifications when he visited the country in November 2004. Schabas, 
(2005)5 
423 There were also 631 supporting staff (secretaries and registrars), Statistics from the Office of the Gacaca. 
Available at: htip: /,., "x-,,, vw. inkiko-gaeaca. gov. r-, v/En,, 'Enlntroduction. litm 424 
426 Vandeginste, Stef. "Justice, Reconciliation and Reparation after Genocide and Crimes against Humanity: The 
Proposed Establishment of Popular Gacaca Tribunals in Rwanda. " All Africa Conference on African 
Principles of Conflict Resolution and Reconciliation United Nations Conference Centre, (Addis Ababa, 8-12 
November 1999, University of Antwerp), 11 
427 Amnesty International, Gaeaca: A Question of Justice, Available at 
littp:,, "'/wwW. amnesty. or%4/library/index/engafr470072002 (accessed 27th June 2008) 427 
428 Official Gazette of the 15'h April 1997, Vandeginste, II 
S. BYAMUKAMA 122 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
with criminal justice requirements, let alone having to contend with the backlog of genocide 
cnme. 429 In fact, by the end of 1995, only 50 of the 147 of the canton courts (Tribunaux de 
Canton), 6 of the 12 courts of first instance and none of the Courts of Appeal were 
functional. 430 
It was evident that this system could not effectively cope as the sole instrument of 
transitional justice that other avenues to transition began to be explored. Due to the need to 
deal with the culture of impunity, along with the catastrophic social consequences of the 
genocide, no serious consideration was given to amnesty or other fonns of judicial remedy. 
"Accountability for the Rwandan genocide has always seemed to be a case of attempting the 
impossible.,, 431 Instead, the Rwandan government decided to merge two objectives; to 
rehabilitate the already fragile justice system that had been drained in both human and 
matenal resources, and to organise genocide trials using the rehabilitated judicial system. 432 
In all cases, the post-genocidal society should strive to assure the 
prevalence of the rule of law, of respect for human rights and for 
[comity] among people ... the effectiveness of the method used to 
rebuild the rule of law in a post-genocidal society may well depend on 
the nature and form of that post-genocidal society. 433 
In the circumstances, sole reliance on retributive justice was not an option. A 
combination of retributive and restorative mechanism may seem more appropriate. 434 "The 
question is not which choice ... should singularly constitute the solution ... 
instead the 
4'9Available at: http: //NvA, v. inkiko-aacaca. i ov. r-, v/En., "Etilntroduction. htm The Ministry of Justice estimated that 
it needed a minimum of about 694 magistrates to get the judicial system running" Amnesty International, 
Gacaca: A Question of Justice, http:., "YwNk,,, v. amnesty. org/library/index/enaafr470072002 (accessed 27th 
June 2008) 
429 Ibid 
4301bid 
431 Schabas, W. "Gacaca Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal ofInternational Criminal Justice 3, (2005) 1-17,2 
432 Vandeginste, S, 13 
433 Drumbl, 288 
434 Universal application of a retributive model runs the risk of devaluing the importance of context in 
determining whether such a model will be effective in redressing mass atrocities in the affected society. If 
retributive justice is implemented without a pre-existing inquiry, a disjuncture might then emerge between 
the imperative to implement trials and the consequences these trials may have on the post-genocidal society, 
Drumbl, "Sclerosis: Retributive Justice and the Rwanda Genocide, " Punishment and Society: International 
Journal o Penology (2000), 288 If 
S. BYAMUKAMA 123 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
question is what should be the appropriate mix of responses? , 435 Such a transitional 
environment calls for an integrated system of responses, which is generally accepted as more 
appropnate. 
NATIONAL LEGISLATION ON PROSECUTING GENOCIDE SUSPECTS 
Faced with a large population languishing in prison, a crippled judiciary and an 
urgent need for reconciliation, the Government of Rwanda held an International conference 
to seek solutions to the aftermath of the genocide from 31" October to 4 th November 1995 in 
436 Kigali 
The recommendations that came from the conference included creating 
Specialised chambers of the existing courts, a classification scheme to 
separate the main organisers of the genocide from criminals with 
lesser degree of responsibility, and a unique approach aimed at 
encouraging offenders to confess in exchange for substantially 
reduced sentences. 437 
Rwanda had ratified the International Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide in 1975, but had not provided penalties for these crimes. 438 
The initial response was to modify the criminal justice system to allow it to cope with the 
scale of the problem. Almost one year after the conference, the recommendations were 
enacted on 3 oth August 1996 . 
439 The principles behind Organic Law No 08/96 are set out in 
435 Drumbl, M. A. 289 
436 Schabas, W. "Gacaca Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal ofInternational Criminal Justice 3, (2005) 1-17,6 
437 Ibid 
438 Ferstman 520, Article V of the Genocide Convention provides that "The contracting parties undertake to 
enact, in accordance with their respective Constitutions, the necessary legislation to give effect to the 
provisions of the present Convention, and in particular, to provide effective penalties for persons guilty of 
genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in Article 3. " 
439 Organic Law No 08/96 on the Organisation of Offences Constituting the Crime of Genocide or Crimes 
Against Humanity Committed since I" October 1990. In the Rwandan system, an Organic Law ranks 
hierarchically immediately beneath the Constitution. Organic Laws are adopted with a view to specifying or 
completing provisions of the Constitution, according to special procedures which must be rigorously 
respected. Schabas (2005) 885, fin 20 
S. BYAMUKAMA 124 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
its preamble and are an elaboration of the principles behind the ICTR Statute. 440 The Organic 
law established specialised chambers for genocide crimes in the civil and military courts and 
elaborated the procedures they must follow. 44 1 Generally, these procedures related to 
confessions and guilty pleas. In exchange for their confessions 442 , the accused were given 
greatly reduced sentences. 443 
The Confession Process 
For the confessions to be accepted, the accused must give a detailed description of the 
offences admitted to, including dates, time and the scene of the crime, accomplices, victims, 
witnesses (if known), and any other infonnation relevant to the prosecution. The applicant is 
also required to apologise for the offences committed. 444 In adopting this process, the justice 
system addressed one of the most difficult matters relating to the prosecution of genocide -the 
question of evidence. Other than the basic evidence of newspaper articles, radio broadcasts, 
militia training, and arms distribution, the prosecution possessed little hard evidence to 
support their prosecutions. Even then, this insufficient evidence would only implicate the 
planners of the genocide. Typically, there was no evidence whatsoever to implicate the 
masses that carried out the genocide. Almost all the eye-witnesses were killed, had fled the 
440 "... Given the genocide and crimes against humanity committed in Rwanda since I` October 1990; Given the 
need to adopt provisions to prosecute and adjudicate the perpetrators of and accomplices of these crimes; 
Given that the acts committed constitute offences for and punished under the Penal Code as well as crimes of 
genocide or crimes against humanity; Given that the crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity are 
provided for specifically the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 
December, 1948 
... ; 
Given that Rwanda has ratified these ... 
Conventions and has published them in the 
Official Gazette, but without having provided for penalties for these crimes; Given that as a result, 
prosecution must be based on the Penal code; Given that in order to achieve reconciliation and justice in 
Rwanda, it is essential that the culture of impunity is eradicated forever; Given that the exceptional situation 
in the country requires the adoption of specifically adapted measures to satisfy the need for justice of the 
people of Rwanda;... " Organic Law No 08/96 dated 30 August 1996 on the Organisation of Prosecution for 
Offences Constituting the Crime of genocide or Crimes Against Humanity Committed since Is' October 
44 1 Articles 19-23 Organic Law 08/1996, Available at: http: //www. inkiko-yacaca. , yov. rw, (Accessed 15 th jUly 
2008) 
442 Articles 4-9, Organic law 08/1996 
443 Articles 14-16, Organic law 08/1996 
444 Article 6, Organic law 1996. The confession can be made in writing or orally. The Proviso of this Article 
provides that the confession is recorded by the Office of the Public Prosecution Department who request the 
applicant to confirm the confession by signing or fingerprint marking it. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 125 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
country, or had some interest in shielding the perpetrators. The survivors were usually in 
hiding and saw nothing; the only evidence they could provide was hearsay, which on its own 
is of little relevance. The prosecution had to provide good incentives to obtain evidence 
against accused persons. The guarantee of a reduced sentence was often incentive enough to 
ensure that the alleged perpetrator would provide eye-witness testimony. 
The confession process had yet another role to play; -the role of reconciliation and 
rehabilitation. This is perhaps a more difficult role to deten-nine and measure in terms of 
success. It was hoped that reconciliation will take place where justice is not only done but 
also seen to be done. While the confession process played a clear judicial role, it was hoped 
that those who confess can be seen to be repentant of their crimes hence initiating the process 
of reconciliation. Indeed, Article 6 of Organic law 08/1996 provides that for a confession to 
be admissible, the accused must apologise for the crimes committed. The difficulty of this 
combined objective as discussed in the findings chapter, is determining the sincerity of these 
apologies amidst the attractive incentives attached and to what extent these confessions bring 
about reconciliation. 
The Categorisation of Offenses 
In order to manage the large numbers, alleged perpetrators were divided into four 
categories. The first category was constituted of the planners, organisers, and supervisors of 
the genocide, persons in position of authority at the national, provincial and district level or 
leaders within political parties, the arrny, religious leaders or the militia who participated in 
the genocide. This category also comprised individuals who committed acts of sexual torture, 
and murderers who became over zealous or became famous for depraved indifference in the 
commission of their crimes. 446 The second and third category 447 contained people who 
See Chapter 7 
446 Article 2, Organic law 08/1996 
447 See Chapter 6 for a detailed discussion on the categorisation of offences. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 126 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
implemented the genocide, but did not belong to the first category. Those who committed 
offences against property formed the fourth category. 448 
Penalties 
The penalties provided in Organic law 08/1996 were based on the Rwanda Penal 
Code, except that persons in category one were liable to receive the death sentence, while 
persons in category two were given life imprisonment. 449 Persons placed in category four 
who were accused of crimes against property were responsible for civil damages determined 
by amicable agreements between the parties. Additionally, persons in the first category were 
not to have a reduction in sentences. 450 If, however, an accused person gave a complete and 
accurate confession to genocide crimes placing him in the first category, before his name was 
published on the list of genocide suspects in Category one, the individual would be placed in 
category two. 451 
When an accused person's confession was accepted, more flexible punishments were 
given. Accused persons belonging to category two were liable to be sentenced to between 
seven to II years of impnsonment, if a confession was made prior to prosecution. However, 
sentencing increased significantly, from 12 to 15 years, if a confession was made during or 
after the prosecution. 452 In cases where the accused belonged to category three, the accused 
would receive a sentence one third the length of what the court would normally give, if 
confession was made prior to prosecution. If the confession was made after prosecution, the 
sentence given was half of what the tribunal would have otherwise passed down to the 
accused 
448 Article 2, Organic law 08/1996 
449 Article 14, Organic Law 08/1996 
450 Article 5, Organic Law 08/1996 
45 1 Article 9, Organic law 08/1996, the Prosecutor General of the Supreme Court is charged with drawing up and 
updating a list of accused persons belonging in the first category. This list shall be updated periodically. 
452 Articles 15-16, Organic Law 08/1996 
453 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 127 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
THE LEGISLATION IN PRACTICE: TRANSITION FAILURE? 
The first court proceeding under the revised legislation began in Kibungo Prefecture 
on the 27 th December 1996.454 Trials under this legislation began to be heard before 
specialised chambers of the courts as of late December 1996.455 4 The Resolution on the 
situation in Rwanda adopted by the UN General Assembly at the end of 1996 urged in 
particular, that the proceedings of the cases of those in detention be brought to a conclusion 
expeditiously. , 456 Still, only 346 accused were tried in 1997,928 in 1998,1,318 in 1999, 
2,458 in 2000,1,416 in 2001 and 727 in 2002.457 Over six years, only 7,193 persons had 
stood trial. The legal system could in no way be said to be dispensing justice. Considering 
that the Ministry of Justice had noted that there were about 120,000 detainees in 1999, at the 
rate that trials were proceeding, it would take more than 100 years to dispense of the cases of 
those in prison alone. 458 The slow progress was a clear indicator that the system was 
deficient. 
454 Schabas, W. (2005) 881 and 886. The cases that followed included the prosecution of 22 convicted 
genocidaires who were publicly executed. The executions included that of Karamira Froduald, a former 
Tutsi who changed to Hum according to Rwanda tradition. His indictment suggested that he was personally 
responsible for the execution of hundreds of Tutsis, including 13 members of his own family. He also had 
an active role in the creation of interahamwe (literally translates: those who come together) militia, and 
inciting genocide on the Mille Collines Radio Station. He was primarily known for his now infamous speech 
on the 23rd October, where he encouraged Hutus "to rise" and "take the necessary measures", and to "look 
within ourselves for the enemy which is amongst us". He became the principle ideologue of the Hutu Power 
Doctrine. On the occasion of this meeting and for the first time in public, he used the term "Hutu Power", 
which, from then on, designated the coalition of the Hutu extremists. James C. Mckinley Jr, "As Crowds 
Vent their Rage, Rwanda Publicly Executes 22, " New York Times, (25 th , 
April, 1998) 
Ibid. 
456 United Nations Resolution adopted by the General Assembly Situation of Human Rights in Rwanda, 
A/Res/51/114, 
457 Drumbl, 291, says "only 1274 out of the 125,000 prisoners had been adjudicated from 1994-1999. " Stef 
Vandeginste, II suggests that there were 304 persons prosecuted in 1997 and 864 in 1998. Amnesty 
International, reported that there were 379 cases prosecuted in 1997,895 in 1998,1306 in 1999,2458 in 
2000 1416 in 2001 and 727 in the first 6 months of 2002. This amounts to a total of 7,181 prosecuted in six 
years. Amnesty International reported that the decrease in the numbers of those prosecuted in the early 
2000's was due to a reduction in international funding. Amnesty International. Gacaca: A Question of 
Justice, 2002 
Ibid. 
458 Available at: www. inkiko-Racaca. gov. rw. There were more persons accused of genocide in the communities 
than those in prisons. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 128 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
In 1997, only 500 people confessed to genocide. The number increased to 9,000 in 
1998, rising further still to 15,000 in 1999 and 20,000 in 2000,459 Although the numbers 
increased to a desired maximum, inevitably, this resulted in more pressure on the fragile legal 
system and critics were slowly shifting their sights from illegal arrests and overcrowded 
prisons to unfair trials. Because acceptable confessions meant that the accused had to name 
and implicate their accomplices increasing the number of accused persons, this created 
tension between alleged perpetrators, particularly those in pnson. 460 Although prisoners who 
confessed to genocide crimes now have separate accommodations from those who have not, 
this was not the case in the late 1990's and early 2000's. At that time, the security of those 
who confessed to genocide was jeopardised . 
46 1 Amnesty International reported that only one 
quarter of confessions were verified due to a judicial system that was lacking in both 
manpower and other infrastructure. 462 
Trials were also heavily criticised for being incongruous with international standards, 
especially the failure to provide defence with counsel . 
Amnesty International, in particular, 
criticised. the lack of defence counsel and the inadequate facilities for the defence team to 
prepare their case, as well as lack of time, general incompetence, impartiality and 
questionable independence of the judiciary and the general environment of the courtroom. 464 
Considering the economic situation in Rwanda and the crumbling judicial system the 
new govenunent inherited, defence lawyers were a luxury the country could ill afford. 465 In 
1995, the World Bank deemed Rwanda to be the poorest nation on earth . 
466 "Rarely had one 
459 Schabas, 9 
460 See Chapter seven 
46 1 Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question ofJustice, 2002 
462 Ibid 
463 Schabas, 8, quoting 'Rwanda Unfair Trials: Justice Denied' April 1997 (Al Index AFR 47/008/1997), Also 
see Vandeginste 10- 11, and Amnesty International, A Question ofJustice, 2002 
464 Amnesty International, 2002. Also see Chapter four 
465 See chapter four 
466 Daly, E. "Between Punitive and Reconstructive Justice: The Gacaca Courts in Rwanda, " Journal of 
International law and Politics, [2002] 366 
S. BYAMUKAMA 129 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
nation or one people had to face so many seemingly insuperable obstacles with so few 
resources.. .,, 
467 Avocats sansftontires-Belgium was the channelling force in the struggle to 
ensure that accused persons appearing before the national courts would receive legal 
representation. 468 Although Article 36 of the Rwandan Penal Code provided for 
representation, Amnesty International reported that of the 44 lawyers newly called to the bar, 
only three of these found it worthwhile to defend those accused of genocide, and even then, 
one "disappeared" in January 1997, and another was actually accused of genocide and 
imprisoned in September 1997.469 Article 36 of the Rwandan Penal Code also provided, that 
although the defendant had a right to legal representation, it could not be at the expense of the 
state. The Rwandan government noted that its laws duly respect its obligation under the 
ICCPR, but acknowledged that the obligation to legal assistance was not absolute and could 
therefore be derogated from. Nevertheless, due to the actions of various agencies, by 2002, 
Amnesty International reported that at least 40% of all accused had some forin of legal 
representation, the quality of trials had improved and Rwanda was close to meeting its 
international legal obligations. 470 
Meanwhile, the country remained under criticism for not meeting fair trial standards, 
including the limitation of a judicial review, as well as "intimidation of defence witnesses, to 
the general hostile atmosphere in the court room vis-A-vis the defendants and corruption 
although massive improvements have been made over the years. 9A7 ' Amnesty International 
reported lack of independence of the judiciary and noted that several judges were allegedly 
46' Daly, 336 
468 Schabas, 8 
469Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question ofJustice, 2002 
470 Ibid. 
471 Vandeginste, 12. The empirical research did not find evidence of intimidation of defence witnesses but did 
find evidence to suggest that prosecution witnesses were intimidated. However, this research was conducted 
in 2006, four years after Amnesty International's report. See Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 130 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
suspended for failing to obey "political orders" , and others arrested on suspicion of 
genocide involvement 473 , 
but reported that their persecution was linked to the release of 
detainees. Amnesty International concluded that by removing such Hutu judiciary, Rwanda 
missed the chance to prove itself as one building a judicial system free of discrimination and 
revenge. In good news, it also reported that despite the flaws in the judicial system, Rwanda 
had not failed and massive improvements were seen. 474 
Improvements in the system were particularly in evidence in the sentences rendered. 
The number of death sentences decreased, while the number of acquittals increased and the 
number of cases being judged also increased. For example, in 1997,30.8% of sentences 
rendered were capital punishment, in 1998 this decreased to 12.8%, in 1999 to 11.0%, in 
2000 it reduced to 6.6% in 2001 it decreased to 8.4% and of the 727 convictions in the first 6 
months of 2002 led to a 3.4% conviction. 475 This clearly showed that the rate of death 
sentences was going down while the number of acquittals was increasing. For example, there 
were 8.9% acquittals in 1997, the number increased to 21.7% in 1998,20.9% in 1999,15.4% 
476 in 2000,22% in 200 1, and 24.8% in 2002 . 
The issue of reparation to the victims has been subject to a great deal of criticism. 
Although trials that had taken place in Rwanda and other countries provided for damages to 
the victims, perpetrators did not have the funds to pay these damages. The New York district 
court decision in Jean Bosco Barayagwiza's case, one of the leaders of the CDR political 
party, in April 1996 awarded $105 million (USD) to a group of survivors who initiated the 
proceedings. Barayagwiza, however, had no assets in the United States, and the actual 
472 For example, Claudien Gatare and Fidele Makombe in February1996. Amnesty International, Gacaca: A 
Question ofJustice, 2002 
473 The Executive Secretary of Gacaca Courts reported that 45,000 Gacaca judges were removed from office on 
suspicion of genocide involvement. Meeting held on the eve of Gacaca Courts trial phase, 15th July 2006 
474 Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question ofJustice, 2002 
475 lbid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 131 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
compensation to the victims was not made. 477 This was not an exception to the rule, but the 
norm, as the majority of those prosecuted for the crime of genocide in Rwanda could not 
afford to pay for the damages awarded by the courts. From the outset, it was obvious that 
compensation of victims on a case-by-case basis could not work. The courts would be over- 
crowded with cases of compensation and claims for damages, when they were still struggling 
with genocide trials. In addition, the ability of the accused to pay the stated amounts in their 
cases was immense and somewhat unrealistic. By May 1999, the compensation awarded in 
civil damages by the courts amounted to $90 million (USD). 478 This is partly why a 
compensation fund was generally agreed upon to assist genocide survivors. 479 
SEARCHING FOR ALTERNATIVES 
As early as 1997, it was apparent that both retributive models of justice; the national 
courts in Rwanda and the ICTR had failed to manage the numbers of accused persons. In 
February 1997, the then Vice-President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame declared that alternative 
methods of transitional justice ought to be considered . 
480 The Gacaca court system was 
introduced as part of the search for solutions to the overcrowded prisons of Rwanda. The 
system began as a series of "Saturday talks" initiated by the former President, Pasteur 
Bizimungu. Participants were composed of civil society, members of the local administration 
and survivor groups and took place at the President's residence, Village Urugwiro. 481 On the 
9th May 1998, the former President Pasteur Bizimungu opened reflection meetings which 
Vandeginste, 9 
Ibid, 15 
479 Law of 22 January 1998 establishing a national assistance fund for the needy victims of genocide and 
massacres committed in Rwanda between October 1990 and December 31" 1994, in the Official Gazette of 
I't February 1998. In addition to the compensation fund, Rwanda adopted the use of community service 
(Tyaveaux dInteyet Generaux TIG) See Chapter six 
490 Schabas, W. "The Rwandan Courts in Quest of Accountability: Genocide Trials and Gacaca Courts", Journal 
ofInternational Criminal Justice 3 (2005), 879-895,891 481 
S. BYAMUKAMA 132 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
lasted approximately one year. 482 On the 17 th October 1998, then President Pasteur 
Bizimungu established a fifteen-member commission headed by the Minister of Justice, 
composed of members of parliament and a number of senior officials in the Ministry of 
Justice to examine possible alternatives. 483 Its report, published on 8 th June 1999, 
recommended that Gacaca courts be established. 
The committee's findings resulted in Organic Law No 40/2000 of 26/01/2001,485 
which adopted the principles of categorisation and confession enshrined in Organic law of 
1996.486 It established four administrative levels of Gacaca courts, the Cell, Sector, 
District/town and Province/city of Kigali. It also introduced community service in the form of 
Traveaux dInteret Generaux (TIG) as an alternative to imprisonment for prisoners who fully 
confessed to genocide according to the law. 
487 This law governed an 18-month pilot phase of 
75 1 Gacaca cell courts in 118 sectors. 
488 Based on the results of the pilot phase, this law was 
amended in 2004,2007 and again in 2008 . 
Gacaca courts were now organised at Cell and Sector levels, with appeals to the 
Sector Appeal Court. In the amendments that followed, the sentences were greatly diminished 
and the number of prisoners being released, either provisionally or after serving their 
sentence and the number of confessions, was increasing. Also, the number of judges on the 
panel on the bench decreased from 14 to 9 to 7 and then to 5. Further still, the jurisdiction of 
Gacaca courts has grown while the number of accused within category one had shrank. 
Parliament is currently considering the possibility of trying some category one members in 
Ibid. 
483 Schabas, 13. Also see Vandeginste, 1999 
484 Report of the Reflection Meetings Held by The Office Of The President Of The Republic From May 1998- 
March 1999 
485 Organic law No 40/2000 of 26/01/2001, Setting up Gacaca Jurisdiction, and Organizing Prosecutions for 
Offences Constituting the Crime of Genocide or crimes against Humanity committed between October 1, 
1990 and December 31,1994 
486 Articles 51,54,55,56,57 and 58, Organic law 40/2000 (n 69) 
487 Available at: http: //xk-%Aw. inkiko-, i4acaca. 40v. rw 488 
Ibid. 
4890rganic Law 16/2004 of 19/06/2004, Organic Law No 10/2007 and organic Law 13/2008 respectively. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 133 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Gacaca courts, although this proposal has encountered some resistance from survivors' 
organisations, particularly IBUKA . 
CONCLUSION 
This chapter considers how the prosecution of genocide in Rwanda has evolved in the 
aftermath of the genocide. Rwanda's choice to prosecute all alleged perpetrators was indeed a 
difficult one. Not only was there a failure to meet international standards of fair trial, but 
Rwanda was not even succeeding to meet the mandates of its own constitutional and Penal 
Code laws. The chapter examines the steps taken by Rwanda to meet the standards of fair 
trials, as well as to meet the requirements of transitional justice. Rwanda's commitment to 
meet its international obligation to prosecute the crime of genocide, also required it to devise 
new means to meet the desired goal amidst a failing retributive criminal justice system. 
The choice of Gacaca courts came out of a search for alternatives. The Rwandan 
govermnent suggests that Gacaca courts provide expedient resolution by trying accused 
persons in an expeditious manner, while also providing members of society with a chance for 
reconciliation. Because traditional Gacaca courts have been enshrined in Rwanda's tradition, 
it has been argued that they were readily acceptable to the population. The system defies the 
typical trend in transitional justice of compromising justice to achieve reconciliation. Rwanda 
argues that it is precisely by prosecuting and holding accountable those responsible for 
human rights abuses, particularly genocide, that reconciliation can be achieved. As such, the 
490 Foundation Hirondelle Agency Rwanda/Gacaca - 1994 Genocide: Gacaca Courts Will Start Trying Rape 
Cases Next Month, 25 th June 2008. One of the major clarifications made by Organic Law n' 13/2008 of 
19/05/2008 Amending organic law n' 16/2004 of 19/6/2004 is in relation to the crime of rape. Article 6 of 
Organic Law 13/2008 gives Gacaca courts jurisdiction to try the crime of rape and adds that confessions to 
the crime of rape can only be made in private. The victim of rape may lodge a complaint to: the Gacaca 
Court of the Sector where the crime was committed; to the Judicial Police or to the Public Prosecutor. 
Article 6 also provides that where such victim of rape is dead or is incapacitated to lodge such complaint, 
any concerned party may lodge such complaint in secret. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 134 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
inner workings of Gacaca courts deserve a close examination, which is what I will discuss 
next. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 135 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 6: TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE IN ACTION: THE GACACA 
COURTS 
EVOLUTION OF GACACA COURTS 
The previous chapter suggests that the use of Gacaca courts was an option of last 
resort by the Rwandan government. Accused persons living in appalling prison conditions 
needed to be tried in reasonable time, their files needed to be filled to allow for at least a 
prima facie case, and the western retributive justice mechanisms had failed . 
49 1 Furthermore, 
the country's resources were being bled dry with the sheer cost of procedures that were 
proving to be anything but adequate. 
This chapter examines the Gacaca process by engaging in a historical analysis of the 
process, considering how it evolved into what it is today. It analyses the objectives of the 
process through its legal instruments and how these objectives are expected to be realised. 
Further more the chapter analyses pre-trial investigations and how evidence is collected 
through the Gacaca process. 
Traditional Gacaca 
Literature on pre-colonial Gacaca courts is limited. In many African countries, pre- 
colonial history was orally passed down from one generation to another. In Rwanda, as in 
many other African nations, history was passed down through myths, songs and poetry. The 
oral tradition in Rwanda concentrated on the feats of kings, the wars they fought, culture, 
dance, and way of life. Similarly, the Gacaca court system was passed down from generation 
to generation through its practice in the communities. However, Gacaca changed during 
colonisation and the post-colonial era. As a result, it is not surprising that while many 
Rwandans are familiar with the concept of Gacaca, not many are familiar with its pre- 
colonial, traditional practices. 
491 See chapters four and six 
S. BYAMUKAMA 136 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Gacaca courts are no different than most other pre-colonial forms of dispute 
resolution in Affica. While there is little literature on traditional Gacaca, there is a vast 
amount of literature on traditional or inforinal African justice systems especially dating back 
to the 1960's and 70's, and again from the 1990's. 492 Rwanda's Gaeaca (traditional justice) 
goes by different names in other African tribes but the principles on which they are based and 
by which they operate are very similar. Traditional justice systems are typically informal, 
based on tradition and custom instead of written laws, and elders within the particular 
community are the judges. The judges are usually known to the parties in conflict and there is 
a high degree of community participation. 
The concept of Gacaca was premised on communal rather than individual 
responsibility. 493 This is because traditional justice systems are concerned with restoring 
social cohesion to the community by promoting reconciliation between disputing parties. 494 
"The aim of the democratic process in traditional Affica was to have a strong, organised 
community, with the interests of the community always being put above individual interests, 
, 495 while individual rights were to be protected by community ethics. In Northern Uganda, 
for example, among the Luo tribes, their version of Gacaca; mato oput is considered as one of 
the key contemporary systems of reconciliation in Northern Uganda following 20 years of 
human right abuses inflicted by the Lord's Resistance Army. 
492 See generally, Penal Reform International, "Access to Justice in Sub-Saharan Africa; The Role of Traditional 
and Informal Justice Systems", Available at: www. penalrefonn. org (Accessed 15 th July 2008) The study is 
based on extensive review of existing literature on traditional informal justice in Africa. The publication 
focuses primarily on traditional and informal justice systems in sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting the wealth of 
material available from different regions in Africa. It also has a rich bibliography on the subject. 
493 Ibid. "Even if an individual committed a fault, all members of his family, group or even clan shared the 
consequences and helped fulfilling the duties that were imposed in the penalty. " Molenaar, Arthur. Gacaca: 
Grassroots Justice after Genocide: The key to Reconciliation in Rwanda? (Graduate thesis 2004), quoting 
Centre for Conflict Management, Les juridictions Gacaca et les processus de r&onciliation nationale 
(National University of Rwanda 2001), 32 
494 Penal Reform International, Access to Justice in Sub-Saharan Africa: The role of Traditional and Informal 
Justice Systems, 9, 
495 Malan Jannie, "Traditional Perspectives of Democratisation in Africa", quoting Ngwane, George. Settling 
Disputes in Africa: Traditional Basesfor Conflict Resolution. (Yaound6: Buma Kor, 1996). 
S. BYAMUKAMA 137 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Gacaca in Pre- Colonial Rwanda 
Gacaca, (pronounced ga-cha-cha, comes from umucaca, pronounced umu-cha-cha, a 
kind of soft carpet-like grass in the Kinyarwanda language) refers to a resting or relaxing 
lawn in a Rwandan homestead where family members or neighbours meet to exchange views 
on issues directly affecting them. 496 Historically, the term refers to a system of informal, 
participative mediation for the settlement of disputes. Significantly, Gacaca seems to be the 
only institution that was not affected by the Hutu, Tutsi and Twa divide. 497 The Gacaca 
process was not a pen-nanent judicial system. Meetings were convened when the need arose 
to settle disputes between a family, clan or members of a particular community. Such 
disputes often included conflict over land or property rights, inheritance rights, marital 
498 disputes, minor theft and destruction of property . The system 
focused on two unique 
themes; inclusiveness and acceptability. First, the process of adjudication was one of debate 
496 Byamukama, S. and Huntley J., "Justice in the Aftermath of the 1994 Rwanda Genocide, A Study of Gacaca 
Courts" in Ralph Henham and Paul Behrens, The Criminal Law of Genocide International, Comparative and 
Contextual Aspects, Series: International and Comparative Criminal Justice, 2007,233-4. 
497 Historically, Hutu-Tutsi divisions lie in the disparity of traditional economic power, where the Tutsi 
controlled power and wealth through ownership of cattle, while the Hutu were farmers, resulting in a 
caste/class system. This was exacerbated by the ubuhakeluburetwa system, which created a servant/master 
relationship. lbid Existing tensions were further exacerbated in 1933-34 with the introduction of identity 
cards. 
498 Molenaar, Arthur 24, referring to a United Nations Research, UNHCHR, Gacaca, le droit coutumier, 10- 15 
suggests that Gacaca dealt with four kinds of crimes: Land disputes, where for example two people claimed 
the same piece of land; pastoral conflicts, where cattle of one family had ravaged the field of a neighbour, 
(but Gacaca had no jurisdiction over conflicts dealing with ownership of cattle, because the king in theory 
owned all the cattle of the land); family wrangles, and; badly honoured contracts between clients and patrons 
or between two equal parties. Molenaar, 25, referring to yet another study by the Centre of Conflict 
Management, les juridictions Gacaca 32, suggests that traditional Gacaca dealt with serious offences and 
could sometimes sentence the offender and his family to banishment from the community. Molenaar, 25, 
refers to an interview he had with Modeste Nzanzabaganwa, an elderly man he interviewed in Butare 13 th 
January 2003, who suggested that Gacaca played a role of determining the circumstances in which a murder 
had taken place before forwarding the case to the King or his representatives in an orally orgamsed file. He 
also interviewed another elderly man of about 80years who suggested that murder was discussed at a village 
level before it was transferred to the King, if such murder was committed by one man who had killed 
another. Mass murders or assassinations were rare, but this suggests that the Gacaca process had no 
jurisdiction over homicide or mass murders. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 138 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
and discussion by the community as a whole. 499 Secondly, an assembly of judges, accepted 
by the community by virtue of their advanced age, integrity, wisdom in decision-making, 
experience, and their social, economic and political influence, would listen to a case and 
sentence according to the gravity of the offence. The usual penalty was reparation to the 
injured party; all members of the clan shared responsibility for making reparation. 500 If both 
parties agreed to the tenns of reparation, they would share a drink as a symbolic gesture of 
agreement. 501 Thus, the objective of Gacaca courts was not to merely determine the guilt or 
innocence of an individual but rather to find an acceptable solution to the parties involved 
and for order to be restored in the given community. The system was effective and therefore 
universally recognised and respected; Rwandans had relied on Gacaca for the settlement of 
disputes over centuries. 
Some authors have suggested that Gacaca courts played a minor investigative role in 
homicide cases, and some have suggested that such cases were then forwarded to the King or 
his representatives. 502 The Executive Secretary of Gacaca suggested that Rwandan traditions 
believed that the spirit of the deceased would haunt the remaining family members when a 
499 Women were not expected to be part of this debate unless they were directly involved in the conflict in 
question. Vandeginste, 16. However, women were active behind the scenes and therefore had some influence 
on the Gacaca courts. Female involvement was limited because, traditionally, women did not have a public 
voice. Children were also not expected to be part of these proceedings unless it was for educational purposes 
in which they were expected to learn good morals and behaviour. Molenaar 25-6 This researcher uses 
French literature, which I do not make use of due to language barrier. Most literature on traditional Gacaca is 
written in French. He quotes authors such as Nshuti Ntampaka, Le gacaca: unejuridiction pnale populaire. 
Available at: http: //droit. francophonie. or4/acct/rii/actu/13NtaMpa. htm; Nshuti Ntampaka, 'Le gacaca 
rwandais, une justice r6pressive participative, ' in: Henry D. Bosly et al., ActualW du droit international 
humanitaire (2001) 212-225; United Nations High Commissionner for Human Rights (UNHCHR), Gacaca, 
le droit coutumier au Rwanda. Rapport final de la premijre phase d'enquite sur le terrain (Kigali 1996). 
Molenaar also based his findings on interviews with former traditional chiefs and with elderly people who 
remembered the ftinctioning of Gacaca courts in colonial times. It must however be recalled that with 
colonialism, traditional Gacaca had been altered in its functions. 
500 Imprisonment was unknown as a penalty in pre-colonial Rwanda. See generally Byamukama and Huntley, 
501 Morrill, Constance. F. "Reconciliation and the Gacaca: The Perceptions and Peace Building Potential of 
Rwanda Youth Detainees, " Journal ofPeace and Conflict Resolution, (2004), Available at: wNyw. trinstitute. or 
ojpcr, 16 Imonilll. pd (Accessed IO'h February 2008) 
502 For example, Molenaar who refers to French literature such as "United Nations Research, UNHCHR, 
Gacaca, le droit coutumier", and "Centre of Conflict Management, les juridictions Gaeaca " to stress 
Gacaca's pre colonial role. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 139 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
murder was not avenged. 503 A variety of options were available. When the aggrieved 
family/community was considered to be more superior than the aggressor's family/ 
community (and did not fear repercussions), that family or community retaliated by killing a 
member of the aggressor's family or the aggressor himself. However, in cases where 
vengeful acts would put the aggrieved family in danger, (i. e. causing widespread destruction 
and revenge on a community), more peaceful means were sought. For example, the two 
families would agree that the aggressor's family or community would give away one of their 
daughters to be married to the aggrieved family, from whom the dead would be "re-bom". 
Alternatively, the families would undertake a symbolic act of revenge by cutting down a 
banana tree and flogging it. 504 
Pre- colonial judicial systems in Aftica and Gacaca did not separate civil and criminal 
law, but rather distinguished cases depending on the seriousness of the offence. Some cnmes, 
such as theft of cows and murder were rare; if and when they occurred, these were thought to 
be very serious in nature, and were forwarded to the King (Mwami), who was the highest 
symbol of authority or his representatives, who were chiefs. The King's Chambers were also 
a fonn of Appeal court. This is clearly expressed in the Kinyarwanda saying, urujya kujya i 
Bwami, rubanza mu Bagabo, literally translating to "before one addresses the king, he must 
,, 505 first visit the wise men. Although theories vary on how homicide was dealt with in pre 
colonial Rwanda, none suggest that the community sat and resolved a murder through 
community discussion, consensus and peaceful reparation to the victims. Clearly, when a 
crime was considered to be especially grave, alternatives to Gacaca were sought. Even when 
503 Interview with Domitilla Mukantagandwa, Executive Secretary of the Gacaca courts, 24 th June 2006 
504 Ibid. Penal Reform International also makes mention of this, quoting Ntampaka Clarles, La conception des 
relations les vivants et les morts dans le Rwanda anciens, Dialogue, Brussels, no 225,2002,12 suggesting 
than in cases of blood crimes, "the operative concept was of vengeance, to the degree that it was understood 
as a religious duty. " 505 
Molenaar, 21 
S. BYAMUKAMA 140 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
it was reported that Gacaca played a role in such crimes, it was in an investigative capacity 
rather than resolving a particular crime. 
Gacaca during Colonisation 
During colonisation, 506 Gacaca played an uneasy role as an aspect of customary law, 
within a codified civil law structure based on the Belgian model. After 1924, it was confined 
to civil and commercial cases, while criminal cases were the sole responsibility of the 
colonial courts. The mwami's (King) authority over judicial functions, such as his right to 
appoint chiefs, was lost. A single chief was appointed by the colonial power to replace the 
triple chieftaincy that administered who was responsible for various tasks, such as the chief 
of land, of cattle and of the army. According to the Belgians, the triple chieftaincy that 
ensured that all parties were represented "did not match the idea of rational governance. , 507 
During this time, who became a 'judge" also changed. Instead of meriting this status 
by virtue of the individual's good standing in society, they were appointed from a legally 
qualified pool by the colonial government. Although colonisation had no direct influence on 
Gacaca court operations, the introduction of new colonial courts and the transfonnation of the 
administrative authority through colonial rule in general, unden-nined the operation of the 
Gacaca courts. 
506 Following the Anglo-German treaty of 1890, Germany was given present-day Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania 
as colonies. After World War 1, in which Germany was defeated, the League of Nations in 1924 gave 
Rwanda and Burundi to Belgium. Emmanuel Gasana, "Countries in Conflict: A Critical Stacktaking by 
country Research Teams: Rwanda", edited by Adebayo Adebeji in Comprehending and Mastering African 
Conflicts: The Searchfor Sustainable Peace and Good Governance, (New York: Zed Books, 1999), 146. 
507 The power over judicial matters was thus vested in one chief whose decisions were controlled by the Belgian 
Authorities. Yet ethnicity and economic activities were traditionally linked and this ensured equal 
representation thereby preventing ethnic tensions. "The Belgians forbade certain rituals and symbols that the 
chiefs employed in exercising their judicial powers. These were considered superstitious and barbarous" 
Molenaar, 27 
S. BYAMUKAMA 141 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Gacaca in Post Colonial Rwanda 
After independence, as a local government mechanism of dispute settlement, Gacaca 
became more institutionalised. Administrative authorities of the cell and sector replaced 
traditional Gacaca judges and family elders in the settlement of minor disputes in a 
community. 508 Although not recognised as a formal legal mechanism, Gacaca still served a 
purpose in the post-colonial era. Decisions made by the Gacaca courts were registered in 
writing, as Gacaca courts became more formal and meetings were held on agreed days rather 
than ad hoc, when a matter arose. While Gacaca courts had lost their traditional form, they 
remained popular in the villages and continued to include the participation of all the parties 
involved. The objective of the village Gacaca courts was to make justice more accessible, 
reconcile parties and maintain order in the communities. "Reintroducing them in a modem 
context was not difficult because the concept and virtues of the Gacaca judges are deeply 
entrenched in Rwandan culture. Since time immemorial, they have been part of the fibre that 
kept Rwandan society together. , 509 
After independence, traditional judicial processes like Gacaca continued to be 
widespread in post colonial Africa. The system thrived because the majority of Africans live 
in the countryside where access to formal judicial mechanisms is extremely limited due to the 
distance between the villages and courts, the cost of legal representation is prohibitive, the 
Vandeginste, 17 
'09 Nantulya Paul, African Nation-Building and Reconstruction: Lessons from Rwanda, (Sabinet Online 
Publishers, 2006), 46. Avialable at: litip: //www. sabinet. co. za,, 'abstracts. 1'accordciaccordc 2006 nI al2. xml 
(Accessed 24/05/2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 142 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
ability to understand legal procedures and the language of the court (hence the need of 
interpreters), and sometimes the parties to the conflict and the types of disputes. 510 
Nonetheless, well before the Rwandan govenunent decided to use Gacaca courts as a judicial 
process through which genocide trials could take place, traditional Gacaca had gone through 
some transfon-nation of their own. This is what Vandeginste refers to as legal pluralism; a 
legal body made up of two (or more) major components. On the one hand, there are 
indigenous customs and structures, largely based on traditional values, which deten-nined the 
generally accepted standards of an individual's and a community's behaviour; on the other 
hand, there are state laws, primarily based on the old colonial power's legislative framework 
and introduced together with the nation state and its general principles of separation of 
powers and rule of law. 511 
This continues to be the case in most African jurisdictions. In Uganda, for example, 
disputes such as theft and family wrangles are resolved through the Local Council Chairman 
One (LC I) who is elected by the people. These disputes were traditionally resolved by chiefs 
who were appointed by the King. The situation is no different in Kenya, Tanzania, and 
Nigeria, where certain disputes continue to be resolved by traditional chiefs. 
510 "Most African states do not have the resources necessary to extend the formal justice system to village level 
to deal with all types of disputes, or to provide the additional legal aid and interpreters that this would 
require. " Penal Reform International, Access to Justice in Sub Saharan Africa, The Role of Traditional and 
Informal Justice Systems, 2000,3 "Most proceedings are subject to considerable delays at all stages, mainly 
as a result of the sheer number of cases being processed through a limited number of courts. For most of the 
population living in rural areas the distance to the nearest court may be immense. The justice administered 
by the state seldom involves restorative or compensatory awards or sentences. In this, it is often out of step 
with the expectations of people whose view of justice is based on traditional justice models. The law and 
procedure practised in formal courts are both unfamiliar and complicated from the perspective of most 
citizens. ibid 6 
511 Vandeginste, 17 
512 For a comprehensive study on justice using traditional African mechanisms, see generally, Penal Reform 
International, Access to Justice in Sub Saharan Africa, the role of traditional and informal justice systems. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 143 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
USING GACACA TO DEAL WITH INTERNATIONAL CRIMES 
It is interesting then that, following the genocide, Rwandan authorities turned to a 
traditional, conciliatory, civil and virtually defunct system to handle vast numbers of the most 
serious crimes imaginable. We have seen that although the Gacaca process has existed 
throughout Rwandan history, few people remember its traditional practices. 
513 Seeking 
solutions to manage the prosecution of individuals accused of genocide, the 1995 
International Conference called on institutions to discuss possible options for Rwanda. A 
cooperative of Rwandan research institutes, funded by the United Nations, tabled a report 
recommending Gacaca courts as a method to deal with the backlog of cases, particularly 
minor offences such as looting and theft. The committee rejected using Gacaca process for all 
genocide cases, and recommended that it focus on reconciliation, as was the case in 
traditional Rwanda. At the time, the government rejected the use of Gacaca saying it "was too 
early and dangerous to put the population together to discuss the genocide. 11514 
It was only after it was clear that the government's first option of prosecuting all 
alleged perpetrators using a western-style retributive judicial mechanism had terribly failed 
that Gacaca courts were once again tabled for discussion. 515 
We had to think of fresh, original and unique models and not just 
copy others blindly. For us, perpetrators and survivors had to continue 
living side by side. If we had resigned ourselves to the conventional 
way of doing things and forgotten our own rich traditions and heritage 
513 African Rights, Gacaca Justice, A Shared responsibility, (Kigali, African Rights, 2003), 4. Also Tully, 395, 
quoting Garine Hovsepian, The Gacaca Tribunals for Trying Genocide Crimes and Rwanda's Fair Trial 
Obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 4 (2001) (unpublished thesis, 
Institut Universitaire de Hautes Etudes Internationales, on file with the Boston College International and 
Comparative Law Review) 7-8 and Jeremy Sarkin, 'The Tension Between Justice and Reconciliation in 
Rwanda: Politics, Human Rights, Due Process and the Role of the Gacaca Courts in Dealing with the 
Genocide', 45(2) Journal of African Law 143 (2001). Sarkin, 159 says that the Gacaca courts functioned as 
courts of first instance before the cases were brought before the Mwami (King). Serious crimes such as 
homicide and conflicts between hierarchical chiefs were not taken through the Gacaca process but straight to 
the Mwami. Typical Gacaca disputes included failure to pay a loan, thefts and conjugal matters. 
514 Molenaar Arthur, Gacaca: grassroots Justice after Genocide, The Key to Reconciliation in Rwanda? 
(Leiden: African Studies Centre, Research Report 77/2005) 
514 See Chapter five 
"' See Chapter five 
S. BYAMUKAMA 144 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
of dealing with conflicts, we would have ended up with a rather 
formalised, legalistic and elite driven mechanism, with little or no 
relevance at all to the grassroots. That, is not the route we wanted to 
follow. 516 
The Gacaca process was modified to meet Rwanda's contemporary needs. "More than 
simply a legal instrument, Gacaca creates new possibilities for social interaction and 
engagement. It sets out to improve relations among the people of Rwanda, and between them 
and the state. , 517 In using Gacaca, Rwanda integrated both traditional and western style 
judicial mechanisms to deal with its challenges practically. The Gacaca process offers a 
means by which the people of Rwanda can collectively acknowledge and condemn the 
genocide, a crime committed in full view of the overwhelming majority. 
518 The new Gacaca 
courts are legally established judicial bodies that formally deal with the gravest of offences; 
genocide in unprecedented numbers. Once so informal, now Gacaca is a structured legal 
system with rules, guidelines, and laws governing its courts. 
Unsurprisingly, a revamped Gacaca required a large number of judges to mediate the 
volume of cases. Rather than select from a small pool of elderly community leaders, Gacaca 
court judges were elected by the population, from among the citizenry. Gacaca courts are 
also supervised by the National Office of Gacaca Courts. 519 As a result, Gacaca is a state 
creation, administered at a national level to deal with the large numbers of persons awaiting 
trial. The jurisdiction of the courts is not only limited to a particular family or community; 
Gacaca courts have jurisdiction over international law crimes of genocide and crimes against 
humanity committed in Rwanda between I" October 1990 to 31" December 1994. 
516 Ndangiza, Fatuma. Executive Secretary of the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, NURC, 
Available at: wwxv. accord. org. za/ct/2006- I/ctl 2006 pg45-50. Vd (accessed 10th April 2008) 
517 African Rights, Gacaca Justice, A Shared Responsibility, (A Publication of African Rights, 2003), 1 
518 Ibid. In practice, as was admitted by most people interviewed, the Gacaca process was quite different. 
5 19Available at: www. inkiko-Gacaca. gov. rw (Accessed 15 th July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 145 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATION OF GACACA COURTS 
jurisdiction of the Gacaca courts 
Article I of Organic Law 16/2004 states that the Gacaca courts have jurisdiction over 
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, and other crimes provided for by the Penal 
Code of Rwanda committed between I st October 1990 to 31st December 1994. Conversely, 
Article I of the ICTR statute limits its jurisdiction to crimes committed in Rwanda and those 
committed by Rwandan citizens in the territory of neighbouring states between I st January 
and 31st December 1994. Although the ordinary court system has concurrent jurisdiction 
with the ICTR, they, like the Gacaca courts, have jurisdiction over genocide crimes 
committed from I" October 1990 to 31" December 1994. The Gacaca Organic Law is silent 
on the position of crimes committed by Rwandan citizens in neighbouring countries. 
Nevertheless, while Gacaca courts are charged with the responsibility of investigating 
all suspects of genocide, their jurisdiction is limited to prosecuting defendants in categories 
two and three. 520 Article 2 of Organic Lawl6/2004 provides that persons ranked in category 
one, are to be tried by the ordinary courts, which apply common law procedural rules, subject 
to exceptions provided by the Organic Law. In cases where the accused is placed in category 
one but his accomplices are in a different category, the accomplices can only appear as 
witnesses in the trial of the accused and will be prosecuted in another court. 521 
Structure of Gacaca courts 
In its latest incarnation, Gacaca has experienced major restructuring. Articles 3 and 4 
of Organic Law 40/2000 noted Gacaca courts were to be administered through Gacaca courts 
of the Cell, Sector, District and Provincial courts. The Cell Court was responsible for 
investigating cases, as well as documenting evidence, including confessions of accused 
520Article 2 of Organic Law 16/2004. Categorisation of offences is provided for in Article 51 of the Organic 
Law. See Categorisation of offences section, chapter six 
52 ' Article 2, Organic Law 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 146 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
persons made in each cell. These courts also had the responsibility to categorise offences and 
try accused persons for offences against property. 522 Article 40 of Organic Law 40/2000 
provided that the Sector Court was responsible for trying accused persons whose criminal 
participation in the genocide did not intend to cause death. Where accused persons intended 
to cause death or indeed caused death, these would be tried under Gacaca court of the 
Distri Ct523, while appeals were handled at the Provincial level . 
All courts were to be 
supervised by the Supreme Court's department of Gacaca Courts. 
Organic Law 40/2000 governed the pilot phase, conducted countrywide in 751 
Gacaca courts of the Cell and 118 Gacaca courts of the Sector. This test phase was 
characterised by case investigation and the categorisation of offences. 525 The initial process 
was launched in two phases: The first phase began on I 9th June 2002, and consisted of one 
Sector in each of the 12 provinces in Rwanda, while; the second phase started on 25'h 
November 2002, and consisted of one Sector in each of the 106 Districts in the country. 526 
The pilot phase lasted through 18 months of observations after which time it was clear 
that some restructuring and modifications had to be made. The recommendations that resulted 
from the test phase formed part of the Organic Law 16/2004 that governs Gacaca courts 
today. Key changes in this law included a decrease in the number of Gacaca judges on the 
bench from 19527 to 9 judges and 5 deputies. 528 Additionally, the four categories of accused 
persons was reduced to three. Categories two and three were merged and the penalties were 
522 See Articles 34 and 39 of Organic Law 40/2000. 
523 Article 41, See generally Articles 36 and 37, Organic Law 40/2000 
524 Article 42 Organic Law 40/2000 
521 During the pilot phase Gacaca courts continued their functions while other Gacaca courts were launched. 
While the rest of the Gacaca courts countrywide busied themselves with pre-trial investigations and later 
categorisation of offences, these pilot phase Gacaca courts were trying accused persons. Although the trial 
process was officially launched on the 15 th July 2006, pilot phase courts had all along been trying accused 
persons. During my court observations in some of the courts, judges from other courts attended trials in pilot 
phase courts as part of their training. Observations in Muhari Sector, June 2006 
52"Available at: http: /,, "www. inkiko-gacaca. poV. rw (Accessed 15 th July 2008) 
527 Article 9, Organic Law 40/2000 
528 Article I of Organic Law 10/2007 has reduced the number of judges on the bench to 5 and 2 deputies. 
S. BYAMUK-AMA 147 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
also reduced. Under the new law, Gacaca courts were administered under three courts, the 
Gacaca court of the Cell, Sector and Sector Appeal '529 all of which 
had different functions. 
There are 12,103 Gacaca courts country wide, 9,013 in the Gacaca court of the Cell, 1,545 in 
the Gacaca court of the Sector and 1,545 in the Gacaca court of Appeal. 530 
Gacaca Court of the Cell 
The Gacaca court of the cell is the lowest court in the Gacaca courts hierarchy. The 
General Assembly of this court is composed of all members of the particular cell above the 
age of 18 years. The General Assembly of every cell consists of approximately 200 residents 
of the cell above the age of 18 and where this number is less than the required minimum, the 
given cell may merge with a neighbouring cell in the same Sector. 53 1 The same criteria can be 
used if the cell in question cannot come up with a sufficient number of judges according to 
the law. 
The General Assembly of the cell is charged with the duty of electing judges, 
attending Gacaca courts and actively partaking in their activities. They are charged with the 
duty in particular, of assisting the Gacaca court of the cell in drawing up lists of persons who 
reside in the cell, who resided in the cell at the time of the genocide and if possible locations 
of where they kept shifting to and the routes they took. They are also charged with the duty of 
establishing residents of their cell who killed in or out of the cell, and those who were not 
residents in their cell but killed in the cell. The General Assembly is also charged with the 
duty of identifying persons who were victimised as a result and the property damaged. Lastly, 
the General Assembly is charged with the duty of presenting evidence or testimonies on all 
persons suspected of genocide and to help examine such evidence. 
529 Article 4 Organic Law 16/2004 
530Available at: www. inkiko-Gacaca. gov. rw (Accessed 15"' July 2008) 
53 1 Article 6, Organic Law 16.2004 
532 See section on judges below. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 148 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Residents are obliged to participate in this process especially if it is clear that there is 
cause to believe that they have such evidence. This is confin-ned by Article 29 which 
provides; 
Any person who omits or refuses to testify to what he or she has seen, 
or on what he or she knows, as well as the one who makes a 
slanderous denunciation, shall be prosecuted by the Gacaca court 
which makes the statement of it. He or she incurs a prison sentence 
from 3-6 months. In case of a repeat offence, the defendant may 
incur a prison sentence from 6months to one year imprisonment. 533 
Although the Gacaca court of the Cell is at the bottom of the Gacaca court hierarchy, 
it plays the most important role in the Gacaca process. In addition to drawing up the lists of 
the different categories of people within a given cell, the Gacaca court of the cell also 
receives confessions from accused persons who participated in the genocide, receive evidence 
and testimonies related to genocide offences and verifies them and also brings together the 
files forwarded by the Public Prosecutor. Article 34(6) of Organic Law 16/2004 provides that 
it is the duty of Gacaca judges of the cell to categorise the accused after the relevant evidence 
is gathered. They then forward files of accused persons belonging to category two to the 
Gacaca court of the sector and those belonging to category one to the Public Prosecution's 
office. They are also expected to try persons accused of offences against property in their 
cell. 
533 One is considered to have refused to testify where it is established that such person has knowledge on a given 
matter, and is denounced by others in his or her presence. Refusing to testify also is extended to persons who 
are summoned to testify but who refuse to speak or deliberately evade questions put to them. It also involves 
a person who has been summoned by the Court but does not appear in Gacaca without sufficient reason. This 
article also applies to a peurer, who gives false evidence under oath. Such person is prosecuted in the same 
hearing where the false evidence has been given. 
534 Article 4 Organic Law 16/2006. Article 41 provides that the Gacaca court of the cell deals with offences 
related to property, objections to sentences in absentia, and categorisation of alleged authors of offences 
defined in Article 51 of the Organic Law 16/2006. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 149 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The Sector and Sector Appeal Courts 
The Gacaca court of the Sector is charged with prosecuting all offences against a 
person, committed in the genocide. They receive confessions and guilty pleas, investigate 
testimonies received, put on trial and make rulings on accused persons within the courts 
jurisdiction. 535 This court in addition acts as a court of appeal for decisions made in the 
Gacaca court of the cell, but only with regard to Articles 29 and 3 0.536 
The Sector Appeal Court is the highest organ in the Gacaca court hierarchy. The court 
hears appeals against sentences brought forward from the Gacaca court of the Sector, 537 by 
the defendant, plainti ff 1 
538 or any other interested person . 
539 Appeals are lodged 15 days from 
the date of judgement. 540 Where the appellant has been wrongly categonsed, 541 the Gacaca 
Court of Appeal retries him, but the decision reached cannot be appealed. If the appellant is 
however in the first category, their file is forwarded to the Public Prosecutor. 542 Technically, 
this is applicable where an accused has been categorised as having committed crimes against 
person when in fact he only committed crimes against property. In such a case, the court 
places him in his rightful category and orders him to pay back the said property. Such cases 
are not appealed. In the same breath, offences against property at the cell level are not 
appealed. 543 The only recourse the appellant may have is to come to a mutual agreement with 
the complainant. 
535 See Articles 36,39,42 Organic Law 16/2004 
536 Article 30, Organic Law 16/2004 provides that any person who exercises pressure, attempts to exercise or 
threaten the witness or the seat member of the Gacaca court Oudge) shall be sentenced to 3-6 months 
imprisonment and in case of repeat offence, the defendant could be imprisoned between 6 months to 2 years 
imprisonment. 
537 Articles 37,39,43,89 Organic Law 16/2004 
538 Article 90 Organic Law 16/2004 
539 Article 19, Organic Law 10/2007, as amended, included any other person. 
540 Article s 87 and 91 Organic Law 16/2004 
541 Article 36(4), 37(4), 3 4(6,7,9,10) It is the duty of every court to examine its competence to deal with cases 
and determine whether an accused person was properly categorised. Where the court is of the opinion that 
the accused was not categorised properly in accordance with Article 5 1, the court has a duty so to do. 
542 Article 92 Organic Law 16/2004 
543 Article 89 Organic Law 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 150 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
judicial review 
Article 93 of Organic Law 16/2004 provides that the Gacaca Court of Appeal may 
review a Judgment lodged by the defendant or plaintiff or their descendants where: 
A person was acquitted in a judgment passed in the last resort by an 
ordinary court, but is later found guilty by the Gacaca Court;... the 
person was convicted in a judgement passed by the ordinary court, 
but is later found innocent by the Gacaca court;... the person was 
given a sentence contrary to the legal provisions on the offences of 
which he is convicted. 
Article 20 of Organic Law 10/2007 in addition provides that a judgement can be 
subject to judicial review where new evidence emerges providing contrary evidence. The 
Article also provides that any person acting in the interest of justice may apply for judicial 
review. 
THE JUDGES (INYANGAMUGAYO) 
Contemporary Gacaca judges 
Unlike traditional Gacaca judges who attained their status by virtue of their age, 
wisdom, experience, and social influence, and unlike the colonial Gacaca judges who were 
appointed by the colonial administration, contemporary Gacaca judges are eligible at the age 
of 21 to be elected by their fellow citizens. 544 The judges preside over international crimes 
such as genocide and crimes against humanity, a far cry from the petty offences they dealt 
with previously. Although education is not a prerequisite to be elected as a judge, all judges 
go through training shortly after they are elected. Today, the Gacaca process is based on 
specific laws and procedures that are strictly followed. 
544 Article 3 10/2007 
S. BYAMUKAMA 151 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Membership on the bench 
In October 2001, Rwandans elected approximately 225,000 inyangamugayo (literally 
'person of integrity' in Kinyarwanda) to act as judges of the Gacaca courts. 545 What amounts 
to "persons of integrity" can be inferred from reasons why some of the nominees were 
rejected. Among the reasons why some nominees were rejected: drunkenness, immoral 
behaviour (adultery, prostitution), not paying debts, looting dunng the genocide, being 
quarrelsome, beating his wife or being an "extremist. , 546 
The judges further elected among themselves nine members and five deputies to join 
the Gacaca court of the Sector and Sector Appeal, while the remainder become judges of the 
547 548 Gacaca court of the cell. There are 12,103 Gacaca courts countrywide , 
108,927 judges 
and 60,515 deputies for a total of 169,442 judges. These are undoubtedly huge numbers and 
the training programme for this new elected judiciary was massive. Despite that, the large 
composition of the Gacaca bench is important to ensure that everybody's interests are 
represented. 
The evolution of Gacaca courts following the pilot phase saw the number of judges 
required on the bench drop dramatically. While Organic Law 40/2000 required the bench to 
comprise of 19 members; 14 judges and five deputies, Organic Law 16/2004 reduced this 
number to 14 members; nine judges and five deputies, 550 but for any proceeding, there must 
be at least seven judges present. 551 The number of judges was further reduced in Organic Law 
545 Daly 356, quoting United Nations Integrated Regional Information Networks (U. N. IRIN), Gacaca Genocide 
Trials to Begin in May 2002 (Dec. 12,2001), at http: //www. allafrica. coin/stories/ 200112120059. html 
[hereinafter U. N. IRIN]. 
546 Penal Reforrn International, Gacaca Jurisdictions and its Preparation July-December 2001, Research on 
Gacaca Report 1,2002, 
54'Article 13, also see Article 8 of the Organic Law 16/2004 
548Available at: h p: //www. inkiko-, iiacaca. -yov. rw. (Accessed I st July 2008) 
549 Sarkin 162 
550 Article 8 Organic Law 16/2004 
551 Article 23 
S. BYAMUKAMA 152 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
10/2007 down to a total of nine judges; seven main judges and two deputies, 552 while the 
quorum required is five. 553 
Education and training 
Judges elect among themselves a coordinating committee 554 that has a yearly 
renewable mandate. The committee is composed of a president, first and second vice- 
president and two secretaries, all of whom must be able to read and write Kinyarwanda. 555 
This is the only area where a literary requirement is noted in Gacaca legislation. It can be 
inferred from this that the rest of the judges need not know how to read and write. From the 
empirical study I conducted, the average education of the judges interviewed in the villages 
was primary six. Judges in Kigali were found to be more educated than their village 
counterparts. The most highly educated judge in the villages that I interviewed was a 
Secondary four graduate, while in Kigali some judges had professional careers. In Muhari 
Sector, for example, I interviewed 14 judges (12 male and two female) after a trial. The 
president of the court had Secondary (S)4 education, the first vice S3, second vice Primary 
(P)5, I" secretary S3 and second Secretary P5, the other members had P4,5,6 and 8 
education. In all these cases the judges were able to read and write to varying degrees. 
The coordinating committee is usually comprised of individuals from the "elite. " It 
presides over and convenes meetings, registers complaints, testimonies and evidence, 
receives files for the accused, and registers appeals filed against judgement passed by the 
Gacaca courts. The committee also forwards to the Gacaca court of appeal judgments 
appealed against, as well as registering decisions made by the courts, and collaborating with 
other institutions in the implementation of decisions made by the Gacaca courts. 556 
552 Article 1, Organic Law 10/2007 
553 Article 5, Organic Law 10/2007 
554 Article 11, Organic Law 16/2004 
555 Article II Organic Law 16/2004 
556 Article 12 of the Organic Law 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 153 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Overall, the majority of educated people in towns and villages chose not to be 
involved in the Gacaca process, leaving those less educated to volunteer for these positions. 
557 Although the Gacaca process did not require that all the judges be educated, there are 
concerns about people's ability to read, understand and interpret the law. 558 This is 
exacerbated by the general tendency for those less-educated to greatly respect and defer to 
those more educated for guidance. This defeats the purpose of placing a large number of 
judges on the bench to ensure impartiality. Moreover, the more educated and cosmopolitan 
judges were elected by their peers to the Sector and Sector Appeal level, leaving the least 
educated at the bottom of the league in the Cell courts. 559 This is troublesome because of the 
critical role played by the Gacaca court of the Cell in compiling and investigating the 
accuracy of the evidence gathered. 
Impartiality of the judges 
To maintain impartiality, Article 10 of Organic Law 16/2004 provides that a Gacaca 
judge must excuse himself or herself from a bench in which; his or her spouse, relative, 
person with whom they have a profound friendship or enmity, or any other person party to a 
proceeding that would compromise his objectivity. At the beginning of the trial, the presiding 
judge (usually the president) asks any member of the bench to step down if he or she has a 
relationship with any party to the proceeding that might compromise his impartiality. He also 
gives the defendant and the general public an opportunity to remove any member of the 
bench whom they feel may be partial due to any "special relationship. , 560 
557 Article II provides that the judges of the Gacaca court elect among themselves the coordinating committee 
made of the President, I" and 2 nd vice president, 2 secretaries, all of whom must know how to read and write 
Kinyarwanda. No academic qualifications are required. 
Amnesty International, 2002 
559Articles 13, provides that the General Assembly elect judges of each cell who in turn elect members to the 
Sector bench and Court of Appeal. See African Rights, Gacaca Justice, A Shared Responsibility, (Kigali: 
African Rights, 2003)34 
560 Article 10, Organic Law 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 154 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Further still, persons who appear on the list of genocide suspects, soldiers, policemen, 
career magistrates, members in leadership of a political party or persons exercising a political 
activity and persons in executive positions of the centrallsed or decentralised government 
administration are not eligible to be voted as Gacaca judges. 561 
judges involvement in the genocide 
Article 3 of Organic Law 10/2007 and Article 14 of Organic Law 16/2004 stipulate 
that judges are eligible for election if they did not participate in the genocide. The Article 
ideology. , 562 
However, between 15 th January 2005 and 3 Oth June 2006,45,396 judges were 
implicated in genocide crimes. An additional 47,095 local leaders were also suspected of 
having participated in the genocide. 563 These played an important role in the investigation of 
genocide crimes. Although these judges have since been replaced, the numbers are 
staggering, but not surprising considering the level of participation in the genocide. Jean, a 
survivor, worried that they elected some judges not knowing that they had participated in the 
genocide. Because so many judges are implicated in the genocide, they cannot then be trusted 
to be honest and impartial. 564 Although the number of judges suspected of genocide presents 
a grim picture, the empirical data suggests that judges in Gacaca courts still carry out their 
duties relatively effectively. 
56 1 Article 15, Organic Law 16/2004 
562 Article 3(8) of Organic Law 10/2007 as amended provides that a judge must be "free from genocide 
ideology. " The proviso to Article 3 defines genocide ideology to consist of "behaviour, way of thinking, 
written documents and any other actions meant to wipe out human beings on the basis of their ethnic group, 
origin, nationality, religion, colour of skin, physical traits, sex, language, religion or political opinion. " 
563 Speech by the Executive Secretary of the Gacaca Courts, 14 th July 2006 on the eve of the beginning of 
Gacaca Trials. Also see http: //inkiko-. gacaca. gov. r (accessed I' July 2008) 
564 Interview 20th June 2006. Also see African Rights, Gacaca Justice (2003)18-23 
S. BYAMUKAMA 155 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
THE CONFESSION PROCESS 
Article 54 of Organic Law 16/2004 stipulates that a person who committed genocide 
in Rwanda between October 1" 1990 and December 31" 1994, "has a right to have recourse to 
the procedure of confessions, guilty plea, repentance and apologies. " Accordingly, the Article 
elaborates what amounts to a confession within the meaning of the Organic Law. It stipulates 
To be accepted as a confession, guilty plea, repentance and apology, 
the defendant must give a detailed description of the confessed 
offence, how he or she carried it out and where, when he or she 
committed it, witnesses to the facts, persons victimised and where he 
or she threw their dead bodies and the damages caused. 
From the onset, the Gacaca process only considers a confession where it has been 
admitted in total. Partial confessions are inadmissible. This point is further elucidated in 
Article 57 which stipulates that where it is found subsequently that there are offences that the 
defendant did not confess to, the defendant shall be prosecuted and put in the category in 
which the crime is placed and the defendant shall be given the maximum sentence in that 
category. 
Furthermore, Article 54 (2) provides that the accused must "reveal the co-authors, 
accomplices and any other evidence useful to the exercise of the public action. " This 
provision affirrns the nature of the confession and notes that such confessions must be made 
in full and that the accused must name his or her accomplices. The empirical data in Chapter 
seven suggests that the requirement to name accomplices is arguably one of the most difficult 
parts of the confession process. This is partly due to the fear of intimidation by accomplices 
and their families, as well as the fear of loosing friendships. 565 Article 54(3) provides that a 
confession is admissible where the defendant "apologises for the offences that he or she 
Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 156 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
committed. " This suggests that the Gacaca process is not only a legal process, but one that 
aims at reconciling people. 
As noted previously, the confession process is possibly the most important element of 
Gacaca. Confessions were the only means that Gacaca courts could collect evidence against 
the accused persons and their accomplices. The nature of the Rwandan genocide was such 
that crimes committed in groups and committed in full view of the majority. This enabled 
those who wanted to come forward and confess to their crimes, as well as those they 
witnessed or were accomplices to, to provide vital evidence that was necessary for the 
prosecution team and Gacaca. Like confessions or plea-bargaining in other jurisdictions, this 
technique speeds the trial process. 
Again, this confession process requires that accused persons not only incriminate 
themselves but also their colleagues, relatives and friends. In exchange, Gacaca laws have 
reduced the sentences of those who confess to genocide. 566 They have also provisionally 
released accused persons who confessed to genocide in prison. 567 The "physical evidence" of 
seeing colleagues released from prison on account of having confessed to genocide 
encourages other accused persons to confess. An accused prisoner in Cyangugu prison said 
that he confessed in 2005 and not earlier because he did not see an immediate advantage to 
confess. It was only when he saw his friends being released after confessing that he also 
confessed. 568 Those who confess to genocide will also benefit from not only having reduced 
sentences, but also serve half of the reduced sentence doing community service. This is a 
further incentive to confess, which also helps reduce the number of im-nates in over-crowded 
pnsons. 
566 See Penalties section below 
567 These would be tried and sentenced by Gacaca courts after their release. 
568 Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 157 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
However, the confession process is expected to play another role; that of truth-telling, 
which ostensibly fosters reconciliation. It is expected that through confessions, the truth of 
what took place in the genocide will be known. The survivors of the genocide often do not 
know what was happening when they were hiding; they have no idea how their loved ones 
were killed. It is hoped that the confession process will bring to light some of these facts. It is 
also anticipated that knowing the truth brings some kind of closure to the survivors of the 
genocide. 569 This is especially true for those victims of genocide that simply vanished and 
were never buried. One survivor of genocide told me that she keeps hoping her son will 
return one day, that possibly he got lost in another province trying to hide. To evidence her 
claim, she gives examples of parents who were reunited with their children almost a year 
after the genocide. She says if she could have proof of what happened to her son, even if he 
died, knowing where his body was thrown, would give her rest because she would know that 
her son died and then she could give him a decent burial. When an accused person confesses 
to genocide and reveals where the dead are buried as well as who was responsible, this gives 
the survivor some sense of closure. 
Be that as it may, there are a number of social pressures that may hinder the truth and 
reconciliation process. At times, it is not that alleged perpetrators do not want to confess, or 
that they do not want to reconcile with their victims, but the perpetrator has to gauge the 
advantages vis-6-vis the disadvantages of confessions. The empirical data suggests that 
accused persons confess at the risk of being seen as traitors by their colleagues, both in prison 
and outside prison, or risk being alienated from the communities they live in. 570 An alleged 
perpetrator I interviewed said that he would not confess to genocide because he fears his 
family will be alienated or discriminated against. He told me that he will confess to genocide 
at his trial and not before that. Since he has been in prison since 1995, he calculated that if he 
See Chapter four 
See Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 158 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
confessed at the trial, he will be released and he would protect his family. "I do not fear for 
myself here in prison, there is security here... I fear for my family... if I implicate people's 
,, 571 relatives... It is not that the accused person's family is actually being intimidated, it is the 
fact that the accused fears this possibility; this is what influences his behaviour in Gacaca. 
Considering that a number of potential witnesses and survivors have been intimidated and 
even killed, these fears are not unfounded. 572 
Additionally, the law further requires an accused person to ask for forgiveness before 
the entire population. It is hoped that this would in some way reconcile the parties to the 
conflict. 
CATEGORISATION OF OFFENCES 
The categonsation of offences was first introduced in Organic Law 08/1996 
governing genocide trials in ordinary courts and was later adopted by the Gacaca courts when 
Gacaca law came into force. The categorisation process has evolved since its adoption in 
1996. Initially, Article 2 of Organic Law 8/1996 established the categories of persons 
accused of genocide. Category one was comprised of those who planned and instigated the 
genocide, persons who were in positions of responsibility at the national, prefecture, 
commune, sector and cell level, religious organisations or persons who were in the military, 
police, and militia who perpetrated the genocide. This category was also comprised of 
notorious murderers who "by virtue of the zeal or excessive malice, distinguished themselves 
in their areas of residence or where they passed". In addition, the category was made of 
persons who committed acts of sexual torture, along with their accomplices. Category two 
comprised of persons who committed "intentional homicide" or "serious assaults against 
persons causing death. " The third category comprised of persons who committed other 
571 Interview Cyangugu Prison, 23d June 2006 
572 12 survivors of genocide were killed in 2008 alone. See Chapter seven. 
573 The concept of remorse and forgiveness is discussed further in Chapter 7 
S. BYAMUK-AMA 159 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
serious cnmes against persons, while the fourth category comprised of offences against 
property. 
In 2000, the Gacaca courts established Organic Law 40/2000, in which Article 51 
adopted the aforementioned Article 2 of Organic Law 08/1996 but also included in Category 
one those persons who committed acts of torture, and rape. The rest of the categories were 
adopted without modification. 
Organic Law 40/2000 was later replaced by the comprehensive Organic Law 16/2004 
that today governs the Gacaca courts. Notably, Article 51 included all persons mentioned in 
Category one of Organic Law 40/2000, but another group; persons who committed 
"dehumanising acts against dead bodies" was added. At this time, categories two and three of 
Organic Law 40/2000 were merged into one category to include all crimes committed against 
person. Category four of Organic Law 40/2000 became Category three of Organic Law 
16/2004. 
In 2007, there were significant changes in Organic Law 10/2007 with regard to 
categorisation of offences. Article II of Organic Law 10/2007 provides that Category one 
includes persons whose criminal acts or criminal participation place them among planners, 
organisers, inciters, supervisors and ringleaders of the crime of genocide or crimes against 
humanity, together with their accomplices. The category also includes accused persons who 
were at the time of genocide "in the organ of leadership, at the national, prefecture, sub- 
prefecture and commune levels, leaders of political parties, members of the high command of 
the anny and gendarmerie, of communal police, leaders of communal domination, or illegal 
militia groups and who committed genocide or encouraged other people to commit genocide, 
S. BYAMUKAMA 160 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
together with their accomplices. " Acts of rape 574 and sexual torture were also included in 
category one. 
Well-known murderers who distinguished themselves by virtue of their zeal, or the 
excessive depravity with which they carried out these crimes, as well as persons who 
committed crimes of torture and those who dehumanised dead bodies were all placed in 
category two. 
Category three is perhaps the only category that has not been changed. It comprises of 
crimes against property, and these are prosecuted by the Gacaca court of the cell. If, however, 
the parties come to an amicable settlement before the said law came into force, he or she will 
not be prosecuted. 
There are a number of conclusions that can be drawn from the 2007 law. First, the 
national courts in Rwanda have exactly the same jurisdiction as the ICTR. These courts have 
been left to concentrate on prosecuting persons in leadership positions who organised and 
planned the genocide, as well as persons who committed the crime of rape. 576 Accused 
persons who were in the anny or gendannene are only placed in the first category if they 
were in "high command. " According to the revised law, the rest of the accused persons who 
belonged to the first category were pushed into the second category, hence giving the Gacaca 
574 The ICTR has held that rape was an act of genocide in Rwanda. However, as with so many issues in the 
prosecution of genocide, this remains contentious. Alleged perpetrators I interviewed questioned why rape 
ranked a higher category than murder, and hence was under the jurisdiction of the Ordinary courts. They said 
that most women were raped and killed and such perpetrators would only be prosecuted for the murder. 
There is clearly insufficient evidence to prosecute them for rape. Those that are prosecuted for rape are only 
those who raped but did not kill their victims. Evidence of rape is also difficult to acquire as the majority of 
survivors are embarrassed to testify against their aggressors because this information would ruin their 
chances of getting married. In line with these concerns, Article 6 of Organic Law 13/2008 stipulates that 
confession to the crime of rape can only be made in private. In addition, where such victim of rape is dead or 
incapacitated to lodge a complaint, any interested party can lodge a private complaint on their behalf. Further 
still, the Gaeaca courts as per Organic Law 13/ 2008 now have jurisdiction to try the crime of rape. 
Prosecuting the crime of rape is a positive step because so many victims of rape in the genocide will get 
justice sooner that they would under the Ordinary court system. There is sufficient evidence to suggest that 
rape was a tool of the Rwandan genocide, as countless women were raped and were sexually tortured. 
575 Article 11, Organic Law 10/2007, 
576 In July 2008, the Gacaca courts will start prosecuting the crime of rape. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 161 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
courts wider jurisdiction. Regardless of their seriousness, all crimes against persons not 
addressed by the national courts or the ICTR are placed under the jurisdiction of the Gacaca 
courts. 
PENALTIES 
The evolution of the Gacaca laws has also resulted in great changes in the penalties 
awarded. Penalties have gone down over the years, but in each case "rewarding" those who 
confess to genocide "generously. " For example, Article 68 of Organic Law 40/2000 provides 
that accused persons in Category one who do not confess to genocide or whose confessions 
have been rejected, risk a life imprisonment or a death sentence. If, however, the accused 
person confessed to genocide, he or she may incur a sentence ranging from 25 years to life 
imprisonment. Article 69 of Organic Law 40/2000 provides that where accused persons in 
Category two do not confess to genocide crimes or where their confessions have been 
rejected 577 , they 
incur 25 years to life imprisonment, but these sentences are reduced if they 
confess to genocide. 
Article 72 of Organic Law 16/2004 provides that defendants in Category one, who do 
not confess, but are convicted of genocide crimes, may incur the death penalty or life 
imprisonment, and the sentence was reduced to between 25 and 30 years imprisonment for 
those who confess. Article 73 provides that those in Category two who do not confess incur 
between 25 and 30 years, and those who confessed after the lists of perpetrators were drawn 
up, face between 12 and 15 years. If they confessed before the lists were drawn up, they face 
a mere seven to 12 years. Those accused of "lesser" crimes in Category two, who do not have 
recourse to the confession process, face between five and seven years imprisonment. Those 
who confessed when the lists were already drawn up face between three and five years 
577 See Article 54, Organic Law 16/2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 162 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
imprisonment and those who confess before the lists were drawn up face between one and 
three years imprisonment. In all cases, only half the sentence is served in prison custody; the 
rest is performed through community service. 
This indicates that the Gacaca process "rewards" accused persons who confess early. 
This acts as an incentive for accused persons to confess. It also saves trouble and anxiety for 
the victims and witnesses, as well as saves time for the Gacaca courts. Reduction of sentences 
is binding on Gacaca courts as it forms part of the existing legislation in the prosecution of 
genocide suspects in Rwanda. 
Article 13 of Organic Law 10/2007 modified Article 72 of Organic Law 16/2004, and 
provides that defendants who fall in the first category and refuse to confess to genocide or 
whose confession has been rejected may incur a death sentence or life imprisonment. 
However, on 25 th July 2007, the death sentence was abolished in Rwanda making life 
imprisonment the maximum sentence. Many countries refused to extradite genocide suspects 
in Rwanda because of its practice of the death penalty. The move to scrap the death penalty 
was at least in part, to encourage other countries to extradite genocide suspects to Rwanda. 578 
In addition, the abolition of the death penalty meant that both the ICTR and the Ordinary 
courts in Rwanda awarded similar sentences. 
Article 14 of Organic Law 10/2007 also amended Article 73 of Organic Law 16/2004 
in a major way. Accused persons who refused to confess to genocide crimes falling in the 
first second and third paragraphs, 579 that is, over zealous murderers who become well known 
for their excessive wickedness in carrying out these crimes, persons who carried out acts of 
578"We have already signed extradition agreements with many countries in Africa, Europe and in North 
America. We are hoping that those countries will co-operate to bring to trial all genocide suspects, or to 
extradite their cases before Rwandan justice. "Justice of Minister in Rwanda, Tharcisse Karugarama Aug. 2a 
week after the abolition of the death penalty. Aimable Twahirwa, Death Penalty-Rwanda: Abolition Spurs 
Quest for Justice, Inter Press Service News Agency. http: //ipsnews. net/africa/nota. asp? idnews=38821. Last 
updated 20th November 2007 
579 Accused persons who were previously placed in category one and were shifted to category two. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 163 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
torture whether or not they led to death of their victims, and persons who committed 
dehumanising acts against dead bodies, incur a sentence ranging from 30 years to life 
imprisonment. If such accused persons confessed to genocide after their names were included 
on the list of perpetrators of genocide, they incur a sentence ranging from 25 to 29 years. An 
accused person in this category serves one third of his or her sentence in custody, one sixth of 
the sentence is suspended, and half of the sentence is carried out in community service. 
However, if he confessed to genocide before his name was placed on the list of accused 
persons, this person would incur a sentence ranging from 20 to 24 years, but would only 
serve one sixth of the said sentence in custody, a third would be suspended and half of the 
sentence would be spent doing community service. 
For example, an accused person who was known in his community for his excessive 
wickedness in torturing and killing his victims, would incur a minimum of 25 years 
imprisonment if he confessed to his crimes after his name was placed on the list of accused 
persons. He would however spend only approximately eight years and three months in 
custody, four years and one month of this sentence would be suspended, and 12 years six 
months would be spent doing community service. However, if the same accused person had 
confessed before his name was placed on the list of accused persons, he would receive a 
minimum of 20 years which would be executed as follows: He would spend in custody 
approximately only three years three months, he would have six years six months suspended, 
and would spend 10 years doing community service. Ultimately, an accused person might 
risk life imprisonment instead of spending approximately eigbt years in custody, or a mere 
three years three months of prison for the exact same crime, depending on whether he 
confesses to genocide and when he confessed. 
Accused persons who (with intent to cause death), killed or injured their victims, 
together with their accomplices are sentenced as follows: Accused persons incur 15 to 19 
S. BYAMUKAMA 164 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
years imprisonment if they refused to confess to genocide, or where their confessions were 
rejected. Where they confessed to genocide after their names were on the list of accused 
persons, they incur a sentence of between 12 and 14 years but a third of the sentence is spent 
in custody, one sixth is suspended, and half is spent doing community service. Where such 
accused persons confessed, pleaded guilty to genocide, and their confession was accepted, 
before their names were put on the list of accused persons, their sentence ranges from eight to 
II years, but one sixth of the sentence is spent in custody, a third of the sentence is suspended 
and half the sentence is spent doing community service. 
The majority of alleged perpetrators belong in this category. In a case, for example, 
where a man killed three men, four women and two children in his village, and refused to 
confess to genocide or his confession was rejected by the Gacaca courts, he would receive a 
minimum of 15 years imprisonment. Where the same person confessed to genocide, after his 
name was placed on the list of genocide suspects, he would get a minimum of four years 
imprisonment. If he confessed to genocide before his name was placed on the list of genocide 
suspects, he would get a minimum of one year and three months imprisonment. Clearly, an 
early confession can result in a greatly reduced sentence. 
Accused persons who participated in criminal acts during the genocide, with no 
intention of causing death, may incur five to seven years of imprisonment if they refuse to 
confess to genocide, or if their confession is rejected. All the same, only a third of this 
sentence is spent in custody, one sixth of the sentence is suspended and half of the sentence is 
spent doing community service. Where such accused persons confess after their names were 
placed on the list of genocide suspects, they would incur a three to four year sentence, but 
again, only a third of the sentence is spent in custody, one sixth is suspended and half the 
sentence is spent doing community service. If the same persons confessed to genocide before 
their names were placed on the list of genocide suspects, they would only be sentenced to one 
S. BYAMUKAMA 165 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
to two years, but one sixth of their sentence would be spent in custody, a third would be 
suspended and half the sentence spent doing community service. 
The sentences rendered according to Organic Law 10/2007 suggest that the majority 
of accused persons who were imprisoned from 1994 will be released. This also highlights the 
importance of the confession process. Where accused persons confess of their own free will, 
before being placed on the list of accused persons, a third of their sentences will be 
suspended and they only spend one sixth of the said sentence in custody. This is a very large 
benefit, compared to the sentences of their counterparts who only confess after they have 
been named. In such cases, only one sixth of that sentence is suspended and they spend one 
third of their sentence in custody. 580 
The Gacaca law is silent on the position of prisoners who have been found innocent 
by Gaeaca courts. There is no mention of any form of compensation for such persons, 
although some innocent individuals have been in prison since 1994. In fact, compensation is 
not given to individuals in this category of accused persons and for the many survivors of 
genocide. 58 1 Articles 94 and 95 provide for compensation of damaged property but Article 96 
provides that other forms of compensation shall be determined by laws that will be set up at a 
future time. Organic Law 10/2007 is silent on the position of compensation of survivors of 
genocide. 
'80 Article 18 of Organic Law 10/2007 provides that an accused person cannot be given a lower sentence than 
that prescribed by law in the pretext of mitigating circumstances. Where indeed these mitigating 
circumstances exist, the accused should be given the minimum sentence in that category as prescribed by 
581 A 90 year old woman survivor of genocide was stabbed and burnt to death by a gang including 4 alleged 
perpetrators who had confessed to their involvement in the 1994 genocide. This was in retribution of her 
petition to get compensation of property damaged during the genocide from her attackers. Gang Kills 
Rwandan Genocide Widow. The Guardian, 15'h May 2008 
582 The practice however is that survivors of genocide are given general compensation such as free education, 
medical services and free housing. See Chapter 4. The issue of compensation is not exhausted in this thesis 
because it is beyond the scope of this thesis. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 166 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
PRF-TRIAL INVESTIGATIONS 
The pre-trial investigation process in Gacaca courts is central to its system of justice. 
It serves the purpose of establishing the commission of the crime of genocide and crimes 
against humanity, with the specific objective of investigating how the genocide was planned, 
583 how it was perpetrated and the individual responsibility of every accused person. The duty 
to investigate is placed on the Gacaca judges, nyumbakumi, 584 zone, cell, sector local 
authorities and the general population. 
Rwanda's priority to hold accountable all persons accused of genocide crimes has 
resulted in a staggering 818,564 people being prosecuted for genocide crimes countrywide. 585 
In a country with a population of approximately 9 million, 41.9%of whom are below the age 
of 15, makes Rwanda's situation even more precarious. 586 With so many people accused, pre- 
trial investigations by means of ordinary police investigations were impossible. Even though 
not all police officers had systematically participated in the genocide, investigating over 
800,000 cases even in an ordinary functioning criminal justice process would be next to 
impossible. Moreover, the police force was one of the departments of government that 
supervised and perpetrated the genocide. 587 A large number of police officers participated in 
the genocide, many of whom are either in exile, in prison, or died during the genocide. It was 
no surprise then that the police force, like the judiciary, was in shambles and in urgent need 
of reconstruction. 
583 Foreword, Progress of Collecting Information required in the Gacaca Courts, Truth-Justice-Reconciliation, 
November, 2004. Available at: w-, vw. inkiko-gacaca. jzov. rw herein after Gacaca manual (I st July 2008) 
584 Nyumbakumi (heads of every ten houses). This is the smallest unit of the administrative organisation of the 
local government. Rwanda has a decentralised administrative system. At the grassroots are the nyumbakumi, 
then the cell, sector, district and Provincial administration. Although not stipulated in the Gacaca laws 
nyumbakumi, Zone leaders, and the cell head play an important role in the investigation stage. Penal Reform 
International, 64 
585 Available at: www. inkik-o-gacaca. gov. rw (Accessed Is'July 2008) 
586 ht p: //www. worldpress. org/profiles2,, Rwanda. cfm (Accessed 24th July 2008) 
587 Chapter five 
S. BYAMUKAMA 167 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Considering that Gacaca courts offered a means of addressing the need for trials 
without undue delay and cost effectively, and considering that Gacaca courts are participatory 
in nature, it is not surprising that the pre-trial investigations through Gacaca aimed at 
involving the whole population from the onset. Community participation played an even 
greater role in the quest for "truth" finding hence fostering reconciliation. It is only through 
participation of the whole community that the truth can be realised and that people can feel 
involved in the process. Although the police do not play a central role in pre-trial 
investigations, they are charged with ensuring that communities are safe. Where an ordinary 
crime or a crime committed resulting from Gacaca (for example acts of revenge or 
intimidation) has been committed in the community, the police have a duty to investigate 
such crimes. 
Pre-trial investigation in Gacaca and the rationale for its use 
Gacaca pre-trial investigations are carried out with the help of grass root community 
leaders who fill out "lists. " The primary investigation task is done by the nyumbakumi (head 
of ten houses) who collects evidence from the ten houses he or she heads. The findings of 
each nyumbakumi investigation are sent to the cell where residents of that cell verify the 
evidence given with the help of elected Gacaca judges. Leaving the responsibility of pre-trial 
investigations to the grass root nyumbakumi ensured the participation of every single 
Rwandan adult in the investigations conducted. 
In addition to ensuring full community participation, the decentralised administrative 
structure adopted in the pre-trial investigations had another advantage. This system had 
existed before the genocide, was well respected, and was familiar to people. The 
nyumbakumi for example, are responsible for all activities within the ten houses, including 
settling disputes, administrative duties such as recommending issuing of identity cards, 
selling or buying of property. During the 2001 election of judges, nyumbakumi encouraged 
S. BYAMUKAMA 168 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
eligible adults within their nyumbakumi to participate as Gacaca judges. They proposed 
names of "persons of integrity, " within each of their ten houses, and forwarded them to cell 
representatives. Their activities were therefore familiar and they were trusted "authority" 
figures within their communities. Although the nyumbakumi were entrusted with the primary 
pre-trial investigations, this is primarily the function of the Gacaca judges. 588 The Gacaca 
judges now only verify the evidence given to them by grass root authorities with the help of 
the general public. 
PRIE-TRIAL INVESTIGATIONS IN PRACTICE 
Pre-trial investigations in Gacaca started with a two phase pilot in 2002. The first 
phase started on 19'h June 2002 in 12 Sectors selected from the 12 Provinces, while the 
second phase started on 25 th November 2002 in 106 Sectors, one Sector selected in each 
district and municipality. Once accused persons were categorised, trials in these pilot Sectors 
started on I Oth March 2005. With the success of the pilot phases, and subsequent to the 
revision of Gacaca laws, pre-trial investigations were launched countrywide on 15 th of 
January 2005. 
The investigations were divided into three phases launched at three different periods. 
First, data collection at the cell level was carried out by the population and their local leaders 
between January and April 2005. This was followed by validation of the evidence by the 
General Assembly (general population) and the Gacaca court of the Cell which took place 
between May and July 2005. Lastly open community discussions took place between August 
and December 2005 . 
S8' Article 33,16/2004 
589 This is not to suggest that Gacaca courts operated and completed their tasks within the given timeframe. By 
the 15 th July 2006 for example, when trials of Gacaca courts started countrywide, some cell courts had not 
completed the verification of information phase and the categorisation of offences. They had to multi-task all 
these responsibilities on different days. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 169 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Gacaca encourages alleged perpetrators to have an active role in compiling these lists, 
since they have specific evidence regarding the implementation of the genocide . 
590 The 
promise of a reduced sentence also provides incentive for the accused to cooperate. The 
contribution of the accused in this process, especially perpetrators in prisons who have 
confessed, cannot be underestimated. Government officials and religious leaders concentrated 
on sensitising prisoners on the benefits of confessions and urged them to implicate their 
accomplices. These efforts have been a success as the numbers of perpetrators who have 
confessed was steadily increasing. 
The Example of Kigali Central Prison (KCP) 
In its first report on Rwanda's Gacaca process in 2001, Penal Reforni International 
observed a prison session in which genocide related evidence was collected. Although the 
session predated Gacaca courts and referred to investigations by prisoners in Kigali Central 
Prison (KCP) of whom 1,127 of 8,000 inmates had confessed, the process reveals how 
investigations were carried OUt. 591 
Pre-trial investigations in prison are organised and conducted by elected "semi- 
judges, " (called urumuri or "the light") themselves prisoners. Although their activities do not 
forrn a legal part of the Gacaca process, their investigations (called Prison Gacaca) provide 
insight into how evidence is acquired in prisons. Prisoners organise themselves in cells like 
ordinary Gacaca courts, collect evidence, testimonies and confessions from its residents, and 
send this evidence to the relevant cell court. This evidence fonns part of the investigation 
process by residents of cells to be verified by the community. 592 4c Prison Gacaca court" 
590 Article 73 of 16/2004 
59 'Penal Reform International, Gacaca Jurisdictions and its Preparation July-December 2001, Research on 
Gacaca Report 1,2002. My research did not cover investigations in prisons. I inter-viewed prisoners and 
observed investigations in Gacaca courts in 2006.1 also took part (passive) in the process of investigations in 
my cell in Kabeza in 2005. 
592 Their mandate can be compared to that of nyumbakumi who record evidence given to them, but evidence is 
subject to review by the community as a whole. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 170 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
evidence is then sent to ordinary Gacaca courts, which then compare the evidence provided 
from that of investigations from the nyumbakumi per cell. 
On 21" November 2001, detainee Gacaca "semi-judges" (urumuri) sat in a 
"courtroom" made from plastic sheeting together with many inmates to determine the murder 
of an unknown woman in a particular zone. "Security guards", also detainees (recognised by 
their bonnets), kept an eye on the proceedings to ensure order. The President of the urumuri 
called the name of the cell where the woman was shot and asked the crowd if anyone had any 
evidence related to her death. 
One person reacted and the President asked him if he had seen 
anything. He said no, but he had heard the shooting and because he 
got frightened, he had run away, but while doing so, he had seen the 
woman's body but not the perpetrators. He had been together with his 
younger brother and five neighbours, most of them now i=ates of 
this same prison. One by one the Gacaca security guards fetched the 
person mentioned from their quarters elsewhere and brought them 
before the committee to testify. Afterwards some were sent back to 
their quarters. 
This investigation revealed according to the Committee: The 
responsibility of the two brothers for the killing of the woman. Both 
denied any involvement and declared that they didn't know the 
perpetrators: the younger one had been near the house of his mother 
to guard her grazing goats and he had only met his older brother and 
friends when they were busy transporting the body of the woman. 
After having gathered all the evidence concerning the death of this 
woman, everything said was written down and shown to the 
participants in order to check if each agreed with the way it had been 
recorded. 594 
Penal Reform International asked the committee to provide complete results from two 
communes that had given most evidence. The committee decided on Kacyiru in Kigali, 
consisting of five sectors and 23 cells, as well as Bicumbi, a rural commune with 15 sectors 
and 90 cells. They produced 230 pages of hand-written report in French with descriptions, 
tables and lists of those who were killed in these communes that were resident in the area, 
593 Babamwezi's interview conducted in Cyangugu prison confirms confirmed Penal Reform International's 
Report. Inter-view I Oth June 2006 
594 Penal Reform International, 29-30 
S. BYAMUKAMA 171 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
indicating what had happened. The report also included lists of the wounded, cases of rape in 
the commune and lists of material damages caused. The committee also listed who committed 
these crimes (as far as they knew), the groups they belonged to, their leaders, the names of 
minors who participated in the genocide, the names of where the survivors now live and an 
additional list of persons who would give additional evidence. Another version of the report 
was 211 pages long and was written in Kinyarwanda. 
Penal Refonn International noted that although the lists of those who participated in 
the genocide should be used with caution, there was no reason to discard evidence relating to 
the other categories they provided, such as persons killed, wounded or raped, per cell per 
sector. Indeed, it is common knowledge in Rwanda that prisoners provide more evidence 
about the genocide through their particular "Gacaca" than those at liberty. 
Pre-trial investigation Procedure Countrywide 
The pre-trial investigation procedure is divided into investigations, validation of the 
evidence and categorisation of offences. Each of these steps requires different key players. 
The investigation phase is mainly done by local authonties such as nyumbakumi, zone, cell 
and sector leaders in collaboration with the general public. The second phase is carried out by 
Gacaca judges with the help of the general public and the nyumbakumi acting as experts on 
evidence they provided. The third phase is carried out exclusively by Gacaca judges behind 
closed doors. 
The investigation phase is divided into three stages, each with a particular objective. 
The first stage looks into how the genocide was planned. The second seeks to know how the 
genocide was perpetrated and the effects of the genocide on every cell. The third phase 
identifies the role of every accused person. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 172 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Stage 1: How the genocide was planned 
At this stage, three groups of lists are drawn up by the nyumbakumi with the help of 
residents in each nyumbakumi. 595 The first group is a list comprised of people who resided in 
the cell in September 1990, those who lived in the cell in March 1994, and those who were 
arrested as "collaborators". 596 After this list is drawn up, the nyumbakumi (head of the 
nyumbakumi)597 then convenes a meeting with his nyumbakumi (ten houses) residents to 
verify the evidence gathered which is then forwarded to the President of the Gacaca court of 
the Cell. 598 The President in turn convenes a meeting of all the Gacaca judges of the Cell to 
verify the collected evidence. 599 Subsequently, the President convenes a general meeting of 
the cell to confirin the accuracy of the evidence gathered . 
6()0 This evidence is then recorded 
and handed to the Executive Secretary of the Gacaca Courts of the Sector who in turn submits 
it to the representative of the National Service of Gacaca Courts. 
The second group includes a list of ring leaders in the Cell, the number of meetings 
held in the Cell to organise the genocide, the list of attendants, and the list of those who had 
to be killed in each Cell. The third group is composed of documents showing the activities of 
individuals distributing deadly tools in the Cell, the militia gangs in the Cell and the 
roadblocks that were set up in each Cell . 
60 1 The same criterion used in group one is also used 
to fill in the lists in the second and third group. 
595 Gacaca Manual, 9 See Appendix 2 
596 "Collaborators" referred to Tutsi and moderate Hutu who were suspected of collaborating with the Rwanda 
Patriotic Front (RPF) in the war. Anyone who did not share the genocide ideology stood the risk of being 
imprisoned or even killed as a collaborator 
597 The head of the ten houses (nyumbakumi) is also called a nyumbakumi. 
598Gacaca Manual, 9 
'99 Ibid. 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 173 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Stage 2: How the Genocide was Perpetrated 
The second Stage, which aims at showing how the genocide was perpetrated and its 
effects in every Cell is itself divided into five separate groups of lists. 
The first group is a form filled in by the accused person citing their confession, guilty plea 
and repentance. In this exercise, the Sector authorities convene a General Assembly of all the 
Cell residents and enlighten them on the intention of the confession and guilty plea 
procedure. They request the nyumbakumi (head of the nyumbakumi) to draw up similar 
programmes in their different nyumbakumi. Assistance may at this stage be sought from 
religious leaders or organisations, non -governmental organisations and alleged perpetrators 
who have already pleaded guilty to genocide, confessed and usually benefited from the 
confession process. Every nyumbakumi is charged with the responsibility of encouraging 
residents of his area to have recourse to the confession process and assist accused persons to 
fill in these fonns. 
Sometimes prisoners who have confessed may be required to participate in this exercise in 
which case the Gacaca coordinator and prison authorities ensure that prisoners are availed for 
this purpose. The completed forms are handed to the nyumbakumi who then hands them to 
the Gacaca Court of the Cell and makes a report to the Cell authorities on how the 
programme was carried out. The President of the Gacaca Court of the Cell convenes a 
meeting with other judges to discuss the inconsistencies in the confessions to be discussed at 
the General Assembly. A General Assembly meeting is then convened where the confessions 
are read out and the inconsistencies (if any) are highlighted. An open discussion is usually 
encouraged where participants and residents of the Cell discuss the confession given. Based 
on the discussion at the General Assembly, the bench then sits to concur or dissent on the 
confessions and guilty pleas. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 174 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
At the outset of the compilation of the lists in both stages one and two, the Sector 
authorities convene a General Assembly meeting of the Cell residents and inform them of the 
previous task that was completed and discuss the new task at hand, the role of every resident, 
nyumbakumi and other cell authorities. 
Group two is composed of eight separate lists that include: Cell residents killed in the 
genocide, non residents killed in the Cell during the genocide, those killed outside their Cell 
in the genocide, those killed in their Cells of residence due to non participation in the 
genocide, non residents killed in the Cell due to non participation in the genocide, those 
killed outside their Cell due to non participation in the genocide, where the corpses were 
thrown and, lastly, a list of the property looted or destroyed in every household. 
Sector residents convene at a general meeting and are informed of the progress of the Gacaca 
courts of the cell. They are enlightened on their role as residents and the nyumbakumi are 
assigned the duty of filling in of these lists with the help of the residents, specifically the 
families involved. However, the gathered evidence is verified at another meeting convened 
by the nyumbakumi where all the residents, particularly the families involved, sit and discuss 
the contents written and whether this evidence is as was given or in conformity with what 
they know to be true. The Nyumbakumi and then hands the book to the President of the 
Gacaca court of the Cell. 
On receipt of the book, the President convenes a meeting of Gacaca judges and their 
substitutes to discuss and record its content and to point out contentious issues, 
inconsistencies (if any), or any evidence that needs clarity or further investigation. This 
evidence is also read out at the general meeting of the Cell. The Gacaca judges convene again 
to record the confirination of the Gacaca Court session and the discussions that arose there 
from. This evidence is written in the register, which the President sends to the Executive 
S. BYAMUKAMA 175 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Secretary of the Sector, which is then sent to the representatives of the National Service of 
the Gacaca Courts. 
Lists in group three comprise of evidence relating to the households that were 
attacked in the Cell, where people took refuge in the Cell, the survivors of genocide in every 
household in the Cell, and those who rescued the targeted victims in the Cell. The forth group 
comprises of a list of attacks in the Cell, attacks directed elsewhere in the Cell and notorious 
killers in the Cell. Similarly to other files, these are compiled with the help of the 
nyumbakumi. The fifth and final category in this stage compiles the details of the deaths of 
each victim in the genocide. The same criterion of verification and recording evidence is 
followed for each of these groups. 
Stage 3: The role of every accused 
The third stage is divided into two groups. The first group comprises the list of every 
accused and what they are accused of, while the second is a charge sheet for every accused 
person. This stage is the responsibility of the Gacaca judges alone. 
In their first task, the bench records the list of accused persons, their identities, and the 
charges against them, regardless of whether they confessed, are accused by others, or are 
collaborators or conspirators. The Gacaca judges present the lists to the General Assembly 
who determine whether anyone or any evidence was left out or recorded differently, and 
mistakes are rectified. The bench then deliberates and corrects such mistakes from the 
register book based on the recommendations of the General Assembly. 
The Gacaca judges then draw up a charge sheet of accused persons. They also verify 
documents related to every accused person which are compiled to make up his or her file. 
These documents include, but are not limited to, the confessions of the accused, documents 
S. BYAMUKAMA 176 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
related to investigations made and their findings, testimonies made by the residents or other 
persons, and investigations from the Public Prosecutions Office. 
This stage is closely followed by the categorisation of the accused according to their 
charges in accordance with Article 51 of the law. Category one offences are submitted to 
Prosecution Service through the National Service of the Gacaca Courts. Category two 
offences are submitted to the Sector Courts through the National Service of Gacaca Courts 
where they retain cases in category three related to property (which are kept at the Sector 
cupboard meant for this purpose) and start preparing to try the cases. Where however accused 
persons in category three reach a mutual agreement with the aggrieved party, a written 
declaration is written and signed or thumb-printed by the parties. Such declarations are kept 
in the file of the accused even though his case does not come up for trial. 
CONCLUSION 
This chapter analyses the evolution of Gacaca courts from pre-colonial, to colonial, 
post colonial and post genocide Rwanda. Gacaca courts have throughout Rwanda's history 
played an instrumental role in its judicial process. Although they lost their main stream status 
during colonisation, they nonetheless remained functional. Because Gacaca courts became 
one of the main stream judicial systems through which international crimes and crimes 
against humanity were to be prosecuted, a significant number of amendments were made to 
allow for effective administration of the process. 
Transitional justice places emphasis on flexibility of a transitional process to meet its 
stated aims and objectives. Since the Gacaca courts became operational in post genocide 
Rwanda, the Gacaca legislation has been amended four times, from Organic Law 40/2000 to 
Organic law 16/2004 which was later amended by Organic law 10/2007 also amended by 
Organic Law 13/2008. In each case, the number of judges has reduced, the categories shifted 
S. BYAMUKAMA 177 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
and the penalties dropped. In Organic Law 10/2007 and Organic Law 13/2008, Gacaca 
courts' jurisdiction was expanded to include some crimes previously under the jurisdiction of 
the ordinary court system. This was primarily due to the slow nature of the national criminal 
justice system. Gacaca courts now have jurisdiction to try all persons accused of genocide 
crimes except those who at the time of committing genocide crimes were in high ranking 
positions. 
The proceeding chapter discusses the practice of Gacaca courts by means of empirical 
research conducted by the researcher in Rwanda between March to August 2006. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 178 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
CHAPTER 7: GACACA IN PRACTICE 
INTRODUCTION 
Previous chapters have discussed the theory of transitional justice and criminal justice 
systems, while also detailing the practice and operation of the Gacaca process. This chapter 
builds on existing literature and research with an analysis of the empirical research I 
conducted in 2006, based on court observations and interviews. Overall, this chapter aims at 
understanding the Gacaca legal process in Rwanda and citizens' perception of it, specifically 
achieving justice through the confession process, as well as themes of reconciliation, truth 
and forgiveness. The chapter also discusses some of the specific challenges and problems 
within the process and how such difficulties have impacted peoples' perception of Gacaca. 
The chapter is divided into three sections. The first section addresses my observations 
of the pre-trial investigations in Gacaca courts and the participatory nature of the process. I 
specifically analyse the legal process of Gacaca and the context in which it operates as a 
fundamental example of transitional justice. The second section explores the trial process, 
evaluating the role of the parties in the process and the impact of the trials on the 
communities in which they take place. I also undertake an exploration of the role of the 
confession process on both justice and reconciliation. The third and final part of the chapter 
discusses the impact of these trials on the reconciliation process. Through the use of 
empirical data, I consider whether the process is an effective means to achieve reconciliation 
and evaluate whether Gacaca achieves its goals. 
As discussed in chapters four, five and six, Gacaca was created or resurrected to 
address Rwanda's urgent and pressing need for an effective justice system in the aftermath of 
genocide. Among the country's challenges, the court system could not readily cope with 
prosecuting the vast number of alleged perpetrators of genocide. Furthermore, Rwanda's 
S. BYAMUKAMA 179 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
prisons were greatly overcrowded and the steadily increasing number of named alleged 
perpetrators was making a bad situation worse. Undeniably, the aftermath of the genocide 
brought about a need to bring to justice those who perpetrated the genocide, however the 
focus on expedience meant that prosecutions did not necessarily adhere to international 
standards of fair trial. 602 On the other hand, imprisoning alleged perpetrators for long periods 
meant further penalising a large proportion of the population-husbands and fathers who are 
the traditional bread-winners in Rwandan society. The state also realised that bringing those 
who perpetrated the genocide to justice was only part of the solution; wider issues such as 
reconciliation and reintegration also required urgent attention. 
The Gacaca process is a criminal law adjudicative system within the wider concept of 
transitional justice. It seeks to prosecute international crimes of genocide and crimes against 
humanity at a domestic level, through a traditional form of justice. The rationale for Gacaca 
as a criminal law process is an attempt to break the culture of impunity in Rwanda. 
Accountability for the serious crimes committed is important not only to establish and affirm 
the rule of law; it is necessary for enabling co-existence in the communities through 
reconciliation. Nonetheless, this dual function makes the process more complex and difficult 
to analyse. 
There are further challenges because, as a traditional justice system, Gacaca is 
adjudicated by lay-men and women who likely witnessed the genocide and live in villages 
with survivors and alleged perpetrators alike. In Gacaca, crimes are prosecuted in the villages 
in which they were committed with full participation of the members of the communities. 
The effects of local prosecution cannot be underestimated or over-simplified because they 
have far reaching consequences on the process itself First, although Gacaca law is a legal 
instrument, its implementation lies in the hands of judges who have very limited legal 
602 See generally Chapter 4 and 5 
S. BYAMUKAMA 180 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
expertise. Secondly, whether judges, officials, accused and survivors of genocide, 
participants to Gacaca all live on the very hills on which the crimes were committed. The 
court process fonns part of the complex web of community life and what happens in Gacaca 
influences life in the community and vice versa. 
Consequently, the Gacaca process is more than a criminal law justice system 
prosecuting international crimes using domestic traditional justice courts; it also aims at 
reconciling the parties to the crimes as well as reconciling communities. At the centre of this 
process are confessions, which are expected to play two distinct roles: Confessions act as a 
plea bargaining process in which the accused confesses in exchange for reduced sentences; 
The second function of the confession is as a means to restorative justice, in which the 
elements of remorse, truth, and forgiveness play a vital role. The researcher in this chapter 
analyses the impact of the confession process on both justice and reconciliation. 
Ultimately, an understanding of the context in which the Gacaca courts operate is 
paramount in order to assess its practice both at the pre-trial investigation stage and the trial 
process. This is essential because Gacaca reflects community life in Rwanda and also has an 
impact on its people. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 181 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Section 1: Court observations of pre-trial investigations 
KABEZA SECTOR AND ITs REsIDENTS 
Kabeza Sector premises are about a five-minute walk from my family home. The 
residents of the area are typically representative of Rwandan towns. Although situated in 
Kigali city, about a 20 minutes drive from the city centre and a 10 minute drive from the 
international airport, you might have to wait on the side of the pot-holed road for up to 30 
minutes to flag a taxi into town. The usual practice is to get a lift from someone with a car, or 
one may resort to motorcycles and bicycles. Residents have electricity about three days in a 
week, and life in the area is generally vibrant with little shops, bars, and open markets with 
fresh food and fruit. The residents generally know eaeh other; while some may not know your 
name, usually they will know who your parents are, who you may be related to, and where 
exactly you live. 
On the Sector premises there is a huge tank from which all residents buy their fresh 
water. This is the most interesting part of the day for many housemaids and some 
housewives; a time to gossip and catch up on what is going on in the area. By about eight 
thirty in the morning, the water for the day has been fetched, and all the gossip of the Sector 
has been gathered and "distributed. , 603 
In addition to Gacaca duties, the Sector offices are used for other decentralised 
administrative functions, which may include judicial duties such as settlement of disputes 
within a Cell and Sector. These may include family wrangles, and minor civil or criminal 
matters. It is the first place you seek redress on any matter. At the back of the Sector offices 
is a semi-permanent structure where Gacaca court sessions are held. The building is roofed 
with iron sheets and has pillars on all sides. There are also benches that accommodate about 
603 There is also a big parking space at the front of the Sector offices where residents in the area park their cars 
at night if their homes have no gates. The sector is a fairly interactive place. 
S. BYkMUKAMA 182 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
200 people. The meetings are usually attended by an even larger number, who stand at the 
back, or alongside the pillars. The meetings of the Gacaca court of the Cell and Sector are 
held on the same premises but on separate days. 
Local Administration Roles 
Every group of 10 houses has a 'house head, ' also called nyumbakumi. 604 The 
nyumbakumi settles little disputes within these ten homes. He or she is the first person you go 
to if you want to sell or buy property in the area or get a national identity card. As described 
in chapter six, the nyumbakumi were trained by Cell coordinators to collect evidence related 
to the genocide in stages one and two. 605 They are equipped with stationary, such as ordinary 
exercise books, pens and a guidebook, which they use to gather evidence. 606 The nyumbakumi 
may choose to call a meeting or go door-to-door to collect evidence. Evidence may include 
confessions, along with other kinds of infori-nation, including hearsay. Hearsay evidence is 
recorded as such, and the author of it names the person he heard reveal such information, to 
identify the source of it and verify the said evidence. A witness may prefer to write their 
testimony or visit the nyumbakumi's residence to give his or her testimony. All the 
information given is written in the exercise books provided by the Sector administration. 
Kabeza cell, like many cells in towns across Rwanda, has many nyumbakumi due to 
the large population. In such cases, the nyumbakumi are divided into zones to make up the 
cell. Kabeza is divided into seven zones, and each zone has about 8-10 nyumbakumi. The 
head of each zone is elected by the nyumbakumi of the zone in question. 
Every Saturday afternoon at about two o'clock, all residents of Kabeza Cell meet at 
the Kabeza Sector premises. 607 The coordinator of the cell or Sector speaks about the 
604 Literal meaning "ten houses" 
605 See diagram 1, Chapter six 
606 See Appendix three for examples of lists filled. 
60' Additionally, the Gacaca court of the Cell convenes every Sunday at 2: 00pm to verify the information 
provided by the zones. This is called the verification phase and is conducted by Gacaca judges. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 183 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
importance of Gacaca and the benefit of confession. He notes that participation in Gacaca is 
the obligation of every Rwandan and reminds the residents of the contents of Article 29 that 
obliges people to participate in the process. In Kabeza, proceedings are sometimes attended 
by the Gacaca Coordinator of the district, who also attends other Gacaca courts in the area. If 
present, the Coordinator addresses the court on issues or problems that are prevailing at the 
time. These may include reports of intimidating witnesses, or "silence"-where members of 
the public are unwilling to testify, or when the community is expected to receive 
provisionally released prisoners. 
The participants then gather in groups according to their zones, each group headed by 
the zone head. Each nyumbakumi reads out the infon-nation they received from their member 
nyumbakumi, while the residents contribute, correct or object to the infonnation written. All 
the information given at these meetings is also in written form, and the persons who 
contribute are noted alongside the infonnation they provide. This is done chronologically, 
depending on the stage and the lists to be filled. The zone heads write the said inforniation in 
a zone register that combines all information from the nyumbakumi and subsequently hand it 
to the President of the Gacaca Court of the Cell . 
From the pre-trial investigations that I attended, it was diffieult to make out any 
particular problems. Only a few of those gathered contributed, while the others remained 
silent. The nyumbakumi asked what anyone knew about a victim's death and if no one said 
anything, the nyumbakumi asked about the next victim. This process went along without any 
608 The coordination of the activities of the different zones is done by a cell representative elected by the 
residents of the cell. The decentralised process has been changed. The smallest unit of administration is 
called an estate (umudugudu), an equivalent of a zone. Phone interview with Gacaca Judge, 27th November 
S. BYAMUKAMA 184 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
complications. However, away from the court, interviewees (particularly survivors) often 
mentioned that people knew more than they revealed at the pre-trial investigation. 
THE VERIFICATION/ VALIDATION PHASE: KABEZA COURT Room 
The residents of Kabeza Cell gather at the Gacaca premises before two o'clock. I 
would arrive at the premises early to secure one of the front seats. The first two columns in 
the two middle rows are reserved for alleged perpetrators. At the time of my court 
observations, alleged perpetrators had been provisionally released by the Presidential Order 
and were living in the community. They sat deep in conversation with each other in the front 
rows as we waited for the proceedings to start. Minutes before the session begins, volunteers 
(usually alleged perpetrators) help carry benches designed for the judges from the offices. 
Once the quorum of the General Assembly of at least 100 adults is achieved, and a quorum of 
at least seven judges is reached 610 , the 
judges emerge from the Sector offices and we all rise. 
The judges wear a sash in the colours of the Rwanda National Flag (blue, yellow, 
green) draped across their chests. While standing, the President of the court leads the General 
Assembly in the observance a moment of silence in memory of the victims of genocide. The 
President of the court motions everyone to be seated and routinely addresses the court on 
what is expected of the residents. He reminds the General Assembly that permission to speak 
in court is through the President and by show of hands. He also urges people to be honest and 
609 Arguably, pre-trial investigations vary from place to place because the genocide was perpetrated and 
administered in different ways. In Gisenyi and Bugesera, systematic killings of Tutsi were reported in 1991 
and intensified in 1992 and 1993. Genocide in Kigali targeted political leaders at the start of the genocide 
and because it is a cosmopolitan town, neighbours could not easily point out who the Tutsi were. As Bayizi 
explained, "In Kigali, people rent in town and you do not know them or their parents or their distant relatives 
because people migrate to work in Kigali" As such, the genocide was carried out by trained militia who did 
not necessarily live in the same places. The genocide in Cyangugu, Gikongoro and Kibuye, started two 
weeks after the plane crash. People were confused and Tutsis were told on radios to go to designated areas. 
In Gitarama and Butare, the genocide started in May because people here belonged to parties that opposed 
the MNRD and CDR parties that planned the genocide. The genocide was only possible when authority 
figures from Kigali came to encourage people to kill and only when militias were brought in from 
Gikongoro and Kigali. Interview with Bayizi, 6 th June 2006. 
610 Organic law 10/2007 reduced the quorum to five judges 
S. BYAMUKAMA 185 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
keep focused on the agenda of the day. The President also reminds the General Assembly that 
giving false evidence, withholding inforniation, threatening or causing chaos is a crime 
punishable under the law. 611 He then reiterates what is on the agenda of the day. 612 
This is followed by the Presidents' question whether there is anyone selling or buying 
property. 613 The seller and buyer of property (usually land or a house) come to the front of the 
General Assembly and present to the inyangamugayo any relevant documents on the property 
such as the land title. The President of the court then reads the said documents and asks if 
anybody knows the seller personally. 
The importance of the public discussion of the sale of property during Gacaca 
proceedings is illustrated through the following examples. On the 9th April 2006, the court 
heard a case in which an alleged perpetrator X "gave" land to another man Y as a "gift. " Y 
had helped X through a difficult time immediately after his release from prison. X gifted Ya 
plot of land as a sign of gratitude. Y in return brought and shared with X and his family 
611 Article 29 and 30 Organic Law 16/2004 
612 The Gacaca court of the cell meets: To confirm the accuracy of information collected by the nyumbakumi 
related to persons who lived in each cell between September 1990 and March 1994 and the list of people 
arrested as collaborators; to confirm accuracy of information in the activity book complied by the cell 
authorities and nyumbakumi regarding the list of ring leaders in the cell, the meetings to organise genocide 
and those who attended them, and the list of those who were supposed to be killed; to confirm information 
compiled by nyumbakumi and authorities of the cell related to the distribution of the deadly tools, the militia 
set up in the cell, roadblocks set up in the cell, and; to deliberate on confessions written by accused persons 
in each cell. The General Assembly deliberates on confessions and concurs or refuses confessions depending 
on the full disclosure stipulated in Article 54 of the Organic Law. Process of Collecting Information 
Required in the Gaeaca Courts, 9-13. Investigations are made into how the genocide was perpetrated and the 
effects it had on the cells. This is a particularly difficult task in some areas, depending on how the genocide 
was perpetrated. In Gishamvu, Nyakizu district, Butare in the Southern Province, there was a particular 
problem in identifying the victims and perpetrators since the victims had fled there from neighbouring 
Sectors of Butare and Gikongoro and the perpetrators had also come from surrounding areas. African Rights, 
Gacaca Justice, A shared Responsibility, 36. 
The General Assembly can meet to verify information collected by the nyumbakumi which although verified 
by the residents of the nyumbakumi is also verified by the cell as a whole. The information relates to the 
households that were attacked in the cell, where people took refuge in the cell, the survivors of genocide in 
every household in the cell, those who rescued the targeted victims in the cell. The President of the Gacaca 
court convenes the General Assembly of the cell residents to confirm and discuss contentious issues related 
to attacks on the cell, attacks directed else where by the cell residents, and notorious killers in the cell. 
Finally the General Assembly of the Gacaca courts convenes to discuss and confirm information already 
complied by the nyumbakumi related to the death of each victim on the cell. The information provided at the 
nyumbakumi is verified by members of the nyumbakumi and is read out at the General Assembly to be 
approved by the residents of the cell. 
613 Article 39(3), provides that the Gacaca court may take temporary protective measures against property of 
those accused of genocide crimes. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 186 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
traditional alcohol (urwagwa) as a seal of friendship and a sign of gratitude. In his defence, X 
said the land was not a sale, but a gift. The judge however held that X had no nght to sale, 
gift or loan property if he was suspected of genocide. The court further ordered that the 
parties negotiate between themselves the return of the traditional alcohol. 
In a separate case, on 28 th May 2006, a young girl A, appeared before Gacaca court of 
Kabeza Cell having sold property to a man B. She said her godmother, a nun who owned the 
property, was sick in Kibuye (Southern Province) and could not attend the court. She 
presented to court a power of attorney signed by the said nun allowing her to sell the 
property. The President of the court asked the General Assembly whether anyone knew the 
young girl or anything related to the said property. Woman C raised her hand, came to the 
front of the General Assembly and introduced herself. 
My name is Venancia, I live 200 metres from the said property in 
Zone M, nyumbakumi N. That plot of land was bought by A's mother 
in 1990 from a man who was killed in the genocide. We all worked in 
the Ministry of Local Government at the time and we were 
colleagues. A's mother participated in the genocide and is presently in 
Kimironko prison. 
Two other witnesses also took the floor to testify that they knew the property to belong to A's 
mother. As a result of these testimonies, the court said that it would further investigate the 
matter and held that if the allegations were to be found to be true, the sale would be 
nullified. 
After property matters are settled, the President asks the Secretary of the court to 
proceed with the programme and read to the General Assembly the lists on the agenda as 
dictated in the programme. These lists are read per item per zone. At the end of every list, the 
President asks the residents of the Cell or nyumbakumi to comment on the contents of the 
614 The sale of property is significant in Gacaca courts because, alleged perpetrators are expected to contribute 
to the compensation of victims. The law governing this is not yet in place in Gacaca. The researcher further 
does not extensively deal with compensation laws in this thesis. She recommends this as an area that needs 
further investigation. See Introduction and Conclusion of thesis. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 187 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
documents. Anyone wishing to remark on the document introduces themselves, giving their 
name, age and place of residence. The President reminds the speaker to confine their 
comments to the agenda of the day. Comments range from simple corrections, such as the 
misspelling of names, to more complex issues, for instance a testimony being misrepresented 
or missing. 
Generally speaking, according to my observations, some stages were more 
problematic than others, and evidence from some zones was more accurate than others. It 
became apparent in some cases that evidence had been altered or misrepresented during 
investigations. The nyumbakumi and zone leaders were called upon to clarify and give further 
particulars on some of the evidence they had collected. The nyumbakumi was occasionally 
called upon to explain or read the information that he had written. A resident might at this 
time object that her evidence was not cited or that the evidence he gave to the nyumbakumi 
was not properly read to the court. If the court is of the view that certain infort-nation was not 
written or that the residents are dissatisfied with what was said in court, the appropriate 
nyumbakumi may be advised to reinvestigate and rewrite the file and is given a day to present 
it. 615 The Secretary then reads back to the General Assembly all the corrections made, and all 
the comments made by those who spoke. The President asks those who spoke in the session 
to line up and sign or thumb print alongside their testimony. The same procedure is used 
when the Secretary goes on to read another list from a separate zone. After the list is read, the 
residents are called upon to comment. At sun-down (about 6 o'clock) the President reads out 
the agenda for the following week and the court session ends. We stand as the judges to leave 
the 'court room' and wait for next Sunday to discuss events that took place in another zone. 
615 In one of the Gacaca court sessions, the President noted that zones D and E were notorious for 
misrepresenting the evidence given by its residents. A committee was set up to investigate why such 
inconsistencies arose between what was written and what people said. The committee was also expected to 
recreate the proper lists conforming to the required regulations and consistent with evidence provided by the 
residents. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 188 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The aforementioned procedure is used to validate all information collected in stages 
one and two. After this phase, the judges meet to create files on every accused person and 
what they are accused of based on the evidence obtained from the validation of evidence 
phase. The judges draw a charge sheet for every accused person in the cell. This is followed 
by the categorisation of offences, also done by Gacaca judges behind closed doors. Files of 
accused persons placed in category one are sent to the Prosecutors Office, those of persons 
placed in category two are sent to the Gacaca court of the Sector while they retain accused 
persons files placed in category three. These files are kept in a cupboard for that specific 
purpose in the Sector office premises. 
The previously described investigative process details pre-trial practices in Gacaca 
courts. We see that the Gacaca is an interactive participatory process, involving all parties to 
the conflict to take an active role in the outcome of the proceedings. Interestingly, the 
nyumbakumi, who are at the bottom of the administration hierarchy, play a central role 
emphasising the need for the participation of all Rwandans. The pre-investigative phase 
provides insight into Rwandan society and the relationships between the parties to the 
conflict. Ultimately, the Gacaca process provides a forum of open debate where members of 
the public come together to debate issues relating to the evidence of Gacaca proceedings. We 
now turn to the actual trial process to better assess Gacaca in action. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 189 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Section 2: Gacaca in action, observing the trial process 
The Gacaca trial process has dual objectives, aiming at justice and reconciliation. It 
hopes to achieve both through expedient trials incorporating three main concepts: The 
categorisation of offences, the confession process, and the reduction of penalties. 616 The 
categorisation of offences ensures the relevant courts have jurisdiction to try the accused 
persons. Categonsation is carried out by the judges after the pre-trial investigation phase is 
complete. As elaborated in preceding chapters, one of the most important aspects of Gacaca 
is the confession or plea bargaining process where, in exchange for confessions accused 
persons receive reduced penalties. 
Because many perpetrators committed crimes against many individual victims, there 
is insufficient documentary evidence to prosecute persons within the jurisdiction of the 
courts. However, evidence is easily and quickly obtained when accused persons confess to 
the crimes they committed and provide evidence against their accomplices. Plea bargaining 
ensures swift trials and convictions consistent with the need to deal with the huge backlog of 
cases. However, as a criminal justice process, exclusive dependence on the confession 
process is insufficient. Additionally, the local population is called upon to testify and 
corroborate the confessions of the accused. As such, the trial process ostensibly involves the 
participation of all citizens. 
The Gacaca process also plays a reconciliatory role in which truth and forgiveness are 
important themes. As an institutional criminal justice process, the statutory nature of the 
Gacaca process is strained by the conflict between institutional and individual 
reconciliation. 617 As a statutory requirement (institutional), reconciliation is expected to take 
place (or at least to pave the way for such an eventuality) when an accused person publicly 
confesses his crimes and makes a public apology in exchange for a lighter sentence. 
616 See Chapter five. 
617 See Section three, Chapter seven 
S. BYAMUKAMA 190 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
However, reconciliation between two parties, particularly where forgiveness is 
involved, is highly personal. Although the literature suggests that reconciliation is not 
personal, it acknowledges that forgiveness is. ForgivenesS618 -generally meaning the 
cessation of anger and resentment against another for an offense-is a significant aspect of 
reconciliation, and as such cannot be divorced from it. The empirical data suggests that 
people who genuinely reconciled were those who not only confessed to genocide in Gacaca 
courts, but also made an effort outside of the Gacaca process to ask their victims for 
forgiveness. Indeed, one can argue that a perpetrator's willingness to confess cannot 
necessarily be interpreted as a willingness to reconcile with his victims. Nevertheless, it can 
be argued that remorse is an important ingredient which survivors depend on to reconcile 
with their perpetrators. 619 
To understand the nature of confession in Gacaca, it is important first to understand 
confession in the context of traditional law practices; what it is expected to achieve, how it is 
expected to achieve the stated objective, how it is carried out, 620 how it is interpreted by 
parties to it, and why alleged perpetrators choose to confess or not. The confession process 
does not operate in a vacuum. Parties with an interest in the process are members of the same 
society and have a stake in the everyday running of the society. They are bound to be 
influenced by social factors in the community in which they belong. 621 
Detertnining whether Gacaca, as a form of transitional justice, meets its objectives can 
only be achieved by means of empirical study. The purpose of my data is to test attitudes and 
feelings of people towards the process rather than to quantify it. In the course of my research, 
618 The idea of forgiveness is philosophically complex and beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, while 
forgiveness may be given without any expectation of compensation, at times, the perpetrator might need to 
ask for forgiveness, and/or offer to make restitution, so that the survivor can assess that the request is 
genuine and the offender feels remorse. Remorse and restitution will be explored ftirther in the chapter. 619 
Section three below 
Chapter six 
Chapter seven below 
S. BYAMUKAMA 191 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the key themes that emerged involved justice and reconciliation. How these can be achieved 
has been an ongoing debate at the core of criminal justice systems, particularly retributive 
and restorative justice. As noted, all societies emerging from conflicts, particularly on the 
scale of genocide, need to reconcile but reconciliation also involves justice, truth, forgiveness 
and remorse. The Gacaca process hopes to incorporate these themes through confessions. 
Confessions on their own are problematic if viewed through the lenses of restorative 
and retributive justice. Through the restorative justice lens, confessions represent recognition 
and acknowledgment of the hann caused, a genuine desire to reconcile and ask for 
622 forgiveness, remorse and truth . 
As an incentive or reward, the accused is given a reduced 
sentence. 623 Through the retributive lens, confessions may represent a compromise of fair 
trial; the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty; the right not to incriminate 
oneself, and the right to defence counsel of one's choosing. When one confesses of his or her 
own free will, the action represents a willingness to cooperate with the court thereby not 
wasting the courts' time. As a reward, the sentence is reduced-a response that may in itself 
be a breach of retributive justice. 
Debates and disagreements on the Gacaca process are inevitable because scholarly 
perception is infon-ned by the lens a researcher uses. Likewise, during the course of my 
research, it was clear that some accused persons saw the confession process as a plea 
bargaining tool to secure a reduced sentence. However, as the evidence will show, survivors 
of genocide seem to use the restorative lens in examining the confession process. 
Considering these duelling perspectives, I believe it best to hear from the people directly 
affected by Gacaca and the genocide to better understand their perceptions and ultimately 
gauge Gacaca's fitness for purpose. 
622 See Chapter 4 and Chapter 7 Section 3 
623 Chapter four and six 
S. BYAMUKAMA 192 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
As elaborated in chapter two, I observed court proceedings and carried out interviews 
with different sectors of the Rwandan community. As a result of my research, several 
concepts emerged to form the thematic basis for this chapter. These include reconciliation 
and justice as manifested through confessions. Themes such as truth, forgiveness and remorse 
also emerge. Ultimately, the success of the Gacaca process can be evaluated through its 
perception among alleged perpetrators, survivors, the general public, Government officials 
and judges. 
The themes discussed in this chapter are interrelated and although an attempt is made 
to discuss them separately, the nature of the research is such that it is impossible to place 
them in "neat" boxes, so that one theme does not overflow into another. For example, it is 
impossible to discuss justice and accountability in the context of Gacaca confessions without 
analysing its impact on reconciliation. Likewise, discussing Gacaca confessions would be 
impossible without considering truth, remorse and forgiveness. The perceptions of the people 
interviewed reveals that these themes all interact to provide an understanding of the bigger 
picture of reconciliation which the Gacaca process hopes to achieve. Lcderach, quoting a 
biblical text (Psalms 85: 10) explains the interrelationship between these themes in an attempt 
to define reconciliation, "Truth and mercy have met together, justice and peace have 
kissed. , 624 
TIMETABLE FOR TRIALS 
As part of my research, I attended trials in Nyarugunga (appeal cases), Busanza, 
Kabeza in Kigali and Nyamasheke, Muhari, Nyakanyinya in the Western Province. Prior to 
the beginning of nationwide trials, the National Service of Gacaca Courts drew up a timetable 
in trying genocide cases. Trials were to proceed in the following manner: Accused persons 
624 Chapter four 
S. BYAMUKAMA 193 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
who confessed to genocide but who had been conditionally released were tried first, followed 
by accused prisoners who confessed to genocide; accused persons who confessed but were 
never detained; accused persons suffering from chronic diseases; accused persons who were 
14 to 18 years of age at the time of the genocide; accused persons suspected of genocide aged 
70 years and over; accused persons who have not confessed and are in prison, and; accused 
persons who had not confessed but who were never imprisoned. 625 At the beginning of every 
month the President of each Court convenes a coordination committee meeting to agree and 
draw a timetable for cases to be heard in the month. 
The fact that accused persons who had confessed to genocide were to be tried first 
accelerated the number of confessions, particularly those by prison inmates, but also raised 
the question on the presumption of innocence of those who do not confess. They inevitably 
have to wait for a much longer period to be tried. Because the Gacaca process is also based 
on reconciliation, alleged perpetrators who confess are tried first as an incentive to reconcile. 
However, confession serves a purely practical reason as well, since non-contested trials 
generally take a shorter time to be completed. 
THE TRIAL PROCESS 
I attended a court session in Muhari Sector, Rusizi district in which the accused, a 54 
year-old local fanner, who had been incarcerated at Cyangugu prison since 1995, was 
charged with genocide. 626 The President of the court read the charges against the accused and 
asked him to plead. The charges included killing seven people, belonging to a group of killers 
that killed a family of 10 near Kamembe airport, as well as arson and looting of property. The 
accused had on 25 th of June 2005 and on 3 Oth January 2006 written confessions admitting to 
looting and destroying property. The secretary of the court read both confession statements to 
625 Speech by the Executive Secretary of the Gacaca Courts on the Eve of the Gacaca Courts Trials, 14th July 
Court Session, Muhari Sector, 29th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 194 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
the public after which the accused was asked to explain the charges against him. The accused 
admitted to looting hens, a mattress, and destroying a house together with others. The 
accused said that he (and others) was forced by uniformed soldiers to destroy a house. He 
admitted to taking two iron sheets and a window and named 10 accomplices. He also 
admitted joining another group of killers who destroyed a house but said he had only taken a 
mattress from that house. 
Upon cross examination by the judges, the accused also admitted to taking a boy who 
had escaped from the house to the airstrip while the rest of his family was killed. The 
president asked him why he had taken the boy to the airstnp when the boy might have had a 
chance to escape. The accused said that a soldier had seen the boy running and forced him to 
chase after the boy and then take him to the airstrip. The accused also said he did not know 
why he was asked to take the boy to the particular location. The accused then offered an 
apology to the Government of Rwanda, the community that was affected by these crimes, and 
the victims involved. 
Witnesses were called on both sides and those in attendance were asked to contribute 
by way of questions or by submitting any other information they might have in relation to the 
case. The court was generally quiet save for two survivors and one accused who had already 
confessed as an accomplice to the said crime. Although the survivors did not appear to have 
witnessed the said crimes, they both pointed out and named accused persons who had 
confessed to the same crimes and implicated the accused on their dossiers. 
After a lengthy cross-examination by the judges and after all the evidence had been 
considered, it emerged that the accused had in fact attended meetings on the day when the 
said crimes occurred. The accused, along with 10 others, went to the home of the victims, 
killed everyone and burned down the house. The accused took the young boy to the airstrip to 
join the rest of the victims where vehicles carried them to the stadium where they were killed. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 195 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The accused was also part of a group of murderers that killed Tutsi in the stadium. 
Overwhelming evidence pointed to the fact that the accused was personally responsible for 
the death of at least nine people. Although the accused admitted to joining the said groups, he 
denied killing anybody. On closer examination, it was apparent that the accused had named 
10 accomplices, all of whom were either dead or in exile. Although the accused was 
registered as a person who had confessed, this example shows how difficult it is to get to the 
truth by relying solely on the confessions of the accused. 
While there is no legal representation in Gacaca, in the course of trial the accused has 
a right to personally defend him or herself and call witnesses. Confessions are corroborated 
by eyewitness accounts of those who were present at the time of the commission of the crime, 
either as bystanders or accomplices to the crime. Hearsay evidence is admissible in as far as it 
can be corroborated or proved to be true. The Gacaca process however faces a major 
problem: Many people are unwilling to testify against an accused person. 627 
In accordance with Article 54, the court rejected the aforementioned accused's 
confession and recommended that he be tried in accordance to Article 65 of Organic law 
16/2004 as someone who had refused to confess. I later visited the accused in prison after his 
trial and he said he would fully confess the next time he went to court. He said that he was a 
peasant fanner who cannot read and write and he found it difficult to express himself and 
present his case properly to the court. 
I also attended another trial in Kabeza-Kigali 628 ; Bayingana was a 55 year-old fonner 
office messenger, who was imprisoned in 1994 and provisionally released in 2005. 
Bayingana's confession had also been rejected by the court. He said, I confessed to 
Discussed below 
628 Kabeza Sector, Kigali, 15/7/2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 196 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
everything ... the problem is someone accused me of a 
fresh charge I didn't know. , 629 
Explaining the 'fresh' charges, Bayingana said, "He accused me of shooting his family, 
which I denied ... 
I explained that his family was 'taken' by other soldiers I didn't 
Another woman accused me of killing a woman and throwing her in a pit latrine I 
confessed to a murder (different from the one in question) and admitted throwing her in a pit 
latrine... she must be confused... I denied it as Well.,, 630 
Bayingana was part of the list of prisoners who had confessed and had been 
provisionally released. He is now an example of once fteed inmates who found themselves 
back in prison after their tnal. Explaining his charges and confession, Bayingana said, 
I was ordered to shoot a man who ran out of a car. They searched him 
and found that he had sugar and ordered me to shoot him which I 
Soldiers shot someone and we went to see who it was ... they 
(soldiers) told me to remove his shoes so that they can check in the 
stockings ... the problem is, 
I took the shoes and I have confessed to 
this crime. 631 
Reflecting on his trial, he said "You think what you confessed to on your dossier is 
the only crime known ... you are surprised that people 
know more at your trial ... and they 
accuse you 'falsely'... that is the main problem. " About the confession process, Bayingana 
commented, "They Oudges) ask you who you committed the crime with and sometimes you 
don't know. That in itself is a crime. Sometimes you cannot remember because it is over 12 
years since the genocide. " It is noteworthy that when an accused person is found guilty of 
crimes he had not previously confessed to, he often faces a custodial sentence, thereby 
contributing to prison overcrowding. The Director of Cyangugu prison noted in an interview, 
"The Gacaca objective of reducing the overwhelming number of prisoners is almost 
629 Interview Kabeza- Kigali, 16 1h July 2008 
630 Ibid 
63 ' The Gacaca courts of the cell had placed the accused in Category one on account of "dehumanising a dead 
body" as stipulated in Article 51 (removing shoes from a dead body) but the decision was overturned by the 
sector. See chapter 6. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 197 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
impossible to accomplish, as most released prisoners are soon brought back after their 
"632 trial . 
In a significant number of the court sessions I attended, the accused only confessed to 
less incriminating crimes and rarely implicated anyone of significance, carefully naming 
people that are in exile or have already died. Even when the court had established that the 
accused committed an act causing death of a victim, the accused might admit to conspiracy 
(i. e. taking a child to a particular location) but not murder. This shows, at least in part, the 
lack of remorse and the unwillingness of accused persons to take responsibility for their 
crimes, making reconciliation between the parties even more difficult. 
Gacaca courts also rely on the confessions of accused persons to cross-examine the 
accused. While the contributions of the attendants in the courtroom are vital to the 
proceedings, it was obvious that the majority of those who were enthusiastic about 
contributing to the process were survivors of genocide. Because most of these individuals did 
not appear to have first-hand information, their contributions were limited to hearsay 
evidence and references to confessions already made. A survivor might ask the judges to 
consider a case in which the accused was implicated in a particular crime by another accused 
person whose case was already completed. Such person may be called to testify against the 
accused or to provide better particulars on the crime in question. 
If a few people in a group confess to all the crimes they stand accused of and name 
their accomplices, this evidence is subsequently used in the cross-examination of those who 
have not fully confessed, or those who deny committing crimes. The evidence that was 
collected in the investigation stage is also used during tnal. It is difficult to fully deny a crime 
when accomplices implicate the accused time and time again. An interviewee in Cyangugu 
said, "I did not confess to those crimes because I thought my brother would not testify 
632 Interview 30/06/2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 198 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
against me when he confessed. I did not think he would mention my name, now that he has, I 
,, 633 have to confess and ask for forgiveness. Accordingly, some alleged perpetrators are 
forced to confess to genocide crimes because overwhelming evidence implicates them in 
crimes. However, in cases where there is little evidence, an accused person may risk pleading 
not guilty to the crime in question. 634 
Despite the inherent problems with confessions outlined above, I do not suggest that 
the Gacaca process does not uncover the truth. Gacaca trials comprise the confession of the 
accused, his or her defence, as well as evidence from defence and prosecution witnesses, 
contributions of the general public, and the cross-examination by the judges. During this 
process, it is likely that a large part of 'the truth' of a particular situation or event will be 
revealed. 
DENYING GENOCIDE CRIMES 
Only four of the 28 alleged perpetrators I interviewed completely denied any 
involvement in the genocide. 635 The majority of cases I attended resulted in the accused 
admitting to some crimes and denying the rest. Only seven of the 28 alleged perpetrators 
interviewed said that they confessed to all the crimes they were accused of in their dossiers. 
Seventeen of the 28 (60%) alleged perpetrators interviewed said that they admitted to some of 
the crimes they had been accused of but denied others. It is difficult to determine how many 
innocent individuals pleaded guilty and how many of those were guilty, but pleaded not 
guilty. 636 What was made clear, from both my court observations and from interviews with 
alleged perpetrators, fully 85% of the accused admitted to belonging to a killing group. 
633 Karamagye, Interview 15/6/2006, Nyakanyinya Court 
634 Discussed below. 
635 These included two men and the only two women alleged perpetrators (prisoners in Kimironko) interviewed. 
There were only six women prisoners in Cyangugu prison of the 3,401 alleged perpetrators, all of which 
declined to be interview. 
636 See Chapter four. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 199 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
However, only three of these admitted in their interviews to having killed people without 
justifying their crimes. Others, for example, while admitting to having caused death, 
suggested that "it was an accident. " Another admitted responsibility for the deaths of three 
children when he got them from their hiding place and took them to a designated area, but 
claimed he did not know that the children would be killed. 637 
There were a number of cases in which the accused denied a particular crime 
regardless of the mounting evidence. The accused person's denials would visibly anger the 
survivors in attendance. Those who denied full responsibility attributed the accusations to 
long-standing quarrels between the alleged perpetrator and his or her accusers. In two Gacaca 
proceedings that I attended, the accused denied responsibility and suggested that the accusers 
used to live in their houses and would prefer the owners of the houses to stay in prison while 
they lived in their houses rent-free. 638 Others referred to family disagreements that existed 
before the genocide. In cases where the accused completely denied participating in a crime, 
citing a family disagreement or a long-standing enmity between parties was the most 
common defence. 
The following case illustrates the difficulties faced by courts to secure evidence as 
well as the limitations of court action. The courts can only convict where there is clear and 
sufficient evidence against the accused. For example, in Nyarugunga Court of Appeal, a 
certain defendant was accused of genocide, torture, arson and looting. He was accused of 
using his minivan to transport killers to different sites. The accused pleaded not guilty to all 
the charges against him and instead alleged that a group of killers came to his house and 
threatened him, tortured him and took his property. Although he admitted to employing a 
637 Interview Cyangugu Prison, I Oth and 30th June 2006. This case will be referred to again later in the chapter. 
638 In the aftermath of the genocide, the majority of survivors' houses were destroyed and many of the 
perpetrators fled in exile, leaving their houses vacant. Survivors of genocide, as well as returnees from exile, 
occupied these houses until about 1997 when the Government intervened suggesting that people should be 
returned to their property. Although this matter may have been resolved, alleged perpetrators still cited this 
as a reason why somebody accused him or her. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 200 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
driver, he denied his vehicle was used for any criminal acts during the genocide. In his 
defence, the accused said that his driver was not a member of any killing group and that he 
did not send him to commit any criminal acts using the said vehicle. The court found him not 
guilty on this count. 
The defendant also claimed that he was tortured by a killing group during the 
genocide. When asked why he was tortured when he was a Hutu, the accused said that his 
father had changed the family's ethnicity in 1960 after their house was burned down in 1959. 
The family decided to change ethnicity so that the children could attend school. The 
defendant said that two people in the killing group knew of his family history and decided to 
torture him. In his defence, the accused claimed that the plaintiff, was a long-standing enemy 
even before the genocide. The defendant claimed that she was accusing him of crimes out of 
jealousy. The accused said that, prior to the genocide, he and the plaintiff had neighbouring 
shops and competed for clients. He also claimed that the people who had taken over his house 
while he was in prison were good ftiends of the plaintiff and this was another reason why she 
wanted to see him prosecuted. 
Although six prosecution witnesses were noted in the accused's dossier, only one was 
alive. The one prosecution witness said that the accused was in a killing group and that he 
was seen pushing his car together with a killing group when it had got stuck, indicating that 
he was actively involved with killing groups. The witness said that she had not personally 
seen the accused, but she was told that this was the case by someone else (Stella). Since 
Stella could not be reached to verify the said information, the witnesses' claims were rejected 
by the court. Subsequently, the court held that the accused could not be held accountable for 
crimes where there was insufficient evidence to prove his guilt. In cases where the only 
available evidence is non-corroborated hearsay, the court has no alternative but to find an 
accused not guilty. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 201 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
This case also shows the challenges that survivors face to prove their cases. First, their 
claims are likely to be hearsay evidence, as the majority of them were hiding and have no 
eyewitness account of the crimes they allege took place. Secondly, the people that gave the 
survivors this information are unwilling to testify, either due to fear of intimidation or to 
protect their own interests. 
Gacaca is a criminal trial process that carries penalties, and as such, incites those 
against whom the evidence is weak to deny any involvement. This, of course, does little to 
facilitate reconciliation. Nevertheless, the very fact that an accused person is actually tried for 
crimes he is alleged to have committed is a stepping-stone towards reconciliation. At the very 
least, there is a functioning process that attempts to seek and reveal the truth, while giving 
people the right to participate in an open forum. 
CONFESSING TO GENOCIDE CRIMES 
Gacaca is part of a restorative justice system in which perpetrators are not only made 
accountable for their crimes through punishment, but they must also publicly acknowledge 
the harni they have done. Restorative justice has an edge over retributive justice in that it 
encourages the accused to 'make right' their actions by recognising the hann caused to their 
VietiMS. 
639 Truth and justice are important and inseparable ingredients for reconciliation. The 
fact that the accused has been tried and that he detailed his crimes, however gruesome, has a 
positive consequence for both justice and reconciliation. The truth allows survivors to know 
how their loved ones died and tells them where their bodies were dumped, which means that 
they can receive a decent burial. The survivor also gets to know how their loved ones died 
and who was responsible for their deaths. This brings closure to the long quest for the truth 
and addresses their suspicions about who was responsible. When a person has been publicly 
639 See literature in Chapter four. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 202 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
tried and has publicly apologised for the crimes he or she committed, the truth is also a step 
towards reconciliation. A public trial held in the community in which the parties to the 
conflict live allows for a public acknowledgement of the pain of the victims. 
However, requiring any criminal justice system, including Gacaca, to engage in dual 
functions of prosecution and reconciliation can be difficult. This is because the survivors 
require the accused to be honest and truthful, as well as remorseful for their actions. As a 
result of these expectations, survivors are regularly disappointed, frustrated, if not outright 
angered by the nature Gacaca trials. As a criminal justice system, the court is concerned 
about the facts and evidence on which they can convict or acquit an accused, and are less 
concerned about the sentiments attached to the process. Consequently, survivors often find 
that the trials do not meet their desires and needs. One survivor said that she no longer 
attends Gacaca court sessions because of the gruesome details an accused person once gave 
in court, citing in detail how he killed her brother. She explained, 
Before the genocide, I had a family ... 
it is all finished ... you 
look for 
salt or 500 frw [50 pence] and no one can give it to you because now 
you have no family ... on top of that you go to 
Gacaca and someone in 
the name of confessing ... saying of your 
loved one... 'l hit him with a 
machete on his neck, he failed to die so I hit him with ubuhiri 640 and 
he fell down'... am I supposed to listen to that to reconcile ... 
? 641 
The survivor felt that the accused had deliberately been insensitive to her feelings in making 
his confession. She felt that although he had told the truth, the manner in which it was told 
was cynical, detached and insensitive. 
Genuine confessions 
There are times when an accused person will freely confess to all the crimes he 
committed, while naming accomplices and also apologising. More often than not, these 
individuals will be on friendly terms with survivors, will visit them and are respected by 
640 One of the tools used to kill in the genocide; a stick with a base studded with nails 
641 Interview, Mururu Sector, 1/07/2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 203 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
them. At the outset of my field study in Kabeza-Kigali, in a meeting with a few residents, I 
explained the objectives of my study and who I was interested in interviewing. One survivor 
immediately recommended a perpetrator who she thought would provide me with a 'good' 
interview. She described him as a 'decent person' even though he had participated in killing 
people in her community. Describing another alleged perpetrator who had confessed in his 
village, a survivor said "Even if they killed, at least they tell us what happened and implicate 
,, 642 
others ... we are all sinners... 
Most perpetrators who had confessed to all they knew had 
spent time in prison and were now either provisionally released or still in custody. 643 By the 
time of their trials, the majority had served more than half their custodial sentences. They 
obviously had more to gain than lose since their confessions would ensure that they did not 
return to prison, whereas if a person who had never been imprisoned confessed to genocide 
they would most certainly serve a custodial sentence. 644 
SILENCE IN THE COURT 
It is well documented that the genocide in Rwanda took place openly; the actions of 
the killers were in no way covert. While part of the population went into hiding, the rest were 
free to carry out their daily activities. Evidence also suggests that the majority of the 
population witnessed the deaths of their Tutsi counterparts. Considering Rwandan society, 
this is not particularly surprising. For example, in towns and villages alike, when an incident 
642 Interview, Mururu sector 1/07/2006 
643 Of the seven perpetrators I interviewed who said they confessed to all the crimes on their dossiers, four were 
provisionally released and three were still in custody. Five of these belonged to category two and two were 
in category one; one, former mayor and one farmer (accused of rape).. The accused denied the charge of rape 
but admits to a number of other hideous crimes. He also implicates more than 50 people in his dossier for 
genocide crimes. The third prisoner was being tried at the time of his interview. Court found him not guilty 
of counts placing him in category two, but found him guilty of looting and of selling stolen goods. He was 
released after his trial. Only one of the seven alleged perpetrators lived in Kigali; the rest were from 
Cyangugu. Also only one of the four released prisoners had been tried and had served his full sentence. One 
of the four was tried after my interview and was sentenced to 27 years. He had accused about 87 people of 
genocide involvement. Although he demonstrated that there was a possibility of reconciliation between 
perpetrators and their victims, the fact that he was given 27 years imprisonment and immediately re- 
incarcerated, indicates that the judges sometimes do not welcome 'genuine' confessions, particularly those 
that implicate large numbers of people. 
644 See Section three. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 204 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
takes place, such as an accident, a wedding, or even a bitter argument between two 
individuals, people quickly gather to catch a glimpse of what is happening and discuss what 
they think of a particular situation. The event of genocide was no different for most of the 
Hutu population. On rare occasions when a member of the general public gave an account of 
a crime, they provided so much detail that the account could only have come from an 
eyewitness. For instance, a young woman in Rusizi district in an interview said, "When the 
Tutsi were being killed, we all ran to see... we all know what happened, people keep quiet, 
,, 645 but we all know. However, when it comes to testifying in Gacaca court, almost no one 
will dare say anything that might incriminate another. 646 Even if somebody did not witness 
the death of someone, he or she will almost certainly have heard about a victims' fate over 
the years. Since victims were part of Rwandan society, their deaths were obviously noticed 
by fonner colleagues, ftiends, neighbours and even relatives. To cite personal experience, I 
lived in Rwanda from about 1995 onward and prior to Gacaca I often heard people freely 
speak about the genocide. Some of the people I knew had been told how their relatives were 
killed and who was responsible from fhends who witnessed the deaths or had heard about 
them. The events of the genocide are told in virtually every household and the details of who 
did what are well-known. 
For example, on the 13 th of January 2008, during a visit to relatives, a cousin of mine 
narrated in detail how she and her sister had survived and how her two brothers and parents 
had died during the genocide. One of her brothers had been taken by the interahamwe 647 fToM 
a church where they were hiding together. She also told me how her other brother and her 
parents had died. It was clear that over the years, she had investigated and discovered what 
happened to her loved ones. She said that she was lueky to have ffiends who told her what 
Interview, Rusizi District, Kamembe, I 9th June 2006 
See below. 
647 Killing groups, literally meaning "those who come together" 
S. BYAMUKAMA 205 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
happened before the Gacaca process started. Those responsible for the deaths of her family 
remained at large and had not yet been tried. She seemed resigned about not getting justice. 
Once, she had approached one of the women who had given her the details of the crimes and 
asked her to testify in Gacaca. The woman had politely declined to testify explaining that her 
two sons were suspected of genocide. She feared that if she implicated anyone in the 
community, her sons would not be "spared. " My cousin said that she understood her ffiend's 
point of view and said that her only hope for Gacaca justice was if a perpetrator were to 
confess and implicate someone in the deaths of her family members. 
It would be na1ve to expect that Gacaca and the confession process have no direct 
bearing on every day life in the communities. Arguably, everyone who participates in the 
Gacaca process has something to gain. The majority of alleged perpetrators will be eager to 
confess to get out of prison. Alleged perpetrators already living in communities will do 
anything necessary to avoid custodial sentences. Survivors want knowledge and closure. 
However, the general population stay silent if they feel that their testimony will impaet them 
negatively. As a result, accusations and testimonies are almost exclusively made by the 
survivors. 
The Gacaca process emphasises the importance of truth so that justice and 
reconciliation can take place. Article 29 of Organic law 16/2004 stipulates that all Rwandans 
have a duty to testify in Gacaca courts and anyone who omits or refuses to testify can incur a 
prison sentence ranging from three to six months. In case of a repeated offence, a person can 
receive between six months to one year imprisonment. When potential witnesses refuse to 
testify to what they saw, it hampers the flow of evidence. This prolongs Gacaca 
investigations and trials. 648 When accused persons and witnesses refuse to testify, accusers 
(usually survivors) are left with insufficient inforination on which the court can build their 
648 See generally Chapter five. Also see wxk-w. inkiko-gacaca. gov. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 206 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
accusations. When one section of the population is eager to know the truth and those that 
know what happened are eager to hide it, the population is divided into accusers and accused. 
Survivors of genocide want to know what happened to their loved ones but they do 
not possess sufficient evidence to ensure the prosecution of those they accuse. Those who 
hold such evidence withhold it for one reason or another. 649 The few that disclose such 
information face consequences ranging from alienation in the community to death threats and 
even death. Of the seven perpetrators who claimed that they confessed to all their crimes, 
three of these claimed they had been subject to some form of intimidation or alienation. Not 
surprising, these three interviewees each implicated more than 30 people in their dossiers. In 
fact, all the alleged perpetrators I interviewed suggested that they had either been subject to 
some forrn of intimidation, or feared to be intimidated or alienated, while some cited 
examples of people who had suffered as a result of their confession or testimonies, implying 
in part, that 'they got what they deserved. ' Prisoners, particularly, expressed concern about 
the safely of their family members who are not protected by the "safeguards" of prison. 
Threats and intimidation do little to foster reconciliation and instead increase 
suspicions and tension in the communities. Suspicion and distrust mount out of lack of 
knowledge regarding who did what, who knows what, who saw what, who is hiding what 
infonnation and for what purpose, as well as who accuses who and who threatens who. 
THE ROLE OF THE PUBLIC IN THE GACACA PROCESS 
Arguably, obtaining evidence of crimes that were witnessed by so many people 
should be relatively easy. That Gacaca justice is administered in a less legally complex 
manner, in accessible language ought to have helped matters further. Since judges are part of 
the community and the courts are located in the communities where atrocities occurred, 
649 Discussed below 
S. BYAMUKAMA 207 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
widespread participation should have been ensured. Surely, after such horrible crimes were 
committed in their communities by people known to them, all residents ought to have been 
interested in broad communal goals such as justice and reconciliation. 
Indeed, it was thought that communities would take the opportunity to collectively 
move forward to a brighter future with Gacaca. 650 In fact, during my interviews, both alleged 
perpetrators and survivors of genocide agreed that there is need for a conflict-free Rwanda 
and for building a brighter future for the next generation. 65 1 However, the reality is that 
people engage in the Gacaca process only insofar as it benefits them. Admittedly, those who 
died were family members of survivors who are much loved and missed. But those who 
committed the crimes are also sons, daughters, husbands, wives, and friends of people in the 
same communities. People naturally want to protect their family members, especially if such 
people have never been imprisoned; they would most certainly receive a custodial sentence if 
convicted. Even when members of the public have previously helped a survivor understand 
what happened to their loved ones, they will generally decline to testify. 
Interestingly, there are exceptions to this rule. For example, one of the female Sector 
Appeal judges I interviewed in Nyarugunga. accused two of her brothers of genocide crimes 
and gave a detailed account of all the activities that they carried out during the genocide. 
There are also a number of other reported cases where members of the public have testified 
against their family members and ffiends. 
Generally speaking, in the course of a trial, the majority of the general public will 
listen silently to the proceedings while the defendant and the plaintiff(s) battle it out in front 
650 See chapter four, 'Literature on restorative justice and reconciliation' 
651 "Confessing to genocide has been of no benefit to me personally, who is in category one. But it will be a 
benefit for future generations and the country as a whole. I have no problem with being in prison because I 
committed a crime. I am 45 years and will be given a minimum of 25 years. Of what use will I be at 70 to 
society or to myself? They give more appropriate punishment is Arusha. If you cooperate with the court 
they give you lighter punishments. What is the difference for me between 25years and life? I may be dead 
before then. " Interview with a perpetrator in Cyangugu prison, I oth June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 208 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
of the judges. The President of the court will usually threaten the public with Article 29 of 
Organic law 2004 which obliges people with relevant infonnation to speak or face a custodial 
sentence of up to six months. Only then will people finally speak. Even then, their 
contributions are not particularly useful to the proceedings. In some instances, a member of 
the public might say, "I knew the accused and we grew up together, I saw him in 1993 when 
we shared beer in the pub but I next saw him after the genocide, " or "I was very sick during 
the genocide and I did not see anything during that time. " For example, a member of the 
public who was supposedly present when an accused person destroyed his neighbour's house 
said, "I know the accused, but during the genocide, I stayed at my house because I didn't 
want to see the bad things that were taking place during that mad period. " Another said, "I 
know the accused to be of good character and from what I remember, he conducted himself 
well during the genocide. " 
Survivors will often show frustration in such cases. They note that the individuals 
had previously told them what happened, but at Gacaca, all of a sudden everyone seems to 
have mysteriously been absent or indisposed when the cnmes were committed. From my 
observation, there are a number of reasons that explain this behaviour, including concern over 
loss of community, the wide scale of involvement, family ties and fear of intimidation. 
Loss of community 
During a Gacaca session in Nyarugunga in which two prisoners were on trial, I sat 
next to a woman of about 55 years. When the judges adjourned to deliberate the first case, the 
woman turned and told me her dilemma. She said that during the genocide, she was not 
'hunted', 652 and as sueh she was able to see what happened. She said that she had testified 
against some accused persons during the pre-investigation phase and at their trials. She also 
told me how she and her sons had saved a number of Tutsi girls during the genocide who are 
652 Because ethnic identities have been 'outlawed', one may explain her identity by her experience in the 
genocide. A Hutu will therefore say that "I was not hunted" while the Tutsi will say "I was hunted" 
S. BYAMUKAMA 209 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
still alive. However, she said that ever since she testified, she had been isolated from her 
community and she no longer has any friends. She appeared to be genuinely distressed. In 
situations like this, the survivors usually embrace such a person, but this did not seem to be 
the case here. One of the judges noticed I had spoken with this woman and after the court 
session asked me what we were discussing. I repeated our conversation to the judge, who 
seemed to know her well. He said that they were neighbours, and confirmed that she had 
testified against some members of the community and was indeed isolated ever since. Why 
else would she choose to sit with the researchers instead of joining her friends? 
What the woman did not tell me, and that I subsequently learned, was that her sons 
had repeatedly raped the Tutsi girls they had saved during the genocide with her knowledge. 
She had also enslaved the girls through hard labour and inhumane treatment. 653 Moreover, 
her sons were suspected of other genocide crimes. Although she had saved their lives, the 
girls had testified to the crimes committed against them, marking the woman as somewhat 
guilty in the minds of survivors. Her sons were particularly upset when the entire village 
decided to reveal every detail of their crimes as a unified act of revenge against the family. In 
this exceptional case, there was no silence in court for the sons' mines. She had broken the 
unwritten code; "scratch my back and I will scratch yours. " As a result, she was ostracised 
from the entire community. 
Large-scale involvement 
The Rwandan genocide was carried out on a large scale in view of everyone in the 
community and a large percentage of the population participated in the genocide in some 
way. If a person did not kill, they looted, destroyed property or pointed out where Tutsis were 
hiding. In an interview with a perpetrator who had confessed to genocide, he said, 
653 Although the woman was not charged with the said crimes, she was still viewed by the community as a 
person of "bad conduct. " Her sons were never imprisoned but were charged with the said crimes. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 210 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Once you say anything or volunteer to give information about a 
particular crime committed, the judges ask you more questions and 
you may end up implicating yourself This happened in Mururu 
Sector. This is because in one way or another, most people 
participated in the genocide and were part of a killing group. 654 
Reflecting on the great number of people that participated in the genocide, the perpetrator 
said, "The Hutus who opposed the killings were themselves hunted down, including those 
who attempted to hide the Tutsi ... 
from a child as little as 10 years, most people participated 
in these killings"655 He also said, 
The Hutus in my village who refused to participate were beaten and 
were sometimes killed ... 
Some were forced to participate and we have 
given their names in Gacaca courts ... 
In my sector, only one person 
was forced to participate in the genocide. He was actually never 
imprisoned and will also not face trial because where his killing group 
had gone to kill, another group had gotten there before them and 
killed the people. 656 
The scale of involvement was perhaps best noted by another perpetrator I spoke to 
subsequent to his trial. He suggested that the genocide was carried out by so many people, 
most witnesses could also be accused of some crime or another. He explained that when a 
person accused someone else of genocide, the accused might admit to the crime but would 
then accuse the person making the allegation of conspiracy to commit the said crime. The 
Gacaca court then places that person on a list, opens a dossier and sends it off for further 
investigation. This perpetrator seemed confident that while no evidence would be found for 
the particular crime he was accused of, evidence of other crimes were bound to be 
discovered. He suggested that people generally do not get involved with Gacaca for fear of 
their crimes being discovered. 657 Nsengimana, a former mayor in Cyangugu prison who 
654 Interview 27 lh June 2006 in Cyangugu Rusizi District 
651 Ibid. 
656 Ibid. 
657 Interview, Kabeza, 16/06/2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 211 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
confessed to genocide echoed this view saying, "Many people fear to be incriminated because 
genocide was committed on a very high scale. 11658 
Family ties 
As stated earlier, it is only in exceptional circumstances that an accused person will 
accuse a member of their own family or friend of crimes of genocide. Rwandans, like many 
Afficans, are part of very large, extended families and it is only in rare circumstances that a 
Hutu will have had no member of their immediate or extended family who participated in the 
genocide. Likewise, it is very rare to find a complete Tutsi family that lived in Rwanda 
during the genocide with no immediate or extended family members who died as a result of 
the genocide. As the evidence shows and most perpetrators support, the genocide was carried 
out on an enonnous scale. Only a fraction of those responsible were imprisoned and a large 
number of perpetrators live in the community. To testify against an accused person is to 
invite people to testify against you or members of your own family. Consequently, it is not in 
the interest of such people to testify against their compatriots. 
Intimidation 
The other reason for public silence at Gacaca trials is fear of intimidation. There are 
far-reaching consequences when a member of the general public confesses to genocide 
crimes. This was substantiated in an interview I had with a 65 year-old woman, whose 
husband has been in prison since 1998. The interviewee said that her husband is innocent and 
so did not confess to crimes he did not commit. She qualifies this by stating that they saved 
some Tutsi who are still alive. Nevertheless, the woman testified in court against her 
neighbour, which resulted in a number of unpleasant repercussions. 
There is a man who died in my village and the neighbours had 
decided not to reveal his death. I saw him killed and told the court 
where he was buried and mentioned the people I saw kill him. One of 
Interview loth June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 212 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
them has never been imprisoned ... 
he destroyed my roof.. they still 
throw stones on my house... his wife beat me in March 2005 and told 
me to move from the village... they said what do you want with that 
nyenzi (cockroach)659 ... and 
I said that he was a human being. 660 
In my interview with Bayingana, a self-admitted perpetrator, he said that he "was not 
particularly happy with members of the public who 'report' others. " He said that people who 
testify against members of their community are intimidated and sometimes must flee their 
homes until the government intervenes. In the area where he lives, two residents fled and 
only returned two months after Government officials intervened. He said, "If they plant their 
crops, they are uprooted, if you are cooking outside and go into the house, you come back 
and find sand in your food ... you 
fear because you realise the enemy is near ... so you shut up 
in the next Gacaca. , 661 
As stated previously, the general public's lack of testimony against accused persons 
delays Gacaca trials, does little for the reconciliation process, and divides communities. 
Survivors of genocide believe that the general public sides with the accused perpetrators and 
the desire to prosecute is left up to the survivors. Where a society is divided, reconciliation 
becomes difficult to achieve. Arguably, the need for justice and reconciliation in its widest 
sense does not take priority over a witness' right to protect his life, especially if protection is 
neither guaranteed by the state or the community in which he or she lives. A person will 
likely shy away from participating in the Gacaca process if it does not directly benefit them, 
especially when a person is threatened with isolation or where such acts are seen as a betrayal 
of your own rather than as a heroic act. 
Although witness protection programmes have improved over the years, they remain 
insufficient. Even if such programmes were sufficient, ensuring the protection of vulnerable 
659 Tutsi 
Interview 29h May 2006 Nyarugunga- Kigali 
Interview 17 th July 2007 
S. BYAMUKAMA 213 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
witnesses is challenging. It is common to find alleged perpetrators, survivors of genocide and 
potential witnesses all in the same family; identifying who needs protection may be difficult. 
For example, in October 2007, a woman was raped and killed in Rusizi district when her 
Hutu husband testified against his brothers for participating in the genocide. 662 On 31" 
August 2007, a principal witness for the prosecution was killed by her own son when she 
testified against him and her in-laws for their involvement in the genocide. 663 On many 
occasions, IBUKA, the umbrella organisation that advocates for the interests of survivors has 
reported that more should be done by the government to protect witnesses. If the Gacaca 
process is to achieve any justice and any forin of reconciliation, witness protection must be 
prioritised. 
THE ROLE OF THE ACCUSED 
Perpetrators can be grouped into different types. There are those who confessed to 
genocide crimes and were provisionally released by Presidential Decrees. There are those 
who confessed but are still in pnson awaiting trial. There are also alleged perpetrators in 
prison who have never confessed, usually persons classified in category one. There are 
perpetrators who confessed to genocide but have never been imprisoned, and there are those 
who deny any involvement in the genocide who freely live in the community. 
The National Office of Gacaca Courts indicates that in Rusizi district where I carried 
out part of my empirical data collection, there are 982 perpetrators that are imprisoned and 
2,437 living at large in the community. In Nyamasheke, the National Office of Gacaca Courts 
662'Genocide witnesses being killed, " Available at: littp: //news. bbc. co. uk., "I/hi/world/africa,, "3324871. stm 
(Accessed 24th July 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 214 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
recorded that there were 300 alleged perpetrators that were under arrest, but that 2,502 were 
still living in the community. 664 
Due to the small sample of alleged and convicted perpetrators that I interviewed, I do 
not distinguish between the different types of perpetrators. According to my data, of the 24 
interviewed alleged perpetrators who stated that they had eonfessed, only seven had 
confessed to all the crimes on their dossiers. Some of the 24 claimed that while they pleaded 
not guilty to some of the crimes they were charged with, they also confessed to some crimes 
that were not in their dossiers. Of the alleged perpetrators I interviewed, 14 percent (four) 
denied any involvement in the genocide. Needless to say, it is difficult to determine those 
who plead guilty when they are in fact innocent, and those who plead not guilty when they 
are guilty of crimes. 665 Two thirds, or 60 percent of the alleged perpetrators I interviewed 
admitted to lesser crimes and denied the more serious charges brought against them. My 
assessment is that it is strictly a function of the courts to identify the guilty and innocent. 
As evidenced by a number of court sessions I attended, while the accused may have 
been provisionally released as a result of their confessions, the courts regularly found them 
guilty of other crimes they had not confessed to. The motivations for alleged perpetrators to 
confess to only part of the crimes committed and the motivation for others to deny 
involvement will be discussed later in this chapter. Nevertheless, goven-tment statistics show 
that since the Gacaca process began, the number of confessions has increased 
tremendously. 666 The empirical data suggests that alleged perpetrators confess to genocide 
due to three main reasons: Remorse; religion or the desire to make amends with God; and, to 
benefit from reduced sentences. 
664 www. inkiko-Gacaca. Lyov. rw (Accessed 12'h August 2008). It was difficult to access information on how 
many people live in each of these communities and how many of people lived there at the time of the 
genocide to calculate the percentage of alleged perpetrators per community. 
665 Chapter four. 
666 Available at: www. inkiko-gacaca.. gov. rw (Accessed 201h July 2008). See Chapter six 
S. BYAMUKAMA 215 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Alleged perpetrators and the general public are the two groups that usually provide 
eyewitness accounts of the genocide. During the genocide, the majority of the general public 
either ran to see how the killers killed and tortured their victims, at times looted victims' 
homes, or pointed out where a Tutsi was hiding to a killing group. A few saved potential 
victims from death while others were simply bystanders. For the most part, killings were 
carried out by groups of two to 50 people, usually in broad daylight. 
That said, participation of residents in Gacaca depends in part, on how the genocide 
was perpetrated in a specific region. There are thousands of genocide victims who were killed 
in churches, stadiums and schools. In Nyange Parish in Kibuye, for example, approximately 
3,500 people were killed by a relatively small number of militias who locked them up in a 
church and then killed them using grenades, bombs, or earth moving vehicles. In Bisesero, 
Murambi and Izansonga in Butare, where there was some resistance from survivors, the local 
interahamwe (militia) were overpowered and a larger enforcement was sent in from 
neighbouring provinces such as Bugarama in Cyangugu. As a result, the identity of the 
perpetrators who killed these victims was difficult to determine in court. The only available 
evidence came from a few prisoners in Cyangugu who admit to being part of the groups that 
killed these victims. Even then, they do not personally know their victims. The interviewee, a 
researcher with African Rights, said that the Bisesero region in particular has the most 
heightened tension between survivors living on these hills and their Hutu neighbours. 
Because no details have come out of Gacaca, survivors remain suspicious of their neighbours 
almost indiscriminately. 667 
Without some form of accountability, tensions remain high with survivors suspecting 
the whole community of genocide involvement. This shows that where Gacaca courts 
function 'normally' such tensions are reduced tremendously. It also underlines the 
667 Interview, I 11h June 2006 Cyangugu Rusizi District 
S. BYAMUKAMA 216 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
importance of truth and accountability for reconciliation to take place in any given 
community. 
Reduced sentences 
All the alleged perpetrators interviewed were imprisoned between 1996 and 1999. If 
their confessions were accepted by the courts, they were immediately released, while those 
who have never been imprisoned and who are found guilty risk custodial sentences. As 
explored in chapter six, all those who pleaded guilty said that they did so, in part, to receive a 
reduced sentence. However, some noted that factors such as religion and remorse played a 
part in their decision to confess. Some individuals said that these factors actually influenced 
their decision more than the promise of a reduced sentence. 
Nonetheless, all the accused welcomed the idea of reduced sentences in exchange for 
their confessions. JTI, a 35 year-old perpetrator who confessed in 1996 and was now free 
said, 
I read the law in its entirety and realised it was beneficial to 
confess ... the 
law is clear, if you confess, you get reduced 
sentences ... there were no charges against me, 
but I knew what I had 
... I went 
in ibitero (killing groups) and I had a gun ... I 
feared 
that if I didn't say anything, evidence of my crime would come out 
and I would be in bigger trouble for not helping the courts. 668 
Nsabimana, a freed perpetrator who was imprisoned in 1996 explained why he confessed so 
late (June 2005), 
People who confessed to genocide were not released 
immediately 
... there was no clear advantage of confessing ... 
confessed because the benefits of confession have become obvious. I 
confessed in June 2005 and was released in August the same year. It 
was not much of a wait. This definitely encouraged people to confess. 
Another perpetrator, Bayingana who was also provisionally released said after his trial 
669 Interview 9'h June 2006 Cyangugu Rusizi District 
S. BYAMUKAMA 217 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
I realised that because of the confession process, the truth would be 
known sometime anyway, so I decided to confess early and benefit 
from it. I also had the opportunity to be tried early, because the 
Gacaca process starts with those who confessed. 669 
The promise of reduced sentences in cnminal proceedings is a strong incentive for accused 
persons to confess. In so doing, important evidence is attained and trials are much shorter. 
However, many survivors of genocide suggest that those who confessed before Gacaca began 
were more genuine than those who confessed after the Gacaca process was underway because 
their confessions were not part of a plea bargaining process. Instead, the perpetrator had 
recognised the hann they caused and expressed a willingness to disclose the truth and 
reconcile. Conversely, it can be argued that confessions, whether as a result of incentives of 
reduced sentences or any other reason, makes way, at least in part, for reconciliation. As 
noted previously, suspicions occur and persist where there is no knowledge or truth of past 
events, or accounting for previous actions. 
Role of Religion 
In Rwanda, over 93 percent of the population claim to be practicing Christians. 670 The 
role of religion and religious institutions in society can neither be ignored nor underplayed. 
The Gacaca manual guidelines note that, prior to the commencement of Gacaca trials, 
religious leaders were given special authority to visit prisons and teach/preach about the 
benefit of confessions. 671 In fact, 29 percent of alleged perpetrators who confessed to 
genocide suggested that they confessed, in part, to make peace with God. Philip, an alleged 
perpetrator serving a 20-year sentence in Cyangugu prison explains, 
16 th July 2007, Kabeza- Kigali 
670 According to a government report dating to November 2006,56.5% of the population is Roman Catholic, 
26% is Protestant, 11.1% Seventh-day Adventist, 4.6% Muslim, 1.7 % claims no religious affiliation, and 
0.1 % practice traditional indigenous beliefs. 2007 Report on International Religious Freedom-Rwanda, US 
Department of State. Available at: http: //www. state. gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2007/ (Accessed 2d May 2008) The 
report suggested that the percentage of Roman Catholic adherents has gone down over the years, partly due 
to the increase in popularity in less traditional religions such as the Seventh Day Adventists. 
671 Collecting of Information in the Gacaca Process, 4 
S. BYAMUKAMA 218 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
I felt the need to confess because I felt guilty. We are very prayerful. I 
got saved and God [touched my heart] ... 
if I die today, I want to have 
told the truth and at least be at peace with God ... 
I confessed even 
672 before the Gacaca process started . 
The only benefit with confession 
is to make peace with God ... when you confess, you are at peace with 
yourself and God. Before I confessed, I used to be so scared, but 
when I confessed, I pray and feel that God is listening to me. If you 
meet people that you wronged, you don't have to hide from them ... 
confessed before the priest and felt peace with myself and it was time 
to make peace with the state ... so 
I told the truth to the court. 673 
Another example, Suzimana, was a primary school teacher prior to the genocide. As 
an educated man, he was considered to be of relatively high status in society and in prison. 
He said, "I was an official prior to the genocide, educated and had refused to confess. But 
since I knew the Lord, and was head of the choir, my conscience was not clear. You can lie to 
man but can't lie to God. 
i674 
One of my main contacts in Cyangugu was a perpetrator who had confessed, served 
his sentence and had moved back into the community. He underscored the importance of 
religious beliefs when he said, "It is not necessarily relevant that a survivor forgives you. 
1675 Your duty is to ask for forgiveness, because then you would have made peace with God . 
One can argue that making amends with God and adhering to religious practice allows 
perpetrators to ask for forgiveness and confess, and that such confessions allow for 
reconciliation. However, not all survivors are convinced. Regarding perpetrators' 
confessions as a way of making peace with God, Twagira a survivor of genocide said, "We 
can't see God so I think God forgives you only if man has forgiven you. They don't ask us to 
forgive them ... no one 
has never asked me to forgive them. 676 
672 Most alleged perpetrators who confessed before the Gacaca process started stress this. This supposedly 
indicates that the accused is particularly remorseful as he or she did not expect a sentence reduction. They 
stated that making peace with God was their priority. However, the 1996 Law also provided for reduced 
sentences. 
673 Interviewed on the I Oth and on 30t" June 2006 
674 Interview 10/06/2006 in Cyangugu 
675 Interview 9h June 2006 in Cyangugu 
676 Interview Cyangugu 24 th June 2008 
S. BYAMUKAMA 219 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
That religious beliefs play a central role in communities and indeed in the 
reconciliation process is undeniable. This is true for both survivors and perpetrators alike. 
Nevertheless, survivors and perpetrators seem to express their religious convictions 
differently. A survivor in Cyangugu told me "There are prayers called remezo where they 
ask survivors to forgive. We are ready to forgive. Who am I going to forgive? Am I supposed 
to forgive air, or someone who has asked for it? If I say that in public, they say I am not a 
Christian. But I still cannot forgive someone who has not asked me to forgive them. It is not 
possible. , 677 
Remorse 
Approximately 80 percent of the alleged perpetrators interviewed said they confessed 
because they were remorseful for the crimes they had committed. However sincere their 
expressions of remorse, their confessions did not necessarily include all the crimes they were 
accused of For example, Mark wrote two letters when he was in prison, confessing to 
looting property and destroying a house. He apologised for the crimes in the letters and again 
at his trial. However, the court found him guilty of crimes he had not confessed to such as 
murder. Another perpetrator, Philip was accused of causing the deaths of three children, his 
sister in-law, as well as a neighbour. He said that he regretted his crimes in relation to the 
three children, but denied the other crimes. "I take responsibility for removing people from 
where they hid to where they asked us to take them. Children and women will report what 
they saw in Gacaca. I did not know that the children were going to be killed. 15678 
Seven of the alleged perpetrators I interviewed said that they confessed to all the 
crimes they committed, whether or not these crimes were on their dossiers, because they were 
truly remorseful. Four of these also stated that they had asked for the forgiveness of their 
677 Inter-view I" July 2006 
678 Interview I Oth June and 3 Oth June 2006. By indicating that children and women will report what they saw, 
indicates that the alleged perpetrator confessed in part because he feared that he would be implicated for the 
crimes committed by witnesses of his crimes. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 220 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
victims in private, even when three of these had been released but not tried. These 
perpetrators usually have good relationships with survivors of genocide and, more often than 
not, are very active in providing evidence in courts. 
IMPACT OF CONFESSIONS ON GACACA COURT PROCEEDINGS 
The genocide was carried out by groups who interacted, 'hunted, ' and committed 
crimes together. Perpetrators who confess to genocide and name accomplices help build a 
chain of evidence. When an accused person chooses to confess and name accomplices, these 
accomplices may also eventually name other accomplices. When a perpetrator gives full 
details of a crime, the evidence from that case is used again when trying the named 
collaborators. As noted, some perpetrators will only confess to crimes when and if the courts 
have sufficient evidence against them. For example, when members of a particular killing 
group confess to crimes committed by it, and name accomplices at their trials, such 
accomplices will generally admit to the crimes already on file. If a perpetrator believes that 
some of the crimes he committed remain unknown, especially crimes that were committed 
alone, usually, he will not confess. Nor will a perpetrator confess to crimes committed with 
others where evidence is in the hands of trusted relatives, friends and neighbours. 
In Nyakanyinya Sector court, Western Province, I observed an accused prisoner plead 
not guilty to belonging to any killing group, and not guilty for the death of two victims of 
genocide. However, the accused admitted to selling looted iron sheets which he said he was 
willing to pay back. Once the Secretary of the court read a detailed confession from his 
brother-in-law, he immediately acknowledged belonging to a killing group and apologised for 
lying to the court, but he still denied ever killing anyone. In a later interview, the accused said 
that he had changed his plea because the evidence given by his brother in-law was 
Section three 
S. BYAMUKAMA 221 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
compelling and that the President of the court had said that this was his first and last chance 
to confess. 
Although the actions of the accused during court proceedings may indicate lack of 
remorse on his part, Gacaca is a trial process and, as such, he who alleges must prove. In the 
absence of sufficient evidence upon which to prosecute the accused, a defendant may risk a 
680 full trial in the hope that the crimes in question will not be proved . 
Because Gacaca trials in Rwanda aim at both justice and reconciliation, and indeed 
were created to hasten trials, it is considered essential that the accused confess to genocide so 
as not to waste the courts time. However, the accused must also be remorseful for the crimes 
committed. This is why Gacaca legislation requires that the accused not only confesses to the 
cnmes committed, but also offer a public apology for these crimes. As elaborated in section 
three, reconciliation between perpetrators and survivors of genocide typically takes place 
where the accused confesses to genocide crimes and asks for forgiveness of the survivors 
outside the confines of Gacaca courts. 
IMPACT OF THE CONFESSION PROCESS ON THE ACCUSED AND THEIR 
COMMUNITIES 
Perpetrators acknowledge the challenges associated with making full confessions, 
even within the realm of their own experiences. For instance, Masamba confessed to 
genocide and implicated 87 people, including four judges, but only five of those were ever 
imprisoned. All the survivors in this area suggested that the provisional release of Masamba 
and his accomplices were beneficial to the Gacaca courts because the released prisoners were 
so willing to provide relevant evidence to help the court process. Thus, it came as a shock 
then to hear that Masamba, who to the satisfaction of many survivors had been remorseful, 
680 Chapter four 
S. BYAMUKAMA 222 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
truthful and had successfully reintegrated into the community was imprisoned for 27 years 
after his trial. 
I had first visited and interviewed Masamba at his residence in Mururu. He seemed 
eager to get on with his life with his young wife who was about eight months pregnant. When 
I later visited him in prison after his trial, he explained that certain villagers provided an alibi 
for him, suggesting that his confessions were untrue. He says there is compelling evidence 
that suggests that he perpetrated the crimes he is accused of. Moreover, he stated that his 
biggest problem is that he confessed to every one of his crimes. In so doing, he implicated 
four judges who were removed from the bench and a cabinet minister, whom he accused of 
supplying killers with weapons and food supplies. He also implicated a large number of 
accused persons. According to Masamba, "Judges only want us to mention the dead or exiled 
perpetrators, if someone does that they get less sentences. Fabian only mentioned the dead 
and exiled and got 13 years while I got 27 ... 
We were tried on the same day. , 681 
I interviewed the Director of prisons who said that Masamba's case needed further 
investigation. He said that he suspected some malpractice and had contacted the people 
responsible to investigate the matter further. Although Masamba had been accused of grave 
crimes, the fact that he had confessed in accordance with Article 54 should have ensured him 
a lesser sentence. 
This case arguably shows the consequences of a confession where an accused's 
confessions implicates a substantial number of persons in the community, including judges. 
Although a number of judges have been removed from the bench on suspicion of genocide 
involvement, this case suggests that there could be some malpractice involved in the process. 
Where malpractice is suspected, immediate investigations take place as was in the case 
above. As explained earlier, Rwanda's citizens are all part of a complex web of 
Masudi interview, 27 th July 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 223 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
interrelationships and extended families and this most certainly includes Gacaca judges. In 
trying to lessen the possibility of partiality, Gacaca laws stipulate that a judge must stand 
down where a relative, friend, or enemy is on trial. Furthermore, at the start of the trial, the 
accused, plaintiff and general public are given an opportunity to request the removal of any 
member of the bench, if they have cause to believe that such person will not be impartial in 
the case. Nonetheless, Masamba's case shows that the system is imperfect and there are 
potential malpractices. 
There are other reasons why perpetrators fear to confess, or choose to only partially 
confess, including: Concerns that their confessions will be unden-nined; Shame due to the 
personal nature of the crimes; Concern that their crime would be placed in a more serious 
category; Desire to protect family members from prosecution; Fear over loss of personal 
relationships; Reflexive obedience to people with status, and; The chasm between rich and 
poor. 
Undermining confessions 
Of the perpetrators I interviewed who had confessed to genocide crimes, 13 suggested 
that they feared that those they implicated in their confessions would subsequently accuse 
them of other crimes they had not committed. Where an accused is thought to have only 
partially confessed, they may risk heavier sentences. Of the accused I interviewed, twenty 
percent of these expressed particular fear that their cases would be jeopardised as a result of 
their confessions. 
Prior to his trial, Masamba was concerned about the outcome of his trial and said, 
"They have threatened to accuse me of crimes I did not commit when my trial starts. I have 
already confessed, so if someone accuses me of crimes I did not commit, the court may 
S. BYAMUKAMA 224 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
consider me as not fully confessed. 11682 Similarly, Philip, a perpetrator serving time in 
Cyangugu prison said, 
Those we implicate at our trials hate us even more than the 
survivors ... they 
implicate us in their trials after we have confessed. If 
the court rejects your confession, then you get a heavier sentence. 
They accuse you of crimes you did not commit well knowing that you 
will not admit them. 683 
Another released prisoner said, "People fear revenge ... 
because there is no physical evidence 
to genocide and most of the evidence is hearsay evidence, if one testifies against a person, 
that person will admit responsibility but implicate you in that case for revenge ... people 
would rather keep quiet. , 684 
Although these fears seemed real to the people I interviewed, in practice, Gacaca 
judges usually thoroughly investigate and verify all accusations. From my observations of 
Gacaca courts, accused persons' confessions, witness statements and any other contributions 
made to Gacaca proceedings are subject to cross-examination, not only by the judges, but 
also by members present. Repeatedly, individuals who had been tried said how much they 
feared that their colleagues would bring false accusations against them, but their trial 
experiences proved otherwise. In three interviews conducted after the accused were tried, the 
interviewees said that they were surprised by the efficient way their cases were handled by 
the Gacaca courts. Bayingana noted that he was pleased that witnesses were cross-examined 
and their accusations verified. 
Personal nature of the crime 
The abhorrent nature of certain crimes and the relationships between the parties 
involved also make people unwilling to confess to some of the enmes. There is sufficient 
Interview Cyangugu- Rusizi District, loth June 2006 and 
30th June 2006 
Interview Kigali, 16th July 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 225 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
evidence to suggest that many perpetrators and victims were known to one another. 685 They 
were colleagues, neighbours, and some were even from the same families. Perpetrators who 
killed members of their own families find it particularly hard to confess to such crimes. In the 
course of the 1994 Rwanda genocide husbands killed wives, sons killed mothers and in at 
least one instance a mother was 'forced' to kill her own children. 686 
Consider for example, Philip who was imprisoned in February 1995, confessed to 
genocide cnmes in 1998, was tried in 2000 and sentenced to 20 years imprisonment. He was 
charged with the deaths of three children, the death of his daughter in-law 687 , and of 
neighbour and long-standing ftiend. Philip denies responsibility for the death of his daughter- 
in-law and of his neighbour, but admits responsibility for the children. "I take responsibility 
I did not 
know that the children were going to be killed. , 688 When I asked why a perpetrator would not 
provide a full confession when the advantages of confessing are so clear, he said that some 
genocide crimes are too embarrassing to confess to. 689 Acknowledging this sense of shame, 
Jean, a survivor of genocide, said that some prisoners are "too embarrassed to come back to 
their communities because of the grave crimes they committed. Some people killed their own 
relatives, how do you admit to that? , 690 
Arguably some crimes are so heinous that perpetrators feel they cannot confess to 
them. Nsabimana a released prisoner said, "The crime of genocide is sometimes too grave to 
confess to. Some people are embarrassed by what they did in the genocide. It is hard to 
685 There are also documented instances of extreme sexual torture during the genocide; here again, the victims 
frequently knew the perpetrators. 
686 African Rights, Confessing to Genocide, Responses to Rwanda's Genocide Law (Kigali: African Rights, 
2000) 
687 This shows proximity of the victims and their perpetrators. Reconciliation is therefore not necessary between 
two distinct groups of people but within their family and their immediate neighbours and friends. 
"88 Interview I Oh June 2006 and 30'h June 2006 689 
690 Interview Cyangugu- Rusizi District 16 th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 226 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
imagine that a person would be forgiven for the crime of genocide. Some people did such 
grave crimes that they would rather remain in prison, they feel more at peace in prison. , 
Re-categorisation of crimes 
In determining the jurisdiction of the courts, accused persons are placed in categories 
depending on the gravity of their offence. Those who planned and instigated the genocide 
and those who committed 'grave' crimes, such as rape, are placed in category one and 
therefore are tried by the ordinary court system, while individuals placed in categories two 
and three are under the jurisdiction of Gacaca courts. 692 The majority of alleged perpetrators I 
interviewed preferred prosecution by the Gacaca court system to ordinary court trials, and 
had admitted to crimes that were classified within the jurisdiction of Gacaca courts. Of the 28 
alleged perpetrators interviewed, three were placed in category one. Two of these were 
former mayors, and were placed in the category by virtue of their leadership position. 
693 A 
local fanner had also been placed in category one because he was accused of rape. 694 Two 
other interviewees had been tried through the ordinary courts because their cases were 
processed prior to the start of Gacaca courts. 695 In addition, two other interviewees, who had 
been initially placed in category one, saw their cases shifted to category two during trial. 696 
691 Interview Cyangugu- Rusizi District 16 th 15 th June 2006 
692 Chapter six 
693 Both interviewees indicated that they preferred the Gacaca system or to be prosecuted by the ICTR because 
of the possibility of reduced sentences. One of the Mayors said, "I am 45 years and will be given a minimum 
of 25 years, of what use will I be at 70 to society or to myself. They give more appropriate punishment is 
Arusha. If you cooperate with the court they give you lighter punishments, what is the difference for me 
between 25 and life. I may be dead before then. " Interview, Cyangugu Prison, I oth June 2006 
694 Although the accused admits to belonging to a number of killing groups, and to killing a large number of 
people, he denies raping two women. Also significant is that he implicates about 50 people of genocide on 
his dossier. Interview Cyangugu prison 23d June and 30th June 2006. 
695 JTI said that although he had served his full sentence, he would have received a lighter sentence under 
Gacaca courts. Interview 9th June 2006. Although had been tried by the ordinary courts and was defended by 
ASF counsel, Philip believed that he would have received a much lighter sentence under Gacaca law. "I 
think I should have got half in the old law or at least one quarter of that sentence in the new law. I have 
already spent II years. I think I should be out of here. In fact I would rather go through the Gacaca court. " 
Interview 10'h June 2006 
696 Court determined in one case that utterances made by the accused in a meeting did not amount to inciting 
genocide, a category one crime. Trial in Muhari-Rusizi Western Province, 29th June 2006. In the second case 
where the accused removed shoes from a dead body, court determined that this did not amount to 
dehumanising a dead body in accordance with Gacaca legislation. Trial in Kabeza-Kigali, 15 th July 2006. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 227 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
At all the trials I attended, every person who was accused of rape, or for inciting 
genocide, or of being a leader in a killing group, denied the charges. They would, for 
example, admit to being at a road block or attending a meeting, but rarely would anyone 
admit to calling the meeting, chairing it, or heading the road block. Admission of such crimes 
would mean that the accused's case would be shifted out of the jurisdiction of Gacaca and 
they would be prosecuted through the ordinary courts. As Philip said, 
It is difficult to confess to rape which is placed in the first category 
and the Gacaca process has no Jurisdiction over such 
cases ... sometimes it 
is important to know what category a defendant 
,, 697 
is placed in before they confess so that they know how to confess. 
Philip's comment illustrates how an accused individual will strategise and 'plan' his or her 
confession to secure the best outcome possible. 
Reluctance of ordinary court trials is partly due to the complexity and the legalistic 
nature of such procedures, and because the sentences these courts mete out are often higher 
than those given through Gacaca. Although the death penalty no longer exists in Rwanda, 
accused persons can be sentenced to life imprisonment, whereas the maximum penalty a 
Gacaca court can hand down is 30 years for accused persons who do not confess. As noted 
earlier, sentences are typically much lower for individuals whose confessions are accepted by 
the Gacaca court. 
At times, the accused may choose to confess to charges that initially appear to be 
against their self-interest. In the course of my interviews, certain perpetrators and victims 
said that when a person is charged with murder and looting or destroying property, he might 
restrict his confession to the murder charges. In these circumstances, accused individuals 
have less difficulty standing trial for murder than meeting their obligation to pay back the 
stolen property. One of the survivors confinned this, saying perpetrators "Prefer to confess to 
Both the accused indicated that they were happy about the change in category, and to be tried by the Gacaca 
courts. 
Interview Cyangugu Prison, I Oth June and 
30th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 228 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
murder than looting ... you are required to pay 
back the property... you can't pay back a 
person but you can pay back property. Of the 40 confessions heard in Nyakanyinya court, 
only three confessed to offences related to property. , 
698 Another survivor said "Accused 
persons would rather admit to murder but not looting, destroying houses or arson because 
, 699 they cannot afford to pay back . 
Although the crime of murder is given higher sentences than those involving looting 
or theft, the obligation of the accused to pay back property is sometimes difficult due to 
poverty levels. The majority of alleged perpetrators are poor citizens and have no property or 
any income, a factor that is further exacerbated by the long sentences they have so far served 
in custody. Considering that most individuals accused of looting are also accused of murder, 
admitting to a murder charge, particularly for prisoners who have already served half of the 
would-be sentence, is more appealing than being obliged to pay back property as well as 
having to serve a custodial sentence. 700 
Desire to shield family and community from prosecution 
As noted earlier, vast numbers of Rwandan citizens participated in the genocide. 
Once Gacaca was established, perpetrators feared that if they confessed to genocide crimes 
and revealed their accomplices, these individuals would seek revenge by exposing unrevealed 
cnmes committed by members of their family. JTI said, "You do not want to report a large 
number of persons who participated in the genocide so that they also do not report your 
698 1 attended the trial of Felix in Nyakanyinya, where he confessed to selling property, but says he bought them 
from other people whose names he provided. Court held that the mentioned people should pay back the 
property, and that he be released. 
699 Jean Damascene Interview Cyangugu 20th June 2006 
MO For example, on the 15 th of May 2008, a 90 year old woman was killed by a gang of criminals, four of whom 
had previously confessed to their involvement in the genocide. The elderly woman was killed because she 
tried to demand compensation for her damaged property during the genocide. Although cases related to 
property seem straight forward and although an accused person may not face charges related to property in 
Gacaca where an amicable agreement has been reached, paying pack such property is difficult considering 
that the majority of these alleged perpetrators are themselves very poor. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 229 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
,, 701 family members. This worry was echoed by an alleged perpetrator in Cyangugu who 
maintained his innocence and refused to confess to genocide. He said, "People hide for each 
, 702 
other ... 
if you testify against some people, you will also be revealed... 
Mahoro, an alleged perpetrator, suggested that this concern extends to family 
members and other members of the community outside prison. 
If you confess, you say the whole truth and all people you 
participated in the crime with. These could include people not in 
prison who may sometimes be members of families in prison. 
Prisoners tell their relatives when they come to visit that such a 
person has implicated so and so. The relationship between our 
families outside prison is tense and the relationship in prison becomes 
a difficult one. 
Convicted perpetrator Suzimana indicated that this tension was so intense that, in prison, 
,, 704 
inmates who confessed were separated from those who have not. Philip underlined the 
antagonism saying, "When you confess you get enemies"705 Kalisa, one of two mayors who 
confessed to genocide, acknowledged, "It is a lot easier to confess in prison because there is 
security ... 
but you have to think of your family on the outside. 706 
Loss of relationships 
Needless to say, relations between those who confess and the individuals he or she 
may have implicated are often strained. People who are accused must make a choice; either 
they make full confession, indicating when, where, how and with whom a crime was 
committed, which would lead to loss of confidence and friendship with family and former 
friends, or they only will confess to crimes that will not jeopardise their relationships. 
Nearly all "confessed" perpetrators face this dilemma. Speaking of his personal 
experiences after his confession, Masamba said, "If I confess, I implicate my father, mother, 
701 Interview Cyangugu gth June 2006 
702 Interview Cyangugu Prison, I Ot" June 2006 
703 Interview Cyangugu 13 th June 2006 
704 Interview Cyangugu 13th June 2006 
705 Interview Cyangugu Prison 10th June 2006 and 30th June 2006 
706 Interview I Oth June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 230 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
,, 707 brothers, sisters ... 
I don't fear implicating anyone as long as I participated with them. JTI 
buoyed his decision to confess through a Kinyarwanda proverb, "If you hide a witch, he can 
kill your infants. 1,708 The adage suggests that if you hide a criminal they will turn and commit 
atrocities against you. Nevertheless, the accused say that the decision to confess or not comes 
at a high personal cost. 
In his confession, Masamba implicated an uncle as an accomplice to many of the 
crimes he committed. "He had trusted that I would not implicate him since he is my 
relative. 709 This has created very sour relations between me and his family. " Masamba also 
attributes his lack of employment to the confession process. "As a painter, I can hardly get 
any jobs because of these bad relations ... you can't ask a 
job from someone who you 
implicated in the genocide or if you implicated any member of his family. , 
Following the lead of those with status 
Nsabimana, one of the prisoners in Cyangugu, said that the lack of full confessions on 
the part of the average perpetrator was because individuals in category one tended to plead 
not guilty or limited their confessions. As people who were in positions of leadership, or who 
are members of the educated elite, individuals in the first category are usually looked to for 
guidance. He said 
The planners of genocide who are usually educated, or had high 
ranking positions, influence and money are usually followed and 
listened to in prisons. They make prisoners not trust the government. 
However this is because if one confessed, it would be impossible not 
to implicate them of genocide. 711 
This view is conceded by some of prisoners who are themselves in category one. One of 
them, a former mayor said, 
Interview 27 
th June 2006 
Interview gth and 13th June 2006 
709 Interview Mururu, Cyangugu, 27 th June 2006 
710 Ibid. 
711 15'h June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 231 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Only two mayors in this prison have confessed, and II have chosen to 
deny their crimes. Most people follow leaders. They think the leaders 
know everything. Because many of them have opted not to confess, 
the local prisoners will also not confess. Most of them wait for a 
bourgemestre (mayor) or other educated people in prison to confess. 
If they do not confess, the rest do not confess as well. There should 
therefore be some benefit to the fori-ner authority leaders who have 
confessed. I confessed on the 25t" qf October 2005, and in one 
month, 216 prisoners had confessed. Our confessions have a great 
bearing on the confession of prisoners yet we stand to benefit 
nothing. , 
Another former mayor in Cyangugu prison said, "Since I confessed many people have 
confessed ... about three to 
five people a day ... 
416 people had confessed in 2001. When I 
started working with the Gacaca courts in prisons, in one year 1,500 people 
confessed ... 
There is a general belief in prison that confession is for the illiterate. , 
Interestingly, the majority of alleged perpetrators I interviewed in Cyangugu prison 
noted that less-educated prisoners tended to confess more than those who were educated. I 
also observed, during my interviews with alleged perpetrators with some level of education or 
status before the genocide, he always made reference to the fact that he was an exception to 
his fellow inmates. 
Suzimana, who had been on remand from 1994, confessed in 2004 and was 
provisionally released in 2005, summarised the "educated/status" phenomenon. 
Most Rwandans are not educated and they follow what the educated 
do. Because most educated people do not confess, they also don't 
confess. Their decisions are based on the actions of the educated. For 
example I used to head a block of 470 prisoners, after I confessed, 
I 10 prisoners also confessed in two days. 715 
JTI further developed this idea, saying, "Planners of genocide do not have an 
advantage to confess and hence have no interest in it. They oppose Gacaca and sensitise 
712 Interview Cyangugu prison I oth June 2006 
713 Interview Cyangugu Prison loth June 2006 
714 Interviews conducted on the 9th, loth , 
23 rd and 3 oth June 2006 This was in part due to the fact that most of 
this "elite" clique has been placed in category one and does not benefit from the Gacaca process. One such 
prisoner explained that "... People in prison think we are mad to have confessed. They think we are not in 
control of ourselves and are traumatised. " Interview 9th June 2006, Cyangugu Prison 
715 Interview Cyangugu, 9th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 232 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
others not to confess. Because they are educated and rich, they have a big following. " 716 
This perspective is not merely held by villagers, but is a countrywide phenomenon. 
Bayingana in Kigali town said that "Educated people do not admit their crimes ... they were 
authority figures themselves ... they 
know the after effects of confessing ... they are not 
like us 
the local people. , 
Explaining this culture of obedience to individuals with status, JTI quoted a Rwandan 
proverb, "Where the water/river/lake flows, is where the stones go.,, 718 He also used another 
Kinyarwanda proverb to explain, "The one who saw your dress is the one who will know 
which one 
fits YOU.,, 
JTI said these proverbs suggest the culture of obedience is embedded 
in Rwandan society and noted that this was the root cause of people's actions. "The state, 
being our leader, knows what is best for us so we do what we are commanded. The state put 
us where it wanted, if we had the [capacity and means] we would have not joined the 
,, 720 genocide. When you have nothing, people use you the way they want . 
Of course, this 
perspective can be also used as a perpetrator's way of justifying or coming to terms with his 
crimes. Individual perpetrators can place sole responsibility for their actions on the bad 
Government and claim to be victims of their own crimes. 
A culture encouraging unquestioning following of the lead of the so-called elite, 
explains, at least in part, why so many people participated in the genocide without question. 
This, coupled with the culture of impunity, created a Rwanda that respected not the rule of 
law, but of those people in power. Prosecuting such individuals is a signal to the rest of the 
population that no one is above the law and that all people, regardless of their social status, 
will be held individually accountable for the crimes they commit. 
716 Inter-view Cyangugu 13th June 2006 
717 Interview Kigali, 16 th July 2006 
718 Interview Cyangugu, 9th June 2006 
719 Ibid 
720 Interview 9th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 233 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
The rich-poor chasm 
Extreme levels of poverty are apparent in most aspects of life in Rwanda; the Gacaca 
courts are no exception. In prison, it is not uncommon to bribe people not to confess. For 
example, well-to-do prisoners will pay off, or promise to support families of prisoners who 
agree to confess on their behalf. 72 1 According to Nsabimana, many educated people or 
wealthy businessmen committed crimes that place them in category one, so the reduced 
sentences offered by Gacaca courts are of no relevance to them. However, if an accused 
person confesses to genocide, he or she will inevitably implicate persons in category one who 
were their leaders and often deny genocide involvement. During the Gacaca process, 
evidence on which the prosecution team in ordinary courts will build their case will come to 
light. In such cases, wealthy accused persons do what is necessary to strengthen their plea of 
not guilty, including offering financial incentives to lie. 
Where poverty is prevalent, class, education, and financial status will be used as a 
means to influence others and secure advantage in the trial process. Mahoro, a 39 year-old 
released inmate agreed, "Most category one prisoners have money and will bribe people not 
to confess, so that they do not implicate them or their families ... poor prisoners 
find it more 
,, 722 
advantageous not to confess. In fact, Masamba says that prison bribery is possibly one of 
the most common reasons perpetrators may not confess to some crimes. 
When you accept having gone to a killing group, you have to mention 
all your accomplices. Some killing groups have people that you 
would not want to mention so you omit it altogether and you can only 
accept a few who you can afford to mention with no grave 
consequence born to you. There are killing groups that led to the 
death of someone important's brother in the village, and you want to 
stay in his good books. Authority figures are very much feared in the 
villages, if you accept responsibility for his wife's or brother's death, 
721 One judge in Nyarugunga cited a case of bribery among judges in Kimironko and said that the whole bench 
had subsequently been dissolved and new members elected. 
722 Interview Cyangugu, 13th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 234 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
you will definitely be scared to mention a big shots brother in the 
killing group, so you deny it fUlly.,, 723 
THE ROLE OF SURVIVORS IN GACACA 
Survivor actions pre-Gacaca 
In the aftermath of the genocide, survivors played an instrumental role in holding 
many perpetrators accountable for their actions. The government was eager to establish a rule 
of law and to punish all those responsible for the genocide. As explained in earlier chapters, 
many survivors made accusations against alleged perpetrators, who were routinely 
imprisoned without trial or dossiers. In the absence of due process, untold numbers of people 
languished in prison for crimes they may not have committed. Indeed, one of the key issues 
being addressed by the Gacaca process is the fate of accused persons who were imprisoned 
with no prima facie case. Nshuti, a survivor of genocide reflecting on the pre-Gacaca era, 
There are a number of people who are innocent in prison. Often when 
you returned from hiding, your neighbour lied about who killed your 
family, so we reported them and they got arrested. With Gaeaca, we 
found out that they had lied to us. They often deny having ever told us 
that they (the prisoners) were responsible. You are considered a 
dishonest person, who has caused another so much misery. Your 
relationship with your neighbours is automatically strained. We learn 
that we had accused people wrongly and instead our neighbours were 
responsible. Those in prison may have been innocent with regards to 
the death of your family but they may have killed other families as 
well. They should not be on your dossier. So Gacaca is good because 
it corrects all that and you know for sure who was responsible for 
your family deaths, and innocent people are released . 
Survivors of genocide make up a very small percentage of the communities in which 
they live. The census in 1993 suggested that there were 7.7 million people in Rwanda at the 
time of the genocide. Statistics of the Tutsi population at the time is highly contested, with 
723 Mahoro, Interview Cyangugu 13th June 2006 
724 Interview Cyangugu, 16 th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 235 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
some placing it at 10%, while others suggest that it was closer to 20% percent. Currently, the 
population of Rwanda stands at 9 million people. 725 Following the investigation phase, the 
office of the Gacaca courts stated that there were 102,743 male and 150,170 female survivors 
of genocide and 74,642 orphans countrywide-representing less than 0.5% of the 1993 
population. 726 After the genocide, in Kigali City, there were 6,597 orphans, 7,303 male and 
8,929 female survivors in Kigali City, and a total of 17,473 orphans, 20,988 males and 
27,891 females in the whole of the Western Province. 727 
In Muhari sector, Rusizi district where I carried out my research, there were only 44 
male survivors, 70 females and 19 orphans. In Mururu Sector, Rusizi district, there were 82 
male, 100 female and 55 orphans. Other sectors in the same district have even fewer 
survivors. For example, Bugumira sector in the same district had no survivors at all, while 
Bunyereri Sector, also in Rusizi district had six male survivors and two female survivors and 
no surviving orphans. 728 The Northern Province has the least number of survivors, many 
sectors have no survivors at all and others average about four survivors. In the Northern 
Province, the number of Tutsi was already small, the majority having been killed in previous 
genocides while others were 'transferred' to Bugesera, an area that was infested with tsetse 
flies in 1973 
729 The few that remained in these areas were almost wiped out during the 
genocide. 
The scale of the Rwandan genocide means that there are very few survivors in the 
country. As such, it is vital that justice is done for the few survivors left. With justice and 
some level of reconciliation, these survivors can hope to move on. Holding perpetrators 
725 Chapter one 
726 www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. rw (Accessed 18 th July 2008) 
727 ibid 
728 www. inkiko-(-, acaca. gov. rw (Accessed 12 th August 2008). As earlier suggested, it was difficult to access 
information related to how many survivors lived in each sector at the time of the genocide to demonstrate the 
percentages of survivors per sector. 
729 Inter-view with a Researcher of African Rights, 6 th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 236 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
individually accountable allows survivors and the rest of the population to live together in an 
open enviro=ent, free of mistrust and suspicion. 
In areas with few or no survivors, the Gacaca process has few plaintiffs and many of 
these will generally stay quiet having been intimidated by the rest of their community. 730 As a 
result, the voices of the victims are marginalised and overshadowed. Masamba, a perpetrator 
who had pleaded guilty, said 
Very few people in this area survived the genocide. They are less than 
five women in my cell who survived the genocide. When they try to 
say anything, they are overpowered by the majority who were Hutu, 
who either participated in the genocide or their relatives. When we 
were released, most of the lists had to be redrawn because everybody 
had tried to silence the truth. Our relation with survivors is much 
better than with fellow perpetrators and their families whom we 
,, 731 implicate. 
Although the Gacaca process was welcomed by survivors of the genocide, the idea of 
allowing perpetrators back into the community before their trials were complete was very 
unsettling. From my interviews, survivors remained fearful of some released prisoners and 
welcomed others. The difference in attitude is based on the behaviour of released perpetrators 
in Gacaca courts, and how they relate to the survivors. Perpetrators who cooperated with the 
courts and confessed to their crimes found it easier to relate to survivors of genocide. This is 
because they provided the survivors with relevant evidence in the prosecution of their crimes. 
In so doing, however, they implicated other people which, in turn, strained perpetrators' 
relations with the rest of their community. 
As noted, some perpetrators only confessed to only a fraction of their crimes and 
denied the rest. In such cases, the accused will do all that is necessary to suppress the rest of 
his crimes from being known. Tactics used by these individuals include the intimidation of 
survivors, or other witnesses, sometimes leading to death. 
730 Interview with the legal advisor of IBUKA, 26 th May 2006 
731 Interview with an alleged perpetrator at his residence in Mururu-Rusizi District, 27 1h June 2008 Also see 
section three 
S. BYAMUKAMA 237 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Impact of survivor's actions on the community 
Survivors have had varying degrees of involvement and influence on both national 
and Gacaca courts. Unsurprisingly, sectors with almost no survivors, or areas with as few as 
three survivors, had a less active role than sectors with more survivors. In most cases, 
survivors of genocide are the plaintiffs. Where there is evidence of crime but no plaintiffs in 
a case, very little will usually come of out of the process. As a result, there will be scant 
evidence on which to prosecute other accused perpetrators related to a specific crime. 
In sectors with no survivors, or as few as five survivors, individuals are usually 
intimidated and fear to accuse perpetrators. 732 Some of those that officially file accusations 
fear for their lives. Their fears are not unfounded considering that there are examples of 
potential witnesses who have been intimidated or even killed. In the course of our interview, 
Nshutl told me of his concems, 
Personally I have my fears, I often think of the people I testified 
against and wonder how we will live together, whether we will be 
able to share anything. I have no idea, yet they wronged me. I have no 
family and am like this because of them. I have a problem with them, 
not because they killed my family, that happened to us all, but 
because I testified against them. If all the people released could 
confess properly [from their hearts], we would know they are sorry 
and live together in peace if they seem willing to cooperate and live 
with us. 733 
One might think that intimidation, death threats, and the murder of certain survivors 
and witnesses would deter survivors from participating in the Gacaca process, but the 
empirical research shows otherwise. Survivors of genocide are very active in the Gacaca 
proceedings in their search for the truth. However, survivors' attempts to seek justice are 
sometimes impeded where the majority of the rest of the population is indifferent to the 
proceedings, and generally do not participate. Challenges to the process are especially acute 
where survivors lack eye-witness accounts of crimes to bolster their case. 
732 See previous page. Also see "Number of Survivors of Genocide, " at www. inkiko-waca. gov. (Accessed 
21" July 2008) 
733 Nshuti Interview Mururu- Rusizi District I" July 2008 
S. BYAMUKAMA 238 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Rwambuga is a case in point; he is a perpetrator in Cyangugu prison who confessed in 
August 2005 and was released after his trial in June 2006. For want of eye-witness evidence, 
it took a full five weeks to complete his trial, when the average Gaeaca case is completed in 
one session or less. The court in this case first had to detennine whether it had the jurisdiction 
to try the accused. The defendant was accused of utterances he made in a "security" meeting 
and the court had to decide whether such utterances amounted to inciting genocide. The 
subsequent facts of the case were not contested: After the meeting in question, 12 women and 
children from the same family were killed. 
The meeting, organised by the mayor of Kamembe-Rusizi District, was attended by 
about 30-50 people. The plaintiff, a 45 year-old male survivor was not at the meeting because 
he belonged to the "hunted" group. From the trial, it became clear that the meeting's purpose 
was to monitor the "work" being done and give instructions on how to further implement the 
genocide. For example, the mayor urged gnocidaires not to destroy buildings, schools, or 
hospitals because their children would need them "after this period. " The mayor instructed 
the members present not to kill women and children and urged them to come back to their 
homes. According to testimony, the defendant asked the mayor, "But what will we do with 
these women and children? We have killed their sons and husbands, will they not poison our 
children? " The mayor replied, "If you fear them, avoid them. " The term 'avoid them' during 
the genocide was interpreted to mean 'kill them. ' As a result, that night, after the meeting, 12 
women and children of the same family were killed. 
The issues before the court were; What were the exact utterances made at the meeting, 
and whether these utterances amounted to inciting genocide, contrary to Article 51 (1) of 
Organic law 16/2004. Here, the court took five times longer than average to decide the case. 
The plaintiff and the witnesses (one was a sister to the plaintiff and the vice-president of the 
court) narrated their hearsay evidence, and the defendant and defence witnesses gave 
S. BYAMUKAMA 239 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
contradicting statements of what they believed the accused had said. An alleged perpetrator, 
who also was a prosecution witness, and who was present at the meeting and participated in 
the killings said that the defendant's involvement should not be judged only on the utterances 
in the meeting, but also by his behaviour at the time the crimes were committed. Although the 
witness said that the accused was not part of the killing group, he had bought the killers 
alcohol after they had killed the family. This was common practice in the genocide; wealthier 
genocidaires would congratulate perpetrators on the "work" done with gifts of alcohol or 
livestock. The witness described the defendant as a wealthy businessman. 
That the defendant attended the meeting was not at issue, but considering there were 
30 to 50 members present, he also said he didn't remember anyone who was at the meeting 
who might corroborate his statements. Some of the other perpetrators who were present at the 
meeting could not recall what the defendant had said at the time, or whether his utterances 
were acted upon by those present. In his defence, the accused said that Nsengimana, the 
prosecution witness and confessed perpetrator, was falsely accusing him, He said that 
Nsengimana testified against him because he (the defendant) had testified against 
Nsengimana on a rape charge (a category one crime under the jurisdiction of ordinary courts). 
The defendant suggested that Nsengimana testified against him so that he would be placed in 
category one as well. The defendant also said that he had a long-standing quarrel with the 
plaintiff whom he accused of confiscating his motorcycle when the plaintiff was elected as a 
conseiller (head of the sector-counsellor) after the genocide. He also accused the plaintiff of 
bribing Nsengimana to testify against him because of their enmity. The plaintiff in his 
defence said that he could not enter into an agreement with someone (Nsengimana) who 
killed his family members. 
This case highlights the problem of admissibility of evidence. First, survivors of 
genocide are not eye-witnesses to the crimes in question, and often cannot find people who 
S. BYAMUKAMA 240 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
are willing to be witnesses in court. Moreover, the confessions of other alleged perpetrators 
must be taken cautiously, especially if they have a personal grudge with the accused. Personal 
grudges were by far the most common defence, but this could also be an example of an 
accused person taking revenge on those who testified against him. It is also possible that the 
accused might use a personal grudge to strengthen his defence. Whatever the real reasons 
may be, in Rwambuga's case, a frustrated survivor of genocide still sought justice for the 
deaths of 12 members of his family. 
The court found the accused not guilty of inciting genocide but guilty of conspiracy to 
commit genocide within the jurisdiction of the court. In a casual conversation with the 
defendant on the day of his release, Rwambuga said he was happy with the outcome of his 
trial. In an interview with the plaintiff, he expressed some dissatisfaction, noting that the 
president of the court was the defendant's first cousin and ensured that the defendant was 
tned in her court. I argued that I was aware that the vice-president was the plaintiffs 
biological sister and he responded that the president of the court was educated and of status, 
compared to his sister who had basic education. 
Article 10, Organic Law stipulates that a judge cannot deliberate in cases where the 
accused has a personal relationship with the judge for example a relative, or where they have 
a deep friendship or enmity. Although the President and the vice-president in this court were 
not members of the bench in question, unlike other trials I attended, they took part in the 
deliberation process when the court adjourned. This case also puts in question, the 
fundamental role played by the judges. Although in my observation of the case and in my 
personal opinion, there was no malpractice in this case, the plaintiffs felt otherwise. 734 
734 Chapter six partly deals with the role of the judges and their influence on Gacaca courts. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 241 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
This section has detailed the nature of trials in Gacaca process. It analyses the role 
different parties' play in this process and how these impact on justice and reconciliation. The 
Gacaca process is a trial process where the accused have a right to defend themselves. In so 
doing, those against whom there is insufficient evidence may deny their cnmes or only 
confess to a limited number of crimes. Sole reliance on these confessions is inadequate, and 
when coupled with the fact that the majority of the population choose to remain silent for one 
reason or another, evidence on which to convict the accused becomes limited. It is even more 
problematic when those who so desperately need this evidence to come to light were 
themselves not eye-witnesses to these crimes. Not only do trials take longer as a result, 
thereby delaying justice, but this has a negative effect on the reconciliation process. 
That said, the very fact that the Gacaca process holds accused persons individually 
accountable for their crimes is a stepping-stone toward reconciliation. First, holding 
individuals accountable for crimes they actually committed avoids collective enmity towards 
the group. Secondly, as a trial process, Gacaca aims at bringing to light the facts of what 
actually happened in the genocide thereby allowing the survivors to have closure. Thirdly, 
public trials and public apology of crimes committed is a means to acknowledge survivors' 
pain and suffering. The next section further analyses the impact of trial on justice and 
reconciliation. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 242 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Section 3: Achieving justice and reconciliation 
The greatest asset of the Gacaca process rests in its dual commitment to provide 
justice and reconciliation in the aftermath of genocide. Gacaca is also commendable for its 
proximity to the people and its less legalistic nature. Nevertheless, the empirical data raised in 
Section two suggests that Rwandans are segmented according to the different "roles" they 
play in the Gacaca process. These roles are formed through the social interactions a person 
has with their community. Conversely, the roles a person plays in Gacaca also influence the 
subsequent social interactions a person will have with their community after a trial is over. 
Although all the people I interviewed indicated that reconciliation was of paramount 
importance, their various kinds of input into the Gacaca process did not always reflect this 
desired goal. The section below details the interactions and the roles played by the different 
parties and how this impacts on the quest for justice and reconciliation. 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEPENDENCY 
Every person who lived in Rwanda through 1994 was directly affected by the 
genocide. Everyone either lost members of their immediate or extended family to the 
genocide or has members of their immediate or extended family that perpetuated the 
genocide or both. As such, the Gacaca process and its reconciliation efforts affect each 
Rwandan citizen in one way or another. Daily interaction between perpetrators and survivors 
is inevitable. People recognise that they have to co-exist and eventually reconcile. 735 
Survivors acknowledge the need to forgive, reconcile and move on for very practical 
reasons. This was underscored by a 35 year old survivor who was raped during the genocide 
and contracted HIV and AIDS as a result. She said, 
735 Chapter four. This particularly relates to survivor and the general public, or perpetrators who committed 
crimes against other families. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 243 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
If I do not forgive my neighbour, who will take me to hospital when I 
am sick? Who will fetch my water when I can no longer manage to go 
to the well? Who will repair my roof when it is leaks? Who will talk 
to my children when I am gone? You have to reconcile. 736 
A 25 year-old genocide survivor who lost his entire immediate family and most of his 
extended family echoes this pragmatism. He said, 
Our people died, when someone stays in prison for ever, the dead will 
not rise ... 
Our people are dead and we cannot do anything about it. 
Living alone is not easy. I can fall sick and fail to find someone to 
carry me to hospita1737 if I have bad relations with my neighbours . 
In five separate interviews, with survivors as well as perpetrators, reference was made 
to a Kinyarwanda saying "Ntawagira akabari wenyine, " meaning that you can't maintain 
your own bar. You cannot own a bar and be your only customer. You need clients to buy 
your alcohol. This expression applies as much to the need for reconciliation as it does to 
explain why people often are not willing to testify at the nsk of isolation from the 
community. A village nyumbakumi in Cyangugu that I spoke to said, "Every one who was in 
Rwanda at the time of the genoeide saw igitero 739 or two ... nobody wants to testify ... 
People 
fear to be isolated by their neighbours ... 
because survivors have no families left ... they 
isolation. , 740 
People recognise that reconciling is the only way to peacefully co-exist and share 
limited farms and land resources. It is possible that living together, and depending on each 
other for survival might force parties to the conflict to move beyond the past and forgive. In 
Affican societies, a person's family is both integral and paramount to their individual welfare. 
The family unit provides basic food and shelter, as well as education, medical care, as along 
with emotional sustenance. For the survivors of genocide, the day their loved ones died, their 
736 Mururu-Cyangugu- Rusizi District, 14 th June 2006 
737 In villages with no roads, the community relies on able-bodied men and youths to physically carry the sick to 
a dispensary, which could be as far as 10 miles away. They use a locally made stretcher called ingobyi, to 
carry people to hospital. 
738 Interview Cyangugu, 16 th June 2006 
739 Killing group 
740 Karemera, Cyangugu- Rusizi District I 9th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 244 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
source of welfare was brutally stolen from them. Alone, a part of their essence is forever 
gone, but they still have to carry on and live. Survivors want to get on with their lives and 
'reconcile' for very practical reasons, otherwise they remain isolated and marginalised. 
However, in cosmopolitan towns and cities, such as Kigali, interdependency is more 
limited. Town populations are mostly made up of individuals who come from different parts 
of the country to seek employment. Compared to life in rural areas, they live in a relatively 
individualistic fashion; they can choose where they want to live and who they wish to interact 
with. Jennifer, one of the survivors of genocide in Kigali town, said 
If I get to know who killed my family ... 
I make sure we do not meet 
If I am going to testify against them ... 
I think that in their 
minds they can get me killed so that whatever they have not confessed 
remains unknown ... or 
better still I do not want to know what they are 
thinking. 741 
Four of the 10 survivors I interviewed in Kigali clearly stated that they would have 
nothing to do with a convicted genocide perpetrator. Interestingly, none of the 26 survivors I 
interviewed in the rural parts of the Western Province shared such strong sentiments. A local 
Pastor (HUtU)742 in Cyangugu along with a survivor of genocide who was educated in Kigali 
both suggested that the difference in responses was due to different literacy levels. However, 
literate or illiterate, every citizen experienced the genocide. All survivors, from town and 
villages alike, lived through the death of their loved ones; the pain is the same. The Pastor 
suggested that illiterate villagers are more inclined to obey authority and, as such, they 
participated in the genocide more than the educated elites of Kigali . 
743 "The government 
asked them to kill and they did not question ... 
It must have been a difficult thing to do for 
some of them, but they had to obey orders. " The Pastor also suggested that this tendency to 
74 ' Kigali 39 
742 A Pastor in Africa (including Cyangugu) is a very respected member of the community, and is also a symbol 
of authority. 
743 Although a significant number of people in Kigali are themselves illiterate, the largest pull of literate people 
live in Kigali. Kigali represents at least 10 percent of the total population of the country 
S. BYAMUKAMA 245 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
obedience explains why villagers are more likely to heed the government's message of 
reconciliation. That said, one might argue that the 'elite', the majority of whom reside in 
urban areas, need to be further persuaded to heed this reconciliation message. 
It is plausible to advocate that the tendency to embrace reconciliation is directly 
related to the interdependency a person experiences with their community. The concept of 
64you cannot own your own bar" is more applicable in villages than in towns. Villagers do not 
have the option to choose who they relate to on a daily basis. For the most part, they live on 
their family land or on their spouse's family plot. They farm that land and necessarily have to 
interact with their neighbours. As a result, survivors in the villages feared being isolated from 
the rest of their community. However, in cities a person's neighbours are likely to be other 
migrant workers from all over the country. A city-dweller does not necessarily live next door 
to the man who raped his mother or gave her HIV, or decimated their entire family. They feel 
the loss of their loved ones, but they do not have to see it or live next to it on a daily basis. 
Consequently, the differing attitudes of villagers and city residents are based on their daily 
realities. 
RECONCILIATION IN THE RWANDAN CONTEXT 
The literature indicates that reconciliation involves the elements of coexistence, 
dialogue, justice, remorse, apology, truth, forgiveness and healing. 745 Lederach amends the 
list somewhat and says that reconciliation involves truth, mercy (forgiveness), justice, and 
744 The researcher did not exhaust all evidence to back this assertion and suggests that more research could be 
done on the subject. 
745 Naraghi Anderlini, Sanam et al, Transitional Justice and Reconciliation, Available at: 
litip:.,, "/'www. huntaltematives. orv, /do-, Nmload,, '49 transitional iustice. pdf (accessed 04/03/2008) See generally 
Chapter four 
S. BYAMUKAMA 246 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
peace. 746 Reconciliation is also defined as a process, recognising that it is a long-tenn goal to 
be aspired to. 
However, the empirical data suggests that different 'groups' focus on certain aspects 
of the Gacaca process more than others. For instance, alleged perpetrators saw Gacaca 
primarily as a trial process, involving the right to be heard, as a means for the innocent to be 
released, and a place where the guilty are identified and punished. They endorsed the use of 
reduced sentences and community service in exchange for confessions. However, some 
perpetrators suggested that 'true' justice would also mean that the state would investigate the 
crimes committed by its own forces during the genocide. 748 
While survivors of genocide agreed with the importance given to the right to be heard 
and the use of the process for prosecution, they were less keen to embrace reduced sentences. 
Unlike alleged perpetrators, they placed a great deal of emphasis on the element of remorse 
and what that entailed. One survivor of genocide explained 
What is important is for all Rwandans to understand the objectives of 
the Gacaca process, and once that is done, reconciliation will be 
possible, if we can know what happened to our people, the guilty get 
punished and the innocent get released. We all know the dead can't 
rise and we can't reverse the situation, but we should do what is 
possible. It is possible to be honest and accountable. 749 
Sharing his assessment of the Gacaca courts, a nyumbakumi in Cyangugu, Western province, 
People who confess to all their genocide crimes and are remorseful 
live together in peace with victims of genocide ... although they may 
have problems with their relatives and friends who oppose the 
746 Lederach explained "Truth is the longing for knowledge of wrong and the validation of painful loss and 
experience, but that it is coupled with mercy, which articulates the need for acceptance, letting go and a new 
beginning. Justice represents a search for individual and group rights, for social restructuring and for 
restitution, but is linked with peace, which underscores the need for interdependence, well-being and 
security. Lederach, John Paul, Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies, (Washington 
DC, United States Institute of Peace Press, 1997) 29. See also Chapter four 
See Chapter four 
Interview with JTI, Cyangugu P July 2006 749 
Interview in Cyangugu I 9th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 247 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
confession process. The problem is with those who deny crimes and 
they are released. They are guilty and fear to be discovered and sent 
back to prison. So they stay at their homes and do not mix with 
others, avoid the public... and may kill potential witnesses. 750 
In a separate interview, Sandra, a 34 year-old widow infected with HIV and AIDS as 
a result of the genocide said, "If all the people released could confess properly [from their 
hearts], we would know they are sorry and live together in peace if they seem willing to 
cooperate and live with us. " 751 Another survivor, who declared to be resigned to reconcile 
due to a lack of any alternative said, "It does not make a difference whether you forgive them 
or you do not. They will be released and come to live next door to you even if you know that 
they did not fully confess. Instead of making unnecessary emnity, you forgive them. , 752 
As Barungi, a survivor, showed me the hill where she lived before the genoeide 753 and 
where almost 63 of her relatives died, she said, 
We were a big family, many houses in one area, but there are only 
two houses left. I asked my neighbour and he said he was in his house 
at the time when our house was destroyed and he said he didn't see 
anyone destroy it. He is accused of having killed other people -not my 
family, which he denies -but we sit and talk and laugh, not about the 
genocide because they all deny knowing anything. We really have no 
option but live together. If people were released, it would not make a 
difference to me. We would still live like we live with many of our 
neighbours implicated in the genocide. We can't get back what we 
lost; it does not make a difference. 754 
Survivors also believe that Gacaca does not entirely benefit them because of its lack 
of compensation laws, 755 a fact also recognised by alleged perpetrators. Kalisa, a former 
mayor incarcerated in Cyangugu prison said, "Reconciliation will not be possible without 
reparation to the victims. They need to be compensated ... 
If they get some level of reparation, 
Ibid. 
Interview, Cyangugu, 14 th June 2006. 
Interview Cyangugu 20th June 2006 
753 Estates that were mainly built for survivors of genocide, majority of whose houses were destroyed. 
754 Interview Cyangugu, I" July 2006 
755 Interview Nyamasheke 28th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 248 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
they might find it easier to forgive"756 Survivors of genocide are compensated through a state 
fund that provides education, medical and housing rather than compensating individuals on a 
case-by-case basis. 
THE ELEMENTS OF RECONCILIATION EXPANDED 
Although Gacaca is a means toward achieving reconciliation, comprising elements of 
truth, justice, remorse and forgiveness, it is fundamentally a criminal trial process. As such, it 
is fair to suggest that Gacaca's primary goal is to provide justice, and through this system of 
justice, reconciliation can be achieved. However, justice without the elements of remorse and 
forgiveness enshrined in this process does not produce the desired goal of reconciliation. 
Within a Gacaca trial, the accused is not only expected to plead guilty to a crime, 
including providing all the relevant evidence to the prosecution, he or she is also expected to 
make an apology and ask for forgiveness. One of the significant shortcomings of the Gacaca 
process is that it alms to meet multiple, and at times conflicting, objectives. 
The Gacaca confession process acts as a plea bargaining process in which the accused 
pleads guilty and receives a reduced penalty for not wasting the court's time and resources. In 
other jurisdictions, an accused person can receive a reduced sentence through a charge 
bargain if he pleads guilty to one crime and not guilty to another. 758 However, in Gacaca 
courts, if the accused is found guilty of crimes he did not confess to, the confession is 
nullified and the sentence delivered is likely to be much more harsh . 
759 This insistence on a 
full confession is critical because the Gacaca process aspires beyond justice; it also aims at 
reconciliation, and consequently the themes of truth, remorse and forgiveness are valued 
756 Interview Cyangugu Prison 10th June 2006. 
757 Compensation laws and procedures are not fully exhausted in this thesis. The researcher recommends this as 
a subject that needs further research. 
758 See Chapter four 
759 See Chapter six 
S. BYAMUKAMA 249 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
within the system. I will now explore these elements to better understand their context in 
reconciliation and their benefit to Gacaca as a whole. 
Truth 
The need for 'truth' is of supreme importance to genocide survivors; they want and 
need to know what really happened. Without truth, many claim that they cannot move on 
with their lives. According to Cohen, the primary aim of truth-telling lies in the value of the 
truth itself 
Many people have a powerful, almost obsessive desire to know what 
exactly happened and that the demand for truth is often more urgently 
felt than the demand for justice. People do not necessarily want their 
former torturers to go to jail, but they do want to see the truth 
established . 
Survivors want to know what truly happened to their relatives, who was responsible, 
and who should be accountable. It is only after the truth has been revealed that they can 
forgive their perpetrators. Survivors also emphasise that the perpetrator must apologise for 
his crimes, and that truth alone is insufficient. Agaba, a survivor of genocide who is also a 
legal representative in IBUKA said, "You forgive someone who has asked for forgiveness, 
,, 762 [asking from the heart] ... telling you what they 
did. JTI, a perpetrator rejoins, 
There is no problem I have encountered with survivors because we 
told them the truth of what happened so it is not hard to live together. 
A survivor usually wants to know the truth because he often was 
hiding. So we get close because we tell them everything. That contact 
makes it possible for us to ask for forgiveness and to also forgive. 763 
A survivor in Nyamasheke, Constance, suggested that reconciliation was possible 
between her and the perpetrator who was responsible for the death of her father because he 
was truthful. The perpetrator was released in 2003 and came to her home eight months later 
to ask for forgiveness. She said, "I used to see him and hide ... I used to 
fear him 
but one day 
Cohen, 18 
Ibid. 
762 Interview Kigali, 26h May 2006 
Interview with JTI, Cyangugu, I 
Oth June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 250 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
he came to my home and we talked. " She said that the killing group "that killed my father 
composed of his [the perpetrator's] father, brothers and uncle who are in Cyangugu 
prison ... 
he told me that he was angry with his father because it was his father who 
encouraged him to join him in the killing group. " She quoted him as saying, "If I knew I 
would be in prison for this long, I would have refused ... 
if he wanted to kill me he would 
have. " She said that "It was out of the fear of punishment that he asked for forgiveness, not 
that he was remorseful. " Nevertheless, she said she had reconciled with him. 
I understood that he would not have disrespected his father, as his 
In the whole group of 18 
Some of those he 
implicated have never been in prison and live in the same 
village ... 
Most of them say they will wait for the trial ... 
Will they be 
remorseful then and not now? ... 
Yet some of them confess to being in 
Since she was not the only surviving child of the deceased, Constance suggested that 
the perpetrator should go to her sisters' house about a kilometre and a half away and also ask 
her for forgiveness, but he did not. 764 She discussed the matter with her sister and they still 
decided to forgive him "Because in Gacaca, he is honest and tells the truth and 'participates 
well'... we decided to forgive him. " She also says that she has no negative feelings towards 
him because she thinks he is remorseful. "We are in an Association called Urumuri 
Rwamahoro 765 which comprises of survivors and perpetrators who confessed and we talk 
often ... 
I think he is remorseful. " Constance and other survivors do not share the same 
feelings of benevolence towards perpetrators who do not confess. She said, "We Rwandese 
764 Florence (43), Constance's sister in an interview said that she had contracted HIV after being gang raped by 
about 12 of Bagambiki's men (who was found not guilty of genocide by the ICTR) in ftill view of her family 
and other Tutsis who had sought refuge in to the church. Interview Cyangugu 28 th June 2006 
765 Directly translates: Flower of Peace. There are a number of such organisations countrywide, the objective of 
which is to encourage survivors and confessed perpetrators to work together for economic gain and poverty 
reduction. In so doing, such Associations and Cooperatives encourage reconciliation between the parties. 
These activities are beyond the scope of this thesis. How these Associations encourage and foster 
reconciliation and the social interaction between parties in these Associations is worthy of further research. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 251 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
hide our feelings, you meet and greet and talk, but they hate us... they are afraid of their 
tri al. i766 
Although Constance noted that she was sceptical about the accused's motivations in 
asking for forgiveness and doubted his remorse, she nonetheless forgave him. Her 
forgiveness was genuine because she felt that he had told her the truth, and she appreciated 
that he actively participated in Gacaca courts. Constance's story highlights the importance 
and value of truth in the reconciliation process. It is again worth noting that most survivors 
felt that they could discern the sincenty of a perpetrator's remorse from their willingness to 
take the step of asking for a survivor's forgiveness in person. 
Forgiveness 
Although the literature suggests that forgiveness is not a prerequisite for 
reconciliation, my empirical data suggests otherwise. Indeed, it can be argued that, for 
survivors, the quest for forgiveness, through Gacaca's confession trial process and 
individually, are the most important parts of the reconciliation process. All the survivors I 
interviewed said that having a perpetrator ask for forgiveness outside the Gacaca process was 
the most important ingredient for reconciliation. 
Hayner believes that reconciliation between individuals is highly personal and there is 
no guarantee that knowledge of the truth will necessarily reconcile victim with perpetrator. 767 
There is a significant difference between the systemic requirement that a perpetrator 
apologise in court and his or her subsequent effort to personally seek out a survivor and ask 
for forgiveness. Nonetheless, what appears to be important to survivors is that the accused 
acknowledges his or her crimes and attempts to make amends beyond the requirements of the 
767 Hayner, Priscilla B. Unspeakable Truths: Confronting State Terror and Atrocity How Truth Commissions 
around the World are Challenging the Past and Cotf-onting the Future, 155 
S. ByAmUKAMA 252 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Admittedly forgiveness, whether of the party who seeks it or the party that provides it, 
is a voluntary process that takes time. 768 Although Article 54 of the Organic law states that 
for a confession to be admissible, the accused must publicly apologise for his or her cnmes, 
the reality is that survivors are less interested in the statutory requirement to ask for 
forgiveness. They would prefer to see the accused make a personal choice, outside the 
courtroom, to ask for forgiveness. Because asking for forgiveness is a statutory requirement, 
most survivors have labelled it as a government policy that does not necessarily reflect their 
desires. One survivor explained, I don't think there is going to be reconciliation 
because 
it's the government that asked [him] to confess ... not that they 
[get it from the 
heart] . 
"769 Another survivor commented, 
When they ask for forgiveness, they only do so in Gacaca, they do not 
specifically ask the victim for forgiveness. They may admit in court 
to killing my father, but no one ever came to me and asked to be 
forgiven. That is very painful because they expect to be forgiven in 
Gacaca but do not ask you (the victim). The only exception I have 
seen is a man who killed my grandfather and came home to ask my 
grandmother for forgiveness. I think my grandmother forgave him 
because he even comes home to visit. Other people do not ask us to 
forgive them individually, we do not forgive them. Let the 
Govertiment forgive them because that is whom they seem to ask for 
forgiveness. 770 
Like many survivors, Twagira believes that court confessions are insufficient since 
they are no guarantee of 'remorse' on the part of the confessor. He describes these as 'not 
from the heart' confessions. Twagira attends almost all the Gacaca proceedings in his cell and 
sector, and described a typical session, 
At every Gacaca, they Oudges) ask if there is anything an alleged 
perpetrator would like to tell the court. The usual response is, 'what I 
would like to add to my case is to ask for forgiveness from God and 
the Government of Rwanda and those I wronged too. ' What hurts is 
that they do not ask those that were wronged if they will 
forgive 
When they come out of prison, they do not come and ask 
768 See Chapter four 
769 Interview, Muhari-Rusizi District, 24 th June 2006 
770 Interview Rusizi District, Kamembe 20th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 253 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
you for forgiveness ... 
it ends in Gacaca ... when they meet you on the 
street, they may or may not greet you. 771 
In contrast to the survivor's perceptions, the majority of accused persons think that 
confessing in court is sufficient. Being forgiven by a survivor is not their primary goal. JTI, a 
released perpetrator who has served his sentence said, "Even if a survivor has not forgiven 
you, if you only ask for forgiveness, that is sufficient because you have made peace with 
God. 11772 
Restorative justice and reconciliation principles emphasise the importance of truth, as 
well as personal acknowledgement of the harm caused, taking responsibility, and a desire to 
make amends. It is possible for a perpetrator to oblige to all the legal requirements of the 
confession process during his trial but fall short of restorative justice's expectations. A 
young survivor, Nshutl aged 25 voiced his concerns about the Gacaca proceedings, 
I do not see how someone who killed in the genocide denies 
responsibility almost totally and when asked whether he has anything 
to say, he is reminded by the judges to ask for forgiveness. He spends 
one hour asking for forgiveness which he has only been reminded to 
do. 773 
As explained earlier, in the course of a Gacaca trial, the accused have no legal 
representation but they have the right to defend themselves. Of course, from a survivor's 
perspective, words said in self-defence can easily be interpreted as denials of criminal action 
and outright refusal to acknowledge personal responsibility. Having listened to perpetrators 
minimise their crimes or involvement during the course of their trials, it is no surprise then 
that survivors claim to be sceptical of the sincerity of court apologies. According to the 
interviews, a personal interaction between victim and perpetrator outside the court would 
demonstrate that the accused acknowledges the pain of his or her victims, is truly sorry for 
the crimes committed, and experiences genuine remorse. 
771 Interview, Rusizi District, Muhari 24 th June 2006 
772 Interview Rusizi District, Kamembe 9th June 2006 
773 Interview Rusizi District Kamembe 16 th June 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 254 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Remorse 
Nearly all of the survivors and perpetrators I interviewed emphasised the importance 
of remorse. Along with forgiveness, remorse is essential to confessions. The interviewees 
stressed that forgiveness and confessions should "come from the heart. " While survivors of 
genocide emphasised that alleged perpetrators should ask for forgiveness [from the heart], 
perpetrators equally believe that survivors should forgive [from the heart]. Although 
confessing to genocide and asking for forgiveness plays a central part in the reconciliation 
process, particularly within the confines of Gacaca, the key ingredient toward achieving 
reconciliation is 'perceived remorse'. What is important is that the survivor perceives the 
perpetrator to be remorseful. The following example typifies a relationship between a 
perpetrator and a survivor, where the survivor perceived the accused to have been remorseful. 
Masamba is a 36 year-old ex-soldier and painter from the village of Mururu, with 
Secondary 3 education. He had been on remand for 10 years and was provisionally released 
by Presidential Decree. At the time of our first interview, he had not been tried but I later 
visited him after his trial and sentence in Cyangugu prison. 774 Masamba told me he was 
personally responsible for the death of six people, including a child whose body he threw in a 
pit latrine. He also admits not knowing the exact number of people he killed when acting 
within a killing group. After the genocide, a survivor accused Masamba of shooting her 
sister. At the time of our interview, Masamba was still awaiting trial, but he had confessed to 
genocide in and out of prison, "Even though I have not been tried, I asked survivors for 
forgiveness in writing when I was in prison. When I was released I went to their homes and 
asked forgiveness. 5775 Asked why he confessed, Masamba said, 
I knew I had committed genocide. I knew I was responsible. I felt [my 
heart] was guilty so I asked forgiveness from those I han-ned ... A 
woman, whose sister I had shot but who didn't die accused me of 
774 Interview, Mururu Sector, Rusizi District, 27 th June 2006 
775 Ibid. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 255 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
genocide and I confessed. I couldn't reconcile with one person when I 
had committed more crimes. So I confessed to looting, killing six 
people, and participating in killing groups. 
Masamba acknowledged the source of some of the incentives he had to confess, saying 
The government sensitised 776 US to confess because it relieves one of 
the burden of the crime. Confession is a way to unity and 
reconciliation. They told us victims will no longer think of us with 
hatred but would relax and forgive us. 777 
I asked Masamba whether the confession process benefited him and he said, 
Yes it helped greatly ... 
First, I felt relieved in my heart. Unity and 
reconciliation was possible. I was released from prison and live in 
harmony with them. God forgave me, and those I wronged also 
forgave me. My relation with my neighbours is good. If I don't have 
soap and they have the ability to provide, they buy for me. I help 
some of them dig in their garden ... ask them what 
I can do for them. I 
have nothing, but am energetic. So I help gardening, splitting 
firewood, or building if their houses need repair. If they have a 
problem they call me. When they have a wedding I go help build a 
platform where guests sit. For example, in May 2006 (one month 
before the interview), there was a wedding in Gahinga; they called 
eight of us, we helped build a platform for their wedding. 778 
Masamba clearly benefited from the confession process and the remorse he has 
demonstrated has allowed him to have better relationships with his neighbours. He also 
anticipates a reduced sentence. 
People welcomed me, except those I reported to have been 
accomplices. They were not happy because I exposed them. I live in a 
mudugudu (estate) that was built for survivors. I bought this house 
from a survivor who did not prefer to come to the estate ... 
In fact I 
didn't buy it, I was released from prison and had no where to go, so 
she gave me the house. I gave her very little money that would have 
otherwise not bought the house. I gave her 80,000frw, (M) for a 
house which would otherwise have cost 300,000frw (0 00). 779 
Masamba also brought me to meet Barungi, a survivor who was only 15 at the time of 
the genocide. She had completed her Primary education and had spent two years at a tailoring 
776 Closest meaning to the Kinyarwanda word gushishikariza. This term is commonly used in Rwanda to 
describe the awareness campaign of the Government. 
777 Interview, Mururu Sector, Rusizi District, 27"' June 2006 
778 Ibid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 256 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
school. At the time of our interview, she looked about six months pregnant, had been married 
and divorced, and had come back to her family home where she lived at the time of the 
genocide. 
Masamba and Barungi exchanged pleasantries and he introduced me to her as his 
c4sister', 780 from Kigali. I found their initial contact odd, considering that Masamba had said 
that Barungi was responsible for his imprisonment in 1995. Their friendship was all the more 
unusual since Masamba had told me gruesome details of his actions during the genocide, 
including how she had been one of the girls he had forcibly taken to the French soldiers in 
Cyangugu stadium to be raped in exchange for tinned food. How could these two live in the 
same village let alone be "friendly9" 
Barungi said she has been looking for Masamba for days because she had a log to 
split and was running out of firewood. He promised to come back the next day and split it for 
her and catch up on some other stories and left. When I asked Barungi what she thought of 
the confession process and she said, 
I don't have a problem with Masamba. He came home after he was 
released from prison and asked my family for forgiveness. He also 
came back and took me aside and asked me specifically to forgive 
... He went to my sister, who 
he shot in the leg, now she is 
disabled and asked her for forgiveness. We all forgave him because 
he asked for it. He also comes home and we talk. If we have a big 
problem like splitting firewood or digging, he helps ... He 
has come to 
find hard to forgive because they 
ask for forgiveness in the Gacaca and make no effort after that. , 781 
Philip, who has been in Cyangugu Prison since 1995, agreed that the Gacaca courtroom is not 
the right place to seek forgiveness. 
I wrote asking her [my victim] to forgive me but I have got no reply. I 
don't know if she forgives me or not ... 
I wish there was a way of 
having a face-to-face confession and asking survivors of genocide 
780 Introducing one as a brother or sister is an indication of acceptance and a high degree of recommendation. 
This is usually a start of a good rapport with the person you meet as a trusted person. 
Inter-view Mururu Sector- Rusizi District, 27th June 2006 and Is' July 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 257 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
forgiveness, but most of us meet them in Gacaca courts and this is a 
hostile place to ask for forgiveness. A trial is usually not the right 
place to ask them for forgiveness. 782 
At the time of the interviews, Mururu sector was preparing for trial. Barungi had cause to 
worry about the quality of evidence acquired in the pre-trial investigation and said, 
We started knowing what happened in the genocide after Masamba 
and his colleagues were released. That's when the files were 
filled 
Masamba accused other people. That is why I feel safer with 
Masamba because even if he killed, he admitted it and mentioned his 
accomplices. There is a bad relationship between Masamba and other 
villagers. 11783 
Barungi went on to say, "We are all sinners. I hated Masamba more than those who killed 
my family. At first, I had forgiven him out of courtesy because he had asked. But because he 
comes home often and we talk, it is now okay. , 784 
It is noteworthy that these interviews were conducted before Masamba was tried in Gacaca 
court. This example is particularly insightful, clearly showing the positive outcome of a 
personal dialogue between the parties of genocide outside of the Gacaca process. The 
interviews illustrate how personal the reconciliation process is and underline the effect of 
perceived remorse on the reconciliation process. 
Indeed, considering the experiences of Masamba and Barungi, one could argue that 
reconciliation between the accused and their victims is actually possible. However, this does 
not imply that the Gacaca trial process has no beanng to the reconciliation process. In fact, 
reconciliation could not have taken place in the absence of justice. Barungi knew that 
Masamba had been on remand for almost 10 years, and that he would be tried for the crimes 
he committed. As such, reconciliation without some forin of accountability for the crimes 
782 1 01h June 2006 and 3 
Oth June 2006, Cyangugu Prison 
Interview Cyangugu 27 th June 2006 and I" July 2006 784 
S. BYAMUKAMA 258 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
committed is impossible. Barungi's perception of remorse was based, in part, on the 
accused's participation in the Gacaca courts. 
The interviews also introduce the theme of reparation (making amends) to the injured 
party. In fact, Masamba mentioned a range of work he has done for his victims. Gacaca law 
stipulates that the convicted perpetrator must serve a custodial sentence, coupled with 
community service. However, these interviews appear to support the importance of the 
perpetrator providing some form of personal reparation to the injured party. The difficulty 
however is assessing how much reparation is sufficient. How much reparation is a person 
required to perform before they can expect to be forgiven? 785 The theme of reparations will 
be reconsidered in the conclusion. 
CONCLUSION 
This section indicates that survivors of genocide reconcile with their perpetrators for 
very practical reasons such as the fear to be isolated in a society that very much depends on 
each other for basic survival. Where this dependency need is not eminent, particularly in 
towns, reconciliation seems to be taking a much slower pace. 
The section also illustrates how reconciliation without justice, truth, forgiveness and 
remorse is next to impossible. Survivors want to know the "truth. " This truth can only be 
accessed through the Gacaca confession process. Truth on its own is inadequate without the 
elements of remorse and forgiveness. This is precisely why the confession process places 
emphasis on a public apology by the perpetrator. 
However the section also indicates that such apology on its own is insufficient. 
Survivors of genocide require that the perpetrator makes a personal decision outside the 
realms of the Gacaca court to make an apology and ask the survivor forgiveness in private as 
115 Area for further research 
S. BYAMUKAMA 259 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
evidenced in Masamba and Barungi's case. However, the fact that alleged perpetrators are 
required to make a public apology indicates that the Gacaca process aimed at justice, but also 
at reconciliation. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 260 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
GENERAL CONCLUSION 
"A nation's unity depends on a shared identity, which in turn depends largely on a shared 
" 786 memory. 
In the aften-nath of the genocide, Rwanda clearly needed to depart from a culture of 
impunity to one that respects the rule of law. Transitional justice suggests a need for legal and 
institutional reforins whereby perpetrators of human right abuses are held accountable and 
remedies are put in place for the victims of such atrocities. It also requires the society going 
through a transition to establish a historical record of past human rights abuses which can 
pave the way for healing and reconciliation. This sort of transition takes place when new 
accountable leaders investigate and punish those responsible thereby preventing future 
abuses. 
The strength of transitional justice lies at least in part, in allowing the state in 
transition to determine what steps it should take to be able to move from this oppressive past 
to a democratic state that respects the rule of law. As seen in Chapter three, transitional 
justice approaches include absolute or conditional amnesty, usually used to protect general or 
national interests, or simply a state granting itself amnesty to avoid accountability. The state 
may also use truth commissions to investigate past human right abuses, or opt for lustration, 
as was the case in the former Soviet bloc, where foriner political leaders were banned from 
holding public office. International tribunals such as the International Criminal Tribunal for 
Rwanda usually selectively prosecute the planners and mastenninds of the genocide. 
However Rwanda opted for none of these approaches and instead sought to prosecute all 
those who committed the crime of genocide. 
Rwanda's choice of transition was arguably informed by the nature and manner in 
which the crime was committed. As discussed in the thesis, one portion of Rwandan society 
786 Aukerman, 47 
S. BYAMUKAMA 261 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
turned against another group of their fellow citizens, such that neighbour killed neighbour, a 
relative killed another, and former colleagues killed each other, all in full view of other 
members of their community. In addition, alleged perpetrators, survivors and those who 
witnessed the genocide still live together and interact with each other on a daily basis, in the 
very communities that these crimes were committed. Societies such as these, not only need 
those responsible punished, but also aim at reconciliation of the parties to the conflict and the 
communities themselves. 
Rwanda was a state in transition, searching for ways to establish a stable and just 
society, while coming to terms with past atrocities. Traditional state institutions were in 
tatters and lacked the capacity and resources to ensure that perpetrators of genocide were 
brought to justice. As discussed in chapter six, Rwanda found a functioning alternative in its 
own form of transitional justice. This process puts the nature and gravity of crimes into 
context, while also considering the historical, cultural and political context of the society in 
transition, as well as the willingness and ability of the state to act. Transitional Justice is 
unique in that it considers the specific circumstances of the state in transition, and allows the 
state to decide what best suits its situation, in relation to the objectives it sets out to achieve. 
The ultimate benchmark of transitional justice is its very impermanency ... ; it is a transition 
toward something better and longer lasting. Nonetheless, it is not a process that can be 
hurried, and it is also a process that involves compromise. 
For peace and reconciliation to take hold in Rwanda, justice needed to be witnessed 
by the very people who experienced a lack of it. Individual accountability was essential so 
that the guilt of some would not tamish and shame the innocent. By holding individuals 
responsible for their crimes, the Hutu as an ethnic group would not be held collectively 
787 The Gacaca laws have evolved over the years in line with its set objectives. Organic Law 16/2004 was 
amended by Organic Law 10/2007 and has further been amended by Organic Law 13/2008. One of the major 
amendments was to give Gacaca courts additional jurisdiction for some offences previously prosecuted by 
the Ordinary courts such as the crime of rape and sexual torture. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 262 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
responsible for crimes committed by only a proportion of group members. However, with 
more than 800,000 individuals accused of genocide, accountability through the ordinary 
criminal justice system was evidently insufficient. 
The Rwandan government's decision to adopt and modify the use of traditional 
Gacaca courts was, in part, due to the failure of its efforts at criminal justice. As such, the 
state adoption of the Gacaca process was a choice of last resort. Nonetheless, upon reflection 
it became clear that Gacaca possessed a number of components which made it both feasible 
and appealing as a method of transitional justice, including its emphasis on reconciliation, its 
simplicity and less legalist nature, its speed, its participatory and inclusive element, as well as 
the fact that the process was rooted in Rwanda's culture and was familiar to the people. 
The Gacaca process is a promise for the future. It is an attempt to remove the culture 
of impunity and to replace it with respect of the rule of law and an attempt to reconcile 
Rwandans. During the course of the thesis, we have seen that the Gacaca process meets some 
elements of reconciliation in that it encourages communication between parties who would 
otherwise find it hard to have such dialogue; it provides a locus where dialogue takes place; it 
provides justice by prosecuting accused persons; it encourages truth where those who confess 
get reduced sentences, and; it encourages apology and forgiveness by requiring an accused 
person to make an apology as part of their confession in court. Overall, participants express a 
common hope that the process will ultimately bring about the healing of the parties involved. 
The evidence suggests that Gacaca can achieve the objectives of transitional justice. Even in 
Rwanda's deeply traumatised society it is possible to hope that people divided by the past 
need not be divided, or indeed partitioned in the future. 
Notwithstanding, from the outset, the Gacaca process was always a justice of 
compromise. It has been greatly criticised for not adhering to international fair trial standards, 
particularly in its inability to provide legal representation, although the accused have a right 
S. BYAMUKAMA 263 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
to defend themselves. As discussed in Chapter four, providing for legal representation would 
inevitably mean that it would take over one hundred years to prosecute the accused prisoners 
alone. Rwanda's situation calls for a revisit and a rethink of how mass atrocities should be 
dealt with in an internationally acceptable manner. Otherwise, any country choosing to 
prosecute all those responsible for human rights abuses through transitional justice will 
always be criticised for not meeting one international obligation or the other. Failing to try 
alleged perpetrators of genocide for fear of failing to adhere to some international standard of 
fair trial is far worse than not trying at all. 
Despite its many challenges, the Gacaca process can be deemed a genuine, if 
incomplete, success. For instance, the Gacaca process reduces the prison population by 
providing parole for prisoners who confess. As such, prisons are far less over-crowded than 
they were only a few years ago. 788 Additionally, confessions are seen as an effective 
mechanism to speed up the process of trying accused persons. In this respect, Gacaca has 
proven very effective in prosecuting accused persons within its jurisdiction. This has led to 
the re-categorisation of offences giving rise to both Organic laws 10/2007 and 13/2008 which 
have both given the Gacaca courts jurisdiction to prosecute some offences previously under 
the jurisdiction of the Ordinary Courts. 789 Furthermore, where accused persons have 
confessed, they have provided evidence of their crimes, as well as identified their 
collaborators, which is important for creating dossiers for co-accused persons. 
Achieving reconciliation must involve elements of truth, justice, remorse and 
forgiveness and as such, justice is only one strand of the reconciliation process. Unless 
788 Although some released prisoners whose confessions were rejected at their trials were given additional 
custodial sentences, and although some alleged perpetrators in the communities will get custodial sentences, 
prison populations on the whole have reduced. 
781) For example, overzealous murderers, those who committed acts of torture and dehumanising a dead body 
who were placed in Category One in Organic law 16/2004 are now prosecuted under the Gacaca courts 
according to Organic Law 10/2007. In addition, Organic Law 13/2008 provides that the crime of rape, 
previously under the jurisdiction of the ordinary court system is now prosecuted in Gacaca Sector courts in 
camera. Rape as Fletcher confirms was a tool of the genocide. Luke Fletcher, (2007), 25 
S. BYAMUKAMA 264 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
perpetrators are held accountable for their crimes, there is nothing to deter them from 
considering repeating their crimes in the future, nor are they made to publicly acknowledge 
their role and responsibility in destroying the lives of others and ensuring the suffering of the 
few who survived. As suggested in Chapter seven, achieving reconciliation (or at least paving 
way for it) required that the alleged perpetrator confess to the crimes committed and make a 
public apology. 
Where an accused person has confessed to genocide and has publicly apologised, this 
indicates a sense of remorse. This is a meaningful gesture for survivors and can make way for 
further dialogue and possibly eventual reconciliation. Gacaca laws expect an accused 
perpetrator to make a public apology at their trial. The public apology is perceived as a 
positive step towards reconciliation because perpetrators acknowledge their crimes in a 
public forum, thereby openly acknowledging the pain and suffering they have caused to their 
victims. As seen in Chapter seven, some alleged perpetrators confess to genocide crimes and 
indeed apologise for their crimes in an open forum, but are still not remorseful for their 
crimes. The possibility of significantly reducing an alleged perpetrators' sentence if he 
confesses is incentive enough to confess and publicly apologise. It does not necessanly 
follow that by confessing, the accused is remorseful for the crimes he committed. 
The empirical data suggests that a public apology in Gacaca courts is in itself an 
insufficient indicator that an accused person is truly remorseful for the cnmes committed. 
The empirical data suggests that a number of survivors were sceptical about the intentions of 
alleged perpetrators making apologies. According to my research, examples of survivors and 
alleged perpetrators who have reconciled are when the alleged perpetrator made the extra 
effort to go to his victim's home and personally asked for forgiveness. This suggests that 
reconciliation between individuals happens beyond the public realm and is deeply personal in 
nature. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 265 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
As a criminal justice process, the court is more interested in the facts of the genocide 
and evidence that the alleged perpetrator committed the cnmes alleged and less interested in 
the sentiments attached to the process. In acquiring such evidence, alleged perpetrators may 
sometimes give gruesome details of how they killed their victims, and this to survivors was 
viewed as insensitive and sometimes cynical, particularly if they perceive that the alleged 
perpetrator is not to remorseful for his or her crimes. According to the empirical data, 
survivors suggested that the general public sides with alleged perpetrators if they refuse to 
testify. Where a society is divided into plaintiffs, alleged perpetrators and those that 
sympathise with them, reconciliation between the parties becomes difficult. 
Reconciliation and apology-making can be perceived to be in conflict with Gacaca 
trial principles where the accused has a right to defend him or herself When an accused 
person defends him or herself, or tries to lessen their responsibility, survivors can easily 
interpret these gestures and words as evidence of a lack of personal accountability. 
However, because Gacaca is a criminal trial process that carries penalties, accused persons 
against whom evidence is weak are naturally tempted to deny or minimise their involvement. 
Both survivors and some alleged perpetrators suggested the Gacaca trial arena is not 
necessarily the best place to ask for an apology. 
While public apology is undeniably important, a separate one-on-one apology seems 
to bring about better results than simply making a public apology. This is pnmarily because 
reconciliation is a voluntary process. Where accused persons are asked to apologise and 
confess in order to get reduced sentences, the primary objective of such confessions may be 
viewed as to benefit from the incentive provided. Where an alleged perpetrator by his own 
free will and without any incentives provided, makes an apology to his victim in private, such 
apology is perceived to be driven by remorse. Survivors' interests lie, at least in part, in 
seeing evidence of the perpetrator's remorse, which according to the empirical data, is tested 
S. BYAMUKAMA 266 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
by the perpetrator's willingness to make an apology to the victim in private. According to 
survivors, this personal interaction indicates that the perpetrator is no longer a threat. 790 
Truth is an important ingredient for reconciliation. When an accused has been tried 
and detailed his or her crimes, however gruesome, this has a positive consequence for both 
justice and reconciliation. Survivors of genocide need to know the truth of who was 
responsible for the deaths of their loved ones and where their bodies were dumped so they 
can finally be given a decent burial. This brings closure to the long quest for the truth and 
addresses their suspicions about who was responsible. When a person has been publicly tried 
and has publicly apologised for the crimes he or she committed in the communities in which 
these crimes took place and which the parties to the conflict live, this allows for the survivors 
pain and suffering to be publicly acknowledged. 
Having discussed the challenges of a dual-objective transitional justice system, and 
establishing the generally positive outcomes of the Gacaca process, there are a number of 
themes that emerge from my research that merit attention. These include witness protection 
needs, survivor reparations, limited bystander participation, and emerging genocide ideology 
among young people. 
Priority must be given to providing adequate witness protection to individuals who 
witnessed atrocities but who remain reluctant to testify in court. lbuka suggests that at least 
one or two genocide survivors are killed every month and suggests that "the ultimate reason 
behind the killings is to block and scare away genocide survivors from testifying in Gacaca 
courts. , 791 As seen in Chapter seven, there are real difficulties in providing witness protection 
because witnesses may be at risk from relatives, often living in the same community and 
790 According to document research, including newspaper reports as well as empirical data, potential witnesses 
are sometimes intimidated and killed by perpetrators in an effort to "kill off evidence. " However, when the 
alleged perpetrator has made an apology to a survivor of genocide in private, these fears disappear, a point 
survivors were eager to highlight. 
/i 1 http:,,, "/news. bbc. co. uk/l, 'hi, 'world, 'africa/3324871. stni (Accessed 2nd August 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 267 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
sometimes even in the same house. In addition, punishment for persons who engage in 
witness intimidation should be guaranteed prosecution and the sentences rendered made 
severe enough to deter the public from committing such crimes. Dunng my research I came 
across protected witnesses, but the fact that some are still targeted suggests that more should 
be done to this end. 
The empirical data also recognises the need for reparation to the injured party, namely 
survivors. While Gacaca courts provide for the general reparation of the community through 
community service, the empirical data suggests that alleged perpetrators who have reconciled 
with their victims are those who have performed additional acts of reparation such as 
repairing roofs, splitting firewood and ploughing the land. The difficulty with this kind of 
reparation is that it cannot be measured. It is difficult to assess how long an alleged 
perpetrator will have to perfonn these acts of reparation to be fully reconciled. 
A source of some concern over the participatory nature Gacaca lies in the limited 
involvement of people in the community who are neither survivors nor perpetrators. The 
majority of Rwandans who participate in Gacaca courts do so because the process is of 
potential benefit to them. Unsurprisingly, survivors of genocide are the usual plaintiffs in 
practice. However, it is troubling that there is limited intervention by the general public. As 
explained in chapter six and seven, there are a number of reasons that potential witnesses 
decline to testify, including personal relationships and proximity with the perpetrators, as 
well as possible fear of intimidation. Nevertheless, where possible, the government should do 
more to address these reasons and ensure that the community, beyond the survivors, feels 
committed to and engaged in the process of justice and reconciliation. 
While it is plausible to say that some reconciliation is taking place between 
perpetrators and survivors, Rwanda is currently facing a new problem. During my interviews, 
S. BYAMUKAMA 268 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
I came across evidence suggesting that young survivors of genocide are bullied, intimidated 
and some have opted out of or changed schools as a result. 792 The scope of this thesis did not 
allow for further research in this area. Recent reports indicate the high level of genocide 
ideology in secondary schools. 793 Parents, teachers and head teachers have been partly 
blamed for this increase. 794 The Government has established civic education for teachers and 
head teachers as a means to counter and address the spread of genocide ideology in schools. 
The government claims zero tolerance of such activities, and parliament is currently setting 
laws that severely punish such criminal acts. Although the resurgence of genocidal ideology 
is not directly related to the Gacaca process, which concentrates on those who committed 
genocide crimes in 1994, the fact that there are such reports, especially among the sizable 
youth population is worrying. I suggest that this is an area worthy of further researeh. 
Having observed ongoing Gacaca courts and interviewed all the stakeholders in the 
process, we must assess whether Gacaca meets the objectives it set out to achieve and 
whether the proeess is fit for purpose as a means for transitional justiee. First, I highlight the 
two key themes, justice and reconciliation, that are recurrent throughout this thesis. The 
empirical data has shown that these objectives, while often complimentary, are sometimes 
conflicting. Ensuring that both objectives are equally met has proven to be difficult. All the 
parties expect justice to be done and reconciliation to take place, and expectations are that 
792 Some students are reported to have developed a habit of writing to each other anonymous genocide-fuelling 
letters. One of the letters presented as evidence said, "m inzoka, baraturambiye kandi tuzabica", which is 
literally translated to mean "they are snakes. We are fed up with them and we will kill 
them". Iittp: //w-, vw. rwandaRateway. or. i/article. php3'? id article=7887 (Accessed loth August 2008) 
793 Article 2 of Organic Law 10/2007 defines genocide ideology as "behaviour, way of speaking, written 
documents and any other actions meant to wipe out human beings on the basis of their ethnic group, origin, 
nationality, religion, colour of skin, physical traits, sex, language, religion or political opinions. " 
794 Authorities in secondary schools such as Association pour la Culture, I'Education et le Development Integre 
de Mataba in Gakenke District, were found to have introduced and encouraged different uniforms for 
genocide survivors. http: //www. rwanda. gatewav. org/article. php3? id article7887 (Accessed 10 August 
2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 269 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
both must happen quickly and simultaneously. However, the actual enforcement of 
transitional justice has proved challenging. 795 
The fitness for purpose of the Gacaca process can be measured by what it is set out to 
achieve and whether this has been achieved. As Kriesberg suggests, reconciliation occurs 
along four dimensions; truth, justice, remorse and forgiveness, and personal or group safety 
and security. 796 Forgiving is almost impossible if one doesn't know who and what they 
should forgive. There can never be closure without knowing what happened to your loved 
ones. Without truth, of who did what, suspicions remain. The Gacaca process boasts that it 
has removed the lingering spirit of suspicion by encouraging debates and trials geared at 
identifying the accused, as well as penalising them for their actions. One can therefore 
conclude that the Gacaca courts are carrying out their task as effectively as the circumstances 
allow. There are genuine instances of justice and of genuine reconciliation. However, the 
limited scope of confessions being provided and the ongoing intimidation of potential 
witnesses require further government action to make the Gacaca process more potent. 
We can conclude that the strength of the Gacaca process, and also its greatest 
challenge, lies in its dual role of providing both justice and reconciliation. It is imperative that 
the accused must be held accountable for the crimes committed in such a way as to put an end 
to impunity and to deter both the alleged perpetrator and the general public from committing 
these crimes in the future. It is only by holding the accused individually responsible for the 
crimes committed that reconciliation can take place. However, the essence of reconciliation is 
that parties to a conflict take a voluntary initiative to acknowledge their responsibility and 
guilt and engage in a self-reflection of their role and behaviour in the conflict. As a criminal 
justice process, accused persons are tried on the basis of the enmes committed and whether 
these crimes fall within the jurisdiction of Gacaca courts. Accused persons do not voluntarily 
See chapter seven 
Kriesberg, 60 
S. BYAMUKAMA 270 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
decide to be tried through the Gacaca process on the basis that they acknowledge their crimes 
and would like to make amends with their victims. In addition, accused persons who wish to 
benefit from reduced penalties are required by law to make a public apology in addition to 
confessing for the cnmes committed. The empirical data suggests that because apology 
making is a statutory requirement, survivors of genocide question the motive behind making 
such an apology. Many survivors suggested that confessions were made to get reduced 
sentences rather than remorse or acknowledgement of the cnmes committed. As such, 
survivors of genocide were more interested in confessions and apologies made in private, and 
outside the Gaeaca courts. 
That said, a public acknowledgement of the crimes committed and a public apology is 
the beginning of reconciliation. The fact that they publicly confess enables the truth of what 
happened in the genocide to be revealed. As suggested in Chapter four, truth is Just as 
powerful and is almost more urgently needed than the demand for justice because it allows 
for public acknowledgement of the pain and suffering of the survivors of genocide. Truth of 
what happened also allows for a clear understanding of not only how and why the crunes 
were committed, but also how these can be avoided in the future. Exposure of the past crimes 
ensures that it never happens again because naming and shaming can be a deterrence in itself 
As discussed in chapter four, the Gacaca process is also restorative in nature and 
presupposes that justice measures must be flexible enough to respond to the particular needs 
of the parties involved. It aims at putting things right and making good the hann done. In so 
doing, the Gacaca process, as a restorative justice process specifically encourages parties to a 
conflict to meet face to face and have an active role in the decision making process. The 
alleged perpetrator through this process is expected to understand the harm caused and make 
amends for the wrong done. The sentences rendered through the Gacaca process include 
community service- Travaux dInteret Generaux (TIG), which ensures that those found guilty 
S. BYAMUKAMA 271 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
of genocide crimes take an active role in the reconstruction of the country and the 
communities they destroyed. 
The Gacaca process is a platforni and starting point through which reconciliation 
between individual parties can be realised. It is a place of dialogue between parties to the 
conflict and it is precisely after the alleged perpetrators have been held accountable for the 
crimes committed in Gacaca courts that reconciliation can take place. Although survivors of 
genocide suggested that they are interested in a one on one dialogue in which an alleged 
perpetrator makes an apology and asks for forgiveness, this is only possible with an existing 
institutional justice system where alleged perpetrators are publicly held accountable for the 
crimes committed that this is possible. The reconciliation process does not end with the 
Gacaca process, but in fact the Gacaca process is the starting point for reconciliation. The 
government for example helps accused persons who have confessed to genocide crimes and 
survivors of genocide to form associations and cooperatives with an economic agenda which 
helps in poverty alleviation. Working together for economic gain fosters reconciliation 
between the parties. 
This thesis builds on the existing literature on transitional justice and suggests that in 
achieving justice and reconciliation in transitional societies such as Rwanda, a combination 
of both retributive and restorative justice is not only feasible but necessary. Prosecuting 
genocide and crimes against humanity on a scale such as Rwanda's through international 
criminal tribunals is necessary but insufficient. Transitional societies are capable of using 
their domestic laws and judicial institution to positively contribute to the stop of impunity. 
The thesis also emphasises the importance of traditional courts which, although 
having lost their main stream status during the colonial and post colonial era, are still popular, 
particularly in the villages. The majority of African countries have traditional courts which 
are still functioning alongside the main stream criminal justice process. Considering that the 
S. BYAMUKAMA 272 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
African continent has had a number of human rights abuses and alleged international law 
crimes, the Rwandan example gives hope for such societies and shows that where there is a 
political will, states are capable of using both their domestic criminal justice process and their 
traditional courts to fight the culture of impunity. Neighbouring Uganda for example has, 
through its Justice Law and Order Sector forum, sought means of integrating Gacaca 
concepts as an effective transitional justice mechanism to deal with human rights abuses that 
have for over twenty years taken place in Northern Uganda. 797 Sole reliance on the 
international community through international tribunals to resolve international law crimes is 
insufficient. The Rwandan example has provided precedent of prosecuting large numbers of 
perpetrators. We can hope that as a result, states will not be so naIve as to encourage their 
citizens to commit serious international law crimes with an implied promise of impunity 
because the numbers are simply too many to be held individually accountable. 
Because of the precise objectives of the thesis, the research does not cover some areas 
which I recommend for further research. If the objective of the Gacaca process is to hold 
accountable all those who participated in the genocide so as to stop the culture of impunity, 
chmes committed by both the Rwandan Patriotic Army and the French involvement require 
further investigation. The Rwandan Government has so far arrested four senior officials of 
the Rwanda Patriotic Front RPF (ruling party) of genocide crimes. In addition, The Rwandan 
government on the 5 th August 2008 released a report investigated by the Mucyo Commission 
in which it accused the French government of genocide involvement. The report suggests that 
France was aware of the preparation of the genocide, trained the Hutu militia who carried out 
these atrocities and actively participated in the genocide. Debate on such findings is 
necessary not only to set the record straight but to break this culture of impunity. 
797 http: //newtimes. co. r\x,., "index. php? issue13612&article=8451 (Accessed 4 th August 2008) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 273 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
This research also does not cover the position of women and children during and after 
the genocide. Current research suggests that up to 250,000 women and girls were victims of 
some fon-n of sexual violence. 798 Because the majority of those who died or perpetrated the 
genocide and as a result either fled the country or are in prison are men, 34 percent of 
households are headed by women, a responsibility traditionally carried out by men. It is also 
estimated that 400,000 to 500,000 children were adopted and fostered by families and women 
headed households. 799 Women play a significant role in their communities and as such, 
research into the role they play in transitional Rwanda not only at the grassroots but also in 
decision making organs is important. Although the Government has encouraged participation 
of women in all sectors 800 , more 
is needed to this end. 
This research recognises the importance of a number of activities that take place after 
the Gacaca process such as economic cooperatives and associations by confessed perpetrators 
and survivors of genocide, the works of the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission 
such as civic education, but does not exhaustively deal with them. The empirical data 
suggests that the Gacaca process is only the beginning of reconciliation. Therefore research 
into these "follow-up" activities and the extent to which they provide reconciliation is 
important. 
The Gacaca system is not a perfect system. It clearly has its shortcomings, but is by 
far the only alternative for Rwanda. The advantages of the Gacaca process far outweigh its 
disadvantages. This forin of transitional Justice clearly stated that all Rwandans have a right 
to life and to a country. More importantly, it has "separated the spoilt eggs from the good 
798 66 percent of those raped have tested positive to HIV/AIDS. Izabiliza Jeanne, "The Role Of Women In 
Reconstruction: Experience Of Rwanda, " 
http: //portal. unesco. or,, /shs, l'eii/files/9184/1138716241 I Presentation Jeanne Izabiliza. pdf/Presentation"`/`2B- 
%2BJeanne%2BIzabilizq. pdf (Accessed 101h August 2008) 
799 Ibid 
800 For example 29 percent of Gacaca judges are women, a significant percentage considering that traditionally 
women did not take part in the Gacaca process. Ibid 
S. BYAMUKAMA 274 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
ones" ensuring that the country was no longer destined to be forever divided into two distinct 
groups, murderers and victims. Instead, by hastening individual trials in a public forum, the 
Gacaca process can be seen to have dispensed justice and contributed to the long journey of 
reconciliation in the country. 
The Gacaca courts of Rwanda are a worthwhile illustration of the possibilities and the 
limitations presented by alternative recourses to justice that attempt to combine the elements 
of justice and reconciliation. As one survivor clearly put it, "If I was the Government, I 
would have not come up with a better alternative... however judges still need to be impartial 
and potential witnesses need proteetion. "801 
'0' Interview with the Vice Rector, Finance and Administration, KIST 17'h July 2006 
S. BYAMUKAMA 275 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
BOOKS 
Adelman Howard, Early Warning Signs and Conflict Management, (York University, 
Toronto Canada, 1996) 
African Rights, Gacaea Justice: A Shared Responsibility, (Kigali: African Rights, 2003) 
African Rights, Confessing to Genocide: Responses to Rwanda's Genocide Law, (Kigali: 
African Rights, 2000) 
Aftican Rights, Rwanda: The Insurgency in the Northwest, (London: Affican Rights 
publication, 1998) 
African Rights, Rwanda: Death, Despair and Defiance (London: African Rights, 1995) 
Affican Rights, Rwanda: Killing The Evidence, Murder, Attacks, Arrests And Intimidation Qf 
Survivors And Witnesses, (London: African Rights, 1996) 
Ashworth Andrew and Redinayne Mike, The Criminal Process, 3d ed, (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2005) 
Ayres Ian and John Braithwaite, Responsive Regulation: Transcending the Deregulation 
Debate, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002) 
Bankowski Z. K., N. R Hutton. J. J. McManus, Lay Justice (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1987) 
Barnet Michael, Eyewitness to Genocide, The United Nations and Rwanda, (New York: 
Cornell University Press, 2002) 
Beigbeder, Yves, Judging War Criminals: The Politics ofInternational Justice. (Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 1999) 
Bloomfield David, Reconciliation: An Introduction, in Reconciliation After Violent Conflict: 
A Handbook, (Stockholm: Intemational IDEA, 2003) (available at 
http: //www. idea. int/publications/reconciliation/upload/reconcillation_full. t)df) 
Bowling and C. Phillips, Racism, Crime and Justice, (Essex: Person Education Limited, 
2002) 
Brooks Peter, Troubling Coifessions, Speaking Guilty in Law and Literature, (University of 
Chicago Press, 2000) 
Bryman Alan, Social Research Methods, (Oxford: Oxford University Press) 
Burgees. G. Robert, Elements of Sampling in Field Research, Field Research: A Source Book 
and Field Manual, (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1982) 
Cassese, Antonio, International Criminal Law, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 276 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Claire De Than and Shorts Edwin, International Criminal law and Human Rights, (Sweet and 
Maxwell, 2003) 
Clerk Phil, Justice Without Lawyers, (University of Oxford: Doctorial Thesis, 2005) 
Clifford G. Christians, "Ethics And Politics In Qualitative Research", in Norman K Denzin, 
Yvonna S Lincoln, Handbook of Qualitative Research, 2 nd ed, (London: Sage Publications, 
2000) 138. 
Dallaire, R, Shake Hands with the Devil: The Failure of Humanity in Rwanda, (Toronto: 
Rando, House, 2003) 
Des Liebhafsky Forges, Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda, (London: Human 
Rights Watch, 1999) 
Destexhe Alain, Rwanda and the Genocide in the 20'h Century (London: Pluto Press, 1995) 
Devereux Stephen and John Hoddinott, Fieldwork in Developing Countries, (Hampstead: 
Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992) 
Eagleton Terry: Ideology: An Introduction, (London: Verso, 1989) 
Eltringham Nigel, Accounting for Horror: Post Genocide debated in Rwanda, (London: 
2004) 
Fatic, Aleksandar, Reconciliation via the War Crimes Tribunal, (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000). 
Ferencz, Benjamin B. An International Criminal Court: A Step toward World Peace. (New 
York: Oceana, 1980) 
Gasana Enmmanuel, Butera Jean Bosco, Comprehending and Mastering African Conflicts: 
the Searchfor Sustainable Peace and Good Governance, (London: Zed Books, 1999) 
Galtung Johan, "After Violence, Reconstruction, Reconciliation and Resolution: Coping with 
the Visible and Invisible Effects of War and Violence", in Mohammed Abu Nimer, 
Reconciliation, Justice and Coexistence, (ed), (Lanham, MD: Lexington books, 2001) 
Gerson Kathleen and Ruth Horowitz , 
"Observation and Interviewing: Options and Choices 
in Qualitative Research", in Tim May, Qualitative Research in Action, (London, Sage 
Publications, 2002) 
Goldstone, Richard J, Prosecuting War Criminals, (London: David Davies Memorial 
Institute of International Studies, 1996) 
Gourevitch, Philip, We Wish To Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our 
Families: Stories From Rwanda, (New York: Farrar, Straut & Giroux, 1998) 
Griffiths David, Confessions: Scottish Criminal Law and Practice Series, (Edinburgh: 
Butterworth and co Publishers, 1994) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 277 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Glynis M. Breakwell, Problems in Practice Interviewing, (London: Bntish Psychological 
Society and Routledge ltd, BPS, 1990) 
Gubrium Jabber, Handbook on Interview Research: Context and Method, (London: SAGE 
Publications, 2002) 
Haley John, "Crime Prevention through Restorative Justice: Lessons from Japan, " in Burt 
Galaway and Joe Hudson, Restorative Justice: An International Perspective, (Amsterdam: 
Criminal Justice Press and Kugler Publishers, 1996) 
Hatzfelf Jean, Into the Quick ofLife: The Rwandan Genocide: The Survivors Speak, (London: 
Serpents Tail, 2005a) 
Hatzfelf Jean, Into the Quick of Life: The Rwandan Genocide: The Killers in Rwanda Speak, 
(London: Serpents Tail, 2005b) 
Harrell E. Peter, Rwanda's Gamble: Gacaca and a New Model of Transitional Justice, (New 
York: Writers Club Press, 2003) 
Hayner Pricilla, Unspeakable Truths: Confronting State Terror and Atrocity, (London: 
Routledge, 2002) 
Heberling J. L, "Plea Negotiation in England", in John Baldwin and A. Keith Bottomley, 
Criminal Justice: Selected Readings, (London: Martin Robertson, 1978) 
Human Rights Watch, Genocide, War Crimes And Crimes Against Humanity, Topical 
Digests of the Case Law of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the 
international Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, (New York: Human Rights 
Watch, February 2004) 
Human Rights Watch, Struggling to Survive: Barriers to Justice for Rape Victims in Rwanda 
(New York: Human Rights Watch, 2004) 
Available: I ttti:.,, "/Iii-Nv. or,, 4/rei-)orts,,, "2004., i-wanclaO9O4i'rwitidiO9O4, pl. i' 
Human Rights Watch, Accountability for Past Human Rights Abuses, Special Issue No. 4 
(New York: Human Rights Watch, 1989) 
Jones, John R. W. D, The Practice qf the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former 
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, (Ardsley: Transnational Publishers, 2000) 
Joyner, Christopher C. The United Nations and International Law. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997) 
Kriesberg Louis, "Changing Fon-ns of Coexistence", in Mohamed Abu Nimer, 
Reconciliation, Justice and Coexistence: Theory and Practice, (Lexington books, 200 1) 
Kritz, Neil J., ed. Transitional Justice: How Emerging Democracies Reckon With Former 
Regimes, 1-3, (United States Institute of Peace, Washington DC, 1996) 
Kuper Leo, Genocide: Its Political use in the 20'h Century, (London: Penguin Books, 198 1) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 278 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Kuper Leo, The Prevention of Genocide, (New Haven/ London: Yale University Press, 1985) 
Kvale, Steinar, Interviews: An introduction to Qualitative research Interviewing, (Thousand 
Oaks California: SAGE Publications, 1996) 
Kvale, Steiner, Interviews: An introduction to Qualitative Interviewing, (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publication, 1996) 
Laudan Larry, Truth Error and Criminal Law, An Essay in Legal Epistemology, (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006) 
Lederach John Paul, Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies, 
(Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, 1998) 
Lemarchand Rene, Selective Genocide in Burundi, (London: Minority Rights Group, 1974) 
Lemarchand Ren6, Rwanda and Burundi, (London: Praeger, 1970) 
Lemkin, R, Axis Rules in Occu ied Europe, Analysis of Government, Proposals for Redress, 
(Washington: Carnegie Endowment for World Peace, 1944) 
Liebmann Marian, Restorative Justice: How it Works, (London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 
2007) 
Linden Ian, Linden Jane, Church and Revolution in Rwanda, (New York: Manchester 
University Press, 1977) 
Magnarelle. J. Paul, Justice in Africa: Rwanda's Genocide, Its Courts and The International 
Criminal Tribunal, (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000) 
Mamdani M, When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism and the Genocide in 
Rwanda, (Oxford: James Currey, 2001) 
Marshall Tory, Punishment and Politics: Evidence and Emulation in the Making of English 
Crime Control Policy, (Devon: William Publishing, 2004) 
Marshall Tony, Restorative Justice: An Overview, (London: A Report by the Home Office: 
Research Development and Statistics Directorate, 1999) 
www. bomeoffice. ,,, ov. uk/rdf -resjus. pdf, Zpdfs/occ 
Mason Jennifer, Qualitative Research, 2 nd ed (London: SAGE Publications, 2002) 
McConville Mike, 'Plea Bargaining', in Mike McConville and Geoffrey Wilson, The 
Handbook of The Criminal Justice Process, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002) 
Melvern Linda, Conspiracy to Murder, The Rwandan Genocide, (London: Zed books, 
2004) 
Melvern Linda, A People Betrayed, The Role of the West in Rwanda'S Genocide, (London: 
Zed Books, 2000) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 279 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Molenaar Arthur, Gacaca: Grassroots Justice After Genocide, The Key to Reconciliation in 
Rwanda? (Leiden: Affican Studies Centre, Research Report 77/2005) 
Minor Martha, Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History After Genocide and 
Mass Violence (Boston: Beacon Press 1998) 
Nigel Walker, Why Punish, (Oxford: Oxford University Press 199 1) 
Othman Mohamed, Accountabilityfor International Humanitarian Law Violations: The Case 
of Rwanda and East Timor, (Berlin: Spnnger, 2005) 
Patton, M. Q. Qualitative Researeh and Evaluation Methods, 3 rd ed (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE Publications, 2002) 
I Pottier Johan, Re-Imagining Rwanda, Conflict, Survival and Disinformation in the 20 th 
Century, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2002) 
Provine, Doris Marie, Judging Credentials: Non-Lawyer Judges and the Politics of 
Professionalism, (Chicago: University of Chicago press, 1986) 
Prunier Gerald, The Rwanda Crisis 1959-1994, History of Genocide, (Kampala: Kampala 
Publishers, 1995) 
Reyntjens, Filip and Stef Vandeginste, "Rwanda: A Typical Transition. " in Elin Skaar, Roads 
to Reconciliation, (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005) 
Rigby Andrew, Justice and Reconciliation After the Violence, (London: Lynne Rienner 
Publishers, 2001) 
Roper S. D and Barria L. A, Designing Criminal Tribunals: Sovereignty and International 
Concerns in the Protection ofIfuman Rights, (Hampshire: Ashgate, 2006) 
Roche Declan, "Retribution and Restorative Justice", in Gerry Johnstone and Daniel W. Van 
Ness, Handbook on Restorative Justice, (Devon: Willian Publishers, 2007) 
Rwigarnba Andrew, Justice And Reconciliation as Instruments Of Political Stability in Post 
Genocide Situations: A Case Study OfRwanda, Thesis, (Nairobi: 2005) 
Setiloane Gabriel 
-41ican 
Theology An Introduction, (Johannesburg: Skotaville Publishers, 
1996) 
Sanders Andrew and Young Richard, Criminal Justice, 2 nd ed (London: Buttonworths Lenix 
Nexis, 2002) 
Schabas, William A. Introduction to the International Criminal Court, 2nd ed, (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004) 
Schabas, William, Genocide in International Law, (Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 
2000) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 280 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Schabas W. A. and M. Imbleau, Introduction to Rwandan Law (Montreal: Editions Yvon 
Blais, 1997) 
Scharf, Michael P. Balkan Justice: The Story Behind the First International War Crimes 
Trial since Nuremberg. (Durham: Carolina Academic Press, 1997) 
Scheltema C and Vander Wolf, The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda: Facts, Cases 
and Documents, Global Law Association 1995 
Semujanga, J. Origins ofRwandan Genocide (New York: Humanity Books, 2003) 
Sharyn L. Roach, Anleu: Law and Social Change, (London: SAGE Publications, 2000) 
Shyaka. A, The Rwandan Conflict, Origin, Development, Exit Strategies, (Kigali: Select 
Graph Publishers, 2005) 
Shedreght E. Van, The Criminal Responsibilities of Individualfor Violations of International 
Humanitarian Law, (The Hague: Asser Press, 2003) 
Stainier, C, Organisation, comp&ence etfonctionnement des Juridictions Gacaca charges 
des poursuites et dujugement des infractions constitutives A crime de gnocide et d'autres 
crimes contre Vhumanit commis entre le Jer Octobre 1990 et le 31 dcembre 1994, 
(Avocats Sans Fronti6res, Brussels 2004) 
Staub Ervin, The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence, 
(London: Cambridge University Press, 1989) 
Steiner Henry J, Philip Alston, International Human Rights in Context, Law Politics, Morals, 
2 nd ed (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000) 
Tor Sellstrorn, Wohlgernuth, Lennart, International Response to Conflict and Genocide 
Lessons ftom the Rwandan Experience, Historical Perspective, Some Explanatory Facts, 
Joint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda, (Sweden: The Nordic Affican Institute 
Upp Sale, (March 1996) 
Tuhiwai Smith Linda, Decolonizing Methodologies, Research and Indigenous People, 
(London: Zed Books, 2004) 
Uvin Peter, Aiding Violence: The Development Enterprise in Rwanda (Connecticut: 
Kurnanan Press, 1998) 
Uwe Flick, An Introduction to Qualitative Research, (London: SAGE Publications, 2002) 
Uwe Flick, An Introduction to Qualitative Research, (London: SAGE Publications, 1998) 
Villa-Vicencio Charles "Identity, Culture, and Belonging: Religious and Cultural Rights" 
John Witte, Jr. and Johan D. van der Vyver eds, Religious Human Rights in Global 
PerspeetNes: Religious Perspectives (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1996) 
Waugh M, Collin, Paul Kagame and Rwanda; Power, Genocide and the Rwandan 
Patriotic Front, (London: McFarland, 2004 
S. BYAMUKAMA 281 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Wayne Fife, Doing Field Work, Ethnographic Methods for Research in Developing 
Countries and Beyond, (Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005) 
Zander Michael, Cases and Materials on the English Legal System, I Oth ed, (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007) 
Zander Michael, Cases and Materials on the English Legal System, (London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1988) 
Zappala, S, Human Rights in International Criminal Proceedings, (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003) 
Zehr Howard, Changing Lenses: A New Focusfor Crime and Justice, (Scottdale, PA: Herald 
Press, 1990) 
ARTICLES 
Akhavan, Payam, "The Crime of Genocide in the ICTR Jurisprudence, " Journal of 
International Criminal Justice 3(4) (2005) 989-1006 
Akhavan, Payam. "Justice and Reconciliation in the Great Lakes Region of Aftica: The 
Contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. " Duke Journal of 
Comparative and International Law, 7(2) (1997) 325-348 
Akhavan, Payam. "The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda: The Politics and 
Pragmatics of Punishment. " American Journal qfInternational Law, 90(3) (1996) 5 01-5 10 
Alvarez, Jos6 E. "Crimes of States/Crimes of Hate: Lessons from Rwanda. " Yale Journal of 
International Law 24 (2) (1999) 365-483 
Alvarez, Jos6 E. "Nuremberg Revisited: The Tadic Case", European Journal ofInternational 
Law, 7(2) (1996) 245-264. 
Arsanjani, Mahnoush H. "The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. " American 
Journal ofInternational Law, 93(l) (1999) 22-43 
Aukerman, Miriam, "Extraordinary Evil, Ordinary Crime: A Framework for understanding 
Transitional Justice" Harvard Human Rights Journal, 15, (2002) 
Bar- Tar-Daniel, Gemma Bunnick, "The Nature of Reconciliation as an Outcome and As a 
Process, " in Yaacov Bar Siman Tov, From Conflict Resolution to Reconciliation, (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004) 11-3 8 
Bagaric Mirko and Morss John, "International Sentencing Law: In Search of a Justification 
and Coherent Framework ", International Criminal Law Review, 6 (2006) 191-225 
Baldwin John and Michael McConville, "The Influence of Sentence Discount in Inducing 
Guilty Pleas" Criminal Justice, Selected Reading, (London: Martin Robertson, 1978) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 282 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Baines Erin K, "The Haunting of Alice: Local Approaches to Justice and Reconciliation in 
Northern Uganda", International Journal of Transitional Justice" l(l)(2007) 91-114. 
http: //ijtj. oxfordjoumal. M. (Accessed 5/2/2008) 
Bassiouni, M. Cherif, "International Crimes: Jus Cogens and Obligatio Erga Omnes. " Law 
and Contemporary Problems, 59 (4) (1996) 63-74 
Bassiouni, M. Chenf, "Searching for Peace and Achieving Justice: The Need for 
Accountability. " Law and Contemporary Problems, 59(4) (1996) 9-28 
Bassiouni, M. Cherif and Edward M. Wise, "Aut Dedere Aut Judicare: The Duty to Extradite 
or Prosecute in International Law", The American Journal ofInternational Law, 91(l) (1997) 
204-205 
Borton John, "The International Response to Conflict and Genocide", Lessons from the 
Rwandan Experience, Study 3, Humanitarian Aid and Effects1doint, Evaluation of 
Emergency Assistance to Rwanda, (March 1996) 
Boyle David, "The Right of Victims: Participation, Representation, Protection and 
Reparation, " Journal ofInternational Criminal Justice, (2006) 307-313 
Braithwaite John: "Restorative Justice and a Better Future, " Restorative Justice; Critical 
Issues, (London: 2003) 54-65 
Braithwaite John: "Setting Standards for Restorative Justice, " The British Journal of 
Criminology, 142(3) (n 2002) 563-577 
Braun Virginia and Clarke Victoria, "Using Thematic analysis in Psychology", Qualitative 
Research in Psychology, 3 (2006) 77-101 
Broun6us Karen, "Reconciliation, Theory and Practice for Development Cooperation, " A 
Reportfor the Swedish International Development Cooperation Ageney, Uppsale University, 
Department ofPeaee and Confliet researeh, (2003) 
Burnside Jonathan, "Retributive and Restoration in Biblical Texts, " in Gerry Johnstone and 
Daniel W. Van Ness, Handbook on Restorative Justice, (Devon: Willian Publishers (2007) 
Byarnukarna S, Huntley J, "Justice in the Aften-nath of the 1994 Rwanda Genocide, A Study 
of Gacaca Courts" in Ralph Henharn and Paul Behrens, The Criminal Law of Genocide 
International, Comparative and Contextual Aspects, Series: International and Comparative 
Criminal Justice, (2007) 231-244 
Carcano, A. "Sentencing and the Gravity of the Offence in International Criminal Law, " 
International and Comparative Law Quarterly, 583, (2002) 
Cassese, Antonio, "Reflections on International Criminal Justice", Modern Law Review 61,1 
(Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 1998) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 283 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Cassese, Antonio. "On the Current Trends Towards Criminal Prosecution and Punishment of 
Breaches of International Humanitarian Law. " European Journal Qf International Law 9,1 
(1998) 2-17. 
Cavanagh, T, "Adopting New Values for the Courts: What is Restorative Justice? The Court 
Manager, " Kimmett Edger and Tim Newell, Restorative Justice in Prisons, A Guide to 
making it Happen, 13 (2,3) (Williamsburg, VA: National Association for Court Management, 
1998) 24-27. 
Chakravarty Anuradha, Gacaca Courts in Rwanda: Explaining Divisions within the Human 
Rights Community, Yale Journal ofInternational Affairs (2006) 132-145 
Clark, Roger S. and Madeleine Sann, eds. The Prosecution of International Crimes (New 
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1996) 
Cohen Stanley, "State Crimes and Previous Regimes: Knowledge, Accountability, and the 
Policing of the Past, " Law and Social Enquiry, 20(l) (1995, ) 7-50 
Ciss&, Catherine, "The End of a Culture of Impunity in Rwanda? Prosecution of Genocide 
and War Crimes before Rwandan Courts and the International Criminal Tribunal for 
Rwanda", Yearbook ofInternational Humanitarian Law, I (1998) 161-188. 
Ciss6, Catherine. "The International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda: Some 
Elements of Comparison. " Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems 7(l) (1997) 103- 
Clawson, Patrick. "Sanctions as Punishment, Enforcement, and Prelude to Further Action. " 
Ethics and International Affairs 7 (1993) 17-3 7. 
Clerk Phil, "In the shadow of the Volcano, Democracy and Justice in Congo", Dissert 
Magazine (2007) 
Clerk Phil, "When the killers go Home, Local justice in Rwanda", Dissert Magazine, (2005) 
Corey Allison and Sandra Joireman, "Retributive Justice: The Gacaca Courts in Rwanda, " 
African Affairs, 103 (2004)73-89 
Croall Hazel, "Mistakes, Accidents, and Someone Else's Fault: The Trading Offender in 
Court; " Journal ofLaw and Society, 15(3) (Oxford: Basil Blackwell 1998) 
Cunneen, Chris, "Thinking Critically About Restorative Justice, " Restorative Justice, 
Critical Issues, (2003) 182-194 
Daly E, "Between Punitive and Reconstructive Justice: The Gacaca Courts in Rwanda, " 
Journal ofInternational law and Politics, 34 (2002) 
Duff, R. A, "Restoration and Retribution", in Andrew Von Hirsch and Julian Roberts, 
Restorative Justice and Criminal Justice: Competing or Reconcilable paradigms? (Oxford 
and Portland: Hart Publishing, 2003) 21-41 
S. BYAMUKAMA 284 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Drumbl, M, A "Sclerosis: Retributive Justice and the Rwandan Genocide", Punishment and 
Society, 2 (3), (London Sage Publications, 2000) 289-308 
DrumbI A Mark, "Punishment, Post Genocide: From Guilt to Shame to [sic] Civis in 
Rwanda", New York University Law Review (2000) 
Ellis S Mark, "Purging the Past: The Current State of Lustration laws in the Fon-ner 
Communist Bloc", Law and Contemporary Problems, 59A Accountability for International 
Crimes and Serious Violations ofFundamental Human Rights, (1996), 181-196 
Erasmus Gerhard and Fourie, Nadine, "The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda: Are 
all Issues Addressed? How does it Compares to South Aftica's Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission? International Review of the Red Cross, 321, (1997) 705-715 
Available at http: //www. icrc. org/web/eng/siteengO. nsf/html/57JNZ9 
Eriksson John, "The International Response to Conflict and Genocide": Lessons ftom the 
Rwandan Experience. Synthesis ReportlJoint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to 
Rwanda, (1996) 
Evenson Elizabeth, "Truth and Justice in Sierra Leone: Coordination Between Commission 
and the Court" Columbia Law Review, 104, (2004) 730-767 
http: //www. colui-nbialawrcview. org/pdf/Evenson-WebCopy. pdf 
Farer, Tom J. "Restraining the Barbarians: Can International Criminal Law Help? " Human 
Rights Quarterly, 22(l) (2000) 90-117 
Fenrick, William J. -The Application of the Geneva Conventions by the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the Fonner Yugoslavia. " International Review of the Red Cross, 
81(834) (1999) 317-329. 
Fenrick, William J. "International Humanitarian Law and Criminal Trials. " Transnational 
Law and Contemporary Problems, 7(l) (1997) 23-44. 
Fenwick Mark, "Dilemmas of Transitional Justice, Criminal Prosecutions or Truth 
Commissions? " The Seinan Law Review, 3 5(3.4) (2003) 
htip: //www. seinan, u. ae. jp/jura/home04/pdf 13503/3503inarkf. pdf 
Ferstman, Carla, "Domestic Trials for Genocide and Crimes against Humanity: The Example 
of Rwanda", African Journal ofInternational and Comparative Law, 9 (1997) 
Fierens Jacques, "Gacaca Courts: Between Fantasy and Reality", Journal of Internal 
Criminal Justice, 3(4) (2005) 896-919 
Fingarette, "Rethinking Criminal Law Excuses", 89, Yale Law Journal 1002,1013-16 (1980) 
Fletcher Luke, "Turning Interahamwe: Individual and Community Choices in the Rwandan 
Genocide", Journal of Genocide Research, 9 (1) (2007) 25-48 
S. ByAmUKAMA 285 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Ganban Sevane, "Crimes Against Humanity and International Legality in Legal Theory after 
Nuremberg", Journal of Genocide Research, 9(l) (2007) 93-111 (Translated from French by 
G. M, Goshgarian) 
Gaparayi 1, "Justice and Social Reconstruction in the Aftennath of Genocide in Rwanda: An 
Evaluation of the Possible Role of The Gacaca Tribunals, " African Human Rights Law 
Journal l(I) (2001) 78-106 
Gasana Emmanuel, "Countries in Conflict: A Critical Stacktaking by country Research 
Teams: Rwanda", edited by Adebayo Adebeji in Comprehending and Mastering African 
Conflicts: The Search for Sustainable Peace and Good Governance, (New York: Zed Books, 
1999) 
Gerry Johnson and Daniel W. Van Ness, "The Meaning of Restorative Justice", in Handbook 
ofRestorative Justice, (Devon: Willian Publishers, 2007) 
Goldstone Richard, Exposing Human Rights Abuses- A Help or Hindrance To 
Reconciliation? Haswtings Constitutional Law Quarterly, 22 (1995) 607,615 
Graybill Lyn and Kimberly Lanegran, "Truth Justice and Reconciliation in Affica: Issues and 
Cases, " African Studies Quarterly, The Online Journal for African Studies, 8(l) (2004) 
http: //www. afiica. ufl. edu/asq/v8/v8llal. htm - edn20 
Greenberg Daniel, The Nature of Legislative Intention and Its Implications for Legislative 
drafting, Statute Law Review, 27 (1) (2006) 
Hamber Brandon, Wilson Richard, Symbolic Closure through memory, reparation and 
revenge in post conflict societies, Journal ofHuman Rights, l(l) (2002), 35-53 
Harmen G Van der Wilt, Genocide, Complicity in Genocide and International v. Domestic 
jurisdictions: Reflection on the Van Anraat Cae, Journal of International Criminal Justice, 
(2006) 
Harper Erica, Delivering Justice in the wake of Mass Violence: New Approaches, Journal Qf 
Conflict and Security Law, (2005) 
Henharn Ralph "The Philosophical Foundations of International Sentencing", Journal of 
International Criminal Justice, 1 (1) (Oxford University Press, 2003) 
Henham Ralph, "Further Evidence on the Significance of Plea in the Crown Court, " Howard 
Journal of Criminal Justice, 41, (2002) 
Henharn Ralph, "The Nonnative Context of Sentencing for Genocide", The Criminal Law of 
Genocide, International Comparative and Contextual Aspects, edited by Ralph Henharn and 
Paul Behrens, (Hampshire: Ashgate, 2007) 
Henharn Ralph, "The Philosophical Foundations of International Sentencing, Journal of 
International Criminal Justice, I (I) (Oxford University Press, 2003)64-85, 
Human Rights Watch, "Genocide, War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity", Topical 
S. BYkMUKAMA 286 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Digests of the Case Law of the International Criminal Tribunal fior Rwanda and the 
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, (London: New York Human 
Rights Watch, February 2004) 
Lambourne Wendy, 'The Pursuit of Justice and Reconciliation: Responding to Genocide in 
Cambodia and Rwanda, ' International Studies Association 40 1h Annual Convention, 
(Washington, 1999) 
Laurel Rose, "Land and Genocide: Exploring the Connections with Rwanda's Prisoners and 
Prison Officials", Journal qf Genocide Research, 9(l) (2007) 49-69 
Joyner, Christopher C. "Arresting Impunity: The Case for Universal Jurisdiction in Bringing 
War Criminals to Accountability", Law and Contemporary Problems 59(4) (1996) 153-172. 
Kai Ambos, "Establishing an International Criminal Court and an International Criminal 
code: Observations from the International Criminal Law Viewpoint, European Journal Qf 
International Law, 7 (1996) 519-544 
Kastrup, Dieter, "From Nuremberg to Rome and Beyond: The Fight against Genocide, War 
Crimes, and Crimes against Humanity, " Fordham International Law Journal, 23(2) (1999) 
404-414. 
Kritz Neil J, "Coming to Tenns with Atrocities: A Review of Accountability Mechanisms for 
Mass Violations of Human Rights", Law and Contemporary Problems: 59(4) (1996) 
Accountability for International Crimes and Serious Violations of Fundamental Human 
Rights, (Duke University School of law), 127-152 
Lee Ann Fugii, "Origins of Power and Identity in Rwanda", Annual Conference for the 
International Studies Association, (Chicago: 200 1) 
Maitra Neelainjan, A Perpetual Responsibility9 The Intemational Criminal Tribunal for 
Rwanda's Recognition of the Genocide of 1994" International Criminal law Review, 5, 
(2005) 573-599 
Marshall N Martin, "Sampling for Qualitative Research", Family Practice (Oxford 
University Press, 1996) 
Meierhenrich Jens, "The Trauma of Genocide", Journal of Genocide Research, 9(4) (2007) 
549-573 
Morrill Constance, The Perception and Peace Building Potential of the Rwandan Youth 
Detainees, The Online Journal ofPeace and Conflict Resolution, (2004) 
Morris, Madeline, International Guidelines against Impunity: Facilitating Accountability, 59 
Law and Contemporary Problems, 29, (1996) 
Moody Susan and Tombs Jackie, "Plea negotiations in Scotland, " Criminal Law Review, 
(1983), 297-307 
S. BYAMUKAMA 287 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Mose Erik, Main Achievements of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Journal 
qfInternational Criminal Justice, 3(4) (2005) 920-943 
McEvoy, Kieran, Harry Mike and Barbra Hudson, "Practice, Perfonnance and Prospects 
of Restorative Justice, " The British Journal of Criminology, 42(3) (London: 2002) 
Mqeke R. B. "Customary Law and Human Rights", The South Aftican Laiv Journal (1995) 
364-365 
Nantulya Paul, Aftican Nation-Building and Reconstruction: Lessons from Rwanda, (Sabinet 
Online publishers, 2006) 
httD: //www. sabiiiet. co. za/abstracts/'accordc/accordc 2006 nI al2. xml 
Nino Carlos, The Duty to Punish Past Abuses of Human Rights Put into Context: The Case of 
Argentina, The Yale Law Journal 100(8), Symposium: International Law (1991) 2619-2640 
Oduro Franklin, "Reconciling a Divided Nation through a Non- Retributive Justice 
Approach: Ghana's National Reconciliation Initiative, " International Journal of Human 
Rights, 9(3) (London: Routledge, 2005) 
Orentlicher Diane, "Settling Accounts: The Duty to Prosecute Human Rights Violations of a 
Prior Regime", The Yale Journal, 100,8, (199 1) 
Reisman Michael, "Institutions and Practices For Restoring And Maintaining Public Order", 
Duke Journal of Comparative and International law, (1995) 
Robinson Darryl, "Servicing the Interests of Justice: Amncsties, Truth Commissions and the 
International Criminal Court", 14 (3) European Journal of International Law, (2003) 48 1- 
Sarkin Jeremy, "The Tension Between Justice and Reconciliation in Rwanda: Politics, 
Human Rights, Due Process and the Role of the Gacaca Courts in Dealing with the 
Genocide, " Journal of 4frican Law, (2001)143-172 
Sarkin Jeremy, "The Necessity and Challenges of Establishing a Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission in Rwanda" Human Rights Quarterly 21(3), (1999) 767-823 
Schabas, W "Gacaca Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal of International Criminal Justice 3, 
(2005) 
Schabas, W "Groups Protected by the Genocide Convention: Conflicting Interpretations from 
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, " Journal of International and Comparative 
Law (2000) 
Ssenyonjo Manisuli, "The International Criminal Court and the Lord Resistance Army 
Leaders: Prosecution or Amnesty9" International Criminal Law Review, 7(2-3) (Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers, 2007) 361-389 
Stephania Wolters, "The Gacaca Process: Eradicating the Culture of Impunity in 
Rwanda, " Situation Report: Institutefor Security Studies, (2005) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 288 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Schabas William A, "Genocide Trials and Gacaca Courts, " Journal ofInternational 
Criminal Justice, 3 (2005), 1-17 
Schabas William A, "Justice, Democracy and impunity in Post Genocide Rwanda: 
Seeking Solutions to Impossible Problems" Criminal Law Reform 7(3) (1996) 
Schabas A William, "Sentencing by International Tribunals, A Human Rights Approach, " 
Journal of Comp. & Int'l Law. (2005) 
Schabas A William. "Hate Speech in Rwanda: The Road to Genocide. " McGill Law Journal, 
46, (2000). 141-171 
Schabas, William A. "Sentencing by International Tribunals" Duke Journal of Comparative 
and International Law, 7(2) (1997) 
Scharf, Michael P. "The ICC's Jurisdiction over the Nationals of Non-Party States: A Critique 
of the US Position. " Law and Contemporary Problems 64 (1) (2001) 67-118. 
Scharf P Michael "The Case of a Pennanent International Truth Commission, " 7 Duke 
Journal of Comparative and International Law (1997) 
Tauri, Juan and MoMs, Allison, "Re-fon-ning Justice: The Potential of Maori Processes" 
Restorative Justice, Critical Issues, (London: 2003) 44-54 
Tiemessen Alana Erin, "After Arusha: Gacaca Justice in Post-Genocide Rwanda", African 
Studies Quarterly, 8, (1) (2004) 
Touko Piiparinen, "Reconsidenng the Silence Over the Ultimate Crime: A Functional Shift in 
Crisis Management from the Rwandan Genocide to Darftir", Journal of Genocide Research, 
9(l) (2007) 71-91 
Tully, D 'Human Rights Compliance and the Gacaca jurisdictions in Rwanda, ' Boston 
College International and Comparative Law Review (2003) 
Uvin P, 'The Introduction of a Modernized Gacaca for Judging Suspects of Participation in 
the Genocide and the Massacres of 1994 in Rwanda' Unpublished manuscript onfile with the 
Boston College International and Comparative law Review, (2004) 
Vandeginste Stef, justice, "Reconciliation and Reparation after Genocide and Crimes Against 
Humanity: The Proposed Establishment of Popular Gacaca Tribunals in Rwanda", All Affica 
Conference on African Principles of Conflict resolution and Reconciliation United Nations 
Conference Centre, Addis Ababa, ( 8-12 November 1999, University of Antwerp) 
Waldorf Lars, "Mass Justice for Mass Atrocity: Rethinking Local Justice as Justice", Temple 
Law Review, (2006) 
Warbrick C, "Referring an Indictment from the ICTY and ICTR to Another Court- Rule II 
bis and the Consequences for the Law of Extradition", International and Comparative Law 
Quarterly, 55 (2006) 219-226 
S. BYAMUKAMA 289 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Wierzynsky Aneta, "Consolidating Democracy through Transitional Justice: Rwanda's 
Gacaca courts", New York University Law Review, 79 (2004) 1934-1969 
Zolo Danilo, "Peace through Criminal Law? " Journal of International Criminal Justice, 2(3) 
(2004)727-234 (Editorial) 
LEGISLATION 
Aftican [Banjul] Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, adopted June 27,1981, OAU Doe. 
CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5,21 I. L. M. 58 (1982), entered intoforce Oct. 21,1986 
Amendment No I of 2/12/2003 of the Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda (June 2003) 
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, Nov 
1950,6,213 U. N. T. S. 222 Europ. T. S Assembly Resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948, 
entry intoforce 12 January 1951 
Criminal Procedure and Investigation Act of 1996 Cap 25 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December, 
1948. Approved and Proposed for Signature and Ratification or Accession by General 
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1998, Entered into force, I 7"h July 
Law No 13/2004 of 17/5/2004 Relating to the Code of Criminal Procedure, Official Gazette 
of the Republic of Rwanda 
Organic Law 13/2008, Establishing the Organisation, Competence and Functioning of 
Gacaca Courts charged with the Prosecution and trying the Perpetrators of the crime of 
Genocide and other crimes against humanity committed between October Ist 1990 and 
December 3 Is' 1994 
Organic law no 10/2007, Establishing the Organisation, Competence and Functioning of 
Gacaca Courts charged with the Prosecution and trying the Perpetrators of the crime of 
Genocide and other crimes against humanity committed between October 1" 1990 and 
December 31" 1994 
Organic Law No 16/2004 of 19/6/2004, Establishing the Organisation, Competence and 
Functioning of Gacaca Courts charged with the Prosecution and trying the Perpetrators of the 
crime of Genocide and other crimes against humanity committed between October 1" 1990 
and December 31" 1994 
Organic law No 40/2000 of 26/01/2001, Setting up Gacaca Jurisdiction, and Organizing 
Prosecutions for Offences Constituting the Crime of Genocide or crimes against Humanity 
committed between October 1,1990 and December 31,1994 
Organic Law No 08/96 on the Organisation of Offences Constituting the Crime of Genocide 
or Crimes against Humanity Committed since Is' October 1990 
S. BYAMUKAMA 290 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Offence Against Persons Act 1861 (Cap 100) 
Statute of the International Cnminal Tnbunal for Rwanda, ICTR Statute, 
http: //www. uii. org/ictr /statute. hti-nl 
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) and Accompanying Codes of Practice 
Security Council Resolution 955 (1994) on establishment of an International Tribunal 
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3453rd meeting, on 8 November 1994 
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda (2003) 
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969), Entered into force on 27 January 1980 
The Rwanda Penal Code, Decree Law No 21/77 
CASE LAW 
A and Others v Secretary of State in the Home Department, [2005] UKHL 71 
A-G Israel v Eichmann, (1968) 36 ILR (District Court, Jerusalem) 
A-G v Eichmann (1961) 36 1. LR5 District Court of Jerusalem 
Erdermovic [1997] ICTY IT-96-22-A 
Prosecutor v Akayesu (ICTR 96-4-T), Trial Chamber 1,2 September 1998 
Prosecutor v Jean Bosco Barayagwiza ICTR November 1999 
Prosecutor v Furundzija (Case No IT-95-17/1), Appeals Chamber, Judgement, 21 July 2000, 
Prosecutor v Kupreskic, (Case No IT-95-16), Appeals Chamber, Judgement, 23 October 
2001, 
Prosecutor v Kayishema and Ruzindana ICTR-95 -1 -T 
Prosecutor v Momir Nickolic [2003], ICTY (Trial Chamber) 
Prosecutor V Tadic IT-94-1 -T (1995) 
Pham Hoang V France, the European Court of Human Rights 
Prosecutor v Kambanda, Case No ICTR-97-23-S, 4 September 1998 
Rv Davis [1979] Criminal Law Review, 327 
Rv Cain [ 1976] Criminal Law Review, 464 
Rv Turner [ 1970]2 W. L. R 1093 
S. BYAMUKAMA 291 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Rv De Haan [ 1967] 3 All E. R 618 Court of Appeal, Criminal Division 
Rv Harper Court of Appeal, Criminal Division 
Rv Costen (1989)11 App Rep (S) 182 
Rv Morris (1988) 10 Cr App Rep 216 
Rv Davis (1980) 2 Cr App Rep (S) 168 at 170 
Rivard v United States 3 75 F 2d 882 (5 Ih Cir. 1967) 278 
UNITED NATIONS, GOVERNMENT AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANISATION REPORTS AND LEGAL DOCUMENTATION 
Amabwiriza Agenga lbisabwa indorerezi Muri Gahunda Y'inkiko Gacaca, (Urwego 
rw'lgihugu rushinzwe Inkiko Gacaca, Kigali, 2005) 
Amnesty International, Gacaca: A Question of Justice, 
http: //www. amnesty. org/library/index/engafr470072002 (Accessed I Oth August 2008) 
Avocats Sans Frontieres Newsletter 2005 111, (Accessed 10th August 2008) 
Association of Chief Police Officers in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, ACPO 
Investigation of Volume Crime Manual, 2002 
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales 2002, Statistics Relating to Criminal Proceedings for 
the Year 2002, Home Office, December 2003,83 
http: //www. archive2. officialdocuments. co. uk/document/cm6O/6054/6054. pd (Accessed 27th 
June 2008) 
Country Brief, Journal of Humanitarian Assistance, Available at 
http: //www. reliefweb. int/library/nordic/tiookl/pbO2Oc. html (20th July 2008) 
Completion Strategy on the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 
Evaluation and Impact Assessment of the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, 
Institute for Justice and Reconciliation (2005) 
Gacaca Process: Achievements, Problems and Future Prospects, http: //www. inkiko- 
gacaca. gov. rw(Accessed 22/05/2008). 
Gabisirege, S and Babalola, S Perceptions about the Gacaca Law in Rwanda: Evidence from 
a multi-method study, Special Publication No 19, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University, 
School of Public Health, Centre for Communication Programs, April 2001 
Home Office, Costs of Criminal Justice system, 1992,1,16 (London: Home Office, 1992) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 292 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Manuel Explicatif sur la Loi Organique portant Creation des Jurisdictions Gacaca, 
published by the Gacaca Jurisdictions Department of the Supreme Court of Rwanda. 
National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, Annual Report 2001 (Kigali: 2001) 
National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, Annual Report f Activities by the National 
Unity and Reconciliation Commission: February 1999-June 2000 (Kigali: 2000) 
National Unity and Reconciliation Commission, Summary Report of the National Summit on 
Unity and Reconciliation, (Kigali: 2004) 
Office of the President, The Unity of Rwandans: Before the Colonial Period under the 
Colonial Rule, Under the First Republic (1999) 
Organisation of African Unity "Rwanda, The Preventable Genocide" Report 2000, Ch 18.49 
Progress of Collecting Information required in the Gacaca Courts, Truth-Justice- 
Reconciliation, November, 2004, www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. rw herein after Gacaca manual 
Penal Reforin International, Gacaca Jurisdictions and its Preparation July-December 2001, 
Research on Gacaca Report 1,2002. 
Penal Reform International, Access to Justice in Sub Saharan Afric:, The Role of Traditional 
and Informal Justice Systems, 2000,3 http: //www. r)enalreform. org 
Report Of The Reflection Meetings Held By The Office Of The Office Of The President Of 
The Republic From May 1998- March 1999 
Republic of Rwanda, Reply to Amnesty Internationals Report, Rwanda: The Troubled Course 
of Justice", 30 (2000) 
http: //www. Rwanda I. com/govemment/06_1 1_00newsai. htm 
Research Ethics Framework, Economic and Social Research Council, at 
http: //www. esrc. ac. uk/ESRCInfoCentre/Images/ESRC Re Ethics-Frame_tcm6-11291. pd 
Research Report on Gacaca courts: Gacaca and Reconciliation; Kibuye case study, with the 
assistance of SWIS Agency for Development and reconciliation (SDC) May 2004 
Report Of The Reflection Meetings Held By The Office Of The Office Of The President Of 
The Republic From May 1998- March 1999 (Kigali: August 1999) 
The Situation concerning Rwanda: Establishment of an international tribunal for the 
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Violation of International Humanitarian Law in the 
Territory of Rwanda and Rwanda's Citizens Responsible for Such Violations Committed in 
the Territory of Neighbouring States, U. N. SCOR, 49th Session, 3453d mtg, at 5, UN, Doc. 
S/PV. 3453 (1994) 
Twelfth Annual Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons 
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law 
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and 
S. BYAMUKAMA 293 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between I January 
and 31 December 1994" at bttp: //69.94.11.53/default. htm Last updated, 5/5.2008. (accessed 
21/05/2008) 
United Nations Integrated Regional Inforination Networks (U. N. IRIN), Gacaca Genocide 
Trials to Begin in May 2002 (Dec. 12,2001) 
httD: i'/www. all afri ca. com/stori es/2001 1212005 9. html 
INTERNET SOURCES 
Amnesty International-Rwanda, littp: //www. amnesty. orlien/region/africa/central- 
afiica/rwanda 
British Broadcasting Cooperation, http: //news. bbc. co. uk/l/hi/world/africa/-')324871. stm 
Embassy of Rwanda -UK, http: //www. ambaiivanda. org. u 
Fondation Hirondelle News Agency, htlp: //www. hirondellenews. com/'contentl, 'Vlew/19/101/1 
Human Rigbts Watch- Rwanda, http: /., /Iuiv. orVdoc/? t=africa&c=rwanda 
International Centre for Transitional Justice, at http: //www. ictj. org/en/tj/ 
International Criminal Court, http: //www. icc-cpi. int/home. html&l=en 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, http: //69.94.11.53/default. htm 
Inter Press Service News Agency. http: //ipsnews. net/africa/nota. asp? idnews=38821. 
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA) at: 
http: //www. idea. i. nt/' 
Report for the Commission of Capital Punishment, 2002, at: 
http: //www. ldoc. state. il. us/ccp/ccp/reports/commission report/index. html 
Statistics from the National Service of the Gacaca, www. inkiko-j4acaca., (-Yov. rw 
The Guardian, bttp: //www. theguardian. co. uk/world. 2008/may---/-"15/Rwanda 
The Guardian, http: //www. j4uardian. co. uk/uRanda/Sto y/O., I 812952.00. html 
The New Times, Rwanda's only English Newspaper, at: http: //newtimes. co. rw 
The New Vision, Uganda's English Daily newspaper, at:. www. newvlsion. co. u 
Transitional Justice Institute, at: http: //transitionaliustice. ulster. ac. uk/ 
Genocide Studies Programme, University of Yale, 
http: //www. yale. edu/gsp/rwaiida/index. htlnl 
S. BYAMUKAMA 294 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
APPENDIX 1: PROCESS OF GACACA INVESTIGATIONS 
Information gathering 
STAGE I 
How genocide was 
planned done by 
cell residents, 
nyubakumi, and 
Gacaca court of cell 
Group I 
-List of people in 
the cell in Sept 1990 
-List of people in 
cell in March 1994. - 
List of those who 
were arrested as 
collaborators 
Group 2 
-List of ringleaders in 
the cell 
-Number of genocide 
meetings held in the 
cell and list of 
attendants 
-List of those killed in 
the cell 
STAGE2 
How genocide 
perpetrated and 
effects on cells done 
by Sector 
authorities, 
nyumbakumi and 
residents of Sector 
Group 3 
-Distribution of 
deadly weapons in 
the cell 
-The militia gangs 
set up in cell 
-Roadblocks set 
up in a cell 
STAGE3 
Role of every 
person accused 
of genocide done 
by nyangamugayo 
and their 
substitutes 
The Charge 
accused sheet of 
and what 
they are 
every 
accused of accused 
person 
Group I Group 3 
-Confession, -Households attacked in the cell 
guilty plea, 
repentance and -Where people took refuge in the 
apology cell 
-Genocide survivors in every 
household 
-Those who rescued the targeted 
victims in the cell 
Group 4 Group 5 
-Attacks directed to the cell -The death of 
each victim in 
-Attacks that went to other the cell 
areas in the cell 
-Those who became 
notorious in the killings 
that occurred in the cells 
Group 2 
-Cell residents killed due to genocide 
-Non-residents of the cell killed due to genocide 
-Those killed outside their cell of residence due to genocide 
-Those killed in their cell due to non-participation in genocide 
-Non-residents of the cells killed in the cell due to genocide 
-Those killed outside their cell due to non-participation in the genocide 
-Where corpses were thrown 
-Property looted or destroyed in every household. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 295 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
APPENDIX 2: MAJOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ORGANIC LAW 
16/2004 AND 10/2007 
Categorisation Confession Sentence Court 
Jurisdiction 
Category I Law 16/2004 -Not Category I Law 
1-planners and supervisors confess/confession 
16/2004 
2-Organs of leadership/political 
denied 
-death sentence/ National 
parties/anny/gendan-nerie/religious 
Jurisdiction 
leaders/militia imprisonment 
3-well known and over zealous 
murderers Confessed 25-30 years 
4-torture imprisonment 
5-rape or sexual torture 
6-Dehumanised dead bodies 
Category I Law 10/2007 Category I Law 
1-planners and supervisors Not 
16/2004 
confess/confession -life National 
denied 802 imprisonment 
Jurisdiction 2-Organs of leadership/leaders of 
political parties/anny, gendarmene 
(in high command), religious 
leaders/ militia Confessed after 25-30 years 
listing 
3-rape sexual torture 
Confessed before 20-24 years listing 
Category 2 Law 16/2004 Para 1,2 Gacaca 
1-killed with intent to cause death -Not confessed 25-30 years 
imprisonment court of 
2-with intent to cause death, Sector 
caused serious injuries 
-Confessed after 
12-15 years, (1/2 
listing custody, 
community 
3-other offences against person service) 
802 Organic Law 10/2007 provides for the death sentence but the death sentence was officially removed 25h July 
S. BYAMUKAMA 296 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
with no intent to cause death 
-Confessed before 7-12 years ( 
Listing custody, 
community 
service) 
Para 3 
-Not confess 5-7 years( 
custody, 
community 
service) 
-Confess after 3-5 years 
listing 
custody, 
community 
service) 
Confessed before 
1-3 years 
custody, 
listing 
community 
service 
Category 2 NoIO/2007 Para 1,2,3 Gacaca 
1-Well known and over zealous Not 30 years to life 
murderers confess/confession imprisonment 
Court of 
denied 
the Sector 
2-torture 
Confessed after 25-29 years (1/3 
3-dehumanising dead bodies 
listing 
custody, 1/6 
suspended, 
community 
4 -killed with intent to cause death service) 
5-with intent to cause death, 20-24 years (1/6 
caused serious injuries 
Confessed before custody, 1/3 
listing suspended, 
community 
6-other offences against person service) 
with no intent to cause death 
Para 4,5 
15-19 years 
confess/confession 
S. BYAMUKAMA 297 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
rej ected 
Confessed after 12-14 years (1/3 
listing custody, 1/6 
suspended, 
community 
service) 
Confessed before 8-11 years (1/6 
listing custody, 1/3 
suspended, 
community 
service) 
Para 6 5-7 years (1/3 
Not confess/ custody, 1/6 
confession suspended/ 
rejected community 
service) 
Confessed after 
3-4 years (1/3 
custody, 1/6 listing 
suspended, 
community 
service) 
Confessed before 1-2 years (1/6 
listing custody, 1/3 
suspended, 
community 
service) 
Category 3 No 16/2004 Civil reparati on Gacaca 
Offences against property court of the 
Category 3 No 10/2007 Civil reparation Gacaca 
Offences against property court of the 
S. BYAMUKAMA 298 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
APPENDIX 3: EXAMPLES OF LISTS FILLED IN THE 
INVESTIGATION PHASE 
REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
NATIONAL SERVICE OF GACACA COURTS 101 
LIST OF CELL RESIDENTS IN SEPTEMBER 1990 
REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
NATIONAL SERVICE OF GACACA COUR`rS 102 
LIST OF CELLRESWENTS IN MARCH 1994 
H .1 
Naurivi and signatum of Mmbom of th* El*nch 
tA t-i --4 h, Ah, r.. Pneml A-blv in the boak of c Nwmbakumi) 
-- r-'77 T 
S. BYAMUKAMA 299 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY 
OF GACACA COURTS 
REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
NATIONAI, SERVICE OF GACACA COUR'I'S 103 
THOSE THAT WERE ARRESTED AS COLLABORATORS 
Names and signatures of members of the Bench 
S. BYAMUKAMA 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
APPENDIX 4: INTERVIEW SCHEDULE 
INTRODUCTION 803 
My name is Shivon Byamukama. I am a Rwandese research Student at Glasgow 
Caledonian University. I am carrying out a research on the prosecution of genocide related 
offences committed in Rwanda, and I am specifically looking at the Gacaca process. 
The main objective of this research is to understand the Gacaca process and its impact 
on both reconciliation and prosecution of such offences. A further aim is to analyse the 
Gacaca process and gauge whether its aims are achieved or achievable. I will specifically be 
looking at the Gacaca in light of the legal requirements of justice such as the role of 
confession and effects of delay. 
To achieve these aims, I am following the Gacaca process here in Kigali, and in 
Cyangugu. I am also interviewing people involved in the process, either as people involved in 
the implementing it, or people who are affected by it. I will be carrying out a total of 
approximately 100 interviews involving judges, concerned officials, survivors of genocide, alleged 
perpetrators whether in prison or in the communities, and whether they have confessed to genocide or 
You are a person who is affected by the process (involved in the implementation 
process), and with your consent, I would like to ask you some questions. These questions 
only relate to the process and its outcomes, and the information given will be strictly used for 
purposes of the research. 
90 The interviews were conducted in Kinyarwanda, the Local Language in Rwanda. Rwanda uses three official 
Languages, French, English and Kinyarwanda. Although the majority of Rwandans speak either English or 
French, everybody speaks or at least understands Kinyarwanda. 
S. BYAMUKAMA 301 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
All the information that you provide will be kept in the strictest confidence. Unless 
you specifically indicate otherwise, this infon-nation will remain totally anonymous. The data 
and information derived from the interviews will be securely kept confidential and will only 
be published in a completely anonymous and confidential form in my thesis, and for no other 
purpose. You may decline to take part in this interview. If you do take part, you can at any 
stage of this interview withdraw your consent. 
KINYARWANDA TRANSLATION 
Nitwa Shivon Byainukama, ndi umunyarwandakazi ukora ubushakashatsi inu ishuri 
ry1twa Glasgow Caledonian University. Nclakurikirana icibwa ry'Inianza z'ibyaha nya 
-, enocide, nkibanda cyane cyane kuri Gacaca. 
Impanivu va mbere nkora ubushakashatsl kun Gacaca ni Augirang . 'korere -o nunive mil 
ya Gacaca iiuruhare rwayo mu ikurikiranwa ry'ibyo byaha n* ubwlyunge. Indi jupamvu ni 
ukwiga niba intego za Gacaca zishoboka cvari, -, wa zi,, , eRvaho. 
Km-, iram-yo ibyo n-lbigercho. ndakurikirana imikorere y'Ink-1ko Gacaca hano I Kigali 
n'l Cyangugu. Ndaganira ri'abantu baylkurikiranira hafi. baba abakurikirana uko ikorwa 
cyaii,, ).,, %,,, a abo ireba. Nzaglrana ibiganlro n'abalitu 100 bose hamwe, harimu abacarnanza, Z 
abakozi bakurikirana Gacaca hafi, abaregwa n' abacitse ku icumu. 
Uri inu bantu barebwa rii iki glkorwa, niba LibyCryiera, han ibibazo nifuzaga kukubaza. 
lbvo blbazo birebana gusa n'irnok-orere y'lnk-lko Gacaca nibyO igeralio, kandi ibisubizo 
uinbwlra bizak-oreshwa, tisa mu bushakashatsl nkora. ZD 
lbyo umbwira byose bizafatwa nk'ibanga, keretse wowe ubwawe urnbwlye ko wiruza 
ko bitan,, azwa. Bizatan azwa rnu buryo butaziguye muri raporo y'Libushakashatsi van've. nta Z:  9-I 'j I 
yindi mpainvu bizakoreshwa, (Jshobora kwanga ko tugirana iki kiganiro, kandi niba womcye, 
ushobora igihe ieyo aricy eyose kubihagarika. C0 
S. BYAMUKAMA 302 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
ALLEGED PERPETRATORS 
(1) INTRODUCTION 
What do you understand by the following words; Confession, Reintegration, Reconciliation 
How old are you? Lifite inyaka Ingalic" 
Where do you live? t., ', tuye helie" 
Did you go back to your community after your release or did you relocate? (if gone back to 
the community, go to 4, if not ask why? ) 
Wasubiye alio wan utuye unbere yitscinbabwok-o cyangwa warimutse? 
Did you find it necessary to move? 
Wabonve ko ari ngombwa ko wimuka? Kubera ik. i wimutse? 
Do you have family and friends back at home? 
LJ Fite urnurvango n*inshuti lwanyu aho uluyc" 
What assistance or help have you received since you moved out of prison? 
Wabonye inifashanyo cyangwa inkunga ki kliva wava muni gereza? 
(2) GACACA TRIAL 
How long were you in prison before your release? 
Waniaze iplic kiiigaiia iki inuri gereza nibetv vOkL. igufungura" 
Talk me through the procedure, up to when your case was complete? 
Wansobanurira Liko uritbanza rwawe rwagenzO 
How long did this process take? 
Byatwaye igyihe khigana iki? 
Did you get any assistance during the trial, and what form did it take? 
Wabonye Mfasliaiiyo ki inu rubanza nv'awe? 
S. BYAMUKAMA 303 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
How do you think the evidence you gave was considered? 
L)ruinva iblinenvetso bvose watanze byakoresh jwe gUte" ej z:, - 
What was the sentence given'? What did you make of the sentence? 
Wakat1we g1hano ki'? Uragitekerezaho Ik. i? 
What is your perception of sentences given in the Gacaca process generally? 
Ni iki utek. ereza ku biliano bitangwa n"inkiko Gacaea i-nun rusange" 
What problems do you see arising from the Gacaca proceedings themselves? 
Ni ibibazo ki bi%l; uka kubera gacaca ubwayo9 
(3) CONFESSION 
How did you find out about the confession process of the Gacaca? 
Wameiiye ute ibyerekeraiiye tio kwirega inurl gacaca? 
Did you discuss this information with anyone? 
Wi0cze ugira uwo niubioanira ho'-. 1 
Did you find the information you were given about the confession process adequate? Was it 
useful? 
Uratekereza W ibyo wasobanuriwe kubv(. ) kwirega byan bilia,,, jj'e Ilari, akainaro 
by, ikugirive" tI 
Why did you have recourse to the confession procedure? 
Kuki wiycni(je kwirega*l 
Did you feel pressured in anyway to confess? 
flari agafiato WigCZC WLMiva ka-Uslivizwelio ii-o wirege" Z:  :.:  I tz, I 
Did you feel pressure from any source not to confess? Why? 
Hari agaliato wigeze ushvirwalio ngo ntiwirege? Kubera iki? C zn 
Was there any kind of tension in prison between those who wanted to confess and those who 
did not? Hari aniakimbirane yari liagati y'abashaka kwirega n'abatabisliaka imiri gercza" 
How do you think your confession was handled in the Gacaca courts? 
Wumva ukwirega kwawe kwarakurikiranywe gute inuri Gacaca'-. ' Z:, I 
S. BYAMUKAMA 304 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Was having recourse to the confession procedure beneficial to you? 
Wuniva kwirega harl icyo byakumariye" 
(4) COMMUNITY REINTEGRATION AND RECONCILIATION 
How are you settling into the community? 
Now that you are back into the community, how do you think the community perceives you? 
Wurriva warakiriwc Lite ri'abawrLinyi' 
What is your general perception of the Gacaca process? 
Gacaca Liyibona ute niun rusaiige? 
Do you think there is some general level of reconciliation ansing from the Gacaca process? 
1. Jboiia liari Ukwivuii-a -Lituruka ITIL). bibera mun gacaca murusaiigc? 
What advice would you give to persons who are fleeing the country because of the Gacaca 
court process? 
Ni ivilie nama wagira abahtiiiga i-ihugu kUbera gacaca9 
Are there any recommendations you would give to the process? 
Hari ibyo ubona byahiiiduka? 
Do you follow the proceedings at the ICTR? If so, what do you think of the proceedings 
there? If not, why? 
Uktirikira mukorere ya ICTR? LTItckcrcza iki ku iniburaiiishirize yayo 
Is there anything else you would like us to discuss? 
llari ikindi waba wifuza ko tuganira? 
SURVIVORS OF GENOCIDE 
(1) INTRODUCTION 
The Gacaca process must be bringing unpleasant memories back, how have you coped with 
(. 3acaca igomba kuba ikw1butsa ibibi byabaye. Ulbyitwaramo Litc? 
What kind of problems have you faced as a result of the genocide in 1994? 
Ni ibilie bibazo wagize kLibera Gejiocide va 94? 
How have you coped with them? Is there any available assistance? If so, what kind? 
S. BYAMUKAMA 305 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Wabikeniuye ute? Hari iiikwiga wabotiye" Ink-unga ki? 
Have you got any help? If so, what kind? 
I lan irrifasfianvo uboiia? Bwoko ki? 
What do you think of the Gacaca process generally? 
Gacaca uy1tckcrazabo Jki imirusange? 
What problems do you see arising from the Gacaca proceedings themselves? 
Ni ibibazo ki bivuka kubera gacaca ubwavol 
Are there any concerns that would stop a potential witness from coming forward? If so what 
can be done about it? 
Han lbibazo ubona bishobora guliagarika abantu kuvuga ibvo babonyc'. 1 N*Jba biliari urabona 
hakorwa iki ngo bikemurwc? 
Do you think there is anything more that can be done to assist is such matters? 
Hart ikindi ubona cyakorwa jigo ibibazo nVibyo bikeniurwe'? 
GACACA TRIALS 
Have you participated in the Gacaca court proceedings? How often do you attend the 
proceedings? 
WI(Yeze witabira inianza Zinkiko oacaca? Uzitabira bingana iki? 
Have you been a witness to any of the trials? 
Wigeze uba unw-abo in Liri wmwe inu nianza? 
How long did the trial of that particular case take? 
I. jrxk,, o rubanza twatwaye igihe kingana iki? 
What is the general duration of a case? 
Urubanza ruinara igilic kingana iki inun rusange? 
What do you think of the evidence given in court? (for example witness statements, hearsay 
evidence, is there addition evidence given) 
Utckcreza iki kLi. bimcne-viso bitangwa mun gaeaca 9 (ubuhaniya bw'aba-abo, lbiliulia, han 
ibmdi bilnenvetso bitam-ywa"? ) 
S. BYAMUKAMA 306 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
What do you make of the sentencing process? What is you general view of the sentences 
given? Utekereza iki ku gutanga ibihano? 
Ni iki utekereza ku bihano bitangwa muri rusaii-e" 
(3) CONFESSIONS 
What do you think of the sentencing process of the Gacaca courts? 
Ni iki utekereza ku bihaiio bitangwa muri rLisaiige? Z-- 
Why do you think people confess? 
I., Itekereza k-o ari iyihe Tiipamvu ittima abaritu birega? 
What do you think of the confessions given? 
Utekereza iki ku byo birega? 
What effect does this process have on you? 
How much confidence do you have in the Gacaca process and the judges? 
Ulfite icyizerc kingana tki muri gacaca n'abacamanza bayo? 
(4) SETTLEMENT AND THE RECONCILIATION PROCESS 
Have you attended any of the sessions provided by the reconciliation commission on 
reintegration of perpetrators into the community? If not, why? 
Wigeze witabira ibiganiro byatannzwe na -con-imission" y'ubwiyun-e kii byerekeye irek. urwa 
ry'abacyekwaho getiocide niu giturage? 
If so, how useful are they? Any lessons learnt? 
Byakugurive ikahc kamaro? NNI 1k. 1 wuilgutse9 
What is your perception of perpetrators coming back into the community? 
Utekercza iki ku byerckeye igaruka imi gituraec ry*abashinjwa getiocide'? C) 
Do you feel there is a level of reconciliation ansing from the Gacaca courts? Ubona ijikiko 
--acaca hari icyo z1faslia mu bwlvLiii,, ), e'. ' 
Do you follow the proceedings in the ordinary courts for the leaders of the genocide? 
Ukurikirana in-tanza z1bera mu nkiko zisanzwe Zaba"leaders- ba genocide" 
S. BYAMUKAMA 307 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
Have you been to court? Have you actively participated in the proceedings, for example have 
you been a witness in these courts? 
w1geze Lijya ini-I bene urwo rubanzi? Nk'urugero uri uaiugabo' 
How long do these proceedings take? 
Izo nian/. a zitwara igilie kiiigana iki? 
How do you compare the proceedings in the ordinary courts with Gacaca? 
Wazigereraiiya ute niniatiza z1bera i-nu nkiko gacaca? 
How do you compare the sentencing process? 
Wagereranya ute ibiliano bitangwa? 4-- 
What is your opinion on the death penalty? 
Ni iki Litekereza kti giliano cy'urupi'O 
Do you follow the proceedings in the ICTR? If not, why? 
If so, what do you make of the proceedings and the sentencing process? 
LJkLirikira inukorcre ya ICTR" Utekereza iki ku iniburanishirize yayO' 
What is your general view of the Gacaca court process? Do you think it is working fine? 
Inkiko gacaca uzibotia Lite iTiLin rusangc? U`boiia z1kora ncza" 
Are there any recommendations you would give to the Gacaca courts, and the way it is run? 
Hari igitekerezo watanga ku i-ik-iko gacaca iiiniikorcre yazo' 
Is there anything else you would like us to discuss? 
Hari ikiiidi wifuza ko twagaiiii-alio? 
OFFICIALS 
There have been reports of difficulties of dealing with the over whelming evidence coming 
from both the prosecution investigations and the confessions of the accused. How have you 
dealt with this? 
There are also reports of fears of people leaving the country for fear of the Gacaca system, 
How significant an issue is this? 
I laravugwa ko liari abantu bantno gahunga igiliugu kubera ubwoba bw" inkiko gacaca, :n tl 
S. BYAMUKAMA 308 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
There are newspaper reports of threats to survivors of genocide or potential witnesses in the 
villages. Some of them have indeed been murdered. Since the Gacaca process is heavily 
reliant on witness statements, what might be the impact? 
Han ibinyamakuru byanditse ko han ugLitotezwa kwa abacitse k--u icurnu cyangwa 
abatangwaho abagabo mu giturage. Ngo -bikaba byarateye k-wlcwa kw', Ibacitse ku Icull-lu. Ni 
ik-i. b, -iz, o gikomeve cyane cyane ko Cjacaca ishingira cyangwa ku bulianiva bw"abagabo. 
Nizilie ngaruka byatera? Murabikoralio lki? 
Why do you think most perpetrators have had recourse to the confession and guilty plea 
procedure? 
Mutekereza ko a6 iki cvaturnyc abaregwa betishi biyem, je kwirega no gusaba mibabazl' 
Do you think there is any pressure to confess or not to? 
Mutek-creza ko liari agato basvirwaho ngo birege cyangwa ntibim-ye? I t) -- 
Do you think some prisoners are threatened by other inmates not to have recourse to the 
confession process for fear of implicating others? 
Wibwira ko liari abanyururu babuza abandi kwitabira gacaca no kwirega kubera ko barega 
abandi" 
Bearing in mind that the maximum sentence for the master minders of the genocide in the 
ICTR is life imprisonment, what impact does potential exposure to the death penalty have on 
the reconciliation process in Rwanda? 
Murebye ko igiliano kinini ICTR itanga ari igifujigo cya burundu, mubona ma ngaruka 
j&, ihano cy'urupfu gitangwa rnu Rwanda cyagira ku bwivunge Wabanyarwanda 
JUDGES 
How does the Gacaca process work, how are the proceedings followed? 
What is the difference between this kind of proceedings and the ordinary courts? Izi manza 
zitaniye lie nimatiza zibera ii-m iikiko zisanwe 
How is the evidence handled? 
I-JbLihamya btikoreshwa gute" 
How are confessions carried out? 
S. BYAMUKAMA 309 
JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
KwIrega bikorwa gutO 
Why do you think most accused persons have recourse to the confession process? Do you 
think there is pressure on the part of the accused to confess? 
How is confession procedure different from a non confession procedure 
Talk me through the role of confessions in the Gacaca process? 
Mwansobanunra bii-anibLIVC icyo kwirega bimara muri , acaca" 
Does an accused person in the Gacaca process presumed innocent until proved guilty or does 
he have to prove his innocence? (Do you think the process works to protect the innocent? ) 
Ese uniuntu uregwa niuri gaeaca at'atwa iikuniwere kugeza igifle icyalia kil-nuhainye 
cyan,, , Wa m-, ornba kwerek. ana ko ari ufnwcre9 
Is there anyone else I can talk to? 
Ilari undi ITILIlIttl wanda,,,: Ira twaganira lbyerekeyc nibyo tuganinye uyumunsi? 
S. BYAMUKAMA 310 
