EVERYDAY ETHNICITIES 
IDENTITY AND RECONCILIATION AMONG 
YOUTH IN POST-GENOCIDE RWANDA 
Lyndsay McLean Hilker 
DPhil in Development Studies 
School of Global Studies 
University of Sussex 
October 2009 
UNIVERSITY OF SUSSEX 
DPHIL (DEVELOPMENT STUDIES) 
EVERYDAY ETHNICITIES: IDENTITY AND RECONCILIATION AMONG 
YOUTH IN POST-GENOCIDE RWANDA 
SUMMARY 
This thesis is an ethnography of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" in Rwanda, a decade 
after the 1994 genocide. It firstly traces the historical production of these identities and 
reconsiders the relationship between "ethnicity" and violence in Rwanda. Although the 
genocide resulted from a complex culmination of factors, it argues that the specific way 
the identities "Hutu" and "Tutsi" were constructed was significant in the production of 
violence. Over time, particular essentialist stereotypes became attached to these 
categories and were a powerful factor in mobilising civilians to participate in the killing. 
The thesis then explores how the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" are understood, used 
and experienced in the everyday lives of young Rwandans living in contemporary 
Kigali. Despite current state policies that seek to de-emphasise "ethnic" identities, it 
demonstrates that the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" remain salient. Although other 
social identities are important and some young Rwandans are forging inter- `ethnic" ties, 
the thesis reveals their persistent need to uncover the "ethnic" identity of significant 
others. It explores the complexities and contradictions of everyday processes of "ethnic" 
identification and demonstrates the worrying persistence of essentialist stereotypes 
about "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi". It juxtaposes these "conceptual" stereotypes, the more 
complex, uncertain "concrete" reality inhabited by young Rwandans, and their diverse, 
often contradictory, narratives about the past. 
The thesis then examines young people's perspectives on "reconciliation" in Rwanda 
and how various government initiatives impact on their lives. It concludes that current 
approaches to reconciliation are not addressing negative aspects of the "ethnic" logic 
that persists in Rwanda and, in some cases, may inadvertently entrench them. Whilst 
these "ethnic" myths and stereotypes alone will not produce further violence, they 
suggest that any recurrence of violence would once again have "ethnic" targets and, if 
unchecked, could again take place on a large scale. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Firstly, I would like to thank my two supervisors Dr Nigel Eltringham and Professor 
Richard Black for their thoughtful comments and constructive feedback over the past 
few years. I would also like to thank Professor James Fairhead, who supervised me for 
the first two years of this doctorate. 
At home, I would like to thank my husband Henrik Hilker for all the support, patience 
and encouragement he has given me over the past six years as well as my two children 
Sienna and Amarys, who both arrived whilst I was working on this thesis. Sienna, in 
particular, was in my tummy for seven and a half months in Rwanda during my 
fieldwork and developed a particular love of Rwandan food and music. 
In Rwanda, I would like to thank all those who accepted me into their homes, looked 
after me and provided me with support and friendship during my fieldwork - in 
particular Claude, Bernardin and Placide Rutagarama, Genevieve Mukandekezi, Marie- 
Noelle and Florent Senyana. I would also like to acknowledge the assistance of the 
Rwandan Ministry of Youth, Sport and Culture (MIJESPOC) in this research. 
My particular thanks goes to my 46 research participants who I cannot name here, but 
without whom this thesis would not have been possible. Over the months, I developed a 
relationship with each and every one of you and appreciate the time and friendship you 
accorded me, your willingness to talk to me about your lives and the courage you 
demonstrated in discussing painful experiences. 
Finally, I would like to thank the Economic and Social Research Council, who financed 
this research (and two periods of maternity leave) for five years, and without whose 
support, I would have been unable to conduct fieldwork or complete this thesis. 
GLOSSARY 
ADFL Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire, a 
coalition of various Congolese rebel and minority groups, led by Laurent 
Kabila, which toppled Mobutu from power. 
abaguze Translates as "cheaters of ethnicity" i. e. those pretending to be of 
ubwoko different ethnic group. 
akazu Translates as "little house" and refers to the small circle of individuals, 
usually of the same clan or family, close to the main powerholder. 
DFID Department for International Development (UK) 
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo (formerly Zaire) 
FAR Forces Armees Rwandaises, the army of the pre-1994 Rwandan 
Government 
FARG Fonds d'Assistance pour les Rescapes du Genocide, a fund set up by the 
Rwandan Government in 1998 to give support to victims of genocide. 
gacaca A form of community justice to try those accused of crimes of genocide. 
ibyimanyi A Rwandan of "mixed" (i. e. Hutu-Tutsi) "ethnic" heritage. 
ibyitso Translates as "accomplice" and used to referred to those who were 
apparently collaborating with the RPF during the civil war. 
ICTR International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 
ingando "Solidarity" of "re-education" camps organised by the NURC that ex- 
priosners, returnees and other groups have attended since 1999. 
inkotanyi Translates as "valiant warrior" and was the name adopted by the RPF to 
refer to soldiers of the RPA and also used by others to refer to them. 
interahamwe Translates as "those who stand together" - the name of the notorious 
militia, which implemented much of the killing during the genocide. 
MNF Multi-National Force 
MRND Mouvement Republicain National pour le Developpement, the ruling 
party in Rwanda from 1975-1994 under President Juvenal Habyarimana. 
NURC National Unity and Reconciliation Commission 
ODA Overseas Development Administration, the name of DFID until 1997 
RPA Rwandan Patriotic Army, the armed wing of the RPF, which fought a 
civil war against the Government of Rwanda from 1990-1994. 
RPF Rwanda Patriotic Front, the political wing of the rebel group, which took 
power in 1994 and is now the elected party in Rwanda. 
RTLM Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines, the infamous radio station 
which broadcast genocide propaganda from July 1993 to July 1994. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFACE: THE PRODUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE ABOUT RWANDA AND 
INTRODUCTION: AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF ETHNICITY, VIOLENCE AND 
CHAPTER 1: THE PRODUCTION OF ETHNICITY AND VIOLENCE IN RWANDA. 12 
CHAPTER 2: SETTING THE SCENE: RESEARCH CONTEXT, APPROACH AND 
CHAPTER 3: YOUNG PEOPLE'S NARRATIVES OF THE PAST: THE ORIGINS OF 
CHAPTER 4: EVERYDAY ETHNICITIES: "ETHNIC" RELATIONS AND 
CHAPTER 5: RWANDA'S "HUTSI": THE LIVES AND EXPERIENCES OF YOUTH 
CHAPTER 6: BEYOND ETHNICITY? OTHER SOCIAL DISTINCTIONS IN 
CHAPTER 7: "ETHNICISING" OR "DE-ETHNICISING" RWANDANS? 
Afterword 
TABLES 
PREFACE: 
THE PRODUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE ABOUT RWANDA AND RWANDANS 
Theories have lives of their own, quite defiantly of the phenomenal world that can actually be 
observed. (Sen 2006: p104) 
Representing Rwanda and Rwandans 
Throughout recent history, the way Rwanda, its people and the events that have taken 
place there have been represented has significantly influenced the course of Rwandan 
politics and society. In the late 19`h century - seeking to explain the unexpectedly 
sophisticated civilisation they encountered in central Africa - early explorers and 
missionaries produced theories about Rwandan society that, in time, would have a 
considerable impact on the way Rwandans understood their own history and reality. 
With the importation of particular European political institutions and the introduction of 
the capitalist economy, these ideas and constructs contributed to reshaping existing 
forms of social and political organisation in Rwanda. As political competition 
intensified towards the end of the colonial period and in the decades after independence, 
Rwandan political elites appropriated and modified these theories to mobilise support 
for their claims and, in some cases, to legitimate violence. 
The production of knowledge about Rwanda and Rwandans has accelerated in recent 
decades partly as a result of technological change, but particularly in response to the 
. violent events of 1994. The brutality, scale and intimacy of the Rwandan genocide 
generated an explosion of interest in Rwanda and resulted in a proliferation of books, 
films and documentaries about the country, its history, politics and people. This was 
particularly the case in the Anglophone world, where, prior to 1994, few people knew 
anything about Rwanda. As Johan Pottier (2002) shows, however, much of this "post- 
genocide" knowledge production has lacked rigour and depth. In a sobering analysis of 
how information about Rwanda has been created and disseminated in the aftermath of 
the genocide, Pottier reveals how international policies in the region have been 
informed by simplistic - and sometimes inaccurate - versions of the past and inadequate 
understandings of the complexities of unfolding events. As a result, he argues, external 
interventions have often exacerbated rather than attenuated the original crisis. 
For example, Pottier (2002: pp130-150) gives a poignant analysis of the way Western humanitarian agencies 
handled the refugee crisis in Eastern Zaire in 1994-1996 and shows how - through their discourses and practices - 
The way knowledge is and has been produced about Rwanda and the impacts this has 
on the lives of Rwandans is an underlying theme of this thesis and has influenced all 
aspects of my work: my initial motivations for conducting research in Rwanda; how I 
have engaged with existing literature; the methods I have used to conduct my research 
and interpret my data; and how I have chosen to present my research findings, analysis 
and conclusions. This concern with knowledge production about Rwanda dates back to 
my own experiences of working on the Great Lakes region in the 1990s. 
From knowledge recipient to knowledge producer 
Prior to 1996,1 was a recipient of knowledge about Rwanda. Like most British people, 
the first time I heard anything about the country was when I saw the horrific headlines 
and gruesome photos on the front pages of the broadsheets in April 1994. Then, in 
autumn 1996, on graduating from university, I started work at the UK's Overseas 
Development Administration (ODA) - now the Department for International 
Development (DFID) - and unexpectedly found myself joining the new army of 
knowledge producers on Rwanda. 
In mid-November 1996, I had been working as Assistant Desk Officer on ODA's 
Angola desk for just over two months. One morning, the Head of Department asked me 
to move to the Great Lakes desk in the next room to help out for a few weeks because 
of the burgeoning crisis in Eastern Zaire. A few days earlier, the Rwandan Patriotic 
Army (RPA)2 and its Zairean allies the ADFL3 had attacked and forcibly closed refugee 
camps close to the Rwandan border in North Kivu Province. These camps were housing 
hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees, who had fled the country when the 
genocide ended and the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) took power in July 1994. The 
refugees included thousands of members of the former regime, its army (the Forces 
Armies Rwandaises - now known as the ex-FAR) and the interahamwe militia 
responsible for organising and implementing the genocide, and tens of thousands of 
civilians, some of whom had participated in the killing. In 1995 and 1996, the ex-FAR 
and militia had used the camps as a base to attack Banyarwanda and other ethnic groups 
in the Masisi region of Zaire and launch attacks over the border into Rwanda. The 
these organisations accepted and upheld the Rwandan Government's notion of an undifferentiated Hutu collectivity, 
thereby reinforcing essentialist discourses on ethnicity and the notion of a guilty Hutu collective. 2 The Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) was the army of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), which took power in 
Rwanda July 1994 at the end of the genocide. 
3 The Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire led by Laurent Kabila. 
Rwandan Government and its Zairean allies had therefore retaliated by attacking the 
camps. Hundreds of refugees were reported to have been killed during the attacks, 
hundreds of thousands more were being shepherded back over the border into Rwanda, 
and an unknown number had fled into the Zairean forest. 
Barely a few days after I moved desks and was desperately trying to get a handle on 
what was happening as well as brief myself about Rwanda and Zaire, I was asked to 
represent ODA at a cross-departmental Whitehall meeting, as neither the Head of 
Department nor Desk Officer could make it. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss 
whether the UK Government should support the UN Secretary-General's appeal to the 
international community to send a multinational force (MNF) into Eastern Zaire and, if 
so, what mandate that force should have. 4 This issue had already been on the table for 
several weeks. Indeed, Paul Kagame - now Rwandan President, but then Vice-President 
and Defence Minister - had made it clear to international diplomats several months 
earlier that if they did not send in an international force to disarm the combatants in the 
camps and stop the incursions into Rwanda, he would send the RPA over the border to 
do the job. After weeks of procrastination by international diplomats, Kagame had done 
what he said and the situation had worsened with thousands of refugees probably killed 
and an unknown number "missing" in the Zairean forest. 
As the ODA representative at the meeting, my role was to give the latest information 
about the number, location and condition of refugees remaining in Zaire after the 
closure of the camps. The problem was that there was little or no information available 
about these refugees because they were deep in the forest and no one was able to access 
them. All I had were a few poor quality satellite images and "guestimates" from 
humanitarian agencies that varied widely, putting the number of refugees left in Zaire at 
between 300,000 and 600,000 with an unknown number killed or "missing" in the 
forests. I found the meeting extremely intimidating as senior Whitehall colleagues 
pressed me for precise information that I could not possibly give. At the same time, I 
On November 9, the UN Security Council had passed Resolution 1078 calling for governments to begin working 
towards a MNF, and on the same day the Canadian government agreed to lead it. In the next few days, a number of 
Western Governments, including the US, France and Spain expressed commitment in principle to provide troops. The 
purpose and mission of the MNF, however, was hotly debated. Many in the UN and humanitarian community argued 
it needed to tackle the critical task of separating armed elements from refugees in the camps around Goma, but the 
Canadians and several other Western Governments only wanted in to secure humanitarian operations and provide 
secure corridors for refugees to return to Rwanda. Yet others argued that it was an unrealistic proposition for the 
MNF to secure humanitarian space without undertaking military action. For a detailed analysis of the lead up to the 
war in Zaire and the international response, see Lautze, S. et al (1998). 
remember being struck that no one else around the table really knew much more about 
the situation on the ground than I did. I was also slightly mystified by the amount of 
time my colleagues spent pressing me about refugee numbers and locations when the 
real issue seemed to be what mandate a multi-national force should be given. The 
meeting appeared -in my inexperienced eyes - to end without a satisfactory conclusion. 
It was in the months that followed this meeting, as full-blown war broke out in Zaire 
and news about the fate of the "missing" Rwandan refugees emerged, that I beg-an to 
comprehend what had been at stake during those few weeks I spent helping out on the 
Great Lakes desk. I realised that the lengthy international discussions around the 
numbers, location and condition of the Rwandan refugees, how best to protect them and 
deliver humanitarian aid, had effectively served as a smoke screen. What had been 
needed from the start - and what Kagame and others had requested - was an 
international force to enter Eastern Zaire and disarm the armed combatants operating in 
the camps. Yet - although the "international community" was keen to be seen to do 
something after its appalling inaction in the face of the Rwandan genocide in 1994 - 
there was no appetite whatsoever for a mission with a mandate to disarm combatants 
that would involve putting Western troops in a combat situation. Thus, when the RPA 
attacked the camps, international diplomatic debate about the MNF quickly (and no 
doubt with relief) switched to how such a force might help deliver humanitarian aid to 
the dispersed refugees and help them "voluntarily" repatriate to Rwanda. 
During those few critical weeks in November whilst the international community 
debated the refugee situation and finally passed a UN Security Council Resolution 1080 
to mandate a MNF, the situation on the ground deteriorated rapidly and it became clear 
that a full-blown insurgency had started. We now know that tens of thousands of the 
very Rwandan refugees the international community was trying to count, locate and 
assess, were killed or perished in the forests of Eastern Zaire. In mid-December, the 
international community abandoned the MNF due to opposition from the Zairean and 
Rwandan Governments and rebel forces. They concluded that the humanitarian mission 
the MNF was intended to implement had mostly been achieved by other means as the 
vast majority of refugees had returned to Rwanda. There was no official mention of the 
vast numbers of refugees "missing" or thought to have perished - put at 200,000 by 
some estimates (e. g. Stockton 1996). Instead, in mid-December, Canadian Prime 
Minister Jean Chretien - who had initially called for the MNF and agreed Canada would 
lead it - announced that discussions about the MNF had served as a "catalyst" which 
helped break the impasse that kept the refugees in the camps for two years and thanked 
the Canadian Forces and their partners for their "timely and professional" response to 
the crisis (IRIN 1996). Although my role was close to negligible, I began to realise that 
I had nonetheless been part of this international game where debates over words and 
figures had served as a cover for inaction and resulted in people losing their lives. 
I learnt much more about the production of knowledge and inaction in international 
diplomatic and development circles a couple of years later. In June 1998, I was 
seconded by DFID to a diplomatic post at the European Council in Brussels as Assistant 
to Aldo Ajello, the European Union Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region. The 
Special Envoy was the EU's political rapporteur on central Africa and part of EU 
diplomatic efforts to bring peace to the region. Our brief covered the conflict in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (formerly Zaire), the Burundi peace process and the 
post-conflict transition in Rwanda. For 18 months, we travelled non-stop around the 
African continent attending peace talks and meeting with African heads of state, 
ministers, rebel groups, international diplomats and aid workers. We visited Rwanda 
many times during this period and met with Paul Kagame and other Rwandan leaders at 
international events around the world. As well as running the Special Envoy's office 
and accompanying him to events and meetings, my role was to draft the political 
telegrams and other analytical reports we circulated to EU foreign ministries and the 
European Commission. 
I was lucky to have an astute boss who was candid about the limitations of our 
"mission" as it used to be termed in diplomatic speak. From the start, the Special Envoy 
warned me that, despite his apparent high profile, in reality his mandate gave us very 
little influence on either events in the Great Lakes region or the actions of EU countries. 
Nonetheless, the knowledge we produced via the political reports I drafted on his behalf 
did to some extent inform EU diplomatic and donor engagement in these countries. 
During the first weeks, I remember feeling quite nervous at the apparent weight of this 
responsibility. At the same time, I was surprised by the way in which communication 
operated between EU diplomats and African politicians and how my EU colleagues 
formulated their analyses of the situation. As we travelled around the region in 
subsequent months, attending peace processes and meetings, and I added to the reams 
of political telegrams, I had a growing sense that, most of the time, Western diplomats 
and development agencies were failing to understand what was really going on "on the 
ground" or in the heads of their African interlocutors. I became increasingly concerned 
that, as a result, the political analysis we formulated and the actions it informed could 
be as likely to have a negative impact on the course of events as a positive one. 5 
There were three main issues that concerned me at that time: (1) Rwanda's role in the 
second war in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which a number of its 
international partners appeared to be supporting - directly or indirectly - despite reports 
of large-scale human rights abuses by the RPA and infighting between Rwanda, Uganda 
and various rebel groups over DRC's territory and mineral resources; (2) Rwanda's 
imidugudu (villagisation) or National Habitat policy, which was being supported by 
several donors as part of a strategy to develop rural areas and provide homes for 
homeless returnees and genocide survivors. Yet there was mounting evidence that in 
some areas - particularly in the northwest of the country - some Rwandans were being 
forcibly moved from their homes and their rights violated; 6 and (3) The reports of 
increasing levels of political and social control being exercised by the Rwandan 
government, limiting civil liberties and silencing voices of dissent, which many 
Western Governments appeared to be ignoring. 
My concerns became more acute on reading Peter Uvin's (1998) book Aiding Violence, 
published shortly after I started my job with the Special Envoy. Uvin examines Rwanda 
in the decades before the genocide and argues that significant levels of "structural 
violence" (institutionalised structures of prejudice and racism) existed in Rwanda 
society and were a key factor in the genocide. He also argues that the substantial levels 
of foreign aid that poured into the country - particularly in the late 1980s - aggravated 
the exclusion and impoverishment of certain groups and contributed to the tensions that 
led to the genocide. He further criticises aid agencies for conducting "business as usual" 
in the months before the genocide and ignoring evidence of escalating tensions, racism 
and violence in Rwandan society. As I read Uvin's book, I began to speculate that a 
new generation of Western governments were inadvertently repeating these mistakes 
through a combination of inadequate analysis of the situation on the ground, a 
S Indeed, many of the narratives and processes Johan Pottier (2002) described in the chapters of his book about the 
(re)construction of Rwanda's past, the 1995 Kibeho massacre and the events in Zaire in 1996 were immediately 
recognisable from my own firsthand experience working for DFID and the EU. 6A detailed report on the implementation of Rwanda's National Habitat Policy and the alleged violations of people's 
rights was later published by Human Rights Watch (2001) - see also Kleine-Ahlbrandt (2004b). 
determination to support the RPF despite signs of repression and evidence of human 
rights abuses, and guilt at their own failure to act to prevent the 1994 genocide. 
The motivation for this thesis 
The motivation for this thesis dates back to that period in 1998-1999 when I became so 
frustrated at the limitations of my role and by what I saw as a widespread lack of 
understanding of what was happening in Rwanda. I remember numerous occasions 
when we were being driven through the streets of Kigali in an ambassador's car, 
peering through the window at "ordinary" life going on around us, and wishing I could 
teleport myself through the bulletproof glass. Or times during diplomatic dinners when I 
would have much rather disappeared into the kitchen to chat with the Rwandan staff 
rather than sit there and be ignored because I was the least important person at the table. 
Yet, in spite of its frustrations, I learnt a great deal through this job and the experience 
made two things very clear to me: I was definitely not destined to be a diplomat and I 
had developed a strong interest in Rwanda, in the way knowledge is produced about 
Rwanda, and in issues of identity, reconciliation and change after widespread violence. 
I returned to Rwanda a couple of times in 2001 and 2002 on short-term consultancy 
trips. I remember being struck by the change in language used by the Rwandan officials, 
international diplomats and embassy aid workers I met with. In contrast to a few years 
earlier, the words "reconstruction" and "reconciliation" were barely used by those I 
spoke with. Instead all the talk was of "development", "reform" and "modernisation". 
Yet, when I met with NGO workers, researchers and their Rwandan colleagues, who 
were more directly involved with the Rwandan population, they mostly expressed 
concern and pessimism about the social and political climate and prospects for the 
future. I particularly remember the sobering comments of an anthropologist I knew who 
had lived in Rwanda for several years. He predicted that there would be further large- 
scale violence in Rwanda in the not so distant future and that, yet again, the 
international community would fail both to foresee this and to intervene to stop it. It 
was on my return to Europe that I decided to apply to do a doctorate and resolved to 
return to Rwanda to undertake research to look at contemporary social relations and 
explore in more depth the links between ethnicity, violence and reconciliation. 
Lyndsay McLean Hilker, June 2009 
INTRODUCTION: 
AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF ETHNICITY, VIOLENCE AND RECONCILIATION 
Too much contemporary writing about identity treats it as something that simply is. This pays 
insufficient attention to how identity `works' or `is worked', to process and reflexivity, to the 
social construction of identity in interaction and institutionally... Indeed, identity can only be 
understood as process, as `being' or `becoming'. One's identity - one's identities - for who 
we are is always singular and plural - is never a final or settled matter. (Jenkins 2004: p5) 
This thesis might best be described as an ethnography of category - an ethnography of 
how a group of young Rwandans living in Rwanda a decade after the 1994 genocide 
evoke, reflect on, embrace, modify or reject the "ethnic" categories "Hutu" and 
"Tutsi". 7 It explores how these young people use these categories as explanations for 
past conflict and their personal experiences, and how they perceive the place of these 
categories in current processes of social change and "reconciliation". It examines how 
these individuals understand, experience and use the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" in 
their everyday lives and how they constantly position themselves and others according 
to different criteria, given the wider social and political context. In this way, the thesis 
also speaks to three inter-related questions that are prominent in the literature on 
"ethnicity" and "ethnic" conflict: (i) How is "ethnicity" produced and transformed in 
everyday life? (ii) What is the role of "ethnicity" in "ethnic" violence? and (iii) How do 
societies recover from "ethnic" violence? 
How is "ethnicity" produced and transformed everyday life? 
It is rare to find any mention of Rwanda today that is not accompanied by a reference to 
"ethnicity", "ethnic violence" or the "ethnic" groups "Hutu" and "Tutsi". Despite an 
extensive literature debating the origin and meaning of these categories - and their role 
in past conflict and violence - in many contemporary books and articles on 
Rwanda, 
these labels are attached to persons without question as if the division of Rwandans into 
these groups is a given and does not require further explanation. For example, recent 
books containing testimonies of survivors, witnesses and perpetrators of the 1994 
genocide almost always indicate the "ethnicity" of the individuals telling their stories 
(see, for example, Gourevitch 1998; Hatzfeld 2000 and 2003). Similarly, most research 
As is discussed in chapter 2, there is a third "ethnic" group, the "Twa" in Rwanda. Due to the methodology and 
focus of this research project, however, I did not interview any people who identified themselves as Twa. 
Furthermore, the division that has been most visible in Rwanda in recent decades is between "Hutu" and "Tutsi". 
This thesis therefore focuses on the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" and the relations between these groups in Rwanda 
past and present. Nonetheless, as the conclusion discusses, further research on the "Twa" would be valuable. 
projects conducted in Rwanda since 1994 explicitly categorise their research 
participants as "Hutu", "Tutsi" or "Twa" or use "ethnicity" as a variable in the analysis 
of survey data (see articles in Stover and Weinstein 2004). 8 In the wake of the 1994 
genocide, these categories appear to have ossified in the minds of observers and are no 
longer subject to the same level of interrogation as in the past. 
Such questioning of the unreflective way in which some external commentators have 
employed these categories is not intended to imply that the categories are not salient in 
Rwandan society today. Neither is it to imply that they were not important in the past. 
Indeed, whatever the precise significance of "Hutu" and "Tutsi" at various moments in 
Rwanda's history and the real extent of the tensions between these groups, the planners 
of the genocide were extremely successful in convincing a large proportion of the 
population that there was a fundamental conflict between these groups. There is also 
little doubt that the events of 1994 have led many Rwandans to imagine their society as 
primarily composed of two opposing groups: "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi". Nonetheless, 
in analysing Rwandan society today or in the past, the presence of these categories 
cannot simply be assumed or taken as a pre-existing immutable given. Rather, these 
categories need to be seen as a social phenomenon to be explained. As with all 
identities, "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" are categories that have been and continue to be 
produced on an ongoing basis and we should seek to understand how their role, 
meaning and salience in society have changed. 
This thesis seeks to do this. It looks at how the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" have been 
produced, reproduced and transformed over time and space in Rwanda and then 
explores how these categories are understood, used and experienced in everyday life in 
Rwanda today. It is particularly concerned with whether and how understandings and 
uses of these categories have changed over time and therefore focuses on a group of 
young Rwandans who are growing up in the aftermath of the 1994 genocide. It 
considers the significance of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" in these young people's 
lives and examines how they negotiate their daily social worlds. It looks at the 
complexities and contradictions, certainties and uncertainties inherent in everyday 
processes of "ethnic" identification and the relationship between "ethnic" categories and 
other social identities. It demonstrates that analysing the dialectic relationship between 
B e. g. Longman and Rutagenwa (2004: pp 162-182) discuss the differences in views between "Tutsi" and "Hutu" 
about the war and genocide; Freedman et at (2004: pp 248-265) categorise their interviewees as "Hutu" or "Tutsi". 
how categories are perceived, imagined or constructed at a conceptual level and how 
they are used and experienced at the concrete level of everyday lived reality is key to 
understanding how identities operate in a particular society. Part of this oscillation 
between the "conceptual" and the "concrete" is informed by how young Rwandans 
make sense both of Rwanda's past and their own personal past experiences and what 
explanatory power they attribute to "ethnicity". This brings us to the second question. 
What is the role of "ethnicity" in "ethnic" violence? 
Although the destruction of human groups on the basis of their religious affiliation, 
national or ethnic identity has a long history, in recent decades violence appears to have 
been increasingly perpetrated against individuals on the basis of their actual or assumed 
belonging to a particular group or category of people, and is often committed by 
individuals who are apparently members of another group or category. "Ethnic" 
identities, in particular, seem to have acquired renewed salience and mobilising 
potential in the post-Cold War era with the occurrence of a range of nationalist 
resurgences and "ethnic" conflicts since 1989 (Duffy Toft 2005; Malesevic 2004). 
Perhaps most disquieting has been the increasing number of civilians or "ordinary" 
people who are directly involved in this violence as both victims and perpetrators. In 
cases such as the Balkans and Rwanda, people who had lived side-by-side in peace for 
many years, engaged in friendships and even matrimonial relations, seemed to suddenly 
turn against each other and engage in violence and killing with astonishing brutality. 
Popular representations of these forms of violence often characterise it as "tribalism" 
and the term "ethnic" seems to have degenerated into a synonym for "primitive" and 
"barbaric" (Malesevic 2004: p2a). Furthermore, the perpetrators of such violence are 
often portrayed either as inherently "evil" or as individuals killing in "moments of 
madness" (Staub 1989: p17-18). The implication seems to be that there is an 
inevitability about the violence, that it is a product of primordial human instincts or 
cultural differences, longstanding antipathy between different "ethnic" or other groups 
(Kaplan 1993), or insurmountable differences between civilisations such as "Islam" and 
"the West" (Huntingdon 1996). The recurrence of such violence in temporally and 
geographically diverse societies, however, and its absence in many other contexts - 
including those with sharp cultural, religious or other group differences - forces us to 
develop a more sophisticated understanding of the processes at work. 
Most contemporary academic literature on collective violence takes issue with these 
"primordialist" perspectives, essentialist views of identity and simplistic models of 
human behaviour. Indeed, numerous studies and ethnographies of violent contexts have 
shown that - even in the seemingly most spontaneous outbreaks of violence - there is 
not anything inevitable either about the nature of the differences or conflicts of interest 
purported, or their articulation through violence (see, for example, Bringa 1995, Hinton 
2001 a, Valentine Daniel 1996). They show instead that collective violence is a product 
of particular social, political and economic circumstances in specific times and places 
(Tilly 2003) and that the perpetrators of violence need to be seen as human beings who 
as social agents shape and respond to changing circumstances and make decisions as 
they progress along the "continuum of destruction" (Staub 1989: ppl7-18). 
In this respect, those writing from an "instrumentalist" perspective argue that collective 
violence is not about identity at all, but is about competition between groups over 
access to power and resources (e. g. Collier and Hoeffler 2004; Cohen 1974). 
Proponents of this perspective argue that ethnic, nationalist, or other identities come 
into being and endure for a purpose and are only relevant in as far as they can be 
exploited for political or economic advantage in interaction with other groups. Some 
authors highlight the role of "ethnic entrepreneurs"- political leaders that strategically 
instrumentalise cultural values, "ethnic" and "religious" symbols, and propagate 
mythical histories of a collective past to mobilize support for their claims and legitimise 
the use of violence (Brass 1985, Turton 1997). 
Although, as this instrumentalist perspective argues, collective violence is often rooted 
in competition over power and resources, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that 
its victims are targeted on the basis of their (assumed) collective identity. In this respect, 
instrumentalist arguments fail to question where and how specific "ethnic", "religious", 
or other identities originate or why "ethnic" or "religious" symbols have such appeal to 
the wider population (Turton 1997: ppl8-22). They also appear to ignore what social 
scientists have learnt about socialisation, the transmission of knowledge between 
generations and the power of norms (Eriksen 2002: p55). In response, "social 
constructivist" approaches tend to put more stress on what people believe or think 
"ethnicity" or "ethnic" groups to be and how this evolves over time. Indeed, empirical 
research shows that members of "ethnic" groups or categories do tend to have notions 
of common ancestry and shared culture justifying their unity (Roosens 1996: pp 81-104) 
and that struggles over ideas, beliefs and values can be important in their own right - 
not just in an instrumental sense (e. g. Juergensmeyer 2000; Langer and Brown 2007). 
Also, those who carry out or experience such atrocities often describe, explain and 
justify the violence in terms of a deep and eradicable difference or conflict between 
"them" and "us" (Turton 1997: p3). This suggests that there has to be some "content" 
to "ethnicity" for it to move human beings to collective action of a violent nature. 
There is therefore a need to examine more closely the way that particular "ethnic" or 
other categories are constructed, modified or rejected in specific contexts and whether 
and how this relates to the "ethnic" or "categorical" violence apparently committed in 
their name. As such, this thesis attempts to move beyond the polarised debates about the 
role of "ethnicity" in the 1994 genocide by arguing that understanding the relationship 
between how categories are conceptualised and how they operate in everyday life is key 
to comprehending the relationship between processes of identification, the production 
of inter-group animosity and the potential for categorical violence. This leads us to the 
third and final question, which concerns what happens in the aftermath of categorical 
violence and how the state and other actors can and do intervene in an attempt to 
engineer social relations to prevent the recurrence of violence. 
How can societies best recover from "ethnic" violence? 
Building a shared sense of Rwandanness is at the centre of reconciliation in Rwanda. 
(Statement on the website of Rwanda's National Unity and Reconciliation Commission)' 
At the end of the genocide in July 1994, when the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) 
captured Kigali, it made a compelling case that, given the devastating legacy of the 
genocide, a significant transition period would be needed to reconstruct the country and 
set Rwanda on the path to become a modern, stable and prosperous nation. The RPF-led 
Government10 portrayed the genocide as a product of a longstanding ideology of "ethnic 
divisionism" dating back to the colonial era and therefore argued that Rwandan society 
needed to be "de-ethnicised" in order to restore its pre-colonial "unity". A key plank of 
the Government's reconciliation strategy has therefore been to promote a unified 
"Rwandan" identity and to rid society of the identities "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa". 
Shortly after taking power, the Government removed ethnic identity from official 
9 See bn: //www. nurc. 2ov. nv/index. 12hn? back(last accessed 01/05/08). 
'o In practice, the RPF effectively dominated and controlled the Government of National Unity until it won the 2003 
parliamentary and presidential elections. See Reyntjens (2004: pp177-210) and International Crisis Group (2002). 
identity cards and has since implemented a range of policies to combat "divisionism" 
and promote "national unity and reconciliation" (see chapter 7). 
This raises important questions about how a "society" recovers from "identity-based" 
violence that has pitted one group against the other and what measures can be taken to 
prevent future violence. For example, the approach of the Rwandan Government 
contrasts to that in neighbouring Burundi where the 2000 Arusha Peace Accord 
explicitly recognized the existence of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa"11 and the 
post-transition constitution set up a form of consociational ethnic power-sharing 
arrangement, which effectively institutionalized these identities, stipulating the 
percentages of Hutus and Tutsis in the executive, legislature and communal councils 
(Lemarchand 2007c: pp7-12). This thesis therefore explores the impacts of the 
Rwandan Government's approaches to promoting reconciliation since 1994 by asking 
what "reconciliation" means to the young Rwandans with whom I lived and worked and 
what impact various Government inititaives are having on their lives. It considers in 
particular whether or not the Government's approach is successful in diminishing the 
importance of ethnicity in Rwandan society and politics. 
Research questions 
Amid conflicting local and international discourses about genocide, "ethnic" violence 
and "ethnicity" in Rwanda and elsewhere, this thesis seeks to explore the everyday 
narratives, practices and interactions of young Rwandans and to advance a grounded 
understanding of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" and their relationship to violence 
and peace. It is shaped by an overriding concern about the production of knowledge 
about Rwanda and Rwandans. In particular, it originates from a desire to examine more 
closely how Rwandans themselves understand or explain their past experiences and 
everyday realities in contemporary Rwanda and how their daily narratives, practices and 
interactions relate to wider political discourse and processes of social transformation. 
This thesis is therefore framed by the following inter-related research questions: 
II See Protocol II, ch 1, article 2 of the Arusha Accord (August 2000) 
(available at http: //www. usip. org/library/pa/burundi/pa burundi 08282000 toc. html)(last accessed 26th November 
2008). 
0 How have the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" been produced, reproduced and 
transformed over time both through the actions and discourses of political elites 
and in the everyday narratives and practices of "ordinary" Rwandans? 
0 What is the significance and function of these categories in everyday life and social 
relations and how do they relate to other categories or conceptions of self/other? 
0 How do young Rwandans construct and understand the differences between "Hutu" 
and "Tutsi" and how well do these constructs correspond to their social reality? 
0 How important is it in practice for people to know the categorical belonging of 
their social acquaintances, how do they determine this, and how does this influence 
social interaction? 
" In what ways has the production, reproduction and transformation of "ethnic" 
categories or other constructs of identity/alterity in everyday life been related to the 
production of violence in Rwanda? 
" How do "ordinary" Rwandans understand and explain their own past experiences 
and the past conflict and violence that has taken place in Rwanda? Do they use 
"ethnicity" as an explanatory factor? 
" What can the narratives, practices and social interactions of Rwandans tell us about 
wider processes of social change and "reconciliation" policies and projects in 
Rwanda? 
The thesis is based on 14 months of ethnographic fieldwork conducted in 2004 and 
2005 in Rwanda's capital city Kigali with young people from diverse social 
backgrounds and with very different past experiences of exile, conflict and violence. 
Whilst it does not set out to give definitive answers to all the questions above, it aims to 
contribute to understanding how social categories shape people's realities, how they are 
understood, represented, used and experienced in everyday life and how this relates to 
the production of conflict and violence and to processes of reconciliation in the 
aftermath of such violence. The thesis therefore aims to contribute to literature on 
Rwanda, but also to wider literature in anthropology, peace studies and development 
studies on ethnicity, identity, violence and reconciliation. In particular, it speaks to work 
on collective or "identity-based" violence and on social relations, the dynamics of 
identity and reconciliation in the aftermath of collective violence. 
Overview of the thesis 
Chapter 1 outlines in more detail the theoretical issues this thesis seeks to explore. It 
draws on wider literature on social identity, ethnicity and collective violence and 
discusses the evolution of the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" in Rwanda and 
their relationship to past violence. It analyses how these categories have been produced, 
reproduced and transformed over time and space and traces the continuities and changes 
in their role, salience and meaning to Rwandans and non-Rwandans. It also examines 
past episodes of conflict in Rwanda and re-considers the role of "ethnicity" in the 
violence. It argues that - although the 1994 genocide was the outcome of a complex 
culmination of factors - "ethnicity" was indeed a key factor in the production of 
violence. What mattered in Rwanda was the specific way in which the categories 
"Hutu" and "Tutsi" were constructed as "ethnic" identities. Over time, particular 
essentialist stereotypes became attached to these categories to construct a "conceptual 
Tutsi" and its Hutu counterpart, which were increasingly divorced from social reality 
and the "concrete" Tutsis and Hutus that inhabited the cities and collines of Rwanda. It 
was these "ethnic" constructs and stereotypes that the organisers of the genocide 
reworked and reproduced in their quest to justify the violence and mobilise civilians to 
participate in the slaughter including, in many cases, of their former social intimates. 
Chapter 2 sets the scene for the ethnographic chapters that follow by describing the 
context in which I conducted my research, discussing the research process and strategy 
and introducing my fieldsite and research participants. It outlines my overall approach 
and why I chose to conduct my research in Rwanda's capital Kigali with young people. 
It then briefly gives a flavour of the socio-political context in Rwanda in 2004-2005, 
which provided the backdrop for my research and the lives of the young people whose 
lives I researched, discussing some of the challenges I encountered in researching 
"sensitive" issues such as "ethnicity" and "reconciliation" in this environment and how 
I overcame them. It focuses particularly on dilemmas concerning access, trust and 
communication in a context still characterised by fear and mistrust and hence justifies 
the adoption of relatively informal and flexible research methods. It also addresses 
issues of my own positionality and how this affected my research, as well as dilemmas 
related to writing up this thesis, representing and producing knowledge about Rwanda 
and Rwandans. Finally, it gives an initial introduction to the young people I worked 
with, how I met them and their role in making this research possible. 
Chapter 3 examines young people's narratives about the past - both personal and 
collective. It firstly discusses the politics of history in contemporary Rwanda and, given 
this context, how young people learn about, relate to and talk about the past. It then 
looks at young people's explanations of the origins of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" and of the genesis of "ethnic" conflict and the 1994 genocide. In this respect, it 
compares and contrasts young people's narratives to the discourses or "meta-narratives" 
of political elites, who have repeatedly manipulated history to justify their positions and 
actions. It also looks at young people's narratives about their own position and 
experiences, examining the relationship between the way people explain Rwanda's past, 
their ethnic or other identities and their own personal histories. It shows that many 
young people are acutely aware of the sensitivities of the past and reveals a widespread 
assumption among young people that other people's views on the past are determined 
by their ethnic identity. Yet I did not find strong evidence that this was the case and 
there was no clear-cut "ethnic" patterning to their narratives. Although young people's 
narratives sometimes incorporated elements of the "meta-narratives" of elites, the way 
specific individuals related to and accounted for the past was far more varied and 
implicitly rooted in their own past experiences and current circumstances. 
Chapter 4 examines the significance and operation of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" 
in the everyday relations and relationships of young Rwandans in contemporary 
Rwanda. Through exploring their everyday narratives, practices and social interactions, 
it demonstrates that - despite current state policies that seek to de-emphasise "ethnicity" 
- the categories Hutu, Tutsi and Twa remain salient in contemporary Rwanda. It 
examines when and how these categories "mattered" in young people's everyday 
relations and relationships. It reveals that, although many young Rwandans continue to 
forge inter-"ethnic" ties, there is a persistent desire to know the "ethnic" identity of 
significant others and to categorise them on an ongoing basis. It looks at how this 
categorisation takes place in practice and how young people seek to determine or 
uncover the "ethnic" identity of others. It looks at the interplay and relative importance 
of different factors such as physical appearance, knowledge of a person's family 
heritage or past experience and observation of their comportment in different situations, 
times and places. Exploring the complexities and contradictions, certainties and 
uncertainties of these processes of categorisation, this chapter investigates the 
relationship between "conceptual" categories and "concrete" persons in contemporary 
Rwanda. As such, it raises fundamental questions about what young Rwandans 
understand "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" to mean and the role of "ethnic" categories, 
stereotypes and anomalies in structuring their social worlds. 
Chapter 5 deepens the analysis of the significance of "ethnicity" and everyday processes 
of "ethnic" identification in contemporary Rwanda by focusing on the position and 
experiences of young Rwandans of "mixed" ethnic heritage. It builds on chapter 4, 
which looked at processes of "other"-categorisation, to consider how these relate to 
processes of "self' categorisation. It focuses in depth on the cases of eight individuals, 
exploring how their mixed identity has shaped their past experiences and influences 
their everyday social interactions and sense of belonging. It also examines the strategies 
they adopt to cope with their "mixed" heritage and to negotiate their daily social worlds. 
This chapter raises important questions about the position of a significant number of 
Rwandans today who do not fit the binary "ethnic" logic that persists in Rwanda. 
Chapter 6 then looks at a number of other categories and identities that are relevant to 
young people in contemporary Rwandan society. Although the categories "Hutu", 
"Tutsi" and "Twa" have been prominent socio-political identities in Rwandan society 
for several decades, they have coexisted with several other identities, ideas of social 
difference, self and other. These have included distinctions on the basis of gender, clan 
and geographical origin, as well as socio-economic or class differences. Depending on 
time or context, these other "non-ethnic" social distinctions have been more or less 
prominent in social and political life and have intersected or overlapped with one 
another. In stark contrast to the pre-genocide period, it shows that regional provenance 
is barely significant in national politics or contemporary relations amongst young 
people in Kigali. Instead, and given the large numbers of post-1994 returnees that live 
in Kigali today, country of origin was a significant factor in social relations in 2004- 
2005. Stereotypes and prejudices persist about differences between "Ugandan", 
"Burundian", "Zairean" and "Rwandan" Rwandans both within elite circles and wider 
society, which both challenge and reinforce "ethnic" boundaries. This chapter also 
discusses gender relations and finds that, despite some positive developments, there is a 
worrying persistence of certain stereotypes about "Tutsi" women, which continue to 
"ethnicise" female sexuality in ways similar to the pre-genocide period. 
Chapter 7 builds on the findings of the preceding chapters in light of endeavours to 
prevent future violence and foster "reconciliation" in Rwanda. Given the context in 
which the Government has made outlawing ethnicity and building a unified national 
identity a cornerstone of its approach to "unity and reconciliation", this chapter 
examines young people's perspectives on "reconciliation" - what it means, whom it is 
for, how current efforts are progressing, and what the challenges are. It also looks at 
their perspectives on and experiences of specific government approaches to 
reconciliation including the official annual commemoration, the gacaca, 12 and the 
FARG13 fund for genocide survivors. Building on discussions in the previous chapters 
about the persistence of stereotypes and "meta-narratives" about ethnicity and history, it 
particularly considers the politics of silencing and victimhood in contemporary Rwanda. 
It demonstrates that despite current policies that seek to "de-ethnicise" Rwanda, many 
aspects of current approaches to "reconciliation" - even if inadvertently - implicitly 
"ethnicise" Rwandans, perpetuating an "ethnic" logic and reproducing many of the 
dangerous precedents of pre-genocide Rwanda. 
The conclusion to this thesis summarises key findings and discusses their implications 
for the broader questions posed in the introduction. Although "ethnic" differences have 
been and continue to be instrumentalised in Rwanda - as elsewehere - both by political 
elites and in everyday social interactions, it argues that the way "ethnic" categories are 
constructed and perceived matters and has real consequences. In particular, it argues 
that under certain circumstances, corporate "ethnic" myths and stereotypes can play an 
important role in mobilising people into violence. In contemporary Rwanda, it argues 
that a corporatist "ethnic logic" persists for a number of reasons, and that the gap 
between how the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" are constructed at a "conceptual" level 
and the everyday realities of "concrete" Hutus, Tutsis and "Hutsis" is a cause for 
concern. It suggests that the Government's current approaches to "reconciliation" are 
not working and that there are real risks that "ethnic" violence might recur in Rwanda. 
It concludes that there is a need to acknowledge the past suffering of all Rwandans and 
encourage dialogue between "concrete" Hutus and Tutsis to help desmytsify the 
powerful "conceptual Hutu" and "conceptual" Tutsi that persist. 
12 Gacaca is a form of community justice to try those accused of crimes of genocide. Pilot trials began in 2002 and 
the main gacaca process was launched countrywide in 2005 (see chapter 7). 
13 The Fonds dAssistance pour  es Rescapes de Genocide, a government-financed fund that provides assistance to 
genocide survivors e. g. by paying school fees and medicals costs or helping reapir their home (see chapter 7). 
CHAPTER 1: 
THE PRODUCTION OF ETHNICITY AND VIOLENCE IN RWANDA 
The important thing is not to record the antiquity of the words "Hutu" and "Tutsi", but to 
account for the processes that have led the people of Burundi and Rwanda to kill each other 
during the 201h century in the name of these identities. (Chretien 1997: p17) 
This chapter discusses the evolution of the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" in 
Rwanda and their relationship to past violence. Drawing on literature on Rwanda as 
well as wider literature on identity, ethnicity and collective violence, it analyses how 
these categories have been produced, reproduced and transformed over time and space 
in Rwanda and traces the continuities and changes in their role, salience and meaning to 
Rwandans and non-Rwandans. It then examines past episodes of conflict in Rwanda 
and re-considers the role of "ethnicity" in the violence. It argues that - although the 
1994 genocide was the outcome of a complex culmination of factors - "ethnicity" was a 
key factor in the violence. What mattered in Rwanda was the specific way in which the 
categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" were constructed as "ethnic" identities. Over time, 
certain essentialist ideas and stereotypes became attached to these categories that proved 
especially potent and played an important role in the production of violence. 
Debating the "ethnic"-ness of the categories "Hutu", ""Tutsi" and "Twa" 
The origin and evolution of the social categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" has been 
an enduring concern of colonial and post-colonial commentary on Rwanda. In the last 
decade, these discussions have become increasingly polarised given their centrality to 
competing explanations of - and hence differential attributions of responsibility for - 
the events and processes that led to the 1994 genocide (Eltringham 1994: ppl63-179). 
Disagreement has centred on the nature of past differences between these groups; the 
porosity of the boundary between them at different points in Rwanda's past; when and 
why changes occurred; the extent of those changes; and whether, when and how each 
group mistreated the other (compare, for example, de Heusch 1966; Maquet 1961; 
Newbury 1988; and Prunier 1995). 14 
A key preoccupation of many scholars has been whether or not the groups "Hutu", 
"Tutsi" and "Twa" can be described as "ethnic" groups or at what point they came to be 
understood as or took on the characteristics of "ethnic" groups. In contrast to ethnic 
"See Eltringham (2004: pp12-27) or Pottier (2002: pp109-129) for a summary of the main points of contention. 
differentiation in other parts of Africa - where linguistic, religious or regional 
differences figure prominently - Rwanda's three groups share a single language, have a 
similar cultural background, are not concentrated in specific regions, and religious 
differences do not follow "ethnic" lines (Prunier 1995: p5). Disagreements have centred 
both on the definition and nature of "ethnicity" itself and on the extent to which this 
term can sufficiently explain the complexities of Rwandan society (see Eltringham 
2004: pp5-27; Mamdani 2001: pp56-59; and Taylor 1999: pp7l-75). Much of this 
literature has attempted to dislodge the notion that "ancient tribal hatreds" drove 
Rwanda's genocide (Straus 2006: p19) and instead show that Rwanda has a very 
specific and complex history of ethnicity. Nonetheless, these debates over the "ethnic"- 
ness or otherwise of the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" have sometimes been 
misleading and have given the impression that the proof or disproof of the "ethnic" 
character of Rwanda's social categories will somehow help us to better explain the 
tragedies that have occurred there. It is argued here that this is the wrong question to ask 
as it misunderstands the genesis both of the term "ethnicity" and of the groups "Hutu", 
"Tutsi" and "Twa". 
"Ethnicity" was one of a number of heuristic constructs invented by social scientists to 
help them analyse the social world and to facilitate comparison between the systems of 
classification encountered in different "societies" across the world. Eltringham (2004: 
p7) likens "ethnicity" to a Weberian "ideal-type" that extracts from reality the generic 
or "essential" characteristics of a phenomenon, synthesising them into a single, abstract, 
universal construct to facilitate comparison. Thus, as an analytical concept, "ethnicity" 
is a contingent approximation of reality and does not correspond to reality. Yet, 
although a singular construct, there is no single definition of "ethnicity"; rather, it is a 
polythetic classification and, in practice, groups have been assigned the "ethnic quality" 
on the basis of having some of a number of archetypal characteristics (ibid. pp9-10). 
The way the concept "ethnicity" has been defined, understood and applied by both 
external and internal actors has therefore varied across time and space. This reflects 
changes in the approaches of social scientists and the complexities involved in 
15 Eltringham (2004: pp 9-10) says that these characteristics may include: "(1) an existing `name' for a group (an 
ethnonym); (2) members speak a different language or dialect; (3) members demonstrate distinct religious practices; 
(4) live in a particular geographic territory; (5) express commitment to particular `values' or 'norms'; (6) dress in a 
particular way; (7) share a sense of fictive/metaphoric kinship, a sense of shared history, ancestors or provenance; (8) 
are economically specialised; (9) possess a characteristic physical appearance; (10) have particular forms of 
leadership; and (11) are perceived to be "racially" or biologically different" 
pigeonholing diverse forms of social organisation, but it also highlights the fundamental 
difficulty in applying unchanging concepts to a changing social reality. Indeed, the gap 
between a fluid and contingent social reality and the relatively fixed concepts and 
theories used to explain it, means that the labelling of a particular schema of social 
categorisation as "ethnic" can have adverse consequences. It may, for example, give the 
classifiers a false sense of certainty that they have accurately understood or "captured" 
that social reality. It may lead them to misunderstand or simplify the way specific 
societies are organised or persons categorised, overlooking the everyday politics of 
identity, processes of contestation, and other significant social cleavages. It may tend to 
"fix" those labels in the minds of the classifiers and the classified so they treat either the 
categories or the social reality they purport to capture as static and unchanging, whereas 
in reality both are in flux. It may also lead them to impute traits or characteristics to 
social groups that they do not possess, reify them as being more distinct than they are, 
or exaggerate the clarity and significance of the social distinction (Eltringham 2004: 
p 10). External actors, in particular, may fail to comprehend the (emit) categories used 
by those classified and instead conceive their own (etic) schema of social categorisation 
to "explain" the structure and dynamics of a particular society. 
To some extent, therefore, debates about whether or not a particular observed schema of 
social categorisation - like the Rwandan categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" - can be 
described as "ethnic" are largely "academic" as this depends on how "ethnicity" has 
been defined by those doing the classification in the first place. Yet, the concept of 
"ethnicity" cannot simply be dismissed as a "neutral" construct of social science. Like 
any concept that purports to say something significant about the way human beings 
relate to each other, it immediately takes on political significance in the social world 
and can be utilised by social actors in the pursuit of their interests: 
Identities exist and are acquired, claimed and allocated within power relations. Identification 
is something over which struggles take place and with which stratagems are advanced - it is 
means and end in politics. (Jenkins 2004: p23) 
For example, in Africa and other parts of the world, labels originally imposed on groups 
of people by outside analysts or colonial authorities have often been co-opted by those 
who have then chosen to represent themselves as "self-conscious communities" 
(Newbury 1988: p15) and a competitive form of "ethnicity" was born (see Vail 1989). 
Once particular social distinctions were externally objectified as "ethnic", local actors 
could represent themselves as members of an "ethnic group", adopt "ethnic stratagems" 
or mobilise their followers to pursue "ethnic goals" (Fardon 1987: pp173-177). 16 In this 
way, the boundary between "ethnicity" as an external analytical tool and as a literal 
construct intrinsic to social reality, and between local and outside understandings or 
social distinctions, becomes less clear-cut (Eriksen 1996 in Eltringham 2004: p12). As a 
result, in many cases, "[t]he classifier's model has been internalised by the classified" 
(Eltringham 2004: p11) and socio-political actors may treat the classification "ethnic" 
as if it has ultimate reality and even impute causality and agency to "ethnicity". 
As this chapter and the rest of the thesis demonstrate, all of the above processes have 
occurred to some extent in Rwanda during the 20`h century and have contributed to the 
durability and potency of the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" in Rwandan society 
and politics. Despite the contested debates about the precise genesis of these groups, 
there is in fact broad agreement that their salience, meaning and political significance 
have varied over time and space as a result of changing, economic, political and social 
circumstances (e. g. Mamdani 2001: pp4l-157; Newbury 1988: pp10-16; Prunier 1995: 
pp9-40). There has been ongoing interaction between local models of social distinction 
and externally imposed constructions of Rwandan society (Taylor 1999: pp55-97) and 
between elite discourses and practices in the national political arena and the everyday 
narratives and interactions taking place in specific localities across Rwanda (Newbury 
1988: ppl4-16). As a result, different understandings of the origins, meanings and 
relations between the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" have become embedded or 
lodged and, at times, disembedded or dislodged from people's imaginaries. Equally, 
whilst present for well over a century, the importance of these social categories has 
varied over time and with circumstance and different social actors have defined, used 
and experienced these categories in diverse ways. 
Building on his earlier work on ethnicity (Barth 1969), Frederik Barth (1995) makes a 
distinction between the designation of social groups and the substance of the "cultural 
materials" on which they are based (see also Eriksen 2002: pp56-58). While social 
16 Fardon (1987: pp168-188) studies the "ethnogenesis" of the Chamba, an ethnic group straddling the Nigeria and 
Cameroonian borders that he says did not exist in the 19`h century. He argues that African ethnicities are not 
"primordial" relics of the distant past, but products of the same world-historical processes that have produced modern 
capitalism, wage labour and class structures. Fardon says that the export of the nation-state form of political 
organisation to Africa - classifying subject peoples into artificially bounded categories and the creation of 
territorially distinct sub-divisions - had the effect of reshaping existing local ethnic identities, making them more 
fixed and less permeable than before, and sometimes creating news ones. 
groups can have clear-cut boundaries, remain categorically distinct from one another 
and be stable over time, culture is in a state of flux, being constantly produced and 
reproduced through experience. The implication is that the "content" or 
"characteristics" of a social group may change even though the salience of the label or 
those categorised under it may or may not. Richard Jenkins (1997: pp167-168) makes a 
similar distinction between what he terms the nominal - the name - and the virtual - the 
meaning or experience - dimensions of ethnicity and other social identities and stresses 
that one dimension can change without the other. For example, although the name 
"Tutsi" and boundary of who is defined as "Tutsi" might not change, the experience of 
being "Tutsi" - the meaning attached to bearing this name - may change considerably 
with circumstance. Similarly, although the "ethnic" label itself may not change, exactly 
which individuals are included within it may change as the defining characteristics of 
membership change. In Rwanda, as the next section shows, there is evidence that both 
these types of changes occurred in the past. 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa": continuity and change during the 20th century 
The main challenge we face in analysing changes in the way different groups of 
Rwandans have understood and experienced the identities "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" 
over time is that there are only a limited number of detailed ethnographic studies of 
specific localities or people (for good examples see Codere 1973; de Lame 2005; 
Gravel 1968 and Newbury 1988). Most studies tend to focus on elites and their role in 
the creation of "ethnic" consciousness through the political instrumentation of "ethnic" 
identities, rather than examining empirically at a local level the role of "ordinary" 
people in the dialectic processes of ethnic identity formation and political activity 
(Newbury 1988: p15). Nonetheless, the different analyses of political and social change 
both globally and in specific localities do shed light on the most significant periods of 
change in the way the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" have been defined, used 
and experienced by Rwandans. 
The beginnings of categorical self-consciousness in pre-colonial Rwanda 
Although their precise origin is disputed, it is agreed that the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" 
and "Twa" have existed in Rwandan society since at least the late 19`h century (de 
Heusch 1966; Maquet 1961; Newbury 1988; Prunier 1995). There is also evidence that 
several decades before colonialism, these labels were closely related to factors such as 
wealth, privilege and proximity to the monarchy (Newbury 1988: pplO-19) and perhaps 
also to economic specialisation and consumption (Taylor 1999: pp67-71). Many authors 
highlight the existence of specific terms in Kinyarwanda during this period - 
"kwihutura " (to cease to be Hutu, to become Tutsi) and "kwitutsira " (to cease to be 
Tutsi, to become Hutu) - which imply that some kind of social hierarchy existed in pre- 
colonial Rwanda and that movement between the categories "Tutsi" and "Hutu" could 
occur. This was most likely as a result of marriage, alliance building or losing or 
acquiring wealth, particularly in cattle (Newbury 1988: ppl2-13; Prunier 1995: ppl3- 
14), although the geographical and numerical extent of such social mobility is likely to 
have been exaggerated by many recent authors (e. g. Gourevitch 1998: pp47-62; 
Mackintosh 1996 in Pottier 2002: p117; Keane 1996: ppll-12). Furthermore, even 
though there is evidence that the identification "Tutsi" applied to the ruling class and 
those lineages with power and wealth for many decades, it seems that the identification 
"Hutu" had little importance in many parts of Rwanda until the introduction of central 
Rwandan rule in the late 19`h century (Newbury 1998: p10). 
Indeed, as Catherine Newbury (1988: pp5-8) explains, the situation in the pre-colonial 
period is unlikely to have been uniform across Rwanda. Pre-colonial borders shifted 
over time and the influence of the political institutions of the central court on different 
parts of Rwanda varied significantly (Prunier 1995: p19; de Lame 2005: p44-47). For 
the majority of the pre-colonial period, the evidence suggests that Rwandan society was 
characterised by a complex, multi-layered set of social networks and alliances and that 
people's ideas and actions - particularly in rural areas - were primarily determined 
reference to clan and lineage affiliations rather than the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" per se (Newbury 1988: p11; Chretien 1997 p35). 17 
It was under the reign of King Rwabugiri from the 1860s onwards that social divisions 
and inequalities increased and the Hutu/Tutsi classification rigidified. As Rwabugiri 
took steps to centralise power and expand the state, increased prerogatives were placed 
in the hands of Tutsi authorities, which used these powers to enhance their control over 
land, cattle and people (Newbury 1988: p17). The lands of formerly autonomous local 
Hutu and Tutsi lineages were confiscated, destroying their political autonomy (Prunier 
17 Louis de Lacger's (1961) account of social relations in the pre-colonial period is perhaps the most comprehensive. 
Catherine Newbury (1988) also examines in depth the evolution of social and political relations in the region of 
Kinyaga (now Cyangugu) in South-West Rwanda. 
1995: p19) and clientship relations became more exploitative with the introduction of 
the bonded labour service uburetwa - from which Tutsis were excepted (Prunier 1995: 
p21; Newbury 1988: p82, p140). Although the degrees of change and oppression can be 
debated and the situation was not uniform across Rwanda, there is little doubt that these 
changes created a severe strain on Hutu livelihoods in many parts of Rwanda and 
engendered (or consolidated) a process of categorical self-consciousness and 
polarisation before the arrival of the European colonial powers (Pottier 2002: pp 112). 
Thus, the claims in much of the "post-genocide" literature (including that produced by 
the RPF-dominated Government), that pre-colonial Rwanda was a harmonious society 
characterised by reciprocity and social mobility are not borne out by the evidence 
presented in much of the earlier literature (Pottier 2002: pp110-123). It is also a vast 
oversimplification to attribute the origins of inequality and ethnic discrimination in 
Rwanda to colonialism alone (Taylor 1999 p68). Nonetheless, there is little doubt that it 
was the colonial period that resulted in the most significant changes to the way 
Rwandans understood and experienced the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa". By 
the end of the colonial period, these categories had become sharply polarised and were 
strongly associated with notions of privilege or exploitation and differential biogenetic 
markers. Although key authors disagree about the relative extent of the change 
(compare de Heusch 1966; Maquet 1961; Newbury 1988; Prunier 1995), it is widely 
acknowledged that the distinction between these categories was accentuated and 
institutionalised under colonial rule and that this played a significant role in the logic 
and nature of the violence that was to follow. 
The "ethnicisation " or "racialisation " of Rwandan society during the colonial period 
Central to understanding the extent of the colonial impact on ideas of identity and 
difference in Rwanda is the underlying ideology that was used to justify many changes 
made: the Hamitic hypothesis. A pseudo-scientific-religious social evolutionist theory 
dating to early European explorers, the Hamitic hypothesis purported to explain the 
origin of seemingly anomalous advanced civilisational traits found in central Africa. 
The form of the hypothesis applied to Rwanda alleged that the "Tutsi" were "Hamites", 
a Caucasoid race from north-eastern Africa who possessed superior moral and cultural 
characteristics and had conquered the less intelligent Negroid or "Bantu" peoples of the 
region, including the "Hutu" and "Twa" of Rwanda. It described the "pygmoid" Twa as 
the original or "autochthonous" inhabitants of Rwanda who were later joined by the 
"Bantu" Hutu who had migrated to Rwanda from the West and were several centuries 
later conquered by the "Hamitic" Tutsi from the North (see Taylor 1999: pp55-97; 
Mamdani 2001: pp79-87; Eltringham 2006). This hypothesis therefore posited separate 
geographical and biogenetic origins of Rwanda's social groups. 
In the late 19th century, the heyday of European "scientific racism", the Hamitic 
hypothesis was embraced by the colonial power and resulted in a predominant view of a 
Rwandan society composed of three distinct racially-defined groups: The "Hamitic" 
Tutsi, whose Caucasian affinities and superior intelligence naturally disposed them to 
rule; the "Bantu" Hutu, whose stocky physiques and "slower-witted" minds naturally 
predisposed them to hard work; and the "pygmoid" Twa who were a pariah race of 
hunter-gatherers destined to disappear (Taylor 1999: p39). It is unlikely, however, that 
this colonial construction of Rwandan society was entirely "invented" from outside: 
No group constructs anything ex nihilo. There is always an antecedent reality upon which 
any construction is based. (Taylor 1999: p61) 
Indeed, as discussed above, the evidence suggests that notions of superiority and 
inferiority, privilege and disadvantage were already associated with the categories 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" prior to colonial rule. Nevertheless, the application of the 
Hamitic hypothesis to Rwandan society resulted in the ethnicisation or racialisation of 
these categories. A distinction was drawn between the groups on the basis of presumed 
innate and immutable biological differences and "the Tutsi" were constructed as 
"foreigners" from outside Rwanda -a "non-indigenous" race that enjoyed a kind of 
virtual citizenship and preferential treatment, but were never accorded the status of an 
indigenous ethnic group like "the Hutu" (Mamdani 2001: pp99-101). 
The culmination of this process of racialisation was the 1933 census in which every 
Rwandan was issued with an "ethnic" ID card, effectively "fixing" their "ethnic" 
identity as "Hutu", "Tutsi" or "Twa" in the eyes of the state and making further 
movement between categories difficult (Mamdani 2001: pp98-102). 
18 It was at this 
point, that the social categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" became known officially as 
18 Nonetheless, it seems there were a variety of means applied by the colonial and local authorities during the census 
to sort Rwandans into these three categories and not all were consistent with one another. In some cases, existing 
church records were the main basis of assigning status; in others, the main factor was wealth in cows; and in yet other 
cases, physical measurements such as a person's height and the shape of the nose were used to classify individuals 
into one of the three categories (Mamdani 2001: pp98-99). Thus, it is almost certain that as a result of this sorting 
process, a number of Rwandans were obliged to or succeeded in jumping categories. 
"ethnic groups". Significantly, the Kinyarwanda term written on the ID cards next to the 
French "ethnie" was "ubwoko ". This word translates as "type" or "species" and was 
previously used to describe other social categories in pre-colonial Rwanda akin to clan 
or lineage. Thus, to Rwandans at the time, the use of the term "ubwoko " combined with 
the "ethno-racial" physical and behavioural stereotypes attached to each group (and 
explained "scientifically" via a particular history of migration and conquest in the 
region) almost certainly implied a biological or genetic difference between the groups 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa". Over time, the idea of there being innate, unchangeable 
differences between persons categorised as one or other ethnie was to prove extremely 
potent and durable. 
The issuing of ID cards was one of a series of steps taken by the colonial authorities that 
institutionalised and politicised the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa". In the 1930s 
- informed by ideas of the Tutsi as "natural aristocrats" - the Belgian colonial authorities 
undertook major reforms of the state administration and chieftancy, effectively 
"purifying" the local leadership of its Hutu elements (Chretien 1997: p13, see also 
Prunier 1995: pp26-27 and Mamdani 2001: pp89-91). They also strengthened various 
forms of exaction such as taxation and corvee (bonded labour), which impacted most 
heavily on Hutus and established a training school for civil servants, which almost 
exclusively admitted Tutsi (Mamdani 2001: p89). The combined effect of these 
measures was to consolidate further the power of Tutsi chiefs over the Hutu peasantry 
and pave the way for political and economic competition to take place on "ethnic" lines. 
Rwandan adoption and appropriation of "ethno-racial " stereotypes 
Over time, and as this thesis will demonstrate, the imposition of these external concepts 
of difference, and their politicisation and institutionalisation under colonial rule, clearly 
influenced Rwandans' own ideas of the meanings of these social categories and the 
nature of differences between them. At first, it was Rwandan elites who appropriated 
these colonial constructions, "ethnic" stereotypes and readings of Rwandan history - 
often in pursuit of their own interests. For example, in early colonial Rwanda, it could 
be advantageous for Tutsi elites to claim Hamitic descent and a separate origin from 
Hutus and to invent traditions to insist on their intellectual, moral and military 
superiority (Taylor 1999: p75). There is evidence that Hamitic themes were absorbed 
into existing understandings of aristocratic Tutsi rule - for example through the works 
of Alexis Kagame, the court ethnographer, and his protege Jacques Maquet (1954) who 
wrote about the "heterogeneite raciale" of Rwandan society. Yet, it is not clear to what 
extent ordinary Rwandans were affected by these concepts during the colonial period. 
There is little doubt that many ordinary Rwandans suffered increased hardship as a 
result of the monetisation of the economy, administrative reforms and more oppressive 
systems of exaction, but it is unlikely that they read these changes purely in "ethnic" 
terms or adopted wholesale colonial ideas about the nature of their social reality. 
In the late 1950s, however, this began to change, when - after favouring the Tutsi elite 
for several decades, but now threatened by their growing ability to challenge their 
power - the Belgian colonial authorities (influenced by the Catholic church) shifted its 
allegiances toward the Hutu elite. As colonial rule faltered, the Belgians began to 
support the education, economic and political advancement of Hutu leaders. At the 
same time, in an increasingly difficult socio-economic climate, many Hutu began to 
organise collectively, creating societies, associations and eventually political parties 
(Newbury 1988: ppl80-206; Prunier 1995: p45). At this point, Rwandan engagement 
with Hamitic themes changed. Some Tutsi nationalists began to embrace a single origin 
theory and - in contrast with their earlier rhetoric that stressed the common fraternity of 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" - Hutu politicians began to echo Hamitic themes stressing 
the separate origin of the Tutsi "invaders" and "autochthony" of the Hutu (Taylor 1999: 
pp77-78). In 1957, a group of Hutu intellectuals published the "Bahutu Manifesto", a 
platform for the political empowerment of Hutus, which challenged the humiliation and 
socio-economic inferiority endured by the Hutu community due to the longstanding 
"political monopoly" of the Mututsi "race" (Prunier 1995: pp45-46). The culmination of 
this mobilisation of the Hutu community was the 1959 "social revolution" during which 
the first incidences of "ethnic" violence occurred. 
The production of violence and genocide in Rwanda 
There are different views on the levels of oppression that segments of the Rwandan 
population endured in the pre-colonial period and to what extent this subjugation was 
determined by social category (compare de Heusch 1966; Maquet 1961; Newbury 
1988). Most evidence suggests that until the late 19P century, local conflicts tended to 
occur between different clans or lineages and that the population - Hutus and Tutsis 
together - followed their common chief (Chretien 1997: p33). As discussed above, 
however, inequalities did increase under the reign of King Rwabugiri (1867-1897) and - 
although there are no records of widespread physical violence between Hutus and Tutsis 
-a degree of "structural violence" 19 was present before the colonial power arrived and 
played into events that followed. The colonial period then accentuated social cleavages, 
rigidifying and institutionalising the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" as "ethno- 
racial" identities and paving the way for inter-"ethnic" political competition. In the late 
1950s, on the eve of independence, political tensions mounted rapidly and an attack on 
a party activist sparked rival attacks and then a more widespread uprising. 
The 1959 "social revolution". independence and first incidences of "ethnic" violence 
Much has been written about the 1959 "social revolution", the relative roles of the 
Belgian colonial power, Hutu elites and the wider population, and the extent to which 
this was really a widespread uprising of the Hutu majority against minority Tutsi 
monarchical rule or the straightforward replacement of one elite by another (compare 
Lemarchand 1970; Mamdani 2001: pp103-131; Newbury 1988: ppl82-198; and Prunier 
1995: pp4l-54). It was during this uprising that the first killings of an explicitly 
"ethnic" nature took place in Rwanda, with members of the Tutsi chieftaincy and 
aristocracy the main targets. 20 Some authors argue that these attacks were targeted 
indiscriminately at Tutsis on the basis of their ethnic (see Prunier 1995: pp49-51). 
Similarly, many Rwandans today - particularly those close to the current RPF 
Government - claim that 1959 was the first incidence of genocide against Tutsis 
(Eltringham 2004: p36). Others maintain, however, that although there was significant 
pillaging and burning of Tutsi houses in certain parts of the country, most of the 
violence was targeted at those Tutsis who held administrative posts and at members of 
the Tutsi aristocracy rather than indiscriminately at all Tutsis (Newbury 1998: p13, 
p195). Nonetheless, as a result of the violence, there was significant population 
displacement21 and thousands of Tutsis fled into exile in neighbouring countries. 
Whether or not the violence against Tutsis in 1959 can be considered as the first episode 
of categorical violence - where people were targeted indiscriminately on the basis of 
their assumed or actual belonging to a particular ethnic - there is little doubt that the 
19 This term, originally conceived by Johan Galtung (1969), is usually defined as the systematic ways in which 
political and social structures prevent individuals from achieving their full potential, usually on the basis of their 
group identity e. g. institutionalized racism or sexism. See also Scheper-Hughes (1993). 
Although most victims were Tutsis, many Hutus were also killed in reprisals or by Hutu activists because of their 
support of the monarchy or membership of the monarchist party UNAR (Union Nationale Rwandaise). 
21 Filip Reyntjens (1994: p7) estimates that by early 1960, around 20,000 Tutsi from the North had resettled to 
Bugesera in the South and more than 10,000 Tutsi had fled to Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi and the Belgian Congo. 
violence in late 1963 and early 1964 was categorical in nature (Eltringham 2004: pp 41- 
44). From the early 1960s onwards, groups of exiled Tutsi refugees had launched 
sporadic armed attacks into Rwanda and these had provoked violent reprisals against 
the Tutsi population inside Rwanda. In late 1963, these groups - called inyenzi 
(cockroaches) by Hutu politicians - launched an attack into Bugesera and came close to 
the capital Kigali. This attack was used as a pretext to launch a massive wave of 
organised violence against Tutsis inside Rwanda. At the onset of the killing, the targets 
were political opponents, but then the killing became more systematic and 
indiscriminate with at least 10,000 Tutsis estimated to have been killed in this period 
and over 200,000 more Tutsis fleeing the country. 22 For some, this was one of the worst 
episodes of collective violence of the 20th century: 
Never before... had the killings reached such frightening proportions. Never before had racial 
hatred led to such bestial cruelty. (Lemarchand 1970: pp216) 
In the three decades of the "Hutu Republic" following independence in 1962, the new 
political elite did little to challenge the colonial ethno-racial construction of Rwandan 
society. Instead, they continued to treat the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" as 
fundamental building blocks of society, retaining ethnic ID cards and periodically 
casting suspicion on those of mixed ethnicity (Chretien 1997: p18). Hutu politicians 
periodically vowed to defend the newly liberated "peuple majoritaire" ("the Hutu") 
against "the Tutsi" who they said refused to recognise the realities of the 1959 "social 
revolution" and were seeking to regain power by any means. Tutsi elites remaining in 
the country - favoured under the first decades of colonial rule - found themselves 
disadvantaged politically and economically, partly due to the "ethnic" quotas instituted 
after independence, 23 and the Tutsi population was subjected to discrimination and 
sometimes violence at the hands of the new Hutu elites (Uvin 1997: pp 100-102). 
In the 1960s, President Kayibanda24 had found that quelling the inyenzi activities had 
strengthened his power (Prunier 1995: p57) and this established a pattern of using the 
Tutsi population as a scapegoat whenever the Hutu leadership felt their power was 
ZZ By independence in July 1962, an estimated 300,000 Tutsi had been displaced, of which around 120,000 were 
outside Rwanda By 1964, an UNHCR / IRC census estimated that 336,000 Tutsi refugees were outside the country. 
Consequently, it appears that 216,000 extra refugees (64% of the total refugees population at 1964) fled Rwanda 
between Independence and the UNHCR/IRC report of 1964 (Eltringham 2004: p41). 
23 After independence, an "ethnic" quota policy was followed. As Tutsis officially constituted 9% of the population, 
ther could be no more than 9% Tutsi students in schools, 9% Tutsi clerks in the civil service or 9% Tutsis in any 
sector of employment. Although Tutsis were disadvantaged compared to the past, they still occupied more than their 
allotted share of employment and some held good positions (Chr6tien 1985: pp158-9 in Prunier 1995: p60, note 35). 
24 Leader of the PARMEHUTU (Parti du Mouvement et del 'Emancipation Hutu), which won the 1962 elections. 
slipping. As will be discussed in chapter 6, the main political faultline during the Hutu 
Republic (1959-1990) was intra-Hutu regional competition rather than ethnicity, 
especially between northern Hutus (abakiga) and southern Hutus (abanyanduga). In 
1972-1973, these regional tensions became acute and Kayibanda faced mounting 
internal criticism of his regime (Pottier 2002: p35; Prunier 1995: pp 85-86). His 
response, in February and March 1973 - and in the wake of the 1972 massacres of 
Hutus in neighbouring Burundi - was to instigate a mass purge of Tutsis from 
university, church and other public posts. Several hundred Tutsis were killed as well as 
those of mixed ethnic heritage or those with false papers considered abaguze ubwoko2s 
(Prunier 1995: pp60-61; Chretien 1997: p73). Panic spread and this provoked another 
exodus of Tutsis across the border. 
The late 1970s and early 1980s: The quiet before the storm? 
Following the bloodless coup of Kayibanda's defence minister Juvenal Habyarimana in 
summer 1973, the attacks on Tutsis all but disappeared for well over a decade. In the 
1970s and early 1980s, Rwanda had begun to modernise and liberalise and enjoyed 
favourable economic success and improving socio-economic indicators - although this 
was still accompanied by significant poverty and rising inequality, especially from the 
early 1980s onwards (Uvin 1998: pp109-127). Habyarimana promised to restore 
equality of opportunity and instituted a policy of "regional and ethnic equilibrium", 
retaining the ethnic quota system where 9% of places in education and employment 
were allotted to Tutsis (Prunier 1995: p75). Although the Tutsi population remained 
politically marginalised throughout the Habyarimana years, 26 the quota policy was only 
sporadically implemented and some Tutsis did well in the private sector (ibid. ). In the 
wider population, ethnic identity also appeared to be losing its importance with an 
increase in business collaboration, friendship and intermarriage between Hutu and Tutsi 
- especially in the South - (Chretien et al 1995: p92) and other rivalries such as 
regionalism remaining prominent (Prunier 1995: pp85-86) 27 
Nonetheless, there was no ignoring the fact that the Hutu Republic was built on an 
extremely dangerous ideological foundation, which had underpinned the earlier anti- 
ZS Those "cheating" or "pretending" to be of a different ethnicity 
26 Throughout the Habyarimana years, there was not a single Tutsi bourgmestre, only one Tutsi prefet, one Tutsi 
officer in the whole army, two members of parliament and one Tutsi minister (Prunier 1995: p75). 
27 Regional antagonism increased after Habyarimana, an army officer from the north, replaced Kayibanda, a 
southerner. Kayibanda had favoured those from his prefecture Gitarama, whereas Habyarimana reversed this and 
started to favour his own northwestern region (Pottier 2002: p35). 
Tutsi violence, was still alive (Prunier 1995: p82). On a day-to-day basis, the existence 
of ethnic ID cards and the quota system signalled the ongoing significance of "ethnic" 
identity, Rwandan children continued to learn the "revolution" version of history at 
school; and as later became clear, "ethnic" stereotypes remained unchallenged. 
Furthermore, the lingering problem of hundreds of thousands of Tutsi refugees living 
outside the country was never resolved. Some efforts were made in collaboration with 
UNHCR in the late 1980s, but made little headway (Prunier 1995: pp61-74). 
At the same time, in the late 1980s, the economic and political situation started to 
deteriorate rapidly with a slump in world coffee prices, famine, and internal dissent due 
to restrictions on freedom of association and speech, charges of favouritism and a 
number of politically-motivated killings (Prunier 1995: pp84-90). After years of relative 
calm, the Habyarimana regime once again repeated the pattern of reanimating popular 
resentment against the Tutsi population. In June 1990, four months before the attack of 
the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) in October, the newly established racist magazine 
Kangura had already started its "anti-Tutsi" editorials (Chretien et al 1995 p92). 
The early 1990s: Civil war and the build up to genocide 
After the RPF attack on 1 st October 1990 and the onset of the civil war, political and 
social relations inside Rwanda started to deteriorate and a three-way struggle began 
between the Habyarimana regime fighting for survival, the internal opposition 
struggling for recognition and the RPF-led Tutsi exiles28 trying to make a comeback 
(Prunier 1995: p99). International pressure forced the Habyarimana government to 
begin to move from thirty years of a single-party dictatorship towards multiparty 
politics, although Habyarimana's circle did everything they could to prevent genuine 
democratisation. When the RPF re-launched the civil war in January 1991 and made 
increasing gains on the battlefield, political pressures on the Habyarimana regime 
mounted and a process of polarisation began within his own MRND(D)29 party and 
opposition parties dividing into political "moderates" and "extremists". In March 1992, 
the Hutu extremist party the Coalition pour la Defense de la Republique (CDR) was 
created and the youth militia impuzamugambi (those with the same goal) and 
18 It is important to recognise that although the RPF was primarily formed of Tutsis and represented thousands of 
Tutsi exiles, it had a very clear "non-ethnic" political platform and recruited several Hutu politicians to its senior 
ranks e. g. Pasteur Bizimungu, who became the RPF's spokesperson. 
29 In July 1991, the Mouvement R6volutionnaire pour le Developpement (MRND) added another  D' to its name to 
become MRND(D) (et la Democratie) to signal the move to democratic politics (Prunier 1995: pI26) 
interahamwe (those who stand together) were organised and started military training a 
few months later just as a ceasefire was signed between the government and the RPF in 
July 1992 (ibid. pp 127-150). 
In this situation of civil war and political tension, the akazu, 30 a small clique around 
Habyarimana and his wife, resorted to the time-tested solution of "ethnic" scapegoating. 
For example, one of the first responses of the Habyarimana Government to the RPF 
invasion was to stage a fake attack on Kigali a few days after the first RPF attack and 
use this as a pretext to launch a massive wave of arrests of educated Tutsis (and 
members of the Hutu opposition), which heightened tensions in the city (Prunier 1995: 
p102, pp108-9). Shortly afterwards, hundreds of Tutsis were massacred in Kibilira in 
the North of the country, in the first of a series of localised pogroms that occurred 
around the country between 1990 and 1994 (Chretien et al 1995: p94; Prunier 1995: 
ppl36-139). These massacres were mostly organised by local officials and preceded by 
virulent propaganda, which, some authors argue, were like trials for the larger-scale 
massacres that were to follow (e. g. Des Forges 1999: pp87-91). 3' 
In 1993, after persistent calls from Kangura, "Hutu Power" (or Hutu Pawa) was born as 
a Hutu alliance against "the Tutsi" and their national and international allies (Prunier 
1995: p188; Mamdani 2001: ppl89-192). Hutu Power leaders began to condemn the 
Arusha accords32 and the weakness of the Government, and instigated a witch-hunt for 
all traitors and ibyitso - RPF "accomplices" as well as Hutus with Tutsi ancestry and 
those who had falsified their documents and were pretending to be Hutu (abaguze 
ubwoko). They also spread increasingly virulent anti-Tutsi propaganda at political 
rallies, in speeches, extremist local-language newspapers and via the radio (Chretien et 
al 1995: pp l41-191). Their goal was to implant a visceral fear of the RPF in the minds 
of Hutus and to extend the RPF threat to all Tutsis - including those 
inside the country. 
30 "4/zu" roughly translates as "little house" and referred to the small circle of individuals, usually of the same clan 
or family, close to the main powerholder. 
31 Strauss (2006: ppl92-195), however, argues that the incidences of violence between 1990-1994 were not 
qualitatively different than previous episodes of violence that took place in Rwanda periods of imminent political 
change, intense contestation over power or after an attack. He argues that there is no evidence that they were part of a 
calculated plan on the part of Hutu hardliners to practice genocide. 
32 On 14 July 1992, a cease-fire was signed between the RPF and Habyarimana's Government and the internationally 
-sponsored Arusha peace negotiations were launched. Negotiations proceeded slowly over the next year and 
eventually produced a complex and possibly unworkable accord in August 1993 that was never implemented. The 
negotiations contributed to a massive rise in tensions inside Rwanda and the split of most political parties into 
"moderate" and "extremist" wings (Prunier 1997: pp 150-151, pp159-191). 
The subsequent events in the immediate lead up to and during the genocide of April- 
July 1994 in which an estimated 800,000 to 1 million Rwandans, mainly of Tutsi origin, 
were brutally slaughtered are well documented both through global accounts (e. g. Des 
Forges 1999; Prunier 1995) and personal testimony (e. g. Hatzfeld 2000; Mukagasana 
1997,1999; and testimonies in Gourevitch 1999). There is also a more limited, but 
growing, literature on the incidences of violence that took place in the aftermath of the 
genocide such as the killings at the Kibeho camp for Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) 
in April 1995 (e. g. Kleine-Ahlbrandt 1998,2004a; Pottier 2002); the attacks on the 
Rwandan refugee camps in Eastern Zaire in 1996 (e. g. Lautze et al 1998, Lischer 2005; 
Pottier 2002; Stockton 1996; Umutesi 2000) and the insurgency in northwest Rwanda in 
1998 (African Rights 1999). Much of this literature makes an attempt to understand or 
"explain" how violence of such an appalling magnitude and brutality came about in 
1994 and then spread across Rwanda's borders in its aftermath. The next section will 
reconsider the key arguments put forward. 
Explaining the violence and genocide in Rwanda 
How do situations come about in which people massively participate in brutal violence 
against their neighbours who have not harmed them? What kind of social and political 
processes have taken place that can bring people to lose the values, restraints and ethics that 
under normal circumstances make these actions impossible, abhorrent to contemplate? (Uvin 
1997: p91) 
In the wake of the events of 1994, hundreds of books and articles have been published 
about the Rwandan genocide. Almost all the literature takes distance from popular 
representations of the conflict and genocide as the brutal expression of "ancient ethnic 
hatreds" and presents more nuanced explanations of the violence in terms of a 
culmination of political, economic and socio-cultural factors, which created a context in 
which "ethnicity" was once again used as a means to compete for and retain power. 
These include a number of detailed accounts of the culmination of events, internal 
political machinations and careful planning that brought about the genocide. They stress 
some of the factors discussed above: the deteriorating economic situation and the 
hardship frustrations this caused among the population, especially against a backdrop on 
population pressure and land scarcity (e. g. Andre and Plateau 1998; Prunier 1995); 
internal and external political pressures on the ruling elite to move to a multiparty 
democracy (e. g. Des Forges 1999; Prunier 1995); the RPF invasion and civil war that 
resulted in massive internal displacement and some loss of life (e. g. Des Forges 1999; 
Prunier 1995; Straus 2006); the meticulous planning of the genocide by powerful 
political hardliners who used the highly organised and centralised Rwandan state 
apparatus to implement their plan (e. g. Des Forges 1999; Prunier 1995); the history of 
"ethnic" antagonism and scapegoating (e. g. Chretien et al 1995; Gourevitch 1999; 
Mamdani 2001; Prunier 1995; Uvin 1997); and the widespread use of genocidal 
propaganda (e. g. Chretien et al 1995; Prunier 1995). 
This "post-genocide" literature provides important insights into the context in which 
elites chose to instigate "ethnic" violence and demonstrates clearly that the genocide 
resulted from a complex culmination of factors. Yet, as Straus (2006: pp 33-35) argues, 
it leaves a number of questions unanswered. 33 Chief among these is the fact that most of 
this literature is not very successful in addressing the question of the participation of 
"ordinary" Rwandans in the killing. 34 Without the participation of so many civilians and 
local officials in the community "self-defence forces", local militia and neighbourhood 
killing bands, it would have been difficult for the organisers of the genocide to carry 
their extermination campaign so far. As Mahmood Mamdani (2001: p8) argues, we 
should not shy away from the "popular agency" of the genocide. Rather, if we are to 
learn from it, we need to seek to understand it, to make it "thinkable". 
The problem of popular participation 
In terms of specific explanations of the popular participation in the killing, authors have 
variously stressed factors such as "poverty" and "deprivation" (e. g. Prunier 1995: p 142; 
Staub 1989: pp 15-23); "greed" (e. g. Prunier 1995: p248); "manipulation" or a cultural 
"obedience to authority" (e. g. Prunier 1995: p141, p353; Gourevitch 1999: p84); 
"ignorance" (Prunier 1995: p142); "fear" (Mamdani 2001: p233); "ethnic prejudice" or 
"antipathy" (e. g. Uvin 1997: p111-112); the existence of a "genocidal culture" or "racial 
ideology" (e. g. Braeckman 1994: p161, Melvern 2006: pp 7-8); the role of "genocidal 
propaganda" and use of "dehumanising" language (e. g. Chretien et al 1995); and 
"coercion" (e. g. testimonies in Gourevitch 1999: pp 23-24; Prunier 1995: p247). 
33 Straus (2006: pp 33-35) says that this "new consensus" leaves four "unanswered questions": (i) How and why did 
the violence start and spread? i. e. How did mobilisation occur in different localities? (ii) How and why did so many 
ordinary Rwanda civilians, with no pre-existing history of violence, take part in the killing? (iii) What was the 
rationale for genocide (over other strategies)? and (iv) What is the right model for explaining the origins of genocide? 
34 On the basis of a detailed study of five localities and nationwide survey of convicted perpetrators, Scott Straus 
concludes that Rwanda's genocide perpetrators were indeed `ordinary' men with their profile - age, education, 
employment etc - strongly resembling the profile of adult men in the country (Straus 2006). 
Although many of these arguments have been advanced in comparative literature on the 
Holocaust and other incidences of mass violence35 and are certainly plausible, they lack 
depth. In many cases, they also do not take sufficient account of ethnographic research 
that was conducted in Rwanda in the 1970s and 1980s. For example, research in the 
1980s into the lives and livelihoods of rural farmers in both Southern and Northern 
Rwanda demonstrated the increasing levels of food insecurity suffered by many in the 
face of a changeable climate, weak state intervention in food marketing and (hence) a 
poor inter-regional food supply system, a declining land-person ratio and the increasing 
exclusion of vulnerable populations from access to land (see Andre 1994; Pottier 1993). 
There is certainly scope for further research to look at how the combination of a poor 
harvest and withdrawal of state support for the national marketing board in 1988, and 
the drought and coffee price crash of 1989, further impoverished tens of thousands of 
(mainly Hutu) farmers and whether and how their increased levels of desperation may 
have made them more susceptible to extremist ideologies or measures. 
Overall, it is clear that a more systematic investigation is needed to determine whether 
and how different factors and mechanisms mattered. This is the task Straus (2006) set 
himself for his own research. Based on detailed studies of the local dynamics of the 
genocide and interviews with over 200 genocide perpetrators, Straus (2006: pp 224 - 
226) argues that three primary factors drove the Rwandan genocide: (i) An intense civil 
war; (ii) the nature of state power; and (iii) pre-existing ethnic/racial classifications. 
Firstly, Straus makes a convincing argument that without a war in Rwanda (and related 
events such as the killing of President Habyarimana), genocide would not have 
happened. He argues that war provided the essential rationale for mass killing - security: 
The logic of Rwanda's genocide was predicated on eliminating a threat, on self-protection 
and the reestablishment of order. War was critical to that logic. (Straus 2006: p7) 
Straus argues that war legitimised killing, created a climate of acute uncertainty and fear 
in which many individuals agreed to take part in the killing, and led to the involvement 
of "specialists in violence" - the soldiers, gendarmes and militia who carried out and 
facilitated the killing. He says that this context of war was critical in leading individuals 
to switch from seeing Tutsis as neighbours to "enemies" who must be killed: 
35 For example, on the relationship between war and genocide, see Shaw (2003); on the role of prejudice or culture in 
driving genocide, see Goldhagen (1996); on ethnic divisions and ethnic cleansing, see Mann (2005); on the role of 
peer pressure and conformity in driving "ordinary men" to kill, see Browning (1992). 
Tutsis became enemies only in war and only when labelled that way by the start. Thus, in 
particular circumstances, Tutsi stopped being neighbours, friends and family and became a 
single category - "the enemy". (Straus 2006: p225) 
Secondly, Straus argues that the particular nature of state power in Rwanda was a vital 
factor. The state in Rwanda - reinforced by the country's geography - had unusual depth 
and resonance at a local level. This meant that by controlling the state, the hardliners 
had the capacity to reinforce their decisions countrywide, associate killing with 
authority and equate violence with de facto policy. Also, Rwanda's long tradition of 
obligatory labour contributed to rapid and large-scale civilian mobilisation: 36 
In the Rwandan context, where state institutions are dense at the local level, where civilian 
mobilisation is a common state practice, where the idea of state power is resonant, and where 
geography provides little opportunity for exit, large-scale civilian mobilization to kill was 
rapid, and the violence was extraordinarily intensive and devastating. (Straus 2006: p7) 
Straus argues that the intense nature of state power combined with intra-Hutu coercion 
and the opportunities to gain property and prestige created a high level of social 
pressure on individuals to participate in the killing: 
In the aggregate, Hutus killed because they wanted to protect themselves during a war and 
during a period of intense uncertainty, because they felt that complying with those who told 
them to kill would be less costly than not complying, and because they opportunistically used 
the period of confusion and violence to obtain power and property. (Straus 2006: pp9-10) 
Thirdly, Straus' stresses that "ethnicity" did matter to the genocide. On reading through 
different parts of his book, however, his precise position on the relative importance of 
"ethnicity" and exactly how it mattered is unclear. On the one hand, at the start of the 
book, he takes issue with arguments that stress the role of "ethnic prejudice", "pre- 
existing antipathy" or "racist propaganda" in driving people to kill: 
Hutus did not kill Tutsis because they hated Tutsis in some constant fashion, because they 
believed Tutsis were no longer human, or because they were deeply committed ideologically 
to Hutu nationalism or to ethic utopia... (Straus 2006: p9) 
Later in the book, Straus analyses his interviews and says that his data suggest that 
perpetrators had little knowledge about Rwandan history and "Hutu power"; instead 
that there were significant levels of interethnic proximity, intermarriage and good 
relations before 1994 (Straus 2006: p128). 37 Although the majority of perpetrators he 
36 Mamdani (2001: p194) also points to the key role played by the use of the "customary" apparatus that went 
alongside the language of "customary" obligation. As early as the Kibilira massacre in October 1990, local officials 
were instructed to kill Tutsi as part of their umuganda (communal work) obligations. 
37 Strauss interviewed over 200 perpetrators and found that 96% had a Tutsi neighbour before 1994 - and that 86.5% 
of these said relations were positive -, 68.8% had a Tutsi family member and 98.9% said that they would allow their 
child to (or would themselves) marry a Tutsi (2006: p128). 
interviewed said they thought "Hutu" and "Tutsi" were different amoko38 before the 
genocide - suggesting awareness of ethnic/racial categories was widespread - Straus 
says that his interviews also show that this in and of itself did not produce antipathy. 
Instead, the most common motivation for killing (64.1%) suggested by the perpetrators 
was what Straus terms "intra-Hutu coercion" i. e. "participating because they feared the 
negative consequences from other Hutus of not participating... including physical harm 
and death but also property damage and financial penalty" (ibid. pp 135-136). The 
second factor cited by perpetrators was "war-related fear and combativeness" (22%). 
Yet, in his conclusion, Straus ultimately argues that "ethnicity" did matter during the 
genocide. He says it mattered through the mechanism of what he terms "collective 
ethnic categorisation" whereby all Tutsis were equated as "the enemy" (umwanzi)39 or 
"infiltrators" (ibyitso) - and thus as legitimate targets for violence in a situation of war: 
[T]he logic of extermination in Rwanda depended on the idea that Tutsis were fundamentally 
alike, the genocidal mandate from the hardliners was to equate "enemy" with "Tutsi" and to 
declare that Rwanda's "enemies" had to be eliminated... Tutsis were labeled the enemy, and 
many Hutus, most of whom had no apparent history of antipathy toward Tutsis, accepted the 
claim. The mechanism that allowed that process to happen is collective ethnic categorisation. 
In case after case... when justifying killing civilians, perpetrators substituted the Tutsi 
category for the individuals they were attacking. (Straus 2006: p9) 
The weakness in Straus' argument, however, is that he fails to explain how this process 
of "collective ethnic categorisation" worked in practice. He does admit that "the idea of 
"Tutsi = enemy" is impossible without some pre-existing, society-wide, and resonant 
notion of ethnic categories" (Straus 2006: p9). What he does not explain, however, is 
exactly what this notion of "ethnic categories" entailed or how and why it resonated 
with the population to such an extent that it led so many people to kill in their name - 
especially if, as he claims, the propaganda had limited effects on ordinary Rwandans. A 
key issue appears to be the nature of the questions Straus asked perpetrators about 
ethnicity, interethnic feelings and racist beliefs. (Perhaps because his study was so 
broad), he asked only a limited number of structured and semi-structured questions 
about these topics (pp 127-135), which in my view, and given my own experience of 
researching ethnicity in Rwanda, were insufficient to really explore these issues in any 
38 Strauss includes a discussion of the meaning of the Kinyarwanda term ubwoko (plural = amoko)(p129), saying that 
it variously means - ethnic groups, clans, relative quality of a product etc - and hence indicates categories, but not 
racial ones. My own understanding of the term when applied to humans or animals, however, is that it is akin to the 
word 'species' and does therefore imply a difference that is genetic or biological. 
39 "Umwanzi ni umwe ni umututsi" (rhe enemy is one; it is the Tutsi) was a common phrase used in the genocide 
propaganda and by those who killed. 
depth. 0 Straus also appears to make a number of leaps in his conclusions - for example 
assuming that perpetrators' responses about the nature of their relations with their Tutsi 
neighbours indicated an absence of "ethnic antipathy". 4' 
Finally, whilst Straus' research adds considerable insights to the existing literature on 
mobilisation during the genocide, it still seems insufficient in terms of explaining two of 
the most disquieting dimensions of civilian participation in the killing: the willingness 
with which some people appeared to kill and the sheer brutality of some of the violence 
- often involving horrific acts of torture and cruelty (Taylor 1999: pp130-140) 
When the national authorities ordered the extermination of Tutsi, tens of thousands of Hutu 
responded quickly, ruthlessly and persistently. They killed without scruple and sometimes 
with pleasure. They jogged through the streets of Kigali chanting, "Let's exterminate them 
all. " (Des Forges 1999: p260) 
Numerous testimonies of survivors, witnesses and killers suggest that many participants 
in the genocide had a degree of choice over whether or not they killed, were cognisant 
of what they were doing, and that it went against their religion and social norms. Some 
people killed former social intimates voluntarily or willingly, engaging in gruesome 
acts, whilst at the same time claiming that they held no particular grudge against them 
as individuals. For example, in the testimonies collected by Jean Hatzfeld (2003) from 
the killers he interviewed in Nyamata prison, one man recounts how he and his 
comrades hunted their football teammate. He describes how they had all played a match 
together only the previous day and that he and his fellow killers all respected and liked 
Evergiste for his skill and character. Yet Evergiste was a Tutsi and he had to be killed 
like all the Tutsis. Evergiste survived the genocide and described to Hatzfeld how he 
hid in the sorghum field near his house and his former teammates hunted him for days 
on end. He recalled that they used to call out specifically to him: 
Evergiste, we have sorted through the piles of corpses and we haven't yet seen your 
cockroach43 face. We will discover you. We will work through the night if necessary, but we 
are going to get you. (Hatzfeld 2003: pp121-122) 
40 Furthermore, although Straus (2006: pp 97-103) does give an account of his sampling strategy, methodology and 
efforts to triangulate his data, he does not really go into any depth about the potential issues of perpetrators "lying", 
"misremembering" or "reconstructing events" that he briefly mentions (p102). As chapter 6 discusses, this is both a 
question about how individuals remember and justify the past, but also about their ability to account for the 
complexity of influences on their own past behaviour. 
41 Maintaining the semblance of "good relations" is important Rwandan culture and social relations (see chapter 2). 
42 Examples include impaling men from anus to head, women from vagina to mouth, cutting foetuses from their 
mother's wombs and forcing parents to eat their children's flesh. 
43 "Cockroach" or "inyenzi" was one of many terms used to denote and dehumanise Tutsis in the genocide 
propaganda. It dates to the 1960s when the Tutsi exiles that attacked Rwanda were known as the "inyenzi'. 
At a micro-level, there are undoubtedly many reasons why particular individuals killed 
neighbours, acquaintances, and sometimes members of their own family. The search for 
a definitive explanation is likely to be fruitless and is not the purpose of this thesis. 
Gaining a better understanding of these stories, however, requires us to explore in more 
detail the socio-cultural and socio-psychological processes at work. How exactly did 
"the Tutsi" come to be seen as "the enemy" in the eyes of "ordinary" people in the lead 
up to the genocide? Why were so many Rwandans convinced it was necessary to kill all 
Tutsis including their neighbours, friends and family, not just those fighting with the 
RPF who had started the civil war? Why did they respond to and in many cases adopt 
the dehumanising language used to refer to Tutsis? Why did they not base their actions 
on their own experience of individuals rather than kill them as tokens of an archetypal 
Tutsi enemy? If Rwanda was once more plunged into a situation of instability, could 
such large-scale collective violence against Hutus or Tutsi happen again? 
Re-examining the role of "ethnicity" in the violence 
In Rwanda, basic psychocultural images about "the Tutsi" and "the Hutu" are basic building 
blocks of society. These profoundly engrained images treat Hutu and Tutsi as radically and 
unchangeably different, in their history as well as in their moral, intellectual and social 
attributes. (Uvin 1997: p103) 
Although it might be argued that the genocide was not directly caused by ethnicity or 
"ethnic" differences between groups, the genocide was clearly about ethnicity in terms 
of the selection of its victims and the specific nature of the torture and killing they 
endured. Whilst Tutsis were not the only victims of the mass killing that took place in 
Rwanda from April to July 1994, the majority of individuals were targeted on the basis 
of their assumed belonging to the Tutsi ethnic. Several testimonies published to date 
also suggest that to many of the victims and perpetrators, the killing was very much 
about "ethnicity" and getting rid of Rwanda's Tutsi population (see, for example, 
testimonies of survivors and killers in Hatzfeld 2000,2003). Thus, even if the genocide 
was not caused by "ethnic" differences per se, this does not mean that people's 
understandings and experiences of "ethnicity" did not shape individual motivations, 
processes of mobilisation or the nature of the killing. As David Turton says, even if 
"ethnicity" is little more than a socio-historical construction, this does not prevent it 
from enduring and having a material effect on people's lives: 
[A]lthough it is (to various degrees and in various ways) `imagined' and  invented', it is not, 
as has often been pointed out, `imaginary'. (Turton 1997a: p3) 
In light of my own research on the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" and "ethnic" 
relations in contemporary Rwanda, I have re-examined the literature on Rwanda and 
argue here that "ethnicity" was indeed an important factor in the violence and genocide 
of the 1990s. What mattered in Rwanda was the specific way in which the groups Hutu, 
Tutsi and Twa were ethnicised and politicised over the course of the 20th century and 
the ever-widening gap between the way "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" were constructed on 
a conceptual level and the concrete Hutus and Tutsis that peopled Rwanda. 
Mobilising the masses: The role of "ethnic" narratives and stereotypes 
In the book Rwanda: Les medias du genocide, Jean-Pierre Chretien and his associates 
(1995) present an extensive study of the propaganda that circulated over the airwaves 
and in the written press before and during the 1994 genocide. They argue that this 
propaganda was central to the preparation, justification and implementation of the 
genocide. Although they agree that the context of war, political and economic 
instability, famine and hardship were important instigating conditions for violence, they 
say these alone could not have produced a genocide of the scale and rapidity that rook 
place in Rwanda in 1994. In particular, they argue that they cannot account for the 
levels of civilian participation in the genocide and the surprising willingness with which 
many killed. Rather, they argue: 
The surprising good conscience that the killers demonstrated can be largely explained by the 
skilful way in which the racist propaganda led masses of people to internalise the messages of 
hatred. Fear and hatred were distilled month after month, day after day. (Chretien et al 1995: 
p380) 
Chretien et al (1995: p95) argue that the propaganda instilled an ideology of "ethnic" 
division, conflict and fear by literally "teaching" the population about the primacy of 
ethnic identity, the fundamental role of the "social revolution" of 1959, and the 
existence of an age-old war between Hutus and Tutsis. They devote a whole chapter to 
the systematic way "the Tutsi" as a group, all Tutsi, were demonised and turned into the 
categorical enemy of all Hutu (pp139-208). For example, in December 1990, the 
magazine Kangura published the now infamous "Hutu Ten Commandments", which 
proclaimed the treachery and dishonesty of "the Batutsi" and stated that any Hutus who 
married, had relations with, traded with, or helped a Tutsi would be considered a traitor 
(ppl41-142). The propaganda claimed the Tutsi had steadily been infiltrating the 
Republic (p145, see also Des Forges pp74-76), were monopolising the economy and 
education (Chretien et al 1995: pp145-147), using their women to seduce Hutu 
politicians (p161) and that the Hutu were losing the gains of the revolution (p142-143). 
It played on people's fears of the war, exaggerating reports of RPF crimes and violence 
and portraying Rwanda as victim of a conspiracy to reinstate the "Hima Empire"44 
(ppl62-166). At its most cynical, the propaganda claimed that the RPF were planning 
genocide against the Hutu (Des Forges 1999: pp78-79). 
Reading through the reams of increasingly virulent and explicit propaganda reproduced 
and analysed in this volume, it does not seem too difficult to imagine why "ethnic" 
tensions and divisions increased in the early 1990s, or even why some incidences of 
"ethnic" violence took place. The question remains, however, whether the virulence of 
the propaganda, which circulated across the airways and collines in the lead up to and 
during the genocide, can help explain the significant numbers of Rwandan civilians that 
participated in the violence. One criticism of Chretien's work is that he tends to make a 
leap from the existence of propaganda to the perpetration of violence and does not 
explain exactly how the propaganda moved people to participate in the killing. 
Furthermore, as mentioned above, Straus (2006: pp 129 -135) argues that his interviews 
with perpetrators suggest that they were unfamiliar with many of the core ideological 
elements of the propaganda such as the "Hutu ten commandments" and construction of 
Tutsis as "Hamites" or "monarchists" - although again Straus' conclusions on this topic 
are somewhat curtailed by the nature of the questions he asked. 
My research into ethnicity in contemporary Rwanda, however, (see chapters 3 and 4), 
suggests that the efficacy of the genocidal propaganda in mobilising civilians to kill 
might be explained in more subtle ways. In particular, it suggests that what mattered 
was the specific nature of the "ethnic" narratives and stereotypes propagated by the 
instigators of the genocide and transmitted among the Hutu population. Firstly, the 
propaganda defined the enemy as an "ethnic" enemy and "ethnicity" seems to be 
particularly potent as a means of mobilising groups, including into violent action. David 
Turton (1997a) says this is because its "content" is constantly open to (re)interpretation, 
yet the "ethnic" differences posited are constructed as primordial or innate and therefore 
unchangeable. Drawing on the work of Anthony Cohen (1985), he argues: 
44 The "Hima Empire" was supposed to be an ancient plan by the Hamites to recolonise the whole of central Africa. 
During the troubles of 1959-1962 a letter was discovered at Nyamitaba apparently outlining a plan for this Hima 
Empire in which the Tutsi were assumed to be complicit (Chretien et al 1995 pp162-166). 
Ethnicity purports to say so much about a person that it can only be known and spoken about 
metaphorically, that is, by means of ethnic (or national or community) symbols. (Turton 
1997a: p21) 
These "ethnic symbols" of culture, religion and language are by definition ambiguous, 
flexible, "multivocal" and "multireferential" (Turner 1967,1969 cited in Turton 1997a: 
p21). They are effective as a mobilising tool because they are imprecise and always 
stand ready for interpretation and reinterpretation. Even if "ethnic symbols" are 
experienced as unconditional, inescapable and timeless, they are in fact open to 
opportunistic interpretation and allow "scope for interpretative manoeuvre" (ibid. p21- 
22). Thus, in periods of change, members may still experience their ethnic identity as a 
constant and leaders can use these malleable but potent symbols to mobilise collective 
action in response to new conditions and in pursuit of new objectives. In short: 
[T]he very effectiveness [of ethnicity] as a means of advancing group interests depends on it 
being seen as  primordial' by those who make claims in its name. (Turton: 1997a: p11) 
As discussed above and as this ethnography will demonstrate, in Rwanda over the 
course of the 20`h century, the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" were naturalised as 
ethno-racial groups with the different physical and behavioural traits attached to these 
groups constructed as primordial and immutable. Thus, the negative characteristics - 
such as "malignancy", "arrogance", "cunningness", "clannishness" and "superiority"- 
ascribed to Tutsis were seen as innate traits, unchangeable and incurable because they 
were literally seen as being "in the blood". This construction of the nature of the 
categories "Tutsi" and "Hutu" certainly lent credence to the claims of the propagandists 
that the only solution to Rwanda's problem was to get rid of every last Tutsi because 
"the Tutsi" were all the same and couldn't change their innate nature. At the same time, 
the flexible nature of these ethnic stereotypes meant that they could be adapted to 
explain the particular predicament of Rwanda in the early 1990s. 
Secondly, and as David Turton (1997a) also discusses, the symbols and narratives of the 
past that elites "invent" to mobilise their followers must appear to be a "natural" 
extension of existing historical memories for them to be effective: 
It is the special achievement of those who use [ethnicity] as a political resource that they are 
able to `construct' an identity for their followers, which, although based on a highly selective 
and distorted view of their collective past, has enough connection with that past to make 
plausible and meaningful. (Turton 1997a: p4) 
Thus, an important element of the mobilising force of ethnicity (or any other collective 
identity) is that it seems real to people, that the discourses and mythical histories 
propagated by leaders seem plausible, that they resonate with the prior knowledge 
people have about the origins and evolution of their societies and communities: 
Because perpetrators are not simply automatons who blindly carry out the ideological dictates 
of the state, genocidal regimes almost always blend the old with the new so that their lethal 
ideologies will be effective and make sense to people. Thus, genocidal regimes usually co-opt 
pre-existing cultural knowledge, dressing it up in new ideological guises that maintain 
familiar and compelling resonances while legitimating new structures of domination and 
violence against victim groups. (Hinton 2001 a: pl 1) 
In the case of Rwanda, as Chretien et al (1995: p380) argue, what was critical to the 
efficacy of the genocidal propaganda in the 1990s was that its central ideology was not 
new, but had existed for several decades and had, over time, been internalised by a large 
number of Rwandans. A detailed analysis of the propaganda reveals that few of the 
stereotypes and narratives about the differences and past conflict between "the Hutu" 
and "the Tutsi" were new. Rather, similarly to that which Alexander Hinton (2001b) 
describes in the Cambodian case, 45 they represented the reproduction and reworking of 
existing forms of socio-cultural knowledge in Rwanda. The genocidal propaganda 
reproduced core elements of the ethno-racial construction of Rwanda's social groups, 
which dated from the colonial period and was central to the "ethnic ideology" of the 
1959 "social revolution". For example, the propaganda contained a number of racist 
cliches and stereotypes to stress the danger represented by "the Tutsi" because of their 
innate nature: their propensity to rule, their intelligence, malice, ingratitude, hypocrisy, 
superiority complex and beauty of their women (Chretien et al 1995: pp 151-162). 
Despite clear splits between Tutsis inside and outside Rwanda, the propaganda spoke of 
"Tutsi unity" (Des Forges 1999: p73), a kind of clannishness that had facilitated Tutsi 
quests in the past. The propaganda also invoked stories from the past to demonstrate the 
propensity of the "cunning" Tutsi to be "secretive", to hide their true intentions in order 
to betray and trick the "naive" and "innocent" Hutu and carry out their strategies to 
regain and keep power (Chretien et al 1995: p153; des Forges 1999 pp8l-82). 
45 Hinton argues that the Cambodian cultural model of "a Head for a Eye" (disproportionate retaliation against an 
enemy who has made a person suffer, lose power or face, and hence bear a "grudge" against the person responsible) 
served as a template to motivate people to participate in the violence. He argues that the most lethal 
forms of this 
model of "disproportionate revenge" were directly invoked and manipulated in Khmer Rouge ideological 
discourse 
about a "class grudge" and thus provided a basis for much of the group vengeance that took place in Democratic 
Kampuchea. Hinton argues, such forms of pre-existing cultural knowledge constitute a "crucial site upon which 
genocidal regimes can work" (2001 b: p256). 
Although in many periods during the three decades after independence in 1962, 
"ethnic" problems were not apparent and Tutsis kept a low profile with no political 
parties of their own, intermarrying with Hutus, living in similar houses, having similar 
incomes and so on, it seems that these longstanding stereotypes and narratives of history 
were not challenged. Rather, they were reproduced, reinforced and politicised by a 
variety of means. As discussed earlier, Hutu political leaders periodically invoked these 
stereotypes and narratives and used the Tutsi population as a scapegoat in response to 
situations of instability and crisis, such as in 1973 purge of Tutsis from public and 
professional posts. Furthermore, as Peter Uvin (1997: p100) argues, they were 
reinforced and institutionalised by the modes of governance, which either discriminated 
directly against Tutsis, excluding them from posts in the army and government, or 
emphasised "ethnic" identity through a quota system. The "social revolution" version of 
history also formed the basis for history teaching in Rwandan schools and universities 
from the 1960s to 1990s. Thus, in spite of relatively harmonious day-to-day relations: 
[T]he notion that the Tutsi presence was a problem, that the Tutsi were an alien group, with 
an inherent potential for evil, never disappeared" (Uvin 1999: p102) 
Instead, these ethno-racial stereotypes and readings of history became embedded in 
everyday social and cultural knowledge, taking on a kind of "goes without saying" 
quality. Therefore in the early 1990s, even if not all the ideas and stereotypes were 
familiar to every perpetrator, the content of the propaganda resonated sufficiently with 
many Rwandans' own understandings of their history and society and was therefore 
critical in making the propagandists definition of the "Tutsi enemy" both credible and 
terrifying to ordinary Hutus. 
Thirdly, as Mahmood Mamdani (2001) argues, the myths and stereotypes were 
designed to invoke and play on people's deep-seated fears. The threat of the loss of the 
gains of the 1959 "revolution" would have deeply felt by elements of the Hutu 
46 Peter Uvin (1997: pp 91-115) takes these arguments one step further to argue that there was a longstanding 
"racist 
prejudice" in Rwandan society since at least the colonial period, which had been institutionalised after 
independence. 
He argues that this "anti-Tutsi ideology" simultaneously fulfilled important political functions for the elites and 
socio-psychological functions for the masses. For the ruling elites, he argues that it served as a tool to 
legitimate their 
hold on power, presenting the incumbent government as the sole defence of the majority Hutu population 
(rubanda 
nyamwinshi) against Tutsi plots and diverting attention from intra-Hutu divisions and the lack of progress 
combating poverty. For the "small people", it helped them "to make sense of their predicament, to explain their 
misery and humiliation through projection and scapegoating" (pi 12). Uvin goes on to argue that the genocide was the 
result of the reactivation and "radicalisation" of this racist prejudice in a context of severe crisis and civil war 
Although Uvin's arguments seem plausible in light of other material presented in this chapter, he does not give any 
evidence in support of his claims. 
population, especially members of the educated and professional middle classes 47 Like 
Straus, Mamdani stresses the shift in attitudes of "ordinary" people following the onset 
of the civil war in 1990. Step-by-step - as the RPF progressed, more people were 
displaced and endured hardship, 48 the army suffered more defeats, the Arusha 
negotiations staggered, ethnic tensions grew in Zaire, and the Hutu President of Burundi 
was assassinated - political coexistence between Hutus and Tutsis seemed increasingly 
impossible. The looming spectre of a return to "Tutsi Power" gave marginalized Hutu 
extremists the ammunition to instil fear into the minds of ordinary Hutus that the RPF 
would "restore the old regime" and that they would lose their land and be consigned 
once more to a life of forced labour and feudal servitude (Mamdani 2001: pp230-233). 
In this way, ideas of "Hutu unity"49 and "Hutu Pawa" 50 (Chretien et al 1995: pp217- 
248) gained the mainstream and Hutu extremists were able to construct the killing of the 
Tutsis as a defence of the 1959 "revolution" and all that it fought for. Mamdani argues 
that critical to the participation of so many "ordinary" people was their self-image as 
victims of an ongoing political drama, in which they had been subjugated before and 
could easily be so again: He concludes: 
If it is the struggle for power that explains the motivation of those who crafted the genocide, 
then it is the return to servitude and fear of reprisals thereafter that energised the foot soldiers 
of the genocide. (Mamdani 2001: p233) 
Finally, the specific content of the "ethnic" stereotypes and narratives that circulated 
was important. Just as in the 1960s, radio broadcasts and official statements in the early 
1990s constantly warned that the population about the risk of "infiltration". The 
propaganda warned that through the use of ibyitso (accomplices), the RPF had 
deviously "infiltrated" Hutu political parties, the economy and ordinary society, 
slipping unnoticed into places "like snakes" (Chretien et al 1995: pp248-252). They 
warned all Hutus to be on their guard and realise that these "accomplices" were 
everywhere, even among them (Eltringham 2004: p25, p92). This construction of "the 
47 As Mamdani (2001: p231) argues, 1959 was the very genesis of the Hutu middle classes, who had previously been 
excluded from public sector jobs and priesthood due to the "Tutsification" that occurred in the mid-colonial period. 
48 There were an estimated 950,0001DPs after the February 1993 RPF offensive (UNHCR 2001). 
49 As well as promoting the radical exclusion of all Tutsi, the propaganda also promoted Hutu solidarity and the 
radical inclusion of all Hutu under the umbrella of "Hutu unity" or "Hutu Power" Leaders instructed the 
Hutu to 
come together, overcome their differences and mobilise for an inter-ethnic conflict to defend their majority rights and 
the Republic (Des Forges 1999: pp82-83). 
50 interestingly, Straus (2006: p 133) found that 71 % of the perpetrators he interviewed were familiar with the term 
"Hutu Pawa", although most said it referred to a political party or movement rather than referring to it explicitly as 
"anti-Tutsi". 
Tutsi" as "infiltrators" or the "enemy within" is very close to Omar Bartov's notion of 
"elusive enemies" in his work on the Jewish Holocaust: 
This notion creates immense paranoia... and can be seen as a crucial precondition for atrocity 
and genocide, since it posits that the people one kills are never those one actually sees but 
merely what they represent, that is, what is hidden under their mask of innocence and 
normality. (Bartov 1998: p785) 
Thus, another reason that the propaganda was so effective in persuading many Hutu that 
their long-time neighbours and even friends were in fact ibyitso - RPF "infiltrators" 
disguised as ordinary civilians and concealing their true identities - was that it resonated 
with longstanding negative stereotypes about the innate "malignancy", "secretiveness" 
and "trickery" of the Tutsi. It became believable to many Hutu that their neighbours, 
colleagues and family members had been concealing their true intentions for years, just 
waiting for an opportunity to rise up and seize their land, power and possessions. As we 
will see later in this thesis, such ideas have unfortunately not entirely disappeared in 
contemporary Rwanda and have arguably been reinforced by the ongoing replaying of 
the genocidal propaganda in broadcasts about the genocide. 
Thus, in summary, and drawing on my own research presented in this thesis as well as 
testimonies in the wider literature, 51 it is argued here that the organisers of the genocide 
reproduced and reworked certain pre-existing "ethnic" myths and stereotypes, subtly 
blending the old with the new and the familiar with the unknown. When these tropes52 
circulated amongst the Hutu population, they resonated sufficiently with people's prior 
understandings of their own society and situation to persuade them that what the 
propagandists claimed was true: that their liberty, land and livelihoods were under 
threat; that the enemy was not just the RPF, but all Tutsis who due to their innate 
"malignancy" and "cunningness" were really "collaborators" or "secret agents"; that 
"the Tutsi" would not share power but would return all Hutus to servitude, that the 
choice was to kill or be killed. Against a backdrop of war, economic crisis, insecurity 
and impunity with orders to kill coming directly from the local and national authorities 
- and alongside the instances of coercion and use of material incentives - 
it is argued 
here that, in some cases, this encouraged people to put aside any misgivings they might 
have and participate in the killing - both willingly and reluctantly. 
51 An examination of the content of the hundreds of testimonies of victims, killers and bystanders of the 1994 
genocide (see, for example, testimonies in Hatzfeld 2001,2003; Gourevitch 1999) confirms the extent to which many 
of these myths and stereotypes about the nature of the categories "Hutu", , Tutsi" and "Twa" and the history of 
antagonism between them, had been internalised by the Rwandan population. 52 A trope is a rhetorical figure of speech, often a play on words. 
Identifying the enemy: matching social reality to categorical constructs 
In his book about the Holocaust, Zygmunt Bauman (1989) traces the position of Jews in 
European society and argues that, at the dawn of the modem era, the presence and 
estrangement of Jews in Europe was central to the self-identity of Christians: 
[Christianity] was born of the rejection by the Jews. It drew its continuous vitality from the 
rejection of the Jews. (Bauman 1989: p38) 
He says, however, that "the Jewish question" was debated at the level of ecclesiastical 
theory, at a conceptual level, "set apart from the context of daily life and made immune 
against the test of daily experience". Thus, anti-Semitism acquired a form in which the 
"conceptual Jew" could exist almost regardless of the real situation of Jews in society: 
To their Christian hosts, Jews were simultaneously concrete objects of daily intercourse and 
exemplars of a category defined independently of such intercourse. (Bauman 1989: p38) 
Bauman (1989) demonstrates how Jews as a category became a kind of symbol of 
modem capitalism and scapegoats for all the insecurities that accompanied it. He shows 
that the "conceptual Jew" conflated irreconcilable elements to create a kind of mythical 
entity that through its own incoherence took on "a demonic, potent force; a force 
simultaneously intensely fascinating and repulsive, and above all frightening" (p39). 
Bauman argues that it was in this context of uncertainty and rapid change with 
increasing vilification of the "conceptual Jew", combined with the possibilities of 
modem technology and bureaucracy, that annihilation of the "concrete Jew" became 
thinkable and do-able. 
There are strong parallels between the constructions of the "conceptual Jew" as a 
mythical, demonic entity divorced from social reality in twentieth century Europe and 
the "Tutsi enemy" in the lead up to the 1994 genocide. As argued above, the organisers 
of genocide were clearly extremely successful in building on longstanding "ethnic" 
narratives and stereotypes to convince significant numbers of Rwandan Hutus that all 
Tutsis were their categorical enemies that had to be eliminated to secure their future 
security and wellbeing. As such, they reduced a diverse mix of individual Tutsis each 
with their particular lives, relationships and loyalties to a homogenous, singularised 
construct of "the Tutsi" who was inherently cunning and complicit with the RPF rebels 
who were waging war on the Rwandan Republic. Once the enemy category was 
successfully defined, however, the challenge for the killers was to accurately identify 
those actual individual members of the enemy group who were to be eliminated. 
Prior to the genocide, every Rwandan above the age of 16 was obliged to carry an ID 
card stating his or her "ethnic" group. There was also limited internal migration due to a 
multitude of limitations on people's mobility prior to 1994 (Uvin 1998: pp115-116). 
Thus, most of Rwandan society was composed of close-knit communities where 
neighbours frequently knew each other's family heritage dating back several 
generations (Prunier 1995: p249). It might be assumed, therefore, that the process of 
identifying individual enemies was quite straightforward. Indeed, testimonies reveal 
that, in some cases, killers appeared to be certain about the identity of their victims. In 
the towns, soldiers and groups of militia often followed pre-prepared lists of "known" 
Tutsis or Tutsi "collaborators" and visited their homes one by one to slaughter them and 
their families (Prunier 1995: pp230-231). In some villages, groups of Hutu farmers left 
in the morning with their machetes to spend their days in the fields of sorghum and 
bananas hunting down the Tutsi neighbours and colleagues that they had grown up with 
and lived alongside for years (see testimonies in Hatzfeld 2000; 2003). 
In spite of this, many other testimonies from survivors, witnesses and killers suggest 
that the process of identifying individual enemies was often fraught with different kinds 
of uncertainties. One type of uncertainty was related to discerning the "real" ethnic 
identity of individuals who may have been unknown to particular killers. In some cases, 
this happened because people arrived at the barriers without their identity card. In other 
cases, killers manifested a significant distrust of the identity cards shown to them and 
sometimes killed those who possessed "Hutu" identity cards, but who they considered 
to possess "Tutsi" physiological traits (Prunier 1995: p249). During the genocide, 
rumours circulated that identity cards could not always be trusted and that some Tutsis 
had succeeded in changing the ethnie on their identity cards and were therefore abaguze 
ubwoko, attempting to pass themselves off as Hutus (Eltringham 2004: p26). 
Furthermore, there had been significant levels of intermarriage in Rwanda since 
independence and although many children of these "mixed" unions were assigned the 
"Hutu" identity of their father, these ibyimanyi were often targeted as potential enemies 
or "accomplices" as they possessed the "Tutsi" blood of their mother. 
As discussed above, colonial ethno-racial stereotypes proved extremely durable in 
Rwanda. Of course, physical stereotypes about differences in height, nose shape and 
gait between those classified as "Hutu" and "Tutsi" do have some statistical 
significance - not least because this was a key factor used when sorting the Rwandan 
population into categories and issuing each individual with an identity card during the 
colonial period. As already discussed, however, not all Rwandans were sorted on this 
basis in 1933 and with intermarriage and the birth of new generations, in 1994 there 
were many Rwandans who arrived at the barriers and did not possess the physical traits 
of the archetypal "Hutu" or "Tutsi" or the traits that matched the ethnie written on their 
identity card. As Arjun Appadurai (2002) points out, the problem is that most 
physiological "ethnic" stereotypes are unreliable in the real world: 
[R]eal bodies in history betray the very cosmologies they are meant to encode. So the ethnic 
body, both of victim and killer, is itself potentially deceptive. Far from providing the map for 
a secure cosmology, a compass from which mixture, indeterminacy, and danger may be 
discovered, the ethnic body turns out to be itself unstable and deceptive. (Appadurai 2002: 
p290) 
The testimonies of killers, such as those interviewed by Jean Hatzfeld (2003), reveal 
another kind of uncertainty many people faced in identifying the enemy. Although they 
felt certain that their victims were "Tutsi", they recognised a gap between their personal 
experiences of these Tutsi neighbours and colleagues and the homogenised singular 
construct of "the Tutsi" as the enemy, exhibiting certain behaviours or characteristics: 
We knew our Tutsi neighbours were not to blame for any wrongdoing, but we thought that all 
the Tutsis were responsible for our eternal woes. We no longer saw them as individuals, we 
didn't linger to recognise what they had been... They had become a greater threat than 
everything we had lived together, which surpassed our vision of things in our community. 
That's how we reasoned and that's how we killed at that time. (L6opard, p147) 
In the commune... we heard that Tutsi women had too fine a physique to stay on our hills, 
that they had smooth skin because they secretly drank milk, and that their fingers were too 
fine to use a hoe... In truth, Hutus didn't notice any of these so-called traits in the silhouettes 
of their Tutsi neighbours, because they bent their backs next to their husbands and bore 
equally heavy loads of water. But it pleased them to repeat them. (Jean-Baptiste p263) 
The words of Leopard and Jean-Baptiste reveal how, in a context of war, fear and 
uncertainty, the stereotypes had taken over and they and their fellow killers no longer 
relied on their knowledge and experience of particular individuals. It is as if at the 
moment individual Tutsi were killed by these men, they had become a kind of symbol 
of the categorical being or life-threatening menace they were supposed to represent. As 
if they were stripped back to some essential fixed core of identity or that their "true" 
inner nature was revealed and the fact that their outward behaviour, characteristics or 
histories did not match these constructs was of little consequence. Thus, the killers 
treated abstract concepts as if they were real, collapsing the fragile line separating the 
"figurative" and "literal" understanding of the category "Tutsi" (Eltringham 2004: p7): 
It is this precariousness that perpetrators of genocide exploit, transforming our `tokens of 
reality' (ethnic groups) from being qualified concepts ('what appears to be') to being 
normative concepts ('what has always been' or `what ought to be'). (Eltringham 2004: pp7-8) 
Arjun Appadurai (2002) argues that this uncertainty over the identity of the categorical 
"other" can also help us understand both the appalling physical brutality of "ethnic" 
violence and why it is often perpetrated by ordinary persons against other persons - 
neighbours, friends and kin - with whom they have lived in relative amity. He argues 
that such killing is a form of "violent closure" where uncertainty is momentarily 
overcome as the bodies of former social intimates are transformed into the "ethnic" or 
political "tokens" (p297) for which they are supposed to stand. The macabre or 
"vivisectionist" techniques of "ethnic" violence literally turn the body inside out to find 
"proof of its betrayal, its deceptions, its definitive otherness, in a sort of pre-mortem 
autopsy, which, rather than achieving death, achieves categorical certainty through 
death and dismemberment", a kind of "dead certainty"" (p291): 
[W]henever the charge of categorical treachery is made to appear plausible secret agents are 
unmasked, impure ethnicities are exposed, and horrible cancerous identities are imputed to 
what we may call the inner body, numerous forms of vivisection seem possible, with the most 
ordinary of people as their perpetrators. (Appadurai 2002: p295) 
The key themes of this thesis 
The above discussion traces how the social categories "Hutu", `Tutsi" and "Twa" have 
been produced, reproduced and transformed in Rwanda over the past century. It argues 
that particular constructs, myths and stereotypes about the origin and nature of these 
groups have proven extremely durable and have played an important role in the 
production of categorical violence in Rwanda in which there were significant levels of 
civilian participation. It therefore introduces many of the key themes this thesis will 
continue to explore, drawing on ethnographic research in contemporary Rwanda. 
Firstly, this chapter has highlighted the dynamic nature of the categories "Hutu", `Tutsi" 
and "Twa" and demonstrated that, over the past century, there have been periods of 
continuity and change, of greater fixity or fluidity, in the way these categories have been 
understood, used and experienced by Rwandans and non-Rwandans. For example, it 
might be argued that to some extent the colonial period "froze" these identities by 
labelling them as "ethnic" groups, constructing the differences between them as racial, 
and then institutionalising these differences (Mamdani 2001: pl01). Yet, although the 
colonial period certainly hardened the boundary between the categories and embedded 
certain stereotypes about each group, this does not mean that the content, boundaries or 
membership of these categories have not changed since the colonial period. 
On the contrary, as a result of ongoing social interaction and changing circumstances, in 
practice, there have been a series of subtle shifts in the meaning, use and experience of 
these social categories. There may have been periods where some of these ethno-racial 
stereotypes became "unfixed" - even if temporarily - as a result of the ebb and flow of 
everyday life - or where new meanings were grafted onto or superseded the old. The 
salience of these categories - the extent to which individual Rwandans invoked, 
referred to or used them - is also likely to have varied over time and in response to 
circumstances. Furthermore, although identity cards made moving between categories 
difficult, it is likely that at particular moments - especially in periods of trouble or 
violence -a number of individual Rwandans succeeded in changing the ethnie on their 
identity cards as they perceived it offered them greater security or advantage. 
This thesis therefore considers the salience, meaning and experiences of the categories 
"Hutu", `Tutsi" and "Twa" in contemporary Rwandan society. It considers the role of 
these categories in politics as well as in everyday life. It explores how the 1994 
genocide and its aftermath have shaped these categories and examines the impacts of 
policies and programmes of reconciliation as well as wider political and social 
developments. It looks at relations between people who were categorised into different 
"ethnic" groups prior to the genocide and examines the relative importance of 
"ethnicity" in Rwanda today compared to other forms of social identification. 
This leads to the second and related theme that this thesis will explore - the relationship 
between how identities are perceived, imagined or constructed at a conceptual level and 
how they are used and experienced at the concrete level of everyday lived reality. This 
thesis looks at how Rwandans today invoke, refer to and explain ethnicity and whether 
any of the myths and stereotypes described endure, or have been challenged and 
dismantled. It also looks at everyday processes of "ethnic" belonging and categorisation 
and asks whether it is important for Rwandans to determine the "ethnic" identity of 
others, and if so how they do this. It also looks at how Rwandans feel about their own 
"ethnic" identity, given their own past experiences and current circumstances. 
Building on the discussion in this chapter about the relationship between ethnicity and 
violence, the third theme that this thesis will move on to explore is the relationship 
between ethnicity and "reconciliation ". It will explore how Rwandans understand the 
idea of "reconciliation" in the aftermath of violence and consider how the 
Government's current approach to reconciliation relates to and impacts on processes of 
social change and everyday "ethnic" relations and relationships on the ground. 
Underlying this whole thesis is a concern with how Rwandans themselves understand, 
experience and explain the meaning of the categories "Hutu", `Tutsi" and "Twa", their 
role in the conflict and violence that have taken place in Rwanda and their relevance to 
the processes of "reconciliation". Despite the reams of literature produced since 1994, 
there have beenly surprising few books and articles that do this. 53 Furthermore, until 
recently, there has been very little ethnographic research on "ordinary" Rwandans - 
much of the literature includes little more than the testimonies or citations of Rwandans 
with very little in-depth analysis of the perspectives or views expressed. 54 Such research 
seems particularly relevant in Rwanda today, given the country is recovering from a 
civil war and genocide that has apparently pitted one "ethnic" group against another and 
during which there was substantial civilian participation in the violence and killing. It is 
this kind of "view from below" (Newbury 1998: p16) that this thesis aims to give. 
53 One exception is Nigel Eltringham's (2004) study of Rwandan political and intellectual elites in Rwanda and 
Europe in which he looks at their narratives of the past and the way these elites "account" for past violence and 
enocide in Rwanda. 
Recent exceptions include Scott Straus' (2006) research with perpetrators and PHD research by Jennie Burnet on 
women and the politics of memory and reconciliation in post-genocide Rwanda (currently being produced as a 
manuscript). The research conducted by the Kigali-based Institut pour la Recherche et Dialogue sur la Paix (IRDP) 
in 2004-2006 on Rwandan history, poverty, the genocide, democracy and rule of law also included detailed 
discussions and debates with different groups of the Rwandan population all over the country (See for example IRDP 
(2003) "Sustaining Peace in Rwanda: Voice of the People"), 
CHAPTER 2: 
SETTING THE SCENE: RESEARCH CONTEXT, APPROACH AND 
CHALLENGES 
This chapter sets the scene for the ethnographic chapters that follow by describing the 
context in which I conducted my research, discussing the research process and strategy 
and introducing my fieldsite and research participants. It firstly outlines my overall 
approach and why I chose to conduct my research in Rwanda's capital Kigali with 
young people. It then briefly gives a flavour of the socio-political context in Rwanda in 
2004-2005, which provided the backdrop for my research and the lives of the young 
people I worked with. It will discuss some of the challenges I encountered in 
researching "sensitive" issues such as "ethnicity" and "reconciliation" in this 
environment and how I overcame them. It focuses particularly on dilemmas concerning 
access, trust and communication in a context still characterised by fear and mistrust and 
hence justify the adoption of relatively informal and flexible research methods. It also 
addresses issues of my own positionality and how this affected my research as well as 
dilemmas related to writing up this thesis, representing and producing knowledge about 
Rwanda and Rwandans. Finally, it gives an initial introduction to the young people I 
worked with, how I met them and their role in making this research possible. 
Research design and approach 
The research questions underpinning this thesis are about the way Rwandans 
understand, experience and use social categories in their everyday interactions, 
narratives and practices and the relationship between processes of identification and 
broader processes of reconciliation and social change in the aftermath of widespread 
violence. In order to explore these issues in depth, it was evident that I needed to engage 
in an extensive period of fieldwork in Rwanda and to involve myself as much as 
possible in the daily lives and lifeworlds of Rwandans from diverse backgrounds. I 
needed to be able to investigate the complexities and contingencies of their daily 
existence: the situations they found themselves in; the activities they engaged in; how 
they interacted with others; how their comportment varied in different contexts; and the 
meaning they gave to those situations, activities and interactions. For this reason, I 
chose to use an ethnographic approach combining "participant observation" and 
informal interview work with individuals and groups. 
Ethnography as a window onto wider processes of social change 
Doing ethnography is establishing rapport, selecting informants, transcribing texts, taking 
genealogies, mapping fields, keeping a diary, and so on. But it is not these things, techniques 
and received procedures that define the enterprise. What defines it is the kind of intellectual 
effort it is: an elaborate venture in... "thick description". (Geertz 1973: pp5-6) 
"Ethnography" is more than just a collection of methods - it is an epistemological 
approach to research. As Geertz (1973) says, "thick description" in particular locations 
is about "clarify[ing] what's going on in such places, to reduce the puzzlement" (p16), 
accessing "the meanings that particular social actions have for the actors whose actions 
they are" (p25) and thus, "draw[ing] large conclusions from small but very densely 
textured facts" (p27). The "thick description" ethnographies of the past have taken the 
form of case studies of particular groups of people in particular places. As such, they 
take a specific approach to producing knowledge or theorising about the social world: 
[T]he essential task of theory building here is not to codify abstract regularities, but to make 
thick description possible, not to generalise across cases but to generalise within them. 
(Geertz 1973: p26) 
This type of research is inductive in nature, letting connections and theory emerge from 
the data, rather than seeking to test hypotheses. Ethnography is perhaps best 
characterised as "extended case study" research as it deals with a detailed sequence of 
events and interactions over a long period. Case studies are selected for their 
explanatory power, rather their typicality, but nonetheless allow for "a detailed 
examination of an event (or series of related events) which the analyst believes 
exhibit(s) the operation of some identified general theoretical principle" (Mitchell 1983: 
p192). Anthropologists are thus implicitly concerned with how cases are embedded in 
the broader context and how they might illuminate that broader context (Platt 1988). 
This ethnography is based on a series of case studies of individual young people and 
groups of young Rwandans who were living in Kigali between January 2004 and 
December 2005. It is based on 14 months of fieldwork in four blocks over this two-year 
period. During this time, I met regularly with 46 young people and followed as closely 
as I could the course of their lives, engaging in social and other activities with them and, 
where possible, meeting their friends and family. I sought to understand the broader 
context of socio-cultural and political change that framed their daily lives, how this 
constrained or enabled their actions and interactions, and how they negotiated, resisted 
and transformed that context. Equally, through exploring the social worlds of these 
particular young people, I sought to examine and illuminate those wider processes of 
social change. As mentioned earlier, the transformation of ideas about "ethnicity" and 
difference are central to the Government's strategy of "reconciliation" and prevention of 
future conflict in Rwanda. This research explores whether and how this is occurring at a 
micro-level, in the everyday worlds of groups of young people living in Rwanda today. 
A focus on youth 
Processes of reconciliation and social change require time and it may take several 
generations to bring about a lasting transformation in both social relations and political 
culture in Rwanda. It is therefore important to conduct research with the younger 
generation to understand whether and how particular ideas and modes of interaction that 
may have contributed to past conflict and violence are being transmitted and 
reproduced. Today's youth population in Rwanda is extremely diverse, incorporating 
young people with very different past experiences and social backgrounds. It includes 
young people who survived the genocide as children, often losing many or all members 
of their families; those who lost their families during the war and its aftermath or during 
exile in Zaire; those who have parents or other members of their family in prison 
accused of crimes of genocide or have spent time in prisons themselves; those who 
fought as teenagers in the war from 1990-1994; those who grew up in exile in varied 
conditions in other neighbouring countries and returned to Rwanda after 1994; and 
those who spent two years or more living in refugee camps in ZaIre and returned in 
1996-7 or after. Many young people witnessed the violence firsthand as children and the 
majority of those who did not were affected in some way by the civil war, genocide and 
its aftermath. A central issue for Rwanda's future is therefore how these young people 
are rebuilding their lives in aftermath of this violence and in what ways they are 
contributing to positive social change, improved social relations and "reconciliation". 
My decision to focus on youth was also influenced by pragmatism. During my first 
weeks in Kigali, I realised that young people were generally more accessible to me than 
older adults. They were often more available because of lower levels of professional 
and family responsibilities, but many young people were also actively interested in 
befriending me and learning about my research. On the whole they tended to be more 
open and willing to talk to me, and several young people specifically suggested I work 
with youth. For example, Aime explained why he thought I should focus on youth: 
We are the new generation. We are the ones who will be leading Rwanda in a few years' 
time, yet no one ever asks for our perspectives. Outsiders always come here to interview 
politicians and NGO leaders... and here in Rwanda, there is a big gap between the 
generations at the moment and quite a lot of conflict. Young people are waking up and 
realising they need their freedom to make their own decisions, but the older people don't 
understand how young people are taking decisions... (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
Aime's comments helped me to make up my mind to focus on young people. I realised 
it was important to understand the ideas, attitudes and relations of the "new generation", 
who in the next couple of decades will, as Aime suggested, be in positions of leadership 
in the Government, business and their families. With encouragement from the Rwandan 
Ministry of Youth, Sport and Culture (MIJESPOC) who indicated their support for this 
research project, I therefore decided to work with young people aged 14 to 35, the age 
group currently defined as "youth" by the Rwandan Government . 
Choosing Kigali as my fieldsite 
Another strategic decision I took was to concentrate my research solely in Rwanda's 
capital city Kigali. The main rationale was that Kigali allowed me to easily access a 
diversity of young people with different social backgrounds and past experiences of 
exile, conflict and violence. Furthermore, although there were certain neighbourhoods 
of the city that were notably wealthier or poorer, on the whole, people from different 
socio-economic, regional and "ethnic" backgrounds were mixed together in the city and 
therefore had occasion to interact in daily life. Critically though, Kigali also allowed my 
research participants and Ia greater level of anonymity. In 2004, I was just one among 
several thousand Europeans living in the city at the time, several of whom were in their 
thirties like I was and involved in projects with young people. This meant that when I 
met with an individual or a group of young Rwandans in a cafe or bar, we would attract 
far less attention and interest than we would have in a more remote, rural area. I have no 
doubt that my research participants found this as reassuring as I did and that it led many 
of them to be far more frank and open with me than they might have otherwise. 
It is obviously important to point out, however, that Kigali is a particular context. 
Although in 2004-05, Kigali did not really have the cosmopolitan and anonymous feel 
of many larger African cities, its size, S6 the mix of people from different backgrounds, 
55 This age range is given in the draft National Youth Policy I was given in 2004 and was confirmed 
in a personal 
communication from the Minister of Youth as well as by the National Youth Council. 
s6 Kigali has grown rapidly in size over the last two decades. UN Habitat figures estimate that the population of the 
city has grown from 350,000 people in 1994 to 800,000 in 2004 
the diversity of its neighbourhoods, workplaces and social spaces, and the pace of 
development of its physical infrastructure, made it a very different social environment 
from the rest of Rwanda - whether rural areas or provincial towns. Kigali was also the 
seat of Government, the heart of most of Rwanda's professional and business activity 
(especially in newer sectors like IT), the location of two of the main universities and the 
place where the vast majority of international diplomats and development workers lived 
and worked. The data presented in this thesis are about young people who lived and 
worked in Kigali in 2004-05 and - although the conclusions it draws shed light on wider 
processes of change in Rwanda - separate research would need to be conducted to 
understand the lives and experiences of young people living in other parts of Rwanda. 
Researching ethnicity in contemporary Rwanda 
This research focuses on the significance, use and experience of the categories "Hutu", 
"Tutsi" and "Twa" in contemporary Rwanda, how they relate to other social categories 
and their relationship with broader processes of reconciliation and social change. As 
Steve Fenton (2003) observes, however, if we go looking for ethnicity, we can be 
reasonably sure to find "it". The task of sociological analysis is instead to illustrate the 
circumstances - structural, historical, political, social - under which ethnicity becomes 
a "focus of action" (Fenton 2003: ppl79-180), where, when and how ethnicity 
"matters" (Kamer 2007: p8). Indeed, the purpose of this research is to interrogate the 
categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa", to discover how they are used in contemporary 
social life, to explore whether, when and how ethnicity "mattered" in the everyday lives 
of young Rwandans. I therefore avoided as far as possible prior assumptions about the 
role or importance of these categories in my research design. 
This meant, firstly, that although I wanted to ensure I worked with Rwandans from 
diverse socio-economic, "ethnic" and regional backgrounds and with different past 
experiences of conflict and violence, I did not make any attempt to explicitly sample my 
research participants on the basis of "ethnic" or other categories. It was important not to 
pre-determine these categories in any way either by making assumptions about what 
they meant or by pigeonholing individual Rwandans into them. Instead, I decided to let 
(httn: //www. unhabitat. ora/content. asn? cid=4606&catid=271&tvneid=l3&subMenuTd=01. The latest government 
statistics estimated the population as I million in 2006 (http: //www kiaalicitv zov nv/spin nhn9article9). The next 
biggest town is Gitarama with an estimated population of around 85,000 in 2002 is tiny in comparison (INSR 2006). 
these categories emerge in the course of the social situations and the discussions I was 
involved in, to understand if, when, where and how people referred to them. 
Secondly, this indirect approach to investigating the salience, significance and use of 
social categories in everyday life meant that I needed to get a broad picture of the 
everyday social worlds or "lifeworlds" of my research participants in order to 
understand whether, how and when particular categories became significant and were 
used. Although there were certain topics and themes I explored over time with each 
individual, I avoided asking directly about "ethnicity", the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" 
and "Twa" or other categories and waited to see when, where and if young people made 
reference to them in the course of our conversations and time spent together. If and 
when they did mention "ethnicity" or their own "ethnic" or other identity, I would then 
use this opportunity to explore this issue further with them. Only in a small number of 
cases, did I introduce the topic of "ethnicity" into a discussion, but this was always after 
several meetings with a particular person and usually when I wanted to clarify or 
follow-up on something they had said earlier about the topic. 57 
Thirdly, this approach was essential due to the prevailing social and political climate 
when I conducted my research in 2004-2005. As chapter 7 discusses in more depth, the 
actions the Government has taken to implement its commitment to the "eradication of 
ethnic, regional and other divisions and promotion of national unity" (Republic of 
Rwanda 2003)58 have effectively criminalized the use of the terms "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" in public discourse (Waldorf 2009: p103). When I conducted my fieldwork, 
there was a palpable sense of political and social control in Kigali and many Rwandans 
I met exercised significant degrees of self-censorship. My research participants were 
mostly acutely aware of the sensitivities surrounding the issue of "ethnicity" and most 
avoided talking openly about "ethnic" issues with anyone beyond close family or 
friends, as one informant told me: 
57 This approach to researching processes of identification and social categorisation also proved helpful 
in explaining 
and presenting my research to the Rwandan Government and to the Rwandans who would be my research 
participants. In the research summary, which I presented to the Government to get research permission and 
distributed to others I worked with, I simply specified that I was looking at questions of social change and 
reconciliation through researching the everyday lives of young people with different past experiences of violence and 
conflict. This describes what I did in practice and certainly made my research project less threatening and quite 
interesting both to the authorities and organisations I engaged with and the young people I spent so much time with. 
sa Constitution of June 2003, Article 9(2) 
There are just some issues that friends from different tribes59 don't talk about... like ethnic or 
political issues, we avoid talking about these things, because we mistrust what the other will 
think or say. Maybe I'm afraid to say what I think because he will think I support another 
ideology... maybe people are also afraid to talk about their past experiences during the war 
because they will be associated with certain things... we are always fearful about talking 
about things in a public place in case someone is listening. We are not free and it is hard. 
(Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
Early on in my fieldwork, one of my research participants Innocent told me that a 
fellow student at the Universite Nationale du Rwanda had been asking questions about 
what I was doing and had warned him that if he told me the "wrong things", he would 
create problems for him with the authorities by accusing him of "divisionism" . 60 
Innocent, like many of my informants, was therefore cautious about how, where and 
when we met and what we discussed. He took care that we were not overheard, avoided 
talking about certain issues in a group situation - even amongst friends - and usually 
preferred to meet me alone. 
It was difficult to judge how significant the risks were to my individual research 
participants, but most of them could give an example of someone in their family, 
workplace or neighbourhood who had run into problems with the authorities for 
speaking out or appearing to act against the Government. As a result, I had to take these 
issues seriously as they had implications for the feasibility of my research and 
potentially for the welfare of my participants and my own safety. In fact, before I left 
for my fieldwork, concerns about the climate in Rwanda almost led me to totally change 
my research agenda. 61 After a trip to Rwanda in January 2004, however, I concluded 
that, although there were certainly many constraints about how this research could be 
approached, presented and conducted, it was both feasible and necessary. My 
assessment of the social and political climate did however have important implications 
for my methodology and the fieldwork methods I used. 
59 Some young Rwandans used the word "tribe" to refer to the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa", perhaps suggestive 
of assumed biological differences (see chapter 4). 
60 "Divisionism" is a term that has been used increasing by the Government since 2000 and was criminalised in the 
2001 law on discrimination and secretarianism - although it remains poorly defined (see chapter 
61 In 2003, whilst writing my DPhil proposal, I went to Belgium to access some francophone literature and meet with 
Belgian academics working on Rwanda. During this trip, a couple of my Belgian colleagues warned me that 
it might 
not be feasible to do research into issues of ethnicity and reconciliation in Rwanda at that time, cautioning me that 
might encounter difficulties both with the authorities and potential participants. One researcher described 
how she 
had been forced to abandon her research in Rwanda after she and her research participants received threats - 
despite 
the fact that she wasn't researching anything anywhere near as "sensitive" as I was proposing. Another 
had his 
passport confiscated for several weeks whilst in Rwanda and then was obliged to leave the country because the 
authorities refused to renew his visa. On my return from Belgium, after discussions with my supervisors, I reluctantly 
decided to change my thesis topic and instead orient my research to the Rwandan diaspora in the UK and Belgium. 
was only by going to Rwanda in January 2004, that I realised it was possible to conduct the research I had planned 
and was therefore able to return to my original topic. 
Research methodology and fieldwork methods 
As Marc Sommers (2001: pp20-27) found during his work with Burundian refugees in 
Tanzania, when a researcher wishes to investigate sensitive issues such as identity, 
social difference and conflict in environments characterised by fear and mistrust, it is 
simply not possible to use formal research methods and sampling strategies. The best a 
researcher can do in these contexts is to use a form of "purposive sampling" in order to 
work with a range of people to see how their various situations and social characteristics 
affect the phenomena under study. Sommers stresses, however, that in reality the 
researcher will also be constrained by the opportunities available and the (probably 
limited) willingness of people to participate in the research. 
Strategies for gaining access and "sampling" participants 
I found that access in the practical sense of meeting young people was not the problem. 
There were plenty of opportunities to meet young people - on the bus, in coffee shops, 
in the neighbourhood where I lived, through projects I got involved in, via friends - and 
many were interested in my research. The challenge was access in the sense of data 
quality - how to encourage young people to talk in depth about themselves and their 
lives and to allow me to participate in some meaningful way in their daily lives and 
activities. As discussed above, most young Rwandans were extremely careful about 
when, how and with whom they discussed sensitive issues such as politics and 
"ethnicity" and even their individual experiences of violence and exile. More precisely, 
they were careful about expressing their true sentiments about these issues and 
revealing certain information about their past. This does not mean to say that Rwandans 
do not talk about these issues. On the contrary, over time, I came to realise that the 
majority of Rwandans actually talk quite a lot about these topics, but that these 
conversations mainly take place mainly in the private sphere amongst tight family 
circles or close acquaintances. 62 Sometimes, these topics are discussed in a more public 
social situation, but often in jest, 63 especially amongst young people. 
From the onset, issues of trust were central and had a major influence on how I accessed 
young people and the methods I used. As Lucia Ann McSpadden describes, based on 
62 Of course, there are exceptions and in some situations - for example in discussions 
facilitated by NGOs or 
researchers - some Rwandans will express themselves quite publicly and vehemently on these topics. 
63 As Radcliffe-Brown (1940,1952) suggests, "joking relationships" can be a ritualised and safe way of releasing 
tensions related to underlying hostilities: "The joking relationship is a peculiar combination of friendliness and 
antagonism. The behaviour is such that in any other social context it would express and arouse hostility, 
but it is not 
meant serious and should not be taken seriously. There is a pretence of hostility and a real friendliness. " (1952: p91) 
her research with Eritrean and Ethiopian refugees in the US, who had suffered violence 
and trauma and who continued to live in a context of fear and exclusion: 
From the very beginning the issue of trust was paramount: trust in me as an interviewer, trust 
in the purpose of the interview, the purpose of the research, and in how the information was 
to be used. (McSpadden 1998: p153) 
McSpadden demonstrates that access is not only a practical issue, but also an analytical 
and ethical one, having implications for how we go about our research; the quality of 
data we produce and for those who participate (see also Hammersely and Atkinson 
1995: pp54-79). Like McSpadden, I found that I needed to spend a substantial amount 
of time building relationships with individuals and groups to gain their confidence and 
allay any fears or suspicions. In some cases, young people were suspicious of who I was 
and my motives for conducting the research and that it took many meetings for them to 
begin to trust me and start to tell me more about themselves, their past experiences and 
points of view. With a few young people, I never really got beyond a perfunctory 
relationship and our discussions remained limited. 
It also became clear during the first weeks that the most effective way to gain 
introductions to young people was to use something akin to a strategy of "snowball 
sampling" (Atkinson and Flint 2001). This is a technique of "chain referral" often used 
to access hidden, hard-to-reach or vulnerable populations, where the research sample is 
gradually expanded using the social networks or initial contacts of "gatekeepers" who to 
a certain extent vouch for the researcher's trustworthiness. When I arrived in Rwanda, I 
already had the contact details of several young Rwandans who were friends and family 
of Rwandans I knew in Europe. The fact that my introduction to these individuals was 
via a friend or family member overseas made a big difference to their initial levels of 
trust. Sometimes, these young people immediately absorbed me into their network of 
friends, invited me to meet their families and agreed to participate in my research. 
I was conscious, however, of the biases that can occur by identifying too many 
participants via referral from one individual or organisation. There is a risk that the 
"friends of friends" approach can result in only identifying people with similar social 
characteristics or political perspectives. I therefore worked to diversify my points of 
entree from the start by going through as many different individuals as possible and 
meeting young people myself. Another route I used to access young people was via my 
involvement in a couple of projects and centres related to children and youth. This was 
particularly helpful in helping me access disadvantaged young people such as orphans, 
those from poorer families or with lower education levels. Nonetheless, I remained 
conscious of the way organisations sometimes try to shepherd researchers in certain 
directions or towards certain people and how the way organisations are perceived can 
affect what people say: 
Even the most friendly or cooperative or gatekeepers or sponsors will shape the conduct and 
development of the research. (Hammersley and Atkinson 1995: p73) 
I quickly realised, however, that most young people I met via projects or centres usually 
preferred to go somewhere more anonymous or private to chat like a cafe in town, 
neighbourhood cabaret or their own home. I also met young people when they 
approached me or we chatted whilst waiting for a bus or in an Internet cafe. After one or 
two meetings I would talk to them about my research and ask if they were willing to 
participate. This was often a useful route to meet young people from more educated and 
better off families, who were those who could afford the bus fare or Internet tariffs. 
As Sommers (2001) suggested, it certainly would not have been possible to adopt any 
kind of formal sampling strategy. Much of the time, I had to follow up on opportunities 
that presented themselves. Furthermore, as discussed above, although I wanted to 
ensure my "sample" of young people included people from diverse backgrounds and 
with diverse experiences, the aim was to interrogate Rwanda's social categories rather 
than pigeonhole individuals into them before I started. Therefore whilst I made efforts 
to broaden my sample to different groups within society and engaging in a form of 
"purposive sampling", I did not aim for numerical representivity by "ethnic" group, 
regional origin, gender, age etc. Even in the most receptive of research climates, 
attempts to use formal sampling techniques like random or stratified sampling are 
fraught with problems of bias and reliability. Given my research topic, the prevailing 
social and political climate in Rwanda and the lack of data on the make-up of Rwanda's 
population, ' the use of such techniques would have been impossible. The only 
downside of this approach was that I unfortunately did not have occasion to meet any 
young Rwandans who identified themselves as "Twa". 
64 "Ethnic" categories are no longer included in census statistics. 
Research methods: observing, participating in and conversing in everyday life 
"Participant observation" has long been the hallmark method of anthropology, 
emphasising the presence of the ethnographer, his or her "being there". Indeed, 
In a sense, all social research is a form of participant observation, because we cannot study 
the social world without being part of it. From this point of view, participant observation is 
not a particular research technique but a mode of being-in-the-world characteristic of 
researchers. (Atkinson and Hammersley 1994 in Silverman 2001: p49) 
Several authors have pointed to a tension or "paradox" (Ellen 1994: p216) inherent in 
the concept of participant observation, arguing it is not possible to simultaneously 
participate in and observe social life. Participation implies involvement, attachment, 
empathy, immersion in the rhythms and flows of life - "inside-ness". Observation 
implies distance, and detachment - "outside-ness". Yet, if we follow Atkinson and 
Hammersley, we cannot be located "outside" - even if we are observing, we are part of 
the social world of those we study. Whilst there are definitely practical trade-offs to be 
made, participation-observation need not been seen as a dichotomy which somehow 
implies a complete separation and incompatibility of the activities. Instead I found the 
metaphor stepping in and stepping out - to some extent a feature of normal social life 
(but without the rigour of memorising or detailed recording) - described quite well the 
kinds of activity I engaged in during my fieldwork. This implies a more flexible and 
fluid relationship between participation and observation, where one can fully engage in 
a conversation or event, then pause for a moment to reflect (or take notes), gain 
perspective and then re-engage. 
I spent a significant amount of time during my fieldwork observing and participating in 
everyday activities and'social interactions. Wherever possible, I took up opportunities to 
participate in social occasions with young people as well as events that I was invited to 
by other Rwandan friends and the families I stayed with during my fieldwork. These 
included weddings, funerals, graduation parties, birthdays, and other family gatherings, 
as well as evenings in local cabarets, bars or nightclubs. These social occasions allowed 
me to observe and get to know individuals in a social context in which they were 
relaxed with their friends and close acquaintances. It also helped me to map their social 
networks and geographies and observe them in interactions with different people and in 
different contexts. These events also provided useful talking points for interviews and 
permitted me to explore the congruence and connections between the way people 
narrated their lives, events and interactions and the way I observed them acting in 
specific social situations. 
Prior to my fieldwork, I had envisaged anchoring my ethnographic research to a number 
of "strategically selected locales" (Marcus 1986: p172) or physical sites around the city. 
In the end, my research was anchored to the individuals and groups I met and depended 
on when and where they gave me access to their lives and social worlds. Although we 
often met regularly in the same physical space - their home, a neighbourhood cabaret, 
one of the cafes or bars downtown - my methodology resembled a kind of 
"anthropology by appointment" rather than more traditional approaches based on living 
amongst people in a "community". Most of my research participants were engaged in a 
variety of other activities during the day and evenings - work, school, university, job 
hunting, social events - many of which it was not possible for me to participate in. I 
therefore tended to make appointments with individuals and groups on a regular basis 
during my stays in Kigali and follow their lives as best I could from this perspective. 
I had also intended to do a significant amount of informal group work with groups of 
friends and acquaintances. I planned to promote discussion within the group on many of 
the core themes of my research to see how they talked about them together, identify 
areas to explore in more depth and gauge different reactions to the issues in this group 
environment. As I got to know the groups better, I then planned to identify individual 
members of the groups to work with in more depth through individual meetings, 
informal interviews and spending time with them in other social environments beyond 
the group. Whilst I did spend a reasonable amount of time with a number of groups of 
young people - and this proved extremely interesting and insightful - in practice I 
found that discussions were fairly limited and that individuals within the group were 
more willing to talk to me on an individual basis. In a number of cases, individuals 
approached me and suggested I met them alone. This was another reflection of the 
prevailing social and political climate as well as certain typical modes of social 
interaction in Rwanda (see below). 
"Interview-conversations ": narratives of self and other, past and present 
The main fieldwork method I used is best described as the "interview-conversation" 
with all my meetings with individuals and groups falling somewhere along this 
spectrum and mostly at the conversation end. Given the nature of my research questions 
and issues of trust, these "interview-conversations" were generally extremely informal, 
unstructured or semi-structured. I drew up a list of themes and areas I wished to explore 
over time with individuals and groups and, as and when possible, I raised particular 
issues or followed-up on something they said. Many of these themes involved eliciting 
narratives from young people about their background, past experiences, particular 
events in their lives, or their views on certain topics. In this respect, my approach 
resembled what is termed a "topical" life story approach (Bertaux and Kohli 1984). 
Life stories are in-depth personal narratives related by individuals about aspects of or 
the totality of their past and current lives: 
Life stories... give the researcher access to the actor's perspective, his or her values, 
definitions of situations, and knowledge of social processes and rules that he or she has 
acquired through experience. (Bertaux and Kohli 1984: p216) 
Proponents of the life story approach argue that the general processes that interest 
researchers are embedded in the everyday lives of the people they study, and that 
personal narrative is a tool of enquiry that allows us to "prise open the different 
dimensions of lived totality" (Gotfried 1998 in Chamberlayne et al 2000: p2). The 
strength of this approach is its resistance to over-simplification, its ability to get at the 
complexities and contradictions, the dissonant voices, the changing views and varying 
perspectives. The life story approach helps us access "the continuous, lived flow of 
historically-situated phenomenal experience, with all the ambiguity, variability, 
malleability, and even uniqueness that such experience usually implies" (Plummer 
1983: p64). As such, life stories are a kind of Geertzian "thick description" of the way 
people describe their lives, their self-reflections, decisions and actions and can 
help us 
reach new understandings either by making plausible connections to existing areas of 
theory or through drawing out new theoretical insights. For life story researchers: 
Theorising becomes commentary, criticism, synthesis, theme, metaphor. The concerns are 
always dual: a concrete case will have wider implications, and the outward manifestations 
must be apprehended from within. (Plummer 1983: p120) 
I used life stories in an ethnographic fashion, where "the aim is to get accurate 
descriptions of the interviewees' life trajectories in social contexts, in order to uncover 
the patterns of social relations and the special processes that shaped them" (Bertaux and 
Kohli 1984: p215). I used "interview-conversations" to explore particular topics with 
participants - such as their experience of conflict, violence, exile and return; 
their 
interactions with other Rwandans; their views of past and ongoing events in Rwanda; 
and - when the opportunity presented itself - their views on "ethnicity" - rather than to 
build a picture of the totality of their past and present lives. In terms of techniques for 
eliciting life stories, I followed the advice of Chase (1995: pp2-3) who argues that in 
order to elicit stories, the researcher needs to ask very open-ended questions and leave 
the participant to talk uninterrupted for lengthy periods of time with only the occasional 
prompts and affirmations where necessary. Only in this way, is it possible to elicit the 
rich and detailed narratives that reveal the complexity of past and current experience 
and the way individuals think and feel about them. 
Over time, as I engaged in repeated discussions with individuals and levels of trust 
strengthened, I began to ask more focused questions to follow up on particular areas or 
themes. With most young people this more structured approach was supplemented with 
long periods of general conversation. I frequently let young people lead the discussion 
or simply asked what they had been doing since I last saw them, so I could get an idea 
of what was important in their lives, where, how and with whom they were spending 
their time, and how they perceived and engaged with the world around them. I also let 
them ask me questions about my life and how I spent my time as I also found the kinds 
of questions they asked and how they asked them to be insightful. 
With a number of young people, our "interview-conversations" resembled a meeting 
with a friend. Indeed many of the young people I worked with referred to me and 
introduced me to others as their "friend" - although they were aware that I was a 
researcher and that they were participating in my research project. With other young 
people, however, our meetings were more staged and resembled a traditional research 
interview. This was often the case where the conversation was conducted in 
Kinywarwanda rather than French or English and I employed the services of a 
translator. 65 This choice was also made because I did not engage in any form of 
recording during the interview-conversations themselves. 
Early in my fieldwork, I decided to put away both my notebook and digital voice 
recorder when meeting with young people. After a few attempts at recording interview- 
conversations or taking notes, I concluded that this had a detrimental effect on the 
content and quality of my discussions with young people. Not only did it give the whole 
discussion a more formal and staged nature and affect what young people were prepared 
65 Most of the quotations in this thesis are translated from French or from Kinyarwanda via French. 
to say, I found it distracted me and prevented me from fully absorbing and responding 
to what individuals were saying. Furthermore, anonymity was a key concern for most of 
my research participants and both recording and note taking seemed to cause concern. 
By contrast, when I did away with the recording devices, we were all more relaxed and 
their narratives and our conversations flowed. Over time, people often discussed highly 
sensitive topics with me, confided in me about certain personal experiences, and were 
surprisingly frank about their views - none of which I am convinced they would have 
spoken about were I fiddling with buttons on a device or scribbling in a notepad. 
I therefore had to train my mind to memorise as much as possible of each interview- 
conversation so I could write detailed notes afterwards. 66 I carried a notebook in my bag 
or car, so I could sit somewhere afterwards to write notes. I noted as much as possible 
of the conversation as I could remember and added memos to record further details of 
the encounter such as the location, atmosphere, dynamics and any constraints. The 
downside of this note-taking technique was that I could not record verbatim what was 
said and I missed some details. This downside, however, was far outweighed by the 
quantity and quality of what was said in this more relaxed atmosphere. 
Key informants: understanding the wider context 
The only exception to my note-taking rule was when I met with certain key informants, 
who were more comfortable with me taking notes or expected me to do so. In order to 
get as much information as possible on the context in which young people were living 
their lives, I engaged with a number of Rwandans working with youth and on projects, 
policies and programmes related to young people, social change and reconciliation. 
During my fieldwork, I conducted more formal interviews with representatives in 
relevant NGOs, government ministries and bodies such as the Ministry of Youth, Sport 
and Culture (MIJESPOC) and the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission 
(NURC), and youth centres or organisations such as the Scouts, Conseil National de la 
Jeunesse and Maison de la Jeunesse at Kimisagara. I also attended a number of relevant 
events such as a regional youth peace camp and a workshop to provide input into the 
new national policy on youth, at the invitation of the Ministry of Youth. 
66 I developed certain techniques over time to help me memorise what was said and I managed to remember some of 
the more significant comments word-for-word. 
I supplemented these more formal meetings and events, with more informal meetings 
with other Rwandans who worked with young people - such as youth workers and 
teachers - and frequent discussions with Rwandan friends. I used these opportunities to 
quiz people about socialisation practices in Rwanda - what children are taught about 
Rwandan values, comportment, culture and history as they grow up - and how these 
have changed and are changing. I was also interested in the changing relationships 
between young people and their parents regarding expectations, discussions and 
conflicts about Rwanda's past, education, work, relationships, marriage and social 
behaviour. In some cases, young people introduced me to their parents and I was able to 
get to know their families and discuss issues of interest with them - although taking 
care not to risk damaging the bond of trust I had with the young person. 
Producing knowledge about Rwanda: Interpretation, validity and responsibility 
One of the issues that brought me to this research project in the first place was a 
concern with how knowledge is produced about Rwanda and Rwandans and the impacts 
this has on the lives and wellbeing of Rwandans and others. In the sections above, I 
have outlined how this research came about, explained the research strategy and 
justified my choice of research methods. Nonetheless, there are still questions to be 
addressed about how I have chosen to present, represent and interpret my research 
findings and the kind of knowledge this research can produce. How can I be sure that 
my research participants told me the "truth", particularly in such a sensitive climate 
characterised by significant levels of fear and mistrust? Have I accurately understood 
and interpreted the words and behaviour of the young people I worked with? What can 
these insights into the lives of a few dozen young people living in Kigali today tell us 
about wider process of social change and reconciliation in Rwanda? How can I draw out 
the wider implications of my research and link my findings to theory, policy and 
practice? What impact might the knowledge I produce have on the lives of those I have 
researched and other Rwandans? 
Challenges of communication, understanding and interpretation 
Barely a few weeks after I arrived in Kigali and had begun my fieldwork, one of my 
research participants warned me to be extremely careful when I was communicating 
with his fellow Rwandans: 
You have to be careful. I can see when you are talking to me that you are accepting at face 
value what people say. Rwandans tell a lot of lies, twist the truth and are rarely direct... They 
have lots of reasons for doing this -a lot of people still fear to talk frankly about things. Or if 
they know you are talking to them and their friends, they may fear you will tell the others... 
and may not deviate from the opinion of the group because of this. (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
A few weeks later, Francine said something similar, telling me that Rwandans never 
communicate directly and that their real meaning is often the opposite of what they say: 
A Rwandan will never tell you he's hungry. He will never ask you anything directly. But, he 
will find an indirect way to let you know that you should give him something to eat or he'll 
take the food directly without asking you... The main problem here in Rwanda is that we 
don't always speak openly and often people say the opposite of what they really want to say. 
For example, if I see that you are wearing a pretty skirt and I tell you that. You won't believe 
me. You will immediately think about what I really wanted to say, that I really wanted to tell 
you that you aren't pretty or the skirt isn't pretty... it's often the same thing when people ask 
for forgiveness or when people say they forgive others... They do it because they are asked to 
do it, but truly in their heart, they haven't forgiven. (Francine, b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
On hearing these comments, I recalled an article I had read the previous year by C. M. 
Overdulve, a Presbyterian Minister who had worked in Rwanda as a missionary for 25 
years until the mid-1980s. Overdulve's (1997) article deals with the "asymmetry" 
between Rwandan and Euro-American modes of communication, arguing that the 
objectives and manner of communication in the two "cultures" are fundamentally 
different. In contrast to Euro-American culture, Overdulve says that the most important 
thing in communication between Rwandans is to maintain the relationship between 
interlocutors, rather than the actual accuracy or "truth" or what is said: 
If one wants to understand what a Rwandan is saying, one should never forget that he speaks 
on two levels. That which counts for him, is not, in the first instance, the concordance 
between his words and the reality, or between what he says and what he thinks about a 
certain subject. That which matters above all, is the relationship between the two partners in 
the dialogue, that must be serviced by the words. (Overdulve 1997: p276) 
Overdulve's words also resonate with what many of my research participants told me 
about the importance of maintaining social relationships. In this respect, Emmanuel's 
comments were fairly typical: 
[W]hen a Rwandan doesn't like someone, he will pretend that everything is okay. He will 
even laugh and share a beer with his enemy. He won't speak about the problem. For example, 
if, one day, you start to tell others bad things about me and then, my friends tell me this, I 
won't say anything to you. I will continue as before because I don't want to create problems 
in our friendship. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Overdulve (1997: pp275-276) locates what he terms the "intricacies" of Rwandan 
modes of communication in the complexity of traditional Rwandan society with its 
highly-structured layered hierarchies of authority and power, in which, he argues, an 
individual's success and survival depended on their ability to use language to their 
advantage and simultaneously satisfy or appear to satisfy multiple chiefs. He says that 
this resulted in a dominant mode of communication in Rwanda, which might be 
described as "esoterism" or "double language" and that "a piece of information, at the 
same time that it says something, also hides something else, it has a secret meaning, 
which may even say something different than the words suggest" (p275). 
Given these warnings, I was sensitive to these issues from the first weeks of my 
fieldwork and careful to observe and analyse how the Rwandans I spent time with 
communicated and behaved with one another and with me. I certainly met Rwandans 
who communicated in the indirect "esoteric" manner described by Overdulve, Aime and 
Francine. There were several others who I felt were constantly assessing what they 
thought I wanted from them and what they wanted from me, and thus changed what and 
how they communicated. I also had a couple of experiences of people being less than 
truthful or lying to me about certain things, which I discovered via other people or 
because they later contradicted themselves. 
At the beginning of my research, I was very perturbed by this and wondered how I 
could possibly conduct research in such an environment and understand the "truth" 
about people's perspectives and experiences. As the months passed, however, I began to 
relax and find ways to deal with some of the challenges. Firstly, I took time to learn 
more about Rwandan culture, values and norms. I also took regular Kinywarwanda 
lessons for several months and found that my growing understanding of the language 
and socio-cultural context helped me to better understand how people thought, behaved 
and communicated about the world around them. Secondly, I realised that the traits and 
characteristics - such as "indirectness", "hypocrisy" and "secrecy" - attributed by 
Overdulve and others to "the Rwandans" were stereotypes, just like the stereotypes 
discussed earlier about the behaviour and appearance of "the Tutsi" or "the Hutu" 
(chapter 1). As with all stereotypes, it was certainly possible to find instances where 
people communicated in these stereotypical ways, but many people did not 
communicate like this and their behaviour varied with circumstance and context. 
Although cognisant of these stereotypes, I therefore subjected them to constant 
interrogation during my research. Thirdly, I realised that Rwanda should not be set apart 
as having a particularly difficult or impenetrable culture of communication, which 
makes it somehow inaccessible to researchers or other non-Rwandans. 
Any researcher in a cultural context that is different from their own (and this may 
simply be another context in their own country or locality) faces challenges of 
understanding, interpreting and representing what the people they are studying think, 
say and do. These questions about "ethnographic authority" are at the heart of our 
enterprise as social researchers: "How do we explain the lives of others without 
violating their reality? " (Joan Acker et al: 1991: p142). How can we claim to articulate 
the perspectives and meanings others give to their lives? How do we deal with the 
multiple layers of interpretation and the fact we are often making representations of 
others' representations? How can we integrate the "informant's perspective" or give 
"voice" to those we research? The task at hand is a veritable challenge: 
[G]et your subject's own words, come to really grasp them from the inside and then turn it 
yourself into a structured and coherent statement that uses the subject's words in places and 
the social scientist's in others, but does not lose their authentic meaning (Plummer 1983: 
pl 11) 
In practice, no social research - or any analysis that reports on the ideas, perspectives 
and experiences of others - is based on their subjects' accurate account of the past or 
present. It is based on their reconstructions of reality, the selection of events they 
choose to mention and the meanings they give to them. This is true in all cultures and 
all societies. The challenge for a social researcher is to contextualise what people say 
and do and to comment on how the particular context might shape their perspectives 
and actions and render them more comprehensible. The researcher must constantly 
challenge his or her own assumptions and cultural baggage and seek to understand the 
world from the perspective of those studied. Thus, if people's narratives appear to be 
inconsistent or incoherent, this in itself is worthy of investigation as it says something 
important about how they see the world and their relationships with those around them. 
The researcher's understanding will never be perfect, but this does not mean that he or 
she cannot gain important insights into what is going on in a particular social context 
through research and analysis. It is also not always the case that a particular culture or 
society is less accessible to an outsider. Many of my research participants repeatedly 
told me that they had more confidence and trust in me because I was an outsider and 
some people confided in me about things I knew their friends and family were not 
aware of. Nevertheless, there are a number of things that a researcher can do to improve 
his or her understanding of a particular socio-cultural context, detect and analyse 
inconsistencies, reduce or account for bias, and ensure the validity of the research. 
Research relationships, positions and issues of validity 
Ethnographic research is a form of social engagement where we enter into relationships, 
communicate, converse, interact, and get close to people's lives. It forms part of the 
social world we seek to investigate and as such is both impacted by and impacts on that 
social world. Furthermore, the research, researchers and those researched, are all 
structured by the social organisation and power relations of the specific context in 
which the research takes place. Even if we try to consciously position or present 
ourselves in a certain way to our research environment and participants, we need to 
recognise that we are unlikely to always be fully in control of the "role" we take and 
that those we work with will develop their own views about our intentions, personal 
behaviour and characters and that these will often not coincide with our own. 7 The way 
in which the researcher, researched and any intermediaries such as interpreters are 
"positioned" with respect to each other and the wider environment can introduce 
asymmetries in the research relationship and introduce different dimensions of "bias" 
into our data, which we need to consider and account for. 
Biases can arise from the researcher as a result of preconceptions or assumptions that he 
or she makes due to the way he or she is located with respect to the research context in 
terms of gender, age, class, ethnicity, personal background, experience, beliefs and 
theoretical orientation. This influences the way the researcher sees, hears and notes 
what is happening and affects everything from the level of access accorded to the 
questions asked, responses gained, categories applied and analysis made. In my case, I 
was a university-educated, married, white British woman in her early thirties who had 
previously worked on Rwanda for the British Government and EU and had visited 
Rwanda over a dozen times before, but always in an "official" capacity. Given my 
previous experience in Rwanda and Africa more widely, I had certain expectations 
about how I might be viewed by different Rwandans I would work with. I was aware, 
for example, that the fact that I was British and used to work for DFID68 would be 
helpful in my dealings with the Rwandan Government and obtaining research 
permission, as the UK Government was seen as one of Rwanda's key international 
partners. On the other hand, I expected that my nationality and the support my 
Government gives to the current Rwandan regime might make certain parts of the 
67 E. g. see Barrett's story of his experiences in a Catalan village in Hammersley and Atkinson (1995: pp 75-76) 
68 The Department for International Development, the UK's overseas development ministry. 
Rwandan population more suspicious of me. I had also considered some of the 
implications of being a white European outsider, especially when living in an almost 
exclusively Rwandan neighbourhood. Nonetheless, what I was not prepared for was that 
some Rwandans would choose to apply their own categories to me. 
A couple of months after I arrived in Rwanda, I accompanied my Kinyarwanda teacher 
Esperance to her neighbour's house to offer my condolences because her son had fallen 
down a latrine and tragically died two days earlier. I spent about half an hour with 
Mama Eddy, as the lady was known in the neighbourhood. The next day, Esperance 
told me that Mama Eddy had appreciated my gesture and that she had commented about 
me, "What a beautiful, tall and well-mannered woman she was. What a fine Tutsi. " I 
was totally taken aback. Esperance explained that Rwandans often categorised outsiders 
as "Hutu" or "Tutsi" on the basis of their appearance or mannerisms. For example, she 
said, people referred to the then U. S. Secretary of State Colin Powell (who appeared 
regularly on TV at that time) as "Hutu". After this incident, there were a couple more 
occasions where I was referred to as "Tutsi" and I became quite concerned about the 
impact this might have on my research. Although Esperance repeatedly assured me that 
this was done in jest and that I would not be treated any differently, I always remained 
somewhat perturbed that I could be categorised in this way. 
There are also possible biases arising from the subject being interviewed. These may 
include the respondent lying or presenting a false front; trying to impress the 
interviewer and gain positive evaluation; anticipating what the interviewer wants to 
hear; or fearing repercussions should the information become public. In some cases, 
people may choose not to disclose certain information and, in others, may see the 
researcher as useful in some way, for example as a mouthpiece for their interests or 
concerns. Where a researcher uses an interpreter, this introduces another stratum to the 
complex and multiple layers of communication and interpretation. This is not just about 
the difficulties of translating between languages, it is also about the relationships and 
objectives involved and the position of the interpreter vis--vis the researcher and the 
person interviewed. As Overdulve (1997: p279) suggests, on the one hand, the 
interpreter is trying to maintain a good relationship with the researcher and thus, is 
trying to anticipate what he or she means by each question and what he or she wants to 
hear in response. On the other hand, the interpreter is trying to negotiate a relationship 
with the interviewee and may be concerned about who the person is and what political 
connections he or she has and thus wish also to please him or her. Equally, the 
interviewee is wondering who the foreign researcher is, why he or she is asking the 
questions, what he or she wants to hear, what he or she will do with the information and 
therefore what the risks are in answering the questions. The interviewee may be equally 
concerned about the identity of the translator, for example whether he is a spy. 
Overdulve's conclusion is pessimistic: 
It is in this muddle of questions, suspicions, hesitations that the questions of the European are 
posed and the answers must be given... The question and the answers are therefore both likely 
to receive a lifting such that by the end, the chance that the European receives the response he 
hopes for is thus reduced to quasi zero. (Overdulve 1997: p279) 
The reason such biases are of concern is that they can affect the validity of our data and 
the claims we can make about the knowledge we produce. Ultimately, this depends on 
the specific research questions we ask, but there are certain techniques or "validity 
checks" we can use to reduce bias. 
I did a number of things to increase my chances of understanding and interpreting 
people's actions, perspectives and interactions accurately and to reduce - or rather 
understand and account for - possible bias and hence increase the credibility of my 
research findings and analysis. The first technique was simply to invest significant 
amounts of time in my research and limit the number of research participants to enable 
me to get to know each person well. I met regularly with each individual - in a group or 
one-on-one context - at least once every two weeks and for several hours and followed 
their lives as closely as possible over a two-year period. In some cases, this was easier 
than others and I saw some young people dozens of times during my fieldwork; in other 
cases, I only managed to meet them four or five times. Nonetheless, over time, people 
became more open and willing to discuss sensitive or difficult issues. In some cases, 
people would apologise for not telling me the "truth" or full story at the beginning of 
our relationship, saying that they did not know whether they could trust me. I also found 
that my slightly unusual approach of doing my fieldwork in four blocks of several 
months actually helped my research relationships as people were pleased when I got 
back in touch after a trip to Europe or sent an email to them whilst I was away. In spite 
of this, there were certainly occasions when some of my research participants seemed to 
exercise caution and not divert too much from what they saw as the official `party line'. 
As a result, the reader will sometimes detect varying degrees of candour and calculation 
in the statements of my research participants. 
The repeated meetings and discussions also gave me opportunity to "triangulate" my 
data, check for inconsistencies or changes of perspective. I would often raise similar 
topics in different ways with people on different occasions and at different stages of our 
relationship and then check their responses against things they said earlier. Because I 
met people in a variety of contexts - alone, with friends, with family, at a social event - 
I could also check what people said about certain people, events and situations against 
what they did in those interactions and situations. Finally, because I often got to know a 
person's friends and sometimes their family, I could sometimes check particular details 
of what they said or explore issues the person was unable or unwilling to articulate. 
Nonetheless, the elimination of all such biases is not possible, neither is it necessarily 
desirable. The knowledge that we produce from social research is always positioned; it 
is always an interpretation from some perspective and as such is necessarily partial and 
subjective. This does not make that knowledge invalid -- it means we need to 
systematically account for the context and circumstances under which it was produced 
and identify the potential sources of bias. A key aspect of this is "reflexivity" - 
rendering our own presence and position in the research public and treating ourselves as 
a subject of intellectual inquiry. This rendering the researcher public does not eliminate 
his or her presence69 - it is not possible to completely separate ourselves from our 
research context or obtain "position-free" or "value-free" knowledge - but it is possible 
to let those reading our work understand how we may have affected the knowledge 
produced, the ways in which that knowledge is "situated". Finally, validity is about 
ensuring the conclusions we draw are backed up by the data and dealing with those 
"negative cases" that do not fit common patterns or our emergent understandings. 
As discussed earlier, this thesis is effectively a series of case studies of the lives of 
individual and groups of young people living in contemporary Rwanda. It does not set 
out to make generalisations about the perspectives and behaviour of all young people in 
Rwanda or to give a comprehensive assessment of the reconciliation process. Rather it 
seeks to use a number of in-depth case studies of the everyday realities of particular 
young people in a particular time and place to explore, illustrate and analyse the 
complex processes of social categorisation and identification at work in contemporary 
Rwanda. In this way, it seeks to challenge certain received wisdom about today's social 
reality in Rwanda and make inferences about what might be happening in wider society. 
69 As seems to be argued in Writing Culture (Clifford and Marcus 1986) 
Ethical dilemmas and research responsibilities 
Given the tense social situation and the sensitivity of my research topic, many of my 
research participants expressed concerns about confidentiality and anonymity. I 
therefore took a number of steps to protect both them and myself from potential harm. 
On a practical level, this meant taking care where and when I met people and spoke to 
them about certain issues and using simple techniques to protect their anonymity such 
as changing their names and other details in my fieldnotes and this thesis to ensure that 
individuals cannot be identified. As I often worked with groups of young people that 
knew each other, I also had to draw clear lines between what was told me in confidence 
and what could be discussed in a group context. I also had to remember to obtain 
"informed consent" on an ongoing basis as I met new individuals and groups. Although 
I had made it clear from the onset that I was a researcher and asked whether particular 
individuals were willing to participate in my research, the informality of my research 
methods sometimes meant that it was easy for them to confuse my roles as "researcher" 
and "friend" and perhaps sometimes assume that I was "off-duty". Thus, I sometimes 
checked with people if they were happy for specific pieces of information to be used. 
I also had to take certain steps to ensure my own safety and that my presence or 
research was not perceived as threatening in any way to the authorities or organisations 
I had contact with. I therefore ensured that I had full research permission from the 
Government of Rwanda and a letter of introduction from the Minister of Youth that 
helped me in accessing information and getting meetings with bodies such as the NURC 
and National Youth Council. Although in a few contexts, particular individuals were 
suspicious of me, on the whole, I managed to keep a pretty low profile and had very few 
problems in conducting this research. 70 
70 The one problem I did have came from a completely unexpected source when I was the victim of a ploy to make 
money. Halfway through my fieldwork, I tried to purchase a car to make it easier to get around when I was pregnant. 
There were problems with the documentation, so the owners let me use the car whilst they sorted out the problem. 
After a few months, however, it became clear that they were never in a position to sell me the car and this had merely 
been a ploy to try to get me to pay rent for using the car. When I tried to return the car and said their demands were 
unreasonable, they began to demand ridiculous sums of money, follow me around Kigali and threaten to stop me 
leaving the country. When, finally, they used their contacts to call me to the local brigade (police station) for 
questioning, I reluctantly enlisted the help of the British Embassy. The Embassy took the threats quite seriously, 
asked me to move house and accompanied me to the Brigade. They also liaised with the authorities to ensure I would 
not be stopped at the airport and helped me negotiate a signed agreement and pay a nominal sum to the vehicle 
owners as a goodwill gesture to resolve the matter. In spite of this, the Deputy Ambassador still felt it necessary to 
ensure I got out of Rwanda safely and escorted me through the airport to the steps of the plane and stayed on the roof 
of the airport until we were airborne. Thus, my departure from Rwanda was slightly higher profile than my arrival 
Writing up, introducing and representing my research participants 
When I started to write this thesis, I spent many weeks agonising over how to write it. 
The first challenge was to decide how to structure it. Would it be better to present a 
series of biographies or case studies of a number of individuals to explore my research 
questions through their ideas, narratives and practices? Or would it be better to structure 
the thesis into thematic chapters, weaving in the perspectives of different individuals? 
The advantage of the first approach is that it gives a more coherent picture of each 
individual, how they are situated in contemporary Rwanda and the complexities and 
specificities or their experiences and perspectives. This biographical approach has been 
used by a number of authors as a means to explore wider issues and social processes 
through the lives of a few individuals. For example, Helen Codere (1973) wrote 48 
biographies of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa men and women in Rwanda, exploring wider social 
and cultural changes from 1900 to 1960 through narrating the challenges confronted by 
these individuals in their lives and how they resolved them. Sarah Mirza and Margaret 
Strobel (1989) took this approach a step further by letting three Swahili women from 
Mombasa speak in their own words about their past and present lives, revealing the 
complexity, diversity, and richness of Swahili society and exploring the impacts of 
slavery, colonialism and Western culture. Finally, Pat Caplan (1997) brings together a 
journal, letters, interviews and conversations she had over many years with a particular 
informant Mohammed and intersperses these with her own commentary to explore areas 
such as family conflict, rituals, and spirituality in a village on Mafia Island in Tanzania. 
Critics of this approach argue that such approach may result in a disjointed set of 
materials with no clear arguments and that authors such as Caplan fail to give sufficient 
historical and socio-cultural background to adequately situate these lives in a broader 
context (see for example, Romero 1998). 
The advantage of the second approach is that thematic issues can usually be addressed 
more comprehensively and it can be easier to sustain a coherent argument through the 
thesis. The disadvantages are that it is easy to lose the integrity and complexity of the 
individual characters, and that their experiences and perspectives can become disjointed 
or anecdotal, with the author picking out the material that supports the idea or argument 
being presented. 
A successful compromise is arguably found by Marc Sommers (2001) in his book about 
the clandestine lives of a small group of Burundian refugee tailors who live and work in 
Dar es Salaam, hiding from the Tanzanian authorities and haunted by the events of the 
1972 that took place in Burundi. Sommers manages to create a coherent argument about 
how fear and distrust permeates their worlds and the coping strategies they have 
developed to negotiate their daily lives. Yet Sommers' characters remain intact and we 
get a clear sense of their personal histories, current situation, personalities and 
relationships and how these intersect with and influence the themes he explores. 
This thesis also attempts to steer a middle ground between a biographical and thematic 
approach. Of the 46 people I researched in some depth, I have focused in particular on 
16 individuals whose stories, experiences and perspectives I believe best illustrate the 
complexities and intricacies of young peoples' past experiences, contemporary social 
relations and processes of identification. Some of these individuals were part of wider 
groups I worked with and I therefore also sometimes bring their friends, colleagues or 
family members into the picture or into a discussion of a particular issue. 
I had originally intended to introduce these 16 characters one-by-one in this chapter, but 
decided against this approach as I felt the reader would continually feel the need to refer 
back to these pages and the thesis would lose its narrative flow. By picking out 
particular aspects of their background, experiences or perspectives, there is also a risk of 
pre-empting or prejudicing the ethnographic material that follows. Instead, in the 
chapters that follow, I briefly introduce each individual the first time I discuss his or her 
experiences or perspectives in some detail. I let the reader know the circumstances 
under which I met each person and what I learnt about their situation, experiences and 
views over time. I therefore aim to let their lives unfold to the reader as they unfolded to 
me during my research. At no point, therefore, will the reader find a reductive summary 
of each person's "ethnic", regional or other background when he or she is introduced. 
The purpose of this thesis is to interrogate and problematise these categories, not to take 
them as pre-existing givens. Thus, with time the reader will learn whether and how 
different identities and categories were invoked, assumed or utilised by and about each 
person. As this happens, the reader may realise that he or she had made certain 
assumptions about particular individuals that will be called into question. 
CHAPTER 3: 
YOUNG PEOPLE'S NARRATIVES OF THE PAST: THE ORIGINS OF 
ETHNICITY, CONFLICT AND GENOCIDE IN RWANDA 
This chapter examines young people's narratives about the past - both personal and 
collective. It firstly discusses the politics of history in contemporary Rwanda and, given 
this context, how young people learn about, relate to and talk about the past. It then 
looks at young people's explanations of the origins of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" and of the genesis of "ethnic" conflict and the 1994 genocide. In this respect, it 
compares and contrasts young people's narratives to the discourses or "meta-narratives" 
of political elites, who have repeatedly used history to justify their positions and 
actions. It also looks at young people's narratives about their own experiences, 
examining the relationship between the way people explain Rwanda's past, their 
"ethnic" or other identities and their own personal histories. It reveals that, despite 
assumptions to the contrary, there was no strong "ethnic" patterning to young people's 
narratives. Rather, the way specific individuals related to and accounted for the past was 
varied and implicitly rooted in their own past experiences and current circumstances. 
The politics of history in contemporary Rwanda 
The politics of history and the politics of genocide are very intense [in Rwanda and Burundi]. 
There are competing and often diametrically opposed interpretations of history and events 
between groups, each demanding that observers validate their views and negate all others... 
It is a debate which takes place through emphasis and omission, through the writing and 
rewriting of events and through the manipulation of allegory and myth. It is an intensely 
political debate which aims to win the hearts and minds of both local populations and of 
outsiders. (Jefremovas 2000: p299) 
Rwanda's past is contested terrain. This reflects an awareness among both Rwandans 
and non-Rwandans of the way that history has been and continues to be used to justify 
and explain conflict and violence in Rwanda and to legitimate the power, position and 
policies of incumbent governments. 
7' Competing versions of the past have been a 
constant feature of the political landscape in Rwanda since the colonial period and have 
been deployed by elites at various moments to justify their actions (Newbury 1998: 
pp7-25). These debates about the past have become more intense since the mid-1990s, 
because they have become central to competing explanations of the 1994 genocide. 
71 As Jan Vansina (1998: pp37-44) argues, to a certain extent historical myths are a central part of all political 
ideologies, but they have been used with particular virulence in central Africa, especially since the colonial period. 
Shortly after taking power in 1994, the RPF-led Government embarked on a campaign 
to re-educate Rwandans (and outsiders) about Rwanda's past and the role that "ethnic" 
and other "divisions" played in the violence and genocide. To this end, the Government 
produced a new historical narrative of the genesis of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" and the origins of conflict between them. In contrast to the version of history that 
dominated under the previous regime and emphasized the different origins, 
characteristics and history of conflict between these groups (Rutembesa 2002: p83), this 
"RPF version" of history (Pottier 2002: pp 109-129) claimed that the "ethnic" character 
of these groups was not Rwandan, but was constructed by European colonialism. 
declared that pre-colonial Rwandan society had been devoid of "ethnic" divisions and 
that the terms "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" had been related to socio-economic status, 73 
but that when the Europeans arrived and applied their racist ideologies, they divided 
Rwandans into three distinct "ethnic" categories and prevented further mobility between 
groups. 74 It then claimed that the colonial powers helped the Hutu elite to remove the 
Tutsi elite from power and that the accompanying violence was the beginning of a 
period of constant persecution of the Tutsi. The 1994 genocide is therefore portrayed as 
the result of a longstanding ideology of "ethnic" division and "anti-Tutsi" prejudice, 
which had existed at all levels of society from national politics to school classrooms. 
The Government has argued that establishing the "truth" about Rwanda's past is 
essential to "unify" and reconcile Rwandans (see also chapter 7) - an argument that is 
common in the aftermath of violent conflict, especially identity-based conflicts where a 
new collective identity is often promoted to replace the competing group identities of 
the past (Buckley-Zistel 2009: pp32-33; Freedman et al 2008: p666). Despite this 
laudable goal, however, the past is inevitably "narrated in a way that secures the new 
government's position, absolves it from all responsibility for past crimes and aims to 
create a society which can be governed according to its intentions" (Buckley-Zistel 
72 See also Buckley-Zistel (2009: pp33-38) for a more detailed overview of the RPF-dominated Government's 
narratives of history. 
73 The following statement in a report by the Government's National Unity and Reconciliation Commission is 
typical: "Ethnic groups, Hutu, Tutsi and Twa characterised wealth or poverty; they were not based on blood. One 
could shift from being a Twa or a Hutu and 
become a Tutsi if he got rich. If he became poor while he was Tutsi; he 
was called a Hutu or Twa. " (NURC 
2000: 19) 
74 pottier (2002: pp109-129) argues that the dominant RPF narrative recycled and greatly simplified the classic 
functionalist ethnography of Jacques Maquet (1961) and rejected postcolonial Belgian scholarship (e. g. de Heusch 
1966) that put together a very different picture of socio-economic inequality in pre-colonial Rwanda and confirmed 
the existence of significant ethnic differences before the arrival of the Germans. Over time the current political elite's 
version of history has 
become more nuanced, but is still contested by many commentators, who argue that it doesn't 
correspond with evidence 
from the past (e. g. Newbury 1998, Pottier 2002). 
2009: p3 1). As a result, in Rwanda as elsewhere, the Government's narrative - termed 
the "RPF" meta-narrative from here onwards - has been and continues to be contested 
by various "opposition" narratives and debates about history continue, as they are also 
contemporary struggles over power, legitimacy and the nature of state and society. 
This is perhaps best illustrated in Nigel Eltringham's (2004) detailed examination of 
how opposing Rwandan elites in Rwanda and Europe "account" differently for past 
violence in Rwanda. 75 He demonstrates that both groups consistently "appeal to history" 
to explain and, in some cases, justify various episodes of violence including the 1994 
genocide (p147). His analysis of their narratives of Rwanda's past shows that the key 
points of divergence centred on the importance of "ethnicity" in the pre-colonial period, 
whether the colonial powers created or exacerbated "ethnic" divisions and the nature of 
the 1959 Rwandan "revolution". 76 Eltringham shows, however, that the main debate is 
not about whether, but about the degree to which, colonialism accentuated and distorted 
existing social distinction in Rwanda (see chapter 1). All his respondents agreed that the 
terms "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" existed in Rwanda prior to colonialism, but the 
disagreement was about the relationship between these groups - how exploitative it was 
- and whether the categories were socioeconomic or "ethnic" in nature. 
Eltringham's "Europe" group of interviewees (exiles including many members of the 
former political and intellectual elite under Habyarimana77) asserted that the Tutsi 
originated outside Rwanda and conquered the country several centuries ago, gradually 
imposing an oppressive regime on the Hutu. Thus, they argue that the colonial powers 
then exacerbated and intensified divisions that already existed. By contrast, the 
"Rwanda" group (government officials and pro-government elites i. e. pro-RPF) argued 
that in the pre-colonial period, the three groups lived in relative harmony and were akin 
to socio-economic groups where changes in status were a feature of society until the 
colonial powers imposed their "ethnic" ideology and ended social mobility, dividing 
Rwandans on "ethnic" lines and triggering the tensions and violence that were to follow 
(i. e. akin to the "RPF" meta-narrative described above). 
75 Eltringham conducted interviews in Rwanda in 1998 and in Europe in 1999. 
76 As Catherine Newbury (1998: pp9-14) notes, these recent debates largely mirror those of the 1950s. 
77 Juvenal Habyarimana was President of Rwanda from 1973, when he came to power via a coup, to 6 April 1994, 
when he was killed when his plane was shot down, a key trigger for the genocide. 
Eltringham (2004: pp164-165) shows that this subtle disagreement between his 
respondents is relevant as it relates to the level of blame or co-responsibility attributable 
to the Tutsi for "ethnically-based" oppression of the Hutu during the colonial period. 
Were the Tutsi elite "unwilling victims of absurd racial fantasies" or did they 
"voluntarily" collaborate with the Belgians in the oppression of the Hutu? Depending 
on how this question is answered, the events of 1959 onwards can be described in quite 
different ways. For example, for the Europe group, despite acknowledged assistance 
from the Belgian powers, the events of 1959 clearly constituted a "revolution" in which 
a collaborating, oppressive Tutsi elite was legitimately removed from power according 
to "democratic" principles and social justice. For the Rwanda group, the Tutsi elite was 
violently removed in a Belgian plan to obstruct democratisation and the Hutu elite 
played an active part in the indiscriminate targeting of Tutsis in 1959-61, which marked 
the first "genocide" in Rwanda (pp171-174). 
Thereafter, the period from 1959 to the 1990s is viewed as consequential. Either there 
was a persistent, even if sometimes dormant, "genocidal project" of constant 
persecution and attack against "the Tutsi" culminating in 1994 (Rwanda group). Or, it 
was a relatively calm period where Tutsis who remained were integrated, marred only 
by attacks by exiled Tutsis who were intent on overthrowing the gains of the revolution 
and taking power by force, and then "wrong reactions" to this threat by a minority of 
Hutu extremists, including violence against a "minority of Tutsi", at least until 1994 
(Europe group). On the basis of his interviews, Eltringham tentatively identifies two 
alternative "meta-narratives"78 which "account for" (both in terms of explaining and 
giving a processual narrative) the 1994 genocide: 
"Europe": A Tutsi elite was co-responsible for crystallising ethnic division - the revolution 
was a legitimate attempt to reverse this - again the Tutsi elite are co-responsible for derailing 
this project with their attack in 1963 - this division was exploited by a minority of Hutu -a 
minority that would eventually commit the 1994 genocide. 
"Rwanda": Tutsi are victims: of Belgian indirect rule; of Belgian opposition to independence; 
and of violence orchestrated by a Hutu elite. (Eltringham 2004: p 178) 
78 In practice, a "meta-narrative" might best be described as a collection of overlapping narratives with the same 
overall sense and components rather than a singular, uniform narrative. 
Whilst Eltringham explicitly avoids attaching ethnic labels to each group, 79 it is clear 
that the majority of the "Europe" exiles he interviewed would have been Hutus and the 
majority of the "Rwanda" elites Tutsis. 80 Other authors more explicitly assert the 
existence of alternative "Hutu" and "Tutsi" narratives of Rwandan history. For 
example, Mahmood Mamdani (2001: p267) states that "[h]istory in Rwanda comes in 
two versions: Hutu and Tutsi". Similarly, referring to narratives about the origins and 
genesis of Rwanda's "ethnic" groups, Peter Uvin argues: 
What could be called the official Hutu discourse (the one that was employed in the genocide 
and is widely accepted by Hutu radicals until now) is what Western scientists would call an 
essentialist one. The Hutu and the Tutsi are radically different people (in local parlance, 
races), with different origins, different histories, and... different moral and ethical features. 
The counter discourse (which is the official one of the current Tutsi-dominated, 
postgenocidal government) is purely social-constructivist. It asserts that the distinctions 
between Hutu and Tutsi are the products of the colonial imagination and associated divide- 
and-rule policies. (Uvin 2001: p76) 
Catherine Newbury (1998) also outlines two contrasting versions of the Rwandan 
"revolution" and the importance of "ethnicity" in Rwanda's pre-colonial and colonial 
past. She says that the first version (akin to the narratives of Eltringham's "Rwanda" 
group) "tend[s] to be advanced by those wishing to rationalize rule by Tutsis" and the 
second version (akin to those of the "Europe" group) is "more characteristic of power 
holders in the Hutu-dominated governments that ruled Rwanda from 1961 until 1994" 
(plO). Thus, Newbury implies that these narratives are primarily propagated by Tutsi 
and Hutu elites respectively, but allows for the possibility that some members of the 
opposing group may express a different view. 
The alternative "Hutu" and "Tutsi" versions of history to which these authors refer, 
however, are the discourses of political elites, not the wider Rwandan population. There 
has been very little research looking at how "ordinary" Rwandans explain and account 
for Rwanda's pasts 1 and the evidence presented by existing studies is quite limited. For 
79 Eltringham (2004: p163) states that this is for two key reasons: (i) He wishes to stress that each group is not 
monolithic but a selection of individuals who recount similar narratives with somewhat formulaic qualities; (ii) 
Although the vast majority of the "Europe" exiles he interviewed were almost certainly Hutu and the "Rwanda" elites 
Tutsi, it is possible this wasn't exclusively the case. For example, Eltringham points out that Hutus in the then 
Rwandan Government interpreted the past differently than Hutu exiles. As Eltringham didn't ask for or often didn't 
find out the individual ethnic identity of his respondents, he couldn't know for sure how they identified themselves. 
8 As discussed, Eltringham's "Europe" group was primarily composed of the pre-1994 political and intellectual elite, 
which was almost exclusively composed of Hutus. His "Rwanda" group consisted of government officials and pro- 
overnment elites, a group that is heavily dominated by Tutsis but includes some Hutus (see Reyntjens 2004). 
" Although it should be noted that many testimonies include explanations about what happened and why (e. g. 
Hatzfeld 2001 and 2003). 
example, 82 in their study of "popular narratives" of memory in Rwanda, Timothy 
Longman and Theoneste Rutagengwa (2004: p 170) state that amongst those Rwandans 
interviewed, "the Tutsi survivors of the genocide held a substantially different view of 
the genocide than that of others, especially Hutu". 83 In practice, however, they present 
limited evidence to back up this statement beyond discussing the different terms the 
Hutus and Tutsis they interviewed used to describe the events of 1994. 84 85 
The rest of this chapter therefore considers how the young Rwandans I interviewed 
talked about the past, given the wider political context in which discussions about 
ethnicity and history are sensitive. Are there alternative and clearly delineated "Hutu" 
and "Tutsi" versions of history circulating amongst "ordinary" young Rwandans today, 
as there seem to be between elites? Or, as Rene Lemarchand (2007: p2) suggests, 
although the past tends to be seen through a different ethnic lens, are there also major 
differences among Hutus and Tutsis in the way in which it is remembered or forgotten? 
What is the relationship between the narratives young Rwandans tell about Rwanda's 
collective past and their own individual experiences and histories? 
The place of the past in the lives of young Rwandans today 
In early 1995, within a year of taking power, the RPF-led Government imposed a 
moratorium on history teaching in schools arguing that previous history lessons were 
biased and propagated negative stereotypes of the "minority" Tutsi as foreigners and 
enemies of the Republic and the "majority" Hutu as the victims of Tutsi injustice 
(Rutembesa 2002: p83). As of late 2005 when I completed my fieldwork, there had 
been no history lessons in Rwandan state schools since 1994, although lessons were due 
to start again after a Government-led project finally succeeded in developing a_ new 
12 Another example is the research conducted by the Rwandan Institute of Research and Dialogue for Peace (2003), 
which used participatory research methods to discuss a range of issues with ordinary Rwandans (They interviewed 
four groups from different cells in two districts of each of Rwanda's then 12 provinces. There were 25-30 participants 
in each group chosen to be representative by gender, age, ethnicity and education level and experience (IRDP 2003: 
pp14-16)), including the role of history in conflicts in Rwanda and explanations of the genocide. Whilst the synthesis 
of this research is insightful, it is difficult to ascertain which groups of Rwandans expressed which viewpoints. 
83 Longman and Rutagengwa conducted research in three communes - one each in Kibuye, Butare and Byumba 
provinces. In each commune, they conducted interviews with 25-35 individuals plus focus groups with genocide 
survivors, women, youth and older adults (104 in total across three communes). 
84 As noted in chapter 2, it is also not clear exactly how Longman and Rutagengwa placed their respondents into the 
categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa". 
85 They say that genocide survivors almost universally invoked the Kinyarwanda term used by the post-1994 
Government and survivor organisations for "genocide" (itsemba bwoko); whereas Hutu were more likely to refer to 
"the war" (intambara), "the killings" (ubwicanyi), "the happenings" (ibyabaye), "the tragedy" (amahono) or "the 
massacres" in general (itsemba tsemba). 
history curriculum. 86 Thus, with a couple of exceptions, 87 the youngest of my research 
participants (i. e. those aged 15 to around 21 when I interviewed them), who grew up in 
Rwanda and were too young to go to school before the genocide or had only done a few 
years of primary schooling, had received no history lessons at school. Nonetheless, 
many had leant selected elements of Rwandan history through civic education lessons, 
which began in the late 1990s and are now part of the curriculum. 88 
The oldest of my research participants (i. e. those aged 25 or above), who grew up in 
Rwanda and were already teenagers before the genocide, remember being taught history 
at school before 1994. A few commented that the history they had been taught was very 
different from the history that has been disseminated by RPF-led Governments since 
1994. For example, Aime described what he learned before 1994, which (as expected) is 
very close to the narrative of Eltringham's "Europe" group of pre-1994 elites (termed 
the "opposition" narratives from this point forwards): 
We learnt that after the Tutsis arrived in Rwanda, the country suffered 400 years of Tutsi 
monarchy, but before there used to be Hutu monarchies; that the Tutsis arrived with lots of 
cows and began to exchange their cows for land, until they had got their hands on all the 
land. Then the Hutus had to work for the Tutsis, give their physical labour in return for a 
house, food and everything; that little by little, Hutus became the slaves of Tutsis. The Tutsis 
had the kingdom and Hutus were often killed... Then in 1959, there was the social 
revolution. The Hutus had had enough of slavery and mobilised to revolt against the kingdom 
and re-establish a Rwanda for the Hutus as it was before. Then after 1959, Rwanda was again 
for the Hutus. That's what we learnt at school.., and for people in the countryside who didn't 
go to school they nonetheless learnt a similar history at home. (Aime, b. 1975 in Rwanda) 
As Aime suggests, however, school history lessons were only one of a number of 
channels through which my young research participants learnt about the past. Some said 
they had learned something about Rwanda's past from their parents, family relations or 
from members of their community. For example: 
My grandfather explained to me that before colonialism, Rwandans lived together and the 
differences were mostly ones of wealth. (Alphonse, b. 1970 in Zaire) 
86 In 2003, the Government launched an Education for Reconciliation project. A group of national and international 
experts (Including the NGO Facing History, UC Berkley's School of Education and Human Rights Centre and the 
National University of Rwanda) was asked to work with Rwandan educators and assist the Ministry of Education in 
developing a new post-genocide history curriculum. After a series of publications and workshops and the 
development of a resource book (Ministry of Education, Technology and Scientific Research (2006) The Teaching of 
History of Rwanda. A Participatory Approach), Rwandan teachers received training in the new curriculum in 2006, 
however, at the time of writing history teaching had still not yet been officially re-launched. 
87 A couple of my interviewees had been taught a limited amount of Rwandan history at their private schools, 
focusing on apparently less controversial issues like the pre-colonial secession of kings. Buckley-Zistel (2009: pp42- 
43) also suggests that some children have been taught limited amounts of history at state schools in spite of the ban. 
88 Interview with John Rutayisire, Director of National Curriculum Development, October 2004 
Many of the youngest among my respondents said, however, that they knew little if 
anything about "ethnicity" or "ethnic" conflict in Rwanda until the civil war of the 
1990s. Those "returnees"89 who spent their early years outside Rwanda did not learn 
about Rwanda at school in their countries of exile and in most cases their parents had 
told them little aside from the fact that they were Rwandan and their families had left 
Rwanda in the past. 90 Like those born in Rwanda, however, once the civil war began, 
their parents had begun to talk to them about Rwanda's past and the reason for the war. 
Since 1994, despite the ban of history teaching, the Government has worked hard to 
disseminate its historical narrative inside Rwanda via official speeches, 91 interviews on 
television and radio, newspaper editorials, conferences, government policy documents92 
and the work of the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission (NURC). 93 
Although only a few of my research participants made direct reference to things they 
heard on the radio or read in the newspaper, there was little doubt that they had 
indirectly absorbed some of the key ideas propagated by the Government, especially 
concerning the "crimes" of "divisionism" and "genocide ideology" (see chapter 7). 
Some Rwandans have also received lessons on Rwandan history during their attendance 
at the Ingando "solidarity" camps94 (Buckley-Zistel 2009: pp43-44). One of my 
research participants spent three months at an Ingando and kept a detailed diary of his 
experiences including the content of lessons, discussions and training. There were 
several sessions on Rwandan history and politics where the content was very close to 
the "RPF" meta-narrative described above, which asserted pre-colonial unity and 
blamed ethnic divisions on colonialism (see also PRI 2004a). 
89 "Returnees" refers to those Rwandans who grew up or spent many years in exile outside Rwanda and returned to 
Rwanda after the RPF victory in July 1994. As chapter 6 discusses, however, in reality many of the young Rwandans 
I interviewed had never set foot in Rwanda before 1994, so "arrival" was a more apt term that "return". 
90 Although some of those who grew up in Burundi described learning about "ethnicity" or Rwanda's history of 
"ethnic" conflict when they were quite young due to the problems and conflict between Hutus and Tutsis that they 
encountered in Burundi, especially in Bujumbura in the early 1990s. 
91 For example, see President Kagame's speech during the commemorations of the tenth anniversary of the genocide 
in 2004, when he stated, "In many ways the genocide in Rwanda stems from the colonial period, when the 
colonialists and those who called themselves the evangelist sowed the seeds of hate and division" (Kagame 2004). 
92 See for example, Republic of Rwanda Office of the President (1999) The Unity of Rwandans 
93 NURC documents often contain lengthy explanations of Rwandan history, which adhere closely to the "RPF 
version" of history discussed above. 
94 Ingando "solidarity" or "re-education" camps were introduced in 1996 and originally targeted at ex-combatants as 
part of their "re-integration". Since this time, they have been compulsory for ex-prisoners, returnees, demobilised 
soldiers and state-funded university students and a number of other groups such as informal traders, disabled people 
and university lecturers have also been sent to the camps. The ingandos are usually between 3 weeks and 2 months 
and are military style camps where participants receive a mix of physical training and civic education lessons about 
Rwanda on five topics: Topics are covered under five central themes: analysis of Rwanda's problems; history of 
Rwanda; political and socioeconomic issues in Rwanda and Africa, rights, obligations and duties and leadership (see 
htm //www. nurc. eov. rw/index. nhn? option=com content&view =article&id=50&Itemid=l 2) (accessed 27/08/2008). 
In many ways, the past is omnipresent in Rwanda today - or more precisely, some 
elements of the past. In 2004-2005, it was rare to listen to or read the news without at 
least one reference to the events and consequences of the genocide. A new genocide 
museum The Kigali Memorial Centre opened in 2004, adding to the numerous other 
memorial sites around the country. There is also an annual ceremony to commemorate 
the genocide and a national week of mourning with limitations on social events, the 
playing of music and working hours, and a variety of organised activities including 
marches, the exhumation of mass graves and reburials. Pilot gacaca trials began in 2002 
and the countrywide process was launched in January 2005. These will also focus on 
the past through taking evidence about local events during the genocide. These public 
processes all recall and reinterpret the past in different ways, emphasising certain events 
and readings and de-emphasising others (as chapter 7 discusses in more depth). 
(Not) talking about the past 
I discussed the past with all the young people whose lives I researched during my two 
years of fieldwork in Kigali. My questions concerned their understandings of the past; 
when, how and from whom they had learnt about the past; and their explanations of the 
origins of ethnicity, conflict and genocide in Rwanda. I also asked young people about 
their personal pasts and what they had experienced growing up inside or outside 
Rwanda. Although, in time, all my research participants told me something about their 
personal histories as well as past events in Rwanda, some were clearly reluctant to talk 
too much about the past. There seemed to be three main reasons for this. Firstly, some 
young people explicitly expressed their wish to move on from their own and Rwanda's 
traumatic past and to focus instead on the future: 
The problem is that many of the older generation are looking backwards and are not able to 
look forward to the future. We can't always concentrate on the war and events of 1994, we 
need to think about the future, how we are going to develop the country and ourselves. 
(Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
Secondly, many of my informants were acutely aware of the controversial nature of 
Rwanda's past and expressed their disillusionment. Some spoke explicitly about the 
existence of competing histories of Rwanda and about the way the past is manipulated: 
In the [Ingando] camp, they told us that the colonists brought all that to Rwanda, that they 
tried to divide the Rwandans to rule them.., that it was them that imported all these ideas of 
difference and that they were just social classes beforehand where the rich people were Tutsis 
and you could become Tutsi if you became rich... My parents never spoke about that when I 
was young, but at school we learnt something else - that the Tutsis had come from outside to 
take the country to rule the Hutus and that they had taken the land from Hutus and forced 
them to work for them... and then the Hutus mounted a revolution to end that. (Emmanuel, b. 
1981 in Rwanda) 
History is very politicised. Each government in power propagates their own version of the 
past that suits their interests. The history that was taught before the war by Habyarimana's 
regime is not at all the same history that the RPF tells today. It's too politicised and used to 
justify killings. (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
Thirdly, many of my informants appeared to be fearful of expressing their views about 
Rwanda's past or relating their own experiences, as they felt that this would locate them 
in terms of their political views and/or "ethnic" identity and potentially create problems. 
This was particularly the case in group contexts, when young Rwandans were especially 
reluctant to speak about the past. I quickly learnt that many young Rwandans avoid 
engaging in any form of discussion about the past - whether personal or collective - 
with their peers. In some cases, young people said that they were concerned that 
invoking past events might traumatise another95 or create conflict - especially in a 
group of friends with different ethnic backgrounds, for example in Rose's group: 
Sometimes, we have spoken of our experiences during the events, but very little... but we 
can't talk about the causes of all that, because we can't agree and it will create a problem for 
our friendship... I think it's better to concentrate on the things we have in common. We can't 
always think in the past. We shouldn't forget, but we must try to live the life we have now 
and do our best. (Rose, b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
In most cases, however, young people's reluctance to talk about Rwanda's past, their 
family history or past experiences was due to their fear that others would jump to 
conclusions about their "ethnic" identity or political views. For example, when I was 
first introduced to Theogene by Aimable, another young man in his neighbourhood, 
Theogene told me that he grew up in the neighbourhood and, without prompting, added: 
I am a survivor. I was outside Kigali with my younger and older sisters to visit my family for 
Easter when the genocide took place. My parents and other brothers and sisters were killed 
here in [the neighbourhood], but me and the others, we survived. We were hidden by others 
and afterwards, we returned to live here in our family house (TheogBne, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
Yet when we met a few days later, Theogene apologised: 
I must apologise for the other day and what I said in front of Aimable - that my parents were 
killed during the genocide by the ex-FAR. Nobody here in Rwanda will tell you their parents 
were killed by the RPF. They will all say that it was by the ex-FAR and during the genocide. 
But in reality, my parents were killed here by the RPF. I'm sorry, but I couldn't tell you all of 
this in front of him - Aimable - the FARG96 guy. 
95 Recurrent trauma was still a significant problem in Rwanda. During my fieldwork, I witnessed two cases of trauma 
triggered by reminders of the past. See case of Aisha later in this chapter. 
96 Here, Theogene like many others, is likely to be using "FARG" as a euphemism for "Tutsi" survivor. 
I later found out why Theogene was reluctant to reveal his past to others: 
Nobody talks about [their past experiences]. Because if you speak to someone about that and 
he discovers that you aren't of his ethnic group, you become his enemy and we don't want 
that to happen. So we prefer to avoid talking about that... if I tell a Tutsi that my parents 
were killed by the RPF, he will immediately think that I am Hutu and he knows that the Hutu 
killed his family. Therefore, I become his enemy straight away. The problem here in Rwanda 
is that we always generalise. If I am Hutu, I am his enemy. 
Unfortunately, I discovered that Theogene's fears were not unfounded. Many young 
Rwandans regularly made assumptions about a person's "ethnic" identity based on what 
they knew about their personal history - for example, whether they were a survivor of 
the genocide, lived in the camps in Zaire following the genocide or "returned" from 
exile after the RPF victory (see chapter 4). Equally, the views people expressed about 
the past were often used as shorthand for their "ethnic" identity i. e. if a person was 
known or believed to be Hutu, it was usually assumed he or she held a particular "Hutu" 
view of past and present events and vice versa. Thus, it was widely assumed that - as 
for the political elites discussed earlier - the historical narratives related by ordinary 
Rwandans about the past would be determined by their ethnic identity. 
Young people's narratives of the origins of "ethnicity" 
As discussed in chapter 2, I never asked any of my research participants directly about 
"ethnicity" or their own "ethnic" identity. Instead, as I talked to each person about 
different aspects of their current lives, past experiences and views about reconciliation 
in Rwanda, I waited to see whether, when and how they talked about "ethnicity" or 
mentioned the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" or "Twa". Over time, as the level of trust 
developed, the issue of "ethnicity" always emerged and every young person referred to 
his or her own "ethnic" identity at some point. There were three main ways in which 
"ethnicity" first emerged during our conversations: (i) During discussions about the 
genocide when young people often used their "ethnic" identity as an explanatory factor 
in their narratives about the past, what they had experienced and the actions they had 
taken; (ii) in relation to the reconciliation process, which was commonly described in 
inter-"ethnic" terms as a process of rapprochement between "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi"; 
and (iii) when discussing the impacts of specific initiatives such as the gacaca, 
memorial sites and the FARG. Once the subject of "ethnicity" had been broached, I 
usually found that young people were more comfortable discussing it in more depth, 
either of their own accord or in response to my questions about the past and present. 
In terms of their understanding of these groups my research participants - almost 
without exception - used the terms "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" interchangeably with the 
French "ethnie " (ethnic group) and the Kinyarwanda "ubwoko" (meaning "type" or 
"species" and originally used to refer to clans, but now commonly understood as "ethnic 
group"), which were the terms written on identity cards before 1994. Some young 
people also referred to these groups as "tribus" (tribes) or "races" (races), not appearing 
to make a distinction between these terms and the term "ethnic group". 97 Apparent 
consensus on terminology, however, obscured substantial variance when young people 
commented directly on the differences between or origins of these groups. 
The origins of the groups Hutu Tutsi and Twa 
When young people spoke to me about the meaning of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa", this was frequently articulated as a discussion about the origins of these groups. 
This suggests that for many young Rwandans - as for political elites - the meaning of 
"ethnicity" is implicitly linked to the past and is explained by reference to past events. 
The most common perspective among my respondents was that the colonial power was 
responsible for creating "ethnicity" and fostering "ethnic" divisions in Rwanda: 
We learnt that before in Rwanda, it was wealth that counted. A Tutsi was someone who was 
rich and had lots of cows, but the Hutu had fewer cows and the Twa hunted. They lived like 
that together. Then when the white people arrived... [t]hey had to find a way to govern 
[Rwandans], so they divided them to rule them. They started to categorise people by their 
physical appearance - like their noses - and they said the Tutsis were the most intelligent and 
beautiful people (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda). 
They were never really ethnic groups. In ancient Rwanda, Hutu, Tutsi or Twa didn't count. 
Rwandans had clans like the abasinga, abasindi, abanyiginya... in all the regions and clans 
there were Hutu, Tutsi and Twa together. Tutsis were the people who were wealthiest in 
cows... and the people who ruled - the chiefs and also the kings. The middle people who 
cultivated and had fewer cows were the Hutus and the very poor people, the Twas. But 
people lived together like that. They accepted the system of being ruled by the king and the 
Tutsis. Then the white people arrived and saw Rwanda was well organised and the system 
worked well. They wondered how they could govern this country where the population 
already had leaders they accepted... They saw there was already some separation among the 
Rwandans between the richest and the others, between the Tutsis and Hutus, so they decided 
to use this to divide people. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Beforehand, Tutsi, Hutu and Twa didn't exist here in Rwanda... But then the colonists came 
and said that all Rwandans that had more than 10 cows were the Tutsis and all Rwandans 
with less than 10 cows were the Hutus, and the others who didn't have any cows - only goats 
- were the Twa. 
(Valerie, b. 1987 in Zaire) 
97 Indeed, as Eriksen (2002: p6) points out, although there is an extensive academic literature debating the 
relationship between the concepts of "ethnicity" and "race", in many empirical situations this distinction is difficult to 
maintain and there is no reason to think that "ethnicity" is any more benign than "race". 
These perspectives are fairly representative of the narratives (or part-narratives) of 22 of 
the 37 people who spoke about the meaning and origins of Rwanda's "ethnic" groups. 
Most of these young people, including Consolee and Aisha, said that although the terms 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" had existed in the pre-colonial period, these groups were 
akin to socio-economic classes or occupational categories with wealth or ownership in 
cows being the key distinguishing factor. Others, such as Valerie, maintained that there 
were no differences between Rwandans in the pre-colonial period and that the terms 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" did not exist at all, but were invented by the European 
colonial powers. All these young people concurred, however, that it was the colonial 
authorities who began to distinguish Rwandans on an "ethnic" basis as a strategy to 
"divide and rule" them. The most common view was that this was done on the basis of 
physical appearance (height, size and shape of the nose, physical beauty) with a few 
young people, like Valerie, saying that Rwandans were categorised based on their 
ownership of cows. 98 
Although individual narratives often varied considerably in their level of detail and 
coherence, the predominance of this perspective (i. e. that pre-colonial Rwanda was 
harmonious and that the colonial authorities were responsible for creating "ethnicity" in 
Rwanda) among my informants seems to suggest that the "RPF" meta-narrative of 
history has significantly influenced the views of the younger generation. This view was 
particularly dominant among my youngest informants who were small children (under 
11) prior to 1994 - and likely had limited exposure to the main "opposition" meta- 
narrative of history propagated by the former regime. 
Although fewer in number, several young people related narratives (or part-narratives) 
that coincided with elements of this "opposition" meta-narrative. These narratives were 
generally most common amongst the older youth (over 11 in 1994) who grew up in 
Rwanda and were more likely to have been exposed to this "opposition" version of 
history before 1994. For example: 
According to what I read, beforehand, there were three different tribes. The Twa were here 
fast and were hunter-gatherers; then the Hutu arrived and were farmers... And then the 
Tutsis came from Ethiopia with their cows and needed land and a place to stay. They were 
98 Several young people referred to what Pottier (2002 pp 116-118) terms the "10-cows soundbite". Pottier discusses 
how RPF leaders successfully disseminated this "easy-to-grasp" soundbite, particularly in the Anglophone world. 
Indeed, I remember it well from my time as a EU diplomat on the Great Lakes region in 1998-1999 As Tharcisse 
Gatwa (1998: p84) points out, however, there were unlikely to have been enough cows in Rwanda in 1933 for this 
rule to apply and in practice church records and physical measurements were used. 
cunning and at first they showed kindness by giving their cows and daughters. But then they 
managed to take the power and they founded the Tutsi monarchy and the Hutus worked for 
them... So they were different tribes. Like an Algerian isn't like an Eritrean and in running, a 
Cameroonian and a Kenyan don't run the same way - one is good at long distance and the 
other is good at sprinting. It's because of their constitution. (Faustin, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
When there was still a king in Rwanda, before the colonists arrived. The Tutsis ruled the 
country and the Hutus were often beaten and forced to work as domestic slaves for the 
Tutsis... When the colonists arrived, they also favoured the Tutsis for work and education. 
But later, when the king was killed in Burundi, it was suspected white people had done it and 
the Tutsis started to fight for independence. The colonists then started to talk to the Hutus to 
encourage them to do something as the majority who was treated badly. The Hutus started the 
insurrection - helped by the colonists - and they won. Then in 1959,1963 and 1973, they 
killed Tutsis to avenge the past. That's how conflict began between the two ethnic groups... 
(Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
As demonstrated by these two narratives, among this cluster of narratives, most 
common was the idea that the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" had separate racial or 
geographical origins, arriving in Rwanda at different points in the past and then that the 
Tutsi established a monarchy and ruled Rwanda. These young people stressed that the 
colonial power then continued to favour "the Tutsi" for many years before switching 
allegiances to "the Hutu" and supporting their "revolution". 
Although the two different clusters of narratives described above seem to cohere quite 
closely with the alternative "RPF" and "opposition" meta-narratives discussed by 
Eltringham, Pottier and others, there was no straightforward correspondence between 
the identity of those young people who gave these accounts and the content of their 
narratives. For example, although 14 of the 24 people who gave an explanation of the 
origins of ethnicity that broadly corresponded with the "RPF" meta-narrative identified 
themselves as "Tutsi", the other 10 identified themselves as being of "Hutu" or "mixed" 
heritage. Equally, whilst most of the young people who gave an explanation more in 
line with the "opposition" meta-narrative identified themselves as being of "Hutu" or 
"mixed" ethnic heritage, again this was not exclusively the case. 
Furthermore, more than half of young people's narratives about the meaning or origins 
of Rwanda's "ethnic" groups diverged from these dominant meta-narratives at one or 
more points or included completely different explanations. For example, some young 
people appeared to mix elements of both meta-narratives, weaving them together in 
more or less coherent ways: 
It's said that three tribes arrived in Rwanda at different moments. Firstly, the abatwa, who 
were potters and good hunters; then the abahutu from central Africa who were cultivators; 
then 400 years ago, the Tutsis came from Ethiopia or Somalia and they were pastoralists 
wealthy in cows. The cow was very special and Hutus wanted to obtain cows. The only 
means was to find a patron and give labour in exchange. So, they did this and in this way, 
many Hutus became rich in cows and thus, also became Tutsis. Also, Tutsis who didn't have 
cows and cultivated became Hutus. So, there was movement between the ethnic groups and 
they lived like that, but without many problems. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
Here Didier suggests that Rwanda's groups were originally different "tribes" (a key 
feature of the "opposition" meta-narrative), but subsequently discusses how individuals 
could move between groups in the pre-colonial period (a claim which fits more closely 
with the "RPF" meta-narrative about pre-colonial social mobility). 99 
In other cases, young people's accounts suddenly diverged altogether from either of the 
dominant narratives. For example, following Aisha's account (above), she continued: 
Then [the white people] saw that the rich people were taller and slimmer and so they said the 
Tutsis were a different race. They invented stories to justify that. They said the Hutus 
resembled people from Chad and were from there, the Tutsis resembled people from Ethiopia 
and originated there and the Twa were the autochthones. Rwandans believed the Belgians as 
they had brought some good things to the country like hospitals, chocolate and bread. So they 
adopted those ideas. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
When I asked Aisha how the rich people who raised cattle were coincidentally also 
those who were tall and slim, she gave a response, which, although diverging from the 
"RPF" meta-narrative, nonetheless maintained the internal consistency of her account: 
It depends on what people eat and from which region they are. Like the Maasai in Tanzania 
and the Bakuyus in Uganda - the people who live in forests and drink milk have a different 
physique. Here, if you look at the cattle herders from Umutara, from the forest, they have a 
very different physique than people from other regions. Today does a Tutsi from Byumba 
resemble a Tutsi from Ruhengeri? No, they are very different. People from Ruhengeri are 
very short and it's easy to mistake their identity... (Aisha, b. 191 in Rwanda) 
Of all the narratives related about the origins of ethnicity, it was perhaps Fidele's 
explanation that appeared to diverge most from the dominant meta-narratives: 
In ancient times, there was a region in Uganda called `Tutsi' and people from there were 
called the `abaTutsi'. That's what `Batutsi' means - people from `Tutsi'. They were 
from a 
region where people herded cattle and came to live in Rwanda with their cows. There was 
also another region in Uganda called `Hutu' where people were called the `abahutu'. They 
were farmers who also came to live in Rwanda. Then these names spread in Rwanda and 
those who were cattle-herders were the Tutsis and the farmers were the Hutus. In general, it 
was the Tutsis who were the wealthiest and they started to rule the others. The Hutus worked 
for the Tutsis and the Tutsis were the kings but the Hutus accepted to be ruled by the 
Tutsis... (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
99 Similarly, Catherine Newbury (1998: plO) points out that at times, hardliners from both groups have accepted the 
myth that Tutsis and Hutus were from 
different racial stock and different origins i. e. that Tutsi hardliners have also 
spoken about the separate "racial" origins or Hutus and Tutsis, even if the rest of their explanation then accords with 
the current "RPF version" of history. 
Fidele gives support to the idea of separate regional (and "ethnic") origins of Hutus and 
Tutsis (in line with the "opposition" meta-narrative), although his story about their 
origins in Uganda does not resemble anything I have ever encountered before. 
Nonetheless, the latter part of his narrative about Hutu acceptance of Tutsi rule accords 
with the "RPF" meta-narrative. Yet, his subsequent explanation of the origins of 
conflict, appears again to mix different ideas and explanations: 
When the colonists arrived, they started to apply their ideas of categorising people. They 
found that the people who ruled and were the wealthiest were taller, slimmed and finer- 
featured with long noses etc. So they categorised these people as Tutsis and the others as 
Hutus. Then they encouraged the Hutus to think the Tutsis mistreated them, that they were 
slaves and had to chase the rich people from the country. It's for this that the war started in 
1959... Afterwards, when certain Hutu took the political power, they continued to propagate 
these divisions and hate against Tutsis to pursue their own interests and get their hands on the 
political and economic power. In this way, this hate and these ideas of divisions and 
differences between Hutus and Tutsis remained. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
Like Aisha, Fidele also states that the people who ruled (i. e. who he just described as 
Tutsi) were taller and slimmer - implying, but not stating explicitly, racial differences - 
in line with the "opposition" meta-narrative. Yet, he then says that the colonists 
categorised Rwandans people as "Hutu" or "Tutsi" and then sowed divisions amongst 
them a claim that is in line with the "RPF" meta-narrative. 
When young people spoke about the genocide and how and why it occurred, their 
narratives were even more diverse and again did not correspond to either the "RPF" or 
"opposition" narrative. 
Narratives of the 1994 genocide 
I discussed the genocide in some depth with 42 of my 46 research participants, usually 
once they had mentioned it themselves in the course of our discussions. We talked both 
about their own experiences during 1994 - whether they were in or outside Rwanda at 
the time - and their understandings of why the genocide occurred. As the stories during 
the subsequent chapters of this thesis will show, the experiences of my research 
participants during and in the aftermath of the violence of 1994 were extremely diverse. 
Whilst there were those whose stories of the genocide were typical of the horrors 
recounted in the widely-read published testimonies of Tutsi genocide survivors (see, for 
example, Hatzfeld 2000, Gourevitch 1998), or the slightly-lesser known stories of Hutu 
survivors who were attacked by the RPA and the ADFL during the civil war and whilst 
in refugee camps in Zage (e. g. Umutesi 2000), there were many other stories that 
diverged considerably from these experiences and challenged dominant accounts of the 
Hutu and the Tutsi experience of events. 
When discussing their understandings of the 1994 genocide, I generally asked my 
respondents a broad question about why they thought the genocide had happened and - 
depending on their response - followed this up with more specific questions. Table 1 
considers the frequency with which young people mentioned different factors. 
Table 1: Views on why the genocide happened 
Situation of war (fear of losing life or livelihood) 20 
Opportunity to pillage / take property and land 19 
Anti-Tutsi propaganda / negative stereotyping / vilification 19 
Political crisis / elite competition over power 13 
People followed orders from the authorities (without questioning) 13 
Jealousy / opportunity for vengeance 12 
Organised and planned by the state 10 
Coercion / people forced to kill by leaders 10 
Peer pressure / intra-group coercion 5 
As this table demonstrates, between them, my research participants mentioned most of 
the major factors mentioned in the main literature on the genocide. ' Most striking 
about young people's responses was the sheer diversity and multiplicity of factors or 
"causes" young people mentioned. In many cases, individuals listed a range of 
contributory factors and demonstrated fairly nuanced understandings of the complexity 
of what happened in 1994. In contrast to Eltringham's elites, however, young people did 
not tend to preface their explanations of the genocide with carefully crafted narratives 
about the history of Rwanda's ethnic groups and divisions. Instead, they tended to focus 
on the immediate events preceding and surrounding the genocide and especially on the 
civilian participation in the killing - perhaps illustrating the significance of this factor in 
the way young Rwandans today remember the genocide. In this respect - as table I 
suggests - the three factors most frequently mentioned by young people were: (i) the 
100 For example, see Straus (2006) on the context of war and nature of state power / organisation; see Prunier (1995) 
on the acute political crisis that proceeded the genocide, the opportunities for vengeance and pillaging and the 
obedience of the population with respect to state orders; see Mamdani (2001) on the fears of Hutus of losing their 
lives, livelihood sand political power, see Chretien et al (1995) on the role of the genocidal propaganda and 
stereotyping (see chapter I for a more detailed discussion of different explanations of the genocide). 
situation of war; (ii) the vilification and negative stereotyping of the Tutsi population 
and; (iii) the opportunity the genocide provided to obtain the property and land of 
others. I will now explore what young people said in more depth. 
Firstly, and largely in line with the "opposition" meta-narrative about the genocidetot 
and the argument made by Straus (2006), 102 almost half of my research participants - 
mostly, but not exclusively those who were in Rwanda in the early 1990s - said that the 
situation of war was significant as it both deepened the political crisis and created fear 
amongst the wider population: 
[During the war], the RPF took territory very quickly, so Habyarimana and others were afraid 
of losing power - that's why they said they had to get rid of all Tutsis and started to plan all 
that... (Innocent, b. 1974 in Burundi) 
It was because of the war and then the death of the President... But at the beginning people 
knew nothing. Some of them didn't even know that there were Tutsis outside the country that 
had fled and were being prevented from returning home... but that changed with the news of 
killings committed by the RPF in Umutara and Byumba and how they killed. Then there were 
Tutsi secret meetings in this period, because there were Tutsis who left to fight with the RPF 
and others that gave information to the RPF. This really influenced people to think that all the 
Tutsis were their enemies. All the same, there were also Tutsis who knew nothing of what 
happened... I remember that in our neighbourhood... we were five good friends. The night 
the President's plane was shot down, there was a secret meeting of Tutsis in our quartier. It 
was in a cave below our houses and an RPF colonel had come to speak to the youth. Two of 
these friends went there. We waited for hours for them to come out and finally around 9pm, 
me and the other two walked back up the hill. Not long afterwards, we saw a convoy of FAR 
soldiers pass us at high speed and then heard gunfire and explosions below. Afterwards, we 
found out that one friend was killed on the spot; the other was injured, but a few days later, 
he left to join the RPF. (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
Like Bosco, many young people spoke about the tangible impacts the war had on social 
relations in their local neighbourhood in Kigali - even though the actual fighting was 
remote. They spoke about the arrival of news about people's relatives being killed or 
displaced, the secret meetings that were held or rumoured to be taking place, and the 
departure of young Tutsi men apparently to join the RPA. Several young people said 
that this latter factor in particular lent credence to the extremists' claims that the enemy 
was not just the RPF, but also Tutsis in their neighbourhood. Significantly, 15 young 
people - most of whom were in Rwanda at the time of the genocide - mentioned the 
101 It is important to stress here that there are variations in the way various opposition groups present the significance 
of the 1990-94 civil war. For some, this simply provides an important part of the context of fear in which the 
genocide took place and can help explain why some Hutus participated in the killing. For others, this context of war 
is used to deny the genocide and argue that the killing of the Tutsis was simply part of the war. This latter position is 
clearly both untenable and unacceptable and none of my research participants ever denied the genocide took place. 
102 Straus' (2006) argues that the context of war has been underplayed in the literature (see chapter 1). 
belief amongst the Hutu population in a secret Tutsi plan to take away the power, jobs 
and property and to dominate or even kill the Hutu population. 
I heard that the Tutsis had planned to kill the Hutus and that they had new materials in their 
houses to do that - like machetes, hoes, spears and petrol to bum the houses of Hutus. When 
the Hutus heard that, they decided to kill before being killed. (Baptiste, b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
This leads to the second factor cited by almost half of my research participants - the role 
of the propaganda and negative stereotyping of the Tutsi. In line with the "RPF" meta- 
narrative and arguments made by Chretien et al (1995), Des Forges (1999) and others 
(see chapter 1), many young Rwandans talked about the role of local meetings and 
propaganda in "sensitising" the population and inciting them to kill: 
[I]n the 1990s, there was a massive campaign to sensitise the population - the propaganda. 
They said many things about the RPF and their accomplices  ibyitso' in the population. It 
was said all Tutsis knew about the plan... and it's not difficult to convince Rwandans of 
things, especially those without any education... They were afraid. They saw that the RPF 
were strong and could win. Hutus also saw that Tutsi families sent their sons to fight with the 
RPF and then, when eventually the plane was shot down, they were convinced that all Tutsis 
knew about the plan, even if most of them knew nothing. (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
The war had already begun in 1990 and there were sensitisation campaigns in meetings and 
on the radio RTMLC, which everyone listened to... They played on people's fears, saying 
that the honour of Hutus was threatened; that [the Tutsis] were going to take their property 
and their lives. There were years of sensitisation... we learnt that Rwanda was the country of 
the Hutus. [At school] we learnt an entire history that justified the domination of Hutus and 
division... It's also true that there were RPF accomplices amongst the Tutsi population, but 
ideas of the Tutsi as malign helped people believe their neighbours all did that in secret as 
well. The sensitisation messages touched something if they pushed people to such a point 
where they killed people they knew... (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
Like Aime, a number of my informants said that the reason the rumours and propaganda 
was believable to ordinary Rwandans was because they resonated with what they had 
already learnt about the nature of the Tutsis: 
People killed because they learnt in history at school that in the past the Tutsi oppressed the 
Hutu and were cunning and bad. Then the authorities said that the Hutus were going to be 
dominated again if they didn't kill Tutsis to stop them. Also, in the neighbourhoods, Hutus 
saw that the sons of Tutsi families left to fight against them for the RPF. They thought all 
Tutsis were implicated, that there was a grand Tutsi secret plan. So they believed they had to 
kill the Tutsis before being killed themselves... At school we always learned that the Tutsis 
were cunning, that they hid the truth and had secrets. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
It is of course important to note, however, that some of those who mentioned this factor 
were not in Rwanda in 1994 and therefore did not speak from firsthand experience (e. g. 
Vincent). Yet, others (e. g. Theogene and Aime) were in Rwanda prior to the genocide 
and perhaps old enough to have some memories of what they learned at school and 
what was discussed in the lead up to and during the genocide. Overall, the frequency 
with which young people mentioned "ethnic" divisions, negative stereotyping and anti- 
Tutsi propaganda certainly demonstrates a reasonably widespread belief among my 
research participants that these factors played a significant role in the genocide (in line 
with the arguments made in chapter 1). 
The third most commonly cited factor that my informants said explained people's 
participation in the genocide was the opportunity it provided to pillage and take the 
goods of others. This factor was cited by many people who were living in Rwanda in 
1994 and witnessed this pillaging firsthand as well as by a number of returnees: 
People thought they could kill and then occupy or take the property - the houses and field - 
of others without problem, without condemnation.. . 
It was the authorities that thought about 
killing on the basis of ethnicity, not the population (Evelyne, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Some did it to get the house and cattle of their neighbour (Norah b. 1982 in Uganda) 
Again, whilst some of the people who gave this explanation were either not in Rwanda 
in 1994 or quite young during the genocide, it is significant that so many young people 
said that this was an important factor. Furthermore, 12 young Rwandans mentioned the 
role of jealousy or vengeance in motivating people to kill others in their neighbourhood: 
There were many cases of vengeance during the genocide. For example, there were two 
families in our quartier who had a conflict five years before the war. Then during the war, 
one family went immediately on the first day to kill the other. It was Hutus killing Tutsis, but 
had nothing to do with ethnicity - that was just the excuse. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
Rwandans are very malicious - it's in their character. They're always jealous of others. If you 
do well in life, they become very jealous and start to create problems for you or figure how to 
get something for themselves. In the countryside, people poison others just because they are 
successful. I think lots of people killed because of this. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
A number of people (like Theogene) mentioned specific cases of vengeance; others like 
Magnifique portrayed jealousy as an innate feature of Rwandan society. What is 
interesting is that factors such as opportunism, jealousy and vengeance have generally 
been downplayed in both the "RPF" and the "opposition" meta-narratives of the 
genocide. In fact, although there have been some good studies of how the genocide 
unfolded in specific regions and localities in Rwanda (e. g. Des Forges 1999; Longman 
1995; Straus 2006), until recently there has been little research looking at the micro- 
dynamics of genocide - especially the role of local social relations and group dynamics. 
Lee-Ann Fujii's (2009 forthcoming) work studies these issues in two rural communities 
and will hopefully start to address this gap as well as shed further light on the 
balance of 
voluntarism and coercion involved in recruiting people to kill. 
Among my research participants, a third of those interviewed suggested that ordinary 
Rwandans killed as they were instructed to do so by their leaders and were accustomed 
to following orders from the authorities. This seems to lend some support to Prunier's 
(1995) somewhat discredited notion of a Rwandan "culture of obedience", although 
Straus' (2006) more nuanced analysis of the history of mobilisation of the population to 
do communal work is arguably more appropriate (see chapter 1). Five young people - 
all young men living in Rwanda in 1994 - talked about the role of peer pressure and the 
fear of exclusion in convincing young men to participate in the killing (See Straus 2006: 
pp143-148 on the role of intra-Hutu coercion): 
It was well organised. People were incited to do that by the Government... as a kind of 
vengeance. They were told they were going to lose their property, that the inkotanyi'3 were 
going to kill or eat them and were raping their women and killing them savagely. They were 
told they must get rid of all the Tutsis that worked with the inkotanyi. They distributed 
weapons in the neighbourhoods. There were barriers everywhere and all the men of the 
neighbourhood were obliged to go there to kill. If not, you were threatened yourself. Because 
of that, lots if youth participated and everyone knew that as a youth, you couldn't avoid going 
to the barrier. You didn't want to be excluded from the group. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
Nonetheless, only a quarter of my informants said that civilians killed because they 
were coerced to do so otherwise they or their families would have been killed. A 
number explicitly commented that even though there was pressure on young Hutus to 
get involved, in practice many had a choice whether or not to kill: 
There was youth training and we always had to take part - all the men in the neighbourhood. 
It was obligatory. That started even the day that we learnt the news of the shooting down of 
the aeroplane - on the 7th April. We had to get up at 5am, run and then come back and learn 
how to handle a gun, how to use grenades and so on. I had to do all that, but all the same I 
managed to avoid the patrols and the barriers. I have never touched a weapon to shoot at 
someone. (Faustin, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
Again what was significant about the way my research participants explained the 1994 
genocide, was that there was no significant "ethnic" patterning to their narratives. In 
contrast to Longman and Rutagengwa (2004: p170), I again did not find evidence that 
there were alternative "Hutu" and "Tutsi" explanations of the genocide amongst my 
research participants. For example, when speaking about the organisation of the 
genocide by the authorities, three young Ugandan returnees dated the preparation of the 
genocide back several decades, as often argued by RPF elites. For example: 
For a long time, it was planned - from the 1980s even - to kill all Tutsi. There was some 
killing before 1994 when the war started, but not with pangas. (Norah, b. 1982 in Uganda) 
103 Inkotanyi'roughly translates as  valiant warrior' and was a name adopted by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) 
to refer to soldiers of their Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and also used by others to refer to them. 
Yet a fourth Uganda returnee - Peter - expressed a totally different view: 
The genocide was planned by the former government, but not for such a long time like they 
say. I don't think the population really had this in their head a long time before - the 
authorities incited them... People, they killed because the authorities told them to. Hutus, 
they had the power for 30 years and they had all the privileges. Then the government told 
them that the Tutsis were going to come back and take the power and make them lose 
everything and work for the Tutsis again... (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
I also did not remark the same clear-cut distinction as Longman and Rutagengwa with 
respect to the terms used to describe the events of 1994. Whilst slightly more young 
people who identified themselves as "Tutsi" used the term "genocide" (itsemba bwoko) 
and slightly more people who identified themselves as of "Hutu" or "mixed" heritage 
who referred to the events as "the war" (intambara), young Rwandans of all 
backgrounds used these terms and sometimes interchanged them from one sentence or 
conversation to the next. Thus, as with their narratives of the origins of "ethnicity", 
although young people's narratives about the 1994 genocide definitely drew on and 
reproduced certain elements or tropes of the "RPF" meta-narrative dominant inside 
Rwanda, or the "opposition" meta-narrative associated with the former regime and 
much of the current external opposition, I found no particular "ethnic" patterning to 
young people's responses i. e. there was no conclusive evidence that there are distinct 
"Hutu" and "Tutsi" versions of history circulating amongst young Rwandans today. 
Contextualising young people's narratives of the past (and present) 
There are not two worlds - the world of past happenings and the world of our present 
knowledge of those past events - there is only one world, and it is the world of present 
experience. (Oakshot 1933, quoted in Jackson 2002: p355) 
In order to comprehend the variations in the content, level of detail and consistency of 
young people's narratives about the origins of the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" 
and the 1994 genocide, we need to examine them in the context of young people's 
present lives. Firstly, it is important to acknowledge the diversity of voices and 
complexity of sites where history is produced (Trouillot 1997: p19). Alongside 
professional historians, many other individuals - including ordinary citizens - augment, 
deflect or reorganise the past (ibid. pp25-26). People learn about history from diverse 
"sources" - radio, TV, Internet, school, family, friends - but the past is also inscribed in 
less obvious ways in almost everything that we do and say: "the past surrounds and 
saturates us; every scene, every statement, every action retains residual content from 
earlier times" (Lowenthal 1985: p185). As a result, and as Sune Haugbolle (2005 on 
Lebanon) and Michel-Rolph Trouillot (1997 on Haiti) show, even in the most repressive 
systems where history is manipulated to serve the interests of those in power, the 
dominant meta-narratives of the powerful can never totally drown out other voices. 
In Rwanda, as the narratives above show, although the Government has attempted to 
impose its own ("RPF") version of history and limit people's exposure to alternative 
versions, in practice there are many diverse and alternative narratives of Rwanda's past 
that circulate among Rwandans, even if mainly in the private sphere. These narratives 
are influenced by the dominant "RPF" and "opposition" meta-narratives to varying 
degrees, but these narratives are absorbed and then woven together in ways that make 
sense to young people given their own personal experiences and current circumstances: 
The narrator's perspective and predilections shape his [sic. ] choice and use of historical 
materials; our own determine what we make of them. The past we know or experience is 
always contingent on our own views, our own perspective, above all our own present. 
(Lowenthal 1985: p216) 
As Nigel Eltringham argues, the critical thing about narratives of the past - whether 
personal or collective - is that they contain arguments that attempt in some way to 
legitimate the present as much as they serve to explain the past: 
[T]he past is a contested place... different interpretations of it should be explored... because 
they reveal what actors hold to be current disparities. (Etringham 2004: p148)104 
For example, in her ethnography of Burundian Hutu refugees in Tanzania, Liisa Malkki 
(1995) demonstrates that processes of remembering and narrating the past are implicitly 
tied to present circumstances. She compares and contrasts the narratives of two groups 
of refugees living in very different contexts of exile. She argues that, although their 
narratives of the past are in part determined by their ethnic identity and experiences of 
victimisation as a homogenised "Hutu" collective, they are also affected by their 
everyday circumstances of exile whether in the institutionalised Mishamo refugee camp 
or in the cosmopolitan township of Kigoma. Malkki's work suggests that, just as 
"elites" may appeal to history to legitimate their political authority and actions, 
"ordinary" people interpret and re-interpret the past to help them justify their current 
position, explain their own and others' past and present actions and make sense of the 
104 For his own interviewees, Eltringham (2004) argues that the "meta-narrative of the "Europe" group provides a 
basis for their claims to innocence in terms of involvement in the genocide, as well as demonstrating that what they 
see as the current Tutsi monopoly of power and subjugation of the Hutu in Rwanda has a historical precedent. For the 
"Rwanda" group, their alternative "meta-narrative" lends credence to their claims that the Tutsi minority is constantly 
under threat and justifies everything since 1994 from the Government's repeated invasions into the Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC, formerly Zaire) and attacks on the refugee camps there in 1996-97 to their current tight 
hold on power (p178). 
events and processes of everyday life. Among my research participants, this is perhaps 
best illustrated by the contrasting cases of Gaspard and Doreen. 
Gaspard. - The perspectives of an ex prisoner 
Like most of my research participants who grew up in Rwanda and lived through the 
events of 1994, Gaspard seemed to have high stakes in the past. Although I heard a lot 
about Gaspard's past from others that knew him - and he talked to me several times 
about his past - what had really happened and his actions during the 1994 genocide 
were never fully revealed. I first met Gaspard at his "coming of age" party in October 
2004 at my friend Esperance's house. Gaspard was the cousin of two of my other 
respondents Francine and Faustin who were living with Esperance in 2004-2005. 
Gaspard had been released from prison the previous year as a "minor" following the 
Presidential Decree in January 2003, which led to the release of certain categories of 
prisoners accused of genocide. 105 Gaspard told me different things about his age - on 
one occasion (see below), he said he was 13 years old in 1994 (making him 22 or 23 
when we met); on another occasion, he told me that he was 25 years old (making him 
14 or 15 years old in 1994). Francine and Faustin told me, however, that Gaspard was 
older than them (at least 28) and therefore could not have been a minor in 1994. Aware 
that Esperance would have spoken to me about him, on the very first occasion we met 
alone, Gaspard was keen to give me his version of his past experiences: 
I think you already know that I have spent several years in prison... At the end of the war, 
my brothers were killed by the RPF and I had to flee to Kibeho camp for displaced persons. 
In 1995, they came to chase us from the camp and they caught me and put me in prison. They 
shouldn't have done this as I was 13 years old and the law said that minors younger than 14 
years old couldn't be put in prison. Firstly, they put me in a cachot16 for 4 months in horrible 
conditions without space to sit down or sleep, with almost nothing to eat. Then they 
transferred me to Nyanza, far from my family where my mother couldn't afford to come and 
visit me. I suffered a lot there -I was there 4 years without seeing my parents, without seeing 
the sun. We had a small piece of ground to sleep on without space to stretch out and there 
wasn't enough to eat. The older prisoners took advantage of us children who didn't have 
family to visit us. They offered us food and clothing in return for sex and you know it is very 
easy to persuade a child who is hungry to accept sex in return for food. I was lucky as I was 
the chef des jeunes and for that, I had the right to two goblets of corn instead of one. I was 
also lucky to meet adults and teachers who helped me... Instead of doing nothing, I asked 
them to teach me... I learned 7 languages in prison and many other things. 
los On V January 2003, a presidential decree ordered the provisional release of some categories of detainees, 
including prisoners who had confessed in compliance with the organic law on the gacaca courts, prisoners who had 
spent more time in prison than required by the organic law, those who were minors (14 to 18 years old) at the time 
the crimes were committed for which they are being prosecuted, and further releases of the elderly and seriously ill. 
Around 22,000 persons were released from prison within the following months of 2003 (PRI 2004). 
106 Cachots are commune level detention centres, never intended to be permanent prisons. The cachots I visited in 
1998 when I worked for the European Council were small, basic mud buildings with bars, almost no facilities and 
completely jam packed with prisoners accused of genocide, living in appalling conditions. 
After four years in Nyanza prison, Gaspard was transferred to Butare prison where he 
continued to study and learn to write with the help of his fellow prisoners until his case 
was finally looked at: 
When I was in Butare prison, they started to investigate me. I didn't have a file. They took 
me in the community where I had lived and no one testified against me, but they did nothing. 
It was only in May 2003 when the Government decided to release the young, old and 
handicapped that I was released from prison after seven and a half years. 
As Gaspard's carefully crafted narrative demonstrates, personal accounts of the past are 
never finished, but continually evolve in response to the needs of current circumstances 
and depending on who they are told to: 
[T]o reconstitute events in a story is no longer to live those events in passivity, but to actively 
rework them, both in dialogue with others and in one's own imagination. (Jackson 2002: p15) 
Accounts of the past are at once less than and more than the past (Lowenthal 1985: 
pp2l4-219). On the one hand, our narratives are always incomplete as we forget, 
discard or block out memories which are irrelevant, undesirable or too painful (see Zur 
1997: p68); on the other hand, the stories we tell rewrite and rework the past to make it 
more comprehensible or bearable (Jackson 2002: p16) or have greater power to justify 
and explain our current circumstances. 
Although in relating his experiences, Gaspard focuses on an undesirable period when he 
was in prison (which he knows I am already aware of), by portraying himself as a minor 
who suffered whilst in prison, his story is designed to evoked sympathy. At the same 
time, Gaspard evaded every opportunity I gave him to talk about his experiences in 
1994. He never gave any more details about what happened to him during the genocide 
and much about him and his family remained a mystery. His mother still lived in 
Butare, yet he rarely went to see her and his older brother lived nearby in Kigali but 
apparently refused to see Gaspard for reasons that no one knew. The only time Gaspard 
talked about the genocide was when I asked a general question about why he thought it 
happened and he responded: 
It was authorised by the state. People were told they could kill and take Tutsis' property. 
Mostly, they were people living in poverty, who would kill if the authorities told them to. 
They also called Tutsi names like serpents. Hutu were used to seeing Tutsi as animals, even 
before the genocide. Also there was the war. The RPF attacked and the authorities made 
people believe that all Tutsi outside and inside the country were the enemy, were in the way 
and needed to be killed, that all Tutsi were helping the RPF... because some Tutsi had sent 
their sons to fight. The authorities also told people that the RPF had killed their President and 
Hutu feared they would lose all their privileges and return to a situation of oppression. 
Here Gaspard emphasizes a number of factors - such as the orders from the authorities, 
the situation of war and the propaganda - which seem to go some way to shifting blame 
from the Hutus that killed - or at least making what they did more comprehensible. It 
was unclear whether Gaspard was saying this in defence of his own actions in 1994 
(which he never related) or those of other family members of friends. 
Despite Gaspard's attempts to constantly position himself in the most favourable 
light, ' 07 there were often inconsistencies in what he told me and said to others. On 
occasion, once he had embarked on one of his lengthy monologues, he appeared to lose 
his own thread and his narratives would veer in different directions. For example, when 
I asked him about Rwanda's past, the start of his narrative seemed to be carefully 
crafted to demonstrate that despite his years in prison, he did not share the views of 
many of the "extremist" Hutus he said he encountered there. Instead, he seemed to want 
to demonstrate that he had absorbed what he had learned during his four months in an 
Ingando camp (i. e. the "RPF" meta-narrative). Yet mid-way through the narrative, he 
seems to veer briefly towards an alternative explanation (more consistent with the 
"opposition" meta-narrative): 
It's said that the colonial power brought [ethnicity] here to Rwanda and that before the 
colonial period, the words Hutu, Tutsi and Twa did not even exist. Instead, there were many 
races - around 27... These clans were the key identity... and then the colonists arrived and 
found that Rwanda was a strong society and they had to find out how to rule it. They 
therefore conceived a policy to divide Rwandans and they did that on the basis of wealth. 
Those who were richest in cows and houses, they called the Tutsis and those who were less 
rich, they called the Hutus, and the Twas, those that had nothing. People could change 
category but it wasn't easy. And then the colonial power started to privilege the Tutsis, for 
example only Tutsi children could go to school. And then the poor Hutus became slaves for 
the Tutsis, they had to work for them and they weren't equal. 
They started to develop hatred for the Tutsis... and then at the end, the colonists started to 
support the Hutu majority and the Hutus took vengeance and took power. Some say it was 
genocide, but it wasn't that in reality. There were only a few people killed and otherwise the 
houses of Tutsis were pillaged and many were sent into exile... 
After independence, there was a bad regime. Tutsis were excluded. They weren't allowed 
access to higher education or power, because the regime feared that this would allow them to 
work with those outside the country and take the power again... Tutsi were inferior and Hutu 
were very proud and honoured. Sometimes, there were more killings of Tutsis and more went 
into exile. It was a bad government, which encouraged Hutu to take revenge for past 
suffering under the colonial period. This is why there was killing in 1959,1965,1973 and 
then finally during the genocide of 1994. 
107 Although he never directly asked me for money, it was clear Gaspard was looking for another expatriate to help 
fund his studies and support him. 
It is interesting to note that, like many of my research participants, Gaspard prefaced his 
response with "it's said that" others said "I was taught that" or "according to a book"). 
This had the effect of distancing himself from what came next, suggesting an awareness 
of the problematic nature of the past or, perhaps, that the views he was about to express 
were not necessarily his own. On another occasion, Gaspard talked explicitly about the 
risks that talking about the past with other Rwandans posed for someone like him: 
Almost no one speaks about their past. We will only do that in the gacaca or perhaps in 
private in our families, but never like that in a cabaret or at school. We can't speak openly in 
Rwanda, especially about ethnicity or our past. Otherwise, you risk being accused of always 
having the ideology - being divisionist - and you can be put in prison for that. At school, do 
you really think that I can speak about the past that I have lived? It would cause so many 
problems for me - they might even expulse me from school. For example, if people ask me 
why I can speak so many languages - English, French, Swahili, Spanish, Italian - do you 
think I explain? No I can't even let them think that I am Hutu, because afterwards they may 
think that I have been in prison and I will have lots of problems. No, it's easier for me to say 
that I have lots of white friends and that I learned the languages from them. 
Doreen: The perspectives of a "returnee" 
Doreen was 22 when we met on the bus to town in February 2004 and was born and 
grew up in Mbarara in Uganda. She spent a few years at school in Kampala before her 
family returned to Rwanda in late 1994, when she finished her secondary schooling and 
started university at the Kigali Institute of Science and technology (KIST), where she 
was studying part-time when I met her. She led a busy life between her studies, a part- 
time job and meeting her friends in town in the afternoons and evenings. She generally 
preferred to meet me in her favourite cafe Fido Dido downtown, although I did also 
visit her home three times and meet her family. I also went out roughly once a month 
with Doreen and her groups of friends, which included Norah and Stella, two of my 
other research participants. The topics of conversation were mainly about the girls' 
studies, aspirations and boyfriends. 
Doreen was very direct and told me on several occasions that she did not feel that 
Rwanda's past was of direct concern to her. For example, when I asked her about the 
gacaca that were taking place every Sunday a few blocks from her home, she said: 
I don't go there. I don't like it. I wasn't even here, so I have nothing to say about 
reconciliation and just have to sit there for 4 hours. I have other things to do. 
I asked Doreen several times in different ways about the past and she never appeared to 
be very interested in talking about it. It just did not seem to be very relevant to her 
current life and aspirations in Kigali. Perhaps as a reflection of this, the little that she 
did say about Rwanda's past was very limited. For example, when she first mentioned 
Hutus and Tutsis, I asked Doreen what the differences between these groups were: 
They are like two different tribes, and it has been like that for a long long time, but I don't 
know exactly where it came from. 
When I asked about the genocide, Doreen's explanation was equally brief and 
apparently unreflective: 
It was hatred. You know for a long time, Hutu they were taught to hate Tutsis, that they were 
like snakes, that they were the enemy and that they had to finish them, all of them. 
Like many of the post-1994 "returnees" I met, Doreen appeared to be disinterested in 
Rwanda's past. This was almost certainly related to the fact that she did not have any 
firsthand experience of the events in the lead up to and during the 1994 genocide. She 
had lost some distant family members during the genocide, but otherwise said that the 
events did not concern her. As a Tutsi "returnee" from Uganda, Doreen also clearly felt 
that, in contrast to Gaspard, her own past did not disadvantage her in any way; rather 
that it helped her present situation. For example, she told me that she had obtained her 
job through "Ugandan" connections. 
The perpetuation of conflict via talking and not talking about the past? 
The narratives presented in this chapter show that, given their different past experiences 
and current circumstances, young people in Rwanda today have varying relationships to 
the past. At a broad level, most young people seemed to be aware of the "sensitive" 
nature of discussions about Rwanda's past, but in practice their narratives were far more 
diverse than those of Eltringham's elites. The "RPF" meta-narrative of history certainly 
seemed to be strongest influence on young people's views, but this was often combined 
with elements of the "opposition" meta-narrative or totally different explanations 
altogether. Although, as the next chapter will discuss in more depth, there was a 
widespread assumption among young people that people's views on the past would be 
determined by their ethnic identity, I did not find strong evidence that this was the case. 
Instead, the material explored in this chapter suggests that young people's narratives of 
the past are a synthesis of explanations they have absorbed from different sources and 
memories of their own firsthand experiences that are related in ways that help them 
make sense of and justify their current lives and circumstances. 
A key challenge, however, seems to be that young people are not talking amongst 
themselves about the past - either their personal experiences of the past or Rwanda's 
past. Whilst they related their experiences and views to me in individual interviews, I 
was constantly surprised by how little groups of friends knew about one another's past. 
In turn, this meant that the assumption that there were alternative "Tutsi" and "Hutu" 
versions of the past was left unchallenged. Although young people and other Rwandans 
clearly discussed the past in intimate private circles, the public domain was almost 
entirely dominated by the "RPF" meta-narrative. Despite the efforts of those involved in 
the Government-initiated project to design a new history curriculum that acknowledges 
the nature of historiography and that multiple histories exist, the Government still seems 
to insist on the "truthfulness" of its own account and uses fairly repressive measures to 
ward off other explanations (Buckley-Zistel 2009: p46; see also chapter 7). 
There are significant dangers attached to such attempts to impose a singular version of 
history. Firstly, this creates a situation in which competing singular versions of history - 
the "RPF" vs "opposition" narrative - effectively continue the conflict by discursive 
rather than physically violent means. Secondly, as discussed in chapter 1, evidence from 
Rwanda and other many contexts shows that interpretations and re-interpretations of 
past violence are used to legitimate further violence (see also Schmidt and Schroeder 
2001: pp 9-13, Van Hoyweghen and Vlassenroot 2000): "[A] persistent appeal to 
absolute history... has been a central element in instigating violence and ultimately 
genocide in Rwanda" (Eltringham 2004: p178). It is for this reason that several authors 
argue that the Rwandan Government needs to explicitly recognise and permit 
exploration of the multiple histories of contemporary Rwandans in order to break the 
pattern of the past and prevent future violence (see also Eltringham 2004: pp177-179): 
[T]o avoid future conflict, instead of glossing over the past and pretending that Rwandans are 
beyond any conflicts, a more situated version of the past is required in which all members of 
society may recognize themselves. In order to move towards national unity and reconciliation 
it is not sufficient to narrate the nation whole-by using the same strategies that were 
deployed for its division-but to listen to the different stories that emerge from the different 
population groups and their particular experience as victims, perpetrators, bystanders, or 
heroes. (Buckley-Zistel 2009: p48) 
As the next chapter will show, these singular, corporate narratives of Rwanda history 
provide a fertile context for the reproduction of corporate "ethnic" stereotypes and 
contribute to the persistence of worrying "ethnic" logic in contemporary Rwanda, 
despite a far more complex social reality. 
CHAPTER 4: 108 
EVERYDAY ETHNICITIES: "ETHNIC" RELATIONS AND RELATIONSHIPS 
AMONG YOUNG RWANDANS 
This chapter explores the significance of "ethnicity" in the lives of a group of young 
Rwandans living in Kigali by examining the role of the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" in their everyday relations and relationships. Through exploring their everyday 
narratives, practices and social interactions, it demonstrates that - despite current state 
policies that seek to de-emphasise "ethnicity" - the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" remain salient in contemporary Rwanda. It examines when and how these 
categories "mattered" in young people's everyday'09 relations and relationships and 
reveals that, although many young Rwandans continue to forge inter-"ethnic" ties, there 
is a persistent desire to know the "ethnic" identity of significant others and to categorise 
them on an ongoing basis. Exploring the complexities and contradictions, certainties 
and uncertainties of these processes of categorisation, this chapter investigates the 
relationship between "conceptual" categories and "concrete" persons in contemporary 
Rwanda. As such, it raises fundamental questions about what young Rwandans 
understand "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" to mean and the role of "ethnic" categories, 
stereotypes and anomalies in structuring their social worlds. 
"Ethnic" relations and relationships among young Rwandans today 
In Kigali today there is little discernable "ethnic" difference or segregation in daily life. 
There are no "Hutu" or "Tutsi" neighbourhoods as in Bujumbura in Burundi in the early 
1990s110 and - although there is a perception among some Rwandans that people from a 
particular "ethnic" group, or provenance, dominate certain workplaces - there are few 
offices or organisations that exclusively employ Hutus or Tutsis. There are few visible 
differences in the way people from different "ethnic" backgrounds talk, "' dress or 
behave - especially amongst the younger generation who are increasingly influenced by 
108 A variation of this chapter was published in March 2009. See Hilker, L. M. (2009) "Everyday ethnicities: identity 
and reconciliation among Rwandan youth" in Journal of Genocide Research 11(1) pp 81 - 100. 
109 As Christian Kamer argues (2007: p4), the concept of the "everyday" is highly contested. He stresses that when 
exploring the "everyday", we must account for several parameters power, history/historicity and consciousness/ 
reflexivity or lack of it. I remain cognisant of his advice in this chapter. 
110 Several of my informants grew up in Bujumbura and talked about the ethno-physical segregation that 
characterised the city in the early 1990s. See also Human Rights watch (1994) Burundi. 
All Rwandans speak the same language Kinyarwanda. Nonetheless, immediately after the 1994 genocide when 
hundreds of thousands of mostly Tutsi Rwandans arrived in Rwanda from years in exile, some of these "returnees" 
did not speak good Kinyarwanda and some Rwandans claim you still detect a difference in intonation when those 
who were born outside Rwanda speak Kinyarwanda. Equally, in terms of other languages spoken, this varies amongst 
those who were born in Rwanda and francophone and Anglophone countries of exile (see chapter 6). 
cultural trends from outside Rwanda. 112 The majority of Rwandans also continue to 
respect traditional social obligations. For example, I witnessed how, if there was a 
marriage, birth or funeral, most families invited their neighbours and work colleagues to 
attend without discounting anyone on "ethnic" or other grounds. 
Perhaps the most visible social divide in contemporary Kigali is between the "haves" 
and "have-nots". In 2004-2005, the city was becoming increasingly marked by growing 
levels of inequality with a small wealthy elite able to afford big homes, nice cars, 
private school fees for their children and to socialise in the expensive venues; a growing 
professional and business class with a decent standard of living, although aware that 
their situation could deteriorate rapidly if the main wage earner lost their job; and a 
large urban proletariat living in the poorer slum-like neighbourhoods, many of whom 
found it increasingly difficult to find employment and were periodically pressured by 
the authorities to return to the rural areas. 113 The key preoccupations of most young 
people were continuing their education or finding a decent job to enable them to have a 
good standard of living and family life. Both they and their parents put a high premium 
on education and it was widely felt that a university degree was the only route to a well- 
paid job. Many parents made significant sacrifices to find money to send their children 
to school. For those young people who had failed or left school or only had vocational 
qualifications, it was difficult to find work and life was particularly precarious - 
especially for those with little or no family. 
Out of the 46 young people I interviewed in depth during my fieldwork, 15 were 
orphans (of both parents), 12 had lost one parent (usually their father), seven had their 
112 Young Rwandans in Kigali have far more contact with influences outside Rwanda than prior to 1994, especially 
with respect to dress, music, sport and using mobile telephones to communicate. For example, Franco (b. 1979 in 
Rwanda) commented, ""There are many changes. For example, before [the genocide] Rwandan guys weren't 
interested in using 'fraicheur' (face powder)... and they didn't dress well. Now, everyone wants to dress like 
Shaggy... It's the people that came from outside that brought that, because there they dressed more like Europeans. " 
As Franco suggests, the key channels of influence are via those young people who "returned" from exile in 1994 
from different countries in Africa and, in some cases, Europe and North America, and via the Internet, television and 
radio. Although many Rwandans do not have access to these technologies, they are influenced by those who do. 
113 During the period I was in Kigali, there were frequent reports and evidence of the authorities trying to "clean up" 
Kigali. I personally witnessed a crackdown of informal street selling, with many of the pavement kiosks and 
makeshift stalls disappearing between two of my field visits and permits and overalls issued to those permitted to 
continue selling in the bus station and elsewhere; the banning of bicycles (for transportation and bicycle-taxis) from 
much of central Kigali; the relocating of the central market to a suburban area; and increasing regulation of the 
"motards" (moto-taxis) requiring them to have a permit, wear a yellow overall and helmet. I also heard reports from 
young people of the authorities attempting to move people out of some of the poorer slum-like areas and send them 
back to the countryside and the police stopping buses coming into Kigali to ensure everyone on the bus has legitimate 
employment or business 
in the city (I experienced two of these checks myself whilst on buses back into Kigali). This 
is reminiscent of Habyarimana's restrictive migration policies, where migration to the city was disallowed, unless the 
person had a job to go to (Verwimp 2000: p11). 
surviving parent absent and only 12 had both parents still alive. In most cases, their 
parents had been killed during the war, genocide or its aftermath. The impacts of the 
death of a parent or both parents had often been catastrophic, especially for those 
orphaned when very young or in their teens. Many had been left with no support 
whatsoever - sometimes even with no shelter or assets - and had struggled to look after 
themselves and been unable to continue school. The lucky ones had been looked after 
by family or friends of their parents or had been supported by a children's centre or the 
FARG fund for genocide survivors. Others ended up having to support siblings or 
friends and scrape a living together in any way possible, sometimes on the streets. 
Thus, "ethnicity" was by no means the central preoccupation in the minds of the 
majority of my research participants. Yet, it did matter in their lives. Ethnicity was 
always just below the surface in everyday social life and was a key factor in shaping the 
social relations and interactions of young Rwandans. 
Revealing the "ethnic" other 
Although relations between young people from different social backgrounds seemed 
harmonious, almost all my informants exhibited a constant - and almost existential - 
need to know the "ethnic" identity (i. e. whether they were "Hutu", "Tutsi" or "Twa") of 
significant others they interacted with and a propensity to categorise those around them. 
Although the zeal with which this other-categorisation occurred varied between 
individuals and depended on place and circumstance, it appeared important for young 
people to know the "ethnic" identity of others in any context in which they had a 
significant social stake. This included, at work; in the classroom; in the neighbourhood; 
in dealings with local officials; and when they were considering forming a close 
friendship or relationship with a person. Several young people attested to this: 
These ideas of differences are fixed inside people's heads today and we can't stop that. All 
the time, we categorise others. It's our habit. When someone passes by, we will categorise 
him. It's automatic. We can't stop ourselves. (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
Always someone he wants to know who he is talking to. He wants to check before saying 
things whether the person is Hutu or Tutsi... My neighbour he knows he is living next door 
to a Tutsi and I know, I am living next door to a Hutu. (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
It depends on the environment. The majority of people get into the bus without thinking 
about it - maybe 10% will immediately look around them. But in other situations, between 
friends and work colleagues, people always want to know the ethnicity of others. (Bosco, 
b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
The purpose of this scrutiny was not immediately clear. In most cases where young 
people knew or thought they knew there was a difference in "ethnic" identity between 
themselves and another person, this did not stop them interacting with that individual or 
even forming a friendship. Indeed, although many of the groups I worked with 
comprised friends from the same "ethnic" background - and often the same country of 
origin -I also came across several examples of young Rwandans in groups of friends or 
colleagues of different "ethnic" backgrounds. Yet, even these relationships were infused 
with the conscious assumption of categorical knowing: 
Some people always want to know exactly who is who, but others aren't concerned about that 
at all and try to make friendships between ethnic groups. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
At school, the Tutsis tend to stick together and the Hutus too. It isn't good. I don't like it... I 
have Hutu and Tutsi friends and there aren't any problems between us. (Paradis, b. 1986 in 
Rwanda) 
My best friend is Didier and Didier is Hutu. In fact all my friends are Hutu and I am the only 
Tutsi, but there are no problems between us. (Hassan, b. 1980 in Zaire) 
Although perceived differences in "ethnic" identity did not impede friendships, they did 
shape the nature of relationships - in particular what was talked about and the level of 
trust that developed: 
We can be friends without problems, but not very intimate. There is always a barrier. I could 
never have total trust in someone of the other ethnicity... We can't talk openly about the 
political situation or about the past or our own experiences. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
There are some people who are friends from different races. It is possible... but they can't 
talk openly with someone who is not the same ethnicity as them. They will never talk about 
ethnicity or the past. People can only talk about this when they are with their ethnic group. 
And someone can maybe say they are Tutsi and be proud of that, but someone can never tell 
you that he is Hutu. He prefers to stay quiet about that. (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
The extent of self-censorship and the limited knowledge close groups of friends had 
about each other's backgrounds constantly surprised me, as the following example of a 
close-knit "mixed" group of friends from different "ethnic" backgrounds illustrates. 
Aime, Sebastien and Jules: The barriers between close friends 
I met Aime when I arrived in Kigali in January 2004 through his younger brother Guy 
who I had met the previous summer in London. Aime was 29 when we met and on 
intermission from a degree in Management Information Systems in Nairobi. He was 
also setting up a new media business in Kigali with his friends Sebastien and Jules. 
Aime was born in Rwanda, although had spent much of his life outside the country. 
When he was young, his father was a diplomat and the family lived in Europe and other 
African countries. They returned to Rwanda in the mid-1980s, when his father got a 
senior public sector job and his mother was a politician. One day, Aime described to me 
what had happened to him and his family during the 1994 genocide: 
When the genocide started I had to hide - because of the way I look, my physiognomy... One 
day I went out with my uncle and we came across a roadblock with interahamwe. They 
started pointing at me and shouting  who is he, this one? ' My uncle went over to the barrier 
to talk to them and tell them not to touch me, that I was not Tutsi. He told me that from then 
on, I was not to leave the house. 
Aime then related how he had been bussed out of Kigali with his mother and brother a 
few days later: 
At some of the first roadblocks, I had lots of trouble because of the way I look and we were 
threatened by shots fired into the air. After that, my brother and I hid amongst the bags with 
several Tutsis. We managed to get as far as Gitarama and then a military friend put us in a car 
and we drove to Butare... We stayed there for a month with my sister... but then there were 
problems, so we left for Gikongoro where my family originates. We were okay there, as 
everyone knew us. 
Aime and his family then left for Uvira in Zaire at the end of the genocide and lived 
there for two years, before moving to Nairobi. Shortly afterwards, Guy went to live with 
his grandmother in Uganda and their sister Jeanne returned to university in Rwanda. 
Aime stayed in Nairobi with his mother to learn English and then start his degree. In 
1998, Aime's father died in Rwanda and the following year, Aime's mother left for the 
UK as a refugee, feeling unable to return to Rwanda given her previous involvement in 
politics. In 2001, Guy and Jeanne left to join her as refugees in the UK. When I knew 
him, Aime had not seen any of his immediate family since then. He stayed in Nairobi to 
study, but returned to Kigali in 2002 to look after his family's business affairs. 
Sebastien (age 26 in 2004) and Jules (age 28) both grew up outside Rwanda. Sebastien 
was born and grew up in Bujumbura, Burundi and Jules in Lubumbashi, Zaire. In 1993, 
when he was 14 years old, Sebastien joined the RPA with his older brother. He spent 
several months on the frontline as well as time training in Akagera in the East of 
Rwanda. He described his experiences in the RPA as tough and, in 1995, he left the 
RPA to return to Burundi and complete his studies. When his father died in 1998, he 
came briefly to Rwanda to live with his mother, before moving to Zaire for three years 
to work for his uncle. He finally came to Rwanda in 2001 to live with his mother and 
younger siblings and shortly afterwards met Jules in an Internet cafe. 
Jules had come to live in Kigali with his family in July 1994 shortly after the RPF 
victory. He often talked about the "culture shock" he experienced on arrival: 
When I arrived here, I didn't understand Rwandans at all and even today, it's as if they are a 
different people than me. In July 1994, there were still dead bodies in the street - it was 
horrible... I was really frightened and I started to talk to people from here and ask what had 
happened... But I couldn't understand. People were calm, quiet - they did not express 
themselves. They simply said that there had been killings, problems, but without emotion. I 
couldn't understand anything. I was used to expressing myself, saying when something was 
wrong... I started to ask people to tell me if there was a problem, if I did something that they 
did not like... not just pretend that all is well... but I see that Rwandans do not change - 
especially those from here. 
In 2001, a couple of months after Sebastien and Jules became friends, they met Aime's 
cousin and then Aime. The three quickly became close friends, united, they each told 
me, by their interest in information technology and their "international" outlook - given 
they had each lived outside Rwanda and had family in multiple countries including 
Europe. When I got to know them in early 2004, the three of them were virtually 
inseparable. They were together nearly every day and evening, working and socialising. 
They were in the process of setting up a new media company together and knew one 
another's families extremely well. They were one of the closest-knit group of friends I 
spent time with and they were very generous with me - inviting me to family and other 
social events, helping me to buy a car, and spending hours talking to me about their 
lives. Yet, after only a few months, it became clear to me that I knew far more about 
each of their backgrounds, views and experiences than they did about one another's. 
For example, one day Sebastien admitted that following his discussion with me about 
his time as an RPA soldier, he had finally decided to tell Aime and Jules about this. 
They had simply replied, "but why didn't you tell us beforehand? " When I investigated 
further, Sebastien admitted that part of his reluctance had been related to the fact that 
the three friends were of different "ethnic" backgrounds: 
In our group, we are very close and have lots of trust in each other. For example, if I have 
problems at home, I can call Aime and he will go there straight away and sort things out for 
me and I do the same for him - even if we are not of the same ethnie, like Jules and I are... 
But, in our group, we don't talk about these ethnic things and about all those things that 
happened in the past... Although I'd like to do that... One day, I'd like to go outside Kigali 
together and simply talk about all that... I even thought about creating an association of our 
group and others - of 30 people or so who have come from different countries or lived here - 
and we could go and talk about all of that - of Tutsi, Hutu and Twa. 
It was clear from what Sebastien said, and similarly from what Jules said on another 
occasion, that they were both conscious of the different "ethnic" backgrounds of the 
members of the group and that they both assumed that Aime was a "Hutu". Yet, I 
discovered that this assumption was based on their own interpretation of the little they 
knew about Aime's past and family, rather than the result of discussion with Aime. In 
fact, when Aime spoke to me about the group and about his past, it was clear that things 
were more complicated: 
In my group, we have never spoken about [ethnicity]. I've got both Tutsi and Hutu friends 
and they all know that I don't like those things... It's nothing to do with my life and I don't 
believe in the concept of ethnicity. I don't even know what it is. I've never seen anything 
positive in this idea of ethnicity, only negative things - conflicts, divisions and killings. It's 
just a way of controlling people and fighting for political power... My friends and I are not 
interested in ethnic issues. We are trying to build a vision together... 
Anyway, I don't how people categorise me or if they try to do that, because I could be Hutu 
but with a Tutsi physiognomy and mindset. Maybe they would try to find out about my 
family, but for me it is very complicated. If they go a short way into my past, they will 
conclude I am Hutu, but if they go a little further, they will probably change their mind... I'm 
not even sure myself what I am, only that I am mixed. My parents never talked about that and 
my father never told me his ethnicity. On my father's side, I have uncles who are Tutsis and 
came back from Uganda and Burundi and others who are Hutus and have always lived here 
in Rwanda. Even my father - he had a government bursary to go and study in Belgium and 
back then, they only gave bursaries to Hutus. But after 6 months, they cut his bursary saying 
he was Tutsi. So I've never really known what ethnicity my father really was... As for my 
Mum, I know her family was also mixed in the past, but I think she is Hutu. 
Again, Aime shows that he has also made an assumption about the "ethnic" background 
of each of his friends, although - like Sebastien - he seems to yearn for a life where 
"ethnicity" is no longer important. 
This example illustrates that "ethnic" identification among my research participants 
operated on a kind of dual "need to know" basis. On the one hand, young Rwandans 
exhibited a constant desire to "know" the "ethnic" identity of others; yet, on the other 
hand, they revealed to others only what they "needed to know" for the purposes of each 
specific relationship or interaction. 
When and where "ethnic " issues are discussed 
In contrast to the example above, it seemed that once a young Rwandan was in an 
environment where he or she felt confident of being with close friends or family of the 
same "ethnic" group, conversations about "ethnicity" or the groups "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa" were a more frequent occurrence. For example, one evening a few months after I 
met them, the following conversation took place in my presence between three friends 
who had all grown up in Burundi: 
[Elois, b. 1986 in Burundi] It is okay when we are with someone of the other ethnie, we will 
be polite with him and act as if we like him. 
[Yves, b. 1984 in Burundi] We don't speak about certain "things" with them, but when we are 
among our own ethnie, we will speak about them and they will speak about us. 
(I asked what "things" Yves meant). 
[Cedric, b. 1987 in Burundi] Ethnicity and all that. We don't to speak to them about that - 
only in private between us. 
It is clear from this conversation that all three young men were confident that they were 
all of the same "ethnic" group i. e. Tutsi. Later, Cedric told me that his family also 
discussed "ethnic" issues at home: 
We sometimes make comments about ethnic issues and what happened in Rwanda... For 
example, when we are watching television, my mother will always comment on who is Hutu 
and Tutsi etc... Also about the neighbours in the quarter - we talk about their ethnicity and 
what they have done... (Cedric, b. 1987 in Burundi) 
Indeed, I gradually learned that, although "ethnicity" was rarely spoken about in public, 
it was a fairly regular topic of conversation in the private domain, at home and among 
close friends, who were confident of being amongst others of the same "ethnic" 
background. I also discovered that ethnicity was sometimes spoken about indirectly or 
through code words or euphemism in more public settings, as one of my informants 
described about a group of school friends she used to spend time with two years earlier: 
In that group of girls, there were signs we made when someone passed to communicate that 
they were a Hutu... for example, they made letters in the air with their hands to indicate that 
the person was a Hutu... I remember that we mixed our words when we were talking about 
Hutus... or, for example, if the group was talking about their experience during the war and 
then a Hutu girl came, they would change to start talking about their school life and then 
switch back as soon as the girl left. (Jacqueline, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Inter-"ethnic" dating and marriage 
One of the most sensitive issues among young people was dating and marriage between 
indivduals of different "ethnic" backgrounds. Although I came across a few young 
people in "mixed" relationships, this was uncommon in Kigali in 2004-2005. Some 
young people expressly said that they could never engage in such a relationship as the 
following conversation between Cedric, Yves and another of their friends Gilbert (who 
they presented as a [Tutsi] "genocide survivor"): 
[Cedric, b. 1987 in Burundi]: I could never love a Hutu girl, never. 
[Yves, b. 1984 in Burundi]: It wouldn't be possible. 
[Cedric]: If I wanted to go out with a Hutu girl, my parents and friends would never let me do 
that. 
[Gilbert b. 1984 in Rwanda]: For me, it wouldn't be possible. She might poison me. 14 
For many young Rwandans, this was a key reason that they needed to reveal the 
"ethnic" identity of others around them, as Stella attests: 
[P]eople they know, they will find out who is who... if you like a boy you first have to 
enquire about him to check - you know - that he is not Hutu. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
The usual reason given for this fear of dating a person of the other "ethnic" group was 
an inability to trust someone enough to engage in an intimate relationship given what 
happened during the genocide. Many young people referred directly to their horror at 
the fact that some Hutu men killed their own families during the genocide: 
I don't have any Hutu friends. Okay, there are acquaintances at school, people I say hello to, 
but I don't see them outside school. The problem is that you can never be sure of someone. 
You know in the genocide husbands killed wives, your neighbour and friend turned round 
and killed you. So how can you trust a Hutu completely, trust that it can't happen again? 
(Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
You know there are not so many cases now of people marrying when they are different tribe. 
You know many mixed Rwandans were also killed in the genocide... You know a Hutu man, 
he killed his wife because she was Tutsi and then his own children because they have Tutsi 
blood. How can you do that? I can't understand. (Winnie, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
In most cases, however, young people said that it was their parents who were the 
obstacle to relationships between youth from different "ethnic" groups: 
[Mixed relationships] happen among youth, but then the parents don't want it and they split 
up the couple. They say their daughter can't marry someone from a family whose ethnic 
group killed hers... But young people, they don't care so much about these things. (Doreen, 
b. 1982 in Uganda) 
My parents tell me that I should never bring a Hutu boy into their home or I will be cast out 
of the family... so we can't forget about ethnic things, they pass it on to us young people. 
(Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
There are many cases of [mixed] copinage, but the problem can come when they want to 
formalise this in marriage. Even if the couple say to each other that they know they are 
different, but they want to be together anyway, the parents will often forbid it. They will 
always give another reason and not say the real reason. Like they will say it is to do with 
money or because they want their daughter to marry another, but the real reason will be 
tribe... In some cases, you know, they might even eliminate the other... I know a boy who 
had to flee for his life out of the country because of this. (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
I came across several cases where a "mixed" relationship had been prevented or forcibly 
ended by a parent or senior family member, as Jimmy's testimony illustrates: 
114 There is a longstanding fear of poisoning in Rwandan culture. See for example Taylor (1999 pp 115-116) and de 
Lame (2005 pp 176-178). 
Shortly after I arrived in Rwanda [in 1995], I had a girlfriend. We were together two or three 
months, but it was important for me. One day, she introduced me to her family. I thought 
everything went well with them - we got on well together, chatted and all that... But a few 
days later, she came to tell me that it would be impossible for us to continue. There were too 
many obstacles and her parents had told her to end the relationship... [It was because] she 
was Hutu, but I didn't care about this. I just loved her. (Jimmy, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
Whilst I was in Kigali in 2005, there was also a high profile case in the newspapers of a 
vice-mayor of Kigali who had reportedly hired henchmen to take his Tutsi daughter into 
the forest and forcibly abort her unborn baby because the father was a Hutu. In the end 
the young couple apparently fled to Belgium to be together. Indeed, many young people 
of different "ethnic" backgrounds made considerable sacrifices to be together: 
I have a cousin... She had a Hutu boyfriend. They grew up together. During the war, he left 
for Tanzania with his family as a refugee, but he continued to write to my cousin. After the 
war, the family came back and the boy and my cousin continued their relationship. But my 
grandmother tried everything to prevent their relationship. She asked my cousin all the time, 
"How can you be with this Hutu? They killed your parents, your family". She refused to let 
the boy come in the house and when she saw him, she insulted him. Then they wanted to 
marry and she refused, saying that her granddaughter could never marry a Hutu... She even 
insulted his family, accused them of being genocidaires. Eventually, his family also refused 
the relationship... Then the boy left to work in Tanzania. My cousin went to work in 
Umutara and they continued their relationship. The boy tried to earn as much money as 
possible and my cousin tried to get a passport... She left a year ago to marry him in Malawi 
and now she's pregnant. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Interestingly, several young people commented that it was more common for the Tutsi 
parents to try to end such "mixed" relationships before things got too serious: 
When the issue of marriage arises, things become more difficult. The parents of the girl say 
that they don't want a Hutu boy' ts in the house... although both families can have objections, 
it's usually the Tutsi family that poses the most problems. (Paradis, b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
Again, most young people explained that this was the case because of the events of 
1994, when some Hutu men killed or betrayed their Tutsi wives and family members. 
Nonetheless, this was not always the case. For example, Bosco's family had problems 
with the family of his wife Celestine for other reasons: 
C61estine's father spent seven or eight years in prison and was only released in 2002, but 
without a file... [He was imprisoned] because Celestine's brother was in the neighbourhood 
interahamwe, before being killed by these same militia. In fact, Celestine's mother and father 
are Tutsi, but her brother became a interahamwe to protect his family. [O]ther brothers of 
Celestine left to fight with the RPF, so this brother stayed and joined the militia because he 
was afraid for the family... Then the RPF arrived quickly in their quartier... Celestine's 
family were afraid... So they left with their Hutu neighbours and went to Gitarama then 
Gisenyi. They spent a few weeks at Gisenyi and then crossed the border at Goma for a few 
115 The implication here and in the examples above is that most contemporary "mixed" relationships consist of a Hutu 
man and a Tutsi woman as in the past (see chapter 5). Whilst, most of the examples I came across were indeed a Hutu 
man and a Tutsi woman, this was not always the case - see for example, Jimmy's story above. 
weeks before returning to Kigali. Her father spent two or three days here and was put directly 
in prison... Celestine's family aren't really Tutsis after this story... Nonetheless, we had 
problems with my family when I introduced Celestine, because one of my cousins' husband 
and children were killed by the militia group of Celestine's brother. We had a lot of 
problems... we had to hold meeting after meeting until eventually my family accepted that it 
wasn't Celestine who killed our family... 
The problems Bosco and Celestine encountered with Bosco's family were, nonetheless, 
directly tied to the violent events of the 1990s, albeit in somewhat exceptional ways. 
What is also interesting about Bosco's comments is the association he makes between 
the experiences of Celestine's family and their "ethnic" identity - implying that past 
experience is a key factor in defining "ethnic" belonging (see later). Equally, this story 
illustrates something that Rwandans told me time and time again - that if one member 
of a family kills or commits a grave error, the whole family is tarnished. 
The politics of "ethnic "purity and mixing among young people 
It was not until I had been in Kigali for several months and had got to know many 
young people better that I realised that, despite the lack of open dialogue about the 
topic, some were in fact very interested in issues of "mixage" or "inter-ethnic mixing". 
Jimmy first alerted me to this during a conversation about dating and marriage between 
young people of different backgrounds: 
In reality there are lots of mixed people in this country - there were always mixed marriages 
in Rwanda. You know there are even people here in Rwanda who are experts on mixes, who 
can tell you - "Ah you know such and such a person had a Hutu grandfather" or "You see 
that girl over there, she is only really 75% Tutsi"... (Jimmy, b. 1975 in Zaire) 
When I asked Jimmy who these "experts" on mixes were, he replied: 
All the people I know that talk about this are Tutsi - in fact, Tutsi who were born outside 
Rwanda. They consider themselves to be pure Tutsi, but say most of those who were born 
here are mixed with Hutus - so they are Hutu. 
Coincidentally or not, the only other people who made these kinds of assertions during 
our discussions all identified themselves as Tutsis born outside Rwanda. For example, 
continuing the conversation about dating, Cedric commented: 
For survivors, it's never possible to date a Hutu girl. And also Tutsi girls are more beautiful. I 
want a girl who is purely Tutsi. (Cedric, b. 1987 in Burundi) 
I asked Cedric what this implied when traditionally ethnicity was passed via the father 
so a girl could have a Tutsi father and Hutu mother and therefore be Tutsi. 
A Tutsi can't accept that. Both parents have to be Tutsi for another Tutsi to accept a person as 
Tutsi. Otherwise, she is Hutu. (Cedric) 
I commented that there had been a lot of intermarriage in Rwanda, so surely nobody 
could know for sure that his or her own family was not of "mixed" heritage. 
No, we know who all our relations are. I know that I am pure Tutsi. (Cedric) 
The others all nodded at this. Similarly, Stella commented that many young people 
pretended to be Tutsi: 
It happens quite a lot - girls and boys - but then usually you can tell. Often it is mixed people 
that do it - you know mixed girls.., but you know even if someone pretends and you make a 
mistake, as soon as you see the father, or maybe a brother... you realise that ah yes, she is 
one. You realise she is a Hutu... (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
I asked Stella about people of mixed heritage who had a Tutsi father and she responded: 
It doesn't matter. It is the same - they are still mixed with Hutu. 
Vincent and Peter made similar comments about people of "mixed" heritage: 
Often we call them "mixed Hutus", but normally we follow the ethnicity of the father to 
categorise them. But certain extremist Tutsis and Hutus don't consider them to be of their 
ethnic group because they have mixed blood and aren't pure. Certain families... will get 
information about a person's father, grandfather, great grandfather etc before agreeing to a 
marriage of their child. They want to know if there is any Hutu blood. (Vincent, b. 1979 in 
Burundi) 
You know, if someone he is mixed, he will always say he is Tutsi. He will never admit he is 
Hutu and he will attach himself to the Tutsi side of the family. If the mother is Tutsi, he will 
attach himself to the mother's family. It's as if the ideal Rwandan is Tutsi, that's how it is 
here... Others, they will always classify him as Hutu. They will find out his real background 
and then talk about him and say he is not really a Tutsi... (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
I asked Peter about people with a Tutsi father and he responded: 
There he will be considered traditionally as Tutsi, but still many Tutsi will say he is Hutu. 
These comments and conversations reveal a preoccupation with "ethnic purity" and 
"mixing" among a segment of Kigali's youth, which is troublingly close to the 
obsession propagandists during the 1994 genocide demonstrated with detecting "false 
Hutu" i. e. those Tutsi who pretended to be Hutu (abaguze ubwoko) or those of "mixed" 
ethnic heritage (ibyimanyi), and guarding against "infiltration" by Tutsi women who 
were married to Hutu men. For example, the following are transcripts from Kangura, 
the extremist magazine, in the early 1990s: 
A person who adopts the ethnic identity which is not that of his or her birth and who carries 
documentary proof, is he or she not a two-headed beast? (Kangura, November 1990; Chretien 
et al. 1995: p97) 
How many children of mixed marriages hide their true Tutsi hertitage and live like [Hutu]... 
for strategic reasons? (Kangura, February 1992; Chretien et al. 1995: p251). 
The Tutsis have sold their wives and their daughters to Hutu power holders... a plan ... to 
place in advance, invaluable spies in the most influential Hutu circles. (Kangura, November 
1991, Chretien et al 1995: p 161) 
If, therefore, as the material above suggests, it was important for young people in Kigali 
today to know the "ethnic" identity of significant others around them, how did they do 
this in an environment where talking about "ethnicity" was effectively taboo? 
Everyday processes of "ethnic" categorisation 
In the decades prior to the 1994 genocide, it was common for several generations of one 
family to live in the same neighbourhood and levels of internal migration were 
relatively low due to the Habyarimana's restrictive policies (Uvin 1998: ppl15-116; 
Verwimp 2000: PI 1). 116 Families knew each other well and had knowledge of each 
other's ancestors and who had married whom. It was this social intimacy that greatly 
facilitated the work of the authorities in drawing up lists of Tutsi families to be killed 
during the genocide and the local militia in knowing exactly which houses to visit and 
who to look for. Furthermore, every Rwandan over the age of 16 was obliged to carry 
an identity card that displayed their ethnie, so in circumstances where an individual was 
unknown to the authorities, they could be asked to produce their identity card. In 
schools and workplaces, the "ethnic" identity of individual employees and pupils was 
usually noted in their records. '" It was, therefore, mainly in informal or casual 
encounters where a particular individual was unfamiliar, that his or her "ethnic" identity 
might be unknown and need to be determined if circumstances necessitated. 
By contrast, in contemporary Rwanda, although in some rural areas a significant 
number of families are still living in the same place as their ancestors, and families 
often still have knowledge about the ancestry and "ethnic" heritage of their neighbours, 
the situation is different in most parts of Kigali. In all of Rwanda, the city of Kigali has 
felt perhaps the biggest turnover in its population since before the 1994 genocide. 
118 In 
116 Although certain periods were marked with sudden increases in province to province migration, mainly due to 
problems of land scarcity (see UNDP/UNEP 2006: p7-8) 
117 Several of my research participants and other informants attested to this. 
118 Tens of thousands of Tutsi and hundreds of Hutu were killed in Kigali during the 1994 genocide. Following the 
RPF victory in July 1994, virtually all of the former Hutu elites fled the city with hundreds of thousands of Hutu. The 
majority, but not all, of these refugees returned following the forced closure of the refugee camps in Zaire in late 
1996. In the months after the RPF victory, tens of thousands of mainly Tutsi refugees - many of whom had fled 
many parts of urban Kigali today, there are families that did not know each other before 
1994 and therefore have little knowledge of the origins and ancestry of their neighbours. 
Thus, if knowing the "ethnicity" of significant others is so important, how do young 
Rwandans in Kigali today determine the "ethnic" identity of their neighbours, 
colleagues, peers and acquaintances in the absence of ethnic ID cards; with a lack of 
firsthand knowledge of a person's ancestry; and in an environment in which people 
avoid speaking about "sensitive" issues like "ethnicity" and past experiences? My 
findings suggest that this process of determining the "ethnic" identity of others is 
fraught with complexities and uncertainties, which raise fundamental questions about 
the role and meaning of "ethnicity" in the lives of young people today. 
Hutu or Tutsi by blood? The patrilineal system of "ethnic" descent 
From at least the mid-colonial period onwards, it was the practice for a child to "inherit" 
the "ethnic" identity of his or her father, irrespective of the ethnicity of the mother. 119 In 
this patrilineal system of "ethnic" descent, the child of a "mixed" union, for example a 
Hutu man and Tutsi woman - the most common configuration of intermarriage in 
Rwanda between the 1960s and 1980s - was considered to be "Hutu" (and vice versa). 
Prior to 1994, when the RPF-led Government abolished ethnic identity cards, all 
children were officially assigned the "ethnic" identity of their father and were issued 
with an "ethnic" ID card at age 16. Nonetheless, as discussed earlier, there have been 
periodic accusations that some Rwandans had changed the "ethnic identity" recorded on 
their identity card and therefore identity cards have often been seen as unreliable. 
Amongst my respondents, for example, both Francine and Franco spoke of rumours that 
their father or grandfather had changed their "ethnic" identity in the past (see chapter 5). 
When I spoke to my research participants about how a person's "ethnic" identity was 
determined, many young people referred to this patrilineal tradition: 
Here in Rwanda, you always take the ethnicity of your father... So if your father is Hutu, you 
are Hutu, even if your mother is Tutsi. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
In Rwanda, a child is considered the same ethnicity as his father. (Bertrand, b. 1980 in 
Rwanda) 
Rwanda during the violence of 1959,1963-64 and 1973 - also returned to Kigali from other countries to 
dominate 
Kigali's new professional and governing elite. (See "Rwanda" in U. S. Committee for Refugees 2007). 
119 This patrilineal system of ethnic descent dates back to at least the mid colonial period. Chris Taylor (1999: p167) 
argues that there is evidence that prior to the colonial period, a matrilineal system applied. 
Indeed, in situations where a person's parentage was known, I found that they were 
categorised as being of the same "ethnic" identity as their father. Yet, in practice, in 
many situations in everyday life, a person's parentage was unknown and therefore 
young people had to rely on other factors to determine his or her "ethnic" identity. More 
often that not, the key marker used in these situations was physical appearance: 
[I]t's your morphology120 that counts more often than the ethnicity of your father... I was 
with a girl I know yesterday. She is also mixed, but with a Tutsi father and Hutu mother, but 
her physique is purely 100% Hutu and everyone takes her for a Hutu. (Theogene, b. 1983 in 
Rwanda) 
Hutu or Tutsi by appearance? The ongoing pervasiveness of physical stereotypes 
When I asked young Rwandans how a person's "ethnic" identity could be determined, 
most young people replied that, in practice, any Rwandan whose heritage is unknown is 
most commonly categorised to one "side" on the basis of their physical appearance: 
From the face you can tell - the nose and the height. (Winnie, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
Whether the nose is long and fine or large and flat. Also, the build, height and here [pointing 
at her gums], we say that for Hutu, it's red and for Tutsi, black. Also, Tutsi girls often have 
spaces between their teeth. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
You can tell from the physical appearance. I have a friend and she can always tell 100% who 
is Hutu and who is Tutsi... [For "mixed" people] it's harder, but she can still tell that they 
have Hutu blood... The foot - from the toes and the heel - for Hutus this part is very, very 
wide. The fingers and hands of Hutus, they are very hard. It is the same for the shoulders - 
Hutus they are hard, compact... they don't really have a neck like us... The nose - if it is 
sharp and long or flat and wide. My friend can tell also from the ears, but I can't. I can tell 
from the foot and the shoulders and normally I am right. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
Most young Rwandans referred to well-worn stereotypes about differences in body 
height, physical build and the size and shape of the nose between Hutus and Tutsis, 
similar to those that have circulated since the 19`h century writings of European 
explorers, missionaries and colonial administrators (see Prunier 1995: pp23-40; Taylor 
1999: pp55-75; and Mamdani 2002 pp79-88). Some elaborated further to include traits 
like gum colour; alignment of the teeth; the shape of the heel; hardness of the body; 
darkness of the skin; and position of the hairline. 
What was striking was the confidence with which some young people, like Stella, felt 
they could determine the ethnicity of others or detect the presence of "Hutu blood" from 
a detailed repertoire of physical features. The majority of young people, however, said 
that although physical appearance was the primary factor used to categorise others, this 
120 Translated from the French morphologie, meaning the shape and form of something. 
was unreliable in practice. Usually, mistakes were put down to intermarriage rather than 
the inaccuracy of the physical stereotypes themselves: 
It's the morphology first, but often we make mistakes. In fact, if someone is pure from one 
side or the other, really pure, we can immediately determine his or her ethnicity without any 
doubt, but beyond that... there have been many mixes. (Faustin, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
With [people of mixed heritage], we often make mistakes... you can find a boy with a Tutsi 
father and Hutu mother, who is therefore Tutsi, but he has all the traits of his mother and 
others mistake him. Like the boys that came to visit my brother earlier - their father is Hutu 
and their mother is Tutsi. Yet, they have the traits of Tutsis - like true Tutsis - and people 
think they are Tutsi. They know they are Hutus, but they will let others think they are Tutsis. 
(Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
The language used by Consolee and Theogene above is revealing. Consolee comments 
that her brother's friends look "like true Tutsis" although they "know" they are Hutus 
because of the ethnicity of their father. Similarly, Theogene says his friend's appearance 
is "100% Hutu" and therefore she is "taken" as a "Hutu" in spite of having a Tutsi 
father. Both, therefore, simultaneously employ and contest the physical stereotypes by 
referring to people of mixed heritage whose physical appearance does not, apparently, 
betray this mixture and who instead look "100% Hutu" or "like true Tutsis" - 
presumably on the basis of the stereotypical physical traits discussed above. The 
implication seems to be that a person's real ethnicity inside might not correspond to 
their apparent ethnicity displayed on the outside. 
We are therefore left wondering exactly what Consolee and Theogene understand 
ethnicity to be or to mean. On the one hand, they imply that a person's real ethnicity is 
genealogically determined because a child inherits the "ethnic" identity of their father 
whatever the identity of the mother. Yet, on the other hand, they use a set of physical 
markers that rest on a racial understanding of the differences between Hutus and Tutsis, 
which, according to them, are genetically determined. In both senses, the implication is 
that ethnicity is passed through the blood, but in the case of people of "mixed" heritage, 
these two positions become inconsistent. A person could be categorised as "Hutu" on 
the basis of his or her father's "ethnic" group but (assuming momentarily that "ethnic" 
phenotypes are undisputed) not possess "Hutu" traits because he or she has inherited 
physical traits from her Tutsi mother. In other words, if the child of a "mixed" union is 
to "take" or be "given" his or her father's ethnic identity, it seems nonsensical to then 
categorise that child by his or her physical appearance, as he or she may not match 
either stereotype. 
Although some young people were confident that the stereotypes were reliable in the 
cases of "pure" Tutsis and Hutus, others were more doubtful: 
80% of the time, you can see someone's ethnicity from their nose, but 20% you are 
mistaken... 50% of the time you can determine their ethnicity from their height. There are 
those who are mixed where mistakes are made, but there are also Tutsis who are small and 
Hutus who are tall... I had a Hutu father and a Tutsi mother, but with my face and height, I 
am 100% Hutu, even if I am mixed. On the other hand, my sister, she has the face of a Tutsi - 
100%. (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
People say that Hutus are short with big noses and Tutsis are tall and lean, but in reality, there 
have been many mixes and people can easily make mistakes... there are also Hutus that look 
completely like Tutsis and Tutsis like Hutus. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
Yet even those who expressly dismissed this mode of categorising seemed to find it 
difficult to escape using the physical stereotypes in practice. Although most of my 
interlocutors said physical characteristics lacked reliability, the stereotypes remained 
pervasive and young people tended to employ them without reflection in everyday life. 
Similarly, when young people talked about their acquaintances that did not match the 
stereotypes, they frequently used those very stereotypes as a reference point. For 
example, Didier says he knows "Hutus that look completely like Tutsis and Tutsis like 
Hutus" and Bosco comments "with my face and height, I am 100% Hutu, even if I am 
mixed". Knowledge of these anomalous persons did not seem to lead people to 
consciously or actively change the stereotypes. 
Hutu or Tutsi by behaviour? Nature and nurture 
Drawing on theories of "scientific racism", colonial constructions of Rwandan society 
also stressed differences in character and behaviour between Rwanda's "ethnic" groups. 
The "Hamitic" Tutsi were often portrayed as being of superior intelligence, cunning, 
clannish and naturally disposed to lead, whereas the "Bantu" Hutu and "pygmoid" Twa 
were variously portrayed as slower-witted, naive and more suited to physical labour 
(see Eltringham 2006 pp425-446 and Taylor 1999: pp55-97). A small, but nonetheless 
significant, number of my informants referred to such behavioural stereotypes: 
[Before the war] we always learnt that Tutsis were cunning, that they hid the truth and had 
secrets. Even today I see this difference - that Tutsis are more cunning than Hutus. Hutus are 
open - they will tell you what they think directly, not like Tutsis. (Thdogene, b. 1983 in 
Rwanda) 
[I]t's said that Hutus and Tutsis have different ideas and I think it's true.., what I see is that 
Tutsis are wise and have virtuous ideas. But Hutus don't manage to control themselves. They 
say everything that comes into their heads without reflection and without knowing how to 
keep quiet. They don't know how to keep secrets. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
Tutsis are more arrogant, more cunning - they always have a sense of superiority over others, 
they are more closed. These are the negative sides, the faults. But on the other hand, they are 
calmer, more serious and stable. If they forge relationships, these generally last longer. Hutus 
are more open and sociable. They make friends easily, but are also unstable. Sometimes, they 
make friends with you, but it's not too serious and it doesn't last. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
When I asked where these differences in character or behaviour originated, opinions 
were divided on whether they were innate or learned through socialisation: 
I think that it's in the blood. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
It's about education, how a person is brought up to behave by his or her parents. (Fidele, b. 
1978 in Zaire) 
I think they are born like that, but there is also the way people speak about certain things that 
marks the difference. For example, when talking about milk, we can never speak of `amata 
menshi' - lots of milk - or `amata make' - little milk. We can only say `amata' - milk... 
Tutsis never make errors like this, but Hutus, especially those in the countryside make a lot of 
mistakes and we can tell that someone is Hutu because of this. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
In spite of expressing these views, the same young people then seemed to contradict 
themselves by referring to people who did not fit the behavioural stereotypes. When I 
asked Theogene whether he had a mix of the behavioural traits he described, given he 
was of mixed heritage, he replied, "No, all the same, I think I am like the Hutus. " 
Equally, Fidele talked about how people of mixed heritage were categorised: 
It depends on a person's tendencies. If he had a Tutsi mother and Hutu father, but he inclines 
more towards his mother's side, we will categorise him as Tutsi... It's more important the 
character, inclinations and attitude that he has taken. For example, I have a friend who is 
mixed like that with a Hutu father and Tutsi mother, but his physiognomy and attitudes are 
really Tutsi. You can't see the difference. So, we have accepted him in my group of friends 
as a Tutsi. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
Fidele again uses stereotypes of "Hutu" and "Tutsi" behaviour as reference points in 
describing his friend's character, rather than seeing this anomaly as a challenge to the 
their reliability. 
Hutu or Tutsi by experience? How a person's past affects ethnic categorisation 
There are many situations in daily life where Rwandans meet others whose family 
background is unknown, whose appearance is ambiguous or does not match prevalent 
stereotypes or where there are apparent contradictions between the conclusions that 
might be drawn from their appearance, behaviour and entourage of friends respectively. 
In such situations, many young people told me that a Rwandan might try to get 
information about a person's background from the person themselves or from associates 
as a means to determine their "ethnic" identity. As talking directly about "ethnicity" 
was effectively taboo, questions would often take a more indirect form, for example 
asking where a person was born or where they were during the war and genocide: 
Sometimes people make mistakes about me. For example, when I was at the Ingando' there 
was a guy who told me lots of things about divisionism and all that. He thought I was Tutsi... 
Yet, there was another guy who told me things about the camps in Congo and the injustices 
and thought I was Hutu... Sometimes, people ask me questions about the past to test me, to 
know who I am - like `How did you manage to escape? (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Emmanuel says that others are often confused by his ambiguous physical appearance 
and sometimes try to discover his ethnic identity by asking questions about his past. 
Yet, in recounting his experiences, Emmanuel demonstrates that he has also made a 
direct connection between what the others say - about their past or their politics - and 
their "ethnic" identity. I came across many similar examples where young people made 
assumptions about the "ethnic" identity of others on the basis of their past experiences. 
For example, if it was known that an individual had spent time in the refugee camps in 
Zaire following the genocide, he or she was automatically assumed to be a Hutu. Yet - 
although the vast majority of people who fled to Zaire were of Hutu or "mixed" origin - 
there were exceptions. For example, two of the eight young people I interviewed who 
had spent time in the camps identified themselves as Tutsis - including Calliste: 
We were at the barrier trying to leave Remera and there were two lines - one of Hutus and 
one of Tutsis. My parents and my six brothers and sisters were in the Tutsi line and they were 
all killed... I was hidden with the Hutus. I was young and they couldn't see the difference. 
Afterwards, I fled with the others to Congo - far from Goma. I lived in the camp there with 
these people for two years before returning to Rwanda. (Calliste, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Similarly, anyone who was a "returnee" born outside Rwanda - for example in Uganda, 
Burundi or Zaire - and had returned to Rwanda with their families after the RPF victory 
of July 1994 was almost always assumed to be a Tutsi. The knowledge that someone 
was a "returnee" from one of these countries was effectively taken as a proxy for them 
being a Tutsi and it was rare for further questions to be asked. Again, whilst it is true 
that the vast majority were Tutsis, this did not apply to every single person or family: 
A family I know... left the country before the war to find work in Uganda... They had sold 
their land in Rwanda and had no fallback here. So they left the country for economic 
reasons... But when the RPF attacked, this family started to say that they had left Rwanda for 
political reasons like the others [Tutsis] and they used this to take back their land by force. 
But this family is Hutu, 100% Hutu. I know them well. (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
I would say that from Congo, 70% of families were mixed. But when they came back to the 
country, they saw that Hutus were considered malefactors and therefore they were never 
going to say that they were Hutu or even that they had Hutu family... all the people who came 
back presented themselves as Tutsis. (Jules, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
[U]s from Uganda, we don't really look like Tutsis. Yet we think it's us who are the real 
Tutsis, the real Rwandans and we are very proud of that. But... in the 1950s, Hutu and Tutsi 
married each other - even there in Uganda. Many Rwandans migrated there for economic 
reasons also, including many Hutu. If there was a rich Hutu, he could find a Tutsi girl to 
marry. So in reality many people from Uganda are mixed, even if they claim to be pure Tutsi. 
(Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
Even Bosco, after recounting the atypical story of his wife Celestine's family during the 
genocide (above), commented "Celestine's family aren't really Tutsis after this story", 
also implying that being a "Tutsi" is tied to a particular past experience. 
The assumption that there was a correspondence between a person's past experience 
and ethnic identity also worked the other way round i. e. knowledge about a person's 
ethnic identity was often used to make inferences about their past. Despite the 
complexity of their own experiences, there were strong stereotypes prevalent among 
young people about the "Tutsi experience" and the "Hutu experience" of past events 
(see also chapter 2). The most common assumption was to equate "Tutsi" with "victim" 
or "survivor" and "Hutu" with "perpetrator" (see also chapter 7): 
The problem here in Rwanda is that we are divided into two groups. There are the survivors 
and the Hutus and there is no trust between them. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
We cannot forget what those Hutus did to our people... I can talk to someone Hutu, maybe 
share a beer with him, but I can't stop thinking he wants to kill me. I feel I can't trust him... 
Even if he didn't kill, for sure his father or brother or uncle did. (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
For some young people - especially those who grew up outside Rwanda - anyone who 
was Hutu was automatically suspected of participation during the 1994 genocide. This 
was in spite of the fact that even the most pessimistic of published estimates puts the 
proportion of the adult Hutu population who participated in the violence at 25%. 
Many others were aware, however, that some Hutus risked their own lives to save their 
Tutsi compatriots and that many Hutus were also killed during the civil war, genocide 
and its aftermath. Yet even some of those who were personally saved or helped by Hutu 
friends or neighbours - like Magnifique122 - still globalised guilt to all Hutus: 
121 This figure from Penal Reform International (2006) is an estimate based on the numbers of people likely to be 
accused of genocide during the gacaca, which they put at 750,000 based on figures from the pilot phase. However, as 
Scott Strauss (2004: pp85-98) notes, estimates of the numbers of perpetrators during the Rwandan genocide vary 
massively from "tens of thousands" to the three million figure often used by Government officials. Strauss' own 
estimate based on micro-level data puts the figure at 175,000 - 210,000 or 7-8% of the adult Hutu population 
in 1994. 
122 Magnifique sought refuge in the Saint Familie church in the centre of Kigali during the genocide with her two 
baby siblings and managed to hide until rescued by the RPF. Several months after the genocide, when she received 
the news of the death of her parents, she and her siblings went to live with Hutu friends of her parents. 
I don't have any Hutu friends. I find it too difficult... You don't know what his or her parents 
have done... Hutus have done lots of bad things to Tutsis and things can turn bad again 
suddenly like they did in 1959 and 1994. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Similarly, the exclusive equation of "Tutsi" with victimhood denies the experiences of 
thousands of young people of Hutu or "mixed" heritage who lost their families during 
the war, genocide and its aftermath, as chapters 5 and 7 will discus in greater depth. 
Hutu or Tutsi by politics? Ethnically determined visions of Rwanda's past 
As discussed in chapter 3, another common assumption among young Rwandans was 
that a person's political position and views about Rwanda's past - in particular about 
the origins of ethnicity, violence and genocide - would be determined by their "ethnic" 
identity i. e. if a person was known or believed to be Hutu, it was usually assumed he or 
she held a particular "Hutu" view. of past and present events: 
There are stereotypes and ideas about politics and the past that are held by people of a certain 
ethnic background, even if they don't match reality. (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
If I put myself in the position of a Rwandan from here - not a Tutsi -I will tell you that [these 
groups] have existed for a very long time, that the Hutus came from Uganda and Congo, the 
Tutsis from Ethiopia and the Twa were the indigenous population... The Tutsis were 
pastoralists and came to settle in Rwanda because of the good environment for rearing 
cattle-They established the monarchy and were the kings and reigning class and the Hutus 
were the low people. But the other - Tutsi - response I can give you is that before 
colonisation, Hutus and Tutsis existed, but the difference between them was a matter of 
wealth. The Tutsis were rich and the Hutus were poorer, but a person could'change between 
Hutu and Tutsi if he earned a lot of money or lost it... Then when the colonists arrived, they 
divided people on the basis of wealth and gave them identity cards... Then they sensitized the 
Hutu, telling them that they were the majority, but the rich people dominated them. So, the 
Hutus started a revolution. (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
Such assumptions were common and in some cases the views a person expressed were 
used as indicators of their "ethnic" identity. Equally, their "ethnic" identity could be 
used to make inferences about their political views. Yet, as chapter. 3 demonstrated, 
when individuals recounted their own views about the past, there was only limited 
correspondence between their views and their "ethnic" identity. Although there were 
certain cases where young people's narratives broadly coincided with the "Hutu" or 
"Tutsi" meta-narratives of history discussed by some authors, in most cases young 
people gave far more mixed or contradictory accounts of past events. Yet, as with the 
other stereotypes discussed above, the assumption that people's political views were 
ethnically determined endured, despite the weight of evidence to the contrary. 
The pervasiveness of "ethnicity" and "ethnic" stereotypes 
The narratives and practices of young people explored above demonstrate that - despite 
current state policies that seek to de-emphasise "ethnic" identity - the categories "Hutt" 
and "Tutsi" remain salient in contemporary Rwanda. Although, ethnicity is not the only 
identity that is significant in contemporary Rwanda (see chapter 6), my research 
suggests that it remains the most important in everyday social relations in urban Kigali. 
Firstly, young people themselves believe that "ethnic" identity is still an important 
factor in Rwandan politics and society - influencing the way people interact, what they 
talk about, the levels of trust they feel, and the intimacy of the relationships they form. 
Secondly, young Rwandans demonstrate a persistent need to determine the "ethnic" 
identity of those with whom they regularly interact and to categorise them on an 
ongoing basis. Thirdly, there are powerful collective stereotypes about the physical 
attributes, behaviour, political views and experiences of "the Tutsi" and "the Hutu", 
which young people use to categorise others and navigate their everyday social worlds. 
The fact that "ethnic" categorisation occurs in Rwandan society is of course in itself 
unremarkable. All societies have their schemas of social categorisation or collective 
identification, their means of classifying people into groups or categories using criteria 
of similarity and difference: 
[W]e can't live routine lives as humans without identification, without knowing... who we 
are and who others are... Without repertoires of identification we would not be able to relate 
to each other meaningfully or consistently. (Jenkins 2004: p7) 
Baumann and Gingrich argue that such "grammars"123 of identity/alterity are key to 
structuring and providing stability to our social worlds and societies: 
Just as linguistic grammars offer a set of rules which allow sentences to be formulated, so 
these social grammars offer a set of rules which allow otherings to be articulated. (Baumann 
and Gingrich 2004: p xi) 
123 Baumann and Gingrich (2004) use the term `grammars' to describe these shared modalities of attributing identity 
and alterity to self and other, stressing that these  grammars' are not defined by their content, but by "the way in 
which they arrange whatever content of self and other they are used to structure" (p ix). Drawing on the empirical and 
theoretical work of other leading social scientists, Baumann and Gingrich describe three different 'grammars' they 
say account for schema of social categorisation in most societies: (i) "Orientalization" (after Edward Said's 
Orientalism), which "constitutes self and other by negative mirror imaging"; (ii) "Segmentation" (after Evans- 
Pritchard's work on The Nuer), which "works by context-dependent and hence sliding scales of selfings and 
otherings among parties conceived as formally equal. "; and (iii) "Encompassment" (after Louis Dumont's Homo 
Hierarchius), which "works by a hierarchized sub-inclusion of others who are thought... to be really `part of us' 
(ibid. ppx-xi). 
At an individual level, these categories provide a way for individuals to associate with, 
attach themselves to, or differentiate themselves from others. At a group level, they 
provide a platform for the articulation and pursuit of common interests. 
In the case of the young people I researched in Rwanda, however, there were two things 
that were striking: (i) The sheer pervasiveness of "ethnic" categorisation in everyday 
relations and relationships; and (ii) The persistence of the various "conceptual" ethnic 
stereotypes in young people's imaginaries, despite the number of "concrete" persons 
around them that contradicted these stereotypes. 
Firstly, the material in this chapter has demonstrated that, although not immediately 
apparent in everyday social life, the need to reveal the "ethnic" identity of significant 
others was a constant preoccupation for many young people. As the next chapters will 
also reveal, although not the only identity that was relevant in their lives, "ethnic" 
identity predominated in almost all social relations and interactions. This constant need 
to categorise others was clearly related to recent events and reflected a deeply 
entrenched sense of shock at the brutality and intimacy of the 1994 genocide. Whatever 
its complexities, the genocide primarily divided Rwandan society on "ethnic" lines, 
with most of the victims Tutsis and most of the killers Hutus. In many cases, people 
were betrayed or killed by those closest to them - neighbours, friends, colleagues and 
even members of their own family. Time and time again young people commented that 
this made it difficult to trust other people, especially those of a different "ethnic" group. 
This apprehension about others was heightened by the social context in Kigali in 2004- 
2005 where many people had not known each other before 1994 and rarely spoke 
openly about their past experiences. It was also intensified by the onset of the gacaca 
trials, which regularly produced new suspects in every neighbourhood and provided 
opportunities for avenging other grievances by making false accusations (see chapter 7). 
Although most of my research participants were children in 1994 and therefore unlikely 
to have participated in the killing, this need to know the "ethnic" identity of others also 
appeared to be about the future. Many young people felt there was a real prospect of 
violence returning to Rwanda in the not so distant future and were in little doubt that 
conflict returned, Rwanda would once more polarise on "ethnic" lines (see chapter 7). 
This need to categorise the other also, therefore, seemed to be about predicting which 
"side" a person would be on if the violence started again - trying to establish whether a 
particular individual would be a friend or enemy. Equally, attempts by young people to 
conceal information about their own "ethnic" identity and past experiences - as well as 
a strategy to make the best of the social climate and protect themselves against rumour 
- might make them a less sure target if violence broke out again. 
Secondly, this chapter has demonstrated the circulation of a number of powerful 
stereotypes about "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" - some of which have been reproduced 
from the period before the genocide, and some of which are related to the events of the 
genocide itself. These stereotypes - physical, behavioural, past experiences, political 
views - seemed to be key facets of a kind of archetypal or "conceptual Tutsi" and its 
"Hutu" counterpart, 124 which were central to the way young people understood and 
navigated their social worlds. Yet, similarly to what Zygmunt Bauman (1989) has 
described (see chapter 1), the accounts above also reveal considerable discrepancies 
between the "conceptual Tutsi" and "conceptual Hutu" as invoked by young people and 
the more complex social reality around them. In many cases, a young person's own 
appearance, behaviour, experiences or views did not fit the stereotypes or they gave 
examples of people they knew who did not match them. Yet these anomalous persons 
and even blatant counter-stereotypes did not seem to prompt young people to reflect on 
the validity of the stereotypes and most continued to use them without reflection in 
daily life. There was a kind of coexistence of the "conceptual Hutu" and "conceptual 
Tutsi" of young people's imaginaries and the "concrete" individual Hutus, Tutsis and 
"Hutsis" that peopled their social worlds and rarely corresponded to these constructs. 
Furthermore, the material presented here shows that the different criteria used to 
categorise others were often inconsistent in practice and could lead to contradictory 
conclusions about the identity of the same individual. As the next chapter shows, the 
process of categorising others is especially complex in the case of people of "mixed" 
ethnic heritage, whose appearance and past experiences may be particularly ambiguous. 
Overall, there seemed to be a pervasive fear that a person might not be who or what 
they seemed - that their "real" identity inside might not correspond to their "apparent" 
identity on the outside. This uncertainty seemed to increase the level of mistrust and 
make the quest to reveal the "ethnic" identity of others and conceal the self more urgent. 
124 All my interlocutors implicitly or explicitly invoked or referred to a "conceptual Hutu" or "conceptual Tutsi" at 
some point during our conversations, although there was not of course a singular "conceptual Tutsi" or "conceptual 
Hutu" with a fixed meaning. Rather there were different clusters of meanings and stereotypes attached to categories 
"Tutsi" and "Hutu" by different people. 
CHAPTER 5: 
RWANDA'S "HUTSI": THE LIVES AND EXPERIENCES OF YOUTH OF 
MIXED ETHNIC HERITAGE 
In Rwanda, a child is for the father and is considered the same ethnicity as his father... [but] 
personally, I can't class myself in either one group or the other because I am not a true Tutsi, 
nor a true Hutu. For example, if you take a red flower and you mix it with a white flower, it 
won't give either a red flower or a white flower. You get another colour... Other people, if 
they know your ancestors, will categorise you like your father - otherwise, on the basis of 
your appearance. (Bertrand, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
In Rwanda - as in many societies where extreme violence has taken place between 
groups on the basis of their apparently different ethnic, national or religious identities - 
there was a long history of cohabitation and cooperation between Hutus, Tutsis and 
Twas prior to the violence. Although punctuated by periods of tension and conflict, in 
Rwanda as in other contexts (e. g. see Bringa 1995: pp37-84 on Bosnia), cooperation 
had extended into the realm of friendship and intermarriage and "ethnicity" was one of 
several affiliations that gave individuals a social stake in different times and places. Yet, 
as chapter 1 discussed, in a context of insecurity, "ethnic" identity suddenly took 
primacy, eclipsing other connections and affiliations among individuals. The fluidity of 
everyday processes of identification and belonging was lost and all members of society 
had to be shoehorned into one or other of the belligerent categories. In such situations, 
when categorical enemies are defined and violence begins, the plight of "mixed" 
families is often forgotten and their experiences silenced. In the aftermath of such 
violence, we also know little about the children of "mixed" unions who must live in a 
polarised social context where they belong to both - or neither - of the polar categories. 
The aim of this chapter is to help to address these gaps by examining the lives and 
experiences of young Rwandans living in Kigali today who describe their "ethnic" 
heritage as "mixed". It builds on the discussion in the last chapter, which looked at 
processes of "other"-categorisation, to consider how these relate to processes of "self'- 
categorisation. It focuses in depth on the cases of eight individuals, exploring how their 
mixed identity has shaped their past experiences, everyday social relations, and sense of 
belonging. It also examines the strategies they adopt to cope with their "mixed" heritage 
and to negotiate their daily social worlds. The chapter raises important questions about 
the position of a significant number of Rwandans, who do not fit the binary "ethnic" 
logic that persists in Rwanda today. 
"Ethnic" intermarriage 125 in Rwanda 
Anywhere from a significant minority to a majority of contemporary Rwandans are likely to 
be children of Hutu and Tutsi intermarriages over the centuries. This means that we cannot 
equate the identities Hutu and Tutsi with those identified as Hutu and Tutsi when the process 
was set in motion. Rather than being biological offspring of Tutsi of centuries ago, today's 
Tutsi need to be understood as children of mixed marriages who have been constructed as 
Tutsi through the lens of patriarchal ideology and the institutional medium of patriarchal 
family. (Mamdani 2002: p54) 
Although there are numerous references in the literature on Rwanda to "frequent" or 
"considerable" intermarriage between Hutus and Tutsis, 126 there is no precise 
information available about the actual levels of "ethnic" intermarriage in Rwanda today 
or in the past (Mamdani 2002: p54). David Newbury (1998: p84) says that reliable 
estimates suggest that at least 25% of Rwandans today would have both Hutu and Tutsi 
representatives among their eight grandparents and that in some regions this figure is 
likely to exceed 50%. The key reason for this lack of data is the patrilineal system of 
descent that was followed in Rwanda from pre-colonial times onwards, where a child 
traditionally belonged to his or her father's lineage. Thus, in cases where a man married 
a woman from outside his clan or lineage group, any children of the union would inherit 
their group identity and status from their father, irrespective of their mother's lineage 
(De Lame pp385-458). The precise situation with respect to intermarriage between 
Hutus and Tutsis is less clear, because the nature of these categories prior to the arrival 
of Europeans is contested (see chapter 1). Nonetheless, many commentators state that 
intermarriage between Hutus and Tutsis did occur in the pre-colonial period and that 
there was an awareness of how this was influenced by and affected status: 
Inter-caste marriage was not prohibited between Hutu and Tutsi. Hutu informants say it 
happened frequently, Tutsi informants claim that such marriages were very rare, but that 
Tutsi often had Hutu concubines. This discrepancy shows clearly that for a Tutsi to take a 
Hutu wife in a primary marriage entailed a loss of prestige. It was resorted to mainly because 
of poverty. Bride-wealth was lower in these inter-caste unions... A prosperous Hutu could 
marry a Tutsi girl, but then the bride-wealth was often greater than that for a Tutsi (three 
cows instead of one). (Maquet 1961: pp65-66) 
Chris Taylor also says that in the pre-colonial and early colonial period a wealthy Hutu 
man could marry into a Tutsi family as a means of social advancement. Contrary to 
Maquet, and the patrilineal tradition, however, Taylor (1999: p167-168) says that the 
125 As Eriksen (1997) points out, it is important to be aware that "`the very notion of `mixed marriage' presupposes 
an ethnically informed epistemology" (p263). Furthermore, as Mary Douglas (1966) has argued, notions of purity are 
to a large extent constructed in opposition to `mixity' or categorical hybridity. 
126 See for example Chretien et al (1995: pl61), Keane (1996: pt 1) Prunier (1995: p5 and p249) and Taylor (1999: 
p167-168). Danielle De Lame notes that there is a mention of frequent `interbreeding' in the 1926 report of the 
Belgian Administration (De Lame 2005: p101) 
children of this union were usually considered "Tutsi" - but he does not refer to specific 
evidence or comment on how widespread this practice was. Based on her extensive 
work on the hill of Murundi, however, Danielle de Lame (2005: ppl46-147; p392) also 
describes situations where young male newcomers from outside a lineage would take a 
local wife as a way to secure land and enter the lineage and that, under these 
circumstances, children of such marriages would be considered members of the 
mother's lineage. 
In the mid-colonial period, when every Rwandan was assigned an official "ethnic" 
identity during the 1933 census (Mamdani 2002a: p98-99), it theoretically became 
possible to register instances of "ethnic" intermarriage. The Belgian colonial authority, 
however, adopted the system of patrilineal descent and the children of Hutu-Tutsi 
unions were therefore not described as "mixed", rather they were assigned the ethnic 
identity of their father. For this reason, there are no official figures of levels of 
intermarriage in the late colonial period. Equally, after independence in 1962, the new 
government retained ethnic identity cards and the same patrilineal system. Although 
there are again no official figures from this period, it is often noted in the literature that 
levels of intermarriage were "significant" between the 1960s and 1980s - particularly 
amongst the ruling elite (e. g. Taylor 1999: p155). 
The most common configuration of intermarriage in this period - especially among 
Hutu elites - was a Hutu man marrying a Tutsi woman. Chris Taylor (1999: pp169- 
170) examines the possible motivations for "ethnic" intermarriage in an environment 
where Hutus were politically and socially dominant and marriage outside one's "ethnic" 
group was generally discouraged. From the Tutsi woman's perspective, he argues, the 
advantages of marrying a Hutu man included protection for the woman and her family 
in the event of "ethnic" troubles and better educational prospects for her children. From 
the Hutu man's perspective, however, the material benefits were less evident. Instead, 
Taylor argues, Hutu men continued to marry Tutsi women due to the ongoing 
dominance of colonial ideas, which revered Tutsi women as being of superior beauty 
(see chapter 6). He argues that the ambivalence of Hutu extremist men towards Tutsi 
women in the lead up to the genocide demonstrates the extent to which these Hamitic 
myths of the intellectual and physical superiority of Tutsis had endured in Rwanda: 
At one level [Hutu extremists] were certainly aware that to preserve the racial purity of Hutu, 
they had to categorically denounce Tutsi women as objects of desire. At the same time, they 
also knew that they themselves were not free of the forbidden desire. (Taylor 1999: p174) 
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, as the political and economic situation worsened and 
political leaders began to promote "Hutu unity" and deploy an anti-Tutsi rhetoric, ethnic 
intermarriage and ambiguous ethnic identities became less tolerated (Taylor 1999: 
p155) with calls for ethnic "transparency" (Chretien et al 1995: pp95-109). Racial 
purity was emphasised as a key component of Hutu identity, levels of intermarriage fell 
and Tutsi women were increasingly vilified in Hutu extremist literature (Taylor 1999: 
p156 and pp170-179). The first of the infamous "Hutu Ten Commandments" published 
in the extremist magazine Kangura in December 1990 read: 
Every Hutu man [Muhutu] must know that whenever he finds a Tutsi woman [Umututsikazi], 
she is working for her Tutsi ethnic cause. In consequence, any Hutu is a traitor who marries a 
Tutsi woman; acquires a Tutsi mistress; or makes a Tutsi woman his secretary or protegee. 
(Chretien et al 1995: p 141) 
In the months leading up to the genocide, Hutu extremist literature contained violent 
sexual imagery and acts of sexual violence against Tutsi women increased. Chris Taylor 
argues that this vilification of Tutsi women was related to the socially liminal position 
they occupied, capable of undermining the categories "Tutsi" and "Hutu" altogether: 
[I]n marriages or long-term sexual liaisons with Hutu men, they were giving birth to children 
who were de jure Hutu but de facto 50 per cent Tutsi. By logical extension, the perpetuation 
and proliferation of Hutu-Tutsi unions threatened the categorical boundary between Hutu and 
Tutsi. (Taylor 1999: p156) 
During the genocide itself, Tutsi women were often subjected to rape and horrific acts 
of torture and killing (African Rights 2004; Taylor 1999: pp140-141, p176 - see also 
chapter 6). The fate of Tutsi women married to Hutu men varied. Some Hutu men 
managed to save their wives, others killed their wives themselves to spare them from 
brutalisation, and others appeared to kill them more willingly (Prunier 1995: p257-258; 
Taylor 1999: p156). Testimonies suggest that the- fate of children of "mixed" parentage 
also varied considerably during the genocide (see Christine's testimony in Hatzfeld 
2000: ppl35-144, Prunier 1995: p258). In some cases, people who were known to be of 
"mixed" ethnic heritage were targeted along with Tutsis because they were considered 
impure due to their Tutsi blood. In many other cases, however, and as will be 
demonstrated by the stories in this chapter, their fate depended on other factors such as 
their physical appearance, social networks and luck. 
The plight of "mixed" families during the genocide and its aftermath 
Although aware of the significant levels of Hutu-Tutsi intermarriage in Rwanda in the 
1970s and 1980s, I had not expected that over a third of the young people I worked with 
would describe their heritage as "mixed". Of my 46 research participants, 16 young 
people identified themselves as "mixed". This included those who had one Hutu parent 
and one Tutsi parent, those who had at least one parent who was of mixed Hutu-Tutsi 
origin and two people who knew they were "mixed" but did not know their precise 
"ethnic" heritage. Among these 16 people, by far the most common family 
configuration was a Hutu father and Tutsi mother. There were four people with at least 
one parent who was of "mixed" heritage and only one young person who had a Tutsi 
father and Hutu mother. As my relationship with each young person developed over 
time, each spoke more openly about their "mixed" identity, how it had shaped their past 
experiences during the violence and genocide, and how it affected their contemporary 
lives in Kigali. In this chapter, I will focus on eight young people of "mixed" heritage - 
Bosco, Evelyne, Faustin, Francine, Jean-Claude, Paradis, Rose and Theogene - whose 
lives, experiences and views bring into sharp relief the complexities of negotiating the 
current polarised social environment in Kigali on a day-to-day basis. Firstly, I turn to 
their very different experiences during the war, genocide and it aftermath. 
Paradis (b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
I met Paradis in October 2004 whilst waiting for a bus in the neighbourhood where I 
lived in Kigali. Paradis was 17 years old and in her penultimate year of secondary 
school. Her mother had died in a car crash shortly after the genocide and Paradis lived 
at home with her father and four siblings. Over the ensuing months, I spent many hours 
with Paradis at her home, in a local cabaret, or going for a walk and picnic with her 
neighbourhood friends. A few weeks after we first met, Paradis recounted what 
happened to her family during the genocide when she was seven years old: 
I was here during the war and then the genocide... My mother, she was Tutsi and my father, 
he is Hutu. They wanted to kill my father and all of us because my father had a Tutsi wife... 
It was the mayibobos127 who came here with machetes, but my father gave them chickens and 
money... and they left us that day. We stayed at the house praying all day. Then one day... 
we went to the Catholic Church down the hill to seek refuge - when it rained the interahamwe 
went home and stopped killing - but when we arrived there, we found the church full of dead 
bodies. So, we returned home and prayed constantly. Then, we were lucky. The inkotanyi 
arrived... and we escaped with them to Ndera... about two weeks after the genocide started. 
127 A pejorative term usually used to describe streets kid that loosely means ruffian'. 
Evelyne (b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Evelyne was one of a group of four girls I met in November 2004 who had all been 
supported by the children's centre L'Espoir, 128 where Theogene had also lived for a 
number of months. Evelyne was 19 when we met and worked at the local market 
sewing and repairing clothes to support her mother and younger twin brothers. Her 
father had died in a car accident when she was five and her brothers had a different 
father, who did not live with them or support them. A few months after we met, 
Evelyne told me that she had' been staying with her father's family in a rural area of 
Kibuye province when the genocide started when she was nine years old: 
My mother was Tutsi and my father Hutu. During the genocide, my father's brothers 
suddenly said that they didn't believe that I was really the daughter of their brother and that 
my mother had cheated my father and slept with a Tutsi. So they said I was pure Tutsi and 
nothing to do with their family. They left for Congo and didn't want to take me with them, so 
they dropped me in the Zone Turquoise129 at Kibuye and left me there. It was there I found 
my mother who had been in Kibuye town and had also survived the massacres. 
Theogene (b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
I met Theogene via his best friend Emmanuel, who had been a youth researcher on an 
NGO research project on street children that I worked on in early 2004. Theogene was 
22 years old when we met and had just finished his final year at secondary school. 
While he was awaiting his results, he translated for me during interviews with young 
people in his neighbourhood, most of which were connected to L'Espoir children's 
centre. When I first met Theogene in front of another young man, he claimed he was a 
genocide survivor, but later apologised for lying to me and explained that his family had 
been killed by the RPA towards the end of the genocide when he was 11 years old. He 
has a Hutu father and Tutsi mother, although I did not discover this until later: 
When the RPF130 attacked, I went with my parents, my little brother and little sister to a big 
house up the hill where we sought refuge with lots of other families. The RPF attacked with 
grenades and we all fled in different directions... I wasn't with my parents, I was with some 
other children and we hid in the sorghum for two days. My parents and my brother and sister 
were killed, but I only found that out two years later when I got back from Congo... 
This was not the end of Theogene's suffering - he then recounted what happened to him 
after his parents were killed: 
128 This is a fictional name to protect the identity of my research participants. 
129 The humanitarian zone set up by French soldiers mid way through the genocide to protect Rwandan civilians. 
130 Although the rebel army was called the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) 
was the political wing, it is common for Rwandans to use the term RPF to refer to the rebel movement as a whole. 
After two days, we went to Nyanza where there was the FAR13' camp and my older half- 
brother was a soldier. We stayed there for a few days until the RPF attacked. My brother tried 
to protect his boss and was shot and injured. Each soldier took a child and we left for 
Gitarama, but my brother died there, as there wasn't enough medicine... Then another 
soldier, a Christian man, took pity and decided to take me with him to his family in 
Cyangugu. We stayed there for several weeks and then... fled across the border when the 
RPF took Cyangugu. We went to Kamanyora camp in Uvira, where I stayed with the soldier 
until both he and his sister decided to marry. Then suddenly he started to treat me and the 
other boy badly - he hit us. It was as if he didn't know how to get rid of us. So one day, we 
decided to leave for Nyangezi camp at Bukavu. I found another religious man there and he 
decided to take me to live with him as his house help... 
I stayed with the man until the end of 1996 when the RPF attacked the camp and killed lots of 
people. We were lucky and managed to escape into the forest. We tried to continue, but after 
two months, we couldn't go any further because the RPF blocked the route. So we turned 
round, left the forest and found the Red Cross. We stayed two nights there and then we were 
taken to Cyangugu, where the man left with the adults and I was put in a CONCERN 
orphanage for two weeks. I then spent three months in another orphanage in Butare whilst 
they looked for my family. Eventually, they found my big sister and little sister and since 
then we have lived together in our family home. 
Rose (b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
Rose was one of Paradis' best friends and lived a few streets away from Paradis with 
her father, stepmother and younger sister Lydia. Rose was 18 when we met and had just 
started her last year of secondary school. She also had three siblings who were living or 
studying abroad. On one of the first occasions when we met alone, I asked if her family 
had been in Kigali during the war and genocide. Her response below implied that her 
family had been targets during the genocide (i. e. that they were Tutsi), but I later 
discovered that her mother, who died in 1989, had been Tutsi and her father Hutu: 
The first day, the 60' April, my father got a call in the evening from a friend who told him 
about the death of the President... The next day, my father went to talk to our neighbour who 
was in the President's party, which was very strong in the country. My father wasn't in this 
party, but he wasn't in the opposition party either. We weren't interested in politics in our 
family. The neighbour said he could protect us, which he did for those first few days. Two 
days later, he said he would help us leave, but the day we intended to leave there were serious 
killings in the next quartier. There were also bombardments over the house... 
After another two days, we left with our neighbour's brother in his car. At the first barrier, we 
had problems. The interahamwe asked how we managed to survive until then. The brother 
told them to let us through because we weren't part of the opposition and eventually he let us 
pass and also at the second barrier. We left for Gitarama and went to stay with some of 
Papa's friends... We stayed there nearly a month, just until May, but then the war arrived 
there... Afterwards, we went to Kibuye... to some friends. We stayed there almost two 
months until the end of the war. Then we came back to Kigali. We stayed in a house lower 
down the hill before returning to our current house. 
131 FAR = Forces Armies Rwandaises, Rwandan Armed Forces of the pre-genocide Government 
Francine (b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
Francine was 26 years old when we met in February 2004 and was just completing her 
final year of secondary school. I met her through Esperance, a friend of a friend, who 
had agreed to teach me Kinyarwanda during my stay. Francine's parents had both died 
before the genocide and she and her younger brother Faustin then went to live with her 
Aunt's family. As will be discussed later, Francine thought that her father had been a 
Hutu and her mother of "mixed" heritage, although there was uncertainty about this. 
When the genocide started, Francine described how she narrowly missed being killed: 
When the genocide started, I had a problem one time... I'd never had an identity card and 
there were some interahamwe at the barrier who thought I was Tutsi. They wanted to kill me, 
but luckily a person that knew me passed by and saved my life... 
The genocide was not the only time when Francine was threatened due to her "Tutsi- 
like" appearance. In June 1994, she and her brother Faustin fled to Zaire with their 
Aunt's family and spent two years living in a refugee camp until it was forcibly closed 
by the RPF. The family then fled further into Zaire where they lived until 2001 when 
they returned to Rwanda and Francine went to live with her mother's friend Esperance: 
When they closed the camp, we went into the countryside somewhere, a very isolated place... 
We had problems there with the interahamwe because they sometimes said that we were 
Tutsi because of our physique. We were afraid and Faustin couldn't go to school... 
Faustin (b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
I first met Francine's younger brother Faustin in September 2005 when he returned to 
Rwanda to live with Francine and Esperance. We met regularly over the following 
months and I followed as best I could his life back in Rwanda after his 11-year absence. 
One day he recounted to me his experience during the genocide and afterwards: 
They started to call me M... which is a Tutsi name, instead of M... 132 When the war, the 
genocide, started in April 1994, I was in Kigali at my maternal aunt's house... and my uncle 
always had to protect me. He was very respected in the neighbourhood. He was an important 
soldier in the FAR. I was living with them because it was the school holidays. But he 
couldn't protect me totally. I had to show I was also present, that I took part in the activities, 
because if not, with my morphology, there were always risks... There was youth training and 
we always had to take part - all the men in the neighbourhood. It was obligatory. That started 
132 According to some of my research participants, Hutus and Tutsis were often given different second (given) names. 
For example, Alphonse (b. 1970 in Zaire) told me "Hutu and Tutsi names are not the same. Normally, we give Tutsi 
babies' names that mean good things like 'jewels' or 'the love of god', but Hutus are often given names that are a 
little sad. For example, if a woman has had many children who died, the family may give the next child a name that 
speaks of that. But, you will never find a Tutsi with a name like this. " Nonetheless, others claimed that things have 
changed and that today, it is usually not possible to determine a person's ethnic identity by their second (given) name. 
I have been unable to find any references to this in current literature. 
even the day that we learnt the news of the shooting down of the aeroplane - on the 7t' April. 
We had to get up at 5am, run and then come back and learn how to handle a gun, how to use 
grenades and so on. I had to do all that, but all the same I managed to avoid the patrols and 
the barriers. I have never touched a weapon to shoot at someone. 
Eventually, on the 22"d May, my uncle managed to use his influence to get me out... There 
was a convoy leaving for Butare carrying the soldiers' wives and I joined it. When I arrived 
in Butare, I saw that Frangine had problems, because everyone asked her: "Where is M...? " 
At that time, many young people from our neighbourhood had left to join the RPF and I don't 
know if they suspected me - but one time, Francine was forced to her knees and someone was 
going to kill her, before another man intervened to say he knew her mother. 
Faustin said he had encountered similar problems in the refugee camp in Zaire and had 
once again been obliged to "participate" to protect himself: 
We went into Kashyushya camp near Bukavu and I had more problems because of my 
appearance and I had to participate in the self-defence forces of the camp with the 
interahamwe and soldiers. We knew the RPF strategies. They came with their equipment and 
tried to infiltrate to spy and get information. Sometimes, they killed several hundred refugees 
- especially civilians - because they were afraid to come too close to the soldiers and self- 
defence forces. But, they managed to burn lots of arms. I could be a suspect, of course... I 
was obliged to fight with the others in the camps between 1994 and 1996. I had to do that to 
survive because of my physical appearance. 
Jean-Claude (b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
I first met Jean-Claude in September 2004 at a party at Aime's house. Jean-Claude was 
28 when we met and grew up in Rwanda, but had lived in Kenya from 1994 where he 
studied for an IT degree. In 2003, he returned to Rwanda and started work as an IT 
officer for an NGO. I met Jean-Claude regularly over the following months at a bar in 
town after he finished work, or with his group of friends. After a couple of months, he 
talked to me about what happened to his family during the genocide and afterwards: 
My Dad was a businessman who supplied the army and several barracks... So the FAR 
helped my father and all our family to get out of Kigali and took us up country... In fact, my 
father is Hutu, but my mother is different - she is Tutsi, but she was protected because of my 
father and so were we... When the genocide broke out on the 6, we were in our house and 
just stayed inside. We only went out in the local area, not any further... The first few days, 
there, it wasn't so bad. It was just the military and the interahamwe who were killing. They 
weren't yet forcing other local people to kill. But we had an aunt with us at the house, who 
was married to a Tutsi man and had children... so when we got out, she was escorted out 
with us by two FAR soldiers... 
We went to Gitarama in a rural area and then after about a week, one of my older sisters 
joined us with her children. She was married to a Tutsi man who had already been killed and 
had managed to escape with her three children and two neighbour's children. Another sister 
also was married to a Tutsi man who was killed. But in Gitarama, people started saying that 
my sister's children and my aunt's three children were children of Tutsi and had to be killed. 
But, we managed to protect them. But then one day, my Dad was away from the house with 
his work and the other men and I were not at home - we were collecting water or something. 
We came back to find that a group of interahamwe had come to the house and all the eight 
children of my Aunt, my sister and her neighbour had been taken away and killed. It was 
horrible - my sister still suffers from that... That happened sometime in late May and soon 
afterwards when the war arrived in Gitarama, we had to move. The two soldiers escorted us 
and we went to Ruhengeri, Gisenyi, Kibuye, then Cyangugu, then via Zaire and Tanzania and 
eventually to Kenya. 
Again, for Jean-Claude's family this was not the end of their suffering. He then 
recounted how his father had returned to Rwanda shortly after the RPF took power in 
1994 and had briefly been imprisoned because a neighbour (who was occupying their 
family home) accused him of neglecting the grandchildren and other children in his care 
and therefore causing their death. His father had contacted a friend in the new RPF 
government, who had secured his release. In 1996, however, Jean-Claude's father was 
imprisoned again, accused by the same neighbour of killing another neighbour. This 
time, the friend was unable to help and his father subsequently spent almost seven years 
in Kigali Central Prison, until his mother and sisters were finally able to secure his 
release when the widow of the man who had been killed testified that he was not guilty. 
Bosco (b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
I first met Bosco in February 2004 via a Rwandan friend of his in the UK. Bosco was 
30 when we met and ran a carpentry workshop in Kigali. We met every few weeks and I 
also got to know his wife Celestine and their two small daughters. A few months after 
we met, Bosco recounted what happened to his family during the genocide: 
When the genocide started, we were afraid because my mother was Tutsi and my siblings and 
I were mixed because my father was Hutu. We lived in a walled enclosure and there was also 
a little house there occupied by my cousin, who is mad. On the 7`h April, my cousin left the 
house and met a group of interahamwe who had already started killing. He started to say 
stupid things and eventually the interahamwe asked him to show them where he lived... They 
came into the house and my father explained that [my cousin] was ill... my mother managed 
to find a prescription for his medicine to show the interahamwe... and they left. Then, on the 
8', one of my father, 's best friends, a colonel in the ex-FAR, sent a vehicle to rescue us... This 
colonel was really nice. He even saved my mother's little sister and all her family. 
Bosco's family were first evacuated to Gitarama and later to Ruhengeri, where the 
colonel friend was able to protect them from the ongoing killing. Towards the end of the 
genocide, the family left for Goma in Zaire where Bosco's father befriended a 
Congolese man who decided to help the family. The man invited Bosco to live in Goma 
with him and go to school there and Bosco's two sisters and a brother went to stay with 
the man's family and go to school in another town North of Goma. Bosco's father, 
mother and three-year old brother went to live in a village a few kilometres from Goma. 
All was fine until late 1996: 
I was at school with another Rwandan who was an RPF spy in Goma and we became good 
friends. In November 1996, the day of the RPF attack and the start of the war over there, this 
friend came to tell me that my cousin was in Gisenyi and had to see me urgently. As I told 
you, my father was Hutu and my mother Tutsi and on my mother's side, there were some 
cousins who were fighting for the RPF. I climbed on my friend's moped and we crossed the 
border around 4pm... Towards 6pm, my cousin arrived and informed me that the RPF attack 
was going to take place at midnight and that's why he asked me to come. He put me up a 
little room in Gisenyi where I found all my books and clothes. My school friend had gone to 
the family where I lived to collect all my things... 
I had to stay in Gisenyi for three days because the border was closed... Then the refugees 
started to return to Rwanda and they re-opened the border. I still had my friend's moped... 
and I had got to know several RPA soldiers the first evening. So, I could cross the border and 
ride to Goma without any problems. I spent a week in Goma to try to get news of my family. 
I learnt that my school friend had sent a message with another man to ask my sisters and my 
brother to cross the border to meet me in Uganda... it saved their lives... I returned to 
Gisenyi and learnt that the girl who worked for my parents was in hospital in Goma seriously 
ill. I went back to Goma and eventually found her. She had shrapnel wounds and two bullets 
in her head. She recounted how she fled with my parents into the forest when the RPF arrived 
in the village. Then the RPF started to fire and throw bombs and my parents and little brother 
were killed by the bombs. I even went to the place where they were killed, but couldn't find 
their bodies, because they were buried in a crevasse in the lava with many others. 
The ubiquity of suffering, but for different reasons 
The first thing that is striking about the testimonies above is that - irrespective of their 
particular heritage - every one of the young people suffered in some way during the 
genocide and its aftermath, either because they were threatened themselves or because 
they lost family members during the violence. For example, Paradis' experience mirrors 
that of many other "mixed" families, who were threatened during the genocide because 
there were Tutsi members in the household. In her case, the family was lucky as they 
were living in a neighbourhood of Kigali where the RPA took control only a couple of 
weeks after the genocide began and they were therefore rescued and taken to a safe 
area. Similarly, Bosco's family felt threatened by the interahamwe, but after one narrow 
escape were rescued by a friend in the Rwandan army. 
Rose's story is difficult to decipher, because she initially told me that her father was 
threatened because he was a Tutsi, but later said something different about his "ethnic" 
identity (see later). Evelyne's experience of rejection by her father's family was also not 
unusual and such accusations of Tutsi women tricking or cheating their Hutu husbands 
were a regular feature of the genocidal propaganda (Taylor 1999: p171). In Evelyne's 
case, the fact that her appearance is closer to the "Tutsi" stereotype certainly did not 
play in her favour. 
Like Paradis and Evelyne, Theogene also had a Hutu father and Tutsi mother, but he 
found himself in very different circumstances during the genocide and suffered for 
different reasons. Despite having a Tutsi mother, it seems that his family were not 
threatened by the interahamwe militia or neighbours during the genocide itself, but 
were attacked by the RPA as they fought for control of Kigali. In this sense, his family 
were not specifically targeted because they were "mixed", but were targeted alongside 
others the RPA attacked, apparently believing interahamwe militia to be among them. 
Theogene lost both parents and two siblings in this attack and subsequently spent three 
years separated from his other siblings in refugee camps and then orphanages. Again, 
Theogene's experience in the camps was not specifically related to his "mixed" 
heritage, but because he fled the country with Hutu soldiers - demonstrating that young 
people with similar parentage sometimes had very different experiences. In Theogene's 
case, in contrast to Evelyne, his appearance is closer to the "Hutu" stereotype, which is 
also likely to have allowed him to blend in with the mainly Hutu refugees. 
In many ways, Francine and Faustin found themselves doubly disadvantaged by their 
"mixed" heritage. Their physical appearances are both closer to the "Tutsi" stereotype 
and, because of this, both felt threatened by the interahamwe during the genocide. 
Francine narrowly escaped being killed and Faustin said he was obliged to "participate" 
(although does not specify how) in the local interahamwe as a mean of self-protection. 
Yet, because they were living with the (Hutu) family of their Aunt when the genocide 
began and their uncle was a FAR soldier, they fled to Zaire at the end of the genocide as 
refugees with tens of thousands of other (mainly Hutu) families. Faustin says again that 
he had to participate in the "self-defence forces" of the camp in order to survive because 
he could easily be suspected of being an RPF accomplice because of his appearance. 
Francine also had a difficult time in Zaire, where she had regular epileptic attacks and 
missed seven years of schooling because her aunt and uncle apparently could not afford 
the fees. The cases of Francine and Faustin demonstrate clearly the importance of 
context and contingency in determining their fate during the violence and it aftermath. 
In Jean-Claude's family, there were multiple "mixed" relationships. Not only were his 
own parents of different "ethnic" groups, but his (mixed Hutu-Tutsi) sisters and (Hutu) 
aunt were also married to Tutsi men. Although, Jean-Claude himself was not threatened 
during the genocide, his sisters and aunts lost their husbands and children. Later, his 
father was accused a number of times of participating in the killing and was imprisoned 
for six years without a file. Whilst I knew him in 2005, Jean-Claude was also called up 
to testify as a witness at the gacaca about the killing of a young Tutsi man in Gitarama, 
although accusations were not made against him personally. Again Jean-Claude's 
"mixed" heritage meant that different members of his family suffered at different times. 
Similarly, Bosco's narrative reveals how his family found themselves on different sides 
of the battle line during the genocide and its aftermath. His (Tutsi) mother's side of the 
family were targeted during the 1994 genocide and his (Hutu) father's side of the family 
during the attacks on the Zaire refugee camps in 1996. There were members of his 
family who fought with the RPA and others with the FAR. Yet, there was also an 
element of chance about where particular members of his family were at particular 
times and the friends they had. At the first outbreak of "ethnic" violence - the genocide 
- the interahamwe targeted part of his family; yet a friend who was a FAR colonel 
saved them. At the second outbreak - the RPA/ADFL attacks on the camps in Zaire -a 
friend and a cousin who were both RPA soldiers rescued half of his family and the other 
half were killed by RPA soldiers. 133 In this way, Bosco's family was effectively 
victimised and rescued by both "sides" of the conflict. 
The experiences of these eight ""mixed" young people during the genocide and its 
aftermath demonstrates that, in some circumstances their liminal position saved their 
lives and in others, it caused them significant suffering. They also demonstrate that in 
certain cases, a person's suffering was not directly related to their "mixed" heritage, but 
because they were assumed to be either "Tutsi" or "Hutu" or the basis of their physical 
appearance or the particular circumstances in which they found themselves. 
The everyday experiences of categorisation of "mixed" youth in Kigali today 
There are a lot of [people of mixed heritage] here in Rwanda. They are really angst-ridden 
and don't know where to put themselves, because they have the two sides of Tutsis and of 
Hutus. It's really complicated for them. We used to say that if your father was Tutsi and your 
mother Hutu, you were Tutsi and then if your father was Hutu and your mother Hutu, so you 
were Hutu. But, sometimes you find a child who lives with the family of his Tutsi mother 
and feels close to them, but the others call him Hutu; sometimes, he can be rejected by the 
two sides. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
133 This story also reveals many of the complexities inherent in situations of conflict and demonstrates clearly that 
organisations and armies such as the RPF or the FAR or "sides" in a conflict are not just amorphous entities, but are 
made up of individuals who may act and think differently in different times and places (see Nordstrom (2004), who 
also challenges the simplistic categories applied in situations of war). 
As discussed above, there are no precise estimates of the numbers of Rwandans of 
mixed heritage living in Rwanda today, but most Rwandans I spoke with estimated that 
at least 25-35% of the population are of mixed parentage, with the proportion highest in 
Kigali and Butare. In Kinywarwanda, there are two words for Rwandans of "mixed" 
heritage: "ibyimanyi" and "abahutsi". According to Esperance, the word "ibyimanyi"' 
originally referred to the crossing of animal species and was later applied to humans 
when intermarriage became more common in the 1960s. The word "umuhutsr' (singular 
of abahutsi) is a combination of the words for Hutu (umuhutu) and Tutsi (umututsi) and 
- again according to Esperance - was used during the former regime by an opposition 
leader (possibly from Parti Liberal) who sought to represent those of "mixed" heritage. 
In spite of the existence of these terms and the significant proportion of Rwandans of 
"mixed" ethnic heritage, the young people I worked with rarely employed these terms 
or spoke spontaneously about "mixed" Rwandans, as one young man mentioned: 
I had an American friend who came here. He is metis, but he told me that over there, he is 
considered to be black because there are either black people or white people - no one ever 
talks about the metis. He told me it was the same in Rwanda - that we never spoke about 
Tutsi-Hutu metis, but only about Hutus and Tutsis as if the others didn't even exist... ' (Jules, 
b. 1976 in Zaire) 
As discussed in the previous chapter, my research suggests that many young Rwandans 
in Kigali today habitually categorise others to one "side" or another i. e. as "Hutu" or 
"Tutsi". Even in cases where it is known that a person has parents of different "ethnic" 
groups, it is rare for others to categorise them as "mixed". Instead, they will mostly be 
categorised according to their father's "ethnic" identity, following the patrilineal 
tradition of ethnic descent mentioned earlier. Yet, as the previous chapter also showed, 
even where a person's family heritage is unknown (which is often the case in everyday 
encounters in urban Kigali) they will still be categorised as "Hutu" or "Tutsi" on the 
basis of other factors - most commonly their physical appearance. In practice, however, 
there is often a discrepancy between the conclusions a person might draw when 
categorising another Rwandan from his or her appearance or genealogy. As the 
following story demonstrates, this can result in people of "mixed" heritage being treated 
very differently in different circumstances and in a disparity between how people of 
"mixed" parentage are categorised by others and how they feel about their own identity. 
Paradis and Rose: the lottery of somatic heritage 
Shortly after we met, Paradis introduced me to Valerie, who also lived locally, was the 
same age as Rose and Paradis and in her final year at secondary school. As we got to 
know each other, Paradis often spoke to me about how Valerie behaved differently 
towards her and Rose, omitting to invite Rose to social occasions and making 
unfavourable comments about Rose being a "Hutu". Paradis said this worried her - both 
because she was trying to discourage such "racism" in her "mixed" group of friends, but 
also because of her own "ethnic" background, which Valerie had mistaken: 
I think it's actually Rose who loves me the most - more than Valerie - despite the difference 
in ethnicity. And Valerie, when she talks, I know she takes me for a Tutsi... and I let her 
think that. I'm afraid to tell her anything else, because I think it will change our friendship, 
that she won't consider me in the same way as before and will treat me differently. 
Paradis first mentioned her own "mixed" heritage when she recounted what happened to 
her family during the genocide (see above). Yet, as the weeks progressed, it became 
clear that there was some confusion about her precise heritage: 
I am not 100% sure about my ethnicity, but I know I'm mixed... My mother spoke to me 
about ethnicity when I grew up. She talked about what happened in 1959 when Hutus killed 
Tutsis and Tutsis had to flee the country... I thought both my mother and father were Tutsi. It 
was only during the war, when the interahamwe came to the house and checked my father's 
identity card, that I understood he wasn't the same as my mother... He had a Hutu identity 
card, but as I said, I think he was also mixed with a Hutu father and Tutsi mother. But, I 
know that my brothers are both Tutsis. I don't know how, but they were both inkotanyi - they 
left to fight with the RPF. So I have always considered myself as Tutsi too. 
Paradis' comments reveal the complexities of the way she feels about her own identity 
and her relationship to others. On the one hand - despite telling me that her father was a 
Hutu or of "mixed" parentage - she says that Rose, who she thinks is a Hutu, is a better 
friend to her than Valerie, "despite the difference in ethnicity " between herself and 
Rose. This suggests that Paradis considers herself to be a Tutsi - indeed she confesses 
that she grew up thinking she was a Tutsi. Yet, on the other hand, Paradis knows 
Valerie thinks she is a Tutsi and says that she prefers to let her think this because she is 
worried Valerie might treat her differently if she tells her something else. This shows 
that Paradis is aware that if others find out the "ethnic" identity of her father, she is 
likely also to be considered a Hutu. For Paradis her "mixed" identity therefore brings 
the threat of discovery, but the opportunity to manoeuvre strategically in her social 
world. On other occasions, Paradis expressed frustration and made comments like "I'm 
mixed and I'm proud of that" and "I just want to be Rwandan". 
Rose's experience of ethnic categorisation was no less complex than that of Paradis. As 
I got to know her better, it became evident that her "ethnic" heritage was not quite as 
the others assumed. The first time we spoke about the past, she told me that her family 
had been threatened during the genocide: 
It was my older brother who told me the truth - that my father and my mother weren't the 
same ethnicity and my father was threatened because he was Tutsi. 
Several months later, when we knew each other better, Rose referred again to her 
heritage, although said something different. I asked if she had attended the gacaca that 
had recently begun. She told me that her father went there regularly and explained why: 
You know that my mother died in 1989 in a car accident and that my parents weren't the 
same ethnicity? Papa is Hutu and Maman was Tutsi. Now, there are some people accusing 
my father of killing my mother... At the start of the war in October 1990, there was a serious 
RPF attack in Kigali. They are saying my father killed my mother during this attack... 
Rose's revelations about her "ethnic" heritage are illuminated further by her comments 
on the situation of people of "mixed" heritage: 
It depends whether you have taken the traits of one parent or the other. You will be classified 
to the side from which you have taken the physical traits. It doesn't matter which parent was 
Hutu and which was Tutsi. People will say you are Hutu if you resemble the Hutu parent... 
It's just like that. We are put to one side or the other. 
Here Rose implicitly refers to herself and the way she is categorised by others. Unlike 
Paradis, who others clearly considered to be a Tutsi - most likely on the basis of her 
physical appearance which was closer to the Tutsi stereotype with her fair skin and finer 
facial features - Rose's physical traits resembled more closely the Hutu stereotype. 
Although she never spoke to me directly about the ethnicity of Rose or Paradis, Valerie 
often talked more generally about relationships between Hutu and Tutsi girls: 
I can see that some Hutu girls have a complex. One thing is because people always say that 
Tutsi girls are more beautiful... In fact, there are a few Hutu girls who are beautiful, but 
sometimes they pretend to be Tutsis... It's because they are always a little bit ashamed, 
because of what the Hutus did here. If someone is Hutu, it's rare that they will proclaim that 
to other people, but as a Tutsi, I can stand up and shout it out without problem. So a few girls 
try to hide their ethnicity. They will only have Tutsi friends for example. But sometimes you 
go to a girl's house and meet her family or you see her family photos and understand you 
mistook her ethnicity beforehand... 
Valerie's words about the conduct of Hutu and Tutsi girls are striking given what 
Paradis and Rose each told me about their "ethnic" heritage. Both Rose and Paradis are 
of "mixed" heritage and both their fathers carried a Hutu identity card prior to the 1994 
genocide. Thus, if the patrilineal system of "ethnic" heritage that operated at that time 
still applied, both girls would be considered Hutus today. Yet they find themselves 
categorised very differently by their social circle. Valerie's behaviour towards Rose and 
Paradis' reluctance to tell Valerie anything about her complex heritage demonstrate the 
concrete ways in which people can be treated differently because of their assumed 
"ethnic" belonging. The difference is that in the current social and political climate, 
Paradis' "Tutsi-like" appearance seems to give her the latitude to let others think she is 
a Tutsi, but Rose does not seem to have this option due to her "Hutu-like" features. 
Paradis' "Tutsi" credentials appear to be further strengthened because her brothers 
fought with the RPA and apparently presented themselves as Tutsis in the local 
neighbourhood, whereas Rose's "Hutuness" is likely to become even more apparent in 
the eyes of others when her father is called up in front of the gacaca. As for Valerie, it 
seems her "Tutsiness" is taken as given, both by Valerie herself and others in the group. 
It is somehow unquestioned or unquestionable by virtue of the fact that she was born in 
Zaire and returned to Rwanda in 1994 after the RPF victory (see chapter 6). 
Strategies of "ethnic" positioning and dissimulation 
The story of Paradis, Rose and Valerie demonstrates that the habit of categorising other 
Rwandans to one "side" or the other and the discrepancy that frequently results between 
categorising people of "mixed" heritage by parentage or physical appearance can work 
to a person's advantage in certain situations. As Valerie discusses and Paradis 
demonstrates, it allows some Rwandans to be "taken for" or to "pass" themselves off as 
a "Tutsi". Francine's story also demonstrates this. 
Francine: Being "taken for" a "Tutsi " 
Although Francine had a number of narrow escapes during the genocide and its 
aftermath in Zaire, in a different time and place, her ambiguous or "Tutsi-like" features 
seemed to be less of a burden. One day, she talked to me about her experiences the 
previous year at school where some pupils also had assumed she was a Tutsi: 
At school... people often took me for the other ethnic group... I had both Hutu and Tutsi 
friends, but a few more Tutsi... These FARG134 girls approached me at the beginning to ask 
why I wasn't in the FARG with them, that they would help me to put my name on the list and 
all that. Of course, I couldn't tell them my background. So I preferred to tell them that after 
the war, there were two of us left and there was only one FARG place and I preferred to give 
that to my little brother and look after myself. So they stopped asking me, but when the 
exercise books arrived from the FARG, one FARG girl gave me an exercise book, another 
girl, another exercise book, like that. They always said  N'uwacu' - she is one of ours - so we 
134 In this context, FARG means "Tutsi" - those Tutsi genocide survivors who qualify for the FARG. 
have to help her. There in Gisenyi people are more direct and often people asked about my 
ethnicity, but I always said, "I am Rwandan" as I don't like that. The Hutus also asked me, 
because they saw I got on well with them, but also with the others. 
Although she knew she was "mixed", Francine had told me several times that there was 
some doubt about her father's "ethnic" identity: 
You know, my father, he had a Hutu identity card, but people say that in the past, he changed 
his ethnicity to protect himself. But I just feel Rwandan - that's all. 
I don't really know for sure because my mother died when I was little and I never had the 
opportunity to ask her. I know that in my family there were Tutsis because I have some 
relations who are Tutsi and others who are Hutu. I know my mother's mother - my 
grandmother - was Tutsi and her father Hutu, but my father we don't know. But he had a 
Hutu identity card and therefore I was also considered as Hutu. It's because of that that I'm 
still here today. 
Yet Francine's narrative about the Tutsi girls at school taking her for "the other 
ethnicity " suggests Francine considered herself a Hutu. Nonetheless, due to her physical 
appearance, in situations where her family background is not known, others frequently 
assumed she was a Tutsi. Where it was likely to be advantageous to her - for example, 
allowing her to be friends with everyone - Francine admitted to letting others think this. 
At home, however, with Esperance's family, Francine was clearly happy to consider 
herself and be considered by others to be a Hutu. Nonetheless, Francine was often 
adamant that she just felt Rwandan and did not want to be forced to choose sides: 
If people ask me, I just tell them that I am Rwandan, because that's how I feel. 
The kind of dissimulation practised by both Paradis and Francine was not uncommon 
amongst the young people I worked with. Yet, it sometimes proved to be a risky 
strategy as Evelyne's story demonstrates. 
Evelyne: On all or no sides? 
During my final field visit to Rwanda in November 2005, Theogene told me that 
Evelyne was pregnant and had left home to live with her fiance. We went to visit her in 
a new, but sparsely decorated and windowless, mud brick house a couple of kilometres 
from the L'Espoir centre. Evelyne told me that her baby was due at the end of February 
and that her fiance -a businessman who was frequently away - would present the 
dowry to her mother in January. She told me, however, that there were some problems 
because he had discovered her "mixed" heritage: 
When I was getting ready to come and live here, my mother told my husband that I had a 
Hutu father and that his family had killed lots of people during the genocide and that I too 
would kill him one day... I think it's because I went to the place where my father had a house 
to claim my property and my mother wanted all of that for herself... [My husband] said it 
isn't important for him and it's okay. But here in Rwanda, you are the child of your father, so 
they say I am Hutu because my father was Hutu. But I consider myself to be on all sides - 
Hutu and Tutsi at the same time - but sometimes I feel that I am on no side. 
Evelyne told me on a number of occasions that she was friends with Hutus and Tutsis 
alike and considered herself as both Hutu and Tutsi. Yet, she was clearly aware that she 
was not always in a position to influence how other people saw her and was evidently 
worried about the situation with her new husband. As I was leaving, she commented: 
Rwandans aren't open. They don't tell you what they really think, what's in their heart. For 
example, my husband, even if he tells me it doesn't matter that my father was Hutu, he might 
change his mind after a few days or just not tell me it's a problem... he may even change 
after I've had three of his children. 
This was the last time I saw Evelyne and I worried about what might happen to her. 
There seemed little doubt that, in the absence of a father, Evelyne's fiance - like many 
others in the neighbourhood - had assumed she was a Tutsi like her mother because of 
her physical appearance and Evelyne had clearly done nothing to correct this 
assumption. The risk was that her fiance might reject her in' the future just as her 
father's family had done during the genocide and her mother did when she left home. 
In a social and political environment where many young people perceive that it is more 
favourable to be Tutsi, Paradis, Francine and Evelyne use - with varying degrees of 
dissimulation - their "Tutsi-like" or ambiguous physical appearances to allow others to 
think they are Tutsis. Although, most of the young people of "mixed" heritage I met 
who did this were girls, this was not exclusively the case. With years of practice, 
Faustin had become a master at proactive manipulation of his identity. 
Faustin: The master impersonator 
Faustin often told me that the reason he had survived the war, genocide and its 
aftermath was the ability he had developed to manipulate his identity: 
Lots of people think that I am Tutsi and I have had to play on that many times to survive. 
When he needed to be taken as a Hutu, Faustin would rely on those who knew his 
family background to vouch for him, or if this was not possible or he was not believed, 
he said he would participate in the activities required of Hutu youth to prove he was 
"one of them". Yet, when it was more advantageous to be taken as a Tutsi, he would use 
his physical appearance to let people think he was a Tutsi. Although he claimed he had 
never actually told anyone he was a Ttsi, he said he was careful to be selective with 
what he said so there was nothing that could "give him away". 
Faustin's ability to "pass himself off' as being of different identities extended beyond 
Rwanda's social categories and boundaries. During one of our earliest conversations, he 
described how in Zaire (then DRC) he had escaped the pressures to become a soldier 
and fight in the "second war" against Rwanda. He had gotten some money together and 
decided to flee to Zambia to try to contact a Belgian monk he had known in Rwanda 
and Bukavu. When Faustin left, he gave Francine a photo, which she later showed me, 
of himself dated 1998 and he had written on the back: "If we aren't prepared to take 
risks, we will go nowhere in life". Francine had no further news of Faustin's 
whereabouts or whether he was alive or dead for over four years. Faustin, however, 
managed to get out of the DRC by pretending he was Congolese: 
In Kisangani, there was a barrier with Rwandan, Ugandan, Burundian and some Congolese 
troops that I needed to get past. I had six weeks to learn Lingala in order to survive. I studied 
morning, day and night and after one week and one month, I knew enough Lingala. I went to 
the barrier and the Rwandans stopped me because of my Rwandan appearance. But then I 
spoke Lingala and the Congolese troops said, "He's okay, he's Congolese". That was how I 
escaped. I then got a Congolese passport by speaking Lingala and paying $300. Later I 
pretended to be Burundian as it was too dangerous to be Rwandese in the region after 1998. 
Faustin spent almost three years living in different countries including Zambia, South 
Africa and Tanzania, before reaching Nairobi in 2001 where he went to live with the 
Belgian monk, who supported him to finish his studies. He told me that the Rwandan 
community in Nairobi was even more divided than in Rwanda, but that he had both 
Hutu and Tutsi friends: 
I like to do that. There are Hutu that know that I am amongst them and then Tutsis that don't 
know my background and think I am Tutsi because of my height and my face... 
The material above demonstrates again that the way a person is categorised by others 
depends on context and circumstance and whether the person's "ethnic" heritage is 
known. In circumstances where it is unknown, the person will usually be categorised on 
the basis of their physical appearance. In cases where the person's physical appearance 
is ambiguous (e. g. Paradis, Francine, Evelyne and Faustin), this can allow the individual 
scope to present him- or herself differently (i. e. as a Hutu or Tutsi) in different contexts. 
In an environment physically removed from where a person grew up or where their 
family are located - such as boarding school or another country -'an individual may 
have more scope to play on their ethnic identity. As Faustin said, "Where people don't 
know your provenance, you can have friends on all sides". Yet, as his and Francine's 
experiences also demonstrate, in another time and place, the same ambiguities about a 
person's physical appearance can mean the difference between life and death. Amongst 
strangers where a person's heritage is unknown, there can also be enemies on all sides. 
When I asked why young people tried to pass themselves off as Tutsis, the answers 
were fairly consistent. As discussed in chapter 4, it was widely perceived to be more 
favourable to be a Tutsi in the current socio-political climate. Firstly, because many 
young people felt that Tutsis dominated the Government and were favoured in terms of 
access to certain jobs and opportunities. So for example, when I asked Jean-Claude 
about the position of Rwandans of mixed heritage, he commented: 
It's complicated. First... in Rwanda, it's the tradition for a child to take the same ethnic 
group as his father, not his mother. Even if you have mixed blood and inside, you feel the two 
sides, you are categorised according to your father's ethnic group. But, secondly, there is the 
political situation... If the government in power is the same ethnicity as your father, you will 
emphasize the side of your father and take distance from your mother's family or the other 
way around. In fact, you try to take the ethnicity that gives you the greater advantages... 
Secondly, many young people said that Hutus continued to be downtrodden and 
disfavoured socially given the events of 1994. As discussed in the last chapter, many 
young people still felt that Hutus could not be trusted because there was a risk that a 
Hutu or someone in his or her family might have killed during the genocide. As Valerie 
points out (above) many Hutus seemed to carry a wider sense of collective shame or 
inferiority given the crimes that were committed in the name of their "ethnic" group - 
even if they or their families were not implicated in those crimes. 
The stories above also demonstrate the extent and limitations of individual agency in 
influencing the way others perceive one's ethnic identity and that this can vary hugely 
from individual to individual. Whereas Paradis' friends and Frangine's classmates 
assume they are Tutsis on the basis of their physical appearance - and Paradis and 
Francine consciously do nothing to lead them to think otherwise - Faustin actively 
encourages people to think he is a Tutsi or a Hutu in different circumstances. Yet, as 
Rose's story shows, it is not always possible for a person of "mixed" heritage to 
influence how others see them or to choose which "side" they want to emphasize. An 
individual's capacity to "pass themselves" off as a member of a particular "ethnic" 
group can be curtailed as well as enabled by their physical appearance and therefore the 
opportunities are not the same for everyone. 
Indeed, some of the other young people of "mixed" parentage I worked with were 
clearly aware that others considered them to be Hutus on the basis of their physical 
appearance and that this gave them very little latitude to present themselves as anything 
other than Hutus. For example, Theogene commented: 
I have never asked anyone, but I know that most people think I am Hutu. 
Similarly Bosco was also aware that others categorised him as a Hutu: 
I had a Hutu father and Tutsi mother, but with my face and height, I am 100% Hutu, even if I 
am mixed'. 
Along with other factors, this seemed to have implications for how an individual felt 
about their own "ethnic" identity. 
Self-categorisation vs "other"-categorisation 
Most people will put themselves to one side or the other if there are two parents of different 
ethnic groups, but it depends. If, for example, one parent dies, you will put yourself to the 
side of the parent who is still alive. Also, it depends on your appearance, because you can 
have traits from one side or the other and people will categorise you on this basis. It's 
complicated because sometimes the Tutsi side of the family can reject you and say that you 
are Hutu, even if you have a Tutsi father... and the others can also reject you saying you are 
Tutsi. So, both sides of the family can reject you at once. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
The narratives above also demonstrate that the way a person feels about their own 
identity does not necessarily reflect the way they are categorised by others. For 
example, Paradis describes how she had always considered herself to be a Tutsi, 
although her comments above suggest that she finds it difficult to know exactly where 
to place herself in Rwanda today. Similarly, although Francine often commented that 
she just wanted to be "Rwandan", her comments suggested that - in spite of the fact that 
she was frequently taken to be a Tutsi - she considered herself to be a Hutu. As revealed 
above, Rose, on the other hand, seems resigned to the fact that others classify her as 
Hutu because of her physical appearance, although she clearly found this difficult. 
Others like Evelyne and Faustin seemed to want to avoid placing themselves firmly to 
one "side" or the other. Others like Jean-Claude felt "stuck in the middle". 
Jean-Claude: "We are stuck in the middle" 
Jean-Claude commented that other people were often unsure about his "ethnic" identity: 
Only a couple of friends have spoken to me openly and they tell me that I am more like a 
Tutsi than a Hutu, that I have more of a Tutsi character. But... I don't even know what the 
difference is between a Hutu character and a Tutsi character. 
Personally, however, Jean-Claude felt that his past experiences were so contradictory, 
that he had no idea where to place himself in contemporary Rwanda: 
It is really complicated. Look at my family for example. I have one sister who lost her 
husband in the genocide, another who lost three children and an aunt who lost all six of her 
children in the genocide. My sisters and my aunt were all married to Tutsi. Then, my father 
was in prison for nine years accused of genocide and my uncle died in prison for the same 
reason. What about my sister? Where does she place herself in all of that? What's her 
position? On the one hand, she was a genocide survivor and therefore took part in the period 
of grieving for the genocide victims. But then she had to take food to her own father who was 
in prison. And perhaps he was in prison with the people who killed her own children? It's 
impossible this situation. I don't knout how she manages to cope with all that... So you can 
understand, that my family, we don't know where we belong. We are stuck in the 
middle.. . We 
have one side of the family from one tribe and the other from the opposite. We 
don't know where our place is. ' (Jean-Claude, b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
A few of the young Rwandans of "mixed" heritage did, however, clearly place 
themselves to one "side", as Emmanuel suggests - for example Theogene and Bosco. 
Theogene: "I think I am like the Hutus " 
On a number of occasions, Theogene communicated quite clearly to me that he 
considered himself to be a Hutu. For example, when he told me that he could see 
differences in behaviour between Hutus and Tutsis, I asked him teasingly if he had a 
mix of the traits he described, and he responded, "No, all the same, I think I am like the 
Hutus". On another occasion, he stated quite clearly: "My father is Hutu and therefore I 
am Hutu like him. " As discussed above, Theogene was also aware that others 
considered him to be a Hutu. It is also likely that Theogene's view of himself was 
influenced by his upbringing, past experiences and present frustrations. He told me that 
when he grew up his father frequently said negative things about Tutsis and expressed 
his regret at having married a Tutsi woman. He also spoke often about what happened 
to his family at the hands of the RPA and how there was no justice for Hutus like him 
who had lost their family during the violence of the 1990s (see chapter 7). 
Bosco: "It depends on how your family were killed" 
As discussed above, Bosco was also aware that others categorised him as a Hutu on the 
basis of his appearance. When I asked him how people of "mixed" ethnicity felt about 
themselves in Rwanda today, Bosco suggested that a person's sense of identity was 
often strongly tied to their personal experiences of past events: 
It depends. I would say that 60% of people who are mixed are neutral. They don't take either 
one side or the other. They are a little bit in the middle. Then there are 20% who take the 
Tutsi side and 20% the Hutu side... Normally, it depends on how your family was killed... 
like me, my family was killed by the RPF... for example, if your father was Hutu and during 
the war, you sought refuge with your father's family, but instead of welcoming you, they kill 
your mother, your sisters and brothers because they are considered Tutsi... Afterwards, you 
will put yourself on the side of your mother, with the Tutsi family that remain. On the other 
hand, if you seek refuge with your mothers family and they kill your father and the other 
sisters and brothers, afterwards you will put yourself on the side of your father's family... 
Bosco hints that in his case, because his family were killed by the RPF, he considers 
himself as a Hutu. 
The narratives above suggest that, for people of mixed heritage, processes of "self'- 
categorisation in contemporary Rwanda are fraught with complexity and can depend on 
a range of factors including a person's parentage (i. e. whether it is their father or mother 
who is/was a Hutu), how he or she is seen by others (which mostly depends on their 
physical appearance), his or her past experiences during the genocide and its aftermath, 
and his or her perceptions of the wider socio-political context. In the current climate 
(which is widely perceived to be more favourable to Tutsis), however, those who are 
frequently assumed by others to be Tutsis, but have a Hutu father (Paradis, Francine, 
Faustin, Evelyne), seem to have more scope to strategically manipulate how others see 
them in different contexts. When they perceive it to be advantageous, they allow others 
to think they are Tutsis, but when they want to be taken as Hutus, they have the option 
to let people know about their parentage. Perhaps as a result, many of these individuals 
did not seem to express a clear empathy with either "side" or to firmly place themselves 
on one "side" or the other. Those who are assumed to be Hutus, however, and also had a 
Hutu father (Rose, Theogene, Bosco) did not have the option to manipulate their 
identity because they tended to be classified as Hutus in most contexts. Given this and 
the wider climate in which Hutus are perceived to be disfavoured, it is interesting that, 
to varying extents, these individuals categorised themselves as Hutus or empathised 
more with Hutus. 
Rwanda's "Abahutsi": Finding a place in a polarised world 
The material in this and the previous chapter have described a contemporary social 
context in which most young Rwandans habitually categorise others to one "side" or 
another (i. e. as "Hutu" or "Tutsi") on the basis of their physical appearance or what is 
known about their family background or past experiences. Even in cases where it is 
known that a person has parents of different "ethnic" groups, it is relatively rare for 
others to categorise them as "mixed". Instead, they will mostly be categorised according 
to their father's "ethnic" identity, as has been the tradition for many decades in Rwanda. 
In most cases, given the configuration of most "mixed" marriages, this means they are 
categorised as "Hutu". In the limited cases where a person's father is a Tutsi, they may 
still be categorised as "Hutu" or perhaps "mixed Hutu" by some Rwandans who say that 
both parents must be Tutsi for the child to be (pure) "Tutsi" (see chapter 4). 
Yet the stories above also demonstrate that there is often a discrepancy between how a 
particular individual is categorised by others and how he or she feels about him- or 
herself. My interviews suggest that a number of different factors and circumstances 
influenced the way people of "mixed" heritage felt about their own identity including 
the "ethnic" identity of their parents, their past experiences, their family situation, the 
political situation and the way they are viewed or categorised by others. This reminds us 
of Richard Jenkins' (1997: p23) distinction between "social categorization" and "group 
identification" as two separate, yet dialectically interrelated, processes: "Social 
categorization" is the external imposition of a classificatory scheme or category on a 
population or person by outsiders; whereas "group identification" describes people's 
experience of solidarity and meaning as self-identifying group members. 
As Jenkins stresses, because identities are produced and reproduced though interaction, 
power relations are absolutely central to their constitution and they are subject to 
constant negotiation. In different times and places, individuals and groups may have 
varying levels of influence on how they are seen and treated by others, on the balance 
between (internal) self-ascription and (external) other-ascription. The stories of Paradis, 
Rose, Francine and Evelyne, in particular, demonstrate the precarious position of 
Rwandans of "mixed" heritage in a political and social climate that is more or less 
polarised in different times and places. Although, as Miri Song (2003) discusses, in 
some circumstances particular individuals have the power, resources or opportunities to 
choose which identity they foreground and influence how they are seen and treated by 
others; in other contexts, the same individuals may find themselves unable to influence 
the way they are categorised by others, unable to resist being stereotyped, and feel 
trapped, distrusted or rejected. As Esperance suggests, in times of instability, the scope 
for people of mixed heritage to choose sides can be severely curtailed: 
[W]hen the country is calm, these  ibiymanyi' tend to be welcomed by both sides. When there 
is trouble, they are the first to be rejected by both sides because they are considered 
accomplices of one or the other ethnic group. They are therefore very vulnerable when it 
comes to affiliating themselves to or being counted as one or the other ethnic group. 
Normally, in Rwanda, the child takes the ethnic group of his or her father, but when these 
stories of division arrive, he who has a Hutu father and Tutsi mother, and he who has a Tutsi 
father and Hutu mother - they are all put in the same basket of discrimination. 
I often heard such stories about people of "mixed" heritage suddenly being distrusted by 
all sides - particularly in times of political or social tension. Nonetheless, although it 
was people of "mixed" heritage whose position seemed most precarious, the identity of 
any Rwandans born in Rwanda could be subjected to scrutiny and when doubts were 
suddenly cast over a person's "ethnic "identity, this could have a dramatic impact on 
their lives as was the case of Faustin's friend Constantin: 
Constantin and I knew each other well at primary school. He is Tutsi. He really has the 
physique of a Tutsi. He is taller than me with very fine features - even his nose, and here his 
gums are very black. His father was a doctor and after the death of his parents, he went to live 
with some friends of his parents - also doctors - who were Hutu. Afterwards, it was like he 
was their son... In 2003, I bumped into him and we became friends again and I was sort of 
part of their group -a group of Tutsis. But recently I saw him and he told me how things 
changed. It appears that, one day, his father - adoptive father - came to visit him. These 
friends saw the father and straight away said, "But, how can he have Hutu father? Is 
Constantin Hutu and we didn't know? " Afterwards, Constantin hardly sees these friends any 
more. (Faustin b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
The week before I left Rwanda at the end of my final field visit, one of my research 
participants Franco, who I had known for almost two years, told me that the recent 
death of his grandfather had plunged him into confusion about his "ethnic" heritage. 
Franco: From certainty to uncertainty about his "ethnic" heritage 
I met Franco a few days after my arrival in Kigali in January 2004 via his brother who I 
had met in London the previous summer. Franco was born and grew up in Kigali and 
said that although he had known his father's wider family was very "mixed" and that he 
had both Hutu and Tutsi relations on his father's side, his father had possessed a Tutsi 
identity card and thus he had always assumed that he too was a Tutsi. 135 He sometimes 
referred to himself as a "genocide survivor" on account of the narrow escape his family 
had during the genocide: 
On the night of 60' April, we heard an explosion and gunfire, although we didn't understand 
what it meant until the morning when we listened to the radio... My father put his head in his 
hands and said, "now it's finished". I really don't think I was at all conscious of what he 
meant at the time. I was only 15 years old... Immediately, my parents told me, my brother 
and sister to stay inside and not to let anyone into the house. If anyone came looking for my 
parents, we were to say that they were outside Rwanda in Burundi... My parents went to hide 
in a ditch near our house, but then as news arrived about the extent of the killings, they 
135 Franco's mother was not Rwandan, but Franco assumed he had the same "ethnic" identity as his father in line with 
the patrilineal tradition. 
decided it wasn't safe to stay and we went into hiding in one of my father's storehouses... 
The interahamwe came to visit us a few times starting on the Sunday. At first, they just asked 
for some things like food and provisions, and my father gave them what they wanted in the 
hope that they would spare our lives. However, after a couple more days - on the Tuesday - 
the leader of the interahamwe group came to tell us that it was over, that they would be 
coming back the next day - on the Wednesday - to kill us. But, on the Wednesday morning, at 
dawn, some RPF soldiers arrived to rescue us. So we were evacuated to Byumba and 
managed to escape. 
Franco had then joined the RPA following the family's rescue in mid-April, fought until 
the victory in July 1994 and stayed in the army until 1996. Afterwards, his father had 
sent him to Uganda to finish his schooling and do a two-year diploma to train to become 
an electrician. Franco returned to Kigali in 2001, but could not find any work, so had 
started a diploma in ICT at the Kigali Institute of Science and Technology (KIST). He 
always worked part-time in an Internet cafe when I knew him in 2004-2005. 
I met Franco regularly during the two-year period of my research, either at his family 
home, in the neighbourhood cabaret with his friends Vincent, Cedric and Elois or in his 
favourite bar in town Nyira Rock. Although his friends spoke often about "ethnicity" 
(see chapter 4), Franco himself had always been dismissive of the issue, saying that it 
had never been significant in his family and was not important for him personally. Yet, 
on the last occasion I met Franco in December 2005, he suddenly raised the issue and 
described how uncertainty had suddenly been cast over his own heritage: 
You know, something has happened. Did you know that I lost my grandfather [his father's 
father)? He died suddenly in August, and people are saying that in fact he was Hutu and not 
Tutsi. People are saying that a long time ago, he did something to change his ethnicity, that 
he was Hutu, but changed to become Tutsi... but now we can never know for sure... 
A great lover of melodrama, however, Franco told me what he had done upon hearing 
the news about his grandfather: 
So, I went to talk to my girlfriend... I didn't want her to hear this news from anyone else. So, 
I asked her, "What would you do if you discovered I was Hutu? ' She replied, "But isn't a 
Hutu also a son of God? " So she said that it wasn't important to her. 
Unfortunately, I had to leave Rwanda a few days later and I was left wondering if things 
would be so simple if Franco's neighbourhood friends - Vincent, Elois and Cedric - 
were to discover that there was a question mark about Franco's "ethnic" identity. The 
group of friends clearly considered Franco to be a Tutsi and were one of the groups I 
worked with who were most openly dismissive of Hutus, saying that they could never 
really be good friends with or trust a Hutu (see chapter 3). If they learned this news 
about Franco's grandfather, how would this affect the way they relate to him? Would 
this change things in spite of the fact that had all been friends for several years and 
shared so many everyday experiences? The last news I had from Franco was an email 
he wrote to me in March 2006, full of his usual cheery optimism: 
about ma grand father, i never went back in the village since his death and some don't want to 
hear about that at all, others fell [feel] happy on it , 
depending on their interests or the social 
group they are staying in. well i real dont know what to think or not but then it doesn't mean 
much to me as i can fall i[n] any of the two groups me being a hutu or a tutsi i don't think i 
can change alot in my well being, i have so many places where I'm cold [called] a hutu and i 
fell fine with it and there some where I'm know as a tutsi and i fell proude of it... the bad 
thing that would ever happen to me is accusing me of what i did not do (for example : call me 
a hutu and then accuse me to have killed tutsi or the other way round) i would realy fell 
[feel] bad about it. if any one would call me a nice hutu a friend to tutsi fine i will be proud of 
,i think the 
hall [whole] thing drove me to be some kind of a hypocrite coz on this other 
hand i don't know who i am ???? but the answer to that question is not so far from me ,i 
decided to be just a RWANDESE full stop and i will always be proud to be a RWANDESE. 
From the time I spent with Franco, I judge that he would certainly have been in a better 
position to cope with this news than most of the other young people I met. He was 
always friendly with everyone and genuinely did not seem to be very interested in the 
"ethnic" identity of his friends or acquaintances. Franco often said that other aspects of 
young people's identity were more important in Rwanda today such as where they grew 
up, what they were interested in, and their changing relationships with their parents. It is 
these other identities and social distinctions that the next chapter will now examine. 
CHAPTER 6: 
BEYOND ETHNICITY? OTHER SOCIAL DISTINCTIONS IN 
CONTEMPORARY RWANDA 
Although the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" have been prominent socio-political 
identities in Rwandan society for several decades, they have coexisted with several 
other identities, ideas of social difference, self, and other. These have included 
distinctions on the basis of gender, clan and geographical origin as well as socio- 
economic or class differences. Depending on time or context, these different social 
distinctions have been more or less prominent in social and political life and have 
intersected or overlapped with one another. This chapter will look some of these 
alternative social distinctions in contemporary Rwanda through the eyes of the young 
people whose lives I researched. Its premise is that a better knowledge of the meaning 
and relevance of these other social distinctions, and how they intersect with or modify 
"ethnic" distinctions, is critical to understanding the complex social dynamics of 
contemporary Rwanda and the links between essentialist constructions and violence. 
The relevance of "non-ethnic" distinctions in Rwanda past and present 
Given the events of the 1994 genocide and the complex politics of "ethnicity" in 
contemporary Rwanda, there is a danger of only viewing the country through an 
"ethnic" lens and focusing exclusively on the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" 
without examining other social categories that may be important in national politics and 
everyday social life (Franche 1995). Prior to the genocide, the salience of "ethnicity" in 
Rwanda varied across the country and over time, and other social distinctions such as 
clan affiliation and region were often more important, especially in national politics. 
Gender inequalities were also significant and women were marginalised legally, 
economically and socially. There were also large and growing socio-economic 
disparities between the small relatively wealthy political and economic elite (mainly 
Hutus, but including some Tutsis) and the rural "peasant" masses (Hutus and Tutsis 
alike). Many of these "non-ethnic" distinctions were significant factors in the political 
and economic tensions of the late 1980s and early 1990s and influenced the local, 
regional and national dynamics of the violence during the 1994 genocide. 
The civil war, genocide and RPF victory in 1994 then resulted in massive social 
upheaval and significant changes in the composition of Rwanda's population. 
Thousands of Rwandans were killed or internally displaced as a result of the civil war 
from 1990-94. A large percentage of Rwanda's resident Tutsi population (an estimated 
800,000 people) plus tens of thousands of Hutus were killed during the genocide. As the 
RPF moved to take power in July 1994, almost two million Rwandans (mainly Hutus) 
fled as refugees mostly to neighbouring Zaire and Tanzania, including the elite, army 
and militia that had organised the genocide plus hundreds of thousands of civilians. 
Tens of thousands of these refugees were then killed when the RPA-backed Alliance of 
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo (ADFL) attacked the refugee camps in 
1996-97. Most of the remaining refugees returned in 1996 and 1997, but tens of 
thousands remain outside Rwanda, including many of the former Hutu professional, 
political and intellectual elites. Following the RPF victory, hundreds of thousands of 
people (mainly Tutsis) began'to return to Rwanda after up to three decades in exile in 
neighbouring countries such as Uganda, Burundi and Zaire and further afield. The 
majority of these people and their families, many of whom had been moderately well 
educated in their countries of exile, flocked to Kigali to form the new governing elite 
and professional classes in the capital. 
These dramatic changes in the composition and distribution of Rwanda's population - 
especially its elite - combined with the horrific legacy of the civil war, genocide and its 
aftermath - have inevitably resulted in significant social and cultural change, especially 
in the city of Kigali. As the previous chapters have shown, "ethnic" distinctions 
remained important in the everyday lives of the young Rwandans I interviewed, but the 
question that this chapter will address is what role other "non-ethnic" social distinctions 
play in contemporary Rwanda - both in politics and in everyday social, interactions. 
This chapter will firstly look at the other social distinctions that were important in 
Rwanda prior to and during the 1994 genocide. Drawing on my interviews with young 
Rwandans, it will then look at the relevance of these social distinctions in contemporary 
Rwanda and consider the role of newer categories like "returnees". Given the overall 
focus of this thesis, this chapter will look in particular at how these "non-ethnic" 
distinctions intersected, modified or replaced "ethnic" categories and whether and how 
they reinforced or dissipated the potency of "ethnic" divisions. 
The role of regional, class and clan distinctions in "pre-genocide" politics 
Prior to the genocide, region was a significant factor in political competition and social 
relations for many decades. From the late 18th century, the stronghold of the monarchy 
was in central and southern Rwanda, and the monarchy's control over other areas varied 
over time, with the Hutu-dominated northern and north-western regions (and one or two 
Tutsi-dominated Eastern lowlands like Gisaka) retaining significant autonomy well into 
the 20th century (Lemarchand 1977: p78; Vansina 2004: pp109-125). Although the 
colonial authorities helped bring these regions more firmly under the monarchy's 
control in the 1920s, differences in social, political and economic organisation remained 
between people from the north-western regions and from central and southern regions. 
In the lead up to independence, although there was a degree of unity in opposing the 
monarchy (Pottier 2002: p35), the two main Hutu parties APROSOMA and 
PARMEHUTU developed distinct regional bases in the southern Astrida (Butare) area 
and the north-western Gitarama-Ruhengeri area respectively (Prunier 1995: p48). 
After independence in 1962 and the birth of the Hutu Republic, the major (but not only) 
fault line of' political competition was regional. In a bid to retain power and control, 
President Kayibanda played different regional constituencies - especially Butare, 
Ruhengeri and his kinsmen from Gitarama - against one other (Prunier 1995: p57). 
Against a backdrop of increasing isolation and economic hardship, these regional 
tensions were a key factor in the 1973 bloodless coup of Kayibanda's Defence Minister, 
the northerner Habyarimana, who accused Kayibanda of favouring his own region. 
Shortly after taking power, Habyarimana created his own political party, the 
Mouvement Revolutionaire National pour le Developpement (MRND) and enshrined 
single-party rule. Underlying regional tensions never really dissipated, however, and 
Habyarimana soon faced similar accusations of favouring his own north-western region 
in the allocation of jobs and resources (Pottier 2002: p25). In the late 1980s and early 
1990s, in a situation of economic and political crisis, the north-south divide hardened, 
and was further complicated by tensions between different regions and even communes 
of the north variously favoured by Habyarimana, his wife and other cabinet ministers 
(ibid. p86). As discussed in chapter 1, the tragedy to these regional tensions was that the 
regime reacted to increasing internal Hutu dissent and political competition by inciting 
disaffection and, ultimately, violence against the Tutsi population. 
Although this regional factor has been most visible at a political level, it has also had 
important socio-economic dimensions. Firstly, there were historical differences in 
livelihood and cultural practices between Rwandans from different regions related to 
variations in land type, natural resource availability, clientship structures and border 
contact with other countries (see Linden 1977: pp 10-24; Pottier 1997). Secondly, the 
distribution of power, class relations and socio-economic disparities varied from region 
to region and even commune to commune across Rwanda (Longman 1995 ppl8-21; 
Pottier 2002: p33). Thirdly, the importance and nature of clan affiliations also varied 
across Rwanda and in some areas at some times, lineage affiliations took priority over 
other loyalties (see d'Hertefelt 1971; Linden 1977). Finally, regional tensions also 
intersected with "ethnic" ones and relationships between Hutus and Tutsis were not 
uniform across Rwanda. In the south - especially around Butare - there had always been 
far more "ethnic" intermarriage - than in the Hutu-dominated northern provinces. 
Despite the small geographical size and high population density in Rwanda, these 
differences endured a relatively long time as, prior to the 1990s, restrictive laws limited 
internal migration (Uvin 1998: pp115-116; Verwimp 2000: pl 1)136 and many Rwandans 
had limited experience of those from other regions. 
There is little doubt that these regional variations in social and political relations and 
relationship to the central power in Kigali, had implications for the patterns of violence 
during the 1994 genocide. Scott Straus (2006: pp 41-64), for example, examines the 
regional variation (at prefecture level) in the dynamics of genocide across Rwanda and 
concludes that two key factors appeared to have been significant in determining the 
differences in timing and intensity of the killings: the degree of support for the ruling 
MRND party and the proximity to RPF positions. For example, in prefectures such as 
Kigali city, Gisenyi and Ruhengeri, where Habyarimana's party had the strongest 
support, Straus finds that violence materialised quickly. In areas where the opposition 
had the strongest support, such as Butare, there was most resistance to violence. 
Although Straus argues that regional "ethnic" diversity per se did not correlate with the 
patterns of violence, others have argued that regional variability in the proximity of 
Hutu-Tutsi relations made a difference in several communes in the central and southern 
regions, many members of the local Hutu population and authorities resisted 
136 Although there were a couple of major population movements - for example the population of Bugesera 
from the 
1960s to 80s in response to drought and land shortage elsewhere in Rwanda. 
participation in the killing, often losing their own lives as a result (PRI 2004b). 137 There 
is also evidence that clan membership was relevant to the organisation of the genocide. 
Although a limited amount has been written about the relevance of clan ties at a local 
level (see Des Forges 1999 for some examples), it is widely acknowledged that the 
notorious Clan de Madame (the akazu), members of Habyarimana's wife's family of 
the abahinza lineage, was critical in the high-level planning and implementation of the 
genocide (Prunier 1995: pp85-87). 
Straus (2006: pp65-94) then conducts a more fine-grained analysis of the dynamics of 
genocide at commune level and also shows that there were often variations between 
different communes in the same regions. He argues that the genocide ruptured the pre- 
existing political order and triggered an intra-Hutu struggle for dominance and authority 
at a local level, which unfolded in different ways depending on the pre-existing local 
balance of power. Timothy Longman (1995: ppl8-21) makes a similar argument by 
comparing two villages in Kibuye province with quite different local power structures 
and class relations and where the genocide dynamics were very different. He argues 
that, in the lead up to the genocide - just as at the national level - local political and 
economic elites were feeling threatened by pressures both from the poor, marginalised 
"peasantry" in their communes and the immanent changes to the political system and 
structures of power coming from above. He argues that, in different ways, embattled 
elites in both Kirinda and Biguhu used the opportunity presented by the genocide to 
eliminate their rivals and challenges to their authority and to reassert their social, 
political and economic dominance. 
The challenge to patriarchy in the lead up to the genocide 
In the decades prior to the 1994 genocide, there were significant gender disparities in 
Rwandan society and women were marginalised legally, culturally and socially. Men 
dominated national and local politics138 and controlled access to economic resources; 
women generally had fewer educational opportunities and lacked access to land and 
credit. Women had no legal rights to set up a commercial business or inherit property 
137 There was of course resistance to the killing from people all over Rwanda, but it was particularly strong in various 
communes in the centre and south of Rwanda. 
138 In 1985, there were no women in the national Government or local administration at the prefecture or commune 
levels and women constituted only 12% of MPs and 2% of the diplomatic service (Women for Women 2004: pl). 
There were no women in the executive branch until 1990, and then women comprised only 5%. Women never filled 
more than 17% of parliamentary seats before 1990 and no woman was in a ministerial position until 1990. Before the 
genocide, there were no female mayors or prefects and only 3.2% of sub-prefects were women (Nowrojee 2006). 
and even needed their husband's signature to open a bank account (Women for Women 
2004: pp1-2). As Jefremovas' (1991) study of three women entrepreneurs demonstrates, 
even those women who had managed to achieve significant degrees of power and 
wealth were severely limited both legally and socially in their capacity to secure 
permanent control of resources and surplus. 139 She shows that each woman's capacity to 
maintain their position was negotiated though their public roles as "virtuous wives", 
"exemplary widows" and "dutiful daughters" (rather than "loose women") of the men 
who legally and socially owned the enterprises and had ultimate claims over the 
resources (Jefremovas 1991: p379). She argues that both men and women - including 
powerful women - used these socially salient stereotypes to interpret, manipulate, 
validate, or negate control over labour, resources, and surplus. 
Although in the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a growth in non-governmental 
women's organisations, the gains for women were relatively limited. Pressure from the 
Union of Rwandese Women for Development (URAMA) 140 did gain women the right to 
participate in cooperatives and profit-making businesses; and in 1992 a new Ministry of 
the Family and Promotion of Women was established, which later the same year 
succeeded in gaining the right for women to open their own bank account (Women for 
Women 2004: pp1-2). Nonetheless, women's rights in other areas remained curtailed 
and the lot of the majority of women - especially poorer, rural women - changed little. 
At the same time, despite their general dominance, the concrete situation of many men - 
particularly young rural men - became increasingly difficult in the late 1980s and early 
1990s. In the context of a severe economic crisis with high levels of social inequality, 
expanding landlessness and an authoritarian government which restricted internal 
migration, rural life for many poor Rwandans was like "a prison without escape in 
which poverty, infantilization, social inferiority, and powerlessness combined to create 
a sense of personal failure" (Uvin 1998: p117). Young men were particularly hard hit as 
they had far less land than their fathers, could not access educational opportunities' 
and were in permanent search for low-paid temporary jobs, mostly in vain. With limited 
139 Mediatrice, Devota and Vestine each owned or operated large brick and roof tile enterprises during her research in 
the mid-1980s. Even though these women successfully ran enterprises, hired labour and generated surplus, they had 
no publicly recognised right over their resources and surplus beyond their personal relationships with powerful men. 
140 USA was set up by the ruling party the MRND in 1988. 
141 Sommers (2006a: p144) points out that although the Government developed the CERAI (Centres d'enseignement 
rural et artisanal integres) vocational education system as an alternative to secondary education, the results were poor 
for both men and women. 
employment and migration options, and a lack of resources to make a living in 
agriculture, 142 most young men were incapable of supporting families or even marrying. 
Several authors concord that it was this dire situation of poor (mainly rural) male youth 
that made them relatively easy recruits for those organising the genocide, especially 
when they were offered material rewards and status (see African Rights 1995b: p56; 
Des Forges 1999: p11; Sommers 2006a: p146). 143 
Adam Jones (2002: p67) characterises this situation of frustration and entrapment of 
younger men prior to the 1994 genocide as a "gender crisis". He speculates that the 
genocide represented an attempt by extremist elements both to get rid of Rwanda's 
Tutsi minority and to diminish the threat of these disenchanted young men by allowing 
them to seize land, cattle, and other property by killing Tutsis. As Jones (2002: pp67- 
68). argues, the genocidal propaganda and rhetoric played on the aspirations and fears 
of young men in a number of ways: (i) it referred to the killing of Tutsis as "work"; 
(ii) it sought to heighten the martial sensibilities of young Hutu males and brand those 
who refused to participate as cowards; (iii) it stressed the opportunities for upward 
mobility that being a diligent genocidaire presented; and (iv) it encouraged male 
bonding complemented by the offer of free beer in the evenings. There is certainly 
evidence that some young men were indeed attracted to the killing by the opportunities 
it presented to claim status and property (see Des Forges 1999: p508; Hatzfeld 2003). 
Chris Taylor (1999: ppl5l-157) takes the argument a step further to claim that the 1994 
genocide was as much about reconfiguring power relations between men and women as 
between groups of men. Although the genocide primarily targeted men, he argues that 
the killing of many prominent women, '45 as well as the removal of the previous 
142 A survey conducted by Clay, Kampayana and Kayitsinga (1997: p109) found that in 1989, although most young 
men and women sought to become farmers, 85% "believe that they will not inherit enough land for the subsistence 
needs of their families" (in Sommers 2006: p145). African Rights (1995) say that by 1990, most of the traditional 
options open to poor young men (inheriting land, clearing new farmland, migration to Uganda or Zage, becoming a 
client of a more powerful man, formal employment) had practically disappeared as a result of the parcelizing of land 
into smaller plots, the expansion of tea plantations and cash crops and a decline in public sector jobs asa a result of 
structural adjustment. 
143 These authors concord that young males made up the majority of the killers in 1994. Sommers (2006a: p155) is 
careful to stress that young Rwandan men were no more violent than any other young men, but that their engagement 
in violence only emerged when their desperation and vulnerability was exploited. 
144 The word "interahamwe" itself was previously used for communal work parties in the 1970s and 80s. Numerous 
testimonies also describe how the "work" of killing was often carried to a strict work-like schedule beginning at 7 am 
and finishing at 5pm (e. g. Des Forges 1999: p390) 
145 Taylor cites the examples of the Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingiyimana, who was executed by Rwandan soldiers 
on 7 April hours after President Habyarimana's death (ppl63-164) and Emilita in February 1993, a prosperous 
female taxi driver (ppl58-161). 
restrictions on the killing or severe abuse of Tutsi women, 146 can be understood as an 
opportunity for men to reassert patriarchal domination. Despite the discrimination 
suffered by most women, some women had achieved prominence in economic and 
professional life in the years preceding the genocide - perhaps most notably Agathe 
Uwilingiyimana, the articulate, anti-ethnicist Prime Minister, a southern Hutu of the 
party Mouvement Democratique Republicain (MDR) - and others began to express their 
personal preferences in their private lives, thereby challenging patriarchal authority. 
Similarly, Georgina Holmes (2008) argues that the Rwandan nation-state became 
increasingly militarized and masculinised in the lead up to the genocide and shows how 
the cartoons in the extremist magazine Kangura militarised Rwandan women - not just 
as wives, mothers and prostitutes, but also as dangerous political subjects. 
Taylor (1999: pp165-177) also argues that the complex gender politics of pre-genocide 
Rwanda had an important "ethnic" dimension. Since colonial times, Tutsi women had 
been depicted as being superior in intelligence and beauty compared to their Hutu 
counterparts. Yet, at the same time, the Hutu elite depicted Tutsi women as dangerous 
due to their subversive potential to undermine the categorical boundary between Hutu 
and Tutsi. As discussed in chapter 5, since pre-colonial times, there had been a 
relatively significant number of marriages and sexual relationships between Tutsi 
women and Hutu men (and few between Hutu women and Tutsi men) and extremists 
viewed the resulting "ethnically anomalous" children as a threat to the racial purity of 
the Hutu nation. Yet, many Hutu extremist men were themselves apparently unable to 
shed feelings of attraction to Tutsi women and had Tutsi wives and mistresses in the 
lead up to the genocide. Taylor locates this ambivalent mix of violence and desire 
towards Tutsi women in the endurance of the colonial Hamitic hypothesis (see chapters 
1 and 4), which expounded their superior beauty and sexual allure in comparison to 
Hutu women. He suggests that a lingering inferiority complex on the part of Hutu men 
may help explain some of the acts of extreme brutality and torture meted out against 
Tutsi women including rape, breast obliteration, impalement and the evisceration of 
146 There is still debate over exactly whether and when the organisers of the genocide gave an order to target Tutsi 
women and children, but Tutsi males were certainly the primary targets in the first month or so and then from mid- 
May onwards the relative number of Tutsi women targeted increased. Jones (2002: p70) argues that, as in Nazi- 
occupied Eastern Europe "gendercidal" atrocities against males helped acclimatise the killers to killing (see also Des 
Forges 1999: pi 1). Nowrojee (1996: p4l) writes that in mid-May the genocide organisers issued an order to the 
Interahamwe not to spare Tutsi women and children. African Rights (1995b) say that the first few weeks of genocide 
were characterised by mass killings of men, women and children and the more gender-selective targeting of males. 
pregnant women (Taylor 1999: p176, see also Sharlach 1999: pp395-396 and Jones 
2002: pp80-82). 147 
Indeed, the narratives from rape survivors in Nowrojee's (1996) study of sexual 
violence in Rwanda reveals that many survivors say that their attackers mentioned their 
"ethnic" identity before or during the rape e. g. "You Tutsi women are too proud", "We 
want to see how sweet Tutsi women are", "You Tutsi women think you are too good for 
us" (p18). During the genocide, rapists included not just soldiers and peasants, but 
educated men, teachers and priests (African Rights 1995a). Thus, Sharlach argues: 
The pre-existing stereotypes and ethnic jealousies, exacerbated by the government 
propaganda campaign denigrating and sexualising Tutsi women, created a climate in which 
the mass rape of Tutsi women appeared to be an appropriate form of retribution for their 
purported arrogance, immorality, hyper-sexuality and espionage. (Sharlach 1999: p394) 
A number of authors also speculate that the examples of brutality displayed by some 
Hutu women towards Tutsi women can also be explained by their jubilation at the 
"come-uppance" of Tutsi females who had been long portrayed as Rwanda's sexual 
elite (Jones 2002: p84; see also Sharlach 1999: p388). The prominent role played by 
Hutu women as organisers, instigators, and perpetrators during the 1994 Rwandan 
genocide is often noted as one of its defining features. Women helped organise the 
genocide at its highest levels (e. g. Agathe Habyarimana, member of the notorious 
akazu); some of the most racist RTLM broadcasters were women; and some female 
local officials were especially vicious, ordering the deaths of Tutsi girls and sometimes 
watching them be raped first. 148 A number of Hutu women also betrayed their female 
Tutsi neighbours to the interahamwe or handed over the Tutsi children that had been 
entrusted to them to be killed, suggesting that a woman's loyalty to her ethnic group 
overrode any sense of sisterhood to other women (Sharlach 1999: p392). 
Given this socio-political context prior to the genocide and the role it is argued that 
regional, class, and gender divisions played in the dynamics of genocide, it is important 
to consider the salience of these distinctions in Rwanda today. In addition to my 
discussions with young people about their past experiences, current social relations, and 
their views on the reconciliation process, I therefore spent many hours observing and 
1' The UN's Special Rapporteur on Rwanda estimated that there were between 250,000 and 500,000 rapes during the 
genocide. Rape was used as a form of torture and genocide and many Tutsi women were taken as 'wives' or slaves of 
Hutu genocidaires (see Nowrojee 1996: p24). 
"' See Sperling 2006 on the purported acts of the then Minister for Family Wellbeing and the Promotion of Women, 
Pauline Nyiramasuhuko (see also African Rights 1995a: pl 10). 
talking to each person about their families and friends, their aspirations for work and 
marriage, and more broadly about how Rwandan society was changing in the aftermath 
of the genocide and in response to outside influences. This revealed some interesting 
material on the significance of these and other social distinctions in their lives. 
The decline of regionalism and clan as factors in social and political life in Kigali 
Despite the past significance of regional provenance in Rwanda, among the group of 
urban youth in Kigali with whom I conducted research, this was rarely mentioned in 
everyday conversations or during our discussions about Rwandan society. 149 When I 
asked young people directly about the importance of regional differences in Rwanda, 
the majority said that whilst regional distinctions had been important before the war and 
genocide, they were no longer of any relevance in Rwanda today. For example: 
People no longer talk about regional divisions. Above all, it's where you come from that 
matters, the country of provenance... if you came from Uganda, from Burundi, from Congo 
or you are from here, Rwanda. It's this that counts these days. (Jean-Claude, b. in Rwanda) 
[Regionalism] is no longer important. I think it has been replaced by the country of origin or 
the region of the country of origin... for us from outside Rwanda, the province of origin in 
Rwanda does not mean anything. (Jimmy, b. 1975 in Zaire) 
As Jimmy suggests, it is important to note that many of my informants grew up in 
Kigali or outside Rwanda. Although the majority knew where their families were 
"originally from" in Rwanda, they often had limited connections to those places aside 
from one or two older family relations or some land. By contrast, the four young people 
who did think that region of origin was still relevant were those who grew up in 
Rwanda, had spent time living in rural areas or went back to rural areas relatively 
frequently to visit family or for schooling. They all stressed, however, that it was 
outside Kigali, where regionalism was still a significant factor among Rwandans. For 
example, one day Francine showed me some photographs of her classmates from her 
secondary school a few miles from Gisenyi town in the northwest. She pointed out a 
girl, who had looked after her when she had her epileptic fits and commented: 
She was also from Butare like me and was even older than me... You know the other girls 
from Gisenyi made fun of her and called her `Tutsi' sometimes. Because people from Gisenyi 
are very close-knit and say that people from Butare are Tutsis. It was like that often - we 
stuck together with groups of friends from our own region. (Francine b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
X49 I did receive a few comments, mainly from older Rwandan acquaintances, when I left Kigali to spend some time 
in other regions. For example, when I went on a weekend trip to Nyungwe Forest in Gitarama province in the 
southwest, I had a number of comments from acquaintances about how people from Gitarama were "dirty" and 
"backwards". Similarly, when I visited the family of Consolee's uncle in Gisenyi Province with Consolee and 
Francine, I received a number of comments about the lack of sophistication and naivety of people from this region. 
Francine told me that although region of origin was far less significant than before the 
genocide, there was still a tendency among Rwandans living in rural areas - to make a 
distinction on the basis of region. She said that people still sometimes jump to 
conclusions about a person's "ethnic" identity based on their origin in Rwanda: 
If you say you are from Gisenyi or Ruhengeri, people will usually think you are Hutu, as 
almost everyone in those regions is Hutu, '5 even if there are a few survivors that have been 
there and a few Tutsis from Congo... If you say you are from Gitarama or Butare, people 
think you are Tutsi or mixed. 
On another occasion, Francine talked about differences in behaviour of people from 
different regions: 
It's the Tutsis and also the Hutus from the southern provinces who don't speak openly. They 
never say clearly what they think. We call people from these provinces - Butare, Kibuye, 
Gitarama and part of Gikongoro - the abanyanduga. These were the regions close to Nyanza, 
the seat of the king. The abanyanduga and the Tutsis, people often doubt what they say and 
take them for liars. In contrast, people from Gisenyi and Ruhengeri - the Hutus there - they 
say everything and cannot lie. People from Ruhengeri and Gisenyi, we call them the abakiga. 
Francine was the only young person to talk in any depth about regional differences and 
her comments are reminiscent of what has been written about the situation before the 
genocide. Her view that regional distinctions remain more significant outside Kigali, 
however, also appears to be shared to some extent by the RPF Government. The 
Government has repeatedly put emphasis on the eradication of "regional" divisions as 
well as "ethnic" divisions, for example in the text of the 2003 Constitution. ' 51 One 
motivation for the reorganisation of Rwanda's provinces in January 2006 also appears 
to have been to combat "regionalism": 
Our President has spoken of this problem and said that he will now upset this history of 
regionalism... he is going to pass a law to break this logic. We will no longer have provinces 
like before. We are going to combine provinces and create only four regions plus Kigali. So, 
we will put together Gisenyi, Kibuye and Cyangugu around the lake; then Ruhengeri, 
Byumba and a part of Umutara in the north; and then another part of Umutara, Kibungo and 
Kigali-Ngali; and then the other southern provinces. Like that, we will force people to create 
links amongst themselves, see how they can cooperate for example via trade... I think that 
this will help break this logic of regionalism and help reconciliation. (Jules b. 1978 in Kigali) 
uo There were certainly regional differences in the pre-genocide percentage of Tutsis in different regions of Rwanda 
as proportion of the whole Tutsi population. For example, using census data from 1991, Straus (2006: p55) calculates 
the following figures in terms of the pre-genocide % of Tutsis as a proportion of the total Tutsi population in Rwanda 
at the time: Ruhengeri 0.6%; Gisenyi 3.5%; Gitarama 13.0% and Butare 21.7%. As discussed above, the central and 
southern regions of Gitarama and Butare were also renowned for higher rates of ethnic intermarriage. There are of 
course no figures on the ethnic composition of the population after 1994, but anecdotal evidence suggests that 
Gisenyi and Ruhengeri still have relatively low numbers of Tutsi and that the population may be less mixed in many 
areas compared to before the genocide with a higher number overall of Tutsis in the towns or close to rural roads and 
market places, rather than on the collines. 
Eradication of ethnic, regional and other divisions and promotion on national unity. " (Republic of Rwanda 2003) 
Thus, whilst region of origin was irrelevant to most young people I interviewed in 
Kigali, the situation is clearly not uniform across the country. 
The young people I interviewed also rarely mentioned Rwanda's clans spontaneously in 
our discussions, except when referring to the past when they often mentioned the 
"multi-ethnic" nature of Rwanda's clans (see chapter 3). This is similar to the emphasis 
that the current Government has placed on the fact that Rwandan clans contained Hutus, 
Tutsis and Twas together - as proof of the harmonious, integrated Rwandan society they 
say existed prior to the arrival of the colonial powers. 152 When I asked young people 
about the importance of clan in Rwanda today, the majority said that it was not of any 
significance and almost half of my research participants said that they did not know 
which clan they belonged to: 
[Clan] doesn't have any importance today. It's really linked to the history of the kingdom 
here, but today people don't know their clan... I don't know mine, but I could ask my 
family... I suppose it perhaps might still be important for certain people, like those from the 
abanyiginya, but I don't really know. (Emmanuel b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
A number of others agreed with Emmanuel that clan was generally diminishing in 
importance, but said that it remained important to some families and parents: 
I don't think that [clan] counts today. It's more important for parents, rather than young 
people... I do think that everyone knows their clan, but maybe not - maybe I'll ask my 
friends if they know their clan... Perhaps for certain families, it is important for marriage and 
all that. (Jimmy b. 1975 in Zaire) 
Interestingly, when I then asked Jimmy if he knew his own clan, this was his response: 
It's complicated, but I do know all my ancestors back to the 15' generation who was a king. 
My father told me all about that - I've got it written down somewhere. 
When I asked him to clarify further, he admitted that his clan was the royal clan 
"abanyiginya". I also came across a few others who felt that clan was still significant: 
Yes, [clan] is very important. You know the people who are from the clan of the king, the 
royal clan, abanyiginya, they are very proud of that and will tell you who all their ancestors 
are... Also, it depends on the clan, but there are certain clans that can't marry each other 
because it will bring bad things. For example, if a man marries a girl from a certain clan - that 
means that he is going to get very ill or even die. Clan is very important, especially for some 
elite families here in Kigali. (Peter b. 1974 in Uganda) 
152 For a detailed discussion of the genesis and development of clans in Rwanda, see David Newbury (1980). 
Although it is true that most of Rwanda's clans were "multi-ethnic" in the early 20`h century, Newbury rejects 
assumptions that Rwanda's clans were primordial units reaching back into the distant past and that they were solely 
based on descent. Instead he argues that the "multi-ethnic" clan structures found in pre-genocide Rwanda were the 
result of specific historical and structural changes related to the extension of central court influence and power over 
regions and people formerly outside the system. 
Clan, it's important... Like there are some bad clans that bring bad luck like Umushingwe. 
The Tutsi girls from that clan - they know they can't find a Tutsi boy, so they often marry 
Hutus... we say the same thing about the Umugesera clan. (Stella b. 1984 in Uganda) 
As Peter suggests, the only young people amongst my respondents who said that clan 
was important were those who were from relatively "elite" families and in all cases, 
these were Tutsi families. In fact, apart from one case, they were from Tutsi "returnee" 
families. This suggests that there is an intersection between issues of clan, class, place 
of origin, and ethnicity - and that although many families that spent several decades in 
exile appear to have no attachment to a particular region of Rwanda, their clan 
membership has remained important to them. 
Country of origin: Rwanda's new geographical and class divide? 
This question of country of origin has become more important than the issue of ethnicity. 
(Franco b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
In urban Kigali when I conducted my fieldwork, the geographical factor most relevant 
to both national politics and everyday social relations was country of origin. As 
discussed earlier, the majority of Rwanda's post-1994 political and professional elite 
grew up outside Rwanda. Most of these "returnees" differed from both the Tutsi victims 
of the genocide and the Hutu elite that had preceded them. Whereas the majority of 
Tutsis in pre-genocide Rwanda lived as farmers in rural areas, and most members of the 
former Hutu elite maintained strong rural roots in the countryside; 153 most of the 
(mainly Tutsi) "returnees" were fairly well-educated, had little knowledge of agriculture 
and limited, if any, family connections in the Rwandan countryside (Prunier 1997: 
p7)'54 They therefore flocked to Kigali and took over most of the urban properties 
(houses, shops, small factories) belonging to the Hutu who had fled and sought to find 
work in the modern administrative and business sectors in the city (ibid. p7). 
There were two key consequences of this in terms of geographical distinctions in post- 
genocide Rwanda. Firstly, this has resulted in a broad dichotomization of the economy 
with the majority of the Hutu population living on the land in rural areas and a town- 
based monetarized economy almost entirely in Tutsi hands (Prunier 1997: p7). 
Secondly, this has resulted in significant tensions in Kigali - both between "returnees" 
153 Philip Verwimp (2000) examines the "peasant ideology" of Habyarimana's regime and argues that this was an 
important factor in the production of genocide. 
154 There were some lesser educated mainly Tutsi "returnees" who were herdsmen and arrived in Rwanda often with 
large quantities of cattle and mostly chose to settle in the Eastern plains of the Umutara region (Prunier 1997: p8). 
from different countries and between "returnees" and those who grew in Rwanda. From 
the perspective of those who were born in Rwanda, had survived the war and genocide 
and had not fled the country, their former lives and livelihoods were often decimated 
and they were faced with a new elite who took political power and quickly came to 
dominate economic life, especially in Kigali. 
From the perspective of the "returnees" themselves, they were faced with a new 
environment where there had been widespread killing in which many civilians were 
involved and in which some had lost family members. Although many returnees had 
financed or supported the RPF's victory and some had fought together as soldiers, in 
reality the groups of returnees from different countries had very little direct experience 
of each other (Dorsey 2000). Thus, tens of thousands of people, who had grown up in 
very different contexts, had diverse experiences of the violence and lacked the kinship 
networks common in rural communities suddenly found themselves together in Kigali. 
They were forced to cooperate and compete in professional, economic and social life as 
they tried to re-establish their lives, find homes, jobs and schools for their children - all 
against a backdrop of appalling human and physical decimation. 
In the mid to late-1990s, in a situation where Hutus were marginalized politically and 
economically, rivalries between various Tutsi groups began to dominate. Life in exile 
had weakened old aristocratic lineage-based intra-Tutsi divisions and replaced them 
with friendship and solidarity networks born out of exile (Prunier 1997: p3). Thus, 
rivalries were expressed between different groups of returnees who became categorised 
by their place of exile i. e. the "Ugandans", "Tanzanians", "Zairians", "Burundese". As 
the realisation set in that life in Rwanda was going to be hard (increasing cost of living, 
limited job opportunities, housing problems, lack of infrastructure), these tensions 
became acute, especially at the political level. In March 1997, there was a cabinet 
reshuffle that effectively sidelined both Hutus and Tutsi returnees from Burundi and 
Zaire, and strengthened the position of the "Ugandans" (Prunier 1997: pp3-6). 
Similarly, in the military, virtually all the key men in the power structure were 
"Ugandans" and mostly RPA or ex-RPA officers, and the "Ugandan" colonels had 
increasing influence on both political decision-making and the allocation of jobs and 
resources in the economy (Dorsey 2000; Prunier 1997: p6, see also ICG 2002: ppl8- 
Relations between young returnees: "Dubais ", "GPs " and "Main Gauches" 
My interviews with young Rwandans in urban Kigali confirmed that tensions between 
different groups of returnees have been significant in Rwanda since the genocide, 
especially in the mid to late-1990s. Many reported that "Ugandans", "Burundians" and 
"Congolese" (or "Zaireans") had frequented different churches and social venues, 
worked in different offices and sometimes lived in different neighbourhoods: 
At the start, there was much suspicion between groups. They kept themselves to themselves. 
There were certain bars where 90% of people were Rwandans from Congo and other bars 
where it was almost entirely Rwandans from Uganda. It was the same thing for jobs. There 
were businesses that employed only people from Burundi and when they needed more staff, 
they chose someone who had returned from the same country. (Jimmy, b. 1975 in Zaire) 
Many young people also mentioned the nicknames that started to circulate in 1995 and 
1996 to refer to those returnees from different countries of exile: 
In 1995/96, we gave different names to Rwandans. From Burundi, they called us the 'GPs' 
for `Jeunesse Perdue' because they thought we were more libertine in the way we behaved 
and didn't respect traditional values. The Congolese were the `Dubais'. You know that cars 
from Dubai and Europe aren't of the same quality. A Carina from Dubai might resemble a 
Carina from Europe, but inside it's of bad quality... we say that the Rwandans from Congo 
are like that - rotten on the inside. The Rwandans from Uganda were `Les main gauches' [left 
handers] because of the cars they drive, but also because they are a little gauche, like 
villagers. And Rwandans from Rwanda, we called them the `sopecyas' - when we arrived in 
Rwanda, there were  sopecya' service stations everywhere. (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
They called us the `Dubais'. They said that we were like products from Dubai. On the 
outside, you think the quality is good, but on the inside, there are no quality parts. It's all a 
trick. Those from Burundi, we call them the GPs after the `Garde Presidentiel' in Burundi. 
Particularly we say that women from Burundi are dangerous, because they chase men and 
they have AIDS. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
As the two examples above illustrate, although many people mentioned these same 
nicknames, the ways in which they explained the significance of the labels varied. For 
example, the interpretation of the nickname "GP" was different between Vincent and 
Fidele and clearly reflected their own positions coming from different countries of 
exile. Whilst many people I spoke to mentioned these nicknames in our conversations, 
in practice I rarely heard them being used spontaneously in social situations and 
dialogues between young people, suggesting that by 2004-2005 when I conducted my 
research, they were less significant than in the mid to late 1990s. Young people did still 
refer, however, to the labels "Ugandans", "Burundians" and "Congolese". The young 
people I interviewed generally felt that tensions had diminished since the late 1990s and 
that there was more mixing between groups of returnees from different countries of 
exile. Most felt, however, that mixing had occurred between those from Burundi and 
Zaire and to some extent from Rwanda, but that the "Ugandans" remained separate: 
I don't have any friends from Uganda. They are always in their own groups (Alphonse, 
b. 1970 in Zaire) 
The Ugandans are always separate. Their way of thinking is different than ours and they 
don't mix too much with others (Elois, b. 1986 in Burundi) 
This was confirmed by a group of young returnees from Uganda in this exchange: 
[Winnie, b. 1984 in Uganda] The groups don't mix much. For example, in my school, the 
Ugandans sit together and the Burundians sit separately. 
[Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda] Yes, there isn't much mixing. For example, there are different bars 
where they go. For example, there is a bar around here called Sole, which is run by a 
Rwandans from Burundi and only Burundians go there. We can't go there. Instead, we go to 
another bar near hear called Mbarara, which is for Ugandans... 
The composition of the groups of young people I researched seemed to confirm the 
general separation of the "Ugandan" returnees from others. Two of the groups of friends 
I interviewed were entirely composed of returnees from Uganda and, although I met 
several of their other acquaintances, they were almost always Ugandan returnees. By 
contrast, I didn't find any other groups of friends that were entirely homogenous in this 
way - except a group of poorer young people who had grown up in Rwanda and said 
they did not know any "returnees" at all. 
This separation of groups of returnees - and "Ugandans" in particular - seemed to have 
several explanations. Firstly, many young people clearly felt that those from Uganda 
were privileged in terms of access to jobs, education and resources and that the 
"Ugandans" tended to stick together and help one another: 
There are still some problems between people who have come from different countries - 
above all for jobs. If someone has come from Uganda, he employs another person from 
Uganda. For example, at Rwanda Revenue Authority, it's only people from Uganda... it's 
them who dominate politics and the economy. (Franco, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
The Tutsis from Uganda... are trying to profit as much as possible from the situation... It's 
them that dominate most of the associations, the public sector jobs and the companies here. 
Here, it's the policy of "integration" that operates. People will integrate and employ others 
from Uganda even if they aren't qualified, because they know they will protect the interests 
of the regime. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
I stayed in the army until 1997 and then I quit... I was sergeant, but it was blocked for me. 
Only the Ugandans could rise up the ranks. Many of the Ugandans I fought with in 1991 are 
colonels and captains now. But we from Burundi and Congo were defavourised. (Hassan, b. 
1980 in Zaire) 
Whilst it is undoubtedly true that those from Uganda still dominate political and 
economic life, this notion has developed into a, strong stereotype and it is often 
automatically assumed that those from Uganda are privileged. Peter and his other 
friends from Uganda spoke to me about how they suffered from this stereotype: 
People often come and ask me if I can get them a job in a ministry or something. They think 
that because a lot of people high in government are Ugandans, that all other Ugandans are 
connected to them. (Paul, b. 1980 in Uganda) 
Peter's group, although all from Uganda, were all living difficult lives in Kigali. When I 
met the group, only two out of eight of them had a job, one was finishing school and the 
others were all looking for work. During the two years I knew them, Paul was lucky to 
get sponsored by a religious organisation to go and study in South Africa and the new 
American husband of one of Winnie's friends paid for Winnie to learn French. Peter 
and the others, however, remained unemployed. Peter tried to apply for more than a 
dozen jobs whilst I knew him and never succeeded, although he had completed 
secondary school and had experience of NGO work. Peter told me that it was because 
his group of Ugandan "returnees" were mostly orphans who had lost their parents and 
were left with no connections or people to help them. Winnie commented that it also 
mattered where in Uganda a person had grown up, signalling another layer of 
complexity beneath the stereotype of privileged "Ugandans". It mattered which camp or 
town in Uganda a person grew up in, which school he or she went to and whether in 
Rwanda today, the person's family remained close to those in power. Yet, just as the 
corporate assumptions about "ethnicity" endured, it seemed that there were parallel 
corporate assumptions about returnees from different countries - despite the exceptions. 
The second reason given for the separation of returnees from different countries was 
language. Many young people felt that language had been a significant obstacle to 
social interaction and to the development of relationships between those from different 
countries of exile and with those who had grown up in Rwanda: 
Language was a problem. We didn't speak French and they didn't speak English, so the 
Francophones and Anglophones stayed together in their own groups. (Winnie, b. 1984 in 
Uganda) 
We spoke some Kinyarwanda in Burundi and Kirundi is very similar. Therefore, when we 
came back to Rwanda, it was easy for us to integrate with Rwandans from here... Rwandans 
from Congo didn't speak Kinyarwanda - only French, Lingala and Swahili. Therefore they 
could speak to us via French and with a limited number of Rwandans from here who spoke 
French. But, those from Uganda, they didn't really speak Kinywarwanda. They only spoke 
English, Kiganda and other Ugandan languages. Therefore when they arrived, they couldn't 
communicate with us or anyone here in the country. (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
As these comments reveal, the situation was not the same for groups from all countries 
and - at least in Kigali - those from Uganda and Tanzania (the "Anglophones") tended 
to suffer more in everyday social life from the language differences than those from 
Burundi, Zaire or even Rwanda itself (the "Francophones"). Initially, the establishment 
of separate Anglophone secondary schools aggravated this situation as groups of young 
people from different countries of exile did not mix - although the Government later 
forced schools and universities to teach in both English and French. '55 In 2004-05, the 
situation was improving. Almost all returnees I came across from Burundi and Zaire 
had mastered Kinyarwanda well and used it in most social interactions. The majority of 
Ugandan returnees could also speak some Kinyarwanda, although most said they were 
uncomfortable speaking it, as their accent made it obvious that they came from an 
Anglophone country. In practice, both of my groups from Uganda still preferred to 
communicate among themselves in Luganda mixed with English. 
The third explanation given for the separation of groups of returnees related to 
purported differences in culture and behaviour between different groups and between 
"returnees" and Rwandans from Rwanda, for example: 
We Rwandans from Congo are like the Congolese, who are very open and talkative, like 
dancing and partying... they are full of life... Burundians also like to party... [Those from 
Burundi] adore Bob Marley and rasta culture... they love reggae... [Rwandans from 
Uganda] weren't brought up very well. Their level of education was very low and they don't 
know how to behave, what manners to adopt... they are rude and arrogant. Particularly when 
they took all the high level posts, they felt self-important... and those from Kenya were more 
like the English with correct manners and very polite. (Jimmy, b. 1975 in Zaire) 
The Rwandans from Burundi and Congo were more Europeanised - more like people from 
developed countries in their behaviour and style of dress... A Ugandan, he is always looking 
for a way to take something from you, to steal something. You can't trust him... And people 
from Congo, they lie often. They don't say things directly. They twist things and make you 
believe things that aren't true. A person who has lived in Burundi is more direct. He will let 
you know immediately if he doesn't like you, but those from Rwanda or Uganda hide the fact 
that they don't like you deep down... People from Burundi, they think more about these ideas 
of ethnicity, because we lived this over there (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
155 Before 1994, primary schooling in Rwanda was generally conducted in Kinyarwanda (and sometimes French in 
the later years of primary school) and secondary schooling in French. Post-1994, with the return of tens of thousands 
of young Rwandans from Anglophone countries that had been schooled in English and did not know French, English 
became the third official language of Rwanda and a variety of new Anglophone schools and institutions such as the 
Kigali Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) were established to cater for them. In 1997, the universities were 
also suspended for a year so that all students could learn both French and English. The first three years of primary 
schooling were in Kinyarwanda with a choice of French or English thereafter. In October 2008, however, the 
Rwandan Government announced that in support of its bid to join both the East Africa Community and the 
Commonwealth, it would drop French as an option in primary schools - something that is seen by some as a snub to 
France due to poor diplomatic relations (e. g. see http: //www. guardian. co. uk/world/2008/oct/l4/rwanda-france). 
As the above comments reveal, similarly to the corporate "ethnic" stereotypes discussed 
in chapter 4, many of these comments about differences had a stereotypical quality and I 
would hear them repeatedly. Also, certain stereotypes mirrored, qualified, or countered 
stereotypes held by others. For example, I frequently heard those from Uganda being 
described as arrogant, poor mannered or socially awkward - especially by those who 
grew up in Congo or Burundi: 
The "Ugandans" are brutal. They don't know how to behave. They are very arrogant because 
they brought the RPF to power, but they were brought up badly. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
Stella who was born in Uganda agreed that those from Uganda were not as able in 
social situations, but she used very different terms to speak about this: 
You know we have quite different cultures... we from Uganda, we don't talk much, we are 
quite reserved in social situations, but those from Burundi, they talk a lot and they know how 
to socialise. They make friends easily. [Those from Congo] are pretty much the same as those 
from Burundi. They talk easily and are sociable. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
The final, related explanation for these differences was due to the varied environments 
in which people had grown up. These explanations also tended to combine a degree of 
factual accuracy with myth and stereotype: 
Those from Burundi are used to the soft life. They didn't suffer as much as us -a few did, 
but most no. In Uganda, we had to work really hard, be organised, make our lives. Many of 
those in Burundi were in Bujumbura and had easier access to schools and jobs. They also got 
used to not doing things for themselves. You know a Rwandan from Burundi can't even 
prepare food. He is used to the women or domestics doing it. They are much more concerned 
about class than us and about not doing certain jobs. But, we from Uganda are not like that, 
we are used to working hard. (Mustapha, b. 1973 in Uganda) 
We from Congo don't have these ideas of division. I think we were well integrated over there 
and there were many ethnic groups, therefore ethnicity wasn't very important... It's only 
after 1994 that it became difficult for Rwandans there... [From Burundi] Those from the 
town... they are open to other ideas and cultures, but from the countryside, no... Also, there 
are the same divisions as here or even worse. There were Rwandans from Burundi who 
arrived here and wanted to live in separate Hutu and Tutsi neighbourhoods like in Burundi... 
[From Uganda] It's as if they are mistrustful of everyone and want to stay together. I think 
it's due to their situation in Uganda, Very few went to live in the towns, and even these 
people spent time in the camps first. Also, they didn't have good access to education - they 
arrived in Rwanda with a very low level. In fact, most were soldiers... I think they had a 
complex because they felt they suffered more than those from other countries... Therefore 
they told themselves: "We have suffered and we fought for this. Now we are going to take 
advantage and live well"... (Jules, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
Although the mutual stereotypes varied a little, people's descriptions of the different 
contexts in which they grew up confirmed broad differences in the refugee experience 
between countries. Those Rwandans who grew up in Congo tended to be far more 
dispersed, living in Goma, Lubumbashi, Bukavu and Kinshasa as well as rural areas. 
Young people's stories suggest that they were well integrated in Congolese society and 
had good relations with other Congolese. Although many of my respondents who grew 
up in Congo said that they had been aware they were Rwandan and were called 
"banyarwanda " by others, until the 1990s, they were effectively treated as another 
Congolese ethnic group. They all grew up with Congolese friends, speaking Lingala and 
French, and only occasionally Kinywarwanda at home. They had lived well in Congo 
and been able to access education, land and jobs without too much difficulty. It was 
only in the 1990s, in the context of the civil war in Rwanda and tensions in the Kivus in 
Eastern Zaire, that Rwandans became less welcome in Congo. 
Almost all of those I interviewed who grew up in Burundi had grown up in the capital 
Bujumbura. Their parents had usually spent a short time in refugee camps on leaving 
Rwanda and then moved to Bujumbura. Overall, they felt they were well treated, 
although they said that being Rwandan often made it more difficult to get jobs, 
especially in the public sector. Also, some said that Rwandans, as non-nationals, were 
required to get higher grades in exams to get into secondary school. In the 1960s and 
70s, however, many Rwandan refugees in Burundi were able to access support from the 
UN including, for some, scholarships to university. Most significant in the Burundian 
context was the backdrop of "ethnic" politics, with relations between Burundian Hutus 
and Tutsis deteriorating suddenly in the early 1990s as a result of the civil war, elections 
and a coup. Many of my respondents described how in 1993, Bujumbura divided in two 
as people moved into Hutu or Tutsi neighbourhoods. Rwandan Tutsis who lived in 
Bujumbura were forced to move into Tutsi neighbourhoods and some got caught up in 
the violence. As well as the civil war, there was regular communal violence in 
Bujumbura and many of my respondents said they had joined gangs. Undoubtedly this 
experience hastened the wish of many Rwandans in Burundi to return to Rwanda. 
Most of my respondents who grew up in Uganda described a relatively tough life there. 
Most Rwandans lived in camps in the southern regions for a long period, eventually 
settling in the rural areas around the camps to farm or look after cattle. Their mobility 
was far more restricted, as was access to education and jobs. A limited number of 
families, mainly those of Rwandan men who became soldiers in the Ugandan National 
Resistance Army (NRA), did move to Kampala or regional capitals such as Mbarara 
where many succeeded in getting their children into good schools - often by changing 
their names. Although many children of Rwandan origin born in Uganda were given 
Ugandan citizenship, in response to Ugandan political events, there were attempts to 
expulse those of Rwandan origin and take away citizenship rights. As others have 
argued, this is likely to have been a major factor in the formation of the RPF and timing 
of the civil war in Rwanda (Mamdani 2001: pp159-184; Prunier 1995: pp 67-74). 
Relations between young "returnees " and those born in Rwanda 
Although there were residual tensions in relations between "returnees" from different 
countries, also significant was the nature of relations between those who came from 
outside Rwanda and those born in Rwanda. Among my respondents, there were some 
friendships between Rwandans from Rwanda and those from "outside", but there were 
also tensions, which were infused with an "ethnic" dimension. For example, some 
young people said that relations between "outsiders" - especially from Burundi and 
Uganda - and Rwandan Hutu were often characterised by mistrust: 
Relations [between those from outside] and survivors are better, because they are all Tutsi, 
but with Hutu, it's still not good. They think we are all genocidaires - especially those from 
Uganda. Even at university... there isn't much friendship between young people from outside 
and Hutus. We make an effort, but they don't want it. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
People from Burundi are racist - they ask me why I spend time with `Trakis'. They are really 
hypocrites. They don't want to say the words Hutu and Tutsi openly, so they have secret 
names for them. Tutsis are the `spears' and Hutus `Trakis'. `Traki' is from Swahili - 
`trakipani' means majority, because the Hutus are the majority here. (Hassan, b. 1980 in 
Zaire) 
A number of young people said that relations between Tutsi genocide survivors and 
Hutus were often better than between Hutus and returnees or even Tutsi survivors and 
returnees, for the following reason: 
It's because the Tutsi who were here know not all Hutus killed, many refused to participate 
and some even helped Tutsi. They know that what happened was very complicated. But those 
from outside, they often assume that all Hutus killed. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
Indeed, amongst the "returnees" I worked with, the majority said that they did not have 
any Hutu friends. Many commented that they had not been present in 1994, did not 
know who had participated in the killing and therefore, could never be sure of a Hutu, in 
case he or she was someone who had killed: 
It's very hard. They see us as the ones who overturned the government and we see them as 
those who killed our people. (Mustapha, b. 1973 in Uganda) 
It is still very divided. People are very separate... and you know those Hutu people, they feel 
very guilty because of what they did. We can't trust them after what they did. You can't 
know if maybe someone killed. And many of them still have the ideology inside and still 
want to kill us. (Winnie, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
These attitudes were compounded by the fact that returnees and Rwandan Hutu often 
had very limited experience of one another beyond encounters at school and in the 
workplace. I certainly did find more examples of friendships and relationships between 
the (mostly Tutsi) Rwandans from outside and Tutsi genocide survivors from Rwanda. 
These relationships were also complicated, however, by memories of 1994: 
People from here are unhappy because it's those from outside who dominate everything - 
employment, politics and the economy. Yet, many survivors have nothing - they are still 
poor'56... when the RPF campaigned here before the war, they said that if all Tutsi supported 
them, after the conquest of the country, they would have lots of things. But then many Tutsis 
lost their life and those who were lucky to survive never got anything they were promised 
and are unhappy. It's the people who were born here who suffered because of the war and 
they continue to suffer now. These people from outside - it's as if they arrived just like that - 
immigrants from another country - without knowing anything. They didn't lose people, they 
didn't live any of that. Yet they dominate the country now (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
With survivors, it is hard... they blame us, the Ugandans, for the genocide. When I arrived 
here and met my cousin who survived, she said that if we hadn't launched a war to return to 
Rwanda, all her family wouldn't be dead. 157 Maybe it's true, but what could we do? We were 
foreigners there - we had to come back to our country. (Mustapha, b. 1973 in Uganda) 
In spite of these tensions, 158 a number of young Rwandans who grew up in Rwanda 
spoke about some positive changes that had occurred as a result of the arrival of 
"returnees". For example, some young people spoke about the introduction of English 
in schools and university as an asset for them and their country. As discussed later in 
this chapter, others mentioned the increasing liberty accorded to young people and 
women since 1994 and put this down to the influence of young people who had grown 
up in more socially liberal countries of exile. 
The two million silent returnees 
As in all ethnographic research, the silences I encountered were equally insightful. The 
(mainly Tutsi) "returnees" that arrived in Rwanda after the RPF victory in 1994, were 
not the only refugees to return to Rwanda in the I 990s. Up to two million (mainly Hutu) 
refugees returned from over two years in exile in Zaire and Tanzania in 1996-97, having 
fled the country at the end of the genocide. The experiences of flight, massacre, exile, 
and return of these "returnees" (or "new caseload refugees") was a major area of silence 
in social and political discourse in Rwanda in 2004-05. - 
Whilst several individuals told 
156 See chapter 7 for a discussion about the lack of financial compensation for genocide survivors. 
15' Alan Kuperman (2004: p64) makes the same point: "It is useful to re-examine the early 1990s role of the Tutsi-led 
Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) rebels, who with the support of the international community threatened Rwandan's 
Hutu regime to such an extent that it retaliated with genocide". Rend Lemarchand (2007b: p142) agrees: "neither is 
there any doubt about the tens of thousands of Tutsi lives that could have been saved had the FPR shown greater 
concern for such stakes instead of concentrating first and foremost on capturing power. " 
158 Michele Wagner (1998) also finds that some Tutsi returnees considered genocide survivors as traitors. 
me that they had spent time in the camps, and a few talked to me in general terms about 
life there, they tended to skate over the detail. Some young people specifically asked me 
not to tell anyone else that they had been in the camps. For example, Theogene told me 
that he kept his refugee background a secret at school as others would automatically 
assume that he or his family fled because they were implicated in the killing: 
I simply told people that I was born in Rwanda and that I've always lived here. I have talked 
about this only with one school friend, because one day he came and admitted that he was in 
Kashashya camp in Congo. Then I told him that I had also been in Congo. (Theogene, b. 1983 
in Rwanda) 
Whilst most of those who lived in the camps in Eastern Zaire returned to Rwanda in late 
1996 or early 1997 when the ADFL/RPA attacked the camps, some Rwandans did not 
come back immediately and spent much longer periods in Congo or elsewhere. Whilst 
some Rwandans stayed away because they were implicated in the genocide, and feared 
arrest and trial, not everyone stayed away for this reason. As discussed in chapter 5, 
Francine and Faustin had fled to Zaire with their Aunt's family and after the camps 
were attacked the family escaped and moved to a rural area where they lived for several 
years pretending to be Congolese. Francine told me that they had been afraid to go back 
to Rwanda because there were rumours about camp returnees being killed. Francine and 
the family returned to Rwanda in 2001, but Faustin had already left Congo in 1998, 
because there had been too much pressure on him to join the rebel forces that were 
mounting attacks on Rwanda. After a few years in different countries, Faustin settled in 
Nairobi for four years and came back to Rwanda in late 2004 aged 25 after a decade 
outside the country. He constantly told me that he had to be careful who knew about his 
background, because anyone who had stayed away so long and spent so much time in 
Nairobi was automatically a suspect. Six months after his return, he told me: 
I still don't go out much and I don't hang out with people I don't know. There are too many 
risks because of rumours... you can't be sure of people you don't know. Perhaps they will 
create problems for me if they know I returned from Kenya recently... Here there are spies 
everywhere. Some of my friends came here from Nairobi for the holidays and were trapped 
by someone in a Cabaret. It was an ex-RPF soldier who pretended to be doing a survey on the 
opinions of the population. He encouraged them to speak frankly and I think they started to 
criticise the Government too much. Afterwards, they were put in prison for divisionism... It's 
already 8 months they've been in prison. 
Young people like Faustin who have spent a significant amount of time outside Rwanda 
have of course also been influenced by the different contexts in which they have lived, 
just like the young people who were born and spent several years of their childhood in 
Uganda, Burundi and Zaire. These experiences and how they relate to the returnee / 
non-returnee distinction are rarely spoken about, however - whether by these "new 
caseload returnees" themselves or by other Rwandans - and represent a significant 
silence in contemporary Rwanda. 
Country of origin: A time-limited factor? 
The material above suggests that since 1994, country of origin has been and continues 
to be a significant factor in Rwandan politics as well as everyday social. relations. This 
appears to demonstrate again, the constant need amongst young Rwandans to locate 
others in relation to themselves and the traumatic events of the 1990s. Although in 
many situations, young people are most concerned to determine the "ethnic" identity of 
others; in other times and places, it is more important to know from which country 
another person originates. There is of course a relationship between the two, because, as 
discussed in chapter 4, being a post-1994 "returnee" was effectively taken as shorthand 
for being a "Tutsi". Again, what was striking about young people's comments was the 
strength of collective stereotypes about "returnees" from different countries, which, in 
many cases, were reinforced by a lack of firsthand experience of one another. 
It is important to note, however, that although in 2004-2005 country of origin was 
clearly a significant factor in politics and society, the importance of this distinction is 
likely to continue to diminish over the years to come. Already, those who returned to 
Rwanda as young children after 1994 have spent significantly more time in Rwanda 
than in the country where they were born and a whole new generation of children are 
now being born in Rwanda to "returnee" families. For example, between Peter, Winnie 
and their friends, there were already some stark contrasts - even within a single family. 
For example, Peter had arrived in Rwanda in 2000 aged of 26 and commented: 
You know we are really Ugandans; we were born there. We have Ugandan identity cards and 
birth certificates and can get passports if we want, so although we are also Rwandans, we feel 
first and foremost Ugandans. (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
Likewise, Winnie arrived in 1998 aged 14, having done most of her schooling in 
Uganda in English and then doing her final years at a newly established Anglophone 
school in Kigali. She clearly felt that her background differed from most Rwandans: 
I think it is the culture that is different. You know, Anglophone and Francophone, and it is 
hard to get on with someone that has a different culture to you. (Winnie, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
By contrast, Diane, who was only two years younger than her sister Winnie, had arrived 
in Rwanda with her mother in 1994, aged 8, and had attended francophone schools. Her 
two main languages were French and Kinywarwanda and she commented: 
I left Uganda when I was very young and have spent more of my life here. So I feel 
Rwandan. (Diane, b. 1986 in Uganda) 
Even those "returnees" who came back to Rwanda as young adults have had to adapt to 
life in Rwanda over the past decade. For some - especially those who grew up in 
Uganda - this process has been particularly hard and their hopes and expectations of 
arriving in Rwanda were often extremely high: 159 
When we grew up, we used to think of Rwanda as the land of milk and honey. We were so 
excited about coming back here, but when we came back, we found that life was really hard 
and different. Things are more expensive, everything is expensive and life is hard. There 
aren't many jobs and the schools aren't as good as in Uganda. (Paul, b. 1980 in Uganda) 
For others - particularly some of those who grew up in Zaire - there had been little 
interest prior to 1994 in returning to Rwanda and the process of adaptation has also 
been difficult - as the case of Jimmy illustrates. 
Jimmy: "Return " and adaptation to life in Rwanda 
I met Jimmy in February 2004 in an Internet cafe where he was working whilst taking a 
break from his studies. He was 29 when we met and grew up in Lubumbashi, Zaire. He 
said he was well integrated there and that when his mother announced they were to 
"return" to Rwanda in 1995, when Jimmy was 20 years old, he did not want to go: 
I was Congolese and all my friends were Congolese... When my mother told us that we had 
to return to our country, I didn't want to. I saw all those images on the television of Rwandan 
refugees returning with yellow jerry cans and I didn't want to do that. But my mother told 
me, "We are Rwandan, not Congolese and we must go home"... (Jimmy, b. 1975 in Zaire) 
Jimmy described his arrival in Rwanda: 
When I came here, at first it was a real shock. There was electricity for only 5 hours a day 
and it was a lot less developed than Congo... I didn't know Kinywawanda... I spoke French, 
three dialects of Swahili and Lingala. Even if our parents spoke to us sometimes in 
Kinyarwanda, I didn't understand and I asked them to speak to me in French. Therefore, I 
really made a effort to speak the language because when you were Rwandan and didn't speak 
Kinyarwanda, other Rwandans mocked you a lot. I went to live for three months with my 
Aunt's family... She and her children, they were survivors. It was there that I really 
understood what it was to be a survivor... It was so heavy. It was living just because one 
happened to be alive, nothing more. Now, it's starting to change, but when I arrived, it was 
horrible. You could lose a 5000 Franc note and become annoyed and a survivor would say to 
you, "A million people have been killed and you are worried about a 5000 Franc note". 
159 See also Prunier (I 995: p66) on this point. 
Later, I asked Jimmy if he felt the experience of returning to Rwanda had changed him: 
I think I've changed a little, even if I have kept certain things from my Congolese side, like 
the ability to get on well with everyone. When I arrived, I was very open and talkative like 
the Congolese -I talked with everyone. I didn't differentiate between people. I never had any 
hidden agenda, I never asked who was who. I didn't even know what ethnic group I was 
beforehand... but with time, it's true that I've changed. I've had to calm down a little. I was 
very naive when I arrived and took several falls because of that16... Now, I am more like 
Rwandans from here. I protect myself. I proceed slowly. I don't open up my heart straight 
away. I want to know first who someone is, where he comes from and his past. Before in 
Congo, I chatted with anyone in the bus... but Rwandans don't do this. Now I stay quiet like 
them. It bothers me sometimes. I am no longer myself. I find I have become more mistrustful 
like Rwandans from here. I speak indirectly like them... like when you pretend you like 
someone when you don't. I don't like that about Rwanda. But, on the other hand I also see 
that I can survive better like this, that I don't make stupid errors, that I don't risk getting hurt. 
Jimmy's story like the comments of Peter, Winnie and Diane, suggests that over time, 
the significance of country of exile in everyday social life will diminish. Much will 
depend, however, on developments at the political level and whether the current regime 
continues to tighten the circle of power to an ever-smaller group of people, dominated 
by "Ugandan" returnees. Overall, these complicated relations between "returnees" from 
different countries, between "outsiders" and "insiders" and between Tutsi "survivors" 
and "returnees" tend to both reinforce "ethnic" divisions and reveal intra-"ethnic" 
divisions - particularly amongst Tutsis. Experience suggests, however, that whilst intra- 
"ethnic" divisions can dominate in calmer times when the other "ethnic" group is not 
perceived as a threat, in times of crisis or perceived threat, it is inter-"ethnic" divisions 
that rapidly come to dominate politics and ultimately everyday social relations. 
Everyday gender relations and the ongoing ethnicisation of sexual politics 
Since taking power in 1994, RPF-led governments have made public efforts to redress 
the gender imbalance in Rwanda and empower women. Over the past decade, a series of 
legislative changes have been passed by the Parliament securing greater rights for 
women in matrimony and inheritance. In 1995, the Government established a new 
Ministry of Gender and the Promotion of Women, 161 and in 1998, a series of "women's 
councils" were elected at all levels of local government. The 2003 constitution reserved 
30% of seats for women in the Senate and Chamber of Deputies and established the 
16 As described in chapter 4, Jimmy had a relationship with a Hutu girl a few months after his arrival in Rwanda, 
which ended quite suddenly as a result of her parents intervention because she and Jimmy were of different ethnic 
backgrounds. This was certainly one of the falls he was referring to here. 
161-Now called the Ministry of Gender and Women in Development (MIGEPROFE) 
National Council of Women. 162 In 2007, President Kagame received the African Gender 
Award163 in recognition of his personal efforts to empower women. In September 2008, 
Rwanda became the first parliament in the world to have a female majority, when 56% 
of seats went to women. In October 2008, this led the Washington Post to claim that, 
"women run the show in a recovering Rwanda". 
These changes in legislation and political participation are clearly very important, but 
there are real challenges in ensuring that the legislation actually serves women. A 
number of analyses suggest that, in reality, the situation of women - especially poorer 
rural women - has been slow to change, particularly in areas such as domestic violence 
where there are still significant cultural taboos on speaking out and enforcement of 
legislation is weak (Women for Women 2004: pp20-22). It is also unclear what the high 
representation of women in parliament and government posts has achieved in practice. 
For example, Burnet (2008) argues that women in political and administrative positions 
have little decision making power. Recent research also finds a significant gap between 
elite female politicians and the majority of women in society with some disappointment 
at the little they appear to have achieved (Women for Women 2004: p31-34). 
During my fieldwork in urban Kigali in 2004-2005, it was clear that changes in gender 
relations were underway. For example, it was widely accepted amongst young men and 
women, that both sexes should receive equal educational and employment opportunities 
- although there was still a general expectation that it was the woman's responsibility to 
look after the children and oversee domestic tasks. '" The majority of Rwandans I met 
placed a high premium on education and parents and older siblings went out of their 
way to educate their children without making a distinction between their sons and 
daughters. Most of the young women I interviewed who were in secondary or tertiary 
education had high ambitions for their education and future careers and received 
encouragement from parents and older family members. There was certainly a trend in 
Kigali for women to seek paid employment or engage in informal commerce - in both 
poorer and wealthier families - related both to the greater acceptability of women 
engaging in a variety of non-traditional sectors and to economic need at a time when the 
cost of living in Kigali was rocketing. 
162 See Republic of Rwanda (2003) The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda, articles 9,76,82 and 187. 
163 Awarded every 2 years by the pan-African network Femmes Africa Solidarit6 (FAS) based in Dakar, Senegal. 
164 Something, which is still the case across much of the globe. 
Despite these broader changes in attitudes, there were many challenges. Many of the 
young men and women I interviewed lived in very difficult circumstances. In some 
cases, this was a direct legacy of the civil war, genocide, and its aftermath. Many young 
people had lost both parents in the violence of the 1990s and, as a result, had missed out 
on educational opportunities, were left with few economic assets and a limited social 
support network. Although some had benefited from the FARG - mainly through the 
payment of school fees - the costs of travel to school were often prohibitive. Others had 
found themselves stranded once the support stopped, or simply that they needed to work 
to support their remaining siblings. A few young people had managed to find external 
sponsors to fund their studies and subsistence, but these arrangements could come to an 
abrupt end, leaving no safety net for the young person. 165 
Finding employment and making a living was a massive challenge for most young 
Rwandans. Among my respondents not in education, only a tiny minority had any kind 
of regular paid work. Only four young people out of the 26 not studying were in formal 
employment; 166 ten young people managed to make some form of living through self- 
employment, informal or casual work167 - although three of these depended on the 
assets of their parents or others - and the other 12 people were seeking work and reliant 
on family or friends for their subsistence. Whilst the four young people who were 
employed were all men with university degrees or diplomas; the self-employed and 
unemployed included both young men and women and those with primary, secondary 
and university education. As Marc Sommers (2006a) found, this was a source of great 
frustration for these young people. In the face of limited economic and educational 
opportunities, 168 many young men were unable to build their own houses, gain 
independence, get married, and make the transition to adulthood. The only prospect for 
many young women was marriage, but many were unable to find a partner with a secure 
livelihood and expressed concerns about how they would manage to support children. 169 
165 For example, after losing her mother in a car accident, a VSO teacher of Winnie's agreed to sponsor the rest of her 
studies but a couple of years later died in a car accident himself. 
166 All were young men - one worked for an international NGO; one for an international donor, one for a Rwandese 
research organisation and one in an Internet cafd. 
167 The types of work these young people did were varied: agricultural labourer, moto-taxi driver, taxi driver, 
chauffeur, sewing, running a carpentry shop, running a cabaret and occasional contracts from NGOs and donors. 
168 Anna Obura (2003) found that 94% of all adolescents were out of school and the Economist Intelligence Unit 
(2005) reported that "less than 5% of secondary students are from the poorest 20% of households. In other words, 
most youth remain out of school and the poorest youth have little chance to advance in the education system. 
169 Many reports and articles also talk about the "feminisation" of Rwanda's population due to the genocide. 
Although some extremely high figures of the ratio of women to men appeared in the press in the late 1990s, most 
figures estimate that Rwanda's population is between 54-57% female (e. g. Women for Women 2004). 
Beatrice and Stella: Living in the same neighbourhood but worlds apart? 
Perhaps most striking was the significant differences among many of my respondents in 
terms of their family situation, educational background, and economic position. For 
example, the worlds of Beatrice and Stella, who were both born in 1984 and lived less 
than a kilometre apart, could hardly have been more different. Beatrice was orphaned 
during the RPA attacks in the aftermath of the genocide and after living with a number 
of different families, mainly as a domestique (maid), and collecting plastic bottles from 
a rubbish dump to make money, she finally managed to build her own small house so 
she could live independently. Beatrice had only four years of primary education (mostly 
before the genocide) and worked as a casual labourer, often struggling to find work and 
surviving hand-to-mouth. She described herself as a traditional, religious young woman 
and said her aspiration was to marry her boyfriend, live with him and start a family. By 
contrast, Stella had returned to Kigali in 1994 from Uganda with her parents and 
siblings, lived in a fairly large house and seemed to have sufficient money at her 
disposal to buy clothes and jewellery and go out. She was studying for a law degree at 
university and aspired to work for an international NGO. She said that she would like to 
get married in her late twenties once she had completed her studies and had a job. 
In spite of their very different experiences, situation, and aspirations, Beatrice and Stella 
did share some common views. Like all my respondents, they felt that Rwanda was 
undergoing a period of social change, particularly with respect to intergenerational and 
gender relations: 
These days, young people no longer listen to their parents. They do what they want and it 
isn't good ... they should wait until they are 
18 to make their own decisions or when they no 
longer live with their parents. (Beatrice, b. 1984 in Rwanda) 
It's nice at home with my family around, but I don't have as much liberty as many girls do 
now and my parents restrict me a lot. I have to be back at 7 or 8pm unless there is a good 
reason. When we go to Carwash, 10 I have to lie to my parents and tell them that I am going 
to a wedding party or a show and then stay at a friend's house or I have to sneak out of the 
house. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
As Stella's comments reveal, one of the major areas of conflict between young people 
and their parents concerned the sexual behaviour of girls and young women. Although 
Beatrice and a number of other young women I interviewed lived alone or with siblings 
and made their own decisions, several young women lived with their parents and faced 
170 A club in Kigali that Stella and her friends frequented for several months and where I sometimes joined them. 
significant restrictions. Some older people I knew lamented what they saw as more 
liberal behaviour on the part of many young women, who had begun to dress 
differently, date more often, and engage more frequently in sexual relations before 
marriage. Their response was to place restrictions on where their daughters could go 
and with whom. Both younger and older people linked these changes in young women's 
behaviour to one of two factors: the increased access to outside influences from other 
African countries and Europe; and the arrival of young "returnees" - especially from 
Burundi and Zaire - after 1994, who had grown up in more liberal social contexts: 
Before the war... girls weren't permitted to wear trousers or a mini-skirt, but now they do 
this. Rwandan girls have started to copy those who retuned from other countries... but I try to 
follow the traditional culture and not do that... Also before the war, there weren't prostitutes 
at the side of the street, but now there are lots. (Beatrice, b. 1984 in Rwanda) 
Young people from outside have brought lots of things and we copy them... Now, boyfriends 
and girlfriends can hold hands in the street and give each other a small kiss in public... before 
that never happened... we've all started to imitate this now. In fact, dating wasn't done openly 
before and we didn't tell our parents... this is also changing. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
I did notice broad differences between young women I knew who grew up in Rwanda 
or Uganda and those who grew up in Burundi or Zaire - certainly those who were 
approaching or in adolescence when they returned. The former tended to continue to 
respect traditional codes around "appropriate" behaviour for girls - or at least, projected 
an image of doing so. I became accustomed to many young women I knew, who were 
extrovert amongst their friends, transforming into compliant, timid girls on occasions 
when their parents were present. 171 Although many young women who were born in 
Rwanda or Uganda had a boyfriend, almost without exception, these young women said 
that they would not introduce a boyfriend to their parents until he was officially their 
fiance. Many young women were acutely aware that their choice of partner would be 
closely policed by their parents and that in most cases a partner from a different ethnic 
group would not be acceptable (see chapter 5). Equally, most young women born in 
Rwanda and Uganda - whether their parents were alive or not - still seemed to adhere to 
some extent to customary expectations around the courtship process i. e. making men 
171 As discussed earlier, Jefremovas (1991) discussed the stereotypical roles ascribed to and adopted by women in the 
1980s - as "virtuous wives", "virginal" or "timid daughters" and "loose women". The girls I interviewed who grew 
up in Rwanda often sought to project themselves as "virginal daughters", at least in their interactions with young men 
and in the presence of their parents. 
wait for several weeks or months before they agreed to date them. 172 Again Beatrice and 
Stella were in accordance and had taken a similar initial approach with their boyfriends: 
I met [my boyfriend] at my brother-in-law's house as they work together. The first time we 
saw each other, we didn't speak, but the second time, he asked my name and we talked a 
little. We saw each other another three times and then he asked me to be his girlfriend. I told 
him that I wanted some time to reflect. So we continued to see each other and then after two 
months, I said yes... A girl doesn't want to show that she is too easy - otherwise the boy will 
think that she has already had many boyfriends before him. You have to show that you are 
serious. (Beatrice, b. 1984 in Rwanda) 
I met [my boyfriend] at a party and he asked me to meet him again. Several times, I said I 
was busy. He kept asking and then I finally agreed to meet him... it took two weeks... you 
can't make him wait 6 months - there are lots of other pretty girls around and he will go for 
one of them... but a girl can't say yes straight away - she has to make a boy wait, so he 
makes an effort and shows he is serious... (Stella, b. 1984 in Rwanda) 
As Stella's comments suggest, this courtship process was sometimes treated like a game 
that young people expected to play and both men and women accepted it, as the 
following exchange illustrates: 
[Elois, b. 1986 in Burundi] Here in Rwanda, it is always the boy who has to make the first 
move. A girl will never show that she loves you, even if inside she is mad about you 
[Franco, b. 1979 in Rwanda] Yes, inside, she might be boiling... 
[Elois] Above all, she will show herself to be indifferent towards you. You will only find out 
that she likes you via her friends. And then when you ask her for the first time to go out with 
you, she will refuse and then you have to insist and charm her. 
[Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi] Girls like us to court them a lot and it's true you never know if 
she likes you, except through her friends. 
Vincent tried to explain further in a later conversation: 
Even when we give the dowry, there is a whole process which takes place where the girls' 
family says she is not at home and the boy's family has to wait - when all the time the girl is 
inside the house. It's tradition to make the boy wait... Girls are afraid that if they say `yes' 
too early, the boy will think she is too easy... the same thing with making love, she has to say 
no at first, otherwise the boy will think she has already done that many times with other boys. 
Many young men and women told me that in practice in Rwanda today, this courtship 
process is about delaying expectations around sexual relations, because, once a girl 
accepted to be their girlfriend, many young men expected the girl to agree to sex. 
Indeed, most young people said that in contrast to a decade earlier, the majority of 
young women are not virgins when they marry. Of course, there were many reasons for 
this, including poverty and vulnerability as well as increasing sexual liberty. For 
172 A number of young men commented, however, that although young women from Rwanda appeared to adhere to 
this process, in reality girls from Uganda were renowned for being easy to have sexual relations with and having 
many boyfriends at the same time. 
example, during my fieldwork, Beatrice was one of three vulnerable young women to 
fall pregnant during my fieldwork - all outside marriage. For young women, the 
courtship process was a means to test whether a young man was serious about the 
relationship. Although, both young men and women said that male infidelity was still 
widespread, expectations were changing. 
In contrast to the above, most young women I knew who had returned to Rwanda from 
Burundi or Zaire - particularly in early or late adolescence - clearly had different 
expectations about relationships with men, were more open about what they wanted and 
generally less restricted by their parents, as Valerie explained: 
We from Congo are very open. We always say what we think and we can tell a person if we 
do or do not like them - not like people from here who never say or show anything. With 
boys, we are at ease... at school, the three girls from Congo hang out with the boys without 
problem. We can give each other advice and have a laugh without any problems - we are just 
friends like that. Also, a boy can come around to my house without any problems and we can 
do our homework together -just as with a girl. I don't see the difference... But the girls from 
here, from Rwanda, they are always together in a group and they don't hang out with the 
boys. When I ask them why, they say that the boys have to make the first step. But that 
blocks friendship - it isn't always a relationship that the boys want. I don't know why the 
girls from here are like that. I think it's the culture - they have to be good and not talk too 
much, especially in front of boys. I think this is stupid (Valerie, b. 1987 in Zaire) 
In fact, many of the women I met who had returned from Zaire or Burundi lived in ways 
not in accordance with Rwandan customs as defined by Valerie. Several had children 
out of wedlock - some purposely - and many sought and obtained significant degrees of 
economic independence from their parents, boyfriends, or husbands. Many young men 
who grew up in Zaire or Burundi commented that they accepted this situation and 
expected to have a more equal and open relationship with women than had been the 
tradition in Rwanda's past. It was clear that these more liberal attitudes were impacting 
on their peers who had grown up in Rwanda. For example, almost all Magnifique's 
friends were "returnees" from Congo and Burundi and she said they had inspired her to 
take the courageous step of opening her own cabaret at the age of 19: 
My (female) friends from Congo and Burundi are much less complicated [than Rwandans 
from here] and more direct. These girls can approach a boy and tell him they love him... they 
can ask for what they want directly... Rwandans girls from here can never do this... It is 
because of these friends that I decided to open this cabaret, to do something to earn money so 
I can pay for my sister to go to school. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 173 
173 Magnifique had lost her parents and other siblings during the genocide. She had sought refuge in the Saint-Familie 
church in central Kigali with her baby brother and sister and had managed to survive until rescued by the RPA. 
Overall, it was clear that both gender and intergenerational relations were in transition 
in Kigali in 2004-2005 when I conducted my fieldwork. Several young people were 
adopting more liberal values and behaviour more or less openly, although many young 
women were still keeping up appearances in front of their parents and in front of young 
men. As the next section will discuss, however, both the way young women behaved 
and the way they were viewed remained circumscribed by their "ethnic" identity. 
The ongoing "ethnicisation " offemale sexuality in Rwanda 
Although many of these changes in gender relations in urban Kigali might be viewed 
positively, my research also revealed worrying trends concerning the relationship 
between gender and "ethnicity". As discussed in chapter 5, "mixed" relationships 
between young people of different ethnic backgrounds were rare in 2004-05 and those 
in such relationships faced significant obstacles. More worrying, however, was the 
reproduction of particular pre-genocide stereotypes about differences in beauty and 
desirability between Hutu and Tutsi women. In our conversations about dating and 
marriage, the majority of the young people I interviewed (young men and women, those 
of Tutsi, mixed and Hutu heritage) made some comment on the superior beauty of Tutsi 
women and/or that both Hutu and Tutsi men sought Tutsi women, for example: 
Boys - both Hutu and Tutsi - they all want Tutsi girls, not Hutu girls and this makes it hard 
for Hutu girls... it is said Tutsi girls are more beautiful. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
For the family of a Hutu boy, it is still considered an honour to marry a Tutsi girl... You 
know, we say here that Tutsi girls are very beautiful, but Hutu girls are very ugly. So if a 
Tutsi boy brings a Hutu girl home, his parents will ask him why he cannot choose among the 
pretty girls of his own ethnic group... I think it is true that Tutsi girls are more beautiful and 
more sought by both Tutsi and Hutu boys... (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
Even if some young Rwandans did not agree that Tutsi women were necessarily more 
beautiful, there was a clear equation between beauty and being Tutsi. Dominant ideas of 
beauty coincided with the stereotypical appearance of a Tutsi woman and young women 
considered beautiful were generally assumed to be Tutsi: 
We always have the idea that Tutsi girls are more beautiful, even if in my opinion this is not 
always true. But if a girl is beautiful, we automatically think that she is Tutsi, but we are 
often wrong... (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
It's probably true that lots of boys prefer Tutsi girls, but my friends and I only look for beauty 
- whether she is pretty or not, whatever her ethnicity ... 
It's true though that our idea of 
beauty is like the stereotype of a Tutsi girl - tall and slim at the top with big buttocks... For 
me big buttocks are important - she shouldn't be like a chauffeur... we say that chauffeurs 
have no buttocks because they are always driving... (Emmanuel b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
In some cases, the stories about the allure and sexual behaviour of Tutsi women went 
further. A few young people commented that many Tutsi women continued the 
traditional practice of labia elongation (said to increase both male and female sexual 
pleasure) and were superior sexual partners. Some of these stories had a distinct 
mythical quality to them, for example: 
Rwandan boys prefer Tutsi girls... because we say that Tutsi girls are more beautiful and... 
more direct sexually... It's said that they make love more often and that it is easier to make 
love with a Tutsi girls because they are not ashamed. For example, for a Hutu girl, it can take 
a boy two hours to persuade her to make love, but only one hour for a Tutsi girl. It's said that 
in the past, if a Tutsi girl went to stay with her Aunt, the Aunt would say,  oh, don't sleep 
alone, sleep with your cousin'... and the aunt left the Tutsi girls to make love with her 
cousin... there is even a Rwandan proverb which says that a Tutsi girl can sleep with her 
cousin. This would be impossible for a Hutu. (Francine b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
As Frangine's final comment hints, however, just as before the genocide, the 
contemporary praise of Tutsi women went hand in hand with their vilification. Many 
young men and women (mainly those of Hutu or "mixed" heritage, but also some 
Tutsis) commented on the supposed superior or subversive behaviour of Tutsi women: 
You know both Hutu and Tutsi girls can be beautiful, but it's the Tutsi girls that think they 
are beautiful... they behave like they are beautiful and think that they do not need to make 
any effort apart from that... they can often be very impolite. (Paradis b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
Tutsi girls always think that they are so beautiful. For example, when we have shows and 
dances with the neighbouring boys school, the Tutsi girls think that all the boys are watching 
them and not the other girls... Tutsi girls always feel superior over the others. It's always 
them who put on the TV or take the initiative. They think that everyone is admiring them and 
that Tutsis have the political power and therefore they think they are better than others... 
Often, they are very rude and behave badly, but they think that being a Tutsi girl is enough 
and that everyone is looking at them. In fact, they say that because they are beautiful, they 
will find men with money and a good position in society. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
Others claimed more directly that Tutsi women used or "prostituted" their beauty to get 
men with money and status: 
It is true that beauty is the first thing most Rwandan men look for... they like to show off and 
show they have succeeded in life and having a beautiful wife on your arm, it's important... 
But, if a girl is beautiful, she will use that to manipulate her husband. She will threaten to 
leave him to get what she wants... she also wants to show off and therefore wants a husband 
with a nice car, who can buy her clothes and jewellery and take her out every week. (Cedric, 
b. 1987 in Burundi) 
[M]any of the pretty Tutsi girls here are prostitutes - they use that to make money. So, it's 
better to choose an average girl. If a girl is too pretty, as soon as she finds someone with more 
money, she will leave you. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Similarly to the pre-genocide period, young Hutu women were portrayed or even 
portrayed themselves as the downtrodden and inferior counterparts of Tutsi women: 
Hutu women have quite a complex because of this. For example, if the boyfriend of a Hutu 
girl finds a new Tutsi girlfriend, the Hutu girl will think it is because she is less beautiful that 
the Tutsi girl. You know, for many girls these ideas influence what they wear. For example, 
you can only wear a mini-skirt if you have beautiful legs and its said that those with the 
beautiful legs are the Tutsis. It's said that Hutu girls have the legs of men or sportspeople. So, 
if someone offered to lend you their skirt, you would say  no thank you' because your legs do 
not allow you to wear it... it's the same thing for breasts. Hutu women have a complex 
because they often have large breasts, but it is said that being beautiful means having small 
breasts. (Francine, b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
This dynamic of superiority-inferiority certainly had an impact on the relationship 
between young Hutu and Tutsi women. Although I did come across one or two 
examples of inter-"ethnic" female friendships, most young Rwandans agreed that 
groups of young Hutu and Tutsi women were generally quite separate: 
The girls are more divided that the boys. There is more mistrust between them... and lots of 
competition. There is still this idea that Tutsi girls are beautiful and sought by both Hutu and 
Tutsi boys... If a girl is Tutsi, she automatically believes herself to be beautiful and superior 
to the others. In fact, there are many Hutu girls who try to pass themselves off as Tutsi to 
avoid this feeling of always being inferior... (Cedric, b. 1987 in Burundi) 
I find that the girls are more divided that the boys - especially at my school. For example, 
when there was the 10th commemoration of the genocide, the day after the girls divided in 
two, saying they would no longer be friends with this person or that person. They even 
changed dormitories... I also think that there is more jealousy between girls. Certain Hutu 
girls have a complex - perhaps because we always have the idea that Tutsi girls are more 
beautiful. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
Gender relations: a flash point for the future? 
Although there are certainly some important changes to gender relations underway in 
contemporary Rwanda, the material presented above suggests that there are worrying 
aspects to the ways relations are configured. Firstly, if the analysis of Jones (2002) and 
Sommers (2006a) about the contribution of a "gender crisis" to the mobilisation of 
marginalised men to kill during the genocide is correct, 174 there appears to be little 
evidence that this crisis has abated. Recent research suggests that poorer young men - 
especially in rural areas - remain "pinioned on the margins" in contemporary Rwanda 
(Sommers 2006a: p137)'75 lacking economic and educational opportunities and with 
few prospects for social advancement and marriage. Although the situation among the 
young men I interviewed was arguably less acute, many of them lived in extremely 
difficult circumstances and struggled to make a living. Some were clearly disillusioned, 
174 There is a growing literature on manhood, masculinity and violence, which would support the contentions of 
Sommers and )ones. See, for example the work of Gary Barker (2005) and Barker and Ricardo (2005) who argue that 
young men who cannot achieve a sense of socially respected manhood are more likely to get involved in violence. 
175 Sommers will publish a new book later in 2009 based on research with rural youth in Rwanda, which paints a 
devastating picture of their ongoing marginalisation and is very worrying for the future (personal communication). 
especially with the ever-widening and visible inequalities between the "haves" and 
"have-nots" in urban Kigali today. This "silent emergency" of Rwandan youth could be 
potentially disastrous in the future given their significant demographic numbers176 and 
their legacy of being drawn or forced into acts of extreme violence (ibid. p150). 
Secondly, the increasingly liberal behaviour of many young women in the economic, 
domestic and sexual spheres is clearly an area of tension between the sexes and between 
generations. Although many would see this as positive process of social change, there 
are a number of potential areas of conflict that may emerge and may result, for example, 
in the further frustration of young men and tensions over marriage partners. 
Finally, the reproduction of corporate stereotypes about differences in the beauty and 
sexual desirability of Tutsi and Hutu women is a cause for concern. These stereotypes 
clearly influenced the extent and brutality of the violence suffered by Tutsi women 
during the 1994 genocide. They also create a dangerous inferiority-superiority dynamic 
between Hutu and Tutsi women which adds to the general feeling that the Tutsi 
population are "on top" in contemporary Rwanda and will surely only aggravate the 
feelings of resentment and injustice being felt by some of the Hutu population. 
Beyond ethnicity? Other identities in contemporary Rwanda 
As Amartya Sen (2006) argues, it is essential to examine both the plurality of people's 
identities (i. e. the fact that they simultaneously belong to multiple social categories) and 
the internal diversity within groups. This chapter has sought to do this by examining 
various "non-ethnic" forms of social distinction in Rwanda past and present - and how 
they intersect with ethnic distinctions. 
Firstly, this chapter demonstrated how the salience and nature of these other social 
distinctions have changed over time and place in Rwanda in response to political and 
social circumstances, but particularly as a result of the civil war and genocide and the 
resulting changes in the composition of Rwanda's population - especially the political 
and economic elite. The material drawn from my interviews suggests that, in urban 
176 In 2005, UNPD (2006) estimated that the population aged 15-24 (UN definition of youth) was 24.8% of the total 
population in Rwanda, one of the highest proportions in the world. There is growing literature on the relationship 
between youth and violence with some quantitative evidence of a correlation between high relative numbers of youth 
(often called a "youth bulge') and a higher risk of violence (e. g. Urdal 2004 and 2006). There is also some case study 
material that suggest that the presence of large numbers of disenfranchised, unemployed and marginalised youth can 
be a key factor in violence (e. g. Richards 1996). 
Kigali at least, regional provenance is no longer particularly important either in national 
politics or in the everyday social lives of young Rwandans. Instead, since the genocide, 
the predominant geographical distinction has been country of origin, with tensions 
between "returnees" from different countries, and between "returnees" more generally 
and those who grew up in Rwanda. Although these tensions appear to be diminishing 
with time, there is still a notable separation of the "Ugandan" returnees who dominate 
political power and appear to have integrated very little with other groups. 
In the case of gender and intergenerational distinctions, since 1994, there have clearly 
been some important steps forward and the new policies and legislation are impacting 
on the lives of some women, especially in Kigali. Some young women - especially 
those with families and connections - were able to negotiate opportunities in their 
personal and professional lives against a backdrop of fairly rapid social change. There 
were often large discrepancies between the situation of young women and men from 
different backgrounds, however, and many remain on the margins in Rwanda today 
with few economic or social opportunities. This is a cause for concern, especially given 
the legacy of large number of young men - who participated in the genocide. 
Secondly, this chapter has shown that powerful essentialist and corporate stereotypes 
also characterise relationships between groups across these other social distinctions. 
Similarly to the "ethnic" stereotypes discussed in chapters 4 and 5, what is striking is 
the strength of these stereotypes, how they are used by young people to navigate their 
social worlds, and the way in which they are reinforced by the lack of direct experience 
of those from other groups. In particular, the relative social isolation of those from 
Uganda seems to further reinforce the idea that Ugandan returnees are either "arrogant" 
or "ill-mannered". In this respect, the recent move by the Government to encourage the 
mixing of young people from different backgrounds in the school system is 
encouraging. 
'77 Furthermore, as current "returnees" grow up, spend more time in 
Rwanda and start their own families, these stereotypes should weaken over time. Yet, 
the material in this chapter suggests that the corporate stereotypes about the superior 
beauty and desirability of Tutsi women have endured from the pre-genocide period and 
have arguably been strengthened in a social and political context where Tutsis as a 
to For example, in 2004-2005, the Government had a policy of dispersing secondary school children from different 
areas across the country away from their homes to encourage social mixing - although the practicalities like funding 
for transport were often not thought through. 
group are widely perceived to be "on top". These stereotypes reinforce a dynamic of 
superiority-inferiority between Tutsi and Hutu women, act as an obstacle to close 
relations and friendships, and appear to repeat the "dialectics of hate and desire" that 
were a feature of the pre-genocide period (Taylor 1999: pp151-179). 
Thirdly, the strong stereotypes of the differences between Tutsi and Hutu women are 
just one of a number of ways that "ethnic" distinctions intersect with these other social 
distinctions. Whilst these other social distinctions have a number of characteristics 
which operate independently of "ethnic" distinctions or reveal internal differences 
within "ethnic" groups, the tendency overall seems to be for these other distinctions to 
reinforce rather than challenge "ethnic" distinctions. For example, although there are 
clearly divisions and tensions between different groups of post-1994 "returnees", 
overall these returnees are collectively assumed to be Tutsi (see chapter 4), and there are 
clear tensions between these Tutsi "outsiders" and "insiders", especially Hutu 
"insiders". Similarly, as discussed above, strong stereotypes about differences between 
Tutsi and Hutu women, clearly reinforce the "ethnic" divide and inter-"ethnic" 
competition between both Hutu and Tutsi males and females. 
Of course, as Amartya Sen (2006) suggests, in different times and places, a particular 
identity or group membership may become more or less important to an individual and 
influence his or her behaviour. For example, it was clear that in certain social 
circumstances, place of exile became more important to some young people than their 
"ethnic" identity. In situations where the other "ethnic" group is marginalised and 
therefore not relevant, intra-"ethnic" rivalries can become more important (Prunier 
1997: p3). Experience in Rwanda and elsewhere suggests, however, that in situations of 
crisis or difficultly, the default option is for inter-"ethnic" divisions to quickly dominate 
again. As will be discussed further in the next chapter, many of the young Rwandans I 
worked with were acutely aware of this and predicted future violence in Rwanda: 
For sure, [violence] will happen again here in Rwanda and it will be worse than the last 
time... It will be an ethnic conflict again. It depends on who will attack because there are ex- 
RPF people outside Rwanda and others still in Congo... Nonetheless, immediately people 
will put themselves in their groups - the people from Uganda, the people from Burundi, the 
Tutsis from here, the Hutus - but ultimately they will divide into Hutus and Tutsis whatever 
the source of the attack. In Rwanda, when there is security, things are okay and people 
continue their lives and call on each other, but as soon as there in insecurity, they put 
themselves with their own ethnic group, straight away. (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
This theme will now be developed further in the next chapter, which focuses in more 
depth on the Rwandan Government's attempts to "de-ethnicise" Rwandan society in 
order to promote reconciliation and avoid future conflict. 
CHAPTER 7: 
"ETHNICISING" OR "DE-ETHNICISING" RWANDANS? PERSPECTIVES 
ON RECONCILIATION IN CONTEMPORARY RWANDA 
This chapter builds on the findings of the preceding chapters in light of endeavours to 
prevent future violence and foster reconciliation in Rwanda. Given broader debates 
about what "reconciliation" means, it firstly looks in more depth at approaches to 
reconciliation in contemporary Rwanda and efforts by the post-1994 government to 
outlaw "ethnicity" and build a unified Rwandese identity. It then examines young 
people's perspectives on "reconciliation" - what it means, whom it is for, how current 
efforts are progressing, and what the challenges are. Given the multiple ways in which 
young people suffered from violence in the 1990s, it also looks at their perspectives and 
experiences of specific government approaches to reconciliation including the official 
annual commemoration, the gacaca, and the FARG fund for genocide survivors. 
Building on the discussions in previous chapters about the persistence of stereotypes 
and "meta-narratives" about ethnicity and history, it particularly considers the politics 
of silencing and victimhood in contemporary Rwanda. It demonstrates that some 
aspects of current "reconciliation" policies implicitly perpetuate an "ethnic" logic and 
potentially reproduce many of the dangerous precedents of pre-genocide Rwanda. 
"Reconciliation": A contested concept 
"Reconciliation" is a concept that is used frequently, yet rarely defined. Those that do 
define it vary widely in their use and interpretation of the term (for discussions of the 
problems of defining "reconciliation" see Abu-Nimer 2001; Assefa 2001; Bloomfield 
2006; Pankhurst 1999). To some people, "reconciliation" is simply the absence of 
violence or achievement of security and stability (sometimes called "negative peace" 
after Galtung 1964). To others it is about peaceful coexistence and cohabitation and re- 
establishing basic relations of exchange, cooperation or "democratic reciprocity"18 
(Crocker 2000). To yet others, it implies a deeper and longer-term process of healing, 
repairing damaged social relations and establishing positive relationships (Bloomfield et 
178 Crocker (2000) defines "democratic reciprocity" as a situation where "former enemies or former perpetrators, 
victims, and bystanders are reconciled insofar as they respect each other as fellow citizens, Further, all parties play a 
role in deliberations concerning the past, present, and future of their country". 
al 2003: p12; Hamber and Kelly 2004: p3; Lederach 2001: p842). 179 There are also a 
variety of opinions on what "reconciliation" entails and what its pre-conditions are. To 
some, it necessarily involves a process of "truth telling" and the asking for and giving of 
forgiveness (Tutu 1999). To others, "reconciliation" is not conceivable without the 
rendering of justice and redress of past grievances (Assefa 2001; Crocker 2000). To yet 
others, it requires a fundamental shift in attitude and how people relate to each other 
(Lederach 1997). Thus, in both the academic and policy literature, "reconciliation" is a 
contested concept that has to deal with several paradoxes: expressing the grievances of 
past yet conceiving an interdependent future; establishing the truth and showing mercy 
yet letting go in favour of a new relationship; seeking justice and redress yet 
envisioning a common future together (Lederach 1997: p81). 
Beyond this theoretical literature, ideas about "reconciliation" also vary between and 
within societies. For example, several Rwandan acquaintances told me that the 
Rwandan concept "ubwiyunge" did not translate precisely to the European term 
"reconciliation". Many of them felt that the notion of forgiveness was central to the 
notion of "ubwiyunge ", but not necessarily to the European term "reconciliation" - 
although the etymological root of the word does not suggest this. 180 Equally, people 
within a society may have different interpretations of what the term means depending 
on how they are positioned with respect to the wrongs committed and what stake they 
have in different visions of the future. Similarly to the concept of "ethnicity", therefore, 
it is important to explore what "reconciliation" means in practice in specific societies at 
specific times. We need to explore how "reconciliation" is understood and implemented 
at the level of official discourse and action, but also at the level of the subjective reality 
of people's lives - examining how they experience or give meaning to it and how it is 
reflected through their own biographies and everyday interactions. 
179 For example, Bloomfield et al (2003) view "reconciliation" as "a process through which society moves from a 
divided past to a shared future" (p12). They describe three broad stages in this process: (i) "Replacing fear by non- 
violent coexistence" - where communication is renewed in an environment of minimum physical security and former 
adversaries "agree to disagree and to use less violent means to accommodate old (and new) disputes"; (ii) "When fear 
no longer rules: Building confidence and trust"- where former adversaries acknowledge each other's humanity and 
victims start to distinguish degrees of guilt. A functioning judiciary and institutions is key to this; and (iii) "Towards 
Empathy" where victims and offenders listen to each other, debate and acknowledge the past and discover common 
interests across old lines of division (p 19-21). 
11O The word "ubwiyunge" is formed from the root -unga, meaning, "to bring together by placing end to end" (Jacob 
1988: 467 in Burnet 2005: p212) also has the connotation of government or military authority, as it has the secondary 
meaning "to bring together several provinces, regions or countries under the same authority" (ibid. ). With the 
addition of the reflexive infix -i-, the root becomes "to join oneself with, to unite oneself with, to reconcile oneself 
with" (Jacob 1984: 203 in Burnet 2005: p212). 
The Government's approach to "reconciliation" in contemporary Rwanda 
We are inculcating a new outlook that is Rwandan, and not ethnic. (President Kagame 2004b) 
The Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) first committed itself to "reconciliation" whilst still 
in exile in the late 1980s. The first point of the RPF's eight-point political plan in 1987 
was "to promote national unity and reconciliation" (Zorbas 2007: p254). It was only in 
1999, however, that a specific commitment on "reconciliation" was added to the RPF- 
led Government of National Unity's (GNU) 181 mandate for the four-year extension of 
the transition period: "Strengthening unity and reconciliation among Rwandans, 
democracy and good governance". 182 The absence of specific language on reconciliation 
during the first five years largely reflected the fact that the Government's agenda was 
dominated by other concerns including: creating a "new Rwandan leadership" with a 
sense of responsibility; implementing key institutional reforms; inculcating a sense of 
"unity" through (re)educating the population; meeting the needs of genocide survivors, 
maintaining security in the face of an ongoing military threat from the ex-FAR and 
interahamwe who had regrouped over the border in Zaire; and ending the "culture of 
impunity" through trying all those accused of genocide (ICG 2002: pp5-6). 
In March 1999, to support its renewed commitment to "reconciliation", ' 83 the 
Government created the National Unity and Reconciliation Commission (NURC) in line 
with the mandate envisaged in the 1993 Arusha Peace Accords. 184 The NURC's work 
has included organising three national summits on unity and reconciliation and offering 
181 After the victory of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) in July 1994 and the end of the genocide, the RPF installed 
a Government of National Unity (GNU) broadly in line with the power-sharing arrangements set out in the Arusha 
Peace Agreement, which included Hutu members of parties not involved in the genocide and set a five-year transition 
period. The Arusha Peace Agreement provided for power-sharing within the framework of a "Broad-Based 
Transitional Government" and allocated ministerial portfolios to different political parties. The RPF followed these 
provisions retaining Faustin Twagiramungu as Prime Minister, but excluding parties that were involved in the 
genocide (e. g. the MRND and CDR) and also creating a new post of Vice-President for the RPF leader Paul Kagame. 
See Schabas and Imbleau (2007) for texts of the Arusha Peace Agreement (pp 241-246), the Protocols on Power- 
Sharing on 30th October 1992 and 9th January 1993, and the RPF Declaration of 17th July 1994 (pp 304-307). 
182 When the Government of National Unity (GNU) was established in July1994, the new eight-point programme that 
was to be the GNU's mandate did not explicitly include the term "reconciliation". The eight points were: (i) to restore 
security and peace in the country; (ii) to restructure local administration at the central and peripheral levels; (iii) 
restore the unity of the Rwandan people; (iv) to repatriate the refugees and rehabilitate the victims of war and 
genocide; (v) to improve the people's living conditions and, in particular, to rehabilitate vulnerable groups, especially 
those who had survived the war and the genocide: orphans, widows and the disabled; (vi) to revive the national 
economy; (vii) to reshape Rwanda's foreign policy; and (viii) to strengthen democracy. 
193 Eugenia Zorbas (2007: p79) argues that the shift in 1999-2000 from the language of "punishment" to the language 
of "forgiveness" and "reconciliation" reflects a pragmatic realization on the part of the Government that it was 
impossible to try everyone accused of genocide. 
184 Article 24 of the Protocol on Agreement on Power-Sharing within the Framework of a Broad-Based Transitional 
Government between the Government of the Republic of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic Front (30 October 
1992) stated that the NURC would be responsible for "1. Preparing a national debate on national unity and national 
reconciliation" and "2. Prepare and distribute information aimed at education the population and achieving national 
unity and national reconciliation. " (Schabas and Imbleau 1997) 
small grants for reconciliation projects, clubs and training in order to promote a 
"national debate" on unity and reconciliation, and, more recently, the setting up of local 
conflict mediation committees (abunzi) and "peace volunteers" (abakangurambaga). 
The NURC has also been responsible for organising Ingando'85 "solidarity" or "re- 
education" camps - for various groups of Rwandans including demobilised soldiers, 
repatriated refugees and IDPs, ex-prisoners, pre-university students and most recently, 
informal traders, women's groups and members of the Rwandan diaspora. These are 
(mostly compulsory) residential camps of 6-8 weeks, where those attending are usually 
required to do military training and attend lectures on topics such as the history of 
Rwanda, political and socio-economic issues, and the rights and duties of citizenship - 
which some commentators argue have been used to "indoctrinate" participants with the 
RPF's ideology and vision of Rwanda past and present (Mgbako 2005; PRI 2004a). 
In the late 1990s, recognising that the formal legal system could not deal with the high 
numbers of prisoners still in Rwandan jails accused of crimes of genocide, the 
Government developed the gacaca, a community-based mechanism of justice, which, 
after a pilot phase beginning in 2002, was launched country wide in July 2006. One of 
the five stated objectives of the gacaca is "to reconcile Rwandans and reinforce their 
unity". 186 In 1998, in response to pressure from survivor's groups and international 
organisations, the Government also set up a compensation fund for genocide survivors, 
the Fonds pour 1'Assistance des Rescapes du Genocide (FARG), which gives assistance 
in the areas of education, healthcare and housing. These "top-down" Government-led 
initiatives have been complemented by a limited amount of "bottom up" work at 
community level implemented by international and local NGOs and aid agencies. 
185 Ingando is taken from the Rwandese verb Kuganda that means halting normal activities to reflect on, and find 
solutions to national challenges. In pre-colonial Rwanda, when Rwanda faced war or disaster the Mwamt (King) 
mobilized and prepared the population through Ingandos. 
186 The official gacaca website states that "the Gacaca Courts system will allow the population of the same Cell, the 
same Sector to work together in order to judge those who have participated in the genocide, identify the victims and 
rehabilitate the innocents. The Gacaca Courts system will thus become the basis of collaboration and unity, mainly 
because when the truth will be known, there will be no more suspicion, the author will be punished, justice will be 
done to the victim and to the innocent prisoner who will be reintegrated in the Rwandan society". The other four 
objectives for gacaca are: to reveal the truth about what has happened; to speed up the genocide trials; to eradicate the 
culture of impunity; and to prove that the Rwandan society has the capacity to settle its own problems through a 
system of 'ustice based on the Rwandan custom (see http: //www. inkiko-gacaca. gov. rw/En/EnObjectives. htm)(last 
accessed 6' June 2009). 
187 Zorbas (2004: p38) puts the prominence of the government's role in reconciliation efforts down to three factors: 
the lack of an independent civil society in Rwanda, the strength and pervasiveness of the state apparatus and the 
political platform of the RPF Government with twin goals of poverty reduction and national unity. 
Despite all these initiatives in the name of "reconciliation", an analysis of Kagame's 
speeches and key government documents since 1994 shows that none of them contains 
a clear statement of how the Rwandan Government defines "reconciliation" or how 
progress will be measured in practice (Zorbas 2007: p75). 188 Nonetheless, Eugenia 
Zorbas argues that an analysis of RPF discourse can be used to identify four key 
themes, which constitute the RPF vision of how to achieve "reconciliation" in Rwanda. 
The first two "backwards-looking" elements are concerned with explaining and seeking 
to allocate responsibility for the 1994 genocide by: (i) blaming the former regime for 
teaching divisionism and organising genocide; and (ii) recognising degrees of 
responsibility for genocide (as defined in the gacaca laws - see later). The second two 
"forward-looking" elements seek to prevent another genocide and promote a peaceful 
future by: (iii) improving Rwandan society and culture; and (iv) restoring the "organic 
unity" of Rwandans, which existed before the colonial powers arrived (ibid. pp8l-84: 
see also Zorbas 2009: p134). 
It is this fourth component of the Government's discourse on "reconciliation" - the 
notion that "building a shared sense of Rwandanness is at the centre of reconciliation in 
Rwanda""89 - that is of central concern here. As discussed in chapter 3, the Government 
has argued that promoting "unity and reconciliation" depends on "de-ethnicising" 
Rwandan society by ridding it of the identities "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" (Buckley- 
Zistel 2006: pp101-113) and combating the worrying persistence of negationism and 
genocide denial (Waldorf 2009: pp103-104). To this end, the Government has put in 
place a number of policies and legal instruments. For example, in 2001, the Government 
instituted a new law on discrimination and secretarianism, 190 which can and has been 
invoked against individuals or organisations accused of "divisionism" -a term that has 
been used repeatedly by the Government since 2000, but lacks a precise definition. 191 In 
188 An evaluation of the NURC's activities conducted in 2005 gave limited information on the concrete impacts of 
NURC activities and suggested more work was needed to measure the population's views on reconciliation, to 
empower communities to engage in reconciliation processes, and to strengthen structures and organisations 
established at a local level (Institute for Justice and Reconciliation 2005). 
189 See httn: //www. nurc. gov. rw/index. phn? hack (last accessed 23d August 2008) 
10 Republic of Rwanda, Law 47/2001 of 18/12/2001 instituting punishment for offences of discrimination and 
sectarianism 
191 The French version of the law reads: "La pratique du sectarisme est un crime commis au moyen de 1'expression 
orale, dcrite ou tout acte de division pouvant gendrer des conflits au sein de la population, ou susciter des querelles. " 
The English version of the law reads that "secretarism is a crime committed through the use of any speech, written 
statement or action that causes conflict that causes an uprising that may degenerate into strife among people. " (As 
Human Rights Watch, 2008, points out, these translations are not exact). The Rwandan Government has never 
defined, however, exactly what constitutes a "divisionist" act (see report of the European Union Electoral 
Observation Mission 2002, Human Right watch 2003 and Waldorf 2009: p108). 
2003, a new law punishing the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war 
crimes was adopted, 
192 which included an article prohibiting the "denial, gross 
minimalization or any attempt to justify or approve of genocide" - and has again been 
used to arrest, detain and convict certain individuals. In June 2004, a special 
commission of the Rwandan Parliament produced the first of a number of reports193 on 
the persistence of "genocide ideology" in Rwandan society, which was followed, in 
June 2008, by the adoption of a new law criminalizing "genocide ideology". The law 
again used vague terms, 194 which some argue risks infringing international legislation 
on the freedom of expression (see Human Rights Watch 2008: pp 41-43). 
Although the objectives of these laws - unity, reconciliation and combating negationism 
- are important, in practice their definitions are so broad, that they are open to political 
manipulation (Waldorf 2009: pp115-118). The Government has been accused of using 
these laws to restrict political competition, silence dissent and curb criticism of its 
regime by prosecuting or threatening prosecution of individuals, obliging them to quit 
their jobs or the country, and banning organisations and political parties. For example, 
in Spring 2003, the 2001 law was used to disband the Mouvement Democratique 
Republicain (MDR) of ex-Prime Minister Faustin Twagiramungu, the key opposition 
party contending the 2003 parliamentary and presidential elections (Reyntjens 2004: 
pp180-184; Human Rights Watch 2003: pp4-9). Similarly, the 2004 parliamentary 
report accused a wide range of media and civil society actors - including the prominent 
Rwandan Human Rights organisation LIPRODHOR195 - of promoting "genocidal 
ideology". As a result, in summer 2004, several of LIPRODHOR's human rights 
defenders, including most of the leadership fled the country (Waldorf 2007). 
192 Republic of Rwanda, Law no. 33bis/2003 of 06/09/2003 punishing the crime of genocide, crimes against 
humanity, and war crimes, (see 
httn: /drooit. fi ncophonie. oredoc%ri2/rw/loi/fr/2003/2003dfrwlk_=frl /2003dfnvlefrl. ndfl 
193 Republic of Rwanda (2004) Rapport de la Commission Parlementaire ad hoc, tree en date du 20 janvier 2004 par 
le Parlement, Chambre des Deputes pour analyser en profondeur les tueries perpetrees dans la province de 
Gikongoro, ideologie genocidaire et ceux qui la propagent partout au Rwanda. 
194 Article 3 of the law which specifies the "criteria" of "genocide ideology" reads: 
"Article 3 Criteria of the crime of genocide ideology: The crime of genocide ideology is manifested in any behavior 
characterized by evidence aimed at depriving a person or a group of persons of common interest of humanity like in 
the following manner: 1. threatening, intimidations, degrading through defamatory speeches, documents or actions 
which aim at propounding wickedness or inciting to hatred; 2. marginalise, laugh at one's misfortune, defame, mock, 
boast, despise, degrade, create confusion aiming at negating the genocide which occurred, stirring up ill feelings, 
taking revenge, altering testimony or evidence for the genocide which occurred, 3. kill, planning to kill or attempting 
to kill someone following the genocide ideology. " 
195 LIPRODHOR = La Ligue Rwandaise pour la Promotion et la Defense des Droits de  'Homme. The 2004 report 
also accused international NGOs TROCAIRE and Norwegian Peoples Aid (NPA) of divisionism and officials forced 
key staff out of the country. 
Since my period of fieldwork in 2004-2005, accusations and crackdowns on opposition 
politicians and press freedoms have continued'96 and many observers have argued that 
the diminishing of freedom of speech is just one indication of the ever tighter political 
control the RPF regime has exercised since the extension of the transition period in 
2000 (ICG 2002; Reyntjens 2004; Waldorf 2007). Although there has been significant 
progress in some areas - achieving stability and security throughout the country, 
rehabilitating infrastructure and public institutions, instituting decentralisation, and 
taking steps towards democratisation through holding elections197 - the RPF-dominated 
government has come under mounting criticism for "authoritarian" tendencies. Critics 
argue that, in spite of a facade of democratisation, in reality the RPF has concentrated 
power and wealth in the hands of a small minority, dismantled all viable (not 
collaborating with the RPF) opposition parties, silenced the independent press, 
destroyed civil society, violated human rights at home and abroad, and that anyone 
criticising the regime has either been killed, imprisoned, disappeared, or fled into 
exile'98 (Human Rights Watch 2003a; ICG 2002; Reyntjens 2004). 
With respect to the policy of outlawing "ethnicism" and framing such actions as 
promoting "reconciliation", some observers argue that this has been part of a wider 
strategy to disguise the "Tutsization" of political and economic power in Rwanda 
(Mamdani 2002: p271; Reyntjens 2004: p187). Recent reports on the political and 
social situation in Rwanda also give a mixed picture of progress with reconciliation, 
suggesting that "ethnicity" is still a highly salient factor in Rwanda politics and society 
and fear and mistrust continue to characterise many communities (Human Rights Watch 
2003a, ICG 2002; Ingelaere 2007; IRDP 2003). The material presented earlier in this 
196 In 2007, Voice of America and the BBC were criticised by Government officials for favouring a "genocide 
'ideology" and in 2008 were excluded from official press conferences alongside reporters from three independent 
newspapers (Human Rights Watch 2008). Most recently in April 2009, the Government suspended the BBC's 
Kinyarwanda radio service, with the Rwandan Minister of Information accusing the BBC of planning a program that 
amounted to a "blatant denial of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi of Rwanda" and containing "unacceptable 
speech. " (Human rights Watch 2009). The BBC suspension occurred after the station broadcast a coming attraction 
for its weekly program Imvo n'imvano ("Analysis of the Source of a Problem") that was to include a debate on 
forgiveness among Rwandans after the genocide. The advance segment included comments by a former presidential 
candidate, Faustin Twagiramungu, opposing the government's attempt to have the country's entire Hutu population 
apologize for the genocide. It also included a man of mixed Hutu-Tutsi ethnicity questioning why the government 
had refused to allow relatives of those killed by the RPF forces to grieve for their loved ones (ibid). 
197 Although there was significant criticism of the conduct of the 2003 elections and several observers argue that they 
only served to reaffirm the RPF's grip on power and to give the exiled opposition more reason to lend support to 
those bent on violent means of accessing power (Human Rights Watch 2003a; Reyntjens 2004). In 2005, there were 
still an estimated 15,000-20,000 Hutu rebels operating inside DRC whose objective is to retake power in Rwanda. 
They include an unknown number of ex-FAR / interahamwe responsible for organising and executing the genocide. 
t98 Since 2000, an increasing number of Tutsis dissatisfied with the regime have fled into exile including both 
genocide survivors and returnees, especially those who returned from Burundi and Congo (ICG 2002; HRW 2003a). 
thesis also suggests that "ethnic" identity continues to be important in everyday social 
relations and demonstrates the worrying persistence of particular "ethnic" myths and 
stereotypes as well as a climate of fear and uncertainty. The key question, therefore, is 
whether or not "ordinary" Rwandans share the RPF vision of "reconciliation" and what 
the impacts of Government initiatives have been in practice? The rest of this chapter 
therefore investigates what "reconciliation" meant to the young Rwandans I 
interviewed, how they viewed the progress made and challenges remaining and how 
they felt various initiatives had impacted on their lives and those around them. 
Young people's understandings of "reconciliation" 
I discussed reconciliation with all the young people I interviewed in Kigali in 2004- 
2005.1 firstly asked each person an open-ended question about what "reconciliation" 
meant. Table 2 below gives an indication of the frequency with which certain themes 
came up in their responses. 
Table 2: Views on what "reconciliation " means 
Coming together / cohabiting / uniting again 12 
Asking for and giving forgiveness Total 11 
(Individual basis, victim - perpetrator) (8) 
(Collective basis, community / society) (3) 
Telling the full truth about what happened 9 
Moving on from / forgetting the past 9 
When ethnicity is no longer important 9 
Living together in peace 8 
Recognising past suffering Total 7 
(Stressed that this must be of all Rwandans) (5) 
Restarting intimate social relations 5 
Helping one another / cooperating 4 
Focusing on building a future together 3 
Remembering the past together 2 
This table shows that young people's ideas were diverse and to a large extent, reflect the 
complexity of wider debates in the literature about what "reconciliation" means, what 
199 In all 25 people gave me some form of definition of reconciliation, but in most cases, their responses contained 
multiple ideas and themes, so I have simply indicated the total number of times each theme was mentioned. 
This has 
involved a process of interpretation on my part - deciding on themes and then interpreting individual responses. 
and whom it involves, and what is to be achieved. For example, most young people said 
something about "reconciliation" involving Rwandans "coming together", "uniting", 
"living together" or "helping each other": 
When people are reconciled, they love one another. They hold hands in life. When you don't 
have any salt, your neighbour gives you salt. You can go to your neighbour for fire when you 
don't have any. But we are no longer like this. We no longer help each other. (Jacqueline, 
b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
It isn't about forgetting. I don't think we should forget... but there has been a conflict 
between you and me in the past and we agree that we will come together to follow the right 
course and we won't keep returning to the root causes of our conflict... It's to take the 
optimistic road together (Faustin, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
Reconciliation on the ground is when people decide to live together, share together; and stop 
always looking at the past and the bad the other did. To erase all that happened, and restart 
again from zero as if they didn't know each other. They say, `hello, I'm so and so, nice to 
meet you' and start to get to know each other again and see how they can cooperate and build 
a future together. (Jules, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
It is to unite people who were divided in the past, to come together and forget what happened, 
forgive one another and share with one another again. I don't mean to completely efface what 
happened from our memories, but to forget that the Hutus killed the Tutsis and the Tutsis 
killed the Hutus. To put that in the past so perhaps someone of another ethnicity can marry 
your daughter (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
When there are no longer any grudges or any hate between people, that they forget what the 
others have done; that they live together and share and recommence intimate relationships; 
that they acknowledge that they are all Rwandans together... (Francine b. 1977 in Rwanda): 
As these comments suggest, however, young Rwandans had different ideas about the 
degree of "coming together" "reconciliation" implies. For some, it was simply about 
peaceful coexistence or cohabitation; others stressed the importance of re-establishing 
transactional ties. A few young people (e. g. Emmanuel and Francine) talked specifically 
about (re)establishing affective ties, such that Rwandans (of different "ethnic" groups) 
engage again in intimate relationships and marry each other. 
Equally, opinions diverged regarding the amount of forgetting or remembering involved 
in the process of "reconciliation". Most young people shared a common idea of putting 
what happened in the past and focusing on building a future together, but whereas some 
(e. g. Jules and Francine) felt the past had to be completely forgotten or erased, others 
(e. g. Faustin) felt it was important to remember or even commemorate what happened 
together (see discussion on commemoration below). 
Almost half of my research participants said that "reconciliation" necessarily implied 
the asking for and giving of forgiveness. 200 For example: 
[W]hen someone who has killed, he comes together with the person whose family he killed 
and asks for forgiveness and then they can go together, live together again like that... (Stella, 
b. 1984 in Uganda) 
Reconciliation is something very specific. It's when the person who has killed someone's 
family asks for his forgiveness, the other accords his forgiveness and then they live together. 
So it's between the killers and the survivors, not a general thing between Hutus and Tutsis. 
(Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
There are the Hutu and the Tutsi and the side that has killed, they have to say sorry and ask 
forgiveness of the other side. Without them saying sorry, there can be no reconciliation here. 
(Doreen, b. 1982 in Uganda) 
I think that those who have killed should admit what they did and ask for the forgiveness of 
the nation, not just of the individual whose family they killed. I don't think that can work. 
How can you forgive someone who killed your family? (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
As these comments illustrate, however, there was a difference of opinion on whether the 
asking for and giving of forgiveness should take place at an individual or collective 
level i. e. between specific perpetrators and their victims as suggested by the majority of 
my respondents (e. g. Stella and Vincent) - or between "the Tutsi" and "the Hutu" as 
groups or those who killed and "the nation" (as implied by Doreen and Jean-Claude). 
This raises the wider issue of who is to be reconciled with whom? Does "reconciliation" 
take place at an individual level between the specific persons and families who were 
injured and those who caused the injury, or at a wider collective level between Hutus 
and Tutsis or Rwandans as a "nation"? 201 If the latter, does it involve all Rwandans now 
living in Rwanda or only those who were in Rwanda in 1994? For example, several 
young returnees said that they did not think that "reconciliation" concerned them, as 
they were not in the country between 1990 and 1994: 
I wasn't here. I don't feel [reconciliation] really concerns me. It's between people that were 
here in Rwanda. I have nothing to say or add to that. (Peter b. 1974 in Uganda) 
This issue is also at the heart of current debates about responsibility for the genocide. 
As illustrated by some of the comments above - as well as in other examples earlier in 
200 This contrasts slightly with Zorbas' (2009: p129) who finds that only just over 8% of her respondents ranked 
"forgiveness" as one of three most important pre-conditions for reconciliation. This could relate, however, to 
difference in the questions asked. I asked my respondents an, open-ended question about what reconciliation was, 
whereas Zorbas asked respondents to chose from a list of ten-concepts, those which best described the three most 
important elements for reconciliation (the list also included security, punishing the guilty etc). 
201 This mirrors debates in the academic literature about the differences between "individual" or "interpersonal" 
reconciliation and "communal", "national" or "political" reconciliation (see Bloomfield 2006: pp10-11). 
this thesis - there is a tendency in contemporary Rwanda for guilt and victimhood to be 
globalised to "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" population respectively (Eltringham 2004: 
p76; Mamdani 2001: p267). As discussed earlier, this collective or "corporate" vision of 
Rwanda's "ethnic" groups can be traced back to the colonial period - where the groups 
"Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" came to be viewed as distinct, but internally homogeneous, 
racial groups - and the strategies of post-independence political elites: 
One principal strategy for mobilizing a political following was to consolidate the mental 
image of a corporate view of ethnicity. The political extremists sought to tag all members of 
the opposing social category with the responsibility of the actions of a few. Thus, in 1996 
when all Hutu became portrayed as genocidaires, so too in 1959 all Tutsi came to be 
portrayed as monarchistes; and in 1994, all Tutsis were labeled as agents of an "evil" 
Rwandan Patriotic Front. (Newbury 1998: p14) 
As discussed in chapter 1, this globalisation on the basis of "ethnic" identity laid the 
grounds for many tragic events in Rwanda's past including the genocide against Tutsi in 
1994 where the authorities promoted the notion that all Tutsi were part of an RPF plot 
to take power and re-establish Tutsi domination, and the massacres of Hutu refugees in 
Zaire in 1996-97 when all Hutus were collectively held responsible for the genocide, 
tracked down in the forests and slaughtered. Thus, as Eltringham argues, the current 
tendency to collectivise guilt and victimhood to "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" population 
respectively is dangerous as it repeats the corporatist logic underpinning the genocide: 
There is a clear danger that the constructed image of two homogeneous collectivities of `the 
Hutu' and `the Tutsi' central to genocidal propaganda can be easily overlaid by 
`genocidaires' (those who committed the genocide) and `rescapes' (survivors of the 
genocide). (Eltringham 2004: p72, underlining in original) 
It therefore seems promising that most of my research participants spoke of the need for 
forgiveness between individual perpetrators and victims of the genocide. Yet at the 
same time, for almost all of the young people I interviewed, "reconciliation" was also 
implicitly tied to the state of corporate "ethnic" relations. When asked about 
reconciliation, over two-thirds of young people talked without prompting about the 
importance of "ethnicity" in Rwanda today and the need to work at a collective level as 
well as an interpersonal level to improve relations between Hutus and Tutsis and to 
diminish the importance of "ethnicity" in Rwandan society. For example: 
[Reconciliation is when] people, they live together without thinking about these ethnicity 
things of Hutu and Tutsi, but they can be friends and neighbours, that they can forget what 
happened and that they can say sorry... There are the Hutu and the Tutsi and the side that has 
killed, they have to say sorry and ask forgiveness of the other side. Without them saying 
sorry, there can be no reconciliation here. (Doreen, b. 1982 in Uganda) 
Here in Rwanda, it means we forget about the thing of Hutu and Tutsi. That's the only way to 
have real reconciliation. (Norah, b. 1982 in Uganda) 
It's not possible to forget about ethnicity, but so it is no longer important in everyday life. 
Like if I wear red clothes, you orange, others black... without any problems, these are just 
clothes and don't matter. Everyone can wear what they want and someone doesn't say he can 
only be friends with a group that wear white clothes like him... so we can be friends, talk 
together without problem or thinking about who the person is or what ethnicity he is. 
(Francine, b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
Given that the 1994 genocide targeted Tutsis as a corporate "ethnic" group, this seems 
unsurprising, but the comments above demonstrate the diversity of young people's 
responses. For example, Norah felt that "reconciliation" requires ridding Rwandan 
society altogether of the Hutu/Tutsi distinction. Francine, on the other hand, felt this 
was not realistic and that Rwandans should work to gradually make "ethnicity" 
irrelevant in daily life. Again, these nuances mirror debates at a political level about 
whether the "de-ethnicisation" of Rwandan society is necessary to "reconciliation" and 
the prevention of future violence, and if so, whether the Government's current strategy 
is effective. As others have noted, there is an inherent tension in the Government's 
discourse: on the one hand, in the quest to continue to explain, commemorate and seek 
justice for the genocide - as well as combat negationism - discussions about "ethnicity" 
cannot be avoided; yet on the other hand, it seeks to reduce the salience of "ethnicity" in 
the name of "reconciliation" and has taken measures to limit - and criminalise - public 
discussions about ethnicity (see, for example, Waldorf 2009: pp101-125). 
Reconciliation in Rwanda: progress and challenges 
In total, 35 young people gave their views on the reconciliation process in Rwanda, the 
progress that had been made and the challenges or obstacles that remained. Table 3, 
interprets their statements at a broad level to give a sense of their views on progress 
with reconciliation since 1994. This shows that the overwhelming majority either felt 
that there had been no progress or that progress was slow but in the right direction. 
Table 3: Views on progress with reconciliation 
Good progress / reconciliation well underway 1 
Slow but gradual progress to reconciliation 17 
No progress on reconciliation / not happening 15 
Situation has worsened since 1994 2 
Most young people gave at least one reason to justify their perspective. A third of young 
people I interviewed commented that there was a lack of equality between Hutus and 
Tutsis in Rwanda today and that Tutsis - especially those from Uganda (see also 
chapter 6 and Prunier 1997) - were favouritised, for example in terms of access to jobs, 
contracts and political positions: 
I think it is easier to be Tutsi today. I think we have a better life than Hutu now. So many of 
them think that Tutsi are superior to them, but I don't think they will start violence again. 
They feel too guilty after what they did before. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
We need to get rid of this history of ethnicity... but I don't think the Government's approach 
is working. Even if we no longer have our ethnic group on identity cards, ethnicity still 
counts in society and in politics... 90% of the people in power are Tutsis and the Hutus who 
are there... they don't have any decision-making power. That's what President Bizimungu202 
said when he quit, that he didn't take any decisions himself. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
It's the Ugandan Tutsis who are in power and are privileged... for them it is much easier to 
find a job. I know people who have changed their CV to say that they grew up in Uganda. 
You know, many documents have been lost, so you can invent things and say you were born 
in Uganda, but returned to Rwanda when you were young so don't speak Luganda well. But 
you have to speak English. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
Whilst almost all young people felt that political power was in the hands of Tutsi 
returnees from Uganda, it is important to note, however, that not everyone agreed that 
Hutus were disadvantaged in terms of education and jobs and some young Rwandans - 
mostly Tutsis (but one Hutu and one person of mixed heritage) - felt that everyone had 
similar opportunities in Rwanda today regardless of their "ethnic" identity. 
A few young people felt that progress with reconciliation was limited as it was simply 
not possible for those who killed and their victims who had lost their families to re- 
establish relations of trust and friendship (see also Jean-Claude's comments above). 
Interestingly, many of the people who expressed this view were not in Rwanda in 1994: 
I don't think it is really working. You can't force people to forget that... it won't just 
disappear, above all for those who lost their families. But it is also difficult for people from 
outside Rwanda, who had to leave their country because of all that... they are afraid and say 
we can never really trust Hutus, that perhaps it will all happen again... and the Hutus are 
afraid the others will take revenge. (Elois, b. 1986 in Burundi) 
I don't think that reconciliation is really possible here in Rwanda, especially not between 
Tutsi and Hutu from here. I don't think Tutsi from here can ever reconcile with those who 
killed their families... (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
202 Pasteur Bizimungu was President of Rwanda from July 1994 to March 2000, when he resigned "for personal 
reasons". In May 2001, Bizimungu launched a new political party, the Parti democratique pour le renouveau- 
Ubuyanja (PDR), which was subsequently banned and Bizimungu put under house arrest. In June 2004, Bizimungu 
was sentenced to 15 years in prison. He was subsequently pardoned and released by President Kagame in April 2007. 
See Reyntjens (2004: p181, p193) and Human Rights Watch (2006). 
Again, Stella and Elois make a link to "ethnicity", implying that reconciliation involves 
an improvement of relations between Hutus and Tutsis. Yet, the majority of my 
respondents felt that the salience of "ethnicity" was not diminishing (see alo chapters 4 
and 5) and many felt that there were still significant "ethnic" divisions and high levels 
of mistrust and fear between Hutus and Tutsis today. For example: 
Ethnicity is still a big problem today and divisions are being reproduced. In many ways, the 
current regime continues to use these divisions - even if they aren't open - to keep power and 
serve its own interests. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
This idea that "we are all Rwandans now" it's trickery. Ethnicity still counts. You can't just 
efface history like that... Ethnicity is still very pertinent in the heads of Rwandans. It isn't 
going to disappear like that; it has to be confronted. (Emmanuel, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
There isn't really any reconciliation here... This whole story saying that we are all 
Rwandans, that there aren't any Hutu or Tutsi, will take us nowhere. It isn't true. We always 
know the ethnicity of the other. It would be better to talk about that, but such that a Hutu can 
love a Tutsi as if he was another Hutu, and the same for Tutsis, with no problem. We have to 
be together like that and ensure that there is equality between groups in terms of jobs, 
education and access to power. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda)' 
Fidele, Emmanuel and Consolee implicitly criticise the Government's approach to 
reconciliation through a kind of imposed "ethnic amnesia" (see Buckley-Zistel 2006b), 
suggesting that the current strategy of outlawing "ethnicity" is poorly conceived and 
ineffectual. For example, Consolee suggests that it would be better to explicitly 
recognize that "ethnicity" exists and is significant, but to work to establish strong bonds 
between Hutus and Tutsis and ensure equal access to power, employment and 
education. 203 Many young people also felt that tensions and fear were compounded by 
a generalised atmosphere of mistrust and lack of dialogue about "sensitive" topics like 
"ethnicity" and the past (see also Burnet 2005): 
We can think of reconciliation on two different levels: political and social. On a political 
level, we have the appearance of reconciliation in the country, because people don't speak 
openly about their problems or what happened. And even if other governments ask questions 
about what happened in the country, the government is able to manipulate things, pretend all 
is well. But in society, I don't see any reconciliation. The problem is that Rwandans don't say 
what they think. They always tell you that everything is fine when it isn't. They aren't open. 
A Rwandan will never tell you everything. There is always a certain distance between you 
and him, something he keeps in reserve as a form of protection. (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
203 Consolee's comments are particularly interesting in light of the approach to peacemaking in neighbouring Burundi 
where the Arusha peace accord explicitly recognized the existence of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa (See Protocol 11, chl, 
article 2 of Accord available at littl2: //www. usil2. ora/librirv/l), L/bLit-undi/41 burundi 08282000 toc html)(last accessed 
26th November 2008) and the post-transition constitution which set up a consociational ethnic power-sharing 
arrangement, which effectively institutionalized these identities, stipulating the percentages of Hutu and Tutsis in the 
executive, legislature and communal councils (See Lemarchand 2007c: pp7-12). 
A few others talked more explicitly about the Government not tolerating criticism and 
therefore people being afraid to express themselves openly out of a fear of being 
branded "divisionist" and risking repercussions (see also chapter 2): 
All the time, we have to be careful about what we say - even in bars and cafes. We are afraid 
someone is listening and will report us to the authorities. People can't express themselves 
freely - they are afraid of being accused of being an opponent. Here you are either 
for or 
against the Government. If you criticise them, they can say you are `divisionist' and put you 
in prison. (Jimmy, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
To bring about reconciliation, people need to talk with each other, but there are many people 
who are afraid to speak. Because in this country, if you talk about what happened, you are 
killed. For example, if you are Hutu and say that you saw a certain person kill others, you risk 
being killed. Or if you are Hutu and had your family killed by the RPF and recount that, you 
are killed. Also genocide survivors can be killed if they testify. So everyone keeps quiet and 
keeps that inside. (Gaspard, b. 197? in Rwanda) 
As Gaspard suggests, the most common obstacle to reconciliation mentioned by just 
over half of my research participants was the continued silence about RPA killings 
during the 1990-1994 civil war, the genocide, its aftermath, and in Zaire in 1996-1997 
(when the RPA backed the ADFL): 
It is difficult to speak about reconciliation when everyone hasn't admitted their participation 
in the killings. The ICTR at Arusha wants to talk about the RPF killings, but the RPF won't 
admit that. Yet, us Rwandans, we all know that they killed lots of Hutus, for example here in 
our quartier... There were also deaths in Congo that we don't talk about. My older brother 
told me how the RPF burned people alive in the forest with petrol and tyres... (Emmanuel, 
b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Killings by the RPF happened and it's a problem for reconciliation... When an RPF solider 
arrived in his community and found all his family killed, sometimes, he took revenge. He 
took all the Hutus from the colline... and fired without stopping to kill everyone. But that 
remains a taboo subject and I don't see that they will talk openly about that. It will create 
instability in the government... (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
Of course we have to speak about the genocide and the horrors that the survivors experienced 
during this period, but there are also Hutus that were killed during and around the genocide 
and we have to recognise this suffering also... like politicians or Hutus who refused to 
participate in the killings, but also the inkotanyi killed people. However, this has to be 
distinguished from the genocide... there is individual responsibility, but not collective... the 
killings of Tutsis weren't cases of individuals who just decided themselves like that to go and 
kill. They were planned and ordered by the state and implemented by the authorities in the 
name of the Hutu. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
As with the other comments above on the nature of and progress with reconciliation, 
there was no particular "ethnic" patterning to these views. 204 The silence about RPA 
killings was mentioned by a variety of young people irrespective of their "ethnic" 
204 This finding is similar to Zorbas (2007) who conducted research on reconciliation in two communities in what 
was then Butare province. Zorbas concludes that the ethnic identities of her respondents 
bore no particular 
explanatory power in terms of attitudes towards other ethnic groups, degree of optimism to the 
future etc (p238). 
heritage or where they grew up. Nonetheless, there was often a different *emphasis with 
many Tutsi returnees (e. g. Vincent and Fidele) characterising these killings as cases of 
individual RPA soldiers who killed out of revenge when they arrived in Rwanda and 
found their families and communities decimated (akin to the RPF position - see 
Eltringham 2004: pp108-110). By contrast, many of those who grew up in Rwanda (e. g. 
Emmanuel and Bosco) stressed that these were mass killings of Hutus in their 
communities and in the forests of Zaire. 
This silence about RPA killings reminds us of the diverse ways in which Rwandans 
suffered during the violence of the 1990s. Of the 46 young people I interviewed, 26 
were living in Rwanda when the genocide began and every single person had suffered 
in one way or the other from the civil war, genocide or its aftermath. 13 young people 
or their families were directly targeted or threatened during the genocide either because 
of their Tutsi heritage (six people - officially "genocide survivors") or "Tutsi-like" 
appearance (seven people) and five of those threatened lost one or both parents and/or 
siblings during the genocide. Of the other 13, seven had personally survived RPA 
attacks on their home neighbourhood in 1994, afterwards in the Kibeho IDP camp in 
1995 205 or in one of the refugee camps in Zaire in late 1996, and all but one of these had 
lost one or both parents in these attacks. The other six had all fled their homes towards 
the end of the genocide as the RPA advanced. In other words, all the young Rwandans I 
interviewed who were in Rwanda in 1994 suffered in diverse ways and at different 
moments, because of or in spite of their ethnic identity - and most of them did not fit 
the victim category "Tutsi genocide survivor". The background experiences of many of 
these young Rwandans have already been discussed in earlier chapters - Gaspard 
(chapter 3), Aime (chapter 4), Bosco, Evelyne, Faustin, Francine, Jean-Claude, Paradis, 
Rose and Theogene (chapter 5) and Beatrice (chapter 6). 
Equally, and despite what is commonly assumed, some of the 20 post-1994 returnees in 
my group had also suffered due to the violence in the 1990s. Four returnees had lost 
close family during the 1994 genocide; Winnie's father was an RPF soldier killed in the 
battle for Kigali in 1994 and Fidele's parents were killed in the anti-Tutsi pogroms in 
Kinshasa in 1998; and two returnees - Hassan and Sebastien - had been child soldiers in 
the RPA in the early 1990s and had suffered due to what they had experienced (see 
205 For a discussion of the RPA killings of several thousand internally displaced persons in the Kibeho camp in 1995, 
see Pottier (2002: pp76-81). 
chapter 4 for Sebastien's story). I will now focus briefly on the story of Hassan to 
illustrate further the diverse ways in which Rwandans suffered in the 1990s and to 
explore how his understanding of "reconciliation" has been shaped by his experiences. 
Hassan: The perspective on an ex-RPA child soldier 
Hassan was 24 when we met and lived in a dense run-down quartier of Kigali with his 
father, older sister, her daughter, and two children of his older brother. Hassan grew up 
in Goma, Zaire, where his father worked as a doctor and his mother had died of illness 
in 1989. The family returned to Rwanda in October 1994. At this time, Hassan had 
already been in the RPA for three years, having joined in 1991 at the age of 11: 
[When] I was nine years old; at school some Congolese pupils insulted me by calling me 
"Tutsi"... So I went to ask my mother if it was true we were Tutsi. Until then I didn't even 
know that I was Rwandan. I was born in Congo and had Congolese friends. My mother 
explained that yes, we were Rwandan Tutsis and why we had left our country. After that, I 
was more conscious of being Rwandan and always had the idea of returning to my country. 
That's why I wanted to join the RPF... It was me who went to look for the soldiers who were 
recruiting young Rwandans. I knew I was a foreigner in Congo. No one knew, not even my 
parents. I decided to leave like that, myself. I was the smallest among the 18 recruited and 
only four of us survived the war. 
After he was recruited into the RPA, Hassan trained for two months in Uganda and was 
then sent directly to the front line as the escort of a senior officer. He described this as a 
terrible period that caused him great suffering: 
The colonel was really evil. He forced us to kill lots of people - civilians, innocents. There 
were many Burundian Hutu refugees in Umutara and when we arrived... all the men had 
fled. So the colonel ordered us to kill the women and children. It was horrible. The children 
were sometimes burned and we took the women to the Akagera River and threw them in. I 
had to do it. I was forced to do it. I was so little -I gunned down women when I was 13 
years old. I hate this man today for what he forced me to do when I was so young. 
Hassan left the army as soon as demobilisation began in 1997 and restarted his 
schooling at the age of 18. In 2005, he was in his final year of secondary school and, 
apart from his time at school, he spent a lot of time in the neighbourhood with Didier 
and another friend Alain. One day he told me his friendship with Didier and Alain 
caused consternation amongst some others in the neighbourhood: 
The problem here in Rwanda is that we are divided into two groups. There are the survivors 
and the Hutus and there is no trust between them... I don't like all of that. Even if I am Tutsi, 
my friends are Hutus. In fact, I prefer to be with the Hutus... because I'm not like the other 
Tutsis from outside the country. I have seen what happened, that we killed people also. I 
returned to my country by force and for that I realise that I have to live with everyone here. 
But when the other Tutsis from Burundi and Uganda see me with Hutu friends, they say, 
"But look at this guy, how he's walking with the Hutus. How can he do that? " They are very 
racist in this way. 
Given his personal experiences of the war and RPA killings, Hassan clearly recognised 
the complexity of the violence of the 1990s, and, in his personal life, made efforts to be 
friends with Hutus and Tutsis alike and practice what he defined as "reconciliation": 
Reconciliation is when people forgive each other. They don't need to forget, but to leave the 
past in the past and no longer think about what others have done... It is to get on with 
everyday life and make an effort to form relationships with everyone. 
Hassan also gave his views on a number of the Government initiatives to foster 
reconciliation, stressing the need to recognise everyone's suffering: 
We don't do enough to help survivors. The FARG is for those who study, but the others have 
nothing... there are also Hutus, who had their families, but they don't get anything. This 
causes a lot of problems. 
I think gacaca can help reconciliation, but it only helps some of the victims. We have to 
recognise everyone's suffering. 
I will now examine in more depth the impacts of the gacaca process and the FARG - as 
well as the annual commemoration ceremony - through the eyes of my research 
participants, highlighting whether and how individual past events are variously 
remembered and silenced, how different victims are treated, and the impacts of these 
initiatives on social relations and prospects for reconciliation. 
Commemoration: The politics of remembering and silencing 
In April 2004, on the 10`h anniversary of the genocide and three months after I started 
my fieldwork in Kigali, the Kigali Memorial Centre was opened on the hillside in 
Gisozi. The centre is built on a site where the bodies of a quarter of a million Tutsi 
genocide victims have now been buried in mass graves. This centre added to hundreds 
of memorial sites that have created across Rwanda in the decade following the genocide 
to commemorate its victims. Some of these sites have been left intact with the decaying 
bodies of victims left where they were killed; others house rows of skulls, bones and 
clothing lined up on shelves; and others consist of simple monuments on the hillsides. 
Each year, an official commemoration ceremony is held on 7th April at a site of major 
massacres and hundreds more bodies are exhumed from mass graves and reburied. 
President Kagame also gives a speech each year at the ceremony, which is usually a 
good barometer of the political climate. 206 During the annual commemoration week 
206 The President tends to use these (and other) speeches to repeat and adapt the RPF's vision, responding to any 
recent criticisms. For example, this year's speech (2009) was use to defend the Government against accusations that it was exploiting the guilt of the international community; to warn against genocide denial and negationism and to 
chastise those countries which have refused to extradite genocide suspects for trial in Rwanda. 
each year, there are also local marches, ceremonies, and vigils held across the country 
organised by local authorities and survivors groups. 
These forms of commemoration are extremely public and all Rwandans are aware of 
them. In 2004-2005, when I was in Kigali, all schools, businesses, and workplaces were 
obliged to close on the day of the official ceremony, local bars were requested to close 
early and not to play music during the week of mourning, and the radio and TV stations 
broadcast commemorative music for several days. Most Rwandans I knew stayed at 
home with their families on the official commemoration day - only a few attended local 
ceremonies or the official ceremony at the Amahoro stadium in Kigali. 
I talked about commemoration with most of my research participants and the vast 
majority had mixed feelings. Most young people felt that some form of commemoration 
was important to recognise the suffering of survivors and learn from the past, but they 
also spoke of the increased tensions and trauma that occurred every April and tended to 
reignite fear and mistrust between people of different "ethnic" backgrounds: 
I think it's important so people don't forget what happened. If we do that, the survivors will 
be angry and say we are trying to make them forget that... but there are more tensions when 
the commemoration happens each year and problems of trauma (Elois, b. 1986 in Burundi): 
Each time there is the commemoration, lots of young people are traumatised... At my sister's 
school last year, there was a lot of trauma and certain pupils accused others -'you killed my 
parents'. There were even pupils who wanted to fight. They had to close the school for a 
week (Valerie, b. 1987 in Zaire) 
We need to think about how much longer we are going to continue with a whole week of 
ceremonies. It traumatises people again and there is a tension that mounts up every year and a 
fissure appears in social relations... Afterwards we have to work hard again to come together 
again and fuse together the fissure ... so 
I ask myself when we will be fused together 
permanently? (Jules, b. 1976 in Zaire) 
In this way, many young people questioned the Government's current approach to the 
annual commemoration with the big ceremony and week of mourning. Several 
suggested that it would be better to hold something more low-key. This point of view 
was especially common amongst those who were in Rwanda in 1994: 
I think it is important to keep the day of 7`h April always, so people remember the genocide, 
so that never happens again... But I don't think it is necessary to have a whole week. It's too 
long and means that tensions always mount in the month of April, people are divided again 
and distrust others (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
Every year, it gets worse. There are lots of tensions and people completely change and want 
revenge... Already we learn about what happened at school, on TV and the radio. We can't 
forget that. I really don't think it is necessary to have an official commemoration. Everyone I 
know - survivors and others - they no longer want it. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
I think it is very important to have the memorial sites, but all that happens every year in April 
- all the ceremonies, I don't agree with all that... If someone has lost all his family, he knows 
very well the period when he should mourn. He will do it in private. He doesn't need others 
to remind him of that. So everything that is shown on the TV and the radio, it's just political. 
The big commemoration is a political instrument used by the current regime... (Faustin, 
b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
Faustin's view that the annual commemoration ceremony was as much about politics as 
genuine commemoration of the genocide victims was common among my respondents, 
irrespective of their "ethnic" background. For example: 
I don't think it's good to continue the big ceremony. It brings up again what happened and it 
divides people again into Hutu and Tutsi. Tutsis think again about how they were killed by 
Hutus and Hutus, they all feel it was them who killed the Tutsi. I don't think it is good for 
reconciliation... But the government finds it is good for politics to still talk about the 
genocide... with donors and the international community. Like that they can get support, but 
Rwandese, they don't want the big commemoration any more. (Peter, b. 1974 in Uganda) 
As Theogene suggests above, most striking was the fact that, of the 13 (six Tutsi, seven 
mixed) survivors of the genocide among my research participants, eight specifically 
said that they would prefer the annual commemoration to be discontinued. For example: 
I don't agree with it, there are so many problems. It shocks people and it creates trauma all 
over again. On TV, they show clips of the killings and that reminds everyone of what 
happened and blocks reconciliation. It would be better to stop the official commemoration 
and encourage people to commemorate on a personal level... For me, even if I tell my story 
and they play the drums, it does nothing for me. It doesn't help me. So I prefer to leave all 
that behind. (Aimable, b. 1982 in Rwanda) 
In fact, only one genocide survivor - Aisha - had ever attended official events during 
the commemoration period - and this was because she was involved in a reconciliation 
project and had attended with the group. Aisha, who herself suffered recurrent trauma 
attacks, said that people should be better prepared for the period of commemoration: 
[W]hen the month of April arrives, the others think that the survivors will change again in 
this period, start to say bad things and behave in a different way. Where we live, every year, 
there are people who leave for other provinces because they are afraid of what the survivors 
will say or that they will take revenge. They don't visit us during this period, because they 
think we have gone mad. I think there is a need for a bigger campaign to raise awareness 
before the commemoration, explain what it's for and so on. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
In all, a third of my research participants - from all "ethnic" and regional backgrounds - 
mentioned the fact that the commemoration ceremony and memorials were only for 
Tutsi victims of the genocide and excluded Hutu victims and survivors. Many young 
people felt that this inability of Hutus to publicly mourn and commemorate their 
families and friends was unjust and a significant obstacle to long-term reconciliation: 
I think it is important it continues, but at the moment it's only for one side. Even if they say it 
is also for the Iiutus, I don't think so. They can't talk about how their families were killed. 
The memorial sites are there where the Tutsi died, not the Hutus. There aren't any sites for 
them. Commemoration has to be for everyone. (Franco, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
It's a problem, because it's only for the Tutsis. Me, I can't go that day. I can't even listen to 
Radio Rwanda. The RPF killed the entire family of my father's older brother. In total, 30 
people were killed, five whole families. A lone small boy survived and lives with us now. 
When there is the commemoration, I can't talk about that... we risk having problems if we 
speak about what the RPF did. (Emmanuel, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
I think it puts all Hutus ill at ease even if they didn't kill or they saved people... Also, the 
commemoration is for the Tutsis, even if it's true that Hutus were killed because they refused 
to kill their neighbours... I also remember that when we were with the inkotanyi they killed a 
lot of people and marched on their bodies... but Hutus can't commemorate their families 
killed like that... (Paradis, b. 1986 in Rwanda) 
I completely agree with the idea of commemoration. It's important that people don't forget 
what happened and have space to commemorate their family and friends who were killed. 
But, we have to tell the whole truth to know what we are commemorating and why. Also, all 
year, no one speaks in Rwanda - there is no freedom of expression - and then suddenly in 
April we open the tap to let people express themselves. Outside April, there is a lot of control 
and people can't talk about what happened... This is a problem and we have to give space for 
the others to commemorate. We have to understand that next to the bones of Tutsis, there are 
also bones of Ilutus and they also should commemorate their dead. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
Overall, the material presented above suggests that most of my research participants 
supported the idea of commemoration and recognised its importance for those who had 
lost loved ones and as a reminder of how and why mass violence can occur. Yet, the 
majority of young people I interviewed felt that the way the Government managed the 
annual commemoration process was potentially damaging prospects for reconciliation 
(however understood). Many felt that the commemoration process was too public and 
extensive, did not really leave private space for the bereaved to mourn and tended to 
retrigger trauma and increase social tensions and divisions. As Claudine Vidal (2004 
pp575-592) argues, such ceremonies are always politicised and governments make use 
of them both to foster a process of national mourning and impose a particular official 
history of a tragedy. In the case of Rwanda, this is clearly the case with the current 
modes of public commemoration, which at once remember, reproduce and transform 
the history of the 1994 genocide and silence and exclude Hutu survivors of the violence 
that occurred in the 1990s. Many of my research participants felt this was a significant 
problem and that it was important to acknowledge the suffering of all Rwandans, 
whatever their background. This also raises the issue of justice for victims of violence. 
Gacaca: Justice for some, reconciliation for few? 
As discussed above, a core element of the Government's programme of "national unity 
and reconciliation" has been its commitment to bringing to justice the large numbers of 
people accused of genocide. By the mid-1990s, there were almost 120,000 people in 
jails and cachots around the country accused of crimes of genocide - many of whom 
had incomplete or non-existent case files. 207 The formal judicial system was in ruins 
following the genocide and, although partially rebuilt with international aid, could only 
deal with a few hundred cases a year when genocide trials began in late 1996208 Given 
the scale of the problem, in 1998 the Government began to investigate adapting a 
traditional form of "community justice" gacaca to try genocide suspects. In March 
2001, a law was adopted to establish the gacaca tribunals and set out a procedure to 
prosecute crimes of genocide and against humanity committed between 1 October 1990 
and 31 December 1994209 Although retaining a participative element and focus on 
restoring social harmony, a key difference between these re-invented gacaca and their 
pre-colonial predecessors 210 is that they are state organised according to a national law 
and judges have the power to impose retributive sentences up to life imprisonment. 1 
Under the gacaca law of 2001, those accused of crimes of genocide and against 
humanity were to return to the communities where it is alleged they committed the 
crimes to be judged in a public hearing by a panel of elected community judges. In line 
with the Government's argument that there were differing degrees of responsibility for 
the genocide, the law established four categories of genocide suspects, which were 
simplified into three categories212 by the later law adopted in June 2004.13 One of the 
stated goals of gacaca was "reconciliation". The pre-amble of the 2001 law stated: 
207 See Tertsakian (2008) for a detailed exploration of the lives and experiences of Rwanda's prisoners. 
208 In late 2002, despite some releases, there were still 110,000 people in jail - many with no case file, and the under- 
euipped formal justice system had tried less than 6% of cases (Amnesty International 2002). 
23 Organic law no. 40/2000 of 26/01/2001 
210 In the pre-colonial period, gacaca were used to resolve inter-communal and interfamily disputes of a relatively 
minor nature such as disagreements over inheritance, land or damage to property. Their primary objective was to stop 
the violation of shared values, restore social order and reintegrate transgressors (Reyntjens 1990; Vandcginste 1999). 
A committee of local elders brought the disputing parties and their families together to discuss the transgression and 
agree a solution, sometimes involving reparations such as financial recompense or community work. 
211 When they were launched, judges also had the power to impose the death penalty, but Rwanda subsequently 
abolished the death penalty in 2007. 
212 The first category includes suspected planners, organisers and ringleaders of the genocide, those in positions of 
authority, "well-known murderers", rapists or torturers and those who performed 'dehumanising acts' on dead bodies. 
Suspects in this category were to be tried a in Rwanda's regular national courts and receive a maximum penalty of 
life imprisonment or death. Category two includes those who committed or assisted in the commission of murder or 
attacks resulting in death, those with the intent to kill who committed serious violence that did not result in death, and 
those who committed serious attacks without the intent to kill. The maximum penalty for this category is 25-30 years 
imprisonment. Category three includes those who committed offences against property with a penalty of paying 
Considering the necessity, in order to achieve reconciliation and justice in Rwanda, to 
eradicate for good the culture of impunity and to adopt provisions enabling to ensure 
prosecutions and trials of perpetrators and accomplices without only aiming for simple 
punishment, but also for the reconstitution of the Rwandese society made decaying by bad 
leaders who prompted the population to exterminate one part of that society. 
From the onset, however, there has been widespread speculation about the impacts of 
the gacaca on "reconciliation" in Rwanda. Despite a relatively successful start to the 
pilot phase in June 2002, tensions increased following the Presidential Decree of 
January 2003, which provisionally released thousands of prisoners who had confessed 
or were elderly, sick or minors in 1994. The NURC Opinion Survey on Participation in 
Gacaca and National Reconciliation (2003) revealed there were high levels of anxiety 
and mistrust around the gacaca process, the release of prisoners, the safety of survivors, 
and the effects on reconciliation. Some survivors groups have repeatedly objected to the 
establishment of the gacaca arguing that in some communities, there may be no 
survivors to testify or that the system may be open to manipulation by people trying to 
bribe the unpaid judges, appropriate property, or seek revenge. These fears were 
compounded by killings of genocide survivors to prevent them testifying in Gikongoro 
and Kibuye provinces in 2003 (Republic of Rwanda 2004). There is also evidence that 
testifying at gacaca tribunals has re-traumatised some genocide survivors rather than 
fostering a process of healing as commonly assumed (see, for example l3roun6us 2008). 
As for those to be tried, most prisoners had spent over a decade in prison in appalling 
conditions - many with no case file and some of whom were innocent. Many others who 
killed were never imprisoned and fearful of being accused and caught. Others who did 
not commit any crimes were fearful of being falsely accused. During my research 
period in late 2004/early 2005, in Butarc province, thousands of Ilutu families fled over 
the border to Burundi because of fears of what might happen during the gacaca (I Iuman 
Rights Watch 2005). Some international NGOs also expressed concerns about whether 
fair standards of trial would be applied (e. g. Amnesty Intcmational 2002). In spite of 
these problems, the gacaca process continued to receive international support and in 
January 2005 following completion of the pilot phase, gacaca courts were launched 
countrywide starting with the data-gathering phase and then moving to the trial phase. 
reparations. Dose found guilty in all categories also lose some civil liberties such as the right to vote and those who 
were minors (aged 14 to 18) at the time of their crime arc to receive half the penalty. Suspects in categories two and 
three are to be tried by the gacaca. There is also a confession procedure in place. %here sentences can be reduced if a 
suspect confesses in detail to their crimes and makes a public apology. 213 Organic law no. 16/2004 of 19/06/2004. 
Of all the reforms and initiatives that the Government has taken since 1994 to 
reconstruct and reconcile Rwanda, the gacaca courts are amongst those most likely to 
impact on the lives of ordinary Rwandans. A high proportion of Rwandans living in 
post-genocide Rwanda knew someone in jail or who had been recently released or 
newly accused214 - either because they are a family member, friend, neighbour or 
alleged killer of loved ones. Equally, a large number of Rwandans had relatives that 
were killed during the civil war, genocide and its aftermath. My research took place in 
2004 and 2005 as the pilot phase was ending and the data-gathering phase began 
nationwide. I discussed the issue of justice with most of my research participants and 
asked them what they thought about the gacaca courts and their impacts on social 
relations and "reconciliation" in their communities and more widely. 
Of the 36 young people who spoke about the gacaca, 12 people had attended a gacaca 
hearing regularly or more than once, 8 people had been just once, and 16 people had 
never been. Just over half of the 36 people thought the gacaca were overall good for 
reconciliation in Rwanda, a third thought they would have a negative impact and the 
rest thought the impacts would be mixed. The vast majority of those who thought it was 
good for reconciliation were post-1994 returnees who were not in the country at' the 
time of the genocide. On the other hand, the majority of those who thought the gacaca 
had the potential to derail reconciliation efforts were living in Rwanda in 1994. I have 
grouped together the main themes that emerged in my conversations with young people 
in table 4 (overleaf) and indicated the frequency with which each view was expressed. 
As the table demonstrates, my research participants expressed a diversity of views about 
the gacaca courts. Some young people had a very sophisticated understanding of the 
mix of opportunities and challenges the gacaca presented, mirroring those raised in key 
reports and articles on gacaca (e. g. Amnesty International 2002; Longman 2006; Penal 
Reform International 2002,2005; Tiemessen 2004). Those young people who felt that 
gacaca could be positive for reconciliation talked about the importance of giving people 
an opportunity to debate and learn the truth about what happened in their communities 
and for perpetrators to ask for and receive forgiveness. 
214 In a June 2005 presentation and based on figures from the 751 pilot jurisdictions, the National Service of the 
Gacaca Jurisdictions (NSGJ) estimated that 760,000 people might be prosecuted for crimes of genocide and against 
humanity. This is I of 4 adults in Rwanda. In September 2005, the NSGJ announced this figure was underestimate. 
Table 4: Heils on the gacaca courts 
Number of mentions 
Gacaca creates new tensions and conflicts 12 
Innocent people will be released I1 
Gacaca will help reveal the truth of what happened 11 
Survivors are being threatened or killed 8 
Gacaca will identify others who killed and are in liberty 7 
People will not testify against family and friends 7 
False accusations are common 7 
Gacaca provides an opportunity for forgiveness 5 
Gacaca only provides justice only for Tutsi not for Hutu 5 
Gacaca are obligatory / not voluntary 3 
The accused are not telling full truth about their crimes 3 
Gacaca creates more trauma for survivors 2 
Gacaca are not identifying all the guilty 2 
Several people mentioned also that gacaca would allow innocent people to be released 
and identify those in liberty who committed crimes, but have never been imprisoned: 
[The gacaca] are really helping. Prisoners are released and they have to tell the truth about 
what they did and apologise in front of the survivors who lost their families - and then others 
that are innocent, they are released... The only thing is that some survivors are threatened. 
Some have even been killed for talking about what they saw. (Norah b. 1982 in Uganda) 
As stated, most, although not all, of those who made positive comments about the 
gacaca were post-1994 returnees, whose immediate families were not implicated 
directly in the gacaca (although they may have lost relatives during the genocide). The 
majority of these post- 1994 returnees had a different stake in the proceedings than those 
who were in Rwanda in 1994 - for one thing because they were unlikely either to be 
accused of crimes or asked to testify. As discussed above, in some cases, young 
returnees appeared to be disengaged from the process, feeling it did not concern them 
and they had no interest in or obligation to attend gacaca: 
I don't go there. I don't like it. I wasn't even here, so I have nothing to say and just have to sit 
there for 4 hours. I have other things to do... but I think it can help. You know people are 
talking and then they can identify all the people who participated, the genocidaires. (Doreen, 
b. 1982 in Uganda) 
In other cases, young returnees seemed to be able to engage in and analyse the process 
with a certain distance. For example, Vincent (who was helping to organise gacaca in 
his cellule) and Fidele (who helped a foreign researcher working on gacaca) both had a 
detailed, but more conceptual understanding of the gacaca than most of the young 
people I interviewed: 
In theory, gacaca is a very good solution. It allows people to know what happened and for 
those who have killed to ask the survivors for forgiveness. But, this requires people to tell the 
whole truth and that's the problem. Also, there is a risk of traumatising people again... There 
are also lots of cases of innocent people who have been in prison for years, but now at least 
the gacaca will discover that and free them... One challenge is that there are still people who 
have killed and have lived in freedom for ten years, but may now get caught. Perhaps 
someone will insist that his friend is innocent, but then the friend will admit what he has done 
and then say to the other `wasn't it you that finished him off? (Vincent, b. 1979 in Burundi) 
Gacaca is a form of popular justice and therefore to succeed... People need to be ready to tell 
the truth and talk about everything that happened... But until now, I don't think this good 
faith exists. Also, I see certain problems. For example, there are people who refuse to talk 
about what happened because they don't want to testify against their neighbour or a member 
of their family... There are other cases where people use the gacaca to take revenge against 
people with whom they have problems or there are jealousies - so there are false accusations 
and the judges don't seem capable of telling the difference. Then there have been killings of 
survivors to stop them testifying in Gikongoro and Kibuye and in Butare, thousands of Hutu 
families have gone over the border to Burundi because of the gacaca. Yet in Kigali, in 
general, it seems to be working and the truth is coming out. So there are places where it is not 
working and places where it is... But gacaca are only one part of the reconciliation process. 
More is needed - an opportunity to talk about everything that happened in this country in that 
period not just during the genocide (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
By contrast, the dominant opinion among those young people who had been in Rwanda 
in 1994 - whatever their "ethnic" background - was that the gacaca were creating new 
tensions bctwcen Rwandans: 
Now the gacaca have started, new conflicts have begun. For example, in the next quartier, 
when the gacaca meetings take place, all the Tutsis sit on one side and all the Hutus on the 
other and they argue face to face like that sometimes. They cause each other new pain and 
conflict starts again... (Kelly, b. 1984 in Rwanda) 
In Nyamirambo, 21S there is a great atmosphere that unites young people. But now things are 
becoming difficult with the start of the gacaca. This is starting to divide people a little... 
There are youth who will testify against our family members and that can create problems 
among friends. For example, the brother of one will testify against the uncle of another. It 
creates new tensions among people. It was too long ago now, 11 years ago. Even my 
girlfriend who is a survivor doesn't want to remember that now... (Didier, b. 1980 in 
Rwanda) 
There are further conflicts and violence because of the gacaca. Here in the quartier, they 
asked people to draw up lists of Hutus and Tutsis who were here during the war - their age, 
where they live etc... This is making people afraid because in this way the authorities will 
know how many Hutus there are in the quartier etc... why do they want to know this? It can 
cause war again. (Jacqueline, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
215 Nyamirambo is a quartier of Kigali to the south of the centre, which is renowned for being a neighbourhood loved 
by young people and which also includes Kigali's main Muslim quartier Biryogo. 
Five people - like Jacqueline - referred to the process of drawing up lists of people's 
names and "ethnic" groups, saying that this was creating fear amongst the Hutu 
population, as it was reminiscent of similar lists used to identify Tutsis to be killed 
during the 1994 genocide. This was one of a number of complaints young people raised 
about the way the gacaca were practised, which they felt did more to impede rather than 
encourage "reconciliation". For example, in spite of the gacaca slogan "Ukuri 
"rakLa" (the truth heals) that dominated roadside billboards all over the country, 
several young people said they felt that the full truth was not being told at the gacaca. 
This was either because people were not willing to testify against their 
friends or 
members of their families, because people were bribed to stay quiet, or 
because the 
accused were not confessing to the full list of crimes they committed. False accusations 
were also highlighted as a problem by a number of young people. For example, 
Jean- 
Claude, who told me his father had been falsely imprisoned for several years for crimes 
of genocide, later claimed that he himself had been falsely accused in the gacaca: 
People want justice because they lost their family, but they accuse anyone. There are too 
many false accusations... In August, I went to the village in Gitarama where my family 
originates. There was a lady who said I knew something about the death of her son and they 
summoned me. I decided it was better to go to stop all the rumours... They asked me to 
recount everything I saw, so I told them that I had known the guy before the war, but the only 
thing I remembered was that I saw a mob spot him and chase him. I could name a few people 
in the crowd, but not say who actually did the deed. So they asked the lady to say precisely 
what she saw and why she implicated me. She said that she didn't want to imply it was me, 
only that I knew something... so they made her sign a document to say that she didn't think I 
was implicated in all that... (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
A number of my research participants also said that gacaca participants felt obliged by 
the authorities to ask for or accord forgiveness, but commented that these acts of 
forgiveness were not genuine or done "with the heart" - for example: 
There isn't any reconciliation here... someone can ask for forgiveness and the other says she 
forgives him. Yet in her heart, she doesn't forgive him and the other didn't really want to ask 
for forgiveness. That's what we do here, but in reality things are not okay and later, one 
person will take revenge against the other. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
In Rwanda, forgiveness has been a contentious issue in relationship to the gacaca 
process. Many survivors interpreted the 2005 conditional releases of confessed 
genocide perpetrators as state-imposed forgiveness removing their right to forgive those 
who had made them suffer (see Zorbas 2009: p134). As Magnifique says above, this has 
been compounded by the way the asking and giving of forgiveness has been handled 
during the gacaca, where apologies, requests for and the granting of forgiveness are 
made in a public rather than personal manner and are frequently seen by prisoners and 
survivors alike as an obligatory step in the confession procedure. Few of those who 
confess ever go to the families of their victims to ask for individual forgiveness - 
something that quashes people expectations of the sincerity of the apology and limits 
genuine processes of healing and reconciliation (Penal Reform International 2005: 
pp24-28). 216 This is certainly one reason why many survivors have grown increasingly 
sceptical of the gacaca and its role in fostering reconciliation. 
Of the 13 genocide survivors among my research participants (six Tutsi, seven mixed 
heritage), eleven felt the gacaca were negative for reconciliation and did not attend 
either to observe or testify. Furthermore, four survivors explicitly said they would not 
testify, in spite of having witnessed killings and having important evidence against 
particular perpetrators. In all cases, they cited cases of killing of genocide survivors and 
their fear of reprisals from the perpetrators or their families: 
There was an old lady, a neighbour, who told her sons to go and kill our family. She was in 
prison, but was released because she was old. Her sons have been in prison since 1995 when 
my older brother testified against them, but they have also been released and will now go in 
front of the gacaca. But we are too afraid to testify against them now. We are afraid of being 
killed. One day, I went into the quartier where I lived before the war and I saw these men 
there and that they had been released. I was afraid... but these men killed a lot of people in 
our quartier and there are others that will testify against them. (Anne, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
I'm not going to testify, because afterwards someone might come to threaten me, even kill 
me. I can't risk that. I have no one to protect me where I live... I think it would be better to 
move on. Gacaca just create new problems between people. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
Again, the stories above demonstrate just how much is at stake for some young 
Rwandans who were in Rwanda at the time of the genocide compared to those who 
returned after 1994. The differences in views between these groups is also likely to 
reflect the fact that the gacaca are only competent to judge crimes of genocide and 
against humanity from 1St October 1990 to 31 s` December 1994 whose victims were the 
Tutsi minority and so-called "moderate" Hutu. The gacaca are not mandated to judge 
war crimes or "acts of revenge" by RPA soldiers against Hutu during that period, 217 
216 Again this recalls debates in the literature about the relationship between reconciliation and forgiveness with a 
number of authors arguing that, although related, the concepts of "reconciliation" and "forgiveness" need to be kept 
distinct, and that there should be no pressure on victims to forgive. For example, Bloomfield (2006: pp23-24) states 
that "Forgiveness is something (often one of few things) that remains in the power of victims to give or withhold. A 
reconciliation process aims to make that forgiveness possible. But a fair reconciliation process should not achieve 
the bestowing of forgiveness through pressure on the victims. Reconciliation as a process works towards the 
(idealistic) goal of an end state of reconciliation where forgiveness may happen at the discretion of victims; if it 
happens earlier during the process, that is a prerogative of the unpressurised victim. " 
217 '(These crimes were to be handled only by military tribunals or the regular courts, but since 1994, only 32 RPA 
ofliccrs have been tried for crimes against approximately 100 victims committed in 1994 and of these, 14 were 
which may have implicated friends and families of the young returnees I interviewed. 
Again, among those who had been in Rwanda in 1994, it was this absence of justice for 
Hutu victims of RPA crimes that was perceived as one of the major problems. Almost 
all of my research participants that grew up in Rwanda - irrespective of their "ethnic" 
identity - felt that the gacaca were "one-sided" and that there was no mechanism for 
Hutu families to seek justice for their relatives killed by the RPA. They felt that this 
reinforced the division between Hutus and Tutsis and was not helpful for reconciliation: 
They say it's for reconciliation... for people to talk together about what happened, but it's 
only for one side, the government side. It's only for the Tutsis who have lost their families 
and can accuse the Hutus that killed them. But a Hutu cannot accuse a Tutsi and seek justice; 
yet there were lots of Hutus killed by the RPF during the war. (Franco, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
I think it will give something, because some people are testifying about what happened... but 
it will only bring justice for one part of the population, but not the other. That's the negative 
side of gacaca - it's only for the Tutsis to find justice, not for the Hutus who had their 
families killed by the RPF... there are Hutus who lost their families and are unhappy because 
they see there is no justice for them. If we really want reconciliation, there has to be justice 
also for their families. (Francine, b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
The point of a legal process like gacaca is to hold specific individuals responsible for 
their crimes in order to counteract notion of collective guilt. As Aime points out below, 
the gacaca should help the local population to gain an understanding of why specific 
people killed and therefore recognise individual choice and responsibility in these acts: 
The gacaca will help people to understand who killed and why he killed... that it isn't 
because a person is Hutu that he killed, as if he had a killer's ideology just because he is 
I lutu. A prisoner will explain why he killed - for example, that the authorities ordered him to 
do so. But at gacaca he will also be asked why he obeyed when he knew killing was wrong 
and maybe, he will explain that he had to kill, otherwise he would have been killed himself... 
like that, the survivors can understand why he did that and he can ask for their forgiveness. I 
think that will help reconciliation a little... (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
Despite Aime's optimism, the overall dynamic of the gacaca seems to reinforce not 
challenge notions of collective guilt and victimhood. In practice - apart from in a 
limited number of cases218 - the gacaca courts treat Tutsis solely as victims and Hutus 
solely as perpetrators of violence. Furthermore, the sheer numbers of Hutus accused 
(Waldorf 2006: pp8l-82) and the refusal of some perpetrators to admit individual 
convicted. Yet the United Nations estimates that between 25,000 and 45,000 persons will killed by RPA soldiers in 
1994 alone - without considering the killings in Kibeho in 1995 and in Eastern Zaire in 1996-1997 (HRW 2008). A 
more recent development was the issuing by a Spanish judge Merelles of arrest warrants for 40 Rwandan Defence 
Force (RDF - the post-1994 combined RPA and FAR army) officers accused for crimes against humanity against 
Spanish, Rwandan and Congolese citizens in the 1990s, drawing on both domestic law and universal jurisdiction 
(IIRW 2003: p92). 
11 There have been a few cases of Tutsis tried for committing crimes of genocide and people being tried for killing 
Hutu'lmodcratcs". 
responsibility (PRI 2005: p45) means that a large proportion of the Hutu population is 
dc facto criminalised. In this way, the gacaca tacitly reinforces the idea of the collective 
guilt of the Hutu population. 
The relationship between justice and reconciliation is far from straightforward in any 
context and there is a delicate balance to be struck between retribution, restoration, 
forgiveness and looking forward to the future (see Bloomfield 2006 and articles in Abu- 
Nimer 2001 and Stover and Weinstein 2004). In the case of the gacaca, this relationship 
seems particularly difficult and the findings above raise serious questions about whether 
the gacaca will make any meaningful contribution to reconciliation (see also PRI 2004, 
2005; Tiemessen 2004; Waldorf 2006). In many cases, the gacaca seem to be creating 
new tensions between groups. This is partly because they are taking place several years 
after the genocide occurred when a certain amount of de facto coexistence has been 
restored, which in some cases is being undone by the onset of trials and new 
accusations. A key problem, however, is that the gacaca are often not practised in a way 
that encourages genuine dialogue and forgiveness between victims and perpetrators. 
Perhaps most significant is the fact that the trials are limited to crimes of genocide 
against the Tutsi (and "moderate Hutu") and do not try cases of RPF war crimes, 
something that reinforces notions of Hutu guilt and Tutsi victimhood. Finally, it is 
important to note that, whilst the gacaca allow for both retributive and restorative 
justice, they do not fully deal with issues of redress and compensation for victims of the 
violence - issues that are also obstacles to reconciliation as the next section will discuss. 
FARG: Dividing a new generation of victims? 219 
Another Government initiative to promote reconciliation has been the establishment of 
a support fund for genocide survivors: the Fonds pour IAssistance aux Rescapes du 
Genocide (FARG). In recognition of the difficulties victims faced in trying to obtain 
compensation from suspected perpetrators, approximately 5% of the state's internal 
revenue is allocated to the FARG to provide educational, housing and medical 
assistance to survivors of the genocide. The 1998 FARG law220 sets out two criteria to 
qualify as a FARG beneficiary: being a "rescape" and being "in need". A rescape is 
219 As yet, aside from Heidi Rombouts' article, there is very little published literature on the FARG - representing a 
significant research gap in contemporary Rwanda. 22 6 Loi No. 02/98 du 22/01/1998 portant creation du fonds national pour l'assistance aux victimes les plus 
nbcessiteuses du genocide et des massacres perpdtres au Rwanda entre le 01 Octobre 1990 et le 31 Decembre 1994, " 
Journal Ofliciel. No. 3,1998, pp 221-24. 
described as a person who escaped the genocide or massacres committed between Ist 
October 1990 and 31st December 1994. It refers to the genocide and massacres as being 
aimed at exterminating individuals because of their ethnic belonging or their opposition 
to the genocide. In theory, it therefore includes Tutsi survivors of the genocide and Hutu 
survivors whose family members were killed because of their political opinions or 
opposition to the genocide (Rombouts 2006: pp214-251). 22' 
I discussed the FARG in detail with 25 of my research participants. Of these, 21 young 
people from all backgrounds were critical of the FARG and felt it was bad for social 
relations and reconciliation - although many of them felt that it was important to support 
survivors. Even those young people who talked about the importance of the FARG for 
supporting orphans of the genocide mentioned significant downsides: 
I think it is a good thing. We must remember that there are lots of children who lost their 
parents and need help.., it's important that the State takes care of them... but the problem is 
it's just for Tutsi. I don't think that a Hutu can have the FARG. (Franco, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
Survivors, they get money for school and everything. I think FARG is good... but there are 
some problems in schools because the FARG, is only for the Tutsi survivors of genocide... 
but there are also Hutu survivors - when Hutus refused to kill, they were killed, but they don't 
get their FARG. (Stella, b. 1984 in Uganda) 
As suggested by Franco and Stella, by far the most common view was that the FARG 
created new tensions and conflicts because it gave support to one group of victims of 
the events of the 1990s and not others. In other words, it gave money to Tutsi survivors 
whose family were killed during the genocide, but not to Hutu survivors whose family 
were killed during the civil war, genocide and its aftermath by RPA soldiers. There 
have clearly been tensions in some communities because some Tutsi survivors have 
received provisions, funds for medical treatment, new housing or had their homes 
repaired with FARG funds, whilst others who lost family members and property have 
received no compensation (see Rombouts 2006: p229-230). 
It is amongst the new generation, however, that the problems caused by FARG appear 
to be the most acute and damaging. Many children were orphaned during the violence 
and the killing that took place in the 1990s - including during the civil war, the genocide 
and its aftermath. Yet, the FARG only accords funds to survivors of the genocide, and 
in practice almost wholly to Tutsi survivors, leaving tens of thousands of Hutu and 
ut A number of reports suggest that in practice Hutu victims of the genocide and massacres have found themselves 
unable to access assistance (e. g. see Amnesty International 2004). 
mixed heritage suvivors without support. As many of my research participants said, 
although the circumstances of their parents' death might not be equivalent in political 
terms (i. e. genocide vs. war crimes or individual killings), from the perspective of a 
child, the outcome is the same - their parents were killed during the violence and 
conflict and they are now orphaned with little or no support: 
One problem is the FARG. It is only given to one section of the children, when there are lots 
of children who lost their parents due to the war. For the children, there is no difference - 
their parents were killed by the other ethnic group. It's the same thing for them. But they see 
certain children are privileged and receive the FARG and they don't have this right. This 
increases tensions. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
If people have been killed, you can't make the death of some people more important than the 
others. Maybe one child is an orphan because both his parents were killed in the genocide and 
the other because his parents were killed in a forest somewhere in Congo. Then you give 
money, school fees and support to the first and not the second. Even if the parents of the 
second child did kill someone, you can't blame that on the child - everyone is being blamed 
for the actions of some people. (Jean-Claude, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
This differential treatment is starkly apparent on a day-to-day basis in classrooms all 
over Rwanda. Although state primary schools now have no fees, children still pay fees 
for secondary schooling and primary school children need money to pay for uniforms, 
books, transport and food. These costs remain beyond the reach of many families in 
Rwanda today and many orphaned children find it difficult simply to survive on a daily 
basis, so finance for schooling is simply out of the question. Although there is limited 
funding for schooling from the Ministry of Local Government (MINALOC) for poor 
and orphaned children, in practice very few children seem to receive his. By contrast, 
children supported by the FARG have their fees paid for them and receive books and 
other basic resources. Yet other (primarily Hutu) poor and orphaned children are sent 
home because they or their remaining family cannot afford the fees. This creates 
significant tensions and a very visible divide between the "FARG children" and "non- 
FARG children" in many schools. More than a dozen young people reported problems 
and conflicts in their school or a school they knew related to the FARG: 
Last year... there was a big conflict between Hutu and Tutsi pupils in my school. There were 
even pupils who brought machetes to school. There are certain pupils who are survivors and 
supported by the FARG, but often other pupils are sent home for not paying their fees. These 
pupils are Hutus that don't have access to the FARG, yet have suffered just the same because 
their parents were killed in the war. But at school, the Tutsi pupils say that the Hutus must do 
everything for them - like cleaning the classroom - and they say bad things to the Hutus. 
creates conflict. (Jacqueline, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
[T]here are sometimes problems at school between those who have the FARG and the others 
who don't, because they say it is an example of favouritism, that the Government only gives 
money to people of their own ethnic group, to the Tutsi. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
These tensions are made worse by the ways the FARG is sometimes administered in 
schools. Many young people mentioned that the FARG pupils are often grouped 
together and called off for a meeting or asked to stand to one side in front of the whole 
school on the day that fees are due. Equally, when resources such as books, pencils and 
soap arrive for the "FARG people", they are often distributed publicly or an 
announcement is made that the pupils should leave the class to collect these items. 
Francine and Aisha described what happened at their secondary schools: 
It is easy to distinguish who is Tutsi and who is Hutu because of the FARG. Everyone knows 
who are the FARG children and that these are the Tutsis. At school, there are special 
meetings for the FARG children and they receive uniforms and materials. Someone comes 
into class to say that they should come and get their things and like that we can see straight 
away who is Tutsi. There is always a problem when they ask the FARG children to stand up 
in the class. This differentiates the children again and they ask why some have the FARG and 
not others... It is also very easy to see who is who when it is the exam time and we have to 
pay our minerTal. First, the FARG children are put to one side in a group, because for them 
the minenval is already paid - and thus we know they are Tutsi. Then there is a group who 
has money to pay their fees and we know these are Hutus with some money. Then, there is a 
third group who cannot pay the minerval and we know that they are also Hutus. (Francine, 
b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
I was paid by the FARG, but I see there are problems nonetheless, because it doesn't help all 
the people affected by the war. It creates conflicts because people ask why certain children 
are helped and not them. They send children home who have not paid their fees, but these 
children also lost their parents and are orphans... For example, there are children whose 
parents were killed by the inkotanyi. A young person can be the same age as me and have no 
parents, yet I receive the FARG because I am a genocide survivor and he doesn't have the 
right. At school, sometimes we receive mattresses and soap. The authorities come into the 
class and say "FARG people, you have a meeting" - that's what they call us, the `FARG 
people'. Even if we don't speak about anything in the meetings, when you come back into the 
class, you feel that the others have lost a little trust in you. (Aisha, b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Perhaps most damaging of all to prospects for reconciliation is that those Rwandans 
(adults and children) who are entitled to the FARG carry a FARG ID card. In effect, 
given that almost every person that gets the FARG is Tutsi, the FARG card simply 
replaces the Tutsi ID card carried before the genocide. Taken together, these practices 
yet again differentiate between Rwandans in a highly visible manner using proxies, but 
on an essentially "ethnic" basis ("FARG people"/"non-FARG" people = Tutsi/Hutu) in 
classrooms and neighbourhoods across Rwanda. The classroom practices described also 
bear striking similarities to the way school children were separated into groups of Hutus 
and Tutsis or called away to "meetings" prior to and during the genocide. 
Several young people also talked about problems of corruption in the organisation that 
administered the FARG and that in practice, many children whose parents were still 
alive and well and many returnee children managed to get the FARG: 
Those who have come from outside - like from Congo and Burundi - they all have the FARG 
too... they say that they are also survivors, because the genocide targeted all Tutsis... 
Therefore, even if someone's whole family is still alive and she has not lost a single person 
and her parents have good jobs, she still receives the FARG. (Francine, b. 1977 in Rwanda) 
My girlfriend is supported by the FARG, but she almost lost it this year, because her name 
disappeared mysteriously from the list. People are deleting names to put down other names - 
friends of the authorities... There are even people from rich families or families that came 
from outside Rwanda who are getting the FARG, whilst Hutus who lost their families get 
nothing. (Didier, b. 1980 in Rwanda) 
When I was in Kigali in 2004-2005, there were regular rumours of corruption in the 
management and distribution of FARG funds. There were accusations that some FARG 
administrators had managed to embezzle funds for their own purposes and, as Didier 
and Francine discuss, there were many cases of young Tutsi returnees receiving the 
FARG for schooling, who were not in Rwanda during the war and genocide, some of 
which still have both parents alive and others who appear to be from wealthy 
families 
222 This only heightens the widespread perception that the FARG is only for 
Tutsis and worsens tensions between young Rwandans. 
Finally, whilst in many cases - and especially in Kigali schools - my research 
participants described FARG children as privileged, in some schools in rural areas, 
young people reported that the FARG children had not been treated kindly: 
[A]t our school, the school authorities are against the FARG and stop FARG administrators 
from visiting the pupils... Also, when a child does something bad, often 
a FARG pupil is 
punished more severely than a pupil without the FARG. (Consolee, b. 1988 in Rwanda) 
When I was at school, the FARG always paid my fees two years late. The school authorities 
weren't happy and we FARG children had to wait to eat. First, the people who paid their own 
fees ate, then the FARG pupils afterwards. The same things for water to wash. But it wasn't 
the school's fault. It was the FARG people who didn't pay and took lots of money for 
themselves, for their big cars and nice houses. (Magnifique, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
In spite of the tensions described above, in reality the FARG gives very limited support 
to those survivors deemed eligible to receive it. The three young people among my 
research participants who had their school fees paid - Aisha, Magnifique and Evelyne - 
had received no material support since finishing school and had to find their own 
222 The New Times (2007) reported on a meeting between President Kagame and the FARG executive secretary, Jean 
Marie Karckezi, who reportedly confirmed that finances meant for the Genocide survivors support fund have 
continued to be accessed by wrong beneficiaries at the expense of bona fide survivors. 
sources of income without any family support. Calliste, who still received the FARG for 
his school fees when I interviewed him, was finding survival very difficult during the 
school holidays when he received no material support. He also struggled every term to 
raise the 3000 FRW223 needed for transport to his school several hundred kilometres 
from Kigali. Many older Rwandans who lost family, but survived the genocide received 
food handouts for a few years, free medical care and had their homes rebuilt, but still 
lack vital family support and assets and live in poverty, barely managing to survive 
from day to day. Many young Rwandans therefore felt that the FARG was insufficient: 
It's not enough. Genocide survivors deserve proper compensation, but will never receive this. 
So the FARG is there to show the Government is doing something to help survivors and to 
avoid the question of real compensation... It's because the genocide was organised by the 
state against a group, that they deserve official compensation, but for Hutus that were killed, 
the individuals responsible should pay compensation to the families. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
Survivors' groups have therefore been demanding proper (financial) compensation from 
the state, similar to that given to Holocaust survivors by the German government. In 
2002, a draft bill was put to the Rwandan Parliament for a new Fonds d'Indemnisation 
(FIND) to replace the FARG and instead accord genocide survivors a one-off fixed sum 
of compensation of 12 million FRW (approx 12,000 at 2007 prices). After significant 
opposition, this bill remains a draft and has never been passed (Rombouts 2006: pp 217- 
220). 224 Even if it is eventually passed, the problem will again lie, however, in the 
definition of who is eligible for a payout. There are significant risks that such a payout - 
although important for Tutsi genocide survivors who have suffered beyond imagination 
- will be a source of further tension and reinforce the Tutsi/Hutu 
division even further. 
Suffering for many; reconciliation for few? 
Despite their evident levels of suffering, perhaps the most striking finding of this 
research was the fact that so few of my respondents were involved in or benefited from 
the reconciliation mechanisms discussed above. In total, of the 24 direct victims of 
violence among my research participants, only four had received support from the 
FARG for schooling; 225 only four attended official events during the commemoration 
223 About 0 in 2004-2005 
2=" This is similar to the situation in South Africa where compensation has repeatedly been promised, but has never 
matcrialiscd (Hambcr and Wilson 2002) 
223 All four were survivors of the genocide - three of Tutsi heritage who had lost one or both parents 
in the genocide 
and one of mixed parentage, whose Hutu father had died before the war but who had survived with her mother and 
managed to access the FARG as she was assessed as being "in need'. Two other Tutsi genocide survivors 
had not 
lost their parents and had not received the FARG presumably because they were from relatively well-off 
families and 
judged not to be 'tin need". The other six children of mixed ethnic heritage who had been targeted 
during the 
period; and only 11 had ever been to a gacaca - and in all cases this was out of 
curiosity or obligation, rather than to seek justice for violence against their family. 226 
These figures and the views above suggest that these reconciliation mechanisms were of 
limited relevance to my research participants for a number of reasons. 
Firstly, individuals deal with suffering in different ways and have different capacities 
for reconciliation and forgiveness depending on their experiences and character (see 
Bramber and Wilson 2002). Thus, some of my individual research participants preferred 
to deal with their suffering in private or find their own path to personal reconciliation 
with those who caused their suffering. This, for example, was the case for Aimable: 227 
The most important thing is that someone asks for forgiveness and I don't think gacaca is the 
best road to this. For example, in 2001, I went to my home in Gitarama, There was a man 
there, the chef dc cellule who had killed members of our family and he was occupying our 
fields. Ile had thought that we were all dead. When he saw me, he was frightened and asked 
the Local Defence Forces to take me to the prison... Then the district major came and asked 
why I was in prison. I told him my story and they released me. The man fled, but they caught 
him. Ile then asked for my forgiveness for what he had done and I forgave him. But for the 
state, that wasn't enough, so they put him in prison. He was released last year. (Aimable, 
b. 1982 in Rwanda) 
Secondly, some of my research participants - all returnees who grew up outside 
Rwanda - simply did not feel that "reconciliation" concerned them, as they were not in 
Rwanda in 1994. Whilst they were absent during the genocide, most scholars and 
practitioners argue that the whole society needs to have some involvement in a 
collective reconciliation process: 
[Reconciliation] is also a very broad process. It applies to everyone. It is not just a process for 
those who suffered directly and those who inflicted the suffering, central though those people 
are... There is also a community-wide element that demands a questioning of the attitudes, 
prejudices and negative stereotypes that we all develop about  the enemy'... Even those who 
have suffered or benefited little from the past absorb the beliefs of their community and their 
culture, and those beliefs can effectively block the reconciliation process if they are left 
unaddressed (Bloomfield et al 2003 p13). 
Thirdly, for the 18 of my research participants wh did not fit the category "Tutsi 
genocide survivor" yet were direct victims of other violence (RPA crimes, the civil war 
genocide had not received the FARG either because they felt they were ineligible due to Hutu parentage, had been 
denied the FARG, or because they had at least parent still alive and were therefore not judged to be "in need". 
Equally, neither Winnie nor Fidele had been deemed eligible for the FARG - Winnie because her 
father was killed as 
an RPF soldier and Fidele because his parents were killed after 1994. The nine people I interviewed of Hutu or mixed 
heritage whose pants, father or siblings had been killed in RPA attacks in Kigali or Zaire, had been unable to 
receive any support for schooling either from the FARG or M INALOC fund. 
2-1 it is of course important to note, however, that the gacaca were only in the pilot and data gathering phases during 
my fieldwork. Nonetheless, there were several gacaca hearings in each of the neighbourhoods where my research 
participants lived during my fieldwork period. 
`-' Sec also examples given by Jennie Burnet (2005: pp235-246) 
and other related incidents), these mechanisms simply did not provide a means to talk 
about, commemorate, or seek justice or reparations of their suffering. As discussed 
above, for some of these victims, this was resulting in a strong sense of injustice, which 
they associated with their "ethnic" identity. Finally, even many who fit the description 
of "Tutsi genocide survivor" did not seem to benefit from the mechanisms in place, in 
some cases feeling the personal risks were too high for them. 
The politics of ethnicity and reconciliation in contemporary Rwanda 
I can't see any reconciliation here. Every year, there are more tensions and problems, 
especially when there is the commemoration and during the elections. People were very 
afraid the violence would happen again. The problems haven't gone away and the Hutu 
population are more and more unhappy... Firstly, because they know they don't have the 
right to commemorate and there isn't any justice for the Hutus that were killed. Secondly, 
because there are lots of innocent people still in prison. Thirdly, because of the FARG. They 
see that children of some rich Tutsi families get the FARG, but other poor children who don't 
even have a pair of flip-flops have no support. (Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
The material presented in this chapter illustrates the complexities of the reconciliation 
process in Rwanda and raises important questions about what "reconciliation" means to 
people affected by different episodes of violence, who is to be reconciled with whom, 
and whose truth can be told under what circumstances. It challenges simplistic 
assumptions about the relationships between truth telling, justice, and reconciliation in 
the aftermath of mass killing and demonstrates that mechanisms conceived to promote 
reconciliation can also create new grievances and divisions. It also demonstrates clearly 
that the reconciliation process in Rwanda is intimately entwined with "ethnic" politics. 
Given that the violence during the genocide and its aftermath was primarily directed at 
"ethnic" targets, this is perhaps unsurprising. Yet it is concerning that, despite the 
Government's stated aim of ridding Rwandan society of "ethnicity", in practice its 
approaches to reconciliation appear to reinforce "ethnic" divisions. Current approaches 
propagate the Government-sanctioned version of the past discussed earlier (chapter 3) 
and leave little space for alternative narratives, genuine dialogue, or individual 
mourning. Although the Government concedes that some "moderate Hutu" were killed 
during the genocide (Eltringham 2004: pp72-76), 
228 and argues that the reconciliation 
mechanisms are also for them, the material presented above suggests that, in practice, 
these approaches exclude, silence, and further marginalise many victims of violence and 
228 For example. when the announced the results of a census of genocide victims in April 2004, it announced that 
"937,000 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutus were killed during the 1994 genocide" (see report at 
htm"/, ww w himndcllc ore-'hirondclle nsf'O'('h21 al 185444298cc1256cOdO0704d20''OrcfDoCU1T e1 t) 
implicitly reinforce collective notions of guilt and victimhood tied to "ethnic" identity 
i. e. "Tutsi" = "victim"; "Hutu" _ "perpetrator. " In many cases, Government 
interventions appear to reproduce "ethnic" boundaries, leave corporatist "ethnic" 
stereotypes unchallenged and, in the case of the FARG, implicitly "ethnicise" and create 
tensions between new generations of Rwandan children. 
In spite of this, many young people were extremely aware of the complex and sensitive 
nature of the reconciliation process and the failings of current approaches. Many were 
witnessing firsthand the way these processes have tended to reinforce and reproduce 
tensions among a new generation of Rwandans. It was particularly striking how many 
young Rwandans I interviewed - of all "ethnic" and geographical backgrounds - talked 
about the lack. of opportunities for Hutu victims of violence to commemorate, seek 
justice, or recompense for the deaths of their friends and family during the civil war, 
genocide, and its aftermath, mainly at the hands of the RPA. Many young people who 
spoke about this problem were astute about the political sensitivities and why the 
Government continued to refuse to discuss these killings. For example: 
There is the problem of how to talk about this, because the killings of the Tutsis weren't the 
same thing as killings of Hutus. It was much worse. It happened in the street in the light of 
day, Tutsis were hunted down and killed. It wasn't the same - except perhaps in the Congo 
where my friends told me how the RPF hunted all the Hutus to kill them. But when we 
compare these two situations, they can't be considered equal... and that's the problem. The 
Government is fearful that if we start to speak of that, people will say that the two situations 
were the same. Also, they are not going to admit the RPF killed, otherwise they will have 
problems with all the donors - but this creates more hate and people will start to support the 
opposition, if ever we have an opposition here. (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
Certain RPF soldiers that [killed] are now colonels and captains in the army. Moreover, they 
think that if they admit this, they are going to have a lot of problems with the international 
community. It could end up with the negation of the genocide and the idea that it was just an 
ethnic war. It could put things on an equal footing - the killings of the Tutsis and the Hutus... 
But I can see that this can foster more problems with young Hutus if they think that there 
isn't any justice for their families and they don't have the right to commemorate. (Vincent, 
b. 1979 in Burundi) 
Vincent and Bosco both capture the dilemma in contemporary Rwanda concerning the 
well-documented killings committed by the RPA from 1990 to 1997. There is a risk that 
a public admission of and investigation into RPA crimes could destabilise the 
Government and create problems with international donors. 29 Nonetheless, they also 
both highlight a potentially more significant problem in the longer-term - the sense of 
229 Of course most international donor countries are already aware of the strength of the evidence and documentation 
that exists about RPF killings. Nonetheless, a public debate and high profile investigation about this would probably 
force them to take public action against the Kigali regime. 
injustice felt by many young Hutus that they are not able to commemorate or seek 
justice and redress for their loved ones who were killed, in a context where 
commemoration and justice for Tutsi victims is an ever-present Government policy. It is 
precisely such a sense of injustice and grievance, which could provide a justification for 
future violence. Indeed, in this respect, it was worrying that over half of my research 
participants said they believed that there would be more violence and killing in Rwanda 
in the not-so-distant future. Even more worrying was the clear patterning to young 
people's responses. It was only post-1994 "returnees" who felt that there would not be 
any further violence in Rwanda; all of those who were pessimistic and felt violence 
would return had been in Rwanda in 1994 - whether of Hutu, Tutsi or mixed hertrage, 
including survivors, witnesses (and possibly, perpetrators 230) of the genocide: 
There is still a lot of mistrust and many people think the Tutsis are privileged, that there in 
power just now, but that it is simply a matter of waiting for their turn, when the Hutus will be 
in power again... I often think about the violence and fear that it is not yet over. (Aisha, 
b. 1981 in Rwanda) 
Many Iiutus think there will be more ethnic violence in Rwanda... we don't know when, but 
we are sure it will happen. We think the survivors will take revenge against the Hutus. For 
example, every year, during the commemoration period, in the countryside, Hutu families 
leave their homes to hide in the forest as they are afraid of being attacked by the survivors 
helped by the Tutsis who came back from outside... After all, it is them who have the army 
and the political power... Above all I think there will be problems in the villages where the 
liutus are more numerous, not here in Kigali where we are a minority... There are also 
people outside the country who are trying to overthrow the government... many Hutus are 
happy about this, but they are also afraid that if these people attack, the Tutsis will take 
revenge against us, 'the Hutus inside the country, just as happened for the Tutsis in 1994. 
(Theogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
Certainly [there will be violence again]. I can't tell you when; I can just tell you that things 
aren't okay between Rwandans and people are unhappy. But I can also tell you that if 
someone is going to create problems for the government, it will come from those close to 
them, not the Ilutus. You know many Tutsis are unhappy, particularly Tutsis from here. On 
one side, they have problems with Tutsis from outside, because they see that it I them who 
have taken everything in the country - the power, the work - and that still have their families 
alive, whilst the survivors lost their families. On the other side, they have still got problems 
with the Hutus, because the Hutus killed their families. So they find themselves stuck 
unhappy between the two. (Faustin, b. 1979 in Rwanda) 
For sure, that will happen again here in Rwanda and it will be worse than the last time... 
Here in Africa people win power by violence... it will be an ethnic conflict again, but it 
depends on who will attack, because there are ex-RPF people outside Rwanda and others still 
in Congo... Nonetheless, immediately people will put themselves in their groups - the people 
from Uganda, the people from Burundi, the Tutsis from here, the Hutus. In fact, in Rwanda, 
when there is security, things are okay and people continue their lives and call on each other, 
but as soon as there in insecurity, they put themselves with their own ethnic group, straight 
away and fight each other (Bosco, b. 1976 in Rwanda) 
2" Whilst there were no confessed perpetrators among my research participants, there is a possibility that a couple of 
individuals participated in the genocide. 
These comments are deeply unsettling and suggest that the Government needs to take 
urgent action to acknowledge the various ways in which different groups of Rwandans 
suffered during and in the aftermath of the violence of the 1990s and to take an 
approach to reconciliation that directly challenges the "ethnic" logic that persists in 
Rwanda. Acknowledging the suffering of different groups is not to make a moral or 
political equation between the genocide and other incidences of violence. The intent and 
organisation behind the genocide and the systematic and brutal targeting of Tutsis as a 
group will always set it apart in human history. Yet the consequences of proceeding 
with a national reconciliation process, which denies and silences the suffering of a 
significant part of the population, and therefore reinforces rather than dissipates a sense 
of "ethnic" difference and division, could be severe. 
CONCLUSION: 
HOW ETHNICITY MATTERS231 
If ethnicity is an invention, then it can be abolished and ignored; if it is primordial, then it is 
unchanging and extraneous to policy concerns; if it is contextually defined, then it is the 
responsibility of the political actors both to recognize it and to attenuate its salience as a 
political force. Instead, avoiding reference to ethnicity has allowed participants to avoid 
addressing directly the nature of ethnicity in Rwandan social process. Ironically, this 
approach has allowed popular stereotypes to thrive and has contributed to a policy which 
implicates individuals on corporate ethnic grounds, such that the worst excesses of members 
of one group are extended to all members of that group, on both sides: in such portrayals, 
depending on what "side" one is on, all Hutu become "genocidaires" and all Tutsi ruthless 
power-seekers. (Newbury and Newbury 1999: p294) 
This thesis has explored the role of the "ethnic" categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" in the 
lives of a group of young Rwandans living in Kigali a decade after the 1994 genocide. It 
has examined how these young people use these categories as explanations for past 
conflict and their own personal experiences and how they perceive the role of these 
categories in relations to current processes of reconciliation. It has explored how these 
particular individuals understand, experience and use the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" 
in their everyday lives and how they constantly position themselves and others given 
the wider social and political context. As indicated at the outset, the purpose of this 
research was not to provide a basis to make generalisations about the situation of youth 
or the role of "ethnicity" across the whole of Rwanda. Rather, the aim was to study in 
depth the lives of a group of young Rwandans - from different social backgrounds and 
with different experiences of violence and exile - in order to understand in detail their 
perspectives and the meaning of "ethnicity" in their lives. The findings of this research 
therefore offer a window onto everyday realities in contemporary Rwanda and suggest, 
rather than confirm what may be happening in wider society. 
With these limitations in mind, the findings of this thesis do provide some insights in 
response to the three inter-related questions raised in the introduction: (i) How is 
"ethnicity" produced and transformed in everyday life? (ii) What is the role of 
"ethnicity" in "ethnic" violence? and (iii) How do societies recover from "ethnic" 
violence? I will now reflect on each of these in turn. 
231 This title is borrowed from Christian Karner's book Ethnicity and Everyday Life (Kamer 2007: p8). 
The production and transformation of ethnicity in everyday life 
This thesis has demonstrated that, although "ethnicity" is not the only division in 
contemporary Rwanda, it remained the most important in the lives of a group of young 
Rwandans living in Kigali a decade after the genocide. It is also remained a significant 
factor in national politics, despite - and partly because of - the Government's strategy 
of outlawing "ethnicism". Given that most of the killing during the 1994 genocide 
targeted victims on "ethnic" grounds, it is to some extent unsurprising that "ethnic" 
identity retains centrality in Rwandan society and politics. Yet, what is concerning was 
the sheer pervasiveness of "ethnic" categorisation in the everyday lives of my research 
participants and the essentialist nature of the "ethnic" narratives and stereotypes most of 
them employed to understand and navigate their social worlds. Although some young 
people had taken important steps towards establishing inter-"ethnic" relationships, there 
was a persistent concern amongst my respondents to reveal the "ethnic" identity of 
significant others. The thesis demonstrates that - although they had some awareness of 
complexity and contingency - in practice, to determine the "ethnic" identity of others, 
they relied on longstanding essentialist physical and behavioural stereotypes about "the 
Hutu" and "the Tutsi", which reproduce many of the powerful negative images central 
to the genocidal propaganda. 
Given Rwanda's complex political landscape, polarized society and history of violence, 
"ethnicity" has to a certain extent become a "catch-all" explanation - for the genocide, 
for ongoing political antagonism and social inequality - for both Rwandans and non- 
Rwandans (Newbury and Newbury 1999: p293). This is the case in everyday social 
interactions as well as in the political arena. For example, Eugenia Zorbas (2007: 
pp 102-103) discusses a fight that broke out one evening in a local bar in Bunzazi during 
her fieldwork, which involved a male Tutsi genocide survivor. Local survivor groups 
were upset by the incident and labelled it as "ethnically-motivated" and an example of 
the persistence of "divisionism" or "genocide ideology". Yet, in reality the fight was 
caused by the fact that an unfaithful fiancee had flirted with the male genocide survivor. 
I came across a similar incident during my fieldwork where one young man privately 
blamed the fact that he had not been successful in a particular job interview on his Hutu 
"ethnic" identity, whereas in reality the person promoted (apparently a Tutsi) was 
widely accepted to have been better qualified than him. 
Paul Brass (1997) recounts similar episodes in Northern India232 and argues that we 
need to be aware that in many situations, "ethnicity" can be used as an explanatory 
factor for situations or events, which in reality have little or nothing to do with "ethnic" 
identity. Christian Kamer makes a similar observation: 
[T]he contemporary power of ethnicity resides less in its inevitable social effects than in its 
imputed effects, that `it' is much less a singular force determining people's behaviour than a 
much used framework of interpretation and political mobilization. The power of ethnicity is 
ascribed to it by social actors, who interpret the world around them through a pervasive prism 
that constructs ethnicity as a powerful force. (Kamer 2007: pp 10-11) 
Equally, just as ethnicity can be used as a post facto explanation of a particular incident 
or circumstance, social actors can also use ethnic myths and symbols as a "resource" in 
pursuit of their ends (see Turton 1997a: pp11-12). In this sense, ethnicity is a model of 
and a model for social relations (Geertz 1993: pp93-94). Again this occurs in everyday 
social situations as well as between political elites competing for power. I came across a 
number of examples of this during my fieldwork. For example, a Rwandan friend Jean 
recounted how his NGO colleague Marie-Louise, a Tutsi genocide survivor, repeatedly 
"played the ethnic card" to get rid of her perceived workplace rivals and secure her own 
position. She particularly preyed on Hutu women, whom she knew would fear what she 
could do or say given their relative positions. Jean recounted a number of incidents: 
In 1996, there was a Hutu woman in the office who was doing well. Marie-Louise threatened 
her and she had to leave the country... in Rwanda just now, it's enough to know someone in 
the army to make threats seem real - especially to Hutus... and Marie-Louise's new husband 
is a soldier. Once she said to me "it's very easy to get someone physically eliminated. " 
Later, Clarisse, the Iiutu wife of a colleague came to do a work placement. She had degrees 
in humanities and rural development and it was clear to Marie-Louise that Clarisse would 
progress in the organisation. Therefore, Marie-Louise said that Clarisse was inexperienced 
and needed to be accompanied on a field mission and suggested I was best suited to go along. 
While we were away, she spread rumours that we were sleeping together and used this to 
completely discredit Clarisse and chase her from the organisation... Clarisse did not object 
because she feared she would be accused of "divisionism" or physically threatened. 
Then in 1999, Marie-Louise was almost thrown out because of problems with a female 
manager, but then she went to this manager and pleaded with her, "I'm a genocide survivor. 
I'm alone with six children. If you chase me away, it's like you are committing another 
genocide". The woman had pity on her and didn't do anything... 
She is very intelligent, this woman Marie-Louise... she always finds a way to get rid of her 
rivals. She usually creates problems with Hutus as it is easier. Then, she always uses the fact 
that she is a genocide survivor and asks us to tolerate her strange behaviour because of what 
she has suffered. That's why I say nothing, even though I find it difficult to work with her. 
232 Brass (1997) analyses several local incidents of so-called "Hindu-Muslim" violence in villages in Northern India 
and examines the widespread assumption that these incidents were "ethnic" in nature and the result of longstanding 
antagonisms between Hindus and Muslims or different caste and status groups. He reveals that the origins of these 
incidents were often complex and ambiguous and could not easily be defined as "ethnic". Yet, through the discourses 
of politicians and in the media, these incidences later became interpreted or explained as "ethnic violence". 
Thus, in a context where one "ethnic" group is perceived to be in power, "ethnicity" 
remains a key factor in social relations, and there are powerful collective stereotypes 
that construct Tutsis as "victims" and Hutus as "perpetrators" of the genocide, Marie- 
Louise was able to use her own "ethnic" identity to achieve her ends. 
Nonetheless, this does not explain how ethnicity acquired this affective power. One 
reason, as the case of Marie-Louise shows and I argued in chapter 1, is that "ethnic" 
explanations do not come from nowhere - they draw on pre-existing discourses in 
society, which construct ethnicity as a significant source of identity and a determinant 
of behaviour. Those who employ these explanations then subtly adapt and transform 
them to fit the needs of their contemporary situation. Thus, "ethnic" identity makes 
sense to individuals as a "predictive" framework, because it resonates with existing 
ideas they possess about their society and position within it. 
As social constructivist theorists argue, "ethnicity" is a way of seeing, experiencing and 
"making sense" of the world (Karner 2007: pp31-33) - and in this process of 
interpretation, "ethnic" differences become naturalised as a seemingly predetermined, 
inevitable fact of nature. In turn, each time "ethnicity" is invoked, embraced or utilised 
as an explanation or justification for a particular situation or action or incident, its "self- 
evident" quality is reinforced. Yet, as illustrated in this thesis, the fact that "ethnic" 
differences have become naturalised and certain stereotypes have endured, does not 
mean that "ethnic" categories are static. Rather, their endurance depends on their 
constant reproduction and reworking as explanatory frameworks for new circumstances 
and, in the process, their content undergoes shifts - more and less subtle - over time. 
For example, as a result of the 1994 genocide, the meanings of the categories "Hutu" 
and "Tutsi" have become inseparable from the violence that occurred and strongly 
associated with collective notions of "guilt" and "victimhood" respectively. Although 
many of my respondents showed awareness of the complexities of events during the 
civil war, genocide and its aftermath, there were powerful collective stereotypes about 
,, the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" experience during this violence. These stereotypes were used 
to draw conclusions about others' experiences and views or to determine their "ethnic" 
identity based on what could be gleaned about their past or the views they expressed. 
Overall, this new positioning of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" has clearly altered 
the "content" of these categories, whilst preserving the meta-categories. 
It is important to stress, however, that this does not mean that every individual had 
precisely the same understanding of "ethnicity" or the categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and 
"Twa". As this thesis has shown, there was some variation in the understandings of my 
research participants, which tended to relate to their different positions and biographies. 
Yet, overall, this thesis suggests that an "ethnic" logic persists in contemporary 
Rwanda, which as Catherine and David Newbury argue (above), implicates individuals 
on corporate ethnic grounds. Just as in 1994, individuals were targeted on the basis of 
their (assumed or actual) belonging to the group "Tutsi", in Rwanda today individuals 
tend to be assigned particular characteristics and views on the basis of their (assumed or 
actual) belonging to the categories "Hutu" or "Tutsi" respectively. This research also 
suggests a number of reasons for the persistence of this corporate "ethnic" logic. 
Firstly, over many decades, particular stereotypes and images of two homogeneous 
collectivities "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" have been produced and reproduced and 
become deeply embedded in Rwandan society. Although they 
have co-existed with 
other notions of difference, the identities "Hutu" and ITutsi" 
have proven particularly 
potent and durable because of the particular way they have been constructed and utilised 
in Rwanda. The differences between these groups have been constructed as racial - and 
therefore innate and immutable - and political leaders 
have periodically differentiated 
between, mobilised and targeted Rwandans on "ethnic" grounds. Over time, although 
the meaning and salience of these categories has varied, particular essentialist "ethnic" 
narratives and stereotypes have taken on a kind of "goes without saying" or self-evident 
quality in the way Rwandans interpret and experience their social world. 
Secondly, although (as in the past) other identities and social categories are important in 
Rwanda, and to some extent cut across "ethnic" categories, they also seem to reinforce 
this "ethnic" logic in a number of ways. For example, although there are clear splits 
between "returnees" from different countries of exile, at another level there are also 
significant levels of mistrust and tension between these (primarily) Tutsi "returnees" 
and those Rwandans - particularly Hutus - who grew up in Rwanda. 
Similarly, this 
thesis has demonstrated the persistence of particular stereotypes about the differences 
between Tutsi and Hutu women, which to a large extent seem to reproduce a dynamic 
of superiority-inferiority on "ethnic" grounds and hence reinforce the "ethnic" divide. 
Thirdly, there is a perception among some young people that access to political power, 
resources and sometimes jobs in contemporary Rwanda is still primarily determined on 
"ethnic" lines. This perception seems to be reinforced - rather than dissipated - by 
actions the current Government has taken to combat "divisionism" and "genocide 
ideology", which - although partially directed at tackling the genuine problem of 
negationism - are interpreted as attempts to curb political opposition and debate and 
consolidate the hold on economic and political power of a small circle of Tutsi elites. 
Fourthly, given the history of the 1994 genocide and other incidences of violence in the 
1990s - and the levels of social and political control exercised by the current 
Government - this thesis suggests that many Rwandans have an underlying and deep- 
seated fear of a return to violence. This seems to make the quest to know or undercover 
the "ethnic" identity of those around them more urgent, as if they need to know whether 
each person will be enemy or foe when the violence restarts (hence the importance of 
the "predictive" quality of "ethnic" identity). In a climate where discussions about 
"ethnicity" are taboo and where most people are fearful of talking openly about their 
past experiences and views (except within their family and tightest social circles), 
young Rwandans therefore have little knowledge about the lives and experiences of the 
"concrete" persons around them and are, as a consequence, more inclined to rely on 
"conceptual" categories and stereotypes to inform their actions and perspectives. 
Finally, current approaches to reconciliation - both the overall Government discourse of 
unifying and "de-ethnicising" Rwanda as well as specific initiatives (e. g. the FARG, 
gacaca, annual commemoration) - inadvertently or not - appear to have entrenched 
rather than challenged corporate notions of ethnicity, reinforced collective notions of 
victimhood and guilt tied to the groups "Tutsi" and "Hutu' and produced new 
grievances tied to "ethnic" identity, given the lack of recognition of, justice and 
compensation for Hutu and mixed heritage victims of violence. 
The question is what the persistence of this "ethnic" logic might mean for prospects for 
future violence or peace in Rwanda. Again, as social constructivist theorists argue, 
when people believe in "ethnic" or other identity differences, this affects their actions 
and, in this way, social constructs can have "real" consequences (Jenkins 2002: p21). In 
other words, people's perceptions of what ethnicity is and does do matter and can lead 
them to take or abstain from action. This raises the question, however, of when and how 
mobilisation on the basis of "ethnicity" can result in violent action as opposed to 
peaceful forms of social or political interaction. 
The role of "ethnicity" in "ethnic" violence 
In an opening chapter of his co-edited volume on identity and difference, Gerd 
Baumann (2004) addresses the relationship between processes of collective 
identification and violence. He argues that whilst in "normal" times, schemas of social 
categorisation - termed "grammars of identity/alterity" - are structural components of 
societies, integral to the stability and functioning of those societies: 
In situations of genocide, the Other is turned from being a necessary, if undervalued, partner 
in the processes of collective selfing into an obstacle to selfing that must be removed by 
indiscriminate violence. The denial of the right to be different turns into the denial of the 
right to be. (Baumann and Gingrich 2004: p47) 
Thus, Bauman argues, because the existence of the "other" is integral to the existence of 
the self, the annihilation of the other effectively annihilates the self or at least the former 
self as it used to be. In this way, he argues that collective violence represents a break 
with "normal" processes of social categorisation and identity formation. It represents a 
situation where the "grammars" are made to implode or breakdown into a binarism of 
"we are good, so they are bad" and gives way to the "non-grammar" or "anti-grammar" 
that accompanies, legitimises and prepares violence (ibid. p42-46). Yet Baumann gives 
little detail of how "grammatical" selfings/otherings give way to "ungrammatical" ones 
and what the precise processes are that lead those belonging to one category of people 
to seek the annihilation of those assumed to belong to the "other" category. 233 
Furthermore, although Baumann's volume contains many interesting case studies of 
specific contexts that have experienced extreme forms of categorical violence, the links 
between these ethnographies and the main "anti-grammar" thesis are noticeably weak. 
Baumann's "anti-grammar" argument rests on the assertion that episodes of extreme 
violence represent a fundamental discontinuity with the past. His argument implies that 
there is a clear disjuncture in the way "others" are viewed between "normal" times and 
233 He speculates that, `one answer may lie in the cognitive role of language", suggesting that the brutalisation of 
language "reduce[s] the complex uses of each grammar to the blatancy of an ungrammatical binarism: "'for us to 
live, they must die"' (p47) i. e. that language is used to dehumanise and delegitimize others such that annihilation 
becomes a possibility. Whilst there is certainly much evidence - including several case studies 
in the volume - that 
brutal language and propaganda play a role in delegitimizing the "other", this argument is insufficient and does not 
account for the socio-economic circumstances, political factors and power relations that affect the configuration of 
self and other within a society and influence possibilities for individual and collective action. 
times of "exceptional violence". 234 Whilst there is little doubt that there is an important 
shift in the way "others" are viewed to make killing them seem like a legitimate option, 
this argument seems to rule out the possibility of important continuities between 
processes of categorisation / identification in times of violence and times of (apparent) 
peace. For example, it is questionable how legitimate or necessary "others" are really 
seen to be in "normal" times. In many societies, at particular moments, the idea of 
getting rid of certain "others" is entertained - not necessarily through physical 
annihilation, but, for example, through physical removal, deportation or assimilation. 
In contrast to the argument put forward by Baumann (2004), the material presented in 
this thesis points to important continuities between the way "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi" 
have been imagined in so-called "normal" times and times of extreme violence. For 
example, it demonstrates that many of the essentialist "ethnic" narratives and 
stereotypes that became attached to the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" by the end of the 
colonial period, endured over several (mainly non-violent) decades and were then 
reproduced and reworked in the genocidal propaganda of the early 1990s to incite 
people to kill. It also shows that many of these same stereotypes endure today and are 
used by young people to understand and navigate their everyday social worlds. The 
question, therefore, is what enables people to move from seeing those who belong to 
another category as (perhaps undesirable) "others" to "enemies" that it is legitimate to 
kill? The material presented in this thesis indicates a possible explanation. 
This thesis suggests that the dialectic relationship between how categories are perceived 
and imagined at a "conceptual' level and how they are used and experienced at the 
'N Baumann (2004: pp45-47) also makes a distinction between genocides, ethnocides and other such forms of 
"exceptional violence', arguing that these forms of violence are qualitatively different from other forms of violence, 
such as structural violence and oppression. He defines "exceptional violence" as "violence that does not maintain a 
system of inequality between selves and others, but destroys that system itself and thus destroys both the others and 
the former selves as they used to define themselves". Baumann justifies these assertions by stating he is sceptical of 
the trend in social science to regard violence as the continuation of social negotiation by other means and that violent 
acts cannot be regarded as "normal pursuits" of `normal societies' (p45). Again whilst it can be argued that there is a 
qualitative difference between different kinds of violence, the argument that "exceptional violence" marks a 
fundamental discontinuity with the past seems to go against a large body of anthropological and other literature on 
violence, which stresses continuities between different kinds of violence - physical, structural, psychological - 
between minor and extreme violent acts, and between situations of war and peace (e. g. Hinton 2001 a; Richards 
(20(4); Scheper-Hughes 1993). Indeed, as discussed above and Baumann (2004) implicitly admits, there are others 
ways - beyond physical annihilation - of enacting violence against and seeking to destroy the 'other' - for example 
emotional, psychological or cultural destruction. In this respect, his argument is weakened by his own admission that 
all ('normal') processes of othering depend upon a certain measure of coercion and violence: "all three grammars are 
kept in place, reasserted and reproduced by the infusion of a certain, though sometimes minimal, amount of violence" 
(p42). This may take the form of domination, suppression or denigration of the 'other' as a means to build positive 
self-identity or secure power and resources for oneself or one's own group, discrimination, denial of certain rights or 
freedoms, or even forced segregation or expulsion. 
"concrete" level of everyday lived reality is key to understanding their potency in 
everyday life, the production of inter-group animosity, and the potential for categorical 
violence. All of my respondents implicitly or explicitly evoked or referred to a kind of 
"conceptual Hutu" and "conceptual Tutsi, which were imbued with archetypal physical 
and behavioural traits and were assigned particular past experiences and political views. 
Yet, whilst these conceptual figures were central to the way they understood and 
navigated their social worlds, young people's accounts also revealed considerable 
discrepancies between the "conceptual Tutsi" and "conceptual Hutu" invoked and the 
more complex social reality around them. In many cases, a young person's own 
appearance, behaviour, experiences or views did not fit the stereotypes or they gave 
examples of people they knew who did not match them. Yet these anomalous persons 
and even blatant counter-stereotypes did not seem to prompt young people to reflect on 
the validity of the stereotypes and most continued to use them in daily life without 
reflection. There was a coexistence of the "conceptual Hutu" and "conceptual Tutsi" of 
young people's imaginaries and the "concrete" individual Hutus, Tutsis and "Hutsis" 
that peopled their social worlds. Rarely did the latter correspond to the former. 
It might be argued that such stereotypes or constructs are simply features of the 
"repertoires of identification" (Jenkins 2004: p7) or "grammars of identity/alterity" 
(Baumann and Gingrich 2004 - see above) that are necessary to structure our social 
worlds. Each "repertoire" or "grammar" consists of a set of interrelated categories, 
which are necessarily defined in contrast to each other on the basis of a collection of 
essential characteristics. These "conceptual" categories act as reference points as people 
decipher and negotiate their social worlds, even if they are aware that many "concrete" 
people do not fit neatly within their boundaries or display the archetypal traits assigned 
to them. It can be argued, however, that the healthy functioning of such schema of 
selfing/othering depends on social actors being cognisant that the stereotypes are just 
that - globalised approximations based on traits that at some point have been observed 
to be common among a particular group - and that in practice they also need to rely on 
their own practical experience of individuals. Problems arise when these stereotypes 
come to dominate people's imaginaries to such an extent that they become the 
overriding influence on their thought and action - when they take on a 
kind of self- 
evident or habitual quality such that they are no longer open to challenge. 
Zygmunt Bauman (1989) argues that this is what happened in early 20th century Europe 
when the way Jewish people were conceptualised became increasingly disconnected 
from the real situation of Jews in society. He argues that it was the increasing 
vilification of the "conceptual Jew" in a context of rapid change and uncertainty, which 
eventually facilitated the annihilation of the "concrete Jew". Amartya Sen (2006) makes 
a related critique of the "illusion of a singular identity" - the popular assumption that 
any person pre-eminently belongs to only one collectivity. 235 He argues that this 
rcductionist view, which overlooks both the plurality of people's identities and internal 
diversity within groups, is a key factor in the production of violence: "The artificial 
diminution of human beings into singular identities can have divisive effects, making 
the world potentially much more incendiary" (ibid. p178). He says that those intent on 
using violent means to achieve their goals skilfully cultivate this illusion of a singular 
identity - eclipsing the relevance of other affiliations through selective emphasis and 
incitement - and then redefine this sole identity in a belligerent form to incite people to 
commit violence in its name (ibid. pp175-176). 
As discussed in chapter 1, there are clear parallels between what Bauman and Sen 
describe and Rwanda of the early 1990s. In a climate of heightened fear and insecurity 
due to the economic crisis and ongoing civil war, the organisers of the genocide used 
sophisticated techniques to incite the civilian population into killing including the 
circulation of propaganda, which systematically demonised "the Tutsi" as a collective, 
all Tutsis, and presented them as the categorical enemy of all Hutus 
236 The propaganda 
resonated with and reinforced longstanding and powerful stereotypes that constructed a 
"conceptual Tutsi", which was divorced from the "concrete" reality of actual Tutsis in 
society. This thesis has argued that it was the specific nature of the stereotypes attached 
to the "conceptual Tutsi" plus the gap between this construct and "concrete" Tutsis, 
which created a deep sense of uncertainty amongst the Hutu population and facilitated 
the participation of a significant number of "ordinary" Hutus in the killing. 
In this light, it does matter that "ethnicity" remains salient in Rwanda today and it 
particularly matters how "ethnic" differences are constructed in contemporary social 
and political discourse and how they are perceived to affect people's lives. This 
us This is the underlying assumption of Samuel Huntingdon's (1996) "Clash of Civilisations" thesis and is popular 
among communitarian thinkers. 
2' Many perpetrators recall the central phrase of the genocide as "Umwanzi ni umwe ni umututsi "- The enemy is 
one; the enemy is the Tutsi (Straus 2006: p225). 
research suggests that, in contemporary Rwanda, it is not only those in power that 
cultivate the "illusion" of a singular identity, but that this has also become a self-evident 
illusion required for navigating everyday life. In Rwanda today, the gap between the 
"conceptual Hutu" and "conceptual Tutsi" invoked by my research participants and the 
"concrete" Hutus, Tutsis and "Hutsis" of their everyday social worlds seems as wide as 
ever. It is argued here that this is a significant cause for concern, and that the persistence 
of a corporate "ethnic logic" combined with a pervasive insecurity about the identity of 
others reproduces the conditions in which "ethnicity" could once again be used as a 
powerful tool of mobilisation into violence - as Rene Lemarchand warns: 
[By] attributing responsibility for genocide not to individuals but to a whole community - 
lumping together the perpetrators of genocide and innocent civilians, including those Hutu 
who risked their own lives to save those of their Hutu neighbours - the result has been to 
create those very conditions that impel some Hutu to become rebels, and ultimately 
`genocidaires'. (Lemarchand 1998: p8) 
This suggests that there is an urgent need for Rwandans to recognise and address the 
insidious "ethnic" logic that persists in contemporary Rwanda. 
Reconciliation in the aftermath of "ethnic" violence 
This thesis suggests that the Rwandan Government's current strategy to "de-ethnicise" 
Rwandan society is not working. Instead, it appears to have created an atmosphere in 
which public discussions about "ethnicity" are taboo; while in closed private circles, 
people continue to talk about these issues. Furthermore, the fact that people cannot 
discuss "ethnic" issues openly seems to have perpetuated feelings of insecurity and 
created a constant need for many Rwandans to uncover the "ethnic" identity of 
significant others. Alongside specific initiatives like the gacaca, FARG and annual 
genocide commemoration, which seem to reinforce corporate notions of guilt and 
victimhood tied to "ethnic" identity, this strategy appears to have emphasized rather 
than de-emphasized "ethnicity" and contributed to the perpetuation of a corporate 
"ethnic" logic with its "conceptual Tutsi" and "Hutu" counterpart. This of course begs 
the question of what the Rwandan Government could do differently to overcome 
tensions, address this "ethnic" logic and foster genuine reconciliation in Rwanda. 
This was a question I posed to many of my research participants and their responses 
were insightful. There were two central themes in their responses. The first theme was 
that the complexities of the past and the multiple ways in which different groups of 
Rwandans suffered should be recognised. My respondents stressed that this would 
involve gaining a greater understanding of how the genocide against Tutsis was planned 
and brutally implemented, but also understanding that there were many Hutus who did 
not participate, who tried to rescue Tutsis or who were killed themselves before, during 
or on the aftermath of the genocide. Equally, it would mean recognising that some 
Rwandans suffered in other ways. Overall, my research participants stressed that all 
those who lost family and friends should have rights to commemorate, seek justice and 
receive support or compensation: 
For me, reconciliation implies many stages and the first stage must be recognition of the 
whole truth of what happened in Rwanda. Yes, there was the genocide, but there were many 
things that happened before and after the genocide that made Rwandans suffer. We must 
speak about all of this and recognise all the suffering... We have to speak about how the 
Hutu suffered in the camps in Congo and how they have a complex about this and they have 
internalised this suffering. We also have to speak about other Rwandans like me who spent 
years in exile and have also suffered because of that... so when people talk about asking for 
or giving forgiveness, for me this is the final stage. (Fidele, b. 1978 in Zaire) 
They should find all the bones of the Hutus and Tutsis that were killed and put them together 
so everyone can commemorate together. Because at the moment, they only put the bones of 
Tutsis at the memorial sites. (Jacqueline, b. 1985 in Rwanda) 
I think that everyone who has killed should be punished - on all sides, Hutu and Tutsi. I think 
we have to teach people how to love on another and encourage true forgiveness between 
them... (Thcogene, b. 1983 in Rwanda) 
The second and related theme was that the Rwandan Government and civil society 
should prioritise working with the young generation and encourage people of different 
backgrounds to talk together and share their experiences, thereby allowing them to 
identify commonalities, to recognise the plurality of their identities and to challenge 
corporate "ethnic" stereotypes - in other words, to dispel the strength of the "conceptual 
Hutu" and "conceptual Tutsi" by encouraging "concrete" Hutus and Tutsis to get to 
know each other better. In this respect, both Fidele and Aime spoke about their own 
experiences of witnessing the changes that could occur when young people came 
together in this way and were able to talk openly: 
We need to do a lot of work with youth, because people aren't really reconciled... Young 
people must talk together and share their experiences at a personal level... With the projects I 
am involved in, we try to encourage young people to speak of their personal experiences, 
forget the stereotypes and globalising ideas about other groups... I ran a workshop here on 
the culture of peace and dialogue. There were 40 young people. It was incredible how they 
changed their ideas during just a few days. They listened to the others for the first time and 
heard about the personal experience of past events. They were able to recognise the suffering 
of others. With me, they said at the beginning that all those from Congo had a good life and 
didn't know anything about what happened. Then I told them my story237 and they all cried... 
but we also need more freedom of expression in this country. People are still afraid to speak 
out. We can't criticise the Government. They don't tolerate criticism. (Fidele, b. 1978 in 
Zaire) 
It's just that young people don't have experience of others, because they always stick with 
people from the same ethnic group. But once they get to know each other that can start to 
change... When I was a Scout leader in 2000, we organised a jamboree of all the scouts from 
the Great Lakes region ... We 
decided it was important to form mixed patrols with people 
from different countries - including of course the mainly Hutu Rwandan refugees from 
Nairobi and the mainly Tutsi scouts from Rwanda... The first day, there were some problems 
for the Rwandans in the mixed patrols, but then they had to do certain tasks and activities 
together and little by little they started to cooperate and things went well. Afterwards, the 
scouts from Rwanda said that they enjoyed themselves and that they had thought that all 
Rwandans in Kenya were interahamwe, yet they realised that they were similar to each other 
with a similar way of thinking and all that. When I returned to Rwanda, everyone spoke of 
this jamboree and wanted to do the same thing in Kigali (Aime, b. 1974 in Rwanda) 
During my fieldwork, I had firsthand experience of the transformative potential of such 
events. I attended the Great Lakes Peace Camp, funded by GTZ and DED, 238 in 
Gikongoro in December 2004, which provided an opportunity for such dialogue and 
refection amongst young people. In a supportive environment, young people were able 
to share their experiences and engage in open discussion about the causes of conflict, 
the role of "ethnic" identity and approaches to reconciliation. The challenge in Rwanda 
today, however, is that there are fewer and fewer initiatives of this kind. This is partly 
because, in the current political climate, people fear that if they engage in such dialogue 
and diverge from the state-sanctioned version of events, they may be accused of 
"divisionism" of "genocide ideology" - even in apparently safe environments like 
reconciliation workshops or NGO fora. 239 It is also because most international donors 
now work primarily with the Government and give very limited funding to international 
and local NGOs, while the Government has made it increasingly difficult for civil 
society organisations to get involved in such projects240 
The current Government is also fearful of the political risks of inviting such debate. 
Whilst this is partly to do with protecting its own hold on power, it is also related to the 
fact that a segment of the population continues to deny or even, to justify the 1994 
genocide. So far, the Government has instead sought to control the debate by imposing 
237 As discussed earlier, Fide`le's parents were killed in 1997 in Kinshasa during the anti-Tutsi pogroms. 
"' GTZ (Gesellschaft Ar Technische Zusammenarbeit) and DED (Deutsche Entwicklungsdients) are two key 
development agencies of the German Government. 
2" For example, Burnet (2005: p253) describes how in a meeting, one member of the Rwandan NGO Reseau des 
Femmes was accused by another of encouraging "ethnic division". 
21 Paul Gready (2008) traces the difficulties that the NGO network LANDNET (Working on land reform issues) and 
Penal Reform International (working on gacaca) have had in engaging in advocacy with the state on sensitive issues. 
a singular narrative of the past and launching a campaign to root out "divisionism" and 
"genocide ideology". As others have argued (See Waldorf 2009: p118), however, the 
way in which this has been done has tended to heighten the atmosphere of fear and 
uncertainty, re-inscribe "ethnic" divisions and play into the hands of the negationists 
and extremists. Interestingly, the Rwandan Government appears to have recently 
changed strategy to re-emphasize "ethnicity" in its description of the 1994 genocide as 
the "Tutsi genocide". 241 It is, as yet, unclear what the precise motivations underlying 
this new "ethnicised language" (ibid. p104) are or what the impacts will be. There is a 
clear danger, however, that - although Tutsis were the primary victims during the 
genocide - if other victims of the violence remain unacknowledged and silenced, this 
may serve to reinforce ethnic differences and stereotypes further. 
Equally concerning is the fact that there now appears to be little dialogue between 
international donors and diplomats and the Rwandan Government about the 
reconciliation process and how it is progressing. Instead, contemporary dialogue 
focuses mainly on issues such as "poverty reduction", "economic development" and 
"good governance", which are generally handled in a technocratic manner (see Uvin 
2003: p3). 242 The material presented in this thesis suggests that this shift of discourse 
away from discussions of "reconciliation" is premature and, given past experience, is 
potentially dangerous. Instead, it suggests that there is an urgent need for the 
Government and its partners to take a fresh look at progress with reconciliation in 
Rwanda, consider the state of inter-"ethnic" relations and develop new approaches to 
overcome the "ethnic" logic that continues to dominate Rwanda society and politics. 
This "ethnic" logic alone will not produce further violence. Nonetheless, given the 
historical legacy of violence in the name of "ethnicity" in Rwanda, the findings of this 
thesis suggest that any recurrence of violence is likely to once again have "ethnic" 
targets and, if unchecked, could again take place on a large scale. Only by demystifying 
the "conceptual Tutsi" and "conceptual Hutu" will Rwandans ensure that violence is 
never again carried out in their name. More widely, only by proactively challenging and 
=41 For example, references to "the genocide" through the 2003 constitution have been modified to "the Tutsi 
genocide" (Waldorf 2009: p104) and, in 2009, for the first time, the 15"' anniversary of the genocide was explicitly 
called the "15`h commemoration of genocide against the TutsC'. 
242 it seems that political and conflict issues are really only raised in the context of discussions about the ongoing 
violence in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). 
247 5 
grounding similar conceptual categories and stereotypes in all our societies, will we 
start to reduce the unprecedented levels of categorical violence in the world today. 
Aftenword 
There are a number of ways in which this research could be extended and broadened 
through future research. Firstly, the experiences and perspectives of young Twas is a 
gap in this research - as none of the young people I interviewed identified themselves as 
`"Twa". As a group that have long been marginalised in society and politics, and have 
sometimes been targeted in previous violence, the perspectives of members of this 
group would add a further important dimension to our understanding of the way 
"ethnicity" is understood and produced in contemporary Rwanda. Secondly, this 
research has focused on young people living in a very specific context - urban Kigali - 
and it would be insightful to conduct similar research in one or more rural areas to 
explore whether and how young people evoke, utilise and embrace or reject the 
categories "Hutu", "Tutsi" and "Twa" in their everyday lives. Thirdly, it would be 
useful to do further work with confessed perpetrators of violence to explore in greater 
depth the role of "ethnic" narratives and stereotypes in the processes that led them to 
participate in the killing. Finally, it would be useful to complement the analysis of 
Government approaches to reconciliation with specific research to look at whether and 
how other - particularly "community-based" - approaches reconciliation have addressed 
the issue of "ethnicity", what the impacts have been on "ethnic" relations and 
relationships, and whether they have succeeded in challenging the "ethnic" logic that 
persists. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abu-Nimer, M. ed. (2001) Reconciliation, Justice and Coexistence: Theory and 
Practice. Maryland: Lexington Books. 
Acker, J., Barry K. and Esseveld, J. `Objectivity and Truth: Problems in Doing Feminist 
Research' (1991) in Fonow, M. M. and Cook, J. A. eds Beyond Methodology: Feminist 
Scholarship as Lived Research. Bloomington, US: Indian University Press. 
Ad hoc Parliament Commission on Genocide ideology (2004) Genocide Ideology 
Kigali: Parliament of Rwanda. 
African Rights (1995a) Rwanda - Not so innocent: Women as Killers. London: African 
Rights. 
African Rights (1995b) Rwanda: Death, Despair and Defiance. London: African 
Rights. 
African Rights (1999) Rwanda: The Insurgency in the Northwest. London: African 
Rights. 
African Rights (2004) Rwanda: Broken Bodies, Torn Spirits. Living with Genocide, 
Rape and HIVIAIDS. London: African Rights. (Available at 
http: //www. peacewomen. orr/resourccs/Rwanda/BrokcnBodies2004. pdT - 
(last 
accessed January 2009). 
Amnesty International (2002) "Gacaca: A question of justice ". London: Amnesty 
International. 
Amnesty International (2004) Rwanda: "Marked for Death"; rape survivors living with 
HIVIAIDS in Rwanda. London: Amnesty International. 
Andre, C. (1994) "Evolution Des Droits Fonciers Au Rwanda: Une Main Invisible? " 
Paper presented to the Onzieme Congres des Economistes Belges de Langue 
Francaise. Louvain-La-Neuve, 24-25 November 1994. 
Andre, C. and J-P. Platteau (1998) "Land Relations under Unbearable Stress: Rwanda 
caught in a Malthusian Trap" in Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization 
34(1) ppl-47. 
Appadurai, A. (2002) "Dead Certainty: Ethnic Violence in the Era of Globalization" in 
A. L. Hinton (2002) ed. Genocide: an anthropological reader. Oxford: Blackwell 
(reprint of 1998 article). 
Assefa, H. (n. d. ) "The Meaning of Reconciliation" in EPCPT People Building Peace. 
Utrecht, Netherlands: European Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation. 
(Available at littl2: //%vwkv. %-, ntiac. net/documents/12bp/r)art1/2 reconc. htm) (last 
accessed 25`h February 2009). 
Assefa, H (2001),  Reconciliation', in L Reychler and T Paffenholz (eds), 
Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers. 
Atkinson, R. and Flint, J. (2001) `Accessing Hidden and Hard-to-Reach Populations: 
Snowball Research Strategies' in Social Research Update 33, Department of 
Sociology: University of Surrey. 
Barker, Gary (2005) Dying to be Men: Youth, Masculinity and Social Exclusion, 
London: Routledge. 
Barker. G. and C. Ricardo (2005) Young Men and the Construction of Masculinity in 
Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, Conflict, and Violence, Social 
Development Papers: Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction No. 26. Washington 
D. C.: World Bank. (Available at: http: //www- 
wds. worldbank. oreJexternal/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2005/06/23/0000 
12009 20050623134235/Rendered/PDF/327120revOPAPEROAFROyoungOmenOWP 
26. d (last accessed 24`h January 2009) 
Barth (1969) `Introduction' in Barth et al Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. The Social 
Organisation of Culture Difference Oslo: Universitetsforlaget pp9-38. 
Barth, F. (1995) "Ethnicity and the Concept of Culture", Paper presented to the 
conference "Rethinking Culture" Harvard 1995. 
Bartov, O. (1998) "Defining Enemies, Making Victims: Germans, Jews and the 
Holocaust. " in American Historical Review 103(3), pp771-816. 
Bauman, Z. (1989) Modernity and the Holocaust. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Baumann, G. (2004) "Grammars of Identity/Alterity: A Structural Approach" in 
Baumann, G. and A. Gingrich, Eds. Grammars of Identity/Alterity: A Structural 
Approach. Oxford; New York: Berghann pp 18-50 
Bertaux, D. and Kohli, M. (1984) The Life Story Approach: A Continental View, 
Annual Review of Sociology, 10: pp215-37. 
Bloomfield, D (2006) "On Good Terms: Clarifying Reconciliation". Berghof Report 
no. 14. Berghof Research Center for Constructive Conflict Management (available at 
http: //www. bers. hof-center. org/uploads/download/brl4e. pdfl (last accessed 29th 
November 2008). 
Bloomfield, D., T. Barnes and L. Huyse (eds) (2003), Reconciliation after Violent 
Conflict: A Handbook. Stockholm: International Institute for Democracy and 
Electoral Assistance. 
Braeckman, C. (1994) Rwanda: Histoire dun genocide. Paris: Fayard. 
Brass, P. R. (1997) Theft of an Idol: Text and Context in the Representation of Collective 
Violence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Brass, P. R. (1985) Ethnicity and Nationalism: Theory and Comparison. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage Publications. 
Bringa, T. (1995) Being Muslim the Bosnian way: Identity and community in a central 
Bosnian village. Princeton, N. J: Princeton University Press. 
Brouneus, K. (2008) "Truth Telling as Talking Cure? Insecurity and Retraumatization" 
in the Rwandan Gacaca Courts in Security Dialogue 39 (1) pp55-76. 
Browning, C. (1992) Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Batalion 101 and the Final 
Solution in Poland. New York: Harper Collins. 
Bruce, J. (2007) "Drawing a line under the crisis: Reconciling returnee land access and 
security in post-conflict Rwanda. " London: ODI, HPG Working Paper, June 2007. 
Buckley-Zistel, S. (2006a) "Dividing and Uniting: The Use of'Citizenship' Discourses 
in Conflict and Reconciliation in Rwanda" in Global Society 20(1) pp101-113. 
Buckley-Zistel, S. (2006b) "Remembering to forget: chosen amnesia as a strategy for 
local coexistence in post-genocide Rwanda, " in Africa 76(2) pp131-150. 
Buckley-Zistel, S. (2009) "Nation, narration, unification? The politics of history 
teaching after the Rwandan genocide" in Journal of Genocide Research 11(1) pp31- 
Burnet, J. E. (2005) "Genocide Lives in Us: Amplified Silence and the Politics of 
Memory in Rwanda" PHD thesis. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina. 
Burnet, J. E. (2008) "Gender balance and the meanings of women in governance in post- 
genocide Rwanda" inAfrican Affairs 107/428 pp361-386. 
Caplan, P. (1997) african voices, african lives: Personal narratives from a Swahili 
village. London: Routledge. 
Chakravarty, A. (2007). " Inter-ethnic Marriages, the Survival of Women, and the 
Logics of Genocide in Rwanda. " in Genocide Studies and Prevention 2(3) pp235- 
Chamberlayne, P., Bornat, J. and Wengraf, T. (2000) Introduction: The biographical 
turn, in Chamberlayne, P., Bornat, J. and Wengraf, T. (eds), The turn to biographical 
methods in social science. London: Routledge, pp1-30. 
Chase, S. E. (1995) Taking Narrative Seriously: Consequences for Method and Theory 
in Interview Studies, in Josselson, R. and Lieblich, A. (eds), Interpreting Experience: 
The Narrative Study of Lives. London: Sage, pp 1 -26. 
Chayes, A. and Minow, M. (2003) eds. Imagine Coexistence: Restoring humanity after 
violent ethnic conflict. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Chretien, J: P. et al. (1995) Rwanda: Les medias du genocide. Paris: Karthala. 
Chretien, J: P. (1997) Le Deft de I'Ethnisme. Paris: Karthala. 
Clifford, J. and Marcus, G. E. (1986) Writing Culture. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 
Codere, H. (1973) The Biography of an African Society, Rwanda 1900-1960: Based on 
Forty-Eight Rwandan Autobiographies. Tervuren: Museum for Central Africa. 
Cohen, Abner. (1974) "The Lesson of Ethnicity" in A. Cohen ed. Urban Ethnicity. 
London: Tavistock pp ix-xxiii. 
Cohen, A. P. (1985) The Symbolic Construction of Community. London, Routledge. 
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2004) "Greed and grievance in civil war" Oxford Economic 
Papers 56(4) pp563-595. 
Crocker, David A, 2000: Retribution and Reconciliation. Institute for Philosophy and 
Public Policy, University of Maryland. (available at 
www. nuaf. umd. edu/IPPP/Winter- Sprinp, 00/retribution and reconciliation. htm) (last 
accessed 23rd November 2008). 
de Heusch, L. (1966) Le Rwanda et la Civilisation Interlacustre. Brussels: Universit6 dc 
Bruxelles. 
De Lacger, L. (1961) Le Ruanda, Kabgayi, Rwanda: Vivariat Apostolique du Ruanda. 
de Lame, D. (2005) A Hill among a Thousand: Transformations and Ruptures in Rural 
Rwanda. Tervuren: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Des Forges, A. (1999) Leave none to tell the story: Genocide in Rwanda. New York: 
Human Rights Watch. 
D'Hertefelt, M. (1964) "Mythes et ideologies dans le rwanda anicen et contemporain" 
in Vansina, J.. Mauny, R. and Thomas, L-V. eds. The Historian in Tropical Africa. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press pp219-238. 
D'Hertefelt, M. (1971) Les clans du Rwanda Ancien: Elements d'Ethnosociologie et de 
1'Ethnohistoire. Tervuren, Belgium: Musee Royale de l'Afrique Centrale. 
Doom, R. and Gorus, J. eds. (2000) Politics of Identity and Economics of Conflict in the 
Great Lakes Region, Brussels: VUB University Press. 
Dorsey, M. (2000) `Violence and Power-building in Post-genocide Rwanda', in R. 
Doom and J. Gorus (eds) Politics of Identity and Economies of Conflict in the Great 
Lakes Region. Brussels: VUB University Press pp3l 1-48. 
Douglas, M. (1966) Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and 
Taboo. London: Routledge. 
Duffy Toft, M. (2005) The Geography ofEthnic Violence. Identity, Interests, and the 
Indivisibility of Territory. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Economist Intelligence Unit (2005) Country Report Rwanda. London: EIU. 
Ellen, R. ed (1984) Ethnographic Research: A Guide to General Conduct. London: 
Academic Press. 
Eltringham, N. P. (2004) Accounting for Horror: Post genocide Debates in Rwanda. 
London: Pluto Press. 
Eltringham, N. (2006). "'Invaders who have stolen the county: The Hamitic 
Hypothesis, Race and the Rwandan Genocide" in Social Identities 12(4) pp425-446. 
Eriksen, T. H. (1997) "Mauritanian Society between the Ethnic and the Non-Ethnic" in 
C. Govers and H. Vermeulen The Politics of Ethnic Consciousness. Basingstoke, UK: 
MacMillan Press pp250-276. 
Eriksen, T. H. (2002) Ethnicity and Nationalism: Anthropological Perspectives Second 
Edition. London: Pluto Press. 
Fardon, R. (1987) "African Ethnogenesis: limits to the comparability of ethnic 
phenomena" in Holy, L. ed. Comparative Anthropology. London: Basil Blackwell 
pp168-188. 
Fenton, S. (2003) Ethnicity. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Franche, D. (1995) `Geneaologie du genocide Rwandais, Hutu et Tutsi: Gaulois et 
Francs? In Les Temps Modernes 582 mai-juin pp 1-58. 
Freedman, S. W., Weinstein, H. M, Murphy, K. and Longman, T. (2008) "Teaching 
History after Identity-Based Conflicts: The Rwanda Experience" in Comparative 
Education Review 52(4) pp663-690. 
Fujii, L-A (2009 forthcoming) Killing Neighbours: Webs of Violence in Rwanda. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press. 
Galtung, J. (1964) "An Editorial" in Journal of Peace Research 1 (1) pp1-4. 
Galtung, J. (1969) "Violence, Peace, and Peace Research" in Journal of Peace Research 
6(3) pp67-191. 
Gatwa, T. (1998) The Churches and Ethnic Ideology in the Rwandan Crises (1900- 
1994). PHD thesis. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh. 
Gcertz, C. (1993 [1973]) The Interpretation of Cultures. London: Fontana. 
Glazer, N. and D. P. Moynihan (1975) "Introduction" in N. Glazer and D. P. Moynihan 
eds, Ethnicity: Theory and Experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
ppl-26. 
Goldhagen, D. J. (1996) Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the 
Holocaust. New York: Random House. 
Gourevitch, P (1998) We wish to inform you that tomorrow we will be killed with our 
families: Stories from Rwanda. London: Picador. 
Goyvaerts, D. cd (2000) Conflict and Ethnicity in Central Africa Tokyo: Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies. 
Gravel, P. B. (1968) Remera: A community in Eastern Ruanda. The Hague, Mouton. 
Gready, P. (2008) "Civil Society and Policy Making in Rwanda: A Case Study of Land 
Reform and the Gacaca Courts" NGPA Working Paper 23. London: London School 
of Economics (available at 
http: //Nvww. Ise. ac. uk/collections/NGPA/publications/WP32 Rwanda Gready Web. p 
df (last accessed 2"d April 2009). 
Hamber, B., and R. A. Wilson (2002)'Symbolic Closure Through Memory, Reparation 
and Revenge in Post-Conflict Societies' in Journal of Human Rights 1(1) pp35-53 
(available at http: //www. brandonhainber. com/publications/jour- 
svmholicclosure. htm)(last accessed 28th May 2009). 
Hamber, B. and G. Kelly (2004) Reconciliation: A working definition. Belfast: 
Democratic Dialogue. 
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (1995) Ethnography: Principles in Practice. London: 
Routledge. 
Hatzfeld, J. (2000) Dans le nu de la vie: Recits des Marais Rwandais. Paris: Seuil. 
Hatzfeld, J. (2003) Une saison de machettes. Paris: Seuil. 
Haugbolle, S. (2005) "Public and Private memory of the Lebanese Civil War" in 
Comparatives Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 25(1) pp191-201 
(Available at 
httl: //cssaaine. dukeiournals. org/c *ii/reprint/25/1/191? ssource=mfc&rss-1) (last 
accessed 24`h March 2009). 
Hintjens, H. (2008) "Post-genocide identity politics in Rwanda" in Ethnicities 8(1) pp5- 
Hinton, A. L. (2001 a) "Introduction: Genocide and Anthropology" in A. L. Hinton ed. 
Genocide: An anthropological reader. London, Blackwell ppl-24. 
Hinton, A. L. (2001b) "A Head for an Eye: Revenge in the Cambodian Genocide" in 
A. L. Hinton ed. Genocide: An anthropological reader. London, Blackwell, pp254- 
Holmes, G. (2008) The Postcolonial Politics of Militarizing Rwandan Women: An 
Analysis of the Extremist Magazine Kangura and the Gendering of a Genocidal 
Nation-state'. Minerva Journal of Women and War 2 (2). 
Human Rights watch (1994) Burundi (Human Rights Developments 1994). (Available 
at http: //www. lirw. or eports/1995/WR95/AFRICA-02. htm#P87 30999) (last 
accessed 09/06/08). New York: Human Rights Watch. 
Human Rights Watch (2001) Uprooting the Rural Poor in Rwanda. New York: Human 
Rights Watch. 
Human Rights Watch (2003) `Rwanda Preparing for Elections: Tightening Control in 
the Name of Unity' Human Rights Watch Backgrounder May 8,2003. New York: 
Human Rights Watch. 
Human Rights Watch (2005) "Burundi: Rwandans' Asylum Claims Must Be Heard" 
Human Rights Watch News, 27 May 2005. 
Human Rights Watch (2006) Rwanda: Historic Ruling Expected for Former President 
and Seven Others. A Human Rights Watch Backgrounder, 2006. 
Human Rights Watch (2008) Law and Reality: Progress in Judicial Reform in Rwanda. 
New York: Human Rights Watch. 
Human Rights Watch (2009) Rwanda: Restore BBC to the Air. Human Rights Watch 
Press Release (available at httn: //www. hrw. orWjen/news/2009/04/27/rwanda-restore- 
hbc-air )(last accessed 28th May 2009). 
Huntingdon, Samuel P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World 
Order. New York: Simon & Shuster. 
Ingelaere, B. (2007) "Living the Transition -A Bottom-up Perspective on Rwanda's 
Political Transition". University of Antwerp: IOB Discussion Paper. (Available at 
http: /hvww. ua. ac. be/obis/00172206. pdt) (last accessed 23rd March 2009). 
Institute of Research and Dialogue for Peace (2003) "Sustaining Peace in Rwanda: 
Voice of the People" Kigali, Rwanda: IRDP: April 2003. (Available at 
www. Mandslacs. net/doe/3654.12d (last accessed 29/08/08). 
Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda (INSR) and ORC Macro (2006) Rwanda 
Demographic and Health Survey 2005. Calverton, Maryland, U. S. A.: INSR and ORC 
Macro. (Available at http: //statistics. gov. rw/images/PDF/1-DHS-Rwanda2005. pdf) 
(last accessed 08/12/2008). 
Institute for Justice and Reconciliation (2005) Evaluation and Impact Assessment of the 
National Unity and Reconciliation Commission (NURC). (Available at 
http: /hvww. nurc. gov. nv/index. php? view=article&id=62) (last accessed 5`h Jan 2009). 
International Crisis Group (2002)  Rwanda at the end of the transition: a necessary 
political liberalisation' ICG Report 13 November 2002. 
IRIN (1996) Emergency Update No. 58 on the Great Lakes (Sunday/Monday 15-16 
December 1996). 
Jackson, M. (2002) The Politics of Storytelling: Violence, Transgression, and 
Intersubjectivity. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press. 
Jefremovas, V. (1991) 'Loose Women, Virtuous Wives, and Timid Virgins: Gender and 
the control of resources in Rwanda'. Canadian Journal of African Studies 25 (3) 
pp378-395. 
Jefremovas, V. (2000) "Treacherous Waters: the Politics of History and the Politics of 
Genocide in Rwanda and Burundi", Review in Africa: Journal of the International 
African Institute, Vol. 70, No. 2 (2000) pp298- 308. 
Jenkins (1994) `Rethinking ethnicity: identity, categorization and power' in Ethnic and 
Racial Studies Vol 17(2) pp197-223. 
Jenkins (1997) Rethinking Ethnicity: Arguments and Explorations London: Sage. 
Jenkins, R. (2002) "Different Societies? Different Cultures? What are human 
collectivities? " in S. Malesevic and M. Haugaard eds. Making Sense of Collectivity: 
Ethnicity, Nationalism and Globalisation. London: Pluto Press. 
Jenkins, R. (2004) Social Identity (Second edition). Abingdon, Routledge. 
Jones, A. (2002) "Gender and genocide in Rwanda" in Journal of Genocide Research, 
4(1) pp65-94. 
Josselson R. (1995) "Imagining the Real: Empathy, Narrative, and the Dialogic Self ", 
chapter 2 in Josselson and Leiblich eds. Interpreting Experience: The Narrative Study 
of Lives Volume 3, London: Sage. 
Josselson, R. and Lieblich A. (eds) (1995) Interpreting Experience: The Narrative Study 
ofLives - Volume 3. London: Sage. 
Juergensmeyer, M. (2000) Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious 
Violence, Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Kagame, P. (2004)a "Speech by his Excellency Paul Kagame at the 10`h Anniversary of 
the Genocide in Rwanda". Kigali: April 7 2004. 
Kagame, P. (2004b) "Speech by His Excellency President Paul Kagame at the 
University of Washington, " April 22,2004 (Available at: 
httn: //www. cov. rw/eovernment/nresident/sneeches/2004/17 04 04 us s eech. html) 
(last accessed 25' May 2007). 
Kagame, P. (2009) "Speech by President Kagame at the 15th Commemoration of the 
Genocide against the Tutsi at the Nyanza Memorial Site in Kicukiro, Kigali" April 7`h 
2009. (available at 
httn: //www presidency. gov nv/index 12hp? ol2tion=coin content&view=article&id=20 
I : nyanza-memorial-site-kicukiro-kigali-7-apri- 
`h 2009&catid=34: speeches&ltemid=34) (last accessed 28 April 2009). 
Kaplan, R. D. (1993) Balkan Ghosts: A Journey through History. London: Picador. 
Kamer, C. (2007) Ethnicity and Everyday Life. Abingdon. Oxon: Routledge. 
Keane, F. (1996) Season of Blood: A Rwandan Journey. Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Books. 
Kleine-Ahlbrandt, S. (1998) "The Kibeho Crisis: Towards a more effective system of 
international protection for IDPs" in Forced Migration Review. (Available at 
httl2: //www. finreview. orc/FMRpdfs/FMR02/fmr2O2. pdD(last accessed 27/08/2008). 
Kleine-Ahlbrandt, S. (2004a) "The protection gap in the international protection of 
internally displaced persons: the case of Rwanda", Graduate Institute of International 
Studies, Working paper no. 04/01. 
Kleine-Ahlbrandt, S. (2004b) "Learning lessons from IDP resettlement: villagisation in 
northwest Rwanda" in Forced Migration Review 2004 Sep (21) pp23-25. 
Kuperman, A. J. (2004) "Provoking Genocide: A Revised History of the Rwandan 
Patriotic Front. " in Journal of Genocide Research 6, (1) pp61-84. 
Langer, A., and Brown, G. (2007) "Cultural Status Inequalities: An Important 
Dimension of Group Mobilization" in Stewart, F. ed., Horizontal Inequalities and 
Conflict: Understanding Group Violence in Multiethnic Societies, Palgrave 
Macmillan, Basingstoke. 
Lautze, S., Jones B. D. and Duffield, M. (1998) Strategic Humanitarian Coordination in 
the Great Lakes Region 1996-1997: An Independent Study for the Inter Agency 
Standing Committee. (Available at 
httn: //www. reliefweb. int/OCHA OL/pub/greatlak/index. html (last accessed 
26/08/2008). 
Lederach, J. P. (1997) Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies. 
Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace Press. 
Lederach, J. P. (2001) "Civil Society and Reconciliation, " in C. A. Crocker, F. O. 
Hampson and P. Aall eds. Turbulent Peace: the Challenges of Managing 
International Conflict. Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, 
pp841-854. 
Lemarchand, R. (1970) Rwanda and Burundi. New York: Praeger. 
Lemarchand, R. (1977) "Rwanda" in Lemarchand, R. ed. African Kingships in 
Perspective. London: Frank Cass pp67-92. 
Lemarchand, R. (1994) Burundi: Ethnocide as Discourse and Practice, New York: 
Woodrow Wilson Press and Cambridge University Press. 
Lemarchand, R. (1997) "Patterns of State Collapse and Reconstruction in central 
Africa: Reflections on the Crisis in the Great Lakes" in African Studies Quarterly 
1(3). 
Lemarchand, R. (1998)  Genocide in the Great Lakes: Which Genocide? Whose 
Genocide? Africa Studies Review 41(1) pp 3-16. 
Lemarchand, R. (2007a) "The Politics of Memory in Post-Genocide Rwanda", 
Occasional Paper Series. Minneapolis, M: University of Minnesota Center for 
Holocaust and Genocide Studies (Available at 
httn: //www. chf, s. umn. edu/histories/occasional/Lemarchand Memory in Rwanda. pdf 
) (last accessed 09/11/2008) 
Lemarchand, R. (2007b) "Controversy within the Cataclysm" Review Eassy in African 
Studies Review pp 140-144. 
Lemarchand (2007c) "Consociationalism and Power Sharing in Africa: Rwanda, 
Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo " in African Affairs 106(422) 
ppl-20. 
Linden, I. (1977) Church and Revolution in Rwanda. Manchester: Manchester 
University Press. 
Lischer S. K. (2005) "From refugees to regional war in Central Africa" in Dangerous 
Sanctuaries: Refugee Camps, Civil War, and the Dilemmas of Humanitarian Aid 
Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press pp73 - 117. 
Longman, T. (1995) 'Genocide and Socio-Political Change: Massacres in two Rwandan 
villages' in Issue: a Journal of Opinion 23 (2) pp18-21. 
Longman, T. (2001) "Identity Cards, Ethnic Self-Perception, and Genocide in Rwanda" 
in J. Caplan and J. Torpey eds. Documenting Individual Identity: The Development of 
State Practices in the Modern World. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Longman, T. (2006) "Justice at the Grassroots? Gacaca Trials in Rwanda" in N. Roht- 
Arriaza & J. Mariezcurrena eds. Transitional Justice in the Twenty-First Century, 
Beyond Truth versus Justice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Longman, T. and Rutagengwa, T. (2004) "Memory, identity, and community in 
Rwanda" in Stover, E. and Weinstein, H. M., eds. (2004) My Neighbor, My Enemy: 
Justice and Community in the Aftermath of Mass Atrocity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press pp162-182. 
Lowenthal, D. (1985) The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Malesevic, S. (2004) The Sociology of Ethnicity. London: Sage. 
Malkki, Lisa H. (1995) Purity and Exile: Violence, Memory and National Cosmology 
among Hutu Refugees in Tanzania, London: University of Chicago Press. 
Mamdani, M. (2001) When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism, and the 
Genocide in Rwanda Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Mann, M. (2005) The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Maquet, J. (1954) Le Systeme des Relations Sociales dans le Ruanda Ancien Tervuren: 
Musee Royal du Congo Belge. 
Maquet, J. (1961) The Premise of Inequality. London: Oxford University Press. 
Marcus, G. E. (1986) "Contemporary Problems of Ethnography in the Modem World 
System" in Clifford, J. and Marcus, G. E. eds. Writing Culture. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, pp165-193. 
McSpadden, L. (1998) "I Must Have My Rights " The Presence of State Power in the 
Resettlement of Ethiopian and Eritrean Refugees, in Krulfeld, R. M. and MacDonald, 
J. L. (eds), Power, Ethics and Human Rights: Anthropological Studies of Refugee 
Research and Action. Maryland, US: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. 
Melvern, L. (2006) Conspiracy to Murder: The Rwandan Genocide. London: Verso. 
Mgbako, C. (2005) "'Ingando" Solidarity Cams: reconciliation and political 
indoctrination in post-genocide Rwanda" in Harvard Human Rights Journal vol 18 
Ministry of Education, Technology and Scientific Research (2006) The Teaching of 
History of Rwanda. A Participatory Approach. Kigali: National Curriculum 
Development Center. 
Minow, M. (2000) Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History After 
Genocide and Mass Violence. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. 
Mirza, S. and Strobel, M. (1989) Three Swahili Women: Life Histories from Mombasa, 
Kenya. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. 
Mission D'observation Electorale de 1'Union Europeene (2003) Final Report. 
Mitchell, J. C. (1983) "Case and Situation Analysis" in Sociological Review, 31(2) 
pp 187-211. 
Mukagasana, Y. (1997) La mort ne veut pas de moi. Paris: Editions Fixot. 
Mukagasana, Y. (1999) N'aie pas peur de savoir. Rwanda: un million de morts. Une 
rescapee tutsi raconte. Paris: Editions Robert Laffont. 
Newbury, C. (1988) The Cohesion of Oppression: Clientship and Ethnicity in Rwanda: 
1860-1960. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Newbury, C. (1998) "Ethnicity and the Politics of History in Rwanda" in Africa Today 
45(1) 1998 pp7-25. 
Newbury, D. (1980) "The clans of Rwanda: An historical hypothesis" in Africa 50(4) 
pp389-403. 
Newbury, D. (1998) "Understanding Genocide" in African Studies Review, 41(1) pp73- 
Nordstrom, C. (2004) Shadows of War: Violence, Power, and International Profiteering 
in the Twenty-First Century. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Nowrojee B. (1996) Shattered Lives: Sexual violence during the Rwandan genocide and 
its aftermath. New York: Human Rights Watch. 
NURC (2000) Annual Report of the Activities of the National Unity and Reconciliation 
Commission: February 1999 -June 2000. Kigali, National 
Unity and Reconciliation 
Commission. 
NURC (2003) "Sondage d'Opinion sur la Participation a la Gacaca et la 
Reconciliation Nationale: Janvier 2003 " Kigali: National Unity and Reconciliation 
Commission. 
Obura, A. (2003) Never Again: Educational Reconstruction in Rwanda. Paris: 
International Institute of Educational Planning. 
Oxfam GB (2004) Activity Report: Community peacebuilding project. Kigali: Oxfam 
Overdulve, C. M. (1997) "Fonction de la Langue et de la Communication au Rwanda" in 
Nouvelle Revue de Science Missionaire 53(4): p9. 
Pankhurst, D. (1999) "Issues of justice and reconciliation in complex political 
emergencies: conceptualising reconciliation, justice and peace" in Third World 
Quarterly 20(1), pp239-256. 
Penal Reform International (2004a) From Camp to Hill, the Reintegration of Released 
Prisoners,. Kigali: PRI (Available at http: //www. penalreform. ora/research-on- 
gacaca-report-vi-frone-camp-to-hill-the-reintegration-of-released-pri s. html)(last 
accessed 12/04/2008). 
Penal Reform International (2004b) "The Righteous: between oblivion and 
reconciliation? Example of the province of Kibuye. Report on Monitoring and 
Research on the Gacaca" (Available at http: //www. penalrefon-n. org/gacaca-and- 
reconciliation-kibuy -case-study-3. htm11(last accessed 15/09/2008). 
Penal Reform International (2005). Integrated Report on Gacaca Research and 
Monitoring: Pilot Phase January 2002 - December 2004. 
Platt, J. (1988) "What can case studies do? " in Burgess, R. (ed. ) Studies in Qualitative 
Methodology Vol 1. Greenwich: JAI Press, reprinted in Bryman A. and R. G. Burgess 
eds. (1999) Qualitative Research, vol. 1, London: Sage: pp160-179 
Plummer, K. (1983) Documents of Life: An Introduction to the Problems and Literature 
of a Humanistic Method. London: George Allen & Unwin. 
Pottier, J. (1993) "Taking stock: Food marketing reform in Rwanda, 1982-1989" in 
African Affairs Vol 92, pp5-30. 
Pottier, J. (1996) "SoLand Reform for Peace? Randa's 2005 Land Law in Context" in 
Journal ofAgrarian Change vol 6(4), pp509-537. 
Pottier, J. (1997) "Social Dynamics of land and land reform in Rwanda". Department of 
Anthropology and Sociology. University of London. 
Pottier, J. (2002) Re-imagining Rwanda: Conflict, Survival and Disinformation in the 
Late Twentieth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pruner, G. (1995) The Rwanda Crisis: History of a Genocide 1959-1994. London: 
Hurst and Company. 
Prunier, G. (1997) "Rwanda: the Social, Political and Economic Situation". WriteNet 
UK, June 1997. 
Radcliffe-Brown, A. D. (1940) "On joking relationships" in Africa: Journal of the 
International African Institute, Vol. 13(3) (July 1940), pp195-210. 
Radcliffe-Brown, A. D. (1952) Structure and Function in Primitive Society, Essay and 
Addresses, London: Routledge. 
Republic of Rwanda Office of the President (1999), The Unity of Rwandans, Kigali 
August 1999. 
Republic of Rwanda (2001) ORGANIC LAW N 40/2000 OF 26/01/2001 setting up  
gacaca jurisdictions  and organizing prosecutions for offences constituting the crime 
of genocide or crimes against humanity committed between October 1,1990 and 
December 31,1994 (Available at http: //www. inkiko- i-acaca. ov. rw/pdf/Law. pdf) 
(last accessed 24`h Match 2009). 
Republic of Rwanda (2002a) Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Planning: June 2002. 
Republic of Rwanda (2002b) Law 47/2001 of 18/1212001 instituting punishment for 
offences of discrimination and sectarianism (Kigali, Rwanda, 15 February 2002). 
Text available at 
littp: //www. amateyeko. net/display rubrique. php? Information ID=1190&Parent ID= 
30692280&type=rublic&Lanve ID=An (Last accessed 02/06/08). 
Republic of Rwanda (2003) The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda. Kigali: 
Republic of Rwanda (available at www. cicr. gov. rw/eng/constitution eng. doc)(last 
accessed 23 Jan 2009). 
Republic of Rwanda (2004) Rapport de la Commission Parlementaire ad hoc, tree en 
date du 20janvier 2004 par le Parlement, Chambre des Deputes pour analyser en 
profondeur les tueries perpetrees dans la province de Gikongoro, ideologie 
genocidaire et ceux qui la propagent partout au Rwanda (Parliamentary 
Commission, Kigali, Rwanda, 28 June). 
Reyntjens, F. (1990) "Le gacaca ou la justice du gazon au Rwanda" in Politique 
Africaine 40, pp3l-41. 
Reyntjens, F. (1994) L'Afrique des Grands Lacs en Crise: Rwanda-Burundi 1988-1994. 
Paris: Karthala. 
Reyntjens, F. (2004) "Rwanda, ten years on: from genocide to dictatorship" in African 
Affairs 103 (411) 2004 pp177-210. 
Richards, P. (1996) Fighting for The Rain Forest War, Youth and Resources in Sierra 
Leone. Oxford: James Currey and IAI. 
Richards, P., ed. (2004) No peace, no war: An Anthropology of Contemporary Armed 
Conflicts. Ohio: Ohio University Press. 
Rombouts, H. (2006) Women and Reparations in Rwanda: A Long Path to Travel, in 
Rubio-Marin, R. (ed. ) What Happened to the Women? Gender and Reparations for 
Human Rights Violations. New York: Social Science Reserach Council, 194-245. 
Romero, P. (1998) Book review: African Voices, African Lives: Personal Narratives 
from a Swahili Village, African Studies Review. 
Roosens, E. (1989) Creating Ethnicity: The Process of Ethnogenesis (Frontiers of 
Anthropology). London: Sage. 
Roosens, E. (1996) "The primordial nature of origins in migrant ethnicity' in H. 
Vermeulen, H. and C. Govers, eds. (1996) Anthropology of Ethnicity: Beyond 'Ethnic 
Groups and Boundaries' Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis pp81-104. 
Rutembesa, F. (2002) "Le discours sur le peuplement comme instrument de 
manipulation identitaire, " in Rutembesa, F. et al. eds. Peuplement du Rwanda. Enjeux 
et Perspectives. Butare: Editions de 1'Universite Nationale du Rwanda. 
Ruzibiza, A. J. (2005) Rwanda: L'Histoire Secrete. Paris: Editions du Panama, 2005. 
Schabas, W. A. and Imbleau, M. (1997) Introduction to Rwandan Law. Quebec, Canada: 
Les Editions Yvons Blais Inc. 
Scheper-Hughes, N. (1993) Death without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday life in 
Brazil. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Scheper-Hughes, N. and Bourgois, P. (2003) Violence in War and Peace: An 
Anthology. London: Blackwell. 
Schroeder, I. W. and B. E. Schmidt (2001) "Introduction: Violent imaginaries and violent 
practices" in Schmidt, B. E. and I. W. Schroeder eds. Anthropology of Violence and 
Conflict (EASA). London: Routledge pp 1-24. 
Sen, A. (2006) Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny. London: Allen Lane. 
Sharlach, L. (1999) "Gender and genocide in Rwanda: women as agents and objects of 
genocide" in Journal of Genocide Research 1(3) pp387-399. 
Shaw, M. (2003) War and Genocide: Organized Killing in Modern Society. Oxford: 
Polity. 
Silverman, D. (2001) Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analysing Talk, Text 
and Interaction. London: Sage. 
Sommers, M. (2001) Fear in Bongoland: Burundi Refugees in Urban Tanzania, 
Refugee and Forced Migration Studies vol 8, US: Bergham Books. 
Sommers, M. (2006a) "Fearing Africa's Young Men: Male Youth, Conflict, 
Urbanization and the Case of Rwanda" in Maria C. Correia and Ian Bannon eds. The 
Other Half of Gender: Men's Issues in Development. Washington DC: World Bank 
Publications. 
Sommers, M. (2006b) Rwandan Youth Assessment Preliminary Report. Unpublished. 
Song, M. (2003) Choosing Ethnic Identity. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Sperling, C. (2006) "Mother of atrocities: Pauline Nyiramasuhuko's role in the 
Rwandan genocide" in Fordham Urban Law Journal. 
Staub, E. (1989) The Roots of Evil: The origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Stockton, N. (1996) Rwanda: Rights and Racism. Unpublished paper: Oxford, 7 
December 1996. 
Stover, E. and Weinstein, H. M., eds. (2004) My Neighbor, My Enemy: Justice and 
Community in the Aftermath of Mass Atrocity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Straus, S. (2004) "How many perpetrators were there in the Rwandan genocide? An 
estimate" in Journal of Genocide Research 6(1) 2004 pp 85-98. 
Straus, S. (2006) The Order of Genocide: Race, Power, and War in Rwanda. New 
York, USA: Cornell University Press. 
Taylor, C. C. (1999) Sacrifice as Terror: The Rwandan Genocide of 1994. Oxford: Berg. 
Tertsakian, C. (2008) Le Chateau: The Lives of Prisoners in Rwanda. London: Arves 
Books. 
The New Times (2007) "Govt discusses ghost' FARG beneficiaries" 4t' April 2007 
(available at 
httn: //wwNv. rwandaI"atewav. orf /article_nhn3? id article=4891 &var recherche=fart ) 
(last accessed 28"' May 2008). 
Tiemessen, A. E. (2004) "After Arusha: Gacaca Justice in Post-Genocide Rwanda" in 
African Studies Quarterly Vol 8(1) (available at 
http: //web. africa. ufl. edu/asg/v8/v8il, 14. htm ) (last accessed 5th November 2008). 
Tilly, C. (2003) The Politics of Collective Violence. Cambridge: Cambridge Univeristy 
Press 
Trouillot, M-R (1997) Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History. Boston, 
MA: Beacon Press. 
Turton, D. (1997a) "Introduction" in D. Turton ed. War and Ethnicity: Global 
Connections and Local Violence. Rochester, NY: Boydell. 
Turton, D. (1997b) `War and ethnicity: Global Connections and Local Violence in 
North East Africa and Former Yugoslavia' in Oxford Development Studies 25(l) pp 
77-94. 
Tutu, D. M. (1999) No Future Without Forgiveness. New York: Doubleday. 
Umutesi, M. B. (2000) Fuir Ou Mourir Au Zaire: Le Yecu Dune Refugiee Rwandaise 
Paris: L'Harmattan. 
UNDP/UNEP (2006) Environment and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda: An Assessment. 
March 2006. 
UNPD (2006) UN World Population Prospects: 2006 Revision Population Database 
(Available at http: //esa. un. or T unpp//) (last accessed 20 January 2009). 
Urdal, Henrik (2004) 'The Devil in the Demographics: The Effect of Youth Bulges on 
Domestic Armed Conflict, 1950-2000', Social Development Papers. Washington, 
D. C.: Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, World Bank. (Available at: 
http: //www. prio. no/Research-and-Publications/Publication/? oid=57846) (last 
accessed 24th January 2009). 
Urdal, Henrik (2006)  A Clash of Generations? Youth Bulges and Political Violence', 
International Studies Quarterly 50: 607-629 (Available at: 
http: //www. 12rio. no/upload/nrio/ISOU- (last accessed 24th January 2009). 
U. S. Committee for Refugees, World Refugee Survey 2007. 
Uvin, P. (1997) "Prejudice, Crisis and Genocide in Rwanda" in African Studies Review, 
40(2): pp 91-115. 
Uvin, P. (1998) Aiding Violence: The Development Enterprise in Rwanda. West 
Hartford: Kumurian Press. 
Uvin, P. (2001) "Reading the Rwanda Genocide" in International Studies Review 3(3) 
pp 75-99. 
Uvin, P. (2003) "Wake Up Some Personal Reflections and Policy Proposals" 
(unpublished paper to donors)(available at 
http: //tletcher. tufts. edu/faculty/uvin/reports/wakeup. pdf) (last accessed 28th May 
2009). 
Vail, L., ed. (1989) The Creation of Tribalism in Southern Africa. Berkeley: University 
of California Press. 
Valentine Daniel, E. (1996) Charred Lullabies: Chapters in an Anthropography of 
Violence, Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Van Hoyweghen, S. and Vlassenroot, K. (2000) "Ethnic Ideology and Conflict in Sub- 
Saharan Africa: The Culture Clash Revisited: in R. Doom and J. Gorus eds. Politics 
of Identity and Economics of Conflict in the Great Lakes Region, Brussels: VUB 
University Press. 
Vandeginste, S. (1999) Justice, Reconciliation and Reparation after Genocide and 
Crimes against Humanity: The establishment of popular Gacaca Tribunals in 
Rwanda. In Conference. Addis Ababa. 
Vansina, J. (1998) "The Politics of History and the Crisis in the Great Lakes" in Africa 
Today 45 (1): pp37-44. 
Vansina, J. (2004) Antecedents to Modern Rwanda: The Nyiginya Kingdom. Madison, 
Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Vermeulen, H. and Govers, C. eds. (1996) Anthropology of Ethnicity: Beyond 'Ethnic 
Groups and Boundaries' Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis. 
Verwimp, P. (2000) "Development Ideology, the Peasantry and Genocide: Rwanda 
represented in Habyarimana's speeches", GSP working paper no 13, Yale University, 
available at http: //www. yale. edu/gsl2/S-Ublications/Rwanda. 12df (last accessed 
15/11/2008). 
Vidal, C. (1991) Sociologie des Passions: Cte d'Ivoire, Rwanda Paris: Editions 
Karthala. 
Vidal, C. (2004) "La commemoration du genocide au Rwanda: Violence symbolique, 
memorialisation forcee et histoire officielle" in Cahiers d'Etudes Africaines, Vol. 
XLIV No. 3 pp575-592. 
Wagner, M. D. (1998) "All the Bourgmestre's Men: Making Sense of Genocide in 
Rwanda" in Africa Today 45(1) pp25-36. 
Waldorf, L. (2006) "Mass Justice for Mass Atrocity: Rethinking Local Justice as 
Transitional Justice" in Temple Law Review 79(1) pp1-87. 
Waldorf, L. (2007) "Censorship and propaganda in post-genocide Rwanda" in A. 
Thompson ed. The Media and The Rwandan Genocide. Pluto Press/Fountain 
Publishers/IDRC. 
Waldorf, L. (2009) "Revisiting Hotel Rwanda: genocide ideology, reconciliation, and 
rescuers" in Journal of Genocide Research 11(1) pp101-125. 
Washington Post (27/10/2008) "Women run the show in a recovering Rwanda", 
(http: //www. washingt, onpost. com/wp- 
dyn/content/article/2008/10/26/AR2008102602197. html)(last accessed 23 Jan 2009). 
Women for Women (2004) Women taking a lead: Progress towards empowerment and 
gender equity in Rwanda. Women for Women International Briefing paper 
September 2004. 
Zorbas, E. (2004) "Reconciliation in Post-genocide Rwanda" in African Journal of 
Legal Studies 1(1) pp29-52. 
Zorbas, E. (2007) "Reconciliation in Post-Genocide Rwanda: Discourse and Practice, " 
PhD thesis, London School of Economics. 
Zorbas, E. (2009) "What does reconciliation after genocide mean? Public transcripts 
and hidden transcripts in post-genocide Rwanda" in Journal of Genocide Research 
1(1) pp127-147. 
Zur, J. (1997) "Reconstructing the Self through Memories of Violence among Mayan 
Indian War Widows" in Lentin R. ed. Gender and Catastrophe. London: Zed Books. 
