THE DETERMINATION OF PROTONA TION STATES IN PROTEINS 
A thesis submitted to The University of Manchester for the degree of 
in the Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Stuart John Fisher 
School of Chemistry 
Table of Contents 
JOH~j "'~V~~.cJOS 
UNV[RSIT'i 
UERARY 
2. Detennination of protonation states in thiamine phosphate synthase using 
2.3.l.l 
2.3.1.2 
2.3.1.3 
2.3.1.4 
2.3.2 
2.3.2.1 
2.3.2.2 
2.3.2.3 
2.3.3 
3. Determination of proton at ion states in pyrroloquinoline quinine protein C 
5. Detennination of proton at ion states from bond length analysis of high 
5.4.1 Introduction
5.5.1.3 
5.5.1.4 
5.5.1.5 
5.5.2 
5.5.2.1 
5.5.2.2 
5.5.2.3 
5.5.2.4 
5.5.2.5 
5.5.3 
5.5.3.1 
5.5.3.2 
5.5.3.3 
5.5.3.4 
5.5.3.5 
6. Myosin Binding Protein-C: An investigation into protonation states using 
9.2 An investigation into the protonation states of the C I domain of cardiac myosin-binding 
protein C 289 
9.3 An evaluation review ofthe prediction of proton at ion states in proteins versus 
Total word count: 68,909 
Table of Figures 
Figure 1.2: Active sites of (A) chymotrypsin (PDB code: 4CHA) (B) subtilisin BPN' (PDB code: 
Figure 1.3: Proposed charge relay mechanism. Reproduced from Blow et al.8  26 
Figure 1.5: Neutron Fo-Fc difference map contoured at 5a for His 57 in trypsin. Reproduced from 
Figure 1.6: His 64 and Asp 32 in subtilisin at 0.78A resolution. 2FoFc electron density map at 4rms 
(orange) and FoFc difference electron density map at 2.50' (yellow). Here showing the hydrogen atom 
positioned between the Asp and His residue. Reproduced from Kuhn et 01.1  27 
Figure 1.9: Mechanism proposed by James et 01.19  30 
Figure 1.11: Mechanism proposed by Veerapandian et al. 21 , derived from Suguna et al.20  31 
Figure l.l2: Deuterium occupancies for refinement of the two proposed models for the protonation 
states of the two aspartate residues in the Endothiapepsin inhibitor complex active site at 2.1A 
Figure l.l3: Bragg's Law in reciprocal space (A) Q not equal to 1 (B) Q = 1, where scattering occurs . 
Figure l.l5: Scattering power as a function of scattering angle for X-rays (dashed line) and neutrons 
Figure l.l6: Neutron protein structures collected as a function of crystal volume, asymmetric unit 
Figure l.l7: Laue diffraction geometry showing the region of reciprocal space accessible between the 
Ewald spheres associated with Amin and A.nax and the sample resolution limit IIdmin  This is a 
volumetric region; by rotating about the beam direction a volume would be shown. Adapted from 
Figure 1.20: A simulated Laue diffraction pattern from a Flock House virus (FHV). The crystal is in a 
rhombohedral space group with cell length a = 325.5A. The highest resolution dmin is set at 3A and the 
Figure 1.22: Layout of the LADI-I11 diffractometer (a) schematic view (b) photograph of the 
instrument in place (c) read out system on LADI-I (d) new read out system and image plates on LADI-
Figure 1.24: Neutron structure of concanavalin A after one month of soaking in D20. Orange regions 
show where hydrogen has been exchanged for deuterium, green are still hydrogenated. Reproduced 
Figure 1.25: Neutron diffiaction patterns from (A) hydrogenated and (B) deuterated crystals of yE-
Figure 1.26: Hydro~en visibility vs. B factor for aldose reductase at 0.66A resolution. Reproduced 
from Howard et al. R  54 
Figure 1.27: His24 in conA at 0.94A from X-ray data59. 2F o-Fe electron density map in blue (2rms) 
and positive Fo-Fe in red (2.5a). The difference electron density map indicates that this residue is 
Figure 1.28: Residues from lysozyme at 0.65A resolution with electron density maps 3Fo-2Fe (blue) at 
4rms and Fo-Fe (green) at 3.2a showing (a) Thr51, and (b) Tyr53 (with split hydroxyl hydrogen 
position) . Reproduced from Wang et al.2 . 55 
Figure 1.29: His24 in conA at 2.2A from neutron data3. Positive Fo-Fe nuclear density map in red 
Figure 1.30: Val 41 methyl CH3 protons are clearly visible in nuclear density maps from antifreeze 
protein collected to 1.8A resolution.44 ............. 56 
Figure 2.2: Activation of the thiamine diphosphate cofactor. Reproduced from Frank et at. 20073 ... 65 
Figure 2.4: Pyrimidine Biosynthesis and Thiamine Formation. Reproduced from MetaCyc7 ... 68 
Figure 2.5: Formation of the ThiS-COSH enzyme complex. Reproduced from Begley et at. 1999
.. 69 
Figure 2.6: Formation of5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole phosphate (8, THZ-P). Reproduced from 
Figure 2.7: Formation of 4-amino-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyrimidine diphosphate (12, HMP-
Figure 2.9: A cartoon representation of thiamine phosphate synthase determined from X-ray data at 
Figure 2.13: Pr0Eosed enzymatic mechanisms for thiamine phosphate synthase. Reproduced from 
Figure 2.14: Active site of thiamine phosphate synthase with bound intermediates from the 1.4A 
Figure 2.17: Nuclear density maps contoured to 2a for HMP generated from structure factors 
calculated to 2A using the CCP4 program SFALLI7. (A) shows hydrogenated HMP, (B) partially 
Figure 2.18: Nuclear density maps contoured to 2(1 for HMP generated from structure factors 
calculated to 3A using the CCP4 program SFALL. (A) shows hydrogenated HMP, (B) partially 
Figure 2.23: SOS-PAGE analysis of nickel purification fractions for hydrogenated SI30A mutant 
Figure 2.24: SOS-PAGE analysis of nickel purification fractions for deuterated S130A mutant protein 
Figure 2.26: SOS-PAGE analysis of gel filtration fractions for the hydrogenated S130A mutant 
Figure 2.28: SOS-PAGE analysis of gel filtration fractions for the deuterated S130A mutant protein89 
Figure 2.31: Heavy precipitation in a drop containing 24% (w/v) PEG 4000 with 2Omg/ml protein .. 92 
Figure 2.33: Light precipitate and crystalline type objects in a drop without MgCh but with 24% 
Figure 2.38: SOS-PAGE analysis of fractions from gel filtered llis6 tag cleaved S130A mutant protein 
Figure 2.39: Possible denatured protein in crystallisation drops containing His6 tag cleaved Sl30A 
Figure 2.40: Active site binding pocket illustrating that the Sl30 residue is exposed at the surface of 
Figure 2.42: A crystallisation drop of wild type protein containing 8% PEG4000. The drop shows 
Figure 2.43: A crystallisation drop of wild type protein containing 20% PEG4000. A skin is present 
Figure 2.44: A crystallisation drop of wild type protein containing 30% PEG4000. The drop shows 
Figure 2.48: Thermal stability of wild type protein in glycerol (WT _G), wild type protein in Tris 
Figure 3.1: Pyrroloquinoline Quinone (PQQ; 4,5-dioxo-4,5-dihydro-l H-pyrrolo[2,3-f]quinoline-2,7,9-
Figure 3.2: PQQ and its precursor's glutamine and tryptophan. Reproduced from Puehringer et at . 
Figure 3.4: Spontaneous SchitTbase reaction following by addition of oxygen by a di-oxygenase .. 113 
Figure 3.6: Crystal structure ofPqqC. Open conformation (apo) in grey, closed conformation 
Figure 3.7: Sequence ofPqqC from Klebsiella pneumonia. PDB Code 10TW, Reproduced from 
Figure 3.8: Active site density for PQQ bound Pqqc. Reproduced from Magnusson et al.8  115 
Fi~ure 3.9: Proposed mechanism for the formation ofPQQ by Pqqc. Reproduced from Magnusson et 
Figure 3.10: Active site ofPqq-C - Active site residues in blue, PQQ in Green and di-oxygen in red. 
Figure 3.11: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2a at 2.oA resolution for D20 soaked PQQ 
Figure 3.12: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2a at 2.oA resolution for perdeuterated 
Figure 3.13: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2a at 3.oA resolution for D20 soaked PQQ 
Figure 3.14: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2a at 3.oA resolution for perdeuterated 
Figure 3.17: SDS-PAGE analysis ofthe large scale expression of hydrogenated and deuterated Y175F 
Figure 3.18: SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from the hydrogenated wild type test expression nickel 
Figure 3.19: SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from the hydrogenated Y 175F mutant test expression 
Figure 3.20:SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from the deuterated Y175F mutant test expression nickel 
Figure 3.23: SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from large scale nickel purification of hydrogenated 
Figure 3.24: SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions from large scale nickel purification ofperdeuterated 
Figure 3.26: Hydrogenated Y175F mutant crystals formed at (A) 22%, (B) 25%, and (C) 27% PEG 
Figure 3.27: Crystals formed when screening ammonium sulphate for (A) nickel affinity 
chromatography eluate (-100-200JLm on edge) and (8) gel filtered (-2-IOJLm on edge) Y175F mutant 
Figure 3.29: Effect ofPQQ:PqqC ratio on crystallisation ofY175F mutant. Showing PQQ:PqqC 
Figure 3.34: Diffraction to 1.5-1.9A from hydrogenated Y175F mutant crystal at ESRF microfocus 
beamline ID23-2
Figure 3.35: Diffraction from a perdeuterated YI75F crystal at ESRF microfocus beam line ID23-2 
Figure 4.2: Active site of halo alkane dehydrogenase, PDB code 2YXP and 2PKY showing the 
Figure 4.4: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed hydrazinium hydrogen oxalate 
(HDRZHO) structures; the change of 9.53 involves H2 N2 H2b, the change of9.15 involves NI N2 
Figure 4.5: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed iminodiacetic acid hydrobromide 
Figure 4.6: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed L-arginine phosphate monohydrate 
(LARGPH) structures. The change of20.60 involves H6 N4 H7 and the change of9.600 involves C2 
Figure 4.7: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed semicarbazide hydrochloride 
(SECAZC) structures. The change of8.30 involves HI NI H2, the change of7.60 involves H4 N3 
Figure 4.8: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed n-tert-butoxycarbonyl-l-
phenylalanine and pyridine complex (RUJCII) structures. The change of5.60 involves C2 01 H3 . 
Figure 4.9: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed bis(3-amino-3-methyl-2-butanone 
oximato)nickel(II) Chloride Monohydrate (AMBONC) structures. Deuterated structure shown in blue 
Figure 4.11: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed 4-methylpyridine with 
pentachlorophenol (GADGUN) structures. Deuterated structure shown in blue and hydrogenated in 
Figure 4.12: Stereo view (cross-eye viewing) of the superimposed 3,5-dimethylpyridine and 3,5-
dinitrobenzoic acid complex (HAXFER) structures. The deuterated structure (in blue) lies on a plane, 
Figure 4.13: Asp82 in concanavalin A at room temperature (PDB code ISCS, in green) and cryo 
Figure 5.1: CSD values for C-Oo 1 and C-002 bond lengths in (A) protonated, and (B) deptoronated 
Figure 5.3: CSD values for histidine bond lengths of the imidazole ring (A) shows both tautomers ofa 
Figure 5.4: CSD values for arginine bond lengths of the guanidinium group shown (A) deprotonated, 
Figure 5.6: Radiation damaged disulfide bonds in hen egg white lysozyme at 12.4keV. 2Fo-Fe electron 
density map in green, and Fo-Fe difference electron density map shown in red (negative) and blue 
Figure 5.7: A radiation damaged aspartate residue from Hm MalDH. Negative Fo-Fe difference 
Figure 5.9: Stereoview of the structure of the final refined structure of subtilisin Carlsberg to 1.26A 
Figure 5.12: Residue (A) Asp 173 and (B) and Glu 113 in subtilisin Carlsberg contoured at 2.25a .. 194 
Figure 5.14: Extrapolated a(x. Bal'g) versus resolution at 100% completeness for subtilisin Carslberg . 
Figure 5.18: His57 and Asp 102 in bovine pancreatic trypsin with unrestrained C-O bond lengths ... 201 
Figure 5.19: Extrapolated a(x. Bavg) versus resolution at 100% completeness for bovine pancreatic 
Figure 5.20: Stereo (cross-eye viewing) view oflysozyme (PDB code 2VB I) at 0.65A resolution .. 205 
Figure 5.24: Extrapolated a(x. Bavg) versus resolution at 100% completeness for triclinic lysozyme . 
Figure 5.25: Comparison of eJ. calculated from the DPI in REFMAC and full matrix inversion in 
Figure 5.26: Comparison of eJ. calculated from the DPI in REFMAC and full matrix inversion in 
Figure 5.27 Comparison of eJ. calculated from the DPI in REFMAC and full matrix inversion in 
Figure 5.28: Comparison of eJ. calculated from the DPI in REFMAC and full matrix inversion in 
Figure 5.30: Extrapolated a(x. Bavg) versus completeness for the four proteins studied assuming 100% 
Figure 6.1: Possible binding ofMyBP-C to actin filaments. Myosin subfragment and motor head 
shown in red, actin monomers in grey, tropomyosin strand in green, essential light chain (ELC) and 
regulatory light chain (RLC) in orange,and cMyBP-C in green. Reproduced from Govada et al.2 ... 218 
Figure 6.2: Surface charge representation of the Cl domain of cMyBP-C. The C-terminal end is 
Figure 6.3: Interpolated values for (A) </>/(1/ and (B) Rmerge and (C) Completeness at l.3A ... 222 
Figure 6.4: Mutation at residue 248 in cMyBP-C from a glutamic acid to an aspartic acid residue. (A) 
Fa-Fc difference maps contoured to 4eJ (negative; red) and 3.2(1 (positive; green) when refined as a 
Figure 6.5: Cartoon view of the structure ofcMyBP-C Cl to 1.30A with multiple occupancy side 
Figure 6.l2: Extrapolated a(x. Bavg) versus completeness for cMyBP-C Cl domain at 1.2A and l.3A 
Figure 6.13: Extrapolated a(x. Bavg) versus resolution for cMyBP-C Cl domain: (a) experimental 
Figure 6.14: Scatter plot of the examples of protein crystals investigated at ILL on the monochromatic 
Figure 7.1: Chemical diagrams of (A) a singly protonated and (B) a doubly protonated histidine 
Figure 7.2: Chemical diagrams of (A) deprotonated and (B) protonated aspartic acid amino acid 
Figure 7.3: Chemical diagrams of (A) deprotonated and (B) protonated lysine amino acid sidechain . 
Figure 7.4: Chemical diagrams of (A) deprotonated and (B) protonated arginine amino acid sidechain . 
Figure 7.5: Superposition of COl atoms for the three conA structures: 2YZ4 in green, UBC in turquoise 
Figure 7.6: Graphical presentation of the predictions for the three concanavalin A coordinate sets by 
each of the three predictive tools are compared. The evidence for Asp28 and Glu102 being protonated 
most firmly stems from ultra high resolution X-ray data bond distance analysis with the neutron 
Figure 7.7: Superposition of COl atoms for the four D-xylose isomerase structures used in this study: 
Figure 7.8: Graphical presentation of the predictions for the four D-xylose isomerase coordinate sets 
Figure 7.9: Graphical presentation of the predictions for the four D-xylose isomerase coordinate sets 
Figure 7.10: Superposition of COl atoms for the three lysozyme structures used in this study: 1 LZN in 
Figure 7.11 Graphical presentation of the predictions for the three lysozyme coordinate sets by each 
Figure 7.12: Superposition of COl atoms for the three myoglobin structures used in this study: 1 L2K in 
Figure 7.13: Graphical presentation of the predictions for the three myoglobin coordinate sets by each 
of the three predictive tools compared. NMR results are reproduced from Dalvit & Wright, Osapay et 
Figure 7.l4: Sequence of snapshots showing the deprotonation of the imidazole ring of the lIisl2 Ne2 
atom: the difference maps are reeresented with a pH-scale colour code from red/acid to bluelbasic 
Figure 7.15: Superposition of COl atoms for the 6 RNase structures. 5RSA in green, 1 KF2 in blue, 
Figure 7.16: Graphical presentation of the predictions for the seven ribonuclease A coordinate sets by 
Figure 7.18: Structure of j3-crustacyanin showing the two bound AXT molecules between the two 
Figure 7.19: Distance between the I lis 92 residue and one of the AXT molecules in j3-Crustacyanin 
showing that the keto-oxygens of the AXT are within hydrogen bonding distance of His 92, Ser94 and 
Asn86 (which could be incorrectly orientated in the X-ray structure). The same situation applies for 
Figure 7.20: The pI(, predictions of the key His residues in {3-crustacyanin for the PDB code: IGKA. 
[The experimental protonation state of these two residues is not known from crystaIJographic 
Figure 7.22: Graphical representation of the protonation prediction results for the cMyBP-C structure . 
Figure 7.23: Graphical representation of the protonation prediction results for the subtilisin Carlsberg 
Figure 7.24: Graphical representation of the proton at ion prediction results for the bovine pancreatic 
Figure 7.25: Complete listing of predicted and known protonation states for all residues in 
Figure 7.26: Complete listing of predicted and known protonation states for all residues in lysozyme 
Figure 7.27: Complete listing of predicted protonation states for all residues in cMyBP-C, bovine 
Table of Tables 
Table 1.1: Coherent and incoherent neutron scattering cross sections and X-ray scattering lengths for 
Table 4.1: Radiation probe, collection temperature (RT = 283 - 303K) and primary citation for all 52 
Table 4.2: Spacegroup, Z number and unit cell parameters for all isomorphous compounds studied. 
Table 4.3: Radiation probe, collection temperature (RT = 283 - 303K), primary citation, spacegroup, 
Table 4.4: Bond angles differences with sigma level> 30-. Meaningful changes (>5) shown in bold . 
Table 4.5: Bond angles with sigma level> 20- and < 30-. Meaningful changes (>5) shown in bold. 158 
Table 4.6: Bond angles differences for the non-isomorphous compounds studied. Meaningful changes 
Table 5.1: Calculation of coordinate and bond length errors required to obtain a 30- protonation state 
Table 5.2: Difference between DPI based on R and Rim for three structures at different diffraction 
Table 5.6: Table ofC-O and c=o bond lengths with 0- levels for subtilisin Carlsberg at 1.26A 
Table 5.10: Table ofC-O and C=O bond lengths with (J levels for bovine pancreatic trypsin. 
Table 5.13: Summary of diffraction and refinement data statistics for 2VBI """"""'''''''''''''''''''''' 204 
Table 5.14: Table ofC-O and C=O bond lengths with 0- levels for triclinic lysozyme. Agreement with 
Table 7.1: Standard pKa values for amino acids in solution. Reproduced from Liljas et al. 9, p14, table 
Table 7.2: Details for the three concanavalin A structures used for this study. RMS differences were 
calculated using the CCP4 program SUPERPOSE37 *The structure 2YZ4 was derived from 1 NLS 
Table 7.3: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for 
Table 7.5: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for d-
Table 7.7: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for 
Table 7.9: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for 
Table 7.10: Overall likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue 
Table 7.15: pI(, prediction values for the six apocrystacyanin structures studied. OOR = Prediction 
Table of Equations 
Abstract 
The University of Manchester 
Stuart John Fisher 
PhD in Chemistry 
The Determination of Proton at ion States in Proteins 
04/06/2010 
The determination of protonation states in proteins can provide crucial information 
regarding the exact mechanism of many protein functions, specifically those that 
involve the transfer of protons. Titratable amino acids including aspartate, histidine 
and arginine, have well defmed pKa values and protonation states in solution, 
however these pKa values can be significantly perturbed when amino acids are 
incorporated into the three dimensional folded structure of a protein. It is therefore 
important to determine the experimental protonation states of amino acid residues in 
proteins in order to gain a clear understanding of the catalytic mechanism. 
Protonation state determination is invaluable for the elucidation of the mechanisms 
of enzyme action. Many biological studies focus on enzyme mechanisms, not least 
drug development by pharmaceutical companies, where novel inhibiters can be 
designed to tackle disease 
Protonation states in proteins can be determined using a number of techniques. 
Classical methods include Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, from 
which proton positions can be determined from the proton resonances, and ultra high 
resolution X-ray protein crystallography, where protons can be directly located in the 
resultant electron density maps. Other methods include the use of neutron protein 
crystallography, which enables protons (as deuterium atoms) to be directly visualised 
in the resultant nuclear density maps even at modest resolutions of 2 to 3A. Other 
emerging techniques include the determination of protonation states from high 
resolution X-ray crystallography using the analysis of bond lengths in amino acids, 
and the prediction of protonation states using estimated pKa values along with the pH 
of crystallisation. 
In this thesis the protonation states of aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and 
arginine residues in a number of proteins have been determined using three 
independent techniques. These are: determination from neutron protein 
crystallographic data, from bond length analysis of high-resolution X-ray 
crystallographic data, and the prediction of protonation states using estimated pKa 
values. The results thus far indicate that a combination of methods should be used 
when determining the protonation states of critically important catalytic residues in 
order to be confident of the relevant protonation state. 
Declaration 
Initial calculations from Chapter 6 were conducted by James Wilkinson and have 
been submitted in support of an application for a Masters degree at the University of 
Manchester . 
Copyright Statement 
1. The author of this thesis (including any appendices and/or schedules to this 
thesis) owns any copyright in it (the "Copyright") and s/he has given The 
University of Manchester the right to use such Copyright for any 
administrative, promotional, educational and/or teaching purposes. 
11. Copies of this thesis, either in full or in extracts, may be made only in 
accordance with the regulations of the John Rylands University Library of 
Manchester. Details of these regulations may be obtained from the Librarian. 
This page must form part of any such copies made. 
111. The ownership of any patents, designs, trade marks and any and all other 
intellectual property rights except for the Copyright (the "Intellectual 
Property Rights") and any reproductions of copyright works, for example 
graphs and tables ("Reproductions"), which may be described in this thesis, 
may not be owned by the author and may be owned by third parties. Such 
Intellectual Property Rights and Reproductions cannot and must not be made 
available for use without the prior written permission of the owner(s) of the 
relevant Intellectual Property Rights and/or Reproductions. 
IV. Further information on the conditions under which disclosure, publication 
and exploitation of this thesis, the Copyright and any Intellectual Property 
Rights and/or Reproductions described in it may take place is available from 
the Head of School of (insert name of school) (or the Vice-President) and the 
Dean of the Faculty of Life Sciences, for Faculty of Life Sciences' 
candidates. 
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations 
ADP Atomic Displacement Parameter 
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
AIR 5-Aminoimidazole Ribotide 
ATCC American Type Culture Collection 
AXT Astaxanthin 
cAMP cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate 
CCP4 Collaborative Computing Project 4 
CGLS Conjugate Gradient Least Squares 
CIF Crystallographic Information File 
conA concanavalin A 
CSD Cambridge Structural Database 
DLAB Deuteration Laboratory 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DPI Diffraction-independent Precision Index 
DQE Detector Quantum Efficiency 
DTT Dithiothreitol 
DXP I-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate 
Dxs DXP Synthase 
EDTA Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid 
ELC Essential Light Chain 
EMBL European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
ESRF European Synchrotron Radiation Facility 
HCM Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 
HEPES 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid 
HEWL lien Egg White Lysozyme 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
HMP 4-amino-5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyrimidine 
HTX High Throughput Crystallisation 
ICSD Inorganic Crystal Structure Database 
ILL Institut Laue Langevin 
IPTG Isopropyl {3-D-I-thiogalactopyranoside 
JAERI Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute 
KIE Kinetic Isotope Effect 
LAD Laue Diffractometer 
LANL Los Alamos National Laboratory 
LB Luria Broth (Lysogeny Broth) 
MAD Multi-wavelength Anomalous Dispersion 
MAND Macromolecular Neutron Diffractometer 
MCCE Multiple Conformer Continuum Electrostatics 
MW Molecular Weight 
MyBP Myosin Binding Protein 
NAD Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide 
Ni-NTA Nickel-Nitrilotriacetic Acid 
NMR Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
OD Optical Density 
ORNL Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
PCS Protein Crystallography Station 
PDB Protein Data Ban k 
PEG Polyethylene Glycol 
PKA Protein Kinase A 
PKC Protein Kinase C 
PPD Protein pK. Database 
PQQ Pyrroloquinoline Quinone 
RFZ Rotational Function Z Score 
RLC Regulatory Light Chain 
RMS Root Mean Squared 
RNA Ribonucleaic Acid 
Rnase Ribonuclease 
RPM Revolutions Per Minute 
SAD Single-wavelength Anomalous Dispersion 
SAM S-Adensyl Methionine 
SDS-PAGE Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate - Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis 
SOC Super Optimal broth with Catabolite repression 
SRS Synchrotron Radiation Source 
TEV Tobacco Etch Virus 
TFZ Translational Function Z Score 
THZ 5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole 
TIM Triosephosphate Isomerase 
TP Thiamine Phosphate 
Tris Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane 
VIVALDI Very Intense Vertical Axis Laue Diffiactometer 
XI Xylose Isomerase 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor John R. Helliwell for his support and 
encouragement, and Dr Matthew P. Blakeley for supervision and help with 
integration into French life during my time at the Institut Laue-Langevin. I would 
also like to express my appreciation for all the help and training provided by Martine 
Moulin from DLAB, without whom the biological side of the project would have 
been impossible. 
1. Introduction and Overview 
A large area of biological research is targeted at detennining exactly how enzymes 
work at a mechanistic level. The results of such investigations are of interest to 
pharmaceutical companies for drug development, for example for the inhibition of 
enzymes involved in disease. They are also of interest to industry, especially where 
there is a need to commercialise a natural process. Furthermore determination of the 
mechanisms of these processes is also valuable academically. 
Although much research is focused on the classic structure-function relationship of 
enzymes, the details of protonation states are generally unavailable from classical 
structural determination methods (namely X-ray crystallography), they are however 
important. The mechanisms of many enzyme catalysed reactions involve proton 
transfer, and consequently research into protonation state determination is becoming 
more commonplace. For example, the action of the serine protease family involves a 
catalytic mechanism in which protons are transferred. Enzymes in this family are 
responsible for the proteolysis of peptide bonds, and as such are involved in many 
biological processes such as digestion and blood clotting. Serine proteases are one of 
the most well studied families of pro teases and includes proteins such as trypsin and 
subtilisin. Its precise mechanism of action has been debated for over 50 years. 
Another important family of proteins is that of the aspartic proteases, which includes 
proteins such as endothiapepsin and the critically important HIV -1 protease, the 
protein responsible for the fonnation of the infectious HIV virus particle. The 
mechanism of action again involves the transfer of protons, and a clear 
understanding of this mechanism is important for HIV antiviral drug development. 
These two families of enzymes and their mechanisms are discussed in the following 
section. 
A number of experimental techniques allow the determination of protonation states 
in proteins. These include ultra-high resolution X-ray protein crystallography, 
neutron protein crystallography, and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy. Furthermore, protonation states can be predicted from estimated pKa 
values if the pH of crystallisation is known, however this requires the protein 
structure to have already been determined via X-ray crystallography" or NMR 
solution structure determination. NMR is limited in its scope as it is generally only 
possible to use it to study small proteins due to the complex nature of the spectra 
obtainedl . X-ray crystallography requires sub-atomic resolution for determination of 
protonation states directly from electron density maps2, although protonation states 
information can be inferred using analysing of bond length changes at around 1.0-
1.5A resolution3 Neutron protein crystallography provides a direct method to 
determine protonation states in proteins even at modest resolutions of 2-3A 4, 
however the limitation of this technique is that large sample volumes are required 
and it is beneficial if the sample is perdeuterated. 
In this thesis the use of three protonation state determination techniques are 
considered; firstly, determination from bond length analysis of high resolution X-ray 
crystallographic data, secondly, determination from neutron protein crystallography 
and fmalIy, inferred protonation states from prediction methods using estimated pKa 
values. These techniques have been used to determine the protonation states in a 
number of proteins including classic test cases such as lysozyme and trypsin, as well 
as a more recent and important case, that of myosin binding protein C, a muscle 
protein implicated in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM). 
1.1 Examples of protein families with mechanisms involving the transfer 
of protons 
1.1.1 Serine Proteases 
About one third of all proteases can be classified as serine proteases which are 
widely abundant in almost all organisms including eukaryotes, prokaryotes, archae 
and viruses5 They are involved in a number of critical pathways including digestion, 
post translational processing of secreted proteins, blood coagulation and complement 
fixation. They also have functions as neurotransmitters and hormones6, 7. These 
proteins fall into three distinct structural clans classified by: (i) chymotrypsin, (ii) 
subtilisin BPN, and (iii) wheat germ serine carboxypeptidase. 
The mammalian serine proteases include: thrombin which activates fibrinogen to 
form blood clots at the site of trauma, chymotrypsin, trypsin and elastase which are 
all present in pancreatic digestion, and keratinase and collagenase which are 
responsible for digestion of hair and connective tissue. 
His 57 
0 Ser195 
Asp 102 I \~ -----H-NV-N----H- O 
Figure l.l: Catalytic Triad of Asp, His and Ser present in all serine proteases 
The three clans of serine proteases share a common active site consisting of the 
classic catalytic triad8 (see Figure 1.1) of serine, histidine and aspartic acid and an 
oxyanion hole9 Apart from the active site, the three clans share no other structural 
similarities (see Figure 1.2). Despite this, it is believed that they have the same 
mechanism because both chymotrypsin and subtilisin bind the substrate in an 
analogous fashion forming an antiparallel {3 structure between the polypeptide 
backbone ofthe substrate and a structurally conserved section ofthe protein lO 
Figure 1.2: Ac tive sit es of (A) chymotrypsin (POB cod e: 4 IIA) (B) subtilisin BPN' (POB code: 
l SBT). 
Over the past 40 years the mechanism of action of the serine proteases has been 
widely investigated using numerous analytical methods including crystallography, 
NMR and optical spectroscopy. The crucial question with regards to the catalytic 
mechanism has been as to which residue in the active site actually acts as the 
catalytic base during proteolysis. 
Chymotrypsinogen, the precursor to chymotrypsin was first equenced in 1964 by 
Hartley". However this equence contained a number of error, mo t important ly the 
mis-identification of residue 102 as asparagine. The residue was correctly identified 
as aspartic acid via the determination of the X-ray structure of chymotrypsin by 
Blow in 19698. This study led to the discovery that the a partic acid group wa In 
fact hydrogen bonded to the histidine residue in the active site. These results led to 
the initial postulation of the charge relay system, illustrated in Figure 1.3; however 
the actual catalytic base was not identified at this time. 
Asp-102 yO 
His-57 
-{:N:b 
\. N" /Ser-195 
H--O e 
_N-C-R 
Figure 13: Proposed charg(' relay mechanism. Reproduc('d from Blow ('I u/.K 
Hunkapiller et al. 12 proposed, from the study of ~Lytic protease using \3C NMR and 
analysis of the pKa values of His 57 and Asp 102, that the histidine residue was an 
intermediate through which the aspartate group acted as the catalytic base. This was 
proposed due to the observed pKa values 0 f Asp 102 (6.7) and very low value for His 
57 of around 3. This meant that after acylation the histidine and apartate groups 
existed as neutral species. 
His~7 
~ 5er-195 
e /-\~ I I 
O-H-N # N---H-O c=o 
Asp-l02---< ~ "-J J 
His~7 
~ Ser-195 
e /--\ I I e 
O_H-N + N-H--O-C-O 
--.l ~ I 
~102 ~ R 
Hgun' t.4: Propos('d mechanism hy \larkl('Y' el ul. I .
Markley et al. 13 challenged this in 1978 using results of further NMR studies and 
new pKa values of the two residues of intere t. They argued that the small pKa 
assigned for His 57 4) may be incorrect if the J 1I coupling constant did not give a 
good representation of the charge state of the imidazole ring. They suggested that 
under their conditions the chemical shift of His 57 CE may be a better indication of 
the charge state. From these results they proposed the mechanism show in Figure 
It wasn't until 1980 that Kossiakoff and Spencerl4 conducted pioneering work u ing 
neutron protein crystallography to study trypsin bound to a transition state analogue 
mono isopro pylphosphoryl (MIP) group. They identified that the proton (as 
deuterium) was clearly attached to His 57 (see Figure 1.5) when the tetrahedral 
intermediate had been formed. This proved that the histidine was in fact the chemical 
base and not an intermediate through which Asp 102 acted, in agreement with the 
mechanism proposed by Markley et al. 
Asp 102 
Figure 1.5: eutron 1"0-1' . difference map cont oured at 5(1 for lIis 57 in trypsin. Reproduced 
from Ko., iakoff a Jl(I 'pencer u 
Jtigurc 1.6: His 64 and "p 32 in ,>ubt il i., in at O.78A re,olut ion. 2 Ft.Fc clec lI'on density map at 
41'1"' (orange) and FII F, difference electron den\ it) map at 2.511 (yellow). Here 'howing th(' 
hydrogen atom po\itiollcd bel\\een lhe \p and Hi<. re .. idue. Reprod uced frOIll Kllhn 1'1 lI t .7 
Even now, there is still debate regarding the subtleties of this mechanism and exactly 
what type of hydrogen bond exists between the Asp and His residues. Recently Kuhn 
et al. 7 solved the 0.78A structure of Bacillus [entus subtilisin bound to the inhibitor 
phenylmethanesulfonyl (PMS) fluoride. Their electron density maps show a 
hydrogen atom present between the Asp and His residue (see Figure 1.6) rather than 
being positioned on the His residue. The peak for this hydrogen atom is however at 
2.5a in the difference electron density map and as such these results should be 
interpreted with caution. Kuhn et al. asserted that the result obtained by Kosiakoff 
and Spencer was due to the heavier isotope 2D atom being fIrmly positioned on the 
histidine, which wouldn't be the case with the 'H isotope. This matter is discussed in 
further in Chapter 4. 
1.1.2 Aspartic Protcascs 
Aspartic proteases commonly occur among plants, fungi, vertebrates and viruses and 
are involved in a variety of disease conditions including hypertension, amyloid 
disease, malaria and AIDSI5. In the case of HI V, the aspartic protease is essential for 
successful formation of the virus particle, and as such inhibitors of this class of 
enzymes are a crucial series of drug targets for treating AIDS. The class of enzymes 
consist oftwo structurally similar domains, each contributing a catalytic aspartic acid 
group forming a catalytic dyad
 The two catalytic residues are held in a coplanar 
orientation by a series of hydrogen bonds with the surrounding and conserved amino 
acid side chain groups 17. 
The majority of eukaryotic aspartic proteases are monomeric and consist of a single 
amino acid chain of about 330 residues (see Figure 1.7), forming two similar 
domains with the active site located between them. The eukaryotic class of enzymes 
comprises the enzymes pepsin, chymosin, renin, cathepsin D, endiothiapepsin and 
pencillopepsin. In contrast, the retroviral protease are much smaller, about 130 
residues long and are dimeric (see Figure 1.8), consisting of two identical subunits, 
each roughly equivalent to one domain of the eukaryotic aspartic protease. All 
enzymes in this class are inhibited by the microbial peptide pestatin which contains 
the unusual amino acid statinel8 
Figure 1.7: Endothiapcpsin at 0.9 re olution (POB ode 10EW) 
Figure 1.8: III -I Protca,e at 1.09, rc>olutioll (PDB ode IKZK) 
The two active ite a partic acid groups have long been implicated in the mechanism 
of this class of enzymes. Determination of the tructure of pencillopcpsin at 2.8A by 
lames et aL. 19 indicated that the two active ite a partate lie at the centre of a deep 
active site cleft, with ignificantly different environment uch that A p32 wa 
deprotonated and A p215 wa protonated. Thi I d to the prop al of vcral 
mechanism in which the two aspartates played di tinct role (ee Figure 1.9). 
o <AsP-32 0 <A"'-32 
Asp-215 ,/ 9 Asp-215'/ 
L l 9, ) Ser-35 L l /0, Ser-35 
1/  j.2'H, ) 1/ 0 H "H,) 
o ",tHR, 0 ..:::; .. ;;:===="'~ 0 IvOH R' 0 
R~~/ RI H~/ 
n H H H 
Tyr-75 Tyr-75 
-- ... 2.8A 
Figure 1.9 : Mecha nism proposed by J ames et al. 19 
, 3.3 A 
3.oA , , 
ASP-2 I S 
THR-21B 
Figure 1. to: T he active site of endothiapepsin. Derived from Pearl & Blundell t 984 17 
The determination of the crystal structure of endiothiapepsin in 1984 by Pearl and 
BlundeU
at 2.1A gave a clearer picture of the active site of this class of enzymes 
(see Figure 1.10). In contrast to the work of James et al., Pearl and Blundell found 
that the active site asparates were held in a co-planar orientation, related by a local 
twofold axis. They also found electron density between the two Asp residues that 
could be attributed to a water molecule or an ion bound centrally between the two 
aspartate groups. Despite the fact that the asparates were found to be symmetrically 
related, they have significantly different pKa values; one unusually high (~5) and the 
other unusually low (~2). Pearl & Blundell suggest that this arises from a single 
proton being shared between the two groups, in which configuration the single 
charge from the two carboxylates can be delocalised to the water molecule. The 
water molecule could then act as a nucleophile or bind a proton to become an 
OxonIum Ion. 
Following Pearl & Blundell's study of the native endothiapepsin, Suguna et al.2o 
studied the enzyme inhibitor (Spatola) complex of rhizopuspepsin. In agreement 
with the nucleophilic water/ion found in Pearl and Blundells structure they suggested 
a mechanism in which the bound water molecule acted as the nucleophile. 
Veerapandian et al.21 built on this mechanism, through their studies of 
endothiapepsin complexed with a tripeptide renin inhibitor. Their mechanism is 
shown in Figure 1.11. 
)--_215 
Figure 1.11: Mechanism proposed by Veerapandian et al.2\ derived from SlIgllna et al.2o 
This key feature of this mechanism is that the transition state is stabilised by a 
negative charge localised on Asp32. This assignment was made on the basis that its 
hydrogen bond capacity was satisfied to a greater extent than that of Asp215, 
implying that the negative charge would be more stable on Asp32. However the 
exact protonation states in the enzyme inhibitor complex had not been fully 
determined, they were only speculative. In 200 I, Co at es et al. 18 studied 
endothiapepsin in complex with a gem diol inhibitor using neutron diffraction at 
2.1A resolution and a perdeuterated enzyme. Using the mechanism proposed by 
Veerapandian et aI., they refined their data against models in which the proton was 
firstly on Asp32 and then on Asp215. Their results are shown in Figure 1.12. 
Model I Modcl2 
" 0" 0.87 o "0 / 0 1.02 1.15 ~ o 0 '0 
)-:OH O~ 
ASl>"32 ASl>"215 
~~D 0;Z 
Asp-32 ASl>"215 
Fi~lIn' 1.12: Ill'utl'rium occupancies for refilll'nu'nt of the two proposed models fm" thl' 
protonation states of the two aspartate residues in the Endothiapepsin inhibitor comple\ actin' 
Sitl' at 2.IA resolution. Reproduced from ('oatl's I'f al. IX 
Figure 1.12 shows that the occupancies for the deuterium atoms refine towards 1 in 
Model I and hence this is the correct model, and Asp215 is protonated in the 
transition state which confirms the mechanism suggested by Veerapandian et al. The 
results show that Model 2 is incorrect as the occupancy of deuterium atom on Asp32 
refines towards zero, indicating that there is not a deuterium atom present at that 
position. Recently, Adachi et al. 22 found a similar result for HIV -1 protease using 
combined X-ray and neutron crystallography studies, which once again locate the 
hydrogen atom on Asp215, confirming Veerapandian's mechanism. 
t. t.3 Conclusions 
The determination of mechanisms such as those of the protein families described 
above, can provide crucial information with wide ranging implications. For example 
Adachi et al. believe that their results for HIV -I protease will enable the 
development of novel and specific inhibitors of HI V-I proteases. Another example is 
that of thro mb in, a serine protease responsible for causing the initial cascade in blood 
clotting in humans in both physiological and pathological contexts. Many 
pharmaceutical companies are focussed on developing inhibitors for thrombin and a 
clear understanding of the mechanism of action will be important for successful drug 
development. 
1.2 Neutron Diffraction 
The neutron is a useful probe for the study of biological macromolecules due to its 
large scattering length for hydrogen, thus making it excellent for locating such 
hydrogen atoms. Neutron scattering differs physically from X-ray scattering as 
neutrons interact with the nucleus and not the electron cloud of an atom Instruments 
dedicated to collecting neutron crystallography data, such as the LADI-III instrument 
at the Institut Laue Langevin in France, make use of the Laue geometry. Laue 
geometry uses a quasi white beam of the source radiation in contrast to the majority 
of single crystal X-ray beamlines which use monochromatic data collection 
techniques. Furthermore, when collecting neutron protein crystallographic data, it is 
beneficial if the sample is perdeuterated, as this results in a two fold increase in the 
diffraction signal to noise ratio. The neutron is a non charged particle that penetrates 
deeply into matter and is isotope sensitive. It has a magnetic moment meaning that it 
can be scattered from magnetic structures. It is a powerful radiation probe for use in 
biology as it is sensitive to hydrogen atoms which are difficult to observe with other 
techniques such as X-ray diffraction, and NMR and optical spectroscopy. 
The neutron is un charged, has a spin Yl, and a mass of 1.0087 mass units. These 
properties have two consequences when a neutron is scattered from an atom Firstly 
the interaction is short ranged which means that neutrons can penetrate deeply into 
matter. Secondly the interaction between the neutron and the nuclei is complex; this 
means that there is no general trend for the scattering function for each element. This 
variation in scattering length with atom makes neutrons a useful complimentary 
probe to X-ray diffraction in which the scattering factor increases with atomic 
number. 
1.2.1 The Physics of Neutron Diffraction23.2.J 
A neutron scattering experiment involves an incident neutron hitting a sample and 
then being scattered, the extent of this scattering is determined by measuring the 
angle of scattering. After interacting with the sample, the neutron undergoes a 
change in momentum, and therefore there must be a change in velocity and/or 
direction. The momentum of the neutron is defined as p = hk, where h is the 
Planck's constant (h = h/2rr) and k is the neutron wave vector, where: 
Ikl = 2rr/ A. 
Equation 1.1: Thl' scattering H'ctor " 
The wavelength of a neutron is given by: 
A = hIp 
Equation 1.2: : Wavelength of a neutron 
and its thermal energy by: 
Equation 1 .. 1: Thermal energy of a neutron 
where k8 is the Boltzmann's constant and T is the temperature of the neutron 
moderator. The momentum change the neutron experiences on scattering is 
described by the scattering vector Q 
Equation 1.4: The scattering vector Q 
where ko and kJ are the incident and scattered wave vectors, and Q is the difference 
between these two vectors. Therefore the change in momentum of the neutron is 
given by hQ. Besides a change in direction and/or velocity, the magnitude of k can 
change if energy is exchanged between the neutron and sample. This energy change 
can be expressed as: 
_ _ 2 k~ 2 k~ E - Eo - El - h - - h - = hw 
2m 2m 
Equation 1.5: Energy change in an inelastic scattering process 
where E is the energy gained or lost by the neutron. Any scattering process from ko 
to kJ involves both Q and E. Ifthere is a change in energy this is known as inelastic 
scattering, ifthere is no change in energy this is referred to as elastic scattering. 
With diffraction, scattering is totally elastic and therefore there is no exchange of 
energy between the neutron and sample. This means that the magnitude of ko and k/ 
are equal and therefore: 
IQI = 2kosinO 
Equation 1.6: Relationship between Q and scattering angle, lJ 
Figure 1.13 shows Q represented in reciprocal space where the origin of reciprocal 
space is denoted D and each lattice point (.) represents a set of lattice planes in real 
space. As Ik;1 = IkA then ADB must be an isosceles triangle. In a general case (figure 
A) point B does not coincide with a lattice point and therefore scattering does not 
occur. However for specific scattering angles 0, B does fall on a lattice point (figure 
B) and scattering occurs. 
.'igure 1.13: Bragg's Law in reciprocal space (A) Q not equal to 1 (B) Q = 1, "here scattering 
occurs. 
In a crystalline material the vector 1 is perpendicular to a set of crystal planes and its 
magnitude is T = n2rrjd, where d is the spacing of the planes in real space and n is 
an integer and therefore when T = Q: 
IQI=-
Equation 1.7: Lattice spacing in reciprocal space 
Substituting Q from Equation 1.6 along with the defmition of k into Equation 1.7 
yields the familiar Bragg Law: 
A. = 2dsinO 
Equation 1.8: Bragg's Law 
This is the condition of constructive interference of waves with angle () on a set of 
equidistant planes separated by a distance d. For truly elastic scattering, the incident 
and scattering wavelengths should be the same, however in practice this is often not 
the case, and as such the inelastic tenn is usually ignored. 
Scattering Lengths and Cross Sections 
For neutrons, X-rays, and all other scattering particles there is an interference 
phenomenon between the wavelets scattered by different elements in the system. 
Figure 1.14 shows the general geometry for a scattering experiment. 
Detector 
Incident 
Figurl' 1.1-': Gl'tulll'try for a scattering expl'riml'llt. Adaptl'd from Squires 197824 
For a neutron scattering from a single fixed nucleus the incident neutrons can be 
represented by a plane wave defined as t/Jo = exp(ikoz), and the resulting scattered 
wave can be represented by: 
t/Jl = - - expCik1  r) r 
Equation 1.9: Wavcfunction of a scattl'rl'd neutron 
as the scattering is spherically symmetric, where r is the detector distance from the 
nucleus and the quantity b, known as the scattering length, has units of length and is 
a measure of the scattering ability of the atomic nucleus. b is real and known if 
absorption effects are discounted. If the detector to nucleus distance is large (see 
Figure 1.14), such that dO, the small so lid angle subtended by the detector is well 
defined, then the differential cross section is given by: 
dcr neutrons S-l scattered in dO -=---------dO ctldO 
Equation l.10: DifT('rential Cross Section 
where I> is the incident neutron flux measured in neutrons cm-2 S-I. The total 
scattering cross section Utot is the number of neutrons scattered per second 
normalised to the flux, which is given by: 
O'tot = J (dO') dl 
all directions dO 
Equation 1.11: Total scattering cross s{'ction 
For a single fixed nucleus we can relate the total cross section to b. If v is the 
velocity of the incident neutrons, then the number of neutrons passing through an 
area dS per second is given by: 
vdSIlfJI 2 = vdS r2 = vb 2dO 
Equation 1.12: Flux of neutrons through dS per second 
From the defmition of the cross-section: 
Equation 1.13: Rdationship betwe{'n the differential cross sectioll and h 
and therefore: 
Equatioll 1.14: Rdationship between total cross section and h 
The total scattering cross section, O'tot has the dimensions of area, and the magnitude 
of b is typically of the order of 10-12cm To first approximation the cross section can 
be regarded as the effective area which the target nucleus presents to the incident 
beam of neutrons. For neutrons, b varies between isotopes, and if the nucleus has a 
non-zero spin it can interact with the neutron spin giving rise to coherent and 
incoherent components of the total cross section O'tot. The cross sections presented 
above are the quantities actually measured in a scattering experiment. 
The value of the scattering length depends on the nucleus in question and the spin 
state of the nucleus-neutron system. Ifthere were a comprehensive theory for nuclear 
forces then b for each nucleus could be calculated, however no such theory exists 
and therefore b must be determined experimentally. 
Coherent and Incoherent Cross Sections 
The value of the scattering length is dependent on the total spin of the nucleus-
neutron system. I f a neutron with spin Yl encounters a single isotope with spin 1 then 
the neutron-nucleus spin is 1  Yl. These two states can be described by two 
scattering lengths b + and b-. The number of spin states for b + are 2(1 + 1z) + 1 = 21 + 
2 and for b- 2(1 - 1z) + 1 = 21, therefore the total number of spin states is 41 + 2. If 
the neutrons are unpolarised and the nuclei are randomly orientated then each state 
has the same probability, therefore b + occurs with frequency: 
and b- with frequency: 
+ _ 21 + 2 _ 1 + 1 
f - 41 + 2 - 21 + 1 
Equation 1.15: Frequency of h' 
f- = 41 + 2 = 21 + 1 
Equation 1.16: Frequellcy of h-
The coherent cross section of each isotope is given as (le = 4rrb2 where b is the 
average value of b. The total scattering cross section is given by (ltot = 4rrb2  The 
average scattering length is given by: 
b = 21 + 1 [(I + l)b+ + Ib-] 
Equation 1.17: Average value of h 
I<:quatioll 1.18: Average value of h) 
The difference between Utot and Uc is the incoherent cross section Uj. If the isotope has 
no spin, such as l2e, then b2 = E2 = b2 and therefore there is no incoherent 
scattering. The coherent scattering contains information about interference effects 
and as such structural information. The incoherent scattering contains no structural 
information but only an isotropic background. Important contributions in biology are 
for example, hydrogen which has a spin Y2 and hence a large incoherent cross 
section. See Table 1.1 for a list of common elements and their associated scattering 
cross sections. 
liOIope Atomic Neutron 
Number Inooherwll 
croee 
 .ctlon 
(Barn I) 
8 0.00 
7 0.50 
8 0.00 
12 0.00 
18 0.00 
1a 0.25 
25 0.40 
28 0.00 
-0.3 " 
0.e67 
0.e65 
0.937 
0.580 
0.540 
0.280 
0.370 
-0.375 
1.010 
X-la, ecatte,inglengthe 
(1 (Jt2 cm) 
Table 1.1: Coherent and incoherent neutron scattering cross sections and X-ray scattl'ring 
Il'ngths for selected elements. Heprodllced from B1akcley 20()92~ 
1.2.2 Neutron Protein Crystallography2S 
Around half the atoms in a protein are hydrogen; however X-rays are generally 
unable to identify hydrogen atoms as their single electron results in a low scattering 
power. Even at ultra high resolution (better than lA) hydrogen atoms are often not 
visible in electron density maps due to their thermal motion. With neutrons however, 
the scattering lengths of hydrogen and deuterium are of a similar magnitude to that 
of carbon and nitrogen (see Table 1.1), hydrogen however scatters negatively. 
Deuterium scatters positively, and is consequently visible even at modest resolutions 
of 2-3A. This allows the bound solvent to be studied in more detaif6-28 which is 
useful as it is well known that the surface and interior bound water molecules play 
important roles in efficient enzyme function. Using X-rays, only the electron density 
for the oxygen atom in a water molecule can be seen, however using neutrons, the 
oxygen atoms and two attached hydrogen (or deuterium) atoms can commonly be 
visualised. This makes it possible to differentiate between D20 and DO- which can 
be important for enzyme mechanistics29  Furthennore the orientation of the bound 
solvent can be studied in order to give insight into hydrogen bonding networks30. 31 . 
Improved hydrogen visibility also allows the detennination of the orientation of 
hydroxyl groups of residues such as tyrosine, serine and threonine and the 
orientations of the methyl groups ofthreonine, valine and leucine residues. 
As well as hydrogen, adjacent atoms in the periodic table such as oxygen and 
nitrogen have significantly different scattering lengths with respect to neutrons, 
allowing them to be distinguished. This allows the correct orientation of residues 
such as glutamine and asparagine to be detennined, which are often incorrectly 
assigned in X-ray structures, and to detennine the absolute orientation of histidine 
residues. Furthennore, the scattering length dependence on isotope can be used for 
contrast matching, for example hydrogen which has a negative scattering cross 
section can be replaced by deuterium with a positive scattering cross section. 
In addition to the difference in scattering cross sections, scattering power as a 
function of scattering angle does not fall off to the same extent with neutrons as for 
X-rays (see Figure 1.15). This means that even at high angles, neutrons are still 
strongly scattered and consequently protein structures can be co llected to high 
resolution. There is however a thennal dependence on scattering power, and 
therefore it is still advantageous to collect data at cryo-ternperatures. 
" " '. " 
Figure 1.15: Scattering power as a function of scattering angle for X-rays (dashl'd line) and 
neutrons (solid line) at a B factor of to and 40 IV. Reproduced from Ostermann et al  2002"'2 
The weak interaction of neutrons with matter renders them a non-destructive probe, 
causing minimal radiation damage, especially in comparison to equivalent X-ray 
techniques. Data can therefore be collected on samples at room temperature, and for 
extended periods of time. This also means that a neutron data set can be collected on 
a single crystal and then an X-ray data set can be collected at cryo-temperatures on 
the same crystal, guaranteeing that the data sets are isomorphous. 
The resolution for neutron protein crystal structures is usually of the order of 2-3A 
and as of 2010 there are roughly 40 structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank 
(PO B). The reason for this low number of depositions is primarily the low flux 
available from neutron sources. The flux of neutrons from a reactor source is usually 
of the order of 106_108 neutrons cm-2 S-I, whereas with X-rays, an anode source has a 
flux of around 101-1011 photons cm-2 S-I and a synchrotron undulator source around 
1016 photons cm-2 S-I. This low neutron flux means that large crystals are required to 
get a reasonable signal to noise level and hence good quality data as the scattering 
intensity of the sample is dependent on the crystal volume. The scattering intensity 
ofa sample can be defined as: 
Equation 1.19: Scattering intensity of a sample 
where I is the diffraction intensity, 10 is the incident neutron intensity, A is the 
detector area, F is the structure factor, Vthe volume of the sample and Vo the volume 
of the unit cell. Therefore the scattering power of a sample is strongly dependent on 
the sample volume, neutron flux and asymmetric unit cell volume. These factors 
mean that collection times for protein crystallography experiments are often very 
long, and this restricted early studies to proteins for which large crystals could be 
grown, such as lysozyme, myoglobin and concanavalin A. 
There are a number of neutron protein crystal diffiactometers in use around the 
world. These include LADI-III at the Institut Laue Langevin, France, BIX-3/4 at the 
Japanese Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI), Japan, the Protein 
Crystallography Station (PCS) at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), New 
Mexico and MANDI is planned at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), USA. 
-------------------
-----1 ----___.. 
Cf)fs~ -----'I VOlume 0.1 ----___... 
(mm 1 10' 
Figure 1.16: Neutron protein tructures collected as a function of crystal volume, a ymmetric 
unit volume and data collection time from instruments worldwide. 
Reproduced from Blakeley 200925 
Figure 1.16 shows the number of structures collected world wide as a function of 
crystal volume, asymmetric unit volume and data collection time. Over time 
technological scientific advancements are being made enabling data collection from 
crystal samples with larger unit cells, smaller crystal vo lumes and with shorter 
collection times. 
1.2.2.1 TheOlY ofCrystallography: The Lalle Meth(}(f3 . . u 
The vast majority of single crystal diffractometers use monochromatic data 
collection techniques, where a single wavelength is selected from the source 
radiation using a monochromator. Contrary to this, the Laue method makes use of 
the continuous spectrum of the full white beam of the source radiation. The primary 
benefit of this is that exposure times are reduced by orders of magnitude due to the 
large increase in available flux35 Another benefit is a reduction in the required 
sample volume as the scattering power is dependent on flux. 
The Laue geometry was initially used for X-ray crystallography with X-rays in 1912 
by Friedrich, Knipping and von Laue36 However, it wasn't until 1984 that it was 
used for rnacromolecular crystallography with the motivation of making time 
resolved measurements37, for which the very short exposure times necessary (on 
modern 3rd generation sources, a fraction of a nano second) allowed for quick 
collection of multiple data sets. The first polychromatic X-ray diffraction patterns of 
a protein were recorded in 1984 at CHESS using a first generation bending magnee7 
with exposure times under a minute. In 1997 the first neutron protein polychromatic 
Laue patterns were collected on hen egg white lysozyme38 and concanavalin A39. . . 
Figure 1.17: Laue diffraction g('ometry showing the region of reciprocal splice accessible 
between the Ewald spheres associated with i.min and ;.mux and the sample resolution limit Ildm1n 
This is a voluml'tric region; by rotating about the beam direction a volume would be shown. 
Adapted from Crukkshank et al. 19StO 
Figure 1.17 shows the Ewald construction for the Laue geometry, where 0 is the , 
original of reciprocal space. The striped region shows the volume ofreciprocal space 
stimulated between A.min and A.max, and the resolution limit dmin Each reflection in this 
region is stimulated by a distinct wavelength which means that the integrated 
intensity of each spot needs to be normalised for variations in intensity versus 
wavelength. This process is known as wavelength normalisation and generates what 
is known as the A-curve. The curve is a mixture of the source spectrum, diffraction 
efficiency factor ,,12, an overall absorption correction and the wavelength dependent 
response of the detector. Figure 1.18 shows a typical A-curve. 
"iJ 0.5 
rn 0.3 
0.9 lA 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.4 3.9 4A 4.9 
Wavelength (A) 
Figurc 1.18: A typical wavelength normalisation cllrve for the LADI-III in trument at ILL 
Figurc 1.19: Ewald construction for the Lane Geometry. Adapted from Ren et al . 1999" 
Figure 1.19 shows a close up ofthe Ewald construction for the Laue geometry about 
the origin of reciprocal space along with the incident (XO) and reflected (OR) wave 
vectors. X represents the sample, 0 the origin of reciprocal space, and R a reciprocal 
lattice point. If the radial line OR passes through a single reciprocal latt ice point, 
then a single reflection is recorded at the corresponding position on the detector. 
However it is possible that this line passes through multiple lattice points 
simultaneously, in which case multiple reflections are recorded cumulatively on the 
detector at the same position, these are known a multiple spots and are denoted as 
energy or harmonic overlap. Cruickshank et al., 198740 conducted a complete 
analysis of multiplicity distribution and concluded that no more than 27% of 
reflections will be involved in energy overlap. However, for this percentage of 
reflections, it is necessary to resolve the multiple pots into their components using a 
process known as multiples deconvolution. 
Laue patterns can be crowded (for example see Figure 1.20) due to the number of 
reflections for larger unit cel ls such as protein and this can lead to a large number of 
spots being spatially overlapped. Cruikshank et al. 1991 41 demonstrated that the 
severity of spatial overlap i a function of the Bragg angle and is predominantly one 
dimensional. 
I  i~ufl.' 1.2(): A ,illllllated Laue diffraction pattern frOIll a Flock lIome virll' (FIIV). The cl)';tal 
i, ill a dlOlIlbohedral 'pace grOIlI> ,,,ith cell length a 325.5 . The highe,t re>oltllioll d"';1I is Sl't 
at 3A and the ,,,avclcngth rangc jo, OA-1.4A. Rq)l'odtlced frOIll Reil (" ul., 199911 
The most common problem with the Laue method is lack data of completeness at 
low resolution. There are several factors which contribute to this: (i) there is a region 
of reciprocal space near the origin for which data cannot be collected (ii) low 
resolution spots are often of high intensity and can saturate the detector, these 
'overloads' are normally rejected during data processing, and (iii) multiples cannot 
always be deconvoluted and usually contain low resolution data. The completeness 
problem can be addressed through both data collection techniques and processing 
software both of which yield good quality data. A key step has been the advent of 
electronic detectors instead of film, such as CCDs for X_rays42 and image plates for 
neutrons. 
It is important to be able to deconvolute both haromic and spatial overlaps in order to 
make full use of the data collected and attain the ideal theoretical data redundancy. 
The main advantage of the Laue method is the greatly reduced exposure time 
required, which is crucial for neutron protein crystallography, where the neutron flux 
is already many orders of magnitude smaller than that of an X-ray source. However, 
even though the exposure time is reduced, the white beam contributes significantly 
to the polychromatic background which results in a low signal to noise ratio. To 
improve this, 'quasi' Laue techniques are often employed at a reactor source, where 
instead of using the full white beam, a bandpass filter is used, which reduces the 
polychromatic background, but still allowing for relatively short exposure times. At 
a spallation source, a time of flight approach avoids this restriction. 
1.2.2.2 The LADI alld LADI-1l1 diffractometer.\' 
In the early 1990s a quasi LAue DIffiactometer (LADI) was constructed at the 
Institut Laue Langevin (ILL) in collaboration with the European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBLt3 It featured a large cylindrical area detector using neutron 
image plates and a nickel/titanium multilayer filter (see Figure l.21) giving a 
wavelength bandpass of between 5 and 35% which allowed for an enhanced signal to 
noise ratio compared with that of using the full white neutron beam. 
8. b. 
Figure 1.21: LAJ)J-I Oiffractometer at the ILL. (a) schematic view and (b) photograph 
The data collection procedure for this instrument con isted of placing samples in a 
glass capillary and mounting on a goniometer in the cylindrical drum. Samples were 
then rotated about the axis in 5 degr e step p r exposure and image were recorded 
on neutron image plates (a variation on the X-ray image plate doped with neutron 
sensitive colour centres) . The multilayer bandpas filter had a bAlA. of 25% with A. 
centred at 3.sA and the resolution at the edge of the detector was I.SA. For large 
systems where the unit cell a axis is > 11 oA a large number of reflections were 
stimulated, resulting in a very dense diffraction pattern where there spat ia lly 
overlapped spots occurred. Narrowing the band pass filter to bAlA. = 5-10% allowed 
for this fraction to be reduced. 
For small unit cell systems, where a < 50A, a bAlA. of 35% could be used to increase 
efficiency and reduce co llection time. The increased area of reciprocal space 
covered and higher flux avai lable meant that LADI-J wa the best neutron protein 
diffractometer in the world for nearly 10 year. It a llowed for quicker data collection 
times on smaller crystals with larger unit cell than p ible using other instruments. 
During its time in commi ion structures were collected both at room and cryo 
temperatures, the latter being a ignificant innovation which opened up the fie ld of 
neutron protein crysta llography to freeze trap tudie. 
_~ ..r.o--
c. d. 
Figure 1.22: Layout of the LAOl-1II diffrac tometer (a) schematic view (b) photograph of the 
instrument ill place (c) rcad out system 0 11 LAD I-I (d) new readOtlt system and im~lge plates 0 11 
LADJ-Ill. Reproduced from BIakcley 200925 
In March 2007 the LADI-III instrument was commissioned. This was based on the 
design of the VIV ALDI (Very Intense Vertical Axis LADI) diffractometer (LADI-II) 
which itself was primarily designed for collecting data on small molecule systems. 
The key changes from LADI-I were that the image plates and read head were now 
mounted on the inside of the cylindrical drum, this lead to an increase in efficiency 
by a factor of three and a reduction in the area of detector hadowed by the readout 
system. Secondly, the size of the cylinder was increased from 318 to 400mm in 
diameter and from 400 to 450mm in height. This lead to a reduction in the number of 
spatially overlapped diffraction spots and a decrease in the background scatter. As 
well as these improvements, the LADI-lII instrument is scheduled to be moved to a 
higher flux neutron guide in 2010 which should lead to an increase in neutron flux 
by up to a factor of 2. Figure 1.22 shows a schematic view of the LADI-III 
instrument as well as the new read out head desig 
Initial tests on Hen Egg White Lysozyme (HEWL) showed that data collected on 
LADI-III had better accuracy (lower R merge factor), an increased signal to noise ratio 
(l/a(J)) , spots were less spatially overlapped, and data were more complete. Data 
could be collected in a shorter period of time from smaller crystals and to higher 
resolution. The calculated Detector Quantum Efficiencies (DQE) for LADI-I and 
LADI-III respectively are 16 and 46%. Since the initial tests and commissioning, a 
variety of systems have been studied using this diffractometer, including thaumatin, 
antifreeze protein44 and aldose reductase45. 
1.2.3 Deuteration and Perdeutcration 
Although hydrogen scatters neutrons with a good magnitude (50% of that of carbon), 
its scattering cross section is in fact negative. [A positive scattering length is 
associated with 180 degree change in phase of the incident and scattered neturon and 
a negative value is associated with an extra 180 degree phase change from a 
resonance level
]. This negative scattering from hydrogen can result in large parts of 
the Ca protein backbone being rendered invi ible due to cancellation effects, where 
two hydrogen atoms can cancel with a carbon atom. This has further complications 
for the study of ligands bound to proteins, where various pruis of the ligand can be 
rendered invisible as well, which is inconvenient a the e are often sites of interest in 
enzyme mechanism studies. 
H D B c o 
0c= -3.74 6.67 5.30 6.65 5.80 
Figure 1.23: cutron ,catlering CI'O\<; sections for some common CICIllClltS~ 7 
1n order to compensate for thi , crystals can be oaked in D20 in order to cause 
paJiial deuteration. Although the backbone hydrogen atoms are not exchangeable 
hydrogen atom bonded to groups such a NH2 and OH are, and bound water can be 
exchanged. Even so the exchange for the e group i not 100% due to buried 
hydrogen atoms, and hydrogen bonding uch a that in {3 heet which inhibit 
exchange. 
Figurc J .24: Ncutron tructlll'C of concanavalin A aftcl' onc month of soaking in DzO. Oran~c 
region how where hydrogen has been e~challgcd for deuterium, grce n are still hydrogenated. 
Reproduced from Ilabash et al., 1997\9 
Figure 1.24 shows concanavalin A after soaking in D20 for one month. The orang 
regions show where exchange has occurred; the green regions are still hydrogenated. 
This low percentage of exchange is mainly due to the strong hydrogen bonds formed 
between the predominantly ~-sheet containing protein. It would be beneficial if there 
was a greater extent of HID exchange as the majority of the Ca backbone is rendered 
invisible due to cancellation effects. To further increase the amount of deuteration 
proteins can be expressed in a perdeuterated environment. 
Perdueteration 
Over 40 years ago Katz and Crespi48 were investigating the growth of organism 
such a algae, bacteria and higher order organisms under deuterated condition. 
Although D20 is toxic to living organisms in large quantities it was found that they 
could be slowly adapted to grow in deuterated conditions, even if their growth rate 
was consequently retarded. Many years later it was realised that thi could be 
advantageous in structural biology, as by expressing proteins from organi m grown 
in deuterated conditions, all hydrogen atoms in a protein can be completely replaced 
by deuterium. 
Initially deuterium labelling was used in NMR structure determination of large 
proteins (>30kDa)49. The use of deuterium labelling afforded better signal to noise 
ratio due to suppressed spin diffusion and decreased relaxation rates of \3C and 15N 
spins
, crucial for analysing the 2D spectra oflarger proteins. Shu et al., 200051 are 
accredited with collecting the fIrst neutron data set from a perdeuterated crystal of 
myoglobin at 2.oA, expressed from perdeuterated E. coli. 
Since these pioneering works a number of facilities worldwide have been opened, 
dedicated to expression, purifIcation and crystallisation ofperdeuterated proteins and 
DNA. These include the Deuteration Laboratory (DLAB) at the ILL52 in France, Los 
Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) in New Mexico and Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory (ORNL) in the USA, as well as Toka~ Japan. 
E. coli BL21 (DE3) is often used as the expression host for proteins due to its 
relatively easy adaptation to deuteration conditions; however it does require a 
deuterated carbon source. At the DLAB in Grenoble, ds-glycerol is used; however 
this is expensive due to its complex synthetic pathway. At LANL deuterated algae is 
used which is significantly cheaper. With the advancements of these facilities a 
number of perdeuterated proteins have been successfully studied using neutron 
protein crystallography including aldose reductase4s, rubredoxins3 and antifreeze 
protem . 
Perdeuteration of proteins has a number of advantages; fIrstly, CH2 cancellation 
effects are completely avoided, secondly, the scattering power of the sample is 
increased as deuterium scatters positively and therefore so do 50% more of the total 
number of protein atoms, and thirdly, the background of the sample is reduced due to 
the fact that deuterium has a signifIcantly smaller incoherent scattering length than 
hydrogen (see Figure 1.25). These changes lead to a dramatic increase in the signal 
to noise ratio for the sample, which means smaller crystals volumes are nece~sary. A 
successfully studied on the LADI-III instrument, compared with hydrogenated 
crystal sizes of the order of 1-10mm3 (see Blakelcy 200925 for a review). Figure 1.25 
shows the different diffraction patterns obtained from a hydrogenated and 
perdeuterated crystal. The figure shows that there is a clear increase in signal to 
noise ratio in the perdeuterated case. 
Figure 1.25: Neutron difft'ac tion pattern from CA) hydroge nated and (8) deuterated crystals of 
yE-crys tallin. Reproduced from Artero et aI" 200SSt 
1. 2.3. J Deuteratioll Eff ects 
There is a general a sumption that deuteration of a molecule does not affect it 
structure. Given the increased interest in perdeuteration it is important to as e the 
validity of this assumption. It is a well known premise that deuteration affect 
kinetics, as deuterium is heavier and is therefore slower than hydrogen at migrating 
in solution. Changes in molecular function upon deuteration have al 0 been 
observed. The effect of deuteration on thermal properties such as ferroelectricity, 
through structural change, has been documented, and is known as the Ubbelohde 
effect55,56 . 
1.3 Methods for Protonation State Determination 
Protonation states in proteins can be determined using a number of techniques; these 
including, X-ray and neutron protein crystallography, as well as spectroscopic 
techniques such as Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Furthermore protonation 
states can be predicted for crystal structures where hydrogen atoms are not directly 
visible using estimated pKa values if the pH of crystallisation is known. 
1.3.1 Inspection of Electron Density l\1aps 
Using electron density maps that result from X-ray diffraction experiments, it can be 
difficult to accurately defme the location of hydrogen atoms due to the very low 
scattering power of hydrogen. Hydrogen only has a single electron, and in the case of 
covalently bonded hydrogen the electron is shared in the bond. Due to this low 
scattering power hydrogen atoms are generally not visible in electron density maps 
for data collected to common resolution limits of 1-2.5A. 
In order to visualise hydrogen atoms with X-rays, ultra high resolution data (better 
than lA) is required. Even at such resolutions, hydrogen atom visibility rapidly 
drops off as resolution worsens. For example, crystal structures solved at a nominal 
resolution of 1.26A such as human a-thrombin3 and subtilisin Carlsberg (see Chapter 
5.4.1) show a number of visible hydrogen atoms. Roughly 10-15% are visible in the 
Fo-Fe difference electron density maps contoured at 2.5a57 In comparison structures 
of human aldose reductase58 at O.66A and subtilisin7 at O.74A show hydrogen 
visibility of 54% and 65% respectively with electron density maps contoured at 2.5a. 
Even at ultra high resolution, visibility of hydrogen atoms is strongly dependent on 
the associated thermal motion parameters. Figure 1.26 shows the relationship 
between hydrogen atom visibility and B factor for aldose reductase at O.66A58 
resolution. It can be seen that visibility rapidly drops off with increasing B factor, 
and above a B factor of around 15 hydrogen atoms are not visible. 
411 so 
:i: 60 
'" 40 -8 ... 30 0 
% of observed H-atoms vs Bfactor 
"- Linear fit. r=O.97 
" " ~ 
I""I"~ 
~ ~~ @ I1l 
2 3 4 5 6 7 B 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
Bfactor of bonded tom 
Figure 1.26: Jlydrogen visibility vs. B factor for aldose reductase at 0.66...\ resolution. 
Reproduced froll1 Uoward et al.s8 
Despite the need for ultra high resolution data and the associated challenges of 
collecting and processing such data, it is possible to determine hydrogen atom 
positions using electron density maps from X-ray diffraction data. Figure 1.27 shows 
His24 in concanavalin A (conA) from X-ray data at O.94A resolution59. The 
hydrogen atom is visible in the Fo-Fc difference electron density map (shown in red), 
however there is noise adjacent to the hydrogen peak. It can be difficult to 
distinguish a hydrogen peak from noise in electron density maps as the peaks are 
often of a simi lar magnitude. 
Figure 1.27: lIis24 in conA at O.94A froll1 X-r-ay datas9 ZFo-Fc electron densit} map in blue 
(hms) and posithe Fo-Fc in red (Z.5u). The difference electron den it}, map indicate .. that thi\ 
re idue is singly protonated. 
A more recent and impressive example is that of lysozyme at O.65A resolution 
determined by Wang et al. 2ooi. Figure 1.28 shows Thr5l and Tyr53 with 
hydrogen atoms clearly visible in the Fo-Fc difference electron density maps 
contoured to 3.20'. 
~l l0S" 
.,. . 
2.1 A '" 
Figlu'c 1.28: Residucs from IY~()Lymc at o.6sA resolution "itll electron density lIlap~ 3F,,-2F,. 
(bluc) at 41'111S and F,,-Fe (grcen) at 3.20' .,ho\\ing (a) ThrSI, and (b) TYl'S3 ("ith <;plit hydroxyl 
h}drogcn position) . Reproduccd frOIl1 Wang et al.2 
1.3.2 Inspection of Nuclear Density Maps 
As well a electron density map , hydrogen atom position can be directly 
determined from nuclear density maps, the re ult of neutron protein cry tallography 
experiments. As neutron cattering is n t related to the number of electron, 
hydrogen scatters with a similar magnitude to that of carbon and a such hydrogen 
atoms are clearly vi ible in nuclear density map. 
Figure 1.29: His24 in cOllA at 2.2A from neutron data3 Positive Fo-Fe nuclear density map in 
red (2.50'). Here the histidine residue is singly protollated (as deutedum)-'. 
Figure 1.29 again shows His24 in conA from neutron data at 2.2A (Ahmed et a1.3) 
resolution following a D20 crystal soak. The hydrogen atom (as deuterium) on the 
histidine is clearly visible as a positive peak in the Fo-Fc difference nuclear density 
map (shown in red), indicating that His24 is singly protonated. In another example, 
Figure 1.30 shows Val41 in antifreeze protein determined from neutron data 
collected to I.sA resolution by Petit-Haertlein et a1.44. The methyl hydrogen atoms 
(as deuterium) are clearly visible in the 2Fo-Fc nuclear density maps. 
FigUl'c 1.30: Val 41 methyl 113 protons arc c1carly visiblc in nuclear den ity maps from 
antifrcezc protein collectcd to I.SA rcsolution.44 
1.3.3 Inference from Bond Length Analysis 
Another method for determining protonation states in proteins is to analyse the bond 
lengths in residues which contain delocalised electrons from X-ray crystal structures. 
The basic principle is that upon protonation, or in some cases deprotonation, 
conjugation of bonds within a residue is lost, resulting in bonds of different lengths. 
Take for example aspartate and glutamate residues which both contain a carboxyl 
group. In the deprotonated state, the negative charge is delocalised between the two 
oxygen atoms resulting in identical c-o bond lengths. When the residue is 
protonated there are two distinctly different bond lengths, where the c=o bond is 
significantly shorter than the C-OH bond. By analysing the difference between these 
bond lengths it is possible to infer whether a particular residue is protonated or not. 
In order to determine whether the difference between the bond lengths is 'real' or 
due to experimental error the standard deviations of the bond lengths must be 
considered. These values can be computed as long as sufficiently high resolution 
data is available; the general requirement is between 1.2 and 1.3A, a modest 
requirement compared with that for determining the hydrogen atom positions 
directly from electron density maps. 
1.3.4 Protonation Prediction 
There are a number of protein cases for which protonation states cannot be 
determined experimentally, either from neutron protein crystallography, due to the 
formation of small crystals or from X-ray protein crystallography due to limited 
diffraction resolution. In these cases it would be beneficial if residue protonation 
states could be predicted based on a solved X-ray crystal structure. If the pKa of a 
residue and the pH of crystallisation are known, the protonation state of the residue 
can be inferred. 
Single amino acids have well defined pKa values in solution, however the pKa of the 
same amino acids when combined into a folded protein can be significantly different 
due to the three dimensional micro-environment afforded to a residue within a 
protein. This can be caused by other charged residues nearby, water molecules in 
close proximity, and/or associated metal ions. Although modelling such 
environments accurately is a complicated procedure, a number of programs exist to 
calculated estimated pKa values in proteins. 
1.4 Aims of the thesis 
Firstly, two proteins, thiamine phosphate synthase and pyrroloquinoline quinine 
protein C have been expressed, purified, and crystallised under perdeuterated 
conditions for the use in neutron protein crystallography experiments. The aim of the 
neutron experiments was to determine the hydrogen positions of the bound 
intermediates and key residues in the active sites of these proteins, and hence to 
provide an insight into the exact workings of their catalytic mechanisms. 
Secondly, the possible effects of deuteration on structure have been investigated via 
data mining of the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD)60 and the Inorganic 
Chemical Structural Database (ICSD)61, as there are only a small number of neutron 
with X-ray ultra high resolution structures currently available in the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB). Pairs of deuterated and hydrogenated small molecule structures studied 
both by neutron and X-ray crystallography have been compared. The results show 
that significant changes do occur, but at a magnitude not relevant to the diffraction 
resolutions commonly encountered with protein crystallography. 
Thirdly, bond length analysis has been used to determine the protonation states in 
three proteins: bovine pancreatic trypsin, subtilisin Carlsberg and a muscle protein 
cMyBP-C implicated in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) with X-ray structures 
determined to diffraction resolutions between 1.2 and 1.3A. 
Finally, the predicted protonation state of four proteins with known protonation 
states from ultra high resolution X-ray and neutron protein crystaUography, as well 
as from NMR data have been calculated as a basis set to evaluate the accuracy of 
three pKa estimation programs, PROPKA, H++ and MCCE. Following this, the 
protonation states for crustacyanin, the protein responsible for the characteristic 
colouration of the lobster carapace have been predicted, along with the pH 
dependant protonation states of Ribonuclease A (RNase). Furthermore the 
protonation states for typsin, subtilisin and cMyBP-C have been predicted for 
comparison with the other protonation state determination techniques. 
1.5 References 
1. H. Vu, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America, 1999, 96, 332-334. 
2. J. Wang, M. Dauter, R. Alkire, A. Joachimiak and Z. Dauter, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 1254-1268. 
3. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. Helliwell and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
4. M. P. Blakeley, P. Langan, N. Niimura and A. Podjarny, Current Opinion in 
Structural Biology, 2008, 18, 593-600. 
5. L. Hedstrom, Chemical Reviews, 2002, 102,4501-4524. 
6. H. Neurath, J. Cell. Biochem., 1986, 32, 35-49. 
7. P. Kuhn, M. Knapp, S. M. Soltis, G. Ganshaw, M. Thoene and R. Bott, 
Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 13446-13452. 
8. D. M. Blow, J. J. Birktoft and B. S. Hartley, Nature, 1969,221,337. 
9. J. D. Robertus, J. Kraut, R. A. Alden and J. J. Birktoft, Biochemistry, 1972, 
11,4293-4303. 
10. J. D. Robertus, R. A. Alden, J. J. Birktoft, J. Kraut, J. C. Powers and P. E. 
Wilco x, Biochemistry, 1972, 11, 2439-2449. 
11. B. S. Hartley, 1964, 201, 1284. 
12. M. W. Hunkapiller, S. H. Smallcombe, D. R. Whitaker and J. H. Richards, 
Biochemistry, 1973, 12, 4732-4743. 
13. J. L. Markley and I. B. Ibanez, Biochemistry, 1978, 17, 4627-4640. 
14. A. A. Kossiakoffand S. A. Spencer, Nature, 1980,288,414-416. 
15. J. B. Cooper, Curr. Drug Targets, 2002,3, 155-173. 
16. L. Coates, H.-F. Tuan, S. Tomanicek, A. Kovalevsky, M. Mustyakimov, P. 
Erskine and 1. Cooper, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2008, 130, 
7235-7237. 
17. L. Pearl and T. Blundell, Febs Letters, 1984, 174, 96-101. 
18. L. Coates, P. T. Erskine, S. P. Wood, D. A. A. Myles and 1. B. Cooper, 
Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 13149-13157. 
19. M. N. G. James, I. N. Hsu and T. J. Delbaere, Nature, 1977,267,808-813. 
20. K. Suguna, E. A. Padlan, C. W. Smith, W. D. Carlson and D. R. Davies, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 1987,84, 7009-7013. 
21. B. Veerapandian, 1. B. Cooper, A. Sali, T. L. Blundell, R. L. Rosati, B. W. 
Dominy, D. B. Damon and D. J. Hoover, Protein Sd., 1992, 1,322-328. 
22. M. Adachi, T. Ohhara, K. Kurihara, T. Tamada, E. Honjo, N. Okazaki, S. 
Arai, Y. Shoyama, K. Kimura, H. Matsumura, S. Sugiyama, H. Adachi, K. 
Takano, Y. Mori, K. Hidaka, T. Kimura, Y. Hayashi, Y. Kiso and R. Kuroki, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106,4641-4646. 
23. 1. Fitter, T. Gutberlet and J. Katsaras, in Neutron Scattering in Biology, 
Springer, Berlin, Editon edn., 2006. 
24. G. L. Squires, Introduction to the theory of thermal neutron scattering, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1978. 
25. M. P. Blakeley, Crystallography Reviews, 2009, 15, 157-218. 
26. X. Cheng and B. P. Schoenborn, Acta Crystallographica Section B, 1990,46, 
195-208. 
27. 1. Habash, J. Raftery, R. Nuttall, H. 1. Price, C. Wilkinson, A. J. Kalb and J. 
R. Helliwell, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2000, 56, 541-550. 
28. H. Savage, Biophysical Journal, 1986,50,947-965. 
29. A. Y. Kovalevsky, A. K. Katz, H. L. Carrell, L. Hanson, M. Mustyakimov, S. 
Z. Fisher, L. Coates, B. P. Schoenborn, G. 1. Bunick, J. P. Glusker and P. 
Langan, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 7595-7597. 
30. 1. P. Bouquicre, J. L. Finney and H. F. J. Savage, Acta Crystallographica 
Section B, 1994,50, 566-578. 
31. M. P. Blakeley, A. J. Kalb, J. R. Helliwell and D. A. A. Myles, PNAS, 2004, 
101, 16405-16410. 
32. A. Ostennann, 1. Tanaka, N. Englcr, N. Niimura and F. G. Parak, Biophysical 
Chemistry, 2002, 95, 183-193. 
33. Z. Ren, D. Bourgeois, 1. R. Helliwell, K. MofTat, V. Srajer and B. L. 
Stoddard, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 1999,6,891-917. 
34. Y. P. Nieh, J. Raftery, S. Weisgerber, J. Habash, F. Schotte, T. Ursby, M. 
Wulff, A. Hadener, 1. W. Campbell, Q. Hao and 1. R. Helliwell, Journal of 
Synchrotron Radiation, 1999, 6, 995-1006. 
35. K. MofTat and W. C. 1. a. R. M. S. Charles, in Methods in Enzymology, 
Academic Press, Editon edn., 1997, vol. Volume 277, pp. 433-447. 
36. M. v. Laue, W. Friedrich and P. Knipping, Miinchener Sitzungsberichte, 
1912. 
37. K. Motfat, D. Szebenyi and D. Bilderback, Science, 1984,223, 1423-1425. 
38. N. Niimura, Y. Minezaki, T. Nonaka, J. C. Castagna, F. Cipriani, P. Hoghoj, 
M. S. Lehmann and C. Wilkinson, Nature Structural Biology, 1997, 4, 909-
39. J. Habash, J. Raftery, S. Weisgerber, A. Cassetta, M. S. Lehmann, P. Hoghoj, 
C. Wilkinson, J. W. Campbelld and J. R. Helliwell, Journal of the Chemical 
Society. Faraday Transactions, 1997, 93, 4305. 
40. D. W. J. Cruickshank, J. R. Helliwell and K. Motfat, Acta Crystallographica 
Section A, 1987, 43, 656-674. 
41. D. W. J. Cruickshank, J. R. Helliwell and K. Motfat, Acta Crystallographica 
Section A, 1991,47,352-373. 
42. Y. P. Nieh, J. Raftery, S. Weisgerber, J. Habash, F. Schotte, T. Ursby, M. 
Wultf, A. Hadener, J. W. Campbell, Q. Hao and J. R. Helliwell, Journal of 
Synchrotron Radiation, 1999, 6, 995-1006. 
43. F. Cipriani, J. C. Castagna, C. Wilkinson, M. S. Lehmann and G. Buldt, in 
Neutrons in Biology, eds. B. P. Schoenbom and R. B. Knott, Plenum Press 
Div Plenum Publishing Corp, New York, Editon edn., 1996, vol. 64, pp. 423-
44. I. Petit-Haertlein, M. P. Blakeley, E. Howard, I. Hazemann, A. Mitschler, M. 
Haertlein and A. Podjamy, Acta Crystallogr. F-Struct. BioI. Cryst. Commun., 
2009,65,406-409. 
45. M. P. Blakeley, F. Ruiz, R. Cachau, I. Hazemann, F. Meilleur, A. Mitschler, 
S. Ginell, P. Afonine, O. N. Ventura, A. Cousido-Siah, M. Haertlein, A. 
Joachimiak, D. Myles and A. Podjamy, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 2008, 105, 1844-1848. 
46. Z. R. Korszun and Charles W. Carter, Jr., in Methods in Enzymology, 
Academic Press, Editon edn., 1997, vol. Volume 276, pp. 218-232. 
47. NIST, http://www.ncnr.nist.gov/resources/n-iengths/, 2003. 
48. J. J. Katz and H. L. Crespi, Science, 1966, 151, 1187-1194. 
49. M. Sattler and S. W. Fesik, Structure, 1996,4, 1245-1249. 
50. D. M. LeMaster and F. M. Richards, Biochemistry, 1988, 27, 142-150. 
51. F. Shu, V. Ramakrishnan and B. P. Schoenbom, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 2000, 97, 3872-3877. 
52. M. Haertlein, http://www.ilI.fr/YellowBookldeuterationl. 2007. 
53. K. Kurihara, I. Tanaka, T. Chatake, M. W. W. Adams, F. E. Jenney, N. 
Moiseeva, R. Bau and N. Niimura, Proceedings o/the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 2004, 101, 11215-11220. 
54. 1.-B. Artero, M. Hartlein, S. McSweeneyand P. Timmins, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2005, 61, 1541-1549. 
55. J. Robertson and A. Ubbelohde, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1939, 170,222. 
56. A. Katrusiak, Physical Review E, 1995,51,589. 
57. S. 1. Fisher, Unpublished Work, 2007. 
58. E. Howard, Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 2004, 55, 
792-804. 
59. A. Deacon, T. Gleichmann, A. J. Kalb (Gilboa), H. Price, J. Raftery, G. 
Bradbrook, 1. Yariv and 1. R. HeIIiweIl, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 
1997, 93, 4305. 
60. CCDC, http://>>,"-w.ccdc.cam.ac.uk, 2007. 
61. F. KarIsruhe, http://icsdweb.fiz-karlsruhe.del, 2008. 
2. Determination of protonation states in thiamine phosphate 
synthase using neutron protein crystallography 
Thiamine Phosphate (TP) synthase is the protein responsible for the penultimate step 
in the biosynthesis of thiamine diphosphate, the active form of thiamine in vivo. 
Expression of a single site mutant (S l30A) of TP synthase has allowed the reaction 
that the enzyme catalyses to be virtually stopped (an 8000 fold reduction in rate of 
reaction). A freeze trapped X-ray structural study on this single site mutant has 
allowed the determination of the structure ofTP synthase bound to what is proposed 
to be an unusual carbo cation intermediate l . These observations have lead to the 
proposal of a reaction mechanism for this enzyme. However as X-rays are not 
sensitive to hydrogen position, this carbo cation species could not be positively 
identified. If the intermediate is indeed a carbocation then this raises the question as 
to how exactly the enzyme is able to stabilise such an unusual species. 
Hydrogenated wild type and perdeuterated S130 mutant TP synthase have been 
expressed and purified in order to conduct a neutron protein crystallography 
experiment. The aim of the experiment was to determine the protonation state of the 
bound freeze trapped carbocation intermediate and hence confirm whether the 
proposed catalytic mechanism is correct. Furthermore this would be the first time 
that a carbocation had been definitively observed in a protein crystal structure. 
Unfortunately it has not been possible to successfully crystallise the enzyme, 
therefore a variety of checks have been carried out to determine the sequence and 
folded state of the protein, and hence try to explain the difficulties of crystallisation 
in this case. 
2.1 Thiamine2 
Figure 2.1: The \tructure of thiamine 
Thiamine (see Figure 2.1), commonly known as vitamin B 1 is a small organIc 
molecule which unlike micro-organisms humans cannot synthesise. As such 
thiamine is an essential part of the human diet with a daily requirement of l.4mg. 
Deficiency of thiamine in humans results in the build up of pyruvate and lactate, 
which cause damage to the nervous and circulatory systems. These are the main 
causes of beriberi and Wernicke's disease which were widespread in Asia in the 19
century where the populations' diet con ists mainly of white rice. Thiamine is 
contained within the husk of rice which is removed during refinement and this lead 
to deficiency. As a consequence thiamine is now added to many commercial food. 
Figure 2.2: Activation of the thiamine dipho\phate cofllctor. Reproduced from Fralll et al. 2007' 
Thiamine diphosphate has catalytic propertie when incorporated into a number of 
enzymes and the e propertie ari e from the formation of a nucleophilic ylid (a 
neutral dipolar molecule with positive and negative charges on adjacent atoms) 
which is formed at the C2 position (see Figure 2.2). Thiamine diphosphate under 
physiological conditions is a very poor catalyst as abstraction of the C2 proton is 
relatively difficult; the proton has a pKa of 17-194 However when the cofactor is 
accommodated in an active enzyme, the micro environment provided by the protein 
allows the proton to be abstracted more easily. There is evidence that the cofactor 
initially tautomerises into the unusual imino form (see Figure 2.2) and that the 
nitrogen atom of the imine is then responsible for abstracting the C2 protons. 
2.1.1 Biosynthctic Pathway in Prokaryotcs2,6 
Thiamine diphosphate (the active form of thiamine in vivo) is synthesised through a 
complex pathway in prokaryotes as illustrated in Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4. This 
pathway is relatively well understood and most studied in Escherichia coli, 
Salmonella typhimurium, and Bacillus subtilis. There are only minor differences for 
the biosynthetic pathway in B. subtilis, the main one being that the thiazole moiety is 
formed from glycine rather than from L-tyrosine6 
There are three major parts to the synthesis of thiamine diphosphate, firstly, the 
synthesis of the pyrimidine moiety, secondly, the synthesis of the thiazole moiety, 
and finally, the coupling of these two moieties. 
Twelve genes have been identified in the biosynthesis of thiamine
 Six of these 
genes (thiF,G,H,I,S and dxs) are involved in the biosynthesis ofthiazole, one (thiC) 
is involved in pyrimidine biosynthesis, one (thiE) is required for the linking of the 
thiazole and pyrimidine moieties and the remaining four genes (thiD,M,L and pdxK) 
are kinases. The reactions catalysed by thiC, thiD, thiE, thiF, thiL, thiM, the 
thiFSGH complex, dxs and pdxK have been reconstructed in vitro and thiS has been 
identified as the sulphur source. 
e: ... 
'" ...,. 
::r ... 
" ~ . 
'" "0 ... 
'" 0. 
... / .., 
HO~SJl 
~methyl-5-(jl- hydroxyethyl)thiazole 
ATP_ I hydroxyethylthiazole 
kmase (Ee): 
Ec-th fM 
Th iamine Formation 
11 QH rH OH 
O-~=O 
6H 'I OH 
D-9Iyce~dehyde-3-phosphate pyruvate 
l -deoxyxylulo3e-S-COt 
phosphate synthue (Ee): Ec-dxs 
221.7 
O-P-OH 
I -deoxy-O- xyllllose ~~hosPha1e 
ThiS protein 
Cl oft\lrosine 
4-hydrox9benzyl alcohol 
o-i~")DJ 
thi,\Inin biosynthesis 
ThiGH complex (Et): 
Ee-thiH Ec-thiG 
~methyl-5 -(ll-hyd (ox\lethyl)thi azole phosphate 
tyrosine bil'YllthCSiS I 
, ~H2 UOH 
l -tyrosine 
thlamhl kinase (Ec): 
2 71.89 
Ec-th," 
Pyrimdine Biosynthesis 
HO-~-O-J -o~ I HO~ y~, 
hydroxymethylpyrilll id,ne 
5-lIminoltllldllZole nbolluCleollde 
Al P hydroxymtthylpynlll,d, e 
kJllAOe (Ec): Ec-pdx" 
hydrox y'Tlell'ylpyrlmld' " ~ 
thl"mln blosy"lhe.i. 
ADP kill sc (Ec): 
I'rotelll lhiC (Ec): [c-th,C 
Ho-:oL6i 
hydroxymcthylpyril1l,dine phosphate 
271.49 
Ec-thiD 
""u.se (c): Ec- th,D 
AlP~ pho,phollydroxyme'lhylpynmidinc 
HO-J~O-~~: ~~ 
A A ~ 
4-i\mino -5 - hYdrox,meth~~1-
methylpyn,,,,done- pyropho ' phate 
2.7 4.7 
1------------- From 
diphO, phal th'<\InUlc phosphAte 
.y,lth se (Ec): Ec-thlE 
25.1.3 
AlP t hliIJllln 1I10110ph0311hate 
kinase (Ec): Ec- thiL 
2.7.4 16 
5OC~ OH OH 
N , H2 o-J-O-J-OH 
thiamine dlpho,phue 
Thiamine Formation 
Thiazole 
Biosynthesis 
figure 2.4: Pyrimidine Biosynthesis and Thiamine Formation. Reproduced from letaCyc7 
Thiazole Biosynthesis 
.. 11 
ThiS~OAMP 
ThiF, ThiI 
Cysteine 
ThiS~SH 
3 (ThiS-COSH) 
Figure 2.5: Formation of the ThiS-COSH enzyme complex. Reproduced from Begley et al. 19996 
The enzymes ThiI and ThiF are responsible for the formation of the ThiS-COSH (see 
Figure 2.5) enzyme complex, which is the sulphur source for the thiazole moiety. 
ThiF catalyses the adenylation of ThiS to yield ThiS-COOAmp (2) and then ThiF 
and an uncharacterised enzyme ThiI are responsible for the sulphur transfer from S-
cysteine to form ThiS-COSH (3). ThiI has been identified as the limiting factor in 
the sulphur transfers. 9 and is not required for the in vitro reaction. 
SJ(:::0H < I 9 (IIET) 
HET Kinase / N 
'ThiM 
~H I'~OH ~H ~OH A
. OP ~ .i" 
0- Dxs ~ OP, ThiS SH 
.. _HO 3 
COOH S nthase) 6 (OXI') 
y HN COOH 
o '4-5 , 
o 7 - Tyrosine inE. coli and S. ~Ip;murium HXR 
7 - Gly"", in B. subhlis 7 
Hgure 2.6: Formation of 5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole phosphate (8, TIIZ-P). Reproduced from 
Begley et al. 19996 
DXP synthase (Dxs) catalyses the formation of I-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate (6, 
DXP) from glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (4) and pyruvate (5). Surprisingly thiamine 
diphosphate is required as a cofactor for this enzyme. 5-(hydroxyethyl)-4-
methylthiazole phosphate (8, THZ-P) is then believed to be formed from 3, 6 and 7 
which is catalysed by the ThiGH enzyme complex and consists of a two electron 
oxidation process and ring formation (see Figure 2.6). In contrast to E. coli and S . .. 
typhimurium in B. subtilis the ThiH enzyme is replaced with an oxygen dependant 
flavoenzyme named ThiO which utilizes glycine instead of tyrosine to provide the 
C2-N3 unit to the thiazole moiety. 
Although ThiH and ThiG have been genetically identified as essential for thiazole 
biosynthesis, incubation of over expressed ThiFSGH with ThiI, ThiS-COOH, dxp 
and tyrosine resulted in no detectable amount of the thiazole product 10. However 
more recently it has been determined that the iron-sulphur cluster present in the ThiH 
protein is highly oxygen sensitive 1 1 , which explains the difficulty of reproducing the 
reaction in vitro. Leo nardi et al. 200411 showed that the reaction could be 
reconstituted in vitro using anaerobic conditions. In addition to the biosynthesis of 
THZ-P (8) described above, thizole alcohol (9) can also be incorporated from the 
medium into the thiamine pool via the ThiM enzyme which catalyses 
phosphorylation ofthiazole alcohol (9) to THZ-P (8). 
Pyrimidine Biosyntheis 
The pyrimidine moiety is formed from 5-Aminoimidazole Ribotide (10, AIR) which 
is an intermediate from de novo purine biosynthesis. ThiC is the only required gene 
product that has been identified for pyrimidine biosynthesis however overproduced 
ThiC does not catalyse any detectable reaction involving AIR (10) on its ownl2  
However more recently Lawhom et al. 2004
identified that ThiC in the presence of 
an unidentified protein from E. coli does indeed catalyse the formation of 4-amino-5-
(hydroxymethyl)-2-methylpyrimidine diphosphate (HMP-P, 11) from AIR. As well 
as the unidentified E. coli protein both S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAM) and 
NADPfNADPH cofactors are also required for activity. 
HO OH ") ---{~ ~.PKOM: ---{~ 
10 (AIR) /" N~ bp, N~ ~,p, 
~N=0 ~K:eK NH2 NH2 
~ U 11 (HMP-P) 12 (HMP-Pp) 
13 (liMP) NH2 
Figure 2.7: Formation of 4-amino-5-(hydrox~methyl)-2-methylp~rimidine diphosphate (12. 1I\1P-PP). 
Reproduced from Regley et Ill. 1999" 
Following formation of HMP-P, ThiD is then responsible for catalysing the 
phosphorylation of HMP-P (11) to HMP-PP (12), this protein is also capable 9f 
phosphorylation ofHMP (13) and hence salvage of this compound from the medium. 
PdxK is also able to catalyse the phosphorylation of HMP (13) however the 
physiological significance of this redundancy is not understood. 
Thiamin Diphosphate Formation 
Thiamin phosphate synthase (ThiE) is responsible for catalysing the coupling 
reaction between the HMP-PP and THZ-P moieties to yield thiamine phosphate (14, 
TP). Mechanistic and structural studies have been mainly carried out on the B. 
subtilis enzyme as the E. coli enzyme forms inclusion bodies. The catalysed reaction 
is easily reproduced in vitro using the HMP-PP and THZ-P substrates as the 
recombinant enzyme is readily expressed and purified from E. coli. 
8~OPI 
\~8 ThiE 
TP Synthase .. 
Figure 2.8: f'ormation ofTPP from TIIZ .. P and II\IP-rp. R(produced from Bcgley et ul. 19996 
Thiamine phosphate kinase (ThiL) is then responsible for catalysing the 
phosphorylation of thiamine phosphate (14, TP) to the active form of thiamine in .. 
vivo, thiamine diphosphate (15, TPP). Thiamine (16) can also be salvaged from the 
medium via the ThiK enzyme which phosphorylates thiamine (16) to produce 
thiamine phosphate (14, TP). 
2.2 Thiamine Phosphate Synthase 
Thiamine Phosphate (TP) synthase is responsible for the penultimate step in the 
formation of the active form of thiamine in vivo, namely it catalyses the coupling of 
the two substrates THZ-P and HMP-PP to form thiamine phosphate. TP synthase has 
been overexpressed from E. coli, B. subtilis and S. cerevisiae. The E. coli enzyme 
does not express well due to inclusion body formation, however the B. subtilis 
enzyme is small (25 277Da) and can be overexpressed at high levels in E. coli. The 
bi-functional yeast enzyme also catalyses the coupling of THZ-P and HMP-PP 
however the enzyme is rather large; an octamer of 58kDa subunits l4 . As such only 
the B. subtilis enzyme is discussed futher. 
Figure 2.9: A cartoon representation of thiamine phosphate ynthase determined from X-ra) data at 1.25 
resolutionl~. POB Code 2TPS 
The monomer of TP synthase is an et{3 protein with a Triosephosphate Isomerise 
(TIM) fold . TP synthase has a classic TIM barrel structure with a core of eight 
parallel {3-strands surrounded by eight a-helices as illustrated in Figure 2.9. In 
addition to the standard TIM barrel structure there are two additional a-helices; one 
of these runs across the N-terminal barrel entrance, whereas the active site is located 
at the C-terminal entrance. The second helix is located between {38 and a10. Figure 
2.10 shows the topology diagram for TP synthase. 
~I IQ N 
Figure 2.10: Topology diagram for TP \yntha\e. Reproduced from hiu et al. 200 114 
The monomer ofTP syntha e consi t of226 amino acid res idues and the sequence 
is shown in Figure 2.11. Chiu et at. 1997 14 cond ucted a sequence imi larity search 
for B. subtilis TP synthase using the program BLAST l s. Eleven additional TP 
synthase sequences were identified with significant sequence identities. All of the 
key active site residues are conserved in these structures suggesting these enzymes 
have similar act ive site structure and mechani m In addition the amino acid res idues 
in the {3-strands pointing into the a-helices primarily con ist of valine, leucine and 
isoleucine which are characteristic of the TIM barrel structure l4 
se op Thlam n phosphate synthase (d2tpsa~ 
os P -v\I\I"-"- --.J\MI\r--
POB HHGIRMTRISREMMKELLSVYFIMGSNNTKAOPVTVVQKALKGGATLYQFREKGGOALTG 
POB 11\ 20 id 4l\ 50 6 I' 
SCOP Thiamin phosphate syntha,e (d2tp a~ 
o P NWV\I\J\J\.,-
seop Thiamin phosphate synthase (d2lp a~ 
OSSP -NWV-
POB VSAHTM SE VKQA EE DGADYVGLGPIYPT ETKKOTRAVQGV 
POB 129 ' 1..0 150 1'0 
seop Thlclmln phosphate synthdse (d2tp a~ 
OSSP~ 
POD ITIDNAA PVIQA GAD GV MI AI QA OP 
89 20b 
VRAA I GOM I LG , 
Figure 2.11: Sequence for Tt> S)J1lha\(' from I'J)B code 2TI'S. Rl' prolluccd frOIll rc\U.org 
The functional form of TP synthase is a homodimer, with the two active sites 
pointing in opposite directions. The major dirner contacts are formed through 
interaction between one of the a-helices, however residues from the His6 affinity tag 
al 0 provide extra dirner contacts. There are a number of electrostatic and van der 
Waals interactions among these contacts including the fonnation of salt bridges. In 
the crystal form the two molecules of the dirner lie side by side in the asymmetric 
unit related by a Non-Crystallographic Symmetry (NCS) operator. 
The protein crystallises in the space group P43212 with a = 76.83A and c = 140.10k 
This is favourable for crystallographic data collection a for tetragonal symmetry 
generally only 45 of data need be collected, assuming the c axis is not parallel to the 
rotation axis. A wide variety of X-ray data has been collected for TP syntha e 
including enzyme-product complexes (PDB Code 2TPS 14) and enzyme-intermediate 
complexes (PDB Code 1 G6i). 
ILE208 
ASP 112 
Fil:urc 2.12: The aclivc sitc of thi a mine phosphal(' S) nl hase \\ ilh bound prod uctl~ 
Figure 2.12 shows the active site for TP synthase a determined from X-ray data at 
1.25A resolution
, this region comprises a pocket fonned primarily by loop region 
59-67 (loop A, joins a3 to (32), 109-114 (loop B, joins as to (J4) and 151-168 (loop 
C, joins cf1 to (J6). The C loop acts as the door to the active site, when the reaction is 
complete this loop moves out of the way to release the products. The pyrophosphate 
binding site is located near three active site loops and close to the opening of tpe 
active site. The pyrophosphate group is stabilised by a number of electrostatic and 
hydrogen bonding interactions. The pyrophosphate and thiazole moieties are 
positioned on opposite sides of the pyrimidine base. The magnesium binding site is 
located towards the edge of the active site and is solvent accessible. The magnesium 
ion is octahedrally coordinated by two aspartic acid residues, two oxygen atoms 
from the pyrophosphate group and two water molecules. Thiamine phosphate binds 
in a V shaped conformation which is maintained primarily by van der Waals 
interactions. The pyrimidine moiety is located at the entrance to the hydrophobic 
core of the barrel. 
2.2.1 Enzymatic Mechanism 
Figure 2.13: Proposed enzymatic mechanisms for thiamine phosphate synthase. Reproduced froll\ Chiu et 
al. 199914 
Chiu et al. 14 initially determined the crystallographic structure of TP synthase in 
1999. From the structure determination, they proposed three catalytic mechanisms by 
which TP synthase could proceed as shown in Figure 2.13. The first proposed 
mechanism is an SN 1 reaction, where the pyrophosphate group initially dissociated 
from the HMP-PP moiety forming a carbo cation intermediate followed by 
nucleophillic attack from the nitrogen of the THZ-P moiety. The second mechanism 
is an SN2 reaction, where the lone pair on the nitrogen atom of the THZ-P moiety 
directly displaces the pyrophosphate group from the HMP-PP moiety. This reaction 
would be expected to proceed through a tetrahedral intermediate. The third 
mechanism is an addition-elimination reaction, and since there is no active site 
nucleophile present in the TP synthase active site this mechanism has been ruled out. 
If the reaction is to proceed by SN 1 then the stability of the carbocation would be 
crucial to the rate of reaction. This would not be the case in the S 2 reaction as the 
intermediate would have much less carbocation character. 
Chiu et al. identified that the residue Ser 130 (S 130) was located within hydrogen 
bonding distance (2.56A) of the pyrophosphate group (see Figure 2.12), this lead 
them to believe that this oxygen of the pyrophosphate group was initially bound to 
the HMP-PP moiety. They proceeded to prepare a single site mutation at this site 
from a serine to an alanine residue (S 130A). They observed that the rate of reaction 
for this mutant was around 8000 times slower than the wild type protein, leading 
them to believe that the reaction did indeed proceed via SNl. 
Figure 2.14: Active site of thiamine phosphate synthase \\ ith bound intermediates from the 1.4, resolution 
X-ray structure l 
Peapus et al. 2001 1 later reported the structure of the S130A mutant protein, Figure 
2.14 shows the active site for this mutant. They initially incubated the protein wit~ 
substrates in the hope of collecting data on an enzyme-substrate complex; however 
what they actually found was a bound intermediate of the reaction pathway. It can be 
seen in Figure 2.14 that there appears to be the trapped carbocation of the SN 1 
pathway located on the HMP moiety. 
2.2.2 Aims of the Neutron Experiment 
If the intermediate is indeed a carbo cat ion then it is also of interest how exactly the 
enzyme manages to successfully stabilise such an intermediate. In particular it is 
unclear whether the pyrophosphate is hydrogen bonded to the pyrimidine ammo 
group (Figure 2.15) or deprotonates the amino group to give a neutral imine (Figure 
2.16). 
3.03A 
Figure 2.15: Hydrogen bond stabilised intcrllll'diate 
0/\ H H ~ I 0--------------------- --------------------N -::?" S 
O~p I 
,-OH H-N~ -
Figure 2.16: Imine stahilised lnh'rmcdiatc 
Previous X-ray studies have revealed thiamine synthase with bound products 14 and 
what appears to be thiamine synthase with a bound pyrimidine carbocation 
intermediate1 The latter crystal unfortunately only diffracted to 1.40A, which is 
below the resolution where hydrogen atoms are visible in the Fo-Fc difference 
electron density map or where bond length analysis can be used 16 (see Chapter 5). In 
order to address the question of whether the pyrophosphate group is hydrogen 
bonded or not, a neutron diffraction study using a fully deuterated protein has been 
proposed. By using neutron diffraction and a fully deuterated protein it will be 
possible to accurately locate the hydrogen (as deuterium) atoms in the key active site 
positions to be determined, due to the significant scattering power of deuterium. The 
enzyme has been expressed in perdeuterated form in large quantity, purified and has 
been trialled for crystallisation. 
2.2.2.1 Key 1,\',\'Ue.'i 
There are three key issues for the success of the neutron experiment: (i) the lifetime 
of the carbocation, (ii) synthesis of fully deuterated substrates, (iii) and the 
achievable diffraction resolution. These are discussed individually below. 
Carbocation Lifetime 
The carbo cation lifetime is important, as the low flux of neutron sources compared 
with that of X-ray sources means that long exposure times are often required. The 
experiment is intended for the LADI-III instrument at the Institut Laue Langevin. 
Allocation blocks for this instrument are usually of the order of 14 days; given the 
space group is P432 12 only 10 or so Laue diffraction images will be needed, thus 
giving a maximum exposure time of roughly 34 hours per image. A beam time 
proposal on the LADI III instrument has been accepted, however only 3 days of 
beamtime were allocated which is unlikely to be long enough to collect a complete 
data set. The carbo cation intermediate is stable at cryogenic temperatures but not at 
room temperature. A beam time proposal at the European Synchrotron Radiation 
Facility (ESRF) has also been accepted in order to test the carbo cat ion intermediate 
lifetime. By collecting a data set at lOOK, then storing the crystal in liquid nitrogen 
for a week and then collecting a second data set at lOOK it should be possible to 
determine whether or not the carbocation is stable for the length of time required for 
the neutron experiment. 
Fully Deuterated Substrates & Diffraction Resolution 
Perdeuteration of the substrates is also crucial to the success of the experiment. If 
such substrates are not available it is possible that cancellation in the nuclear density 
maps could occur due to the hydrogen atoms scattering negatively (thus two 
hydrogen atoms can cancel a carbon atom). Collaborators at Comel University, 
Tthaca, have confirmed that per deuterated HMP-PP has been synthesised 
successfully, so cancellation at the key hydrogen positions shou ld not be an is ue. 
Perdeuteration of the THZ-P substrate is however more challenging and it appears it 
may only be possible to deuterate this compound at the C2 position, however this 
substrate should be located far enough from the carbocation that it does not interfere 
with the nuclear density maps of the intermediate. Figure 2.17 and Figure 2.1 8 show 
calculated nuclear density map for hydrogenated, D20 soaked and perdeuterated 
HMP at 2 and 3A resolution. The effects of cancellation can be clearly seen in these 
maps. 
Figure 2. 17: uclear den,it) map' contourcd to 2a for 11 lP gCll cra ted from ,tructure factor~ ealculnted 
to 2 u\ing the CCN program SF LL I7. ( ) ,ho,,~ h)drogcnntcd 11 1\1 P, (B) partially dellterHted, IIl1d ( ' ) 
full) deut('rated 
A B H c 
Figure 2.18: Nuclear density maps contoured to 2u for liMP generated from structure factors ca lcul a ted 
to 3 u ing the CCP4 program SFALL. (A) sho\\ s hydrogenated liMP, (B) partia lly deutera ted, a nd (C) 
full y deuterated 
Given that deuterated HMP-PP is available it should be possible to avoid the 
situation shown in Figure 2.18a where there is essentially a spherical region of 
nuclear density. This would make assigning the orientation of the intermediate and 
number of protons bound to the carbocation very difficult. 
The upgrade from LADI-I to LADI-III has led to a threefold increase in efficiency of 
the instrument and with the availability of deuterated substrates it is hoped that it 
will be possible to collect data that will result in nuclear density maps like those 
shown in Figure 2.17c and Figure 2.18c. 
2.3 Preparation of Perdeuterated Thiamine Phosphate Synthase 
2.3.1 S130A Mutant 
2.3.1.1 Expressioll 
Hydrogenated thiamine phosphate synthase was prepared as described by Zhang et 
a1. 199i 8. BL21 (DE3, the standard strain used for genetic manipu lations) E. coli 
cells were transformed using l/.d of plasmid pYZC6927 (incorporating the S130A 
mutant) via heat shock at 42C for 30 seconds followed by cooling on ice for 2 
minutes. The cells were then incubated at 37C for an hour in 900Jl.1 of Super 
Optimal broth with Catabolite repression (SOC) medium. Following th is the cu lture 
was centrifuged at 3000rpm for 2-3 minutes, the supernatant was removed and the 
pellet was re-suspended in a further 100Jl.1 of SOC medium. This 100Jl.1 solution was 
then spread onto a plate containing LB medium and the antibiotic kanamycin 
(working concentration of 30Jl.g/ml) in order to select the transformed cells. A single 
colony from the plate was used to prepare ate t expre sion system in 10ml of LB 
medium (2Sg of medium / 11 water). The culture was grown to mid log phase at 
which point 700Jl.l of the culture was each placed into 3 flasks containing 30ml of 
LB medium and 90Jl.l kanamycin (10mg/ml stock solution). The 3 cultures were then 
grown to an Optical Density (OD) of roughly 1.0 at 37C at which point a SOOJl.1 
sample was collected (before induction; BJ) and the cu ltures were induced u ing 
1 mM isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyrano ide (lPTG). The 3 flasks were then incubated 
at 22, 30 and 37C respectively overnight. 
Synthase 
22C 30C 37C 
61 AI P SN M 61 AI P SN M 61 AI P SN 
- - 20 
- - 10 
Figure 2. 19 : S DS-P C E anul},i, ror th e h}c1roge natl'd t l" tl'\llrl'~,ion or SIJO IIIlItant protein 
Another SOOjLI sample was then taken (after induction, AI) and cells were isolated by 
centrifugation at 6000rpm for lSmins; the cell pellet was then re-suspended in 10ml 
of lysis buffer (SOOmM NaCI, 20mM Tris-HCI) and cells were disrupted using 
sonication. Soluble protein was isolated from the disrupted cells by centrifugation at 
19000rpm for 4Smins and a SOjLI sample of the remaining cell pellet was collected 
(pellet, P). Samples from before induction (BI), after induction (AI), isolated cell 
pellets (P) and supematant after sonication (SN) were analysed using Sodium 
Oodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SOS-PAGE). The BioRad 
precision plus "All Blue" protein standard marker (M) was used to identify the 
molecular mass of the bands present on the gel. Figure 2.19 shows the SOS-PAGE 
results for the hydrogenated expression tests; TP synthase is clearly present in good 
quantity around the 2SkOa marker region in all three of the expression temperatures 
tested, however soluble protein expression (as visible in the supernatant [SND seems 
to be better at 22C compared with 30 or 37C. 
Oeuterated TP synthase was prepared in a similar manner to the hydrogenated TP 
synthase. Initially 1 ml of an LB plus kanamycin hydrogenated culture was spread 
onto a plate containing deuterated EN FORS medium (see 2.S Appendix) and 
kanamycin and the plate was left to grow for 2 days. A scraping from the deuterated 
plate (as isolated colonies do not form on deuterated plates) was then used to start a 
culture consisting of 10ml D-ENFORS and 30jLI kanamycin (labelled I x). This was 
grown to mid log phase at 37C. Following this liquid adaptation was used in order 
to speed up the cell growth under deuterated conditions and minimise contamination 
from the initial hydrogenated cells; this consisted of preparing diluted cultures on a 
daily basis. A tenfold dilution was ftrst prepared; 1 ml of the 1 x culture was placed 
into a new flask containing 9ml of O-ENFORS and 30jLI kanamycin (and labelled 
2x). The new culture was again grown to mid log phase at which point the procedure 
was repeated to produce a new culture labelled 3x. 200jLI of the 3x culture was then 
each placed into two new flask containing 9.8ml D-ENFORS and 30ILI kanamycin 
(fiftyfold dilution). These two cultures were grown again to mid log phase at which 
point they were diluted fourfold by addition of 30ml O-ENFORS and 90ILI 
kanamcyin. They were then grown to an OD of 1.0 at which point they were induced 
using 1 mM of IPTG. One flask was placed in an incubator at 22C and the other at 
30C overnight. 
The following day the cells were harve t d usmg centrifugation at 6000rpm for 
lSmins. The cell pellet wa then re-suspended in 30ml of lysi buffer and the cell 
were disrupted using sonication. Disrupted cells were then separated from oluble 
protein using centrifugation at 19000rpm for 4Smins. Crude supernatant was then 
analysed along with sample from before induction (BI), after induction (A]) 
disrupted cell pellet (P) and supematant (S ) u ing SOS-PAGE. Figure 2.20 show 
the results for this analy is; once again TP synthase is clearly pre ent in good 
quantity at both 22 and 30C a illustrated by the band at around 2SkOa; so luble 
protein expression in the deuterated ca e however seems better at 30C compared 
with 22C. 
Synthase 
nc 30C 
_ "II,,-__ AJ P SN M 
- 210110 
- 110 
- 100 
_ - 10 
- :IS 
Figure 2.20: ' 0 '-p \GE anal)~i\ for the deuterated tC\t c\prc\~ion of SIJOA Illutant protein 
Lar e Scale Pre arations 
Large quantities of pr tein were prepared in a imilar manner to the te t expre ion. 
A hydrogenated tarter culture wa prepared u ing the initial hydr genated plate. A 
ingle colony from the hydr genated plate wa placed into a fla k containing 10ml 
LB medium and 30111 kanamycin. Thi wa gr wn at 37C fi r 5-6 h urs at which 
point the culture was diluted fortyfold by ach placing 1 ml of the tarter culture int 
two new flasks containing 30ml LB medium and Olll kanamycin. The e ulture 
were grown to mid I g pha e at which point ISml f the culture wa each add d t 
two new fla ks containing I L LB medium and 3ml kanamycin, th c ultur were 
gr wn to an 00[0.8 at which pint they wer induced with I mM I PT and pia d 
in an incubator at 22 rnight. The fi 11 wing day cell were i olated u ing 
centrifugation at 7500rpm for 25 rmns; cell paste was then separated from the 
supernatant and stored at -20C. 11 g of cell paste was obtained from a 2L culture. 
Figure 2.21: INFORS-IIT, LABFORS 3 beneh top fermentation system 
A large scale preparation of the deuterated protein was prepared using a high cell 
density fermentation system (INFORS HT, LAB FORS 3 bench top fermentation 
system, see Figure 2.21). The procedure for liquid adaptation used to setup the test 
expressions was continued from the 3x culture up to a 6x culture. The 6x culture was 
then used to setup a starter culture for fermentation. 1.5ml of the 6x culture was 
placed into a new flask containing 50ml D-ENFORS and 150/11 kanamycin and this 
culture was grown to mid log phase at 37C at which point 1 ml of the starter culture 
was placed into a new flask containing 75ml D-ENFORs and 225/11 kanamycin. The 
culture was again grown to mid log phase at which point it was used to start the 
fermentation process. The entire 75ml culture was placed into the fermenter along 
with 1.7L of D-ENFORS medium and 5ml kanamycin. Feeding solution (12% 
deuterated dg-glycerol in O-ENFORS) and deuterated base (4% NaOD in 0 20) were 
prepared in order to supplement the fermentation. The fermenter culture was grown 
to an OD of 12.4 overnight at which point it was induced using 1 mM IPTG (2ml). 
The fermenter culture was incubated at 22C for 24 hours and cells were isolated 
using centrifugation at 7500 rpm for 25 mins. The supernatant was disposed of and 
cell paste was collected and stored at -20C. 69.3g of cell paste was obtained from a 
1.7L culture. 
Large Sca le (H) 
M BI AI 
Synthase 
Fermenter (D) 
M BI AI 
- 100 
Figure 2.22: Large ~ea l e c\prc\\ion of dc ut cra tcd a nd h},drogcna tcd S 130A mut a nt protein 
Figure 2.22 shows SOS-PAGE analy is of ample from the large cale preparation, 
TP synthase is again present in good quantity in both hydrogenated and deuterated 
preparations as shown by the band at - 25kOa in the after induction (AI) lane. 
2.3.1.2 Purificatioll 
Both the hydrogenated and deuterated crude protein extract were initially purified 
using nickel affinity chromatography. For purification of the te t expre ion culture 
1 ml of Qiagen nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni2+- TA) re in (50% u pen ion in 30% 
ethano l) was initially mixed with 1 ml of Iy i buffer (SOmM Tris-H I, SOOmM 
NaCI) and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins, the upernatant wa discarded and 
more lysis buffer wa added, this procedure wa repeated 3 time in order t remove 
the storage ethano l from the resin giving a final vo lume of SOOj1.1 of re in. Once the 
re in had been equilibrated int the Iy i buffer the crude protein extract (Iy ed from 
test expres ion ce ll pa te, - 5ml extract) wa added and the mixture was agitated at 
4C for an hour. 
The mixture wa then loaded onto a co lumn and the flow through (FT) wa 
collected . The column wa then wa hed with three wa h buffer (WI 2 ) f Sml 
containing different concentration of a I. The genera l make up f the buffer wa 
20mM Tris-H I pH7.S and 10mM imidaz I where the fir t wa h contain d I M 
NaCl, the second 500mM NaCI and the third 250mM NaCI. The protein was then 
eluted from the column using 5ml of elution buffer consisting of 20mM Tris-HCl 
pH7.5, 250mM NaCI and 250mM imidazole, and was fractionated into 10 500j.l.1 
fractions. 
Figure 2.23 and Figure 2.24 show SDS-PAGE analysis for the nickel affmity 
chromatography purification of hydrogenated and deuterated protein from the test 
expressions. TP synthase is relatively pure as shown by the single band at ~25kDa 
and is present all the way up to fraction 7. The perdeuterated protein is slightly less 
pure compared with the hydrogenated as can be seen from the bands present at larger 
molecular weight in the SDS-PAGE analysis. Fractions containing TP synthase were 
poo led and concentrated to a volume of 500j.l.1 using an Amicon Ultra 10K 
centrifugal concentrator. 
C FT Wl W2 W3 M 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
- 100 
Synthase Al Ib 
Figurc 2.23 : SOS-PAGE ana lys is of nickcl purification fracti ons for h) d rogc natcd 130 mutant protein 
Impurities 
"~IIIIII~~'IJI'iI~~~~~ - 100 
Synthase 
Figure 2.24: 0 -P GE ana lys is of nickel purification frac tions for dcutc rated 130 mutant protein 
The nickel affmity chromatography purification process was scaled up in order to 
purify crude protein extracted from the large scale preparations. 5g of cell paste wa~ 
initially re-suspended in 30ml of lysis butTer, and then sonicated. Disrupted cells 
were then separated from soluble protein using centrifugation at 19000 rpm for 45 
mins. 8ml of Ni2+-NTA (4ml once ethanol was removed) resin was incubated with 
the crude protein extract (-30ml) at 4C for an hour. The mixture was loaded onto a 
column and washed with 50ml of each of the three wash butTers used for the test 
expression purifications. The protein was eluted with 30ml of elution buffer and 
collected into 20 1.5ml fractions. 
Gel Filtration 
Following nickel affmity purification, gel filtration was then used to obtain the 
highest possible protein purity. Gel filtration is a form of size exclusion 
chromatography. It enables particles to be separated on a size basis, the theory being 
that larger particles elute quicker as they have a smaller distance to travel. 
AGE Healthcare Superdex 200 gel filtration column was used alongside a BioRad 
BioLogic DuoFlow system. The column was initially equilibrated with a gel 
filtration butTer consisting of 50mM Tris-HCl, 50mM NaCl and ImM dithiothreitol 
(DTT) by flowing the buffer through the column for an hour. After equilibration 
500ILI of protein from the nickel affmity purification was loaded onto the column. A 
flow rate of O.5mllmin was used and 500jll fractions were collected. A gel filtration 
profile was automatically generated during filtration which consisted of taking a UV 
measurement at 280nm for each fraction collected in order to determine the protein 
concentration. 
Figure 2.26 shows the gel filtration profile for the hydrogenated protein which 
appears to behave well on the column giving a single peak corresponding to TP .. 
synthase in a single homogeneous state. Fractions 34-41 were then analysed by SDS-
PAGE to eonfrrm the presence ofTP synthase, Figure 2.26 shows the results for this 
analysis. TP synthase is present in good quantity from fractions 36 to 39 and these 
were poo led. 
"i 0.03 
'" .J:J < 0.02 
-0.0 1 
Calibration 
Anomaly 
OIl ~ 
Non-aggregated 
protein 
Time (minutes) 
Fractions 
34 - 41 
Figure 2.25: Gel filtra t ion IJrofile for hydrogenated IJOA mutant protein 
C M 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
.IIII---TP 
Synthase 
Figure 2.26: J) -PAG E ana lys is of ge l tilt ra tion fractions for the hydrogenated BOA muta nt protein 
The same procedure was used for the deuterated protein, SOOJ1.1 of concentrated 
protein from the nickel affinity chromatography was loaded on the column, a flow 
rate of O.Sml/min was used and 500J1.1 fractions were collected. Figure 2.27 shows 
the gel filtration profile for the deuterated protein. The deuterated protein appears to 
behave very differently to the hydrogenated protein when using gel filtration, the 
bulk of the protein now elutes much quicker (see Figure 2.27) indicating that the 
protein has aggregated. This can be seen by the major peak now appearing at around 
17 mins instead of 36 mins in the hydrogenated case (see Figure 2.25). There are 
also other peaks present between the times of 17 and 36 mins indicating various 
other states of the protein. The fractions from gel filtration were then analysed by 
SOS-PAGE to conftrm the presence of TP synthase; these re ults are hown In 
Figure 2.28. 
Aggregated --. 
0.08 protein 
Smaller 
aggregated states 
Non-aggregated 
e- 0.04 l~e;" 
'" .c 
o 0 0 
o 0 0 
o V') 0 
N N <') 
Time (minutes) 
Figure 2.27: el fi lt ra t ion profi le for d(' utcrated 130A mu ta nt protein 
32 33 34 36 38 - lOO 
TP - 10 
Synthase AlBlJt 
Figure 2.211: SDS-PAC I~ ana l),i, of gel filtra tion frac tion\ for th e dcut e rated S I30A mut a nt protein 
The SOS-PAGE re ult show that TP yntha e i pre ent in all fraction ana ly ed. It 
was propo ed that the aggregati n ph en menon could be a concentration dep ndent 
equi librium. In order to te t thi the pr tein wa dilut d and then purified u ing gel 
fi ltration, the gel filtration profile for the diluted protein i hown in Figure 2.29. The 
equi librium now appear t ha e hift d back t ward the n n aggregated form f 
the protein, however ome of the aggr gated form i till pre ent in th earlier 
fraction, a uch fraction 34-3 were po I d. 
'"' o 
0.015 
0.010 
~ 0.005 
0.000 
-0.005 
Aggregated 
protein 
Fractions 
.. 34 - 38  
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
V) 0 V) 
N ~ ~ 
Time (minutes) 
Non-aggregated 
protein 
Figure 2.29: Ge l filtration profile for' diluted deuterated S130A muta nt prote in 
2.3.1.3 Crystalli.<iatioll 
Initial crystallisation conditions were used from Chiu et al. 14  These conditions were 
as follows: "A hanging-drop vapour diffusion system setup at 4 QC was used. A drop 
containing 3J.d of protein solution (20mglml in 50mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, and 
1 mM DTT) plus 3J.l.I of reservoir solution was equilibrated against a 1ml reservoir 
solution [75mM Tris-HCI, 75mM MgCh, 21-22% (w/v) PEG 4000, and ImM DTT, 
pH 7.5]". Although the paper indicates the protein was stored in 50mM Tris-HCI pH 
7.5 and 1 mM DTT, the protein is not actually stable in this buffer and readily 
precipitates. A 500J.l.I sample of the protein from gel filtration was dialysed against 
this buffer using a Prince 3500 Molecular Weight (MW) cut off dialysis cassette. 
Roughly 50% ofthe protein was lost through precipitation; following this the protein 
was concentrated, the maximum obtainable concentration with this buffer was only 
8mglml. Concentration above this resulted in loss of the protein via precipitation. 
The quoted buffer is unusual in that it contains no salt which could lead to reduced 
protein solubility. To rectify this 200mM salt was added to the dialysis buffer in 
order to help solubilise the protein. This resulted in 70% of the rotein being retained 
90 1 JOH I ItA' ~ 
when dialysed into the new buffer. The protein was again concentrated using an 
Amicon Ultra 1 OK centrifugal concentrator as the protein so lution obtained from the 
gel filtration after dialysis was of the order of 0.S-4.0mglml. A concentration of 
12.4mglml was the highest obtainable concentration using the buffer with 200mM 
NaCI. Hanging drop vapour diffusion crystallisation conditions were setup using 
hydrogenated protein with an initial screen of 21-26% (w/v) PEG 4000 in 1 % steps. 
All of these crystallisation conditions resulted in the precipitation ofthe protein. The 
general nature of this amorphous precipitate can be een in Figure 2.30. 
Figure 2.30 : Amorphou\ precipitate formed "hen cr)stallising the 5130 mutant protein 
The same condition were screened for the deuterated protein, and agam 
precipitation occurred in all case. Further condition were screened using 13- 19% 
(w/v) PEG 4000 solutions in 2% steps and at three pH conditions of7 .3, 7.5 and 7.7, 
once again precipitation occurred. Sample were al 0 ent to the High Throughput 
crystallisation (HTX) robot at the European Molecular Biology Lab ( MBL). This 
uses micro drops (100nl) to screen a large variety of cry tallisation condition; thi 
again re ulted in only precipitation or clear drop no crystals were formed even after 
8 weeks. 
Following discussion with collaborator at ornell Univer ity Ithaca, 10% (v/v) 
glycerol was added to the nickel affmity ChI mat graphy wa h and elution buffi r , 
and to the dialy i buffer in order to tabili e the protein further. Furthermor ge l 
filtration was not used a the protein wa deemed pure en ugh rrom nicke l affinity 
chromat graphy. The e conditi n had b en pr vi u Iy u d for the bi chemical 
assessment of the protein. The dialysis buffer now consisted of 20mM Tris-HCI pH 
7.5, I mM DTT and 10% (v/v) glycerol. Dialysis into this buffer resulted in 80% of 
the protein being retained and the protein could be concentrated up to 20mglml. 
Given the previous precipitation problems a larger PEG 4000 screen was conducted 
in order to check where exactly precipitation occurred. Hanging drop vapour 
diffusion crystallisation conditions were setup as previously, however 4% steps of 
PEG 4000 (w/v) from 4% to 24% were used. 
Figure 2.31: lIeavy precipitation in a drop containing 24% (\\ /v) PEG 4000 "ith 20mg/ml protein. 
Figure 2.31 shows the precipitation that occurs at 24% (w/v) PEG 4000, this heavy 
precipitation is unlikely to ever crystallise. This precipitation occurs very quickly, 
when setting up the drops this precipitation can be observed under the microscope as 
soon as the precipitant is added to the protein solution. 
Figure 2.32: Light precipitation in a drop containing 12% (w/\) PEG 4000 with 20mg/ml protein. 
However as the PEG 4000 concentration is lowered precipitation occurs to a lesser 
extent; Figure 2.32 shows the lighter precipitation that occur at 12% (w/v) PEG 
4000. It is difficult to clearly see, however this doe not look like an amorphou 
precipitate; it is possible that this is instead microcrystalline. 
Further screens were conducted by altering the MgCh content In the reserVOlr 
solutions. Figure 2.33 shows the results when there is no MgCh added to the 
reservoir solution at 24% (w/v) PEG 4000. A very light precipitation occurs in the 
centre of the drop and crystalline type objects are also present. Crystalli ation 
conditions were also screened with 35rnM MgCh ver us the initial 75rnM, with a 
PEG 4000 screen of 4-24% (w/v) in 4% steps. 
Figure 2.33: Light precipitate and cr)\tullinc t)pe objcct\ in u drop \\ithout IgCl2 but \\ilh 24% (\\ / \) 
PEG 4()OO. 
Some crystal were eventually ob erved ( ee Figure 2.34) at 75mM Mg h, 10% 
glycerol at 4 and 8% P G4000, however it wa not possible t reproduce the e 
result u ing the exact ame cry tall i ation buffer and pr tein batch. 
Figure 2.34: C rys ta ls obta ined in 7S ml\1 I\ JgClh J 0% glycerol, 8% PEG4000 
As the crystals could not be reproduced using spontaneous nucleation the crystals 
that did form were then used to macro and micro seed pre-equilibrated crystallisation 
drops. 
Microseeding 
A series of 6 hanging drops containing 75mM MgCh, 10% glycerol and 8% 
PEG4000 were equilibrated for 24 hours yielding clear drops. A single crystal was 
taken from the drop and placed into an eppendorf tube along with 40Jll of mother 
liquor. The tube was then vortexed vigorously in order to pulverise the crystal and 
produce a homogeneous seed stock solution. The stock solution was then serially 
diluted from \ 00-1 OOOx in 100x steps. 1 Jl\ of each of the solutions was then added to 
the pre-equilibrated drops and the drops were resealed. The drops were left for a 
number of weeks, however no crystals were obtained. 
Macroseeding 
Another series of 6 hanging drops containing 75mM MgCh, 10% glycerol and 8% 
PEG4000 were equilibrated for 24 hours yielding clear drops. One crystal wa 
placed into each drop and the drop was resealed. The crystallisation tray was then 
left for a number of weeks. Surprisingly the crystals neither dissolved nor grew any 
larger. 
2.3.1.4 S130A Mutallt lIis6 Tag Cleavage 
Fo 1I0wing the issues crystallising the S 130A mutant protein, the attached H iS6 
affinity tag was cleaved from the S130A mutant protein. From the previously 
published structure (PDB code 2TPS) the his6 tag appears to be present in the crystal 
structure and is involved in the formation of dimer contacts, however the His6 tag 
has been known to cause issues with both crystallisation and protein solubility. The 
plasmid sequence (pET28) contains a common his tag cleavage site as shown in 
Figure 2.35. This sequence can be readily and efficiently cleaved using Tobacco 
Etch Virus (TEV) protease. 
MG HHHHHH CENLYFQII H 
Figure 2.35: lIi~b tag clca\age ,cqucncc 
I ml of 20mg/ml S 130A protein was initially dialy ed into 50mM Tris-HCI pH8.0, 
150mM NaCL, O.SmM DTA and 1 mM DTT. Following this O.5ml of 1 mg/ml T V 
protease was added and the mixture was incubated at room temperature with 
agitation over night. The cleaved S 130A protein wa i olated from the reaction 
mixture using nickel affinity chromatography. The cleaved protein now contained no 
his tag and will not bind to the nickel column and therefore hould be pre ent in the 
flow through and washe . TEV protease itself is hi tagged and therefore should bind 
the column along with the cleaved his tag. Figure 2.36 hows that the wa h fraction 
contains the cleaved S 130A protein with a mall amount of the protein still pr ent 
in the elution fraction along with TEV protea e (MW - 2SkDa). 
FT W1 M 2 4 6 8 11 14 17 
Uncleaved TP Synthase 
- 1(1) 
present in elution - 7S 
1 - so - 37 
- - 10 
Synthase TEV Protease 
Figlln~ 2.36: SDS-J> \(;1 : Il1lh,i, for fraction, 0/"1 E\, ccuH'd SUO \ mutant proteill 
Following nickel affmity chromatography, the cleaved protein was further purified 
using gel filtration. The protein was purified using a GE Healthcare Superdex S200 
column as previously used for the S130A mutant. Figure 2.37 shows the gel filtration 
profile for the His6 tag cleaved protein. 
0.15 Aggregated 
= 0.09 
.S ... 
5 0.07 
~ 0.05 
-0.01 
protein ~ 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
V) 0 V) 
Non-aggregated 
/ ",ot,;, 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
V) 6 V) 0 V) 6 
N ~ ~ "'" "'" 
Time (minutes) 
Figure 2.37: Cel filtrati on profile for Ilis6 tag cleaved S I30A muta nt protein 
Aggregation has occurred as can be seen by the peak at ~ 17 minutes; however un-
aggregated S130A protein is still present at 35 mins as expected from previous gel 
filtration profiles. The fractions were run on SDS-PAGE in order to verify the 
presence of the S130A protein. 
SN M 2 4 6 8 10 13 16 19 
- 100 
TP Synthase 
1 - 50 - 31 
- - 10 
TEV Protease 
AI SlIt 
Figurc 2.38: SOS-PAC E analysis of fraction, from gcl filtered IIi \6 tag cleaved S 130A mutant protein 
Figure 2.38 shows the SDS-PAGE results for the gel filtration of the His6 cleaved 
S 130A mutant protein. S 130A mutant protein is present in fractions 13-19 and TEV 
protease is present in fractions 4-6. Following purification various cry tallisation 
screens were setup. 
Initially the protein was screened using PEG 4-24% (w/v) in 4% steps with 75mM 
MgCh and 75mM Tri -HCl pH7.5. Further to thi the protein was screened us ing a 
lower concentration of MgCh (35mM) in order to reduce precipitation; however 
both of these strategies resulted in a heavy brown precipitate in the crystallisation 
drops as shown in Figure 2.39. This precipitant is likely to be denatured protein and 
is therefore unlikely to crystallise. 
l i/.:ure 2.39: Po\\ihlc dellaturcd proltin in er)\talli\ulion drOJl\ conluinin/.: ""~ lag cleu\CcI SIJOt\ 11111111111 
prolcin 
2.3.2 Wild Type Protein 
Peapus et al. I mention that seeds of wild type crystals were used to initially seed the 
S 130A mutant crystals. It is possible, although unlikely, that the point mutation at 
Ser130 has resulted in a change in long range protein interactions in the crystal and 
hence the mutant is unable to successfully spontaneously nucleate. Figure 2.40 
shows the active site of TP synthase along with a surface representation of the 
protein, it can be seen that Ser130 is actually accessible by the solvent almost at the 
surface of the protein. Given the inability to crystallise the His6 tag cleaved S l30A 
protein, wild type protein was prepared in order to be used as seeds for the S 130A 
mutant protein. 
Figure 2.40 : Acti ve site binding poc ket illustra ting tha t the S130 res idue is HpO ed at the surface of the 
protein. 
2.3.2.1 Expression 
Hydrogenated wild type thiamine phosphate synthase was expressed in a similar 
manner to the S130A mutant as previously described. BL21 (DE3) E. coli cells were 
transformed using IJ.tl of plasmid pQE-30 (pREP4). The wild type plasmid was a 
different construct to the S 130A mutant and contained dual antibiotic resistance; 
therefore transformed cells were selected on a plate using 50Jlg/ml kanamycin and 
100Jlg/ml ampicillin. A single colony from this plate was used to prepare a test 
expression system in IOml ofLB medium. This was grown to an OD of 0.8 at which 
point it was induced using 1 mM IPTG and placed in an incubator overnight at 37C. 
Cells were isolated using centrifugation at 6000rpm and expression was checked 
using SDS-PAGE analysis. 
Large Scale Preparation 
A hydrogenated starter culture was prepared using the initial hydrogenated plate. A 
single colony from the hydrogenated plate was placed into a flask containing IOml 
LB medium, 50llglml kanamycin and lOOllglml ampicillin. This wa grown at 37C 
for 5-6 hours at which point the culture was diluted fortyfold by each placing 1 ml of 
the starter culture into two new flasks containing 30ml LB med ium and 90111 
kanamycin. These cultures were grown to mid log phase at which point I5ml of the 
culture was each added to two new flask containing 1 L LB med ium and 5ml 
kanamycin and lOml ampicillin, these cultures were grown to an OD of 0.8 at which 
point they were induced with 1 mM IPTG and placed in an incubator at 22C 
overnight. The following day cells were i olated using centrifugation at 6500rpm for 
25 mins; cell paste was then separated from the upernatant and tored at -20C. I3g 
of cell paste was obtained from a 2L culture. 
2.3.2.2 Purification 
Wild type protein was purified in the same way a the S l30A mutant protein. Protein 
wa isolated from the crude cell extract u ing nickel affmity chromatography. Large 
quantities of pure protein were obtained as can be een in Figure 2.41 (the gel i 
overloaded hence the large meared band it i however pure). Roughly 40mg of 
protein was obtained from 5g of cell pa te. The protein wa to red a previou Iy 
de cribed in SOmM Tris-H 1 pH7.S and J 0% glycer I. Gel filtration wa not u ed a 
the protein wa deemed pure enough from nickel affinity chromotography. 
SN M 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
TP Synthase 
I<igurc 2AI: ~I)S-P \(;1<, Ullul)\j\ of fruCljol1\ from nickcll)uriticnfjol1 of\\ild I)-Pl' TP .. ~nlhn'c 
2.3.2.3 Crystallisatioll 
Following purification, various crystal screens were set up for the wild type protein. 
The previously used screen based on Hampton Crystal Screen I solution 6 [7SmM 
MgCh, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.S, 1 mM DTT, 22% (w/v) PEG 4000] was initially 
used with PEG concentrations from 20-22% (w/v) and a protein concentration of 
lSmg/ml. This resulted in no crystals and only what appeared to be a skin on the 
drop. The same screen was setup again, but using an MgCh concentration of7.SmM 
instead. Once again this resulted in no crystals but only skin formation on the drop. 
Since no crystals formed using the published conditions and a small screen around 
those, a further PEG 4000 screen was setup from 4-24% (w/v) in 4% steps and at 
protein concentrations of 5, 10 and 20mg/ml in order to identifY where precipitation 
occurred. 
Figure 2.42 shows one of the drops from the PEG screen at 8% (w/v) PEG 4000. It is 
possible that this is microcrystalline and not just precipitant, however leaving the 
drops for longer periods oftime did not result in any crystals. 
Figure 2.42: A crystallisation drop of \\iJd typc protcin containing 8% PEG4000. The drop sho\\ s po .. ~ible 
micro-crystalline objects 
Figure 2.43 shows a drop at 20% (w/v) PEG4000 concentration, here a skin has 
formed on the drop. This is often the re ult of denatured protein or can sometimes be 
formed by the PEG4000 19. Once again no crystals formed. 
Fi gure 2.43: A cry\tullhution drop of \\ild t)pe protein contuining 20% PI<:C4000. A skin is present on the 
surface of th e drop 
Figure 2.44 shows a drop at 30% PEG 4000. Here pha e separation has occurred 
between the protein and precipitant; crystal can ometimes form on the interface 
between the two phases however in thi ca e no cry tal formed. 
Fi gure 2.4 ... : \ er)\tulii\lltion drop of \\ild t)Jll' p,.ot~il1 containing 30% I'EG"'O()(). Th(' clrop 'ho", phll'l' 
\~ Il a r u tion h<'ln l'~ n protein and precipitant , lInd ,kin un the wrfllc~ ufthe drop 
Given that no crystals were obtained after a number of weeks, wild type protein was 
prepared without glycerol or NaCI in the lysis and purification buffers. This was to 
assess if the wild type protein was more stable than the mutant and to see whether 
the protein could be crystallised without these additives. The wild type protein could 
now be purified and concentrated without using glycerol. A final concentration of 
l6mglml was obtained in a buffer consisting of only 50mM Tris-HCI pH7.5. 
Using this new batch of protein another series of crystallisation trials were setup 
using a PEG screen of 4-24% in 4% steps and at protein concentrations of 5, 10, and 
20mg/ml. These conditions again resulted in no crystals being formed. Following 
this, the same protein batch was used to manually set up a Hampton Crystal Screen I 
kit in order to rescreen the protein for a fresh crystallisation condition. Unfortunately 
none of the 50 conditions resulted in any crystals, however many drops containing 
PEG resulted in skin formation on the drops, and a variety of drops resulted in phase 
separation. 
A further fresh batch of protein was prepared using the originally published (Chiu et 
al. 14) phosphate buffers instead of the Tris-HCI buffers used throughout the previous 
expression, purification and crystallisation. Protein was purified using this buffer and 
dialysed into Tris-HCI pH 7.5 before concentration to 12.9mglml. This batch of 
protein was then used to setup crystal screens as before using 4-24% (w/v) PEG4000 
in 4% steps. Once again no crystals were observed. 
Thiamine phosphate should be secreted into the cells and culture medium during 
expression and therefore thiamine should be bound to TP synthase without the need 
for co-crystallisation. However it is possible that in this particular expression system 
this is not the case and it could be that thiamine is not already bound to the enzyme. 
In this case the protein could be in a considerably different conformation to when the 
substrate is bound and therefore prevent the protein from crystallising. Therefore 
crystallisation conditions were further screened by co-crystallising the wild type 
protein with the reaction product thiamine phosphate. Drops were setup using the 
original Hampton crystal screen condition [200mM MgCh, 30% PEG 4000, 1 mM 
OTT] and 2mM thiamine phosphate. Further drops were setup with thiamine 
phosphate, extra MgCh, and phosphate. None of these conditions resulted in the 
formation of any crystals. Figure 2.45 shows an example of a drop which ha been 
co-crystallised with thiamine phosphate. Artefacts are present in the drop but no 
actual crystals formed. 
Figure 2,45: A cry\ta llisati on d rop of " ild t) pc protein co-c ry ta lli sed \\ ith thiamine pho .. phatc 
A final fresh batch of wild type protein wa prepared, concentrated to 13mglml and 
sent to the EMBL HTX robot in order to identify any further conditions which could 
be used for crystalli ation however after a period of 6 week no cry tals were 
obtained. 
2.3.3 Protein Checks 
Due to the large number of issues presented for crystallising both the wild type and 
S130A mutant proteins a number of checks were conducted in order to determine the 
state of the protein and to check the correct plasmids had been used throughout. 
Plasmid Sequences 
Firstly the Open Reading Frame (ORF) of the plasmid was sequenced in order to 
check that the correct protein had been expressed and that it was the same as the 
previously published structures (PDB codes 2TPS for the wild type, and 1067 for 
the S 130A mutant). Figure 2.46 shows the sequence alignment for the wild type and 
S 130A plasmid ORFs against the published structure sequences. 
wildtype 1 MRGSHHHHHHG--- 56 
2tps 1 48 
Ig67 1 46 
mutant 1 MGSSHHHHHHSSGENL 64 
wildtype 57 120 
2tps 49 112 
Ig67 47 110 
mutant 65 128 
wildtype 121 184 
2tps 113 176 
1967 111 174 
mutant 129 192 
wildtype 185 235 
2tps 177 227 
1967 175 225 
mutant 193 
Figure 2.46: Sequence alignment for both wild type and S130A mutant proteins 
As expected the wild type plasmid used for expressIOn matched the published 
sequence from the structure 2TPS indicating that the correct plasmid was in fact 
being used . The first 8 or so residues are likely to be disordered and hence are not 
present in the crystal structure; however the presence of the HHO motif does imply 
that the His6 tag is present in the published wild type structure. 
Furthermore, although the S 130A plasmid is a different construct (it has only 
kanamycin resistance rather than kanamycin/ampicillin resistance), the single site 
mutation is in the correct place (Sl30) and cleavage of this his tag would resu lt in a 
very similar sequence to the published structure. 
Protein Purity 
Even though gel filtration was not used for the wild type protein m previously 
published literature this technique was used to assess the purity and homogeneity of 
the wild type protein. Figure 2.47 shows the gel filtration profile for the wild type 
protein. This shows a single peak corresponding to a pure and mono di perse samp le. 
There is a small secondary peak at around 27mins indicating some aggregated 
protein, however the majority of the protein is in a non aggregated, mono-disperse 
state. 
... 0.05 
5 0.04 
'" J:l 
~ 0.03 
Aggregated 
protein 
f'l f'l 
Time (minute) 
Non-aggregated 
protein 
Figure 2A7: Gel filtration profile for \\i1d t)pe thiullIinc pho\phatl' \)l1tha\c 
Protein State 
Given that the correct protein ha been expre ed and that it pure and 
homo gene us, the folded tate of the protein wa then checked u ing ypr range 
dye from Sigma-Aldrich. ypro orange bind hydr phobic amin a id uch a 
tryptophan and tyrosine. When the protein is in a folded state these residues are 
buried deep within the protein and so the dye cannot bind. Upon denaturation of the 
protein and unfolding the dye can then bind to these residues. By measuring the 
fluorescence spectrum of the dye versus temperature it is possible to observe the 
protein unfolding. 
--WT_G 
9000 -- 130A_G 
:G 6000 .. 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
Temperature (C) 
Figure 2.48 : T herma l stabilit y of wild type protein in glyce"ol (WT _G), wild type protein in Tri~ (WT). 
a nd 130A mut ant p rotein in glycerol ( 130 _G) 
Figure 2.48 shows a plot of Sypro orange fluorescence versus temperature for the 
wild type protein in Tris-HCl (WT) and glycerol (WT_ G), and S130A mutant 
protein in glycero I (S 130A _G). The graph shows that the protein is stable up to a 
temperature of about 35C at which point it starts to denature, indicating that there is 
folded protein at 20C. 
2.4 Conclusions 
Protein crystallisation is often notoriously difficult to reproduce; even using identical 
chemicals from the same manufacturer it is often difficult to reproduce previously 
published conditions. As well as the differences between chemicals from different 
manufacturers, water has also been blamed for the lack of crystal formation, even 
though in most cases water from a Millipore Milli-Q machine is used. It would 
appear that the composition of the resultant water from these machines does vary 
depending on the quality of the input water. 
Both the wild type and S 130A proteins are readily expressed in large quantities and 
can easily be purified using a combination of nickel affmity chromatography and gel 
filtration. Furthermore, the correct protein has been expressed throughout as indicted 
from sequencing results and the protein is in a mono-disperse, non aggregated state 
after purification. Despite the availability of pure protein material, previously 
published crystallisation conditions could not be reproduced. Furthermore the 
protein could not be crystallised using common commercially available crystal 
screens such as Hampton crystal screens I and 11. Even screening a very large 
number of conditions using the EMBL high throughput crystallisation platform it 
was still not possible to fmd a suitable crystallisation condition. 
2.5 Appl'ndix 
D-ENFORS Medium 
O-ENFORS is a deuterated minimal medium for bacterial growth; it consists of the 
following ingredients made up to I L with deionised 020: 
 6.S6g (Nli4hP04 
 l.S6g KH2P04 
 6.618g Na2HP04.2H20 
 0.49g (Nli4)2-H-Citrate 
 Sg deuterated glycero I 
 Iml MgS04 (I M) 
 I ml metal salts 
Where the metal salts solution consists of the following ingredients made up to 
SOOml with deionised 020: 
 O.Sg CaCh.2H20 
 16.7g FeCh.2H20 
 O.lSg ZnS04.7H20 
 O.16g CuS04.SH20 
 0.15g MnS04.4H20 
 O.ISg CoCh.6H20 
 20.1 g Na-EDT A 
2.6 References 
1. O. H. Peapus, H. 1. Chiu, N. Campobasso, J. 1. Reddick, T. P. Begley and S. 
E. Ealick, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 10103-10114. 
2. T. P. Begley, Natural Product Reports, 1996, 13, 177. 
3. R. Frank, F. Leeper and B. Luisi, Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 
(CMLS), 2007, 64, 892-905. 
4. F. Jordan, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2003, 20, 184 - 201. 
5. N. Nemeria, A. Baykal, E. Joseph, S. Zhang, Y. Van, W. Furey and F. 
Jordan, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 6565-6575. 
6. T. P. Begley, D. M. Downs, S. E. Ealick, F. W. McLafferty, A. P. G. M. Van 
Loon, S. Taylor, N. Campobasso, H.-J. Chiu, C. Kinsland, J. J. Reddick and 
J. X~ Archives of Microbiology, 1999, 171,293-300. 
7. MetaCyc, http://biocyc.orglMETA/NEW-
IMA GE?type= PA T1IWA Y &ohject= THISYN-PWY &detail-/eve/= 3, 2008. 
8. S. V. Taylor, N. L. Kelleher, C. Kinsland, H.-J. Chiu, C. A. Costello, A. D. 
Backstrom, F. W. McLafferty and T. P. Begley, J. Bioi. Chem., 1998,273, 
16555-16560. 
9. S. V. Taylor, PhD Thesis, Comell University, USA, 1998. 
10. T. P. Begley, J. X~ C. Kinsland, S. Taylor and F. McLafferty, Current 
Opinion in Chemical Biology, 1999, 3, 623-629. 
11. R. Leonardi and P. L. Roach, J. Bioi. Chem., 2004, 279, 17054-17062. 
12. C. Costello, PhD Thesis, Comell University, USA, 1996. 
13. B. G. Lawhorn, R. A. Mehl and T. P. Begley, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004,2, 
2538. 
14. H. J. Chiu, J. J. Reddick, T. P. Begley and S. E. Ealick, Biochemistry, 1999, 
38,6460-6470. 
15. S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers and D. J. Lipman, Journal 
of Molecular Biology, 1990, 215, 403-410. 
16. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. Helliwell and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
17. Collaborative Computational Project 4, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
1994, 50, 760-763. 
18. Y. Zhang, S. V. Taylor, H. J. Chiu and T. P. Begley,J. Bacteriol., 1997,179, 
3030-3035. 
19. T. M. Bergfors, Protein Crystallisation, Intl. University Line, 1999. .. 
3. Determination of protonation states in pyrroloquinoline quinine 
protein C (PqqC) using neutron protein crystallography 
Pyrroloquinoline Quinine Protein C (PqqC) is the protein responsible for the final 
step in the biosynthetic pathway of Pyrroloquinoline Quinone (PQQ). Based on the 
reaction catalysed by PqqC a mechanism has been proposed, in which a PQQ 
precursor is converted into PQQ via ring closure and a three step eight electron 
oxidation process. Preparation of a single site mutant (Y175F) ofPqqC has allowed 
the trapping of what is believed to be a reaction intermediate from this reaction 
cycle. Recent X-ray structural studies of this single site mutant with bound 
intermediate, have attempted to determine the particular step of the catalytic 
mechanism which has been trapped. However this could not be directly determined 
as the hydrogen atoms bonded to the intermediate cannot be successfully located at 
the diffraction resolution limit ofthe X-ray study (1.4A). 
A neutron protein crystallography experiment has been proposed in which the proton 
positions of the intermediate and an associated 02 or H202 molecule can be directly 
determined. In order to achieve the best possible results from the neutron 
experiment, hydrogenated wild type and perdeuterated YI75F mutant protein have 
been expressed, purified and crystallised. Furthermore, a perdeuterated analogue of 
the precursor required for PqqC has been produced from Methylobacterium 
extorquens AMI in order to allow the complete proton (as deuterium) positions of 
the intermediate to be determined in the neutron experiment. 
The hydrogenated Y 175F mutant crystals are well formed and diffract to around 
I.8A on the ID23-2 microfocus beam line at the ESRF synchrotron. Although 
protonation states cannot be determined at this resolution, the resolution could be 
significantly extended using a more intensive synchrotron X-ray beam line. Initial 
crystals of the perdeuterated Y175F mutant PqqC protein show what appears to be 
multilayer crystals and diffraction tests at ESRF indicate multiple lattice diffraction. 
Therefore further optimisation of the crystallisation conditions for the perdeuterated 
protein is required before neutron data can be collected. 
3.1 Pyrroloquinoline Quinine 
Fi~urc 3.1; P)rroloquinolinc Quinonc (PQQ; 4,S-dio'\o-4,5-dih)dro-llI-p)rroloI2,J-flquillolinc-2,7,9-
tricarbo'\)lic acid) 
Pyrroloquinoline Quinone (PQQ) is a water oluble heat table, tricyclic ortho 
quinine. It serves as a redox co-factor for variou bacterial dehydrogena e . The be t 
known of these are methanol l and glucose2 dehydrogena e. PQQ belong to the third 
class of redox cofactors after pyridine nucleotide and flavin dependant cofactor. 
PQQ ha attracted significant intere t due to it pre ence in food tuffi it antioxidant 
propertie 3 and sugge ted role as a growth promoting factor4. Although n enzyme 
that require PQQ as a cofactor in animals have been found nanomolar quantie of 
PQQ have been shown to increase responsivene of T and B-cells to mitogens and 
improve neurological function in rodents5. 
3.2 Rio ynthetic Pathway 
Unlike many other qummc cofactor which ar derived fi-om tyr ine and 
tryptophan, PQQ i derived fi- m glutamate and tyro ine (see igure 3.2). The 
biosynthesi of PQQ inv lve upto 7 gene (PqqA- ) which are I cated in the PQ 
operon. in Kleb 'iella pneumonia ix arc required wherea in M ~/h loha 'I rium 
eXlorquens (AMI) seven are required. lntere tingly in Acinelobacl "r ca 'oac >licus 
only four gene are required. Although much i kn wn about the c fact r whi h 
utili e PQQ, relatively little i kn wn ab ut P bi ynthe i . 
Fi~un' J.2: J>Q<) and its Ilrl'l'UrSur's ~Iutaminl' and tryptophan. Rl'produccd from PUl'hringl'r et at. 
It is believed that the initial step in biosynthesis is the formation of a C-C bond 
between the two amino acids: tyrosine and glutamate which are part of the 23 residue 
peptide PqqA (see Figure 3.3). PqqE is believed to catalyse this C-C formation as it 
has a high sequence identity to radical SAM proteins capable of forming C-C bonds. 
Following this bond formation the covalently linked amino acids must be cleaved 
from the peptide. The most likely candidate for this is PqqF as it has significant 
sequence identity to that of other proteases. 
COOH \ 
Figurc :U: C-C bond formation betwccn gill and tyr catalyscd by PqqE 
Following cleavage from the peptide the N6 of gIu and OH of tyr are primed for a 
Schiff-base reaction resulting in ring closure (see Figure 3.4). Next, two OH groups 
must be added requiring a dioxygenase. Possible candidates are PqqB or PqqD 
which do have some sequence similarity to other dixoygenases. 
eaOH \ 
Spontaneous 
PqqDIE? 
Figure 3.4: Spontaneous Schiff base reaction following by addition of oxygen by a di-oxygenase 
The fmal step in the pathway is catalysed by PqqC which involves ring closure and 
an 8 electron oxidation. 
3.3 Pqq Protein C 
PqqC is a 28.9kDa protein consisting of251 residues with a theoretical pI of6.9. It is 
a cofactorless oxidase which catalyses the penultimate step in the biosynthesis of 
PQQ. First the enzyme catalyses ring closure and then a three step oxidation process 
without the need for a metal cofactor. 
A mutant strain of Methylobacterium extorquens AMI missing the PqqC gene 
accumulates an intermediate that can be converted to PQQ by addition of PqqC 
proving that PqqC catalyses the fmal step in the PQQ biosynthetic pathway. This 
intermediate was found to be a fully reduced form ofPQQ7. The identification of this 
substrate allowed the overall reaction catalysed by PqqC to be identified. Figure 3.5 
shows this reaction. 
PQQ Precursor eOOH eOOH PQQ COOH 
HOOC HOOC 
o o o 
Figure 3.5: The reactioll calal~sed by Pq(lc. 
PqqC crystallises in the space group P2 1212 with unit cell parameters ofa = 71.6A, b 
= 116.7A and c = 68.2A. The X-ray crystal structure of native PqqC protein to 2.1A8 
from Klebsiella pneumoniae shows that the enzyme exists as a homodimer in which 
each monomer is folded into a compact seven helix bunch. This seven helix bunch 
provides the scaffold for a huge active site cavity site measuring 9x13x23A with a 
volume of2200A
Figure 3.6: rystal structure of Pqqc. Open conformation (al>o) in grey, closed conformation 
(substratc/product bound) ill red. Reproduced from Puehringc r et ul.6 
The sequence of PqqC is shown in Figure 3.7. Magnusson et al. 8, found that 
sequence alignment of PqqC from four different bacterial sources (K. Pneumonia, 
protein ID P27505; Pseudomonas aeruginosa, protein ID NP250677' 
Magneto pirillum magnetotacticum, protein ID ZP00052131, and 
Desuljitobacterium hafniense, protein ID ZPOOI01389) showed high sequence 
similarity. 
srop ______________________ _ 
[)'iSP~ 
" ID .. '00 '" 11. sco, _______________________ _ 
U ~f' 
PDB VRFAVDAYLNFARRAQWOEAACSSLTELFAPOIHOSRLD5WPOHV~IKEEGVFVFRSRL 
POD ,I, ' 30 ,.b 1iI, 166 11& ,BO 
co, _______________________ _ 
Dnr .-- -
\CCl' _ ____ _ 
pnR DKAAWHT T RL VL E IHlHHIIH 
ltOI U1 2~ 
Figure 3.7: ' equellcc of PqqC from Kteh\iellll pllel/lIIOl/ill. PDB Code IOTW. Reproduced from rcsb.org. 
The X-ray crystal structure ofPQQ bound PqqC at 2.3A8 shows that upon sub trate 
binding, PqqC undergoes a large conformational change (see Figure 3.6). Residues 
in the active site move to closer to coordinate with PQQ, in particular the carboxylic 
group CT (see Figure 3.2). This rearrangement shifts His154 and Argl57 into the 
active site and the largest shift occurs between re idue 170 and 187. During this 
conformational change Tyr175 (Y175) move almost 7 A from a solvent exposed 
region to a position directly in the centre of the molecule. Furthermore extra density 
is found close to the PQQ product which can be modelled as either oxygen or 
peroxide although which of these is bound cannot be determined u ing X-ray 
crystallography. Figure 3.8 shows the active ite electron density for bound PQQ and 
the putative H20 2 molecule. 
Figure .1.8: \clhc ,ite den,il) tor PQQ hound 1'<1<](. Rcpro<iuc('d from \Iugnu\\oll <'I at. x 
A PQQ readily react with oxygen to form free radicals, the question arises as to 
how exactly PQQ is transported to its site of action and how the release ofPQQ from 
PqqC i facilitated. 
3.3.1 En.lymatic Mechanism 
PqqC manage to catalyse an extraordinary reaction and is umque ill that it can 
cataly e this reaction without the need for a redox metal or cofactor. Magnusson et 
aL.8 propo ed the mechanism shown in Figure 3.9 for the formation ofPqqC from its 
precur or based on the identification of the precursor structure and the fact that 
oxygen/peroxide wa bound at the active site. 
Initially the tricyclic ring i fonned to yield 2 in reaction scheme A. This occurs by 
1,4 addition of the primary amine to the conjugated ring structure which may be 
as i t d by interaction of the ubstrate with active site residues such as Tyr 53. 
ooc HzN coo 
ooc N 0 
* ooc N OH I , H 0 'm 'OOC ~ 0 
I ) ., coo '" "m -~ ooc 0 
ooc HN 
~W" -
bW'] 000 N 0 
[~] 
m 'OOC O 
'ooe N 10 
COO' w OOC N O 
02 Hz02 
(   
0, ",0, 
mooe HN coo' I"" 'ooc N 0 
m ooc 0 
"2]j~ 
ooc.-4-" 0 
ooe N 0 
Fif.u r 3 .9: Propo\l'cI mcchanhm for thc formution of PQQ hy Pqq . Reproduccd from \Iagnll\~on 1'( 01.
F 11 wing ring ur Pqq 
Magnu n ?/ al. ugg t d that 
then cataly e an 8 electron 3 step oxidation. 
idation occurs through the formation of quinol 
intermediates, which are capable of direct electron transfer to molecular oxygen 
and/or hydrogen peroxide (reaction scheme B). This mechanism involve sequential 
base-catalysed tautomerisations to produce a reduced quinol from oxidised quinine 
with the introduction of three double bonds. 
H/.:ure 3. 10: Ac ti ve 'i itc of Pqq- - Active site res idue., in bluc, PQQ in Creen and di-oxyge ll in 
r ed. Derived fro m PDB code IOT\\ 
The structure of PqqC with bound PQQ identified a number of re idue important for 
cataly i (see Figure 3.10). The e include three histidine re idue ; Hi 85, 24, and 
154, ideally placed for general ba e cataly i . Residue Tyr53/Ly 214 could als 
help proton abstraction due to the close proximity of the oxygen of Tyr53 to 9. A 
further important res idue is Tyr175 (Y175) which i within 3A of both 4 and 05 
and is part of the hydrogen bonding network that extend to the urface, it i 
therefore uggested that Tyrl75 may be re pon ible for huffiing pr ton t and from 
04 and 05 during tautomerisation. 
Biochemical data6 show that three equivalent of 2 are n umed and tw 
equivalents of H20 2 are produced per m le of PQQ formed. The st ichi metry can 
be explained if the fir t 0 2 i reduced by four electr n t yield tw quivalcnt f 
water, whereas the other two equivalent of 2 are reduced by tw electr n t yi Id 
two equivalents of H2 2 (reaction cheme B tep I J J and "J). 
Given the importance of residue Tyr 175 in the hydrogen bonding network, it was 
proposed that a single site mutant at position 175 from Tyr to Phe (YI75F) be 
prepared in an attempt to trap an intermediate from the proposed scheme. A plasmid 
harbouring the Y175F mutant was prepared and protein expressed from E. coli. 
Incubation of this mutant PqqC protein with the PQQ precursor resulted in the 
formation of an intermediate that contained a ring closed product from the proposed 
reaction above (as determined from spectroscopic studies\ Whether or not the 
precursor had been oxidised could not be determined either spectroscopically or 
from X-ray crystallographic studies due to the low scattering power of hydrogen 
with X-rays. Thus the specific intermediate trapped (assumed to be ring closed) 
using this particular mutant has not yet been determined. 
3.3.2 Proposed Neutron Expcrimcnt 
X-ray studies ofPqqC with a reaction intermediate bound only diffracted to 1.4A. At 
this resolution it is not possible to locate hydrogen atoms in the electron density 
maps, nor is it possible to determine their positions using bond length analysis. By 
using neutron protein crystallography it will be possible to determine directly the 
proton positions (as deuterium) of the bound PQQ intermediate / precursor and also 
any hydrogen atoms attached to the nearby oxygen/peroxide atom. 
In order to fully deduce the protonation states of both the intermediate and the 
oxygen species both perdeutered protein and substrate are required. PqqC is 
expressed from E. coli and therefore adaptation to deuterated conditions is relatively 
straightforward. The PQQ precursor is secreted from a knockout Methylobacterium 
ex/orquens AM 1 strain lacking the PqqC protein and it should be possible to adapt 
this to grow under deuterated conditions. If the PQQ precursor is not perdeuterated 
then there is the possibility of cancellation occurring in the nuclear density maps. 
Figure 3.11, Figure 3.12, Figure 3.13, and Figure 3.14 show the calculated nuclear 
density maps for the PqqC/PQQ precursor complexes when 020 soaked, and 
perdeuterated, at 2.0, and 3.0 A resolution for the three products of the oxidation 
cycle. 
From these calculated nuclear densities it is possible to see the difference between 
steps I and 11 of the oxidation cycle even when the substrate is only D20 soaked and. 
not perdeuterated at 2.oA. Differentiating between steps 11 and III however is more 
complex and will require perdeuterated PQQ as the differences between the D20 
soaked nuclear density maps are minimal. At 3.oA resolution interpretation of the 
nuclear density maps is much more difficult. Even with perdeuterated PQQ 
intermediate differentiating between the three oxidation states will be difficult. 
Although it may be possible to determine which step from the oxidation pathway has 
been trapped if the neutron results are used in conjunction with high resolution X-ray 
data showing whether the fIrst ring is planar or not. 
Figure 3.11: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2u at 2.0,,\ resolution for 0 20 soaked PQQ intermediate from reaction scheme B steps I, 11, and Ill. 
Fi~ul'e 3.12: Calculated nuclear densit} maps contoured to 2u at 2.0,,\ resolution fOl' perdeuterated PQQ intermediate from reaction scheme B steps I, 11, and Ill. 
Figure .1.13: Calculated nuclear densit~ maps contoured to 2(J at 3.0A resolution for 0 20 soaked PQQ intermediate from reaction scheme B steps I, 11 , and Ill. 
Figure 3.14: Calculated nuclear density maps contoured to 2u at 3.oA resolution for perdeuterated PQQ intermediate from reaction scheme B steps I, 11 , and Ill. 
3.4 P.'oduction of Pc.'dcuterated PqqC Yl75F Mutant 
3A.1 Expression 
Hydrogenated Protein 
Hydrogenated wild type and Y175F mutant proteins were prepared as previously 
described for thiamine phosphate synthase. BL21 (DE3) E. coli cells were 
transformed using IJ.d of plasmid (20~g/ml) via heat shock at 42C for 30 seconds 
followed by cooling on ice for 2 minutes. The cells were then incubated at 37C for 
an hour in 900~1 of sac medium. Following this the culture was centrifuged at 
3000rpm for 2-3 minutes, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was re-
suspended in a further I OO~1 of sac medium. This 1 OO~1 solution was then spread 
onto a plate containing LB medium and the antibiotic kanamycin (working 
concentration of 30~g/ml) in order to select the transformed cells. A single colony 
from the plate was used to prepare a test expression system in 10ml of LB medium 
(25g of medium / 11 water). The culture was grown to mid log phase at which point 
700~1 of the culture was placed into a flask containing 30ml ofLB medium and 90~1 
kanamycin (1 Omg/ml stock solution). The culture was then grown to an OD of 
roughly 1.0 at 37C at which point a 500~1 sample was collected (before induction; 
81) and the culture was induced using 1 mM IPTG. The culture was then incubated at 
37C overnight. 
Another 500~1 sample was then taken (after induction, AI) and cells were isolated by 
centrifugation at 5000rpm for 3Omins; the cell pellet was then re-suspended in 10ml 
of lysis buffer (200mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8). A few milligrams of 
lysozyme was added to the resuspended cells and the mixture was left to agitate for 
an hour. The cells were then frozen and thawed, and fmally sonicated. Soluble 
protein was isolated from the disrupted cells by centrifugation at 19500rpm for 
45mins and a 50~1 sample of the remaining cell pellet was collected (pellet, P). 
Samples before induction (81), after induction (AI), isolated cell pellets (P) and 
supernatant after sonication (SN) were analysed using SDS-PAGE. Figure 3.15 
shows SDS-PAGE results for the hydrogenated expression tests. PqqC is clearly 
visible in the AI, SN and P fractions from the band around 25kDa; lysozyme is also 
present in the SN and P fractions at ~13kDa. 
Wild Type Y175F 
M BI AI SN P BI AI SN P M 
- - lOO 
- - 37 
PqqC -~ .. ~ 
Lysozyme --+ 
10 ,.-
Fj~ure 3.IS; SOS-I'AGE anal)"j\ for the h)dro~ena('d e\pre~"ion le\ of\\iJd )pe Pqq , 
Deuterated Expression 
Cell were adapted to deuterated condition u ing liquid adaptation. A ingle colony 
from the initial hydrogenated plate wa placed into a flask containing 10ml 
hydrogenated ENFORS minimal medium and kanamycin and the culture wa grown 
to an OD of 1 at 37C. Following this 1 ml of this hydrogenated ENFOR tart er 
culture was placed into 9ml of deuterated FORS and kanamycin. The flask was 
incubated at 37 over night. The culture wa then diluted 10 fold and grown to an 
OD of 1 once a day for 6 days (labelled 6x) in order to speed up the growth of the 
deuterated cell. Following this a te t expre ion was prepared for both deuterated 
wild type and Y175F mutant. 
1 ml of the 6x culture was placed in 9ml of 0- FOR with kanamycin and f:,'Town 
at 37 to an OD of 0.6. xpre sion was inducing u ing I mM IPTG and cell were 
incubated overnight at 30 . Figure 3.16 h w 0 -PAG re uH 6 r the te t 
expre ions. Pqq is pre ent in the AI, N and P fraction 
Wild Type Y17SF 
M BI AI SN p BI AI SN p 
- 100 
PqqC ~ 
Lysozyme -+ - IS 
Figure 3. 16: SOS-PAG E analysis of the deuterated tes t expression of wild type PqqC 
Large Scale Expression 
Following the test expressions large quantities of hydrogenated and deuterated 
Y175F mutant were prepared as previously described for thiamine phosphate 
synthase, however cultures were incubated at 30C overnight instead of 22C. 12.2g 
of cell paste was obtained from 2L of culture medium. Deuterated protein wa also 
prepared as previously described for thiamine phosphate synthase using the high cell 
density fermentation systems. Figure 3.17 shows the SDS-PAGE results for the large 
scale expressions. PqqC is again present in the AI, SN and P fractions, showing 
expression in large quantities. 
Hydrogenated Deuterated 
M BI AI SN P BI AI SN P 
PqqC~ 
Figure 3.17: 0 -PAG E analysis of the large scale C\.pre sioll of hydroge na ted and deutera ted YI 75F 
mutant PqqC protein 
3.4.2 Purification 
Test Expression Purification 
Hydrogenated and deuterated proteins were purified in the same way u ing nickel 
affmity chromatography. 1 ml of Qiagen nickel-nitrilotrlacetic acid (N?+ -NT A) resin 
(50% su pension in 30% ethanol) was initially mixed with 1 ml of lysis buffer 
(50mM Tris-HCI pH 7.8, 200mM NaCI) and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 3 mins, the 
supernatant was discarded and more lysis buffer was added, thi procedure was 
repeated 3 times in order to remove the storage ethanol from the resin giving a fmal 
volume of 500111 of resin. The crude protein extract (lysed from te t expression cell 
paste, - 5ml extract) was added and the mixture wa agitated at 4C for an hour. 
The mixture wa then loaded onto a column and the flow-through (FT) was 
collected. The column was then washed with 25ml of wash buffer containing 50mM 
Tris-HCI pH7.8, 200mM NaCl, and 25mM imidazole (W). he protein wa then 
eluted from the column using 10ml of elution buffer con isting of 50mM Tris-H I 
pH7.8, 200mM NaCl and 400mM imidazole and wa fractionated into 10 1ml 
fractions (1 - 9). Figure 3.18, Figure 3.19 and Figure 3.20 how OS-PAGE re ults 
for hydrogenated wild type and Y175F mutant and deuterated Y 175F mutant 
purification. The SOS-PAG result show that Pqq is pre ent in good quantity and 
i pure as hown as a single band in all three purification ca e . 
FT W M 1 2 3 5 7 9 
- 100 
Lysozyme 
"i gun~ :1.111: snsp \(;", atllll)\i\ u"rUCliOl1\ 'rOl11thl' h)drllj.l'llatld "ild t)Jltr\tl \prl"iul1 nicl\l'1 
It fflnit) purification 
FT W M 1 2 3 5 7 9 
- lOO 
Lysozyme - 37 
i - 20 - IS 
Figure 3. 19: 0 -P G E ana lysis of frac tions from the hydrogenated Y 175" muta nt test npression nickel 
a ffinit y purirication 
FT W M 1 2 3 5 7 9 
Lysozyme - 37 
Figure 3.20: 0 -P G E a na l) i of fractions from the dcuteratcd Y 175F mutant test exprc sion nicke l 
affinit y I)urifica tion 
Following nickel affmity chromotography, gel filtration was then used to check the 
protein purity from nickel affinity chromotography. A GE Healthcare Superdex 200 
gel filtration column was u ed. This was initially equilibrated with a gel filtration 
buffer con isting of 50mM Tris-HCI pH 7.8, 200mM NaCI, 5mM DTT, and 10% 
(v/v) glycerol by flowing the buffer through the column for an hour. Aft r 
equilibration 500j.t1 of protein from the nickel affmity purification was loaded onto 
the column, a flow rate of 0.5mVmin was used and 500j.t1 fractions were collected. 
Figure 3.21 and Figure 3.22 how gel filtration profiles for hydrogenated and 
deuterated Y 175F mutant protein. Both profiles show a single peak indicating 
homogeneou pure protein. However in both hydrogenated and deuterated ca e 
there is a shoulder adjacent to the single peak for the non aggregated protein. This 
may be protein in monomer form. 
'.::l I 0 
0. ' ... 
'" .J:J 
'.::l 
; 1.0 
Non-aggregated ___ 
protein ~ 
Possibly monomer 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Run Time (min ) 
Fil-:ure .1.21: Gel filtration profile for hydrogenated' 1751' mutant protein 
Peak broadening. 
possibly some 
aggregation 
15 20 25 30 
Run Time (min ) 
Possibly monomer 
35 40 
Figun' .1.22: Gel filtr ation prol1le for deuterated , 1751' llIutant pr()tein 
The perdeuterated protein does however show slight aggregation in contrast with the 
hydrogenated protein a shown by the slight splitting of the main peak for the 
deuterated profile. 
Large Scale Purification 
Large quantities of protein were purified in the same way as the test expres ions 
except that 6ml of Ni resin was used, resulting in a final volume after removal of 
storage ethanol of 3ml. Sg of cell paste was resuspended in 40ml oflysis buffer and 
lysed as previou ly described. Crude cell extract was incubate with the 3ml of i 
resin for an hour and then loaded onto a column. The flow through (FT) was 
collected and then the column was washed with IOO-lS0ml of wash buffer (W). The 
purified protein wa eluted using 30ml of elution buffer, and IS 2ml fractions were 
collected (1 - 14). Figure 3.23 shows SDS-PAGE results for the hydrogenated large 
scale expression. Y17SF mutant PqqC is present in large quantity as shown by the 
band at ~2SkDa. The band is smeared as the gel is overloaded; the sample IS 
however pure. Around 1 OOmg of protein was obtained from Sg of cell paste. 
FT W M 1 3 5 8 11 14 
Figure 3.23: D -r \G E nnnl)si\ of fractions from large scale nickel purification of h)drog nated \ 175F 
mutant [>rotein 
Figure 3.24 how the DS-PAGE r suits for the deuterated large scale expre ion 
again Y 17SF mutant PqqC i present in large quantities as hown by the band at 
~2SkDa. Again the band i mear d as the gel is overloaded; the ample i howe er 
pure. - 40-50mg of protein was obtained from 5g of cell pa te. PqqC i still present 
in the flow through and wash indicating that the nickel resin was lightly overloaded. 
FT W M 1 3 5 8 11 
- 100 
t IS -PqqC 10 
.. igure 3.24: SDS-P G E anal)\i\ of fraction) from largc \calc nickcl purification of pcrdcutcrutccl , 1751<' 
mutant prot in 
Following nickel purification the protein wa directly conc ntrated to 40-50mglml 
u ing an Ami n centrifugal concentrator with a molecular weight ut off f 10,000. 
Protein wa frozen at -80C in aliquot of 50-1 OOJlI. However freezing thc protein 
re ulted in the formation of a large white precipitate / aggregate in the lution. 
Although the upematant till contained protein (as checked by 0 -PA ) the 
concentration wa greatly reduced. In an attempt to rectify thi and tabili e the 
protein a fre h batch wa prepared u ing 10% glycerol in both the wa hand luti n 
buffers. Thi allowed the protein to be frozen at -80 with no prccipitation. 
Furtherm re protein that wa gel filtered could al 0 be fr z n at - 0 with n 
precipitation pr blem as the gel filtration buffer already c ntained 10% glyc r I. 
3.4.3 Crystallisation 
Initial cry tallisation trial were c nducted with a hydr genat d wild typc pr tcin 
batch ent fr m the Univer ity f alzburg. hi protein wa t red in mM Tri -
H I pH 7.8 200mM Na I and 400mM imidaz I . ry talli ati n nditi n w r 
ba ed n Hampton Index creen buffer F7 which ntain . 1 M Si -Tri pll .5, 
0.2M Ammonium ulfate and 25% P 3 50 (w/v). 
Wild type protein was initially crystallised using sitting drop vapour diffusion. 8Jllof 
protein wa mixed with 2JlI of PQQ and incubated for 30mins at 4C. 200JlI of 
Hampton Index Screen F7 was placed in the well and drops containing 2JlI of protein 
+ PQQ and 2JlI of precipitant were mixed. The trays were stored at 25C. F7 buffer 
were prepared from laboratory materials, and in D20 to test crystallisation und r 
deuterated conditions. All three buffers produced crystals in under 48 hour . 
Fi~urc :U5: clock" i~ e (a) lIamplon F7, (b) In house 1'7, (c) Dculcrated 1'7 (d ) Tris- II I F7 
Figure 3.25 how the cry tal that were formed, dimension are of the order of 
200Jlm on edge and 50Jlm deep. rystals were cryo-cooled in F7 buffer containing 
20% gluco e and diffracted to around 1.8A from te ts at ESRF on the micro-fo u 
beamline 1D23-2 and had the ame cell dimen ions a previously publi hed ( ee 
preliminary r utt, ection 2.6). Furthennore crystals could be reproduced u ing an 
in hou e batch ofwitd type Pqq when concentrated to ~50mg/ml. 
Hydrogenated Mutant 
After ucce fut cry talli ation of the wild type protein the Yl75F mutant protein 
was creencd again initially u ing the F7 buffer. Fr ezing the protein wa till an 
i ue and protein batche containing 10% glycerol wcre al 0 screened. dding 
10% glycerol to the buffer changed the cry tallisation conditions ignificant lyand 
many screens resulted in no crystals being formed, or re ulted in howers of cry ta ls. 
The best crystals were obtained directly from the nickel affmity chromatography 
eluate. 
Cry tal size and nucleation rate was initially optimised using a PEG 3350 screen in 
1 % steps from 22-27% (w/v). The be t cry tal urpri ingly were obtained u ing the 
Hampton PEG 3350 concentration of 25% (w/v). Concentrations either ide of th is 
resulted in the formation of cluster of crystals or poorly formed cry ta l (ee Figure 
3.26). 
/oiJ.:urc J.26: lI)drOJ.:Cllutcd \ 1751' mutant Ct)\tal\ f()rll1cd at (\) 22",", (B) 25%, and (C) 271111 PEC :1350 
Deutcrated M utant 
Perdeuterated Pqq Y 175 mutant wa cry talli ed In the ame way a th 
hydr genated mutant u ing the Hampton F7 pr cipitant lution. The initia l bat h f 
YI75F mutant pr tein wa t dilute (- IOmglml) and all cry talli ati n nditi n 
re ulted in the fi rmation flight precipitat . Further batchc w re e ne ntratcd t 
50mglml and cry talli ed u ing a P ereen f22-27% (w/v). Thi ' re ult d in 
the formation of micro crystals and/or showers of crystals. Following this, 
crystallisation conditions were screened around the ammonium sulphate concentrate 
in steps of 25mM from 25-175mM with both nickel affmity chromatography eluate 
and gel filtered protein. The nickel affmity chromatography eluate resulted in poor 
crystal formation in all 6 drops and the gel filtered protein resulted in precipitate and 
micro crystals (see Figure 3.27). These results are more than likely due to the change 
in protein solubility between hydrogenated and perdeuterated fonns . 
Fi~ure 3.27: r) tal~ formed "hen screening ammoniulll sulphate for (A) nickel amnit) chromatO'.,:raph) 
eluate (- 100-200/L111 on edge) and (B) ge l liltered (- 2- 10/L1ll on edge) YI75F mutant protein 
Due to the precipitation issue when freezing the protein 10% glycerol wa added 
after purification and an initial crystallisation trial was setup, allowing the protein to 
be screened both with and without glycerol. Crystals with 10% glycerol re ulted in 
the formation of showers and clusters of crystals and/or heavy pr cipitate when 
screened again t ammonium sulphate 25-175mM and with PEG 3350 concentration 
of 15 and 25% ( ee Figure 3.28). 
Fi~ure 3.28: Ilea\') precil)itlltc formed "hen crystallising' 1751' l11ulanl "ilh 10% gl)cerol 
Given the dense precipitate formed in the glycerol crystallisation drops, further 
screens around the PEG 3350 concentration were set up. A course concentration. 
range was selected in order to identify at what point precipitation was occurring. 
Drops were setup at 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35% (w/v) PEG 3350, with ammonium 
sulphate concentrations of25-175mM in 25mM steps. The drops at 15% (w/v) PEG 
3350 resulted in clear drops as expected, 20% (w/v) PEG 3350 resulted in some 
precipitate and higher concentrations resulted in heavy precipitate. 
As it was not possible to crystallise the protein with glycerol in the buffer latter 
protein batches were screened without glycerol and 10% (v/v) glycerol was added 
for freezing. This was then dialysed out for further crystallisation trials. Only poor 
crystals were obtained using the perdeuterated nickel affmity chromatography eluate 
so crystals were trialled after gel filtration without the presence of glycerol as well in 
order to assess the purity of the nickel affmity chromatography eluate protein. 
Crystallisation conditions were screened using PEG 3350 with concentrations of22-
27%. These conditions resulted in the formation of potentially micro crystalline 
precipitate but no single crystals. 
The protein had previously been co-crystallised with PQQ in 1:1 molar ratio. The 
PQQ concentration was 3mM and PqqC at -50mglml is about 2mM. Previous trials 
using 2ILI PQQ incubated with 8ILI PqqC is actually a PQQ:PqqC ratio of 3:8, 
meaning that some crystals could be formed without any bound PQQ, therefore 
leading to a mixture of crystal forms. Apo PqqC forms needle like crystals in 
comparison to the parallelepiped type crystals formed when PqqC is incubated with 
PQQ. Due to this shortage of PQQ a number of crystallisation trials were setup with 
variations in the PQQ:PqqC ratio. Crystals were trialled using PQQ:PqqC ratios of 
1:9, 1:4,2:3, and 1:1. Using larger amounts ofPQQ with PqqC does however result 
in reduced protein concentration. It is apparent that below a certain concentration 
limit (-40mglml) no crystals were formed at all. In drops with 1: 1 rat io the protein 
concentration is too low for crystallisation to occur and these drops resulted in the 
formation of a light precipitate. Crystals were formed in drops with 3:2 and 4: 1 
ratios, however all were badly formed (see Figure 3.29). 
Figure 3.29: Effect of PQQ: Pqq rati o on crys ta llisa tion of Y 175F muta nt. how ing PQQ:PqqC ratio of 
(A) 9: 1, (8)3 :2, ( ) I: 1 
Due to the problems presented with crystallisation of the perdeuterated Y175F 
mutant protein a fine screen around the PEG 3350 concentration was conducted in 
1 % steps from 13%-40% (w/v) PEG 3350, with ammonium SUlphate concentrations 
of 0.1 and 0.2M. Interestingly crystals are formed with increasing quality from 20-
25% (w/v) PEG 3350 with 0.2M ammonium sulphate (see Figure 3.30 and Figure 
3.31). No cry tals are formed below 20% (w/v) PEG 3350 only a light precipitate 
forms and above 28% PEG 3350 a heavy precipitate occurs. 
Figure 330: Y 175F ' r) stals form ed at 22% nnd 23% PEG 3350 
Figure 3.31: Y 1751' Cr}\tal~ formed ut 24 and 27% PEG 3350 
The best crystal obtained to date are of the order of O.Smm on edge ( ee Figure 
3.32); however the e crystal are multilayered and not of any use for diffraction 
experiment. Further optimisation is needed to obtain good ingle cry tal for 
neutron diffraction. 
Figure 3.32: Large \ 1751< mutunt cr)\tal\. (1)\lal\ an.' ho\\eH'r IlIullilu)ered. 
3.5 Production of the Pq(lC precusor 
In order to fully elucidate the protonation states of the PQQ reaction intermediate, 
perdeuterated PQQ precursor (see Figure 3.33) is required for the neutron study. 
Velterop et al.
found by studying the synthesis of PQQ in vitro, that the PQQ 
intermediate was produced from E. coli cells lacking PqqC both in the culture 
medium and in the cells. The amount produced however was low, and the 
intermediate was unstable. Toyama et al. ll found that the intermediate was produced 
in much larger quantity from a knockout strain of Methylobacterium extorquens 
AM I lacking the PqqC gene. 
Figure -' .. B: PQQ precursor 
Methylobacterium extorquens is a facultative methylotroph capable of growing on 
methanol, succinate, methylamine hydrochloride, and C2, C3, and C4 compounds. 
They are non-motile, rod shaped bacteria, and typically pink in colouration. They are 
often found in soil and on plants where they can grow by utilizing the methanol 
emitted from the stomata. 
Toyama et al.
cultured the Meythlobacterium extorquens AMI knockout strain on 
minimal salt mediums as described by Jayasuriyal2 and MacLennanl3 using 0.2% 
(w/v) succinate, 0.2% (w/v) methylamine hydrochloride plus 0.2% or 0.5% (v/v) 
methanol as the carbon source
Jayasuria's medium A contains the following components (mg/IOO ml): KH2P04, 
136; Na2HP04, 213; (NH4)2S04, 50; MgS04.7H20, 20; CaCh.2H20, 1; 
FeS04.7H20, 0.5; MnSO.5H20, 0.25; Na2Mo04.2H20, 0.25; potassium oxalate, 
K2C204.H20, 1000. 
Maclennan's medium contains the following components (glL): H3P04 0.65; 
(NH4)2S04 3.6; MgS04.7H20, 0.45; FeS04.7H20, 2xlO-3; CUS04 5H20, 4xlO-\ 
H3B03, 3xlO-
s; MnS04.4H20, 2xl0-4; ZnS04.7H20, 2xlO-4; Na2Mo04, 4xlO-
CaCh.2H20, 5.3xlO-3; CoCh.6H20, 4xlO-s. The pH was 2.83. 
3.5.1 Growth Trials 
Stocks of both Jayasuria and Maclennan's medium were prepared, pH adjusted to 7, 
and filter sterilised using a 250ml Millipore steritop. A cell stock of the knockout 
strain of Methylobacterium extorquens AM 1 was obtained from Robert 
Schwarzenbachers group at the University of Salzburg. t OILI of this stock was each 
placed in two flasks, one containing 10ml of Jayasuria's medium A and the other 
tOml of Maclennan's medium. The culture medium was supplemented with 0.5% 
(v/v) methanol and placed in an incubator for 24-48 hours at 30C. After 24 hours 
the pink colouration of the cells had diminished in both mediums and the optical 
density had not increased, indicating that no bacterial growth had occurred. 
Following this, trials were setup using 0.5% (v/v) methanol plus 0.2% (w/v) 
methylamine hydrochloride and separately 0.5% (w/v) methylamine hydrochloride 
as the carbon source with 10ml of culture medium as previously. Once again growth 
for 24-48 hours at 30C resulted in diminished cell colour. In the case of 
methylamine hydrochloride alone as the carbon source, aggregation of the cells in 
solution occurred. Inspection of these aggregates under the microscope showed some 
lysed but mostly whole cells adhered together. 
After the failed attempts to use methylamine hydrochloride as the carbon source, 
succinate was trialled alone. Again two flasks were setup one each of Jayasuria and 
Maclennan's medium along with 0.2% (w/v) succinic acid, and were incubate~ at 
30C for 48 hours. Once again the colour of the cells diminished along with the 
optical density of the medium indicating that no growth had occurred. A further 
culture medium (medium 396) was found on the American Type Culture Collection 
(ATCC) database and was also used to test cell growth. This medium consisted of 
Kl{zP04, 1.0g; K2HP04, 2.12g; Methylamine HC~ 6.75g; Solution A, 5.0ml; 
Solution B, l.Oml; Agar (for solid medium), 15.0g; Distilled water, l.0L. The 
solution was adjusted to pH 7.0 and sterilised by filtration using a Millipore steritop. 
Solution A consisted of MgS04.7H20, 2.0g; CaCh.2H20, 0.2g; FeS04.7H20, 0.2g; 
Distilled water, 100.OmI, Solution B consisted of MnS04.7H20, 0.05g; 
Na2Mo04.2H20, 0.05g; Distilled water, 100 ml. As previously, culture flasks setup 
for 24-48 hours at 30C resulted in diminished colouration of the cells and no 
increase in optical density. 
As cell growth could not be reproduced using either of the published media nor the 
three different carbon sources the cells were inspected under the microscope. This 
clearly showed cells moving, indicating that the cell stock was indeed live. As the 
cell stock could not be grown in any of the previously published minimal mediums, 
further growth trials were conducted in rich medium. Culture flasks were setup using 
10ml of LB medium placed in an incubator overnight at 30C. These trials resulted 
in an increased optical density; however decolouration of the cells still occurred. 
Inspection of the cells under the microscope showed two different strains. One of 
these could be a possible contaminant. Initial trials were conducted without an 
antibiotic, however Morris et al. 14 indicate that the AM2 mutant strain should have 
rifamycin resistance. Rifampicin and Rifamycin SV were obtained from Sigma 
Alrdich and each used in growth trials at a working concentration of 20#Lg/ml. These 
trials once again resulted in no apparent increase in optical density. 
More recent trials have focussed on growth in LB medium along with antibiotic as 
the rich medium trials at least resulted in an increased optical density. Some 
recolouration of cells can be obtained once the cells have been starved of carbon 
from the glycerol source in LB. It appears that colouration of the cell may occur once 
they begin feeding from the methanol as opposed to the carbon source available as 
part of the rich medium. 
The immediate future plans are, firstly, to test the supematant from the existing 
growth trials for the presence of the PQQ intermediate using an enzyme assay and, 
following this, further optimisation of the growth conditions is required in order to 
obtain any reasonable quantity of the PQQ intermediate for use in crystallographic 
experiments. 
3.6 Preliminary Results 
Crystals of the Y175F mutant PqqC protein cry tallised u ing an in hou e Hampton 
F7 buffer, and cryo-cooled in paraffm oil successfully diffracted to 1.9-I.SA on the 
microfocus beamline 1023-2 at ESRF. Crystals were of the order of200x I 00x50j.tm. 
90 of data were collected with an oscillation angle of 1.0. A diffraction image from 
the test experiment is shown in Figure 3.34. Data were indexed and integrated in 
space group P2 1212 with unit cell parameters of a = 67.9, b = 73.0 and c = 11 8.9 A, 
yielding an Rmerge of8.6% to 1.9A. 
Fi~ure 3.34: Diffraction to 1.5- 1.9 from h)dro~cnated , 175~ lIIutllnt cr~'talllt I.SRF microfocu, 
healllline Jl)23 -21 ~ 
The images show good diffraction and yield pr ml 109 r ult when int grated. 
1023-2 i a micr focu beamline with a beam mea uring about I x j.tm . I r a data t 
wa collected on 1023- 1 where the beam ize i ignificantly larger, it i I ibl 
that the diffraction re luti n uld be extended. Although dirrracti n is nly to 
- 1.7A where prot nation tate are n t determinable fr m b nd length ana lysi r 
electron den ity map , these crystals could be further optimised for neutron work 
using a mixture of cryocooling by soaking in cryoprotection buffer over a stepwise 
gradient, or by using macro and/or micro seeding methods. Although the crystals are 
relatively mall in terms of neutron diffraction, the diffraction resolution obtained is 
perfectly acceptab le for neutron diffraction. The major requirement is an increase in 
sample vo lume a minimum of 0.1 mm3 is required for an experiment on the LADl-
III instrument using a perdeuterated protein crystal. 
Figure 3.35 hows a diffraction image from a perdeuterated Yl75F mutant crystal 
with diffraction to aro und 2. IA. The crystal was of the order 0.5xO.5xO. 2mm and 
showed ome multilayer-cry tal characteristics. Visual inspection of the diffract ion 
pattern show sp lit diffraction pot indicating overlapping crystal lattices. Although 
the quality of the diffraction i poor, the image can still be indexed. Thi yield the 
expected space group ofP2,22, with unit cell parameters ofa = 67.2, b = 70.9 and c 
= 11 6. 1 A compared with a = 71.6A b = 116.7A and c = 68.2A for the hydrogenated 
wild typ protein. 
~ , . 
" , ... . 
, (I  "'" 
~ o- / ' 
. ,. .. ; 
,: : i : . . . 
i . . ,. . 
.. ~. ~ ~ ~ 
, \ . 
.' . '.'" , . . . . 
. , , I , 
" , ' , I 
 , " 
 f " 
\ .. J, ~ ' . . ...\ \ 
.. . . ; . . . 
'I , .. .  I  
, ,', . : 
: ~  r f,. 
~ . .. - ;,. 
,  I . . 
. -. ' 
Figurc 335: Diffraclion from a pcrclculeruled \' 1751' crysllll III E In' microfocu~ beam line 1\)23-2 
The unit cell parameters differences between the hydrogenated and perdeuterated are 
slightly larger than the standard difference required for isomorphism of 1 %. All of 
the unit cell parameters however show a decrease for the deuterated fonn; this is 
similar to the effect observed when crystals are cryo-cooled indicating that 
perdeuteration may also have a similar effect to that of cooling the crystal. 
Optimisation of the crystallisation conditions is still required in order to obtain good 
crystals for the use in neutron or ultra high resolution X-ray diffraction. Further 
crystallisation buffers must be screened and the purity of the protein checked. 
Despite the multilayer crystals, current results are promising and furthermore based 
on these results and a proposal submitted for the LADI-III instrument at the ILL, 12 
days of beam time have been awarded for future reactor cycles. 
3.7 References 
1. C. Anthony, Suhcell Biochem, 2000, 35, 73-117. 
2. G. E. Cozier and C. Anthony, Biochem. J., 1995,312,679-685. 
3. K. He, H. Nukada, T. Urakami and M. P. Murphy, Biochemical 
Pharmacology, 2003, 65, 67-74. 
4. F. Steinberg, T. E. Stites, P. Anderson, D. Storms, I. Chan, S. Eghbali and R. 
Rucker, Exp. Bioi. Med., 2003,228, 160-166. 
5. T. E. Stites, A. E. Mitchell and R. B. Rucker, J. Nutr., 2000, 130, 719-727. 
6. S. Puehringer, M. Metlitzky and R. Schwarzenbacher, BMC Biochem, 2008, 
7. O. T. Magnusson, H. Toyama, M. Saeki, R. Schwarzenbacher and J. P. 
Klinman, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2004, 126, 5342-5343. 
8. O. T. Magnusson, H. Toyama, M. Saeki, A. Rojas, J. C. Reed, R. C. 
Liddington, J. P. Klinman and R. Schwarzenbacher, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2004, 101, 
7913-7918. 
9. S. Puehringer, Unpiublished Work, 2008. 
10. J. S. Ve1terop, E. Sellink, J. J. M. Meulenberg, S. David, I. Bulder and P. w. 
Postma, Journal (?f Bacteriology, 1995, 177, 5088-5098. 
11. H. Toyama, L. Chistoserdova and M. E. Lidstrom, Microbiology-(UK), 1997, 
143, 595-602. 
12. G. C. N. Jayasuriya, J Gen Microbiol, 1955, 12,419-428. 
13. D. G. Mac1ennan, J. C. Ousby, R. B. Vasey and N. T. Cotton, J Gen 
Microhiol, 1971, 69, 395-404. 
14. C. J. Morris, F. Biville, E. Turlin, E. Lee, K. Ellermann, W. H. Fan, R. 
Ramamoorthi, A. L. Springer and M. E. Lidstrom, Journal of Bacteriology, 
1994, 176, 1746-1755. 
15. D. Flot, T. Mairs, T. Giraud, M. Guijarro, M. Lesourd, V. Rey, D. van 
Brussel, C. Morawe, C. Borel, O. Hignette, J. Chavanne, D. Nurizzo, S. 
McSweeneyand E. Mitchell, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 17, 107-118. 
4 Deuteration Effects: Investigation into possible structural 
changes 
4.1 Introduction 
There has recently been a major expansion in the microbiological expression of 
perdeuterated proteins for use in neutron protein crystallography experiments with 
results complementary to those of X-ray protein crystallography (for a review see 
Blakeley et al. I , and Ahmed et al.2). The advantages of perdeuterated over 
hydrogenated proteins in neutron protein crystallography have been discussed by 
Gamble et al. 3, Shu et al.4 and Hazemann et al.5 The key physical crystallography 
advantage of the use of perdeuterated proteins is a more than 10 fold reduction of 
sample background, leading to a reduced sample volume requirement, and improved 
diffraction resolution. The chemical structural crystallography advantage is an 
increased visibility of the hydrogen (as deuterium) atoms both on the protein and on 
the bound solvent (see Habash et al.6 ). 
As the use of perdeuterated molecules for structure detennination using neutron 
protein crystallography increases, it is important to evaluate the assumption that 
deuteration of a molecule does not affect its structure. It is well known that 
deuteration affect kinetics; the reduction in rate of reaction due to replacement of an 
isotope with a heavier one is known as the Kinetic Isotope Effect (KIE)7. It can be 
classified as either a primary or secondary effect, depending on the bond fission 
involved in the rate determining step. The primary KIE occurs when the rate 
determining step requires the fission of a bond involving the isotope8 and the 
secondary KIE occurs when the rate of reaction decreases even though the bond 
broken does not involve the isotope9 
Physically the KIE occurs as a result of the increased reduced mass, p.. Equation 4.1 
shows the harmonic oscillator approximation for energy levels in a diatomic 
molecule, where h is Planck's constant, v is the fundamental vibrational frequency, k 
is the spring constant, p. is the reduced mass and n is the energy level. Increasing the 
reduced-mass (for example changing H for D) results in a decreased zero point 
energy (n = 0), and hence an increase in the amount of energy required to cleave a. 
bond, thus resulting in a slower rate of reaction. 
J..l=---
ml +m2 
ECluation 4.1: Energy levels based on the harmonic oscillator apllroximation 
Although perdeuteration is becoming more common, there are a limited number of 
high resolution perdeuterated protein structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank 
(PDB). Therefore, in order to evaluate the effect of perdeuteration on structure, the 
small molecule database, namely the Cambridge Structure Database (CSD)IO, has 
been data mined for pairs of hydrogenated and deuterated small molecules resulting 
in more than 50 pairs of structures. This database contains of the order of 500,000 
structures and significantly more perdeuterated structures than the POB, providing a 
larger group of samples for comparison. The hydrogen bond geometry in the 
hydrogenated and deuterated structures has been compared and any significant 
differences noted. Isomorphous and anisomorphous pairs of structures have been 
analysed separately and the effect of the data collection temperature, which may 
mask a deuteration effect is discussed. The effect of temperature on the structures 
cannot be directly analysed as the CSO does not provide Atomic Displacement 
Parameter (ADP) details. A limitation of this study is that small molecules are not 
hydrated in the same way proteins are, for example it has been reported that proteins 
stiffen in D2011 and thus effects like this cannot be analysed using a cohort of small 
molecule structures. 
Before considering the CSO, a short literature review is presented discussing the 
effect of perdeuteration on proteins with regards to (i) the kinetic effects, (ii) the 
structural effects, (Hi) possible effects on protonation states, and (iv) functional 
changes that occur. 
Most of the published work on perdeuteration and its effect on proteins was 
performed in the 1960's by Crespi and Bcrnsl2. 13. Their experiments, as well as 
more recent data, indicate that perdeuteration has a general destabilizing eiTect on 
proteins and hence are more easily denatured. They concluded that even though there 
are ob erved phy icochemical differences
between hydrogenated and perdeuterated 
proteins, they are not of an overall structural nature. Furthennore biological 
propertie such a ligand-binding appear not to be significantly affected by 
perdeuteration
. R centJy OJgun1 7 published a mini review of the biological 
effect of perdeuteration and found with reference to ATP synthase that the 
contribution fperdeuteration to the pKa of Asp 61 is 0.35. 
A number of studie focu on the possible effects of deuteration on structure. A key 
inve tigation wa p rformed by Gamble et al.3 when they determined the structure of 
perdeuterated Staphylococcal Nuclease (SNase, see Figure 4.1). The native and 
perdeut rated form of SNa e behaved similarly throughout the purification 
procedure and cry tallized under the same experimental conditions. The X-ray 
diffraction charact ri tic and tructure of the native and deuterated protein w re 
compared in a number of way; fir tly by direct comparison of the diffraction data, 
se ndly by anal i of difference Fourier maps for the two data sets, and lastly by 
indep ndent r finement and comparison of the two structures at 1.9A resolution. The 
conclu ion drawn from the e compari ons was that there were no significant 
tructural differ n b tween hydrogenated and perdeuterated SNase. 
Figuf'l' 4.1: \ Cl1l10011 r('pr(,\(,lItlllioll of S \(' 
Since Gamble et al. there have been more recent studies comparing the structure of 
hydrogenated and perdeuterated protein. Cooper et al. I compared hydrogenated 
and deuterated GDP-EFTu at 3.oA resolution and concluded that there wer no 
discernible changes. Artero et al. 19 compared the hydr genated and deuterated 
structures of 'Y -crystallin and reported no significant difference in tructure 
however there were change in B-factor . More recently Blakely et al.2o compared 
the X-ray tructure of perdeuterated and hydrogenated aldo e reducta e and 
concluded that there were no ignificant difference. 
Although the majority of tudies find that there are n tructural change bctween 
hydrogenated and deuterated protein ome tudie do note ignificant change. Liu 
et al.21 compared the hydrogenated and perdeuterated haloalkane dehalogena e X-
ray tructure at l.sA re olution they ee a change in the enzyme active ite 
involving a mi ing water molecule and an as ociated rotation of a carb xy l gr up 
by 20 (see Figure 4.2). Whil t no tandard uncertaintie w re qu tcd the e change 
are ignificant given that the active ite i well ordered. However thcir re ult i 
complicated by the fact that the hydrogenated and perdeuterated pr tcin wcrc 
cry talli ed at different pH values, 6.0 and 4.6 re pectively making their data n t 
entirely comparable. 
Asp124 
Asp260 
His289 
Fij.UH -'.2: \clh~ \ill' ()fhillualkun~ dch)cl rClj.C11 U\l', 'DIl c(Klc n '\1' 01 lid 21'" \ ,hc)\\illJ.: thc clittrll' tI('C in 
pu\ilioll ut I-C) rc\idul'\ htlnnnlhc h)dl u:cnatcd alld dculcratl'd ,tIIlCIIlIC\. 
In addition to the possible effects perdeuteration can have on structure, comparisons 
between X-ray and neutron studies such as those by Kuhn et al. 22 and Kossiakoffand 
Spencer23 on the serine protease family suggest that the protonation state of some 
residues can also be affected by the exchange of hydrogen with deuterium. Kuhn et 
al. found in their 0.78A X-ray structure of a serine protease (Bacillus lentus 
subtilisin; see Chapter 1.1.1, Figure 1.6) that the critical active site hydrogen was 
positioned between His64 and Asp32, in contrast to the findings by neutron protein 
crystallography of Kossiakoff & Spencer23, in which it was definitively positioned 
on the histidine. Kuhn et al.
suggested that the different results regarding the 
protonation state of the two residues was a consequence of the replacement of 
hydrogen with deuterium which was used in the neutron experiment. Deuterium has 
a lower zero-point energy and thus is confined to a single position; a hydrogen atom 
in contrast, they argued could be shared (see Chapter 1.1.1). 
Changes in molecular function upon deuteration are also known. The effect of 
dcuteration on thermal properties through structural change has been documented 
before and is known as the Ubbelohde effect
.25. McMahon et al.26 report a change 
in the phase transition temperature upon deuteration for the compound KH2P04, due 
to a change in hydrogen bond geometry. The structures for KH2P04 and the 
deuterated KD2P04 can be found in the Inorganic Crystal Structural Database 
(lCSD)27. Comparison of the deuterated (lCSD code 201372) and hydrogenated 
(lCSD code 201370) structures 28 reveal a change of 0.73 in the hydrogen bonding 
angle as previously described by Katrusiak25. 
4.2 Ilata 'lining 
In order to find suitable small molecule structures for this study the CSD was data 
mined for all compounds containing either an O-D or N-D bond, for which a 
hydrogenated and perdeuterated structure existed. The resulting 200 Crystallographic 
Information Files (CIFs) for these compounds were do wnloaded. The unit cell 
parameters of each of the hydrogenated and deuterated structures were compared and 
compounds with large non-isomorphous differences were kept separate for analysis 
later. Thc hydrogenated structures were checked for the presence of hydrogen atoms 
and whether hydrogen atoms were in calculated or real positions. Those with 
hydrogen atoms in calculated positions were dismissed. This resulted in 26 
compounds with both hydrogenated and deuterated structures, with hydrogen atoms 
in real (non-calculated) positions and with isomorphous unit cell parameters. 
Figure 4.3: Example bond angles for a hydrogenated and deuterated compound 
The bond angles and associated standard deviations (a) for each compound were 
then calculated using the validation and analysis tool PLATON 29. The results were 
filtered for R-O-D/H and R-N-HID bond (corresponding to OH and NH hydrogen 
bonds, see Figure 4.3) angles. The standard deviation of each bond angle was then 
used in order to determine whether any difference between the hydrogenated and 
deuterated bond angles was real or an artefact of experimental error. In order for the 
difference to be significant the angles must differ by three times the combined 
standard deviation of the two bond angles. This corresponds to a standard 3a 
statistical test and can be calculated using Equation 4.2, where OD, and OH are the 
hydrogen bond angles in the deuterated and hydrogenated structures respectively, 
and aBD' and aBH are the standard deviations for these angles. 
a level = 
Equation 4.2: Formula for calculating standard uncertainty beh\een 2 bond angll's 
As X-ray structures in chemical crystallography can determine atomic positions to 
o.oolA the associated errors can be as small as 0.002A, and hence bond angles in 
some cases can be determined to 0.03. This means that a 3a significance level can 
be obtained from a bond angle difference of much less than 1, therefore a secondary 
cut off of L1H > 5 was used in order to identify changes that may be chemically 
meaningful within this significantly screened sub-group. A 5 change was chosen as 
this level of change is likely to be visible even in a moderate resolution protein 
crystal structure. 
Table 4.1 shows the data-mining collection parameters and the primary citation for 
each of the 52 isomorphous compounds studied and Table 4.2 shows 
crystallographic parameters for each of these compounds. Table 4.3 shows the data 
mining collection parameters, primary citation and crystallographic parameters for 
each of the non-isomorphous compounds studied. 
Isomorphous Compounds 
CSDCode IIID Radiation Probe T (K) Primary_ Citation 
CUHDAK Hydrogenated Unknown RT Schildkamp et al. (1984) 
CUHDAKOl Deuterated Unknown RT Kek et al. (1997) 
CYTOSM04 Deuterated Neutron 82 Weber et al. (1980) 
CYTOSMll Hydrogenated X-ray RT McClure (1973) 
DINICAll Hydrogenated Neutron 15 Cowan et al. (2005) 
DINICA13 Deuterated Neutron 15 Cowan et al. (20051 
DIYJUQ02 Hydrogenated X-ray 130 Zuniga et al. (1991) 
DIYJUQ03 Deuterated Neutron RT Ezpeleta et al. (1996) 
FORMACOl Hydrogenated X-ray 98 Nahringbauer (19781 
FORMAC02 Deuterated Neutron 4.5 Albinati et al. (1978) 
HAZFAPOI Hydrogenated X-ray RT Reetz et al. (199'L 
HAZFAP03 Deuterated X-ray RT Reetz et al. (1994) 
HDRZH002 Hydrogenated X-ray RT Thomas (1973) 
HDRZH003 Deuterated X-ray RT Thomas (1973) 
IMDACB02 Deuterated X-ray RT Oskarsson (I 976J 
IMDACBII Hydrogenated Neutron RT Oskarsson (1976) 
I MZMALl1 Hydrogenated Neutron RT Hsu (1980) 
IMZMAL13 Deuterated Neutron RT Hussain et alJ 19801 
JUQSOD Hydrogenated X-ray 100 Evdokimov et al. (1999) 
JUQSODOl Deuterated Neutron 20 Evdokimov et al.J200 I) 
KECYBU06 Hydrogenated Neutron RT Semmingsen et al. (197'Zl 
KECYBUIO Deuterated Neutron RT McMahon et al.J1991) 
KFSCCNOI Deuterated X-ray RT Emsl~ et aIJI9S\} 
KFSCCNIO Hydrogenated X-ray RT Emsley et al. (19821 
KFURDC Hydrogenated X-ray RT Jaulmes (1978) 
KFURDCOI Deuterated X-ray RT Jaulmes J 19782 
LABSEMOI Hydrogenated X-ray 295 Baran et al. (2002) 
LABSEM02 Deuterated X-ray 360 Baran et al.J200~ 
LARGPHOl Hydrogenated X-ray RT Saenger (1972) 
LARGPH07 Deuterated Neutron RT Cheng et al. (19971 
UIOXALOI Hydrogenated X-ray RT Thomas 1197~ 
LIIOXAL02 Deuterated X-ray RT Thomas (1972) 
LIACET02 Hydrogenated X-ray RT Galigne et al. (1970) 
LIACET05 Deuterated Neutron RT Kearl~ et al. J19961 
OXACDH04 Hydrogenated Neutron RT Sabine et al.Jl9691 
OXACDH28 Deuterated Neutron RT Coppens (1969) 
POVHEN Hydrogenated X-ray 122.4 Madsen J 19981 
POVHENOl Deuterated X-ray 122.4 Madsen et al. (19981 
PUHROZ Hydrogenated X-ray 80 Jerzykiewicz et al.1199ll 
PUHROZ02 Deuterated X-ray 80 Jerzykiewicz et al. (1998) 
QUlCNA02 Hydrogenated Neutron 100 Takusagawa (19781 
QUlCNAll Deuterated Neutron 100 Takusagawa (1979) 
RUJCII Hydrogenated X-ray RT Meervelt et al. (1997) 
RUJCIIOI Deuterated X-ray RT Meervelt et al.J 19971 
SECAZC02 Hydrogenated Neutron RT Roul et al. (198~ 
SECAZC03 Deuterated Neutron RT Roul et al. (1988) 
URPRBNOl Deuterated Neutron 116 Weber et al. (1980) 
URPRBNIO Ilydrogenated X-ray RT Col man J19701 
WAGMOIIOl Hydrogenated X-ray 276 Bao-Qing Maet al.12OO4) 
WAGMOII02 Deuterated X-ray 90 Bao-Qing Maet al. (2004) 
WIVDUAOl Deuterated X-ray 298 Iloriuchi et al. (2005) 
WIVDUA02 Ilydrogenated X-ray 298 Iloriuchi et al. (2005) . ' . , 
I ahle 4.1: l{adlatlOn pruhe, cullt'cUnn temperature (I{ I = 211,\- .\0.1'" and pJ'llllary citatIOn for 1111 52 
Isomurphuus comllUunds studied. 
CSDCode 
CUHDAK 
CUHDAKOl 
CYTOSM04 
CYTOSMl1 
DINICAll 
DINICA13 
DIYJUQ02 
DIYJUQ03 
FORMACOI 
FORMAC02 
HAZFAPOl 
HAZFAP03 
HDRZHOO2 
- HDRZHOO3 VI 
IV IMDACB02 
IMDACBII 
IMZMALll 
IMZMALI3 
JUQSOD 
JUQSODOI 
KECYBU06 
KECYBUlO 
KFSCCNOI 
KFSCCNIO 
KFURDC 
KFURDCOI 
HID Spacegroup Z a (A) b(A) c (A) ae) ~e) ye) Chemical Formula 
Hydrogenated P2./n 4 9.556(4) 12.897(6) 8.128(3) 90 91.23(2) 90 CS H14 Asl NI 06 
Deuterated P2./n 4 9.556(4) 12.897(6) 8.128(3) 90 91.23(2) 90 CS Hl1 D3 Asl NI 06 
Deuterated P2./c 4 7.7q(l) 9.830(4) 7.505(4) 90 100.52(2) 90 C4 H2 DS N3 02 
Hydrogenated P2./c 4 7.783(2) 9.825(2) 7.668(2) 90 99.57(2) 90 C4 H7 N3 02 
Hydrogenated P2./c 4 9.7116(13) 11.1347(17) 6.4421(13) 90 1 08.595( 1 0) 90 C7 H5 NI 04 
Deuterated P2./c 4 9.7196(13) 11.1396(17) 6.4540(13) 90 108.754(10) 90 C7 H3 D2 NI 04 
Hydrogenated Pnma 4 10.909(7) 10.029(3) 10.813(2) 90 90 90 C5 HI5 Cal C12 NI 04 
Deuterated Pnma 4 10.95(1) 10.15(1) 10.82(1) 90 90 90 CS Dl5 Cal C12 NI 04 
Hydrogenated Pna2. 4 10.241(1) 3.544(1) 5.356(1) 90 90 90 Cl H2 02 
Deuterated Pna2. 4 10.2361(8) 3.5203(2) 5.3572(4) 90 90 90 Cl D202 
Hydrogenated P2./n 4 3.800(1) 11.208(1) 27.447(2) 90 92.22(1) 90 C14 HION2 04 
Deuterated P2 1/n 4 3.793(1) 11.175(1) 27.581(4) 90 91.99(1) 90 C14 H9 Dl N2 04 
Hydrogenated *P2./m 2 3.5792(3) 13.3228(16) 5.0965(3) 90 102.6 90 C2 H6N2 04 
Deuterated *P2. 2 3.5858(5) 13.3085(16) 5.1001(5) 90 102.488 90 C2 D6N2 04 
Deuterated Pmmn 2 12.8047(33) 5.8670(16) 5.0807(12) 90 90 90 C4 H4 D4 Brl NI 04 
Hydrogenated Pmmn 2 12.815(2) 5.8707(7) 5.0870(7) 90 90 90 C4 H8 Brl NI 04 
Hydrogenated P2./c 4 10. 85st21 5.518(1) 14.616(4) 90 102.87(1) 90 C7 H8N2 04 
Deuterated P2./c 4 10.858(1) 5.525(1) 14.631(2) 90 102.85(1) 90 C7 HSD3 N204 
Hydrogenated P2.2.2. 4 10.339(3) 15.495(2) 4.6265(10) 90 90 90 C6 HI2 05 
Deuterated P2.2.2. 4 10.332(3) 15.446(2) 4.614(1) 90 90 90 C6 H9D3 05 
.fydrogenated P2./m 2 6.143(2) 5.286(2) 6.148(2) 90 89.96 90 C4 H2 04 
Deuterated P2./m 2 6.152(1) 5.269(1) 6.165(1) 90 89.92(1) 90 C4 D2 04 
Deuterated Pnam 4 7.0709(5) 5.5752(5) 16.871(3) 90 90 90 C4 H4 D2 FI Kt 04 
Hydrogenated Pnam 4 7.0680(1) 5.5710(1) 16.846(2) 90 90 90 C4 H6 FI Kl 04 
Hydrogenated P-I 2 8.154(4) 11.598(5) 3.7239(3) 91.7S(3) 100.13(3) 91.02(4) C6 H3 KI 05 
Deuterated P-I 2 8.125(6) 11.583(5) 3.716(2) 91.75(3) 100.24(4) 91.16(3) C6 H2 Dl KI OS 
Table 4.2: Span'group, Z number and unit cell parameters for all isomorphous compounds studied. Error in last significant figure (1lIoted in brackets. 
*Note isomorphous unit cell but loss of symmetry in deuterated molecule. 
CSDCode HID Spacegroup Z a (A) b(A) c (A) a (0) (Je) .1 e) Chemical Formula 
LABSEMOl Hydrogenated P2./a 4 9.793(1) 8.481 (2) 7.409(2) 90 100.43(3) 90 C2H8NI05Pl 
LABSEM02 Deuterated P2./a 4 9.824(1) 8.473(2) 7.450(2) 90 100.43(3) 90 C2 H2 06 NI 05 PI 
LARGPHOI Hydrogenated P2. 2 10.898(3) 7.910(2) 7.339(2) 90 97.97(3) 90 C6 HI9 N4 07 PI 
LARGPH07 Deuterated P2. 2 10.843(3) 7.913(2) 7.321(2) 90 97.99(3) 90 C6 H7 012 N4 07 PI 
LHOXALOI Hydrogenated PI 1 5.056(1) 6.140(1) 3.411(1) 95.06(1) 98.93(1) 78.57(1) C2 ID Lil 05 
LHOXAL02 Deuterated PI 1 5.055(1) 6.138(1) 3.410(1 ) 95.05(1) 98.62(1) 78.57(1) C2 03 Lil 05 
LlACET02 Hvdrogenated Cmmm *4 6.820(7) 10.88(1) 6.620(7) 90 90 90 C2 H7 Lil 04 
LIACET05 Deuterated Cmmm *2 6.82082(9) 1 0.88842( 12) 6.59911(7) 90 90 90 C2 07 Lil 04 
OXACOH04 Hydrogenated P2./n 2 6.119 3.607 12.057 90 106.32 90 C2 H606 
OXACOH28 Deuterated P2./n 2 6.15 3.605 12.102 90 106.63 90 C20606 
POVHEN Hydrogenated Pnam 8 6.4274(10) 11.826(2) 17.616(2) 90 90 90 C5H9NI04 
POVHENOl Deuterated Pnam 8 6.427(1) 11.826(2) 17.616(2) 90 90 90 C5 H5 D4Nl 04 
PUHROZ Hydrogenated P2./c 4 12.483(8) 7.551(5) 16.066(12) 90 112. 15{7) 90 C14 H13 N3 06 
PUHROZ02 Deuterated P2./c 4 12.488(7) 7.556(6) 16.070(12) 90 112.18(6) 90 C14 HI2 01 N3 06 
QUICNA02 Hydrogenated P2./c 4 7.415(5) 12.396(9) 7.826(6) 90 117.05(4) 90 C7H5NI04 
QUICNAl1 Deuterated P2./c 4 7.422(2) 12.392(4) 7.835(5) 90 117.06(2) 90 C7ID 02Nl 04 
RUJClI Hydrogenated P2.2.2. 4 9.547(1) 10.298(1) 19.135(3) 90 90 90 C19 H24 N2 04 
RUJCIIOI Deuterated P2.2.2. 4 9.641(3) 10.385(3) 19.340(8) 90 90 90 C19 H22 D2 N2 04 
SECAZC02 Hydrogenated P2.2.2. 4 7.53(1) 13.18(2) 4.67(1) 90 90 90 Cl H6 Cll N3 01 
SECAZC03 Deuterated P2.2.2. 4 7.55(1) 13.21(2) 4.68(1) 90 90 90 Cl 06 Cll N3 01 
URPRBNOl Deuterated P2./c 4 8.910(3) 5.597(2) 14.525(6) 90 108.39(3) 90 C406N404 
URPRBNI0 Hydrogenated P2./c 4 9.137(14) 5.623(3} 15.013(45) 90 109.13(3) 90 C4H6N404 
WAGMOHOI Hydrogenated Pca2. 4 21.52(2) 9.645(7) 6.643(6) 90 90 90 CI0 HI6N406 
WAGMOH02 Deuterated Pea2. 4 21.483(3) 9.5933(14) 6.5701(10) 90 90 90 CI0 H8 08 N4 06 
WIVDUAOl Deuterated P2./n 2 12.3997(9) 3.9144(3) 17.409(2) 90 107.882(6) 90 C18 H8 02 Br2 N2 04 
WIVDUA02 Hydrogenated P2./n 2 12.364(1) 3.9220(5) 17.395(2) 90 107.828(4) 90 C18 HIO Br2 N2 04 
Table 4.2 (continued): Spacegroup, Z number and unit cell parameters for all isomorphous compounds studied. Error in last significant figure quoted in brackets. 
*By inspection Z = 2 although LlACET02, Galigne et at (1970) record Z = 4. 
Non-lsolOOrphous Compounds 
CSDCode HID Radiation Probe T(K) Primary Citation 
AMBONCOI Hydrogenated Neutron RI Schlemper et al. (1971) 
AMBONC02 Oeuterated Neutron RI Hsu et al. (1980) 
GADGUN Hydrogenated X-ray RI Malarski et aJ. (1987) 
GADGUNOI Oeuterated X-ray RI Majerz et aJ. (1990) 
HAXFER Hydrogenated X-ray RI lerzykiewicz et aJ. (1993) 
HAXFEROl Oeuterated L-X-ray RI lerzykiewicz et aJ. (1993t 
CSDCode Space Group Z a CA) b(A) c CA) a (0) ~ (0) y (0) Chemical Formula 
AMBONCOl P2l/c 4 12.74(2) 10.79(2) 11.81(2) 90 92.5(2) 90 CIO H25 Cll N4 Nil 03 
AMBONC02 P2 1 2 11.033(4) 12.940(5) 5.862(2) 90 101.97(1) 90 CIO HI8 07 CIl N4 Nil 03 
GAOOUN P-I 2 7.408(6) 8.934(7) 13.653(9) 100.15(6) 118.50(6) 103.67(6) C12 H8 CI5 NI 01 
GAOOUNOI Cc 4 3.942(3) 27.73(3) 13.297(9) 90 101.81(6) 90 C12 H7 D1 CI5 NI 01 
HAXFER P-l 2 9.409(9) 10.813(7) 12.310(7) 95.75(5) 108.17(7) 91.46(7) C21 HI7 N5 012 
HAXFEROl P2l/c ~ 11.680{} _8.451(4) 24.382(9) I- 90 102.94(4) 90 C21 H15 02 N5 012 
Table 4.3: Radiation probe, collection temperature (RT = 283 - 303K). primary citation. spacegroup, Z number and unit cell parameters for all 3 non-isomorphous compollnd~ 
studied. 
4.3 Results and Discussion 
One of the compounds studied here; bromanilic acid phenazine (CSD code: 
WIVDUA) has been extensively studied, most recently by Horiuchi et al. 30, due to a 
change of lOOK in its ferroelectric phase transition temperature, Tc, between 
hydrogenated and deuterated forms. Horiuchi et al.3o concluded that a change in 
hydrogen bond geometry is only partially responsible for the change in phase 
transition temperature and do not offer and further explanation for this phenomenon. 
However there is no significant change in bond angles, with largest t10 of 9.and 
n(t10) = 5.8, thus the sigma significance level is only 1.54<J and therefore for this 
reason this compound is not discussed further here. 
For each of the pairs of structures found in the CSD, the PLATON bond angle 
results have been tabulated and analysed in order to determine the difference 
between the bond angles, the combined standard deviation, and the overall sigma 
level of significance using Equation 4.2. Significant (3<J bond angle differences) and 
meaningful changes (t1fJ>5) are highlighted in bold. Each compound is referred to 
by its CSD code for convenience. 
4.3.1 Isomorphous Differences 
Table 4.4 shows 9 compounds with a sigma level of significance greater than 3a and 
Table 4.5 shows 4 compounds with a sigma level greater than 2a between the 
hydrogenated and deuterated structures. These are discussed in turn. 
u level of Collection 
CSDCode Bond AO(O) (1(AO) (0) si2nificance Temperature 
CYTOSM C(1) - N(I) - H(I) 1.20 0.10 11.49 D (82K), H (RT) 
C(4) - N(I) - H(I) 0.99 0.10 9.48 
C(2) - N(3) - H(4) 2.60 0.11 22.80 
C(2) - N(3) - H(5) 0.49 0.11 4.30 
H(4) - N(3) - H(5) 2.97 0.15 20.40 
H(2) - 0(1) - H(3) 1.66 0.16 10.20 
FORMAC C( 1 ) - O( I) - H( I ) 0.85 0.21 4.12 D (4.5K), H (98) 
HDRZHO* N(2) - N(I) - H(I) 5.70 0.23 24.76 D (RT), H (RT) 
N(2) - N(\) - H(1)b 1.06 0.23 4.60 
H(I) - N(I) - H(I)b 2.29 0.25 9.00 
N(I) - N(2) - H(2) 4.39 0.21 21.02 
N(I) - N(2) - H(3) 2.67 0.26 10.42 
N(I) - N(2) - H(2)b 9.15 0.17 53.55 
H(2) - N(2) - H(3) 3.88 0.19 19.98 
H(2) - N(2) - H(2)b 9.53 0.43 22.31 
H(3) - N(2) - H(2)b 2.92 0.30 9.65 
IMDACB* C(2) - N(I) - H(I) 1.52 0.16 9.27 D (RT), H (RT) 
C(2) - N(I) - H(I)a 1.53 0.16 9.33 
H(l) - N(l) - H(I)a 7.10 0.58 12.18 
C(2)a - N(I) - H(I)a 1.53 0.16 9.33 
KECYBU C( 1 ) - O( I ) - H( I ) 0.35 0.10 3.54 D (RT), H (RT) 
C(2) - 0(2) - H(2) 0.54 0.11 5.08 
LARGPH* C(2) - N(I) - H(13) 9.60 3.06 3.14 D (RT), H (RT) 
H(6) - N(4) - H(7) 20.60 5.10 4.04 
D (122.4K), H 
POVHEN H(6) - N(I) - H(7) 3.30 0.95 3.48 (122.4K) 
QUICNA C(I) - N(I) - H(4) 0.83 0.16 5.14 D (lOOK), H 
('(5) - N(I) - H(4) 0.63 0.17 3.61 (lOOK) 
SECAZC* ('(I) - N(I) - H(I) 4.60 0.57 8.13 D (RT), H (RT) 
('(1)-N(I)-H(2) 4.50 0.58 7.72 
H(1) - N(t) - H(2) 8.30 0.64 12.96 
N(2) - N(3) - H(4) 4.70 0.64 7.34 
H(4) - N(3) - H(5) 4.20 0.57 7.42 
H(4) - N(3) - 8(6) 7.60 0.72 10.54 
H(5) - N(3) - H(6) 6.90 0.78 8.83 
Tllhll' -t ... : Bond 'tngll'S diO'l'n'nCl's nith sigma Inl'l > 30. Meaningful changes (>5) sho\\n in bold. 
CYTOSM 
This compound has bond angles defmed with errors as small as 0.03 consequently. 
even with very small angular changes, large sigma levels result. The NH2 group has 
changed by 3 resulting in a sigma level of 20.40'. The movement of the water 
molecule can presumably be ignored as water of crystallisation can change between 
crystals. 
FORMAC 
This compound has a 110 of < 10 yet has a significance level of 4.10' due to the very 
small standard deviations. This change, like that of CYTOSM, is unlikely to be 
meaningful. 
IIDRZlIO 
Although all the sigma significance levels are > 40', the majority of the angular 
differences are less than 5. The two N-N-H bond angles and the H-N-H are however 
potentially interesting with 110 of 5.7,9.150 and 9.53 respectively. 
IMDACB 
This compound also has very high sigma significance levels, all greater than 90'; 
however all except one of the bond angles has 110 < 5. The bond angle of interest; 
namely the H-N-Ha bond deviates between hydrogenated and deuterated form by 
7.1. 
KECYBU 
Both the C-OH bond angles deviate by <1 and even though they have significant 
sigma levels are unlikely to be meaningful. 
LARGPII 
The H-N-H bond angle in this compound has changed by a relatively large 20.6 
between hydrogenated and deuterated forms. Even though the bond angle standard 
uncertainties are 5 this still relates to a sigma significance level of> 30'. There is 
also a C-N-H bond angle that varies by 9.6. 
POVHEN 
The single bond angle with a 30- significant difference only has a ,,18 of 3. This 
particular change is unlikely to be meaningful. 
QUICNA 
The L1H values for the 2 C-N-H bond angles are both <1  and show a 30- significance 
due to the very small uncertainties on each bond angle. These changes are very 
unlikely to be meaningful. 
SECAZC 
This compound shows deviations greater than 5 on three N-H-N bond angles and all 
the deviations with> 30- significant differences have ,,18 > 4. The primary citation 
for this paper was followed by an erratum31  They detailed how hydrogen bond 
geometry had been incorrectly published, however no updated atomic coordinates 
were given. This erratum therefore should not affect analysis as bond angles have 
been calculated directly from the associated CIF files as opposed to from data within 
the papers. 
As well as the compounds with a bond angle difference at 30- those at 20- were also 
considered. Table 4.5 shows the compounds that had 20- differences, as can be seen 
the first two compounds also appear in the 30- table, however OXACDH and RUJCII 
are new additions, OXACDH however only shows ,,18 = 1.6 and hence is unlikely to 
be a meaningful change, RUJCII however shows movement of a C-O-H by slightly 
greater than 5, which is potentially interesting. 
CoUection 
CSDCode Bond AO (1(AO) a level Temperature 
IMDACB C(\) - 0(2) - H(3) 1.60 0.58 2.74 D (RT). H (RT) 
H( 1) - N(1) - H(3) 2.00 0.92 2.17 
H(2) - N(1) - H(3) 2.70 0.92 2.93 
LARGPH H(ll) - N(t) - "(14) 10.20 4.08 2.50 D (RT). H (RT) 
OXACDH C( \ ) - O( \ ) - H( 1 ) 1.60 0.61 2.63 D (RT). H (RT) 
RUJCn C(2) - 0(1) - H(3) 5.60 2.33 2.40 D (RT). H (RT) 
N(2) - N(3) - H(6) 0.80 0.36 2.22 
Tohll' 45: HOlld olljll'S \\ilh sijlllllll'\'el > 2u alld < Ju. Meanin)ful changes (>5) shown in bold, 
Of the 26 compounds studied 5 appear to have meaningful changes with e > 5. 
These compounds encompass all four combinations of radiation probe and stllJcture 
type (X-ray, neutron, hydrogenated, and deuterated) and a such show no weakness 
in the standard uncertainty assessment. For each of these 5 compound the 
hydrogenated and deuterated fonns were superimpo ed u ing the CP4 program 
SUPERPOSE32, the result are shown below. The labelling of the hydrogen and 
deuterium atoms is arbitrary. 
Hlb Hlb 
02 02 
0 4 04 
Hl Hl 
DJ DJ 
Figurl' 4A: Sll'rl'O ~il'\\ (cros\-l')l' \ il'\\ ing) of th e wpcrirnpO\l'd h~dnlli n iu m h}d rog 'n o\ ulll te 
(II DJ{ZIIO) \tructurl'\; thl' chunJ.:l' of 9.53 i n ~ol\ c\ 11 2 '\ 2 11 2h, lhc chll nJ.:c of9. 15 imol\C\ 1 2 11 2b 
and thc chunc of5.700 in\ol\l'\ 2 "\1 Ill. 
Figure 4.4 how the uperimpo ed HDRZHO tructure' the deuterated tructure 
eem to have a li ght ly distorted tetrahedral g metry ab ut the H3 t in In 
compari on to the hydrogenated structure. The H- -H b nd angle i lightly 
maller for the NH2 group in the deuterated ca e. lntere tingly h wcvcr the 
replacement of hydrogen with deuterium ha re ulted in a di t rti n away fr m 
ymmetry with the 10 f the mirror plan in the tructur due t the I ngthcning 
and rotation of onc fthe N-H b nd ab ut the hydrazinium i n. 
Figure ~.5: tereo \ie\\ (cro~s-e)e vie\\ing) or lhe ul}erimposed iminodiacetic acid h)drobromide 
(I\ID \ ' B) structure. The changc of 7. 10 involvcs III I ilIa. 
Figure 4.5 how the uperimpo ed IMOACB structures; the carboxylic acid C-O-H 
bond angle i irtually identical for the deuterated and hydrogenated forms, however 
the protonated amino group doe slightly differ between the two. 
Figure 4.6: , tereo \ iell (ero ~-e)c \ ic\\ ing) of the uperimposed L-arginine pho phate l11onoh)drate 
(LAR .P II) ,tructur . The chunge 01"20.60 in volves 116 4 11 7und thc chan.:c of 9.60 imohes 2 I 
structure. Th 
th LARGPH upertmpO ed structures' there are vi ible deviation 
uterium atom pre ent on all of the nitrogen atoms in the 
d iati n although the large t out of all the compound tudied 
still only quat t a m ment in atomic po ition of 0.31 between atoms 07 and 
Figure 4.7: Stereo vic\~ (cro\s-c}e \ic\\ing) orthe superimpowd \emicarba/ide hydrochloride ( ECi\Z 
structures. The change of 8.30 invohes III I 112, the change or 7.60 im ol\es 114 J 116 and the chunge 
of 6.90 il1\ol\cs liS \3 116. 
Figure 4.7 shows the SECAZC superimposed tructure; the major deviations occur 
on the tenninal NH/ and NH2 group however these deviations although 
significant, are still rather minor the large t equating to a shift in atomic po ition by 
O.IBA between the H6 and 06 atoms. 
Figure 4.8: ' tcreo vic\~ (cros\-e}c vic\\inJ.) of the supcrimpo\cd n-tcrt-buto\)clIrbonyl-l-phclI)lulunine 
and p) ridinc COml)I(''I: (IH.J ' 11) \tructure\. 'I he change of 5.60 ill\oh c ' 201 113. 
Figure 4.B how the upcrimpo ed RUJ I I tructure' a lthough nly at a 2a 
s ignificance level there is till an angu lar difference f > 5 at the - -H b nd. 
Although greater than 5 the actual hift in atomic p iti n r late t nly O.16A 
between 02 and H3 which i unlikely t be meaningful. 
4.3.2 Non-Isomorphous Differences 
The compounds found earlier to have non-isomorphous unit cells were also 
examined. These compounds first needed superimposing as the position of the 
structure within the unit cell is different for the hydrogenated and deuterated 
structures, and furthermore the hydrogen and deuterium naming is not consistent. 
Following superimposition of the structures the bond angles were calculated using 
PLATON. The differences and significance levels were calculated as with the 
isomorphous compounds. Bond angle analysis results are shown in Table 4.6. 
u level of 
CSDCode Bond A9 (0) o(A9) (0) si2nificance 
AM BONC N(I) - 0(1) - H(l6) 2.00 0.67 2.98 
Ni(l) - N(3) - H(ll) 8.20 0.42 19.33 
Ni(l) - N(3) - 8(13) 10.20 0.42 24.04 
C(4) - N(3) - H(ll) 0.30 0.42 0.71 
C(4) - N(3) - H(13) 1.20 0.42 2.83 
H(II) - N(3) - H(13) 2.30 0.57 4.07 
Ni(l) - N(4) - H(14) 4.80 0.42 11.31 
Ni(l) - N(4) - H(15) 4.30 0.42 10.14 
C(5) - N(4) - H(l4) 0.50 0.42 l.l8 
C(5) - N(4) - H(l5) 0.10 0.50 0.20 
H(14) - N(4) - H(15) 2.10 0.57 3.71 
8(17) - 0(3) - 0(18) 5.40 0.94 5.72 
GADGUN C(I) - 0(1) - 0(1) 7.00 4.24 1.65 
HAXFER C(21) - 0(7) - 0(10) 5.00 6.32 0.79 
C(5) - N(1) - 0(1) 5.00 4.47 1.12 
Tahlc t6: Bond anjll's differenecs for the non-isomorphous compounds studied. l\1esninjful changes (>5) 
shown in hold. 
The AMBONC structures show a number of significant changes with (J levels of 
significance as high as 240". The maximum change in LlB is 10.20 and is therefore 
likely to be a meaningful change. Most of these changes are the result of rotation of 
the hydrogen atoms about the CH3 methyl groups, however there is also the rotation 
of the C(CH3hNH2 group. The nickel co-ordination site remains generally 
unchanged between the two structures. 
Fil-:ure 4.9: Stereo vic~\ (cro\\-eye de" ing) of the ~upcri mpo~ed bi (3-amino-3-mclhyl-2-hutallollc 
o\imato)nickel(lI) hloridc Monoh}drutc ( 1\1BOI'I; ) \tructurc\. Oeuleratcd ~truclurc \honn in blue and 
h)drogenated in green. 
The deuterated and hydrogenated forms of AMBO are very simi lar de pite 
differences in crystal packing. The major difference between the asymmetric units i 
the shift of one of the C(CH3)2NH2 groups and the apparent formation f a hydrogen 
bond to the water molecule. 
, ---,--" --I 
~--- ,, / 
',j;b--"', , , , , 
Figure 4.10: t<: \umplc dihedral plane angle for the compound  \J)Gl 
Both GADGUN and HAXF R show little in the way f ignifi ant hange in b od 
angle between the hydrogenated and deuterat d f( rm . They d however show 
significant difference in their crystal packing. In rder t tati tically ana ly e the 
difference, dihedral angles were calculated b tween the In le ule ccntr id (ee 
Figure 3.10) along with the a ociated IT r 
deuterated compound. The dihedral angle wer calculated by electing at ms 
lying within a plane fi reach centroid and then u ing the 'dihedral' pti n in 
PLATON. Fr In the e value a igma lev I f ignifican e wa ca l ulat'd u ing 
Equati n 4.3 where 1>D and 1>H are the dihedral angles in the deuterated and 
hydrog nated tructure , and (JcPD and (JcPD are the associated standard deviations. 
Equation .t . .'\: Formula fOl calculating standard uncertainty beh\Cen 2 dihedral angles 
Table 4.7 how the re ult of the dihedral analysis for the two ani omorphous 
compound that how little change in the bond angles between hydrogenated and 
deuterated forms . Du t large change in dihedral angles between the hydrogenated 
and d ut rated mp und , all the results how very large levels of significant. 
GADG and H 
GADGUN 
FER ar di cu sed in turn below. 
Dihedral 
AO e) 
39.60 
59.60 
23 .50 
42.10 
Tahle 4.7: Oihedrall)lane angle anal)si~ 
(J level of 
nificance 
93.34 
133 .27 
52.55 
94.14 
.. ijure .t. t I: Stl' rl'O \ it'\\ (cro .. ,-c) c \ ic\\ ing) of t he ~uperilllpo~cd 4-meth) Ip) ridinc \\ ith 
pcntachlorophcnol (G \I)(;l ) \tructurc\. I)cutcrat d trueturc sho\\n in blue and hydrogenated in green. 
The mp n nt f th a mm tri unit are virtually identical in both the deuterated 
and h dr g nat d a . Th pa king of the components is however significantly 
different with the dihedral angle between the 2 centroids differing by 39.6 between 
the hydrogenated and deuterated forms (see Figure 4.11). 
HAXFER 
I igure 4.12: Stereo view (cros\-cye \-ic\\ing) orlhe \upcrimpo\cd 3,S-dimClh)lpyridinc and 3,5-
dinitrobcll/oic acid complex (11 XFER) ~truclure~. Thc deuterated ~tructurc (in blue) lic, on a planc, the 
hydrogenatcd ~trllctllrc (in grcen) ho\\c\-cr d()('~ not. 
In a imilar manner to GADGUN, the component of the a ymmetric unit for 
deuterated and hydrogenated HAXFER are virtually identical; however there i once 
again significant difference in cry tal packing. In the ease of the deuterated structure 
all three components of the asymmetric unit lie on a plane in the hydrogenated case 
they do not. The difference in dihedral angle a ociated with this change equates to 
59.60 (see Figure 4.12). 
The large change in dihedral angle for the GADGUN and HAXF R mp und 
although significant are unlikely to be cau ed olely by deuteration. It i m re likely 
that in these case a different crystal form ha occurred by chance a pp d to by 
deuteration of the cry tal. 
4A SCI'utiny of possible structure differences with temperature 
The individual small molecule structures compared above, have, in some cases been 
collected at different temperatures, raising the question ofwhether structural changes 
can be attributed to a temperature rather than a deuteration effect. There is also the 
possibility that a deuteration effect could be masked by a temperature difference. 
The LABSEM structures were collected at 180K & 295K (H) and 296K & 360K (D) 
in order to study the paraelectric and ferroelectric phases. DADCBL was collected at 
15K and compared with the 279K structure. The DINAC structures were studied at 
15K, 150K and 296K for both the hydrogenated and deuterated forms and the 
DIY JUQ03-D compound was studied at both 35K and 293K. None of these pairs of 
structures show changes with a significance level greater than 30- and therefore 
temperature induced structural changes can be ruled out as being greater than 
deuteration induced changes. 
In protein crystallography identical protein structures studied at lOOK and room 
temperature do show differences in side chain multiple ordered states (usually 2 
conformers) for approximately 10% of the side chains, sometimes with attached 
bound waters moving as a resule3 Furthermore Atomic Displacement Parameters 
(ADPs or B factors) systematically decrease on cooling. Such temperature induced 
differences have been studied in detail by Dunlop, Irvin and Hazes 34 with the 'PAK 
pilin' protein. They concluded that it is advisable to collect both room temperature 
and cryo diffraction data for the optimum detail and characterisation of structural 
changes between cryo and (near)physiological temperature. Changes in residue 
position have also been observed between room temperature and cryo cooled 
structures. For example Figure 4.13 shows Asp82 from concanavalin A, for which 
there is a movement of 1.8A between the structures at lOOK and room temperature. 
The residue is in a single conformation at both room and cryo data collection 
temperatures. 
Figure 4.13: 1\\1>82 ill cOllcalltl\u lin lit room temperature (pOB code I CS, ill green) and cryo 
tCOlpcrlllurc (PDB code I "L. , in cyan). 
Skrzypczak-Jankun et al. 35 investigated the difference between room temperature 
and cryo cooled structure fr m the perspective of structure ba ed drug dc ign. They 
concluded that using a (protein) receptor tructure determined from cryog nic data a 
a target for computational ligand creening require flexible docking t enable the 
expansion of the binding- ite cavity and sampling of alternative confc rmation fth 
crucial re idues. 
4.5 onclusions 
f the 26 isomorphous small molecule c mpound tudied, 4 have b th ignificant 
(>3a) and meaningful (>5) change between the hydr genated and deuterated fI rm 
with the change in hydr gen b nd angle being between 5 and 21 . Alth ugh a 2 1  
shift in hydrogen po ition could have functional implication the hilt in atomic 
position between the relevant hydr gen and deuterium at m 1 at ma imum . I . 
Thi 21  change in the compound LARGPH i related t additional hydr gcn b nd 
from a deuterium atom to the pho phate gr up in the deuterated ca e. 
Two f the three n n-i omorphou mp und h wed ignifi ant hange in ry tal 
packing and rientati n between hydrogenated and deut rated 6 rm h wc r it i 
not pos ible to deduce whether the e change were au ed y d uterati n r n t. It i 
m re likely that another cry tal fI rm ha curr d purely by hanee du' 
meta table crystalli ati n c nditi n. iffcrent pacegr up ' can r suit fr m chan 
in crystallisation buffers and in some cases mUltiple crystal forms can grow In 
identical crystallisation conditions. 
It appears that the effect of temperature is unlikely to mask a deuteration effect in the 
case of small molecules, although this effect may be more pronounced in proteins 
where there are large volumes of solvent, and hence such solvent molecules may be 
effected by deuteration. Blakeley et al. 20, report an increased number of visible water 
molecules in the deuterated protein in their studies of perdeuterated and 
hydrogenated aldose reductase. 
With regards to the consequences for protein crystallography, the changes described 
here are unlikely to cause any anxiety in terms of structure between hydrogenated 
and perdeuterated proteins. Although as illustrated by Liu et al. 21, it is important to 
thoroughly characterise both hydrogenated and perdeuterated protein structures with 
X-rays in order to assess any differences before conducting a neutron protein 
crystallography experiment. This is generally the case, as in order to solve the 
neutron structure an X-ray structure is required. Furthermore it is becoming more 
common to collect both the X-ray and neutron structures from the same crystal. 
With the advent of the LADI-III neutron protein diffiactometer at the Institut Laue 
Langevin in France, the number of deposited neutron protein structures has almost 
doubled in the space of 2 years. Hopefully as the number of deposited perdeuterated 
structures increase it will be possible to examine the effect of perdeuteration on 
proteins directly using data from the PDB. 
4.6 References 
1. M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. R. Helliwell and P. J. Rizkallah, Chem. Soc. 
Rev., 2004, 33, 548. 
2. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. Helliwell and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
3. T. R. Gamble, K. R. Clauser and A. A. KossiakotT, Biophysical Chemistry, 
1994, 53, 15-25. 
4. F. Shu, V. Ramakrishnan and B. P. Schoenbom, Proceedings a/the National 
Academy o/Sciences, 2000, 97,3872-3877. 
5. I. Hazemann, M. T. Dauvergne, M. P. Blakeley, F. Meilleur, M. Haertlein, A. 
Van Dorsselaer, A. Mitschler, D. A. A. Myles and A. Podjarny, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2005,61, 1413-1417. 
6. J. Habash, 1. Raftery, R. Nuttall, H. J. Price, C. Wilkinson, A. J. Kalb and J. 
R. Helliwell, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2000, 56, 541-550. 
7. P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins' Physical Chemistry, 7th edn., 2002. 
8. E. C. Ralph, M. A. Anderson, W. W. Cleland and P. F. Fitzpatrick, 
Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 15844-15852. 
9. M. C. Cheng and E. N. G. Marsh, Biochemistry, 2007, 46,883-889. 
10. CCDC, htfp://wl-vw.ccdc.cam.ac.lIk, 2007. 
11. P. Cioni and O. B. Strambin~ 2002, 82, 3246-3253. 
12. A. Hattori, H. L. Crespi and 1. J. Katz, Biochemistry, 1965,4,1213-1225. 
13. D. S. Bems, Biochemistry, 1963, 2, 1377-1380. 
14. D. 1. Brockwell, The University of Manchester, 1996. 
15. R. J. Brennan, A. Awan, J. Barber, E. Hunt, K. L. Kennedy and S. 
Sadegholnejat, J. Chem. Soc . Chem. Commun., 1994, 1615. 
16. J. P. Derrick, L. Y. Lian, O. C. K. Roberts and W. V. Shaw, Biochemistry, 
1992,31,8191-8195. 
17. A. Olgun, Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling, 2007, 4, 9. 
18. S. J. Cooper, J. Raftery, J. R. Helliwell, D. Brockwell, D. Attwood and J. 
Barber, Chemical Communications, 1998, 1063. 
19. J.-B. Artero, M. Hartlcin, S. McSwceney and P. Timmins, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2005, 61, 1541-1549. 
20. M. P. Blakeley, F. Ruiz, R. Cachau, l. Hazemann, F. Meilleur, A. Mitschler, 
S. Ginell, P. Afonine, O. N. Ventura, A. Cousido-Siah, M. Haertlein, A. 
Joachimiak, D. Myles and A. Podjamy, Proceedings of the National 
Academv of Sciences, 2008, 105, 1844-1848. 
21. X. Liu, B. L. Hanson, P. Langan and R. E. Viola, Acta Crystallographica 
Section D, 2007, 63, 1000-1008. 
22. P. Kuhn, M. Knapp, S. M. Soltis, G. Ganshaw, M. Thoene and R. Bott, 
Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 13446-13452. 
23. A. A. KossiakotTand S. A. Spencer, Nature, 1980,288,414-416. 
24. J. Robertson and A. Ubbelohde, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1939, 170, 222. 
25. A. Katrusiak, Physical Review B, 1995,51, 589. 
26. M. McMahon, R. Nelmes, W. Kuhs, R. Dorwarth, R. Piltz and Z. Tun, 
Nature, 1998,348, 317. 
27. F. Karlsruhe, http://icsdl1'eh.flz-karlsruhe.del, 2008. 
28. R. J. Nelmes, G. M. Meyer and J. E. Tibballs, Journal of Physics C: Solid 
State Physics, 1982, 59. 
29. A. Spek, Journal of Applied Crystallography, 2003,36, 7-13. 
30. S. Horiuchi, K. Kumai and Y. Tokura, JACS Communications, 2004, 127, 
5010-5011. 
31. B. K. Roul, R. N. P. Choudhary, H. Rajagopal and A. Sequeira, Acta 
Crystallographica Section C, 1989, 45, 1271. 
32. Collaborative Computational Project 4, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
1994, 50, 760-763. 
33. A. Deacon, T. Gleichmann, A. J. Kalb (Gilboa), H. Price, J. Rafiery, G. 
Bradbrook, J. Yariv and J. R. Helliwell, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 
1997,93,4305. 
34. K. V. Dunlop, R. T. Irvin and B. Hazes, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
2005,61,80-87. 
35. E. Skrzypczak-Jankun, O. Y. Borbulevych, M. I. Zavodszky, M. R. Baranski, 
K. Padmanabhan, V. Petricek and J. Jankun, Acta Crystallographica Section 
D, 2006, 62, 766-775. 
References for the 58 compounds studied: 
36. Albinati, A, Rouse, K. D., Thomas, M. W., (1978), Acta Crystallogr., Sect.  
B,34,2188 
37. Bao-Qing Ma, Hao-Ling Sun, Song Gao, (2004), Ch em Commun., 2220 
38. Baran. J., Lukaszewicz, K., Pietraszko, A, Sledz, M., (2002), J. Mol. Struct., 
611, 155 
39. Cheng, Z., Cheng, Y., Guo, L., Xu, D., (1997), Z. Kristallogr., 211, 221 
40. Colman, P. M., Medlin, E. H., (1970), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 26, 1547 
41. Coppens, P., Sabine, T. M., (1969), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 25, 2442 
42. Cowan. J. A, Howard, J. A K., McIntyre, G. J., Lo, S. M.-F., Williams, I. 
D., (2005), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 61, 724 
43. Emsley, J., Jones, D. J., Kuroda, R., (1981), J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 
44. Emsley, J., Jones, D. J., Osborn, R. S., Overill, R. E., (1982), J. Chem. Soc., 
Dalton Trans., 809 
45. Evdokimov, A G., Kalb Gilboa, A J., Koetzle, T. F., Klooster, W. T., 
Martin, J. M. L., (1999), J. Phys. Chem. A, 103, 744 
46. Evdokimov, A, Gilboa, A J., Koetzle, T. F., Klooster, W. T., Schultz, A J., 
Mason, S. A, Albinati, A, Frolow, F., (2001), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 57, 
47. Ezpelcta, J. M., Zuniga, F. J., Paulus, W., Cousson, A, Hlinka, J., Quilichini, 
M., (1996), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 52, 810 
48. Galigne, J.-L., Mouvet, M., Falgueirettes, J., (1970), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. 
B,26,368 
49. Horiuch~ S., Kumai, R., Tokura, Y., (2005), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 127,5010 
50. Hsu, B., Schlemper, E. 0., (1980), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. n, 36, 3017 
51. Hsu, B., Schlempcr, E. 0., Fair, C. K., (1980), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. n, 36, 
52. Hussain, M. S., Schlcmpcr, E. 0., Fair, C. K., (1980), Acta Crystallogr., Scct. 
B, 36, 1104 
53. Jaulmcs, S., (1978), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. n, 34, 116 
54. Jcrzykiewicz, L. B., Lis, T., Malarsk~ Z., Grcch, E., (1993), J. Crystallogr. 
Spectrosc. Res., 23, 805 
55. Jerzykiewicz, L. B., Malarski, Z., Sobczyk, L., Lis, T., Grech, E., (1998), 1. 
Mol. Struct., 440, 175 
56. Kcarley, G. J., Nicolai, B., Radaelli, P. G., Fillaux, F., (1996), 1. Solid State 
Chem., 126, 1 84 
57. Kek, S., Grotepass-Deuter, M., Fischer, K., Eichhom, K., (1997), Z. 
Kristallogr., 212,671 
58. Madsen, D., Flenburg, c., Larsen, S., (1998), 1. Phys. Chem. A, 102,2177 
59. Madsen, D., Larsen, S., (1998), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C, 54, 1507 
60. Majerz, I., Malarski, Z., Lis, T., (1990), J. Mol. Struct., 240, 47 
61. Malarski, Z., Majerz, 1., Lis, T., (1987), J. Mol. Struct., 158, 369 
62. McClure, R. 1., Craven, B. M., (1973), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 29, 1234 
63. McMahon, M. I., Nelmes, R. 1., Kuhs, W. F., Semmingsen, D., (1991), Z. 
Kristallogr., 195, 231 
64. Meervelt, L. V., Bruyneel, C., Morisse, H., Zeegers-Huyskens, T., (1997), J. 
Phys. Org. Chem., 10, 825 
65. Nahringbauer, I., (1978), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 34, 315 
66. Oskarsson, A., (1976), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 32, 2163 
67. Reetz, M. T., Hoger, S., Hanns, K., (1994), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 33,181 
68. Roul, B. K., Choudhary, R. N. P., Rajagopal, H., Sequeira, A., (1987), Acta 
Crystallogr., Sect. C, 43, 668 
69. Roul, B. K., Choudhary, R. N. P., Rajagopal, H., Sequeira, A., (1988), Acta 
Crystallogr., Sect. C, 44, 1244 
70. Sabine, T. M., Cox, G. W., Craven, B. M., (1969), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 
25,2437 
71. Saenger, W., Wagner, K. G., (1972), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 28, 2237 
72. Schildkamp, W., Schafer, G., Spilker, J., (1984), Z. Kristallogr., 168, 187 
73. Schlcmper, E. 0., Hamilton, W. C., La Placa, S. 1., (1971), J. Chem. Phys., 
54,3990 
74. Scmmingsen, D., Hollander, F. J., Koetzle, T. F., (1977),1. Chem. Phys., 66, 
75. Takusagawa, F., Koetzle, T. F., (1978), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 34, 1149 
76. Takusagawa. F., Koetzle, T. F., (1979), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 35, 2126 
77. Thomas, J. 0., (1972), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 28,2037 
78. Thomas, J. 0., (1973), Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B, 29, 1767 
79. Weber, H. P., Craven, B. M., McMullan, R. K, (1980), Acta Crystallogr., 
Sect. B, 36, 645 
80. Weber, H. P., Ruble, J. R., Craven, B. M., McMullan, R. K, (1980), Acta 
Crystallogr., Sect. B, 36, 1121 
81. Zuniga, F. J., Ezpeleta, J. M., Perez-Mato, J. M., Paciorek, W., Madariaga, 
0.,(1991), Phase Transitions, 31,29 
5. Determination of protonation states from bond length analysis of 
high resolution X-ray data 
5.1 Introduction 
The protonation states of residues in proteins are generally detennined directly using 
electron or nuclear density maps, which result from X-ray and neutron protein 
crystallography experiments respectively. However, the use of X-ray crystallography 
for this purpose is limited as ultra high resolution data is required in order for 
hydrogen atoms to be visible in the electron density maps. This is a challenging 
prospect given that at the time of writing ultra high resolution (better than I A) 
structures make up only 0.7% of the deposited 55,000 structures in the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB). Furthennore, although neutron protein crystallography is much more 
sensitive to hydrogen atom position than X-ray crystallography, it is limited by the 
need for large sample volumes. 
An alternative method of detennining protonation states in proteins is via bond 
length analysis of high resolution X-ray data. This technique has more modest 
resolution requirement of 1.2-1.3A, which accounts for 10% of the deposited 
structures in the POB. Protonation state determination from bond length analysis is 
based on the inference of the presence ofa hydrogen atom from the analysis of other 
localised bonding within the residue rather than by direct determination. The 
principlc is that a conjugated molecule (or in this case the functional group in a 
residue) contains bonds of the same length due to delocalisation of electrons. Upon 
protonation, or in some cases deprotonation of an atom in the residue, the electrons 
can no longer be delocalised resulting in bonds of different lengths. The analysis and 
comparison of the bond lengths in the residue therefore allows the protonation state 
to be inferred. 
One functional group that shows significantly different bond lengths between its 
protonated and deprotonated fonns is the carboxyl group in aspartatic and glutamic 
acid residues. Figure 5.1 shows average bond lengths for protonated and 
deprotonated forms of this functional group with the associated spread of values 
from the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD)I. It can be seen that in the protonated 
form there is a 0.1 A difference between the C-Oo 1 and C-002 (OE 1 and 2 in the case 
of Glu) bond whereas in the deprotonated case both bond lengths are the same. 
Therefore a significant difference between the calculated lengths of these carbonyl 
bonds would infer that the residue is protonated. 
Fi~ure 5.1: CSD values for C-Ool and C-002 bond I,'ngths in (A) protonatcd, and (B) 
dt'ptoronated aspartic acid side-chains (Reproduced from Ahmed et 01.2) 
In order to determine whether the two bond lengths are really different, or if the 
difference is due to experimental error, the experimental error to which the bond 
lengths have been determined needs to be considered. This error is termed the 
standard uncertainty or standard deviation (a). For the difference in bond lengths to 
be significant, the bond lengths must differ by three times the combined standard 
uncertainty of the two bond lengths (3a). This corresponds to a confidence interval 
of99.7% in the normal distribution and can be calculated using Equation 5.1, where 
le-OM is the C-OO 1 bond length. le-ool is the C-002 bond length, alc- 061 is the 
standard deviation on the C-002 bond, and alc- 06Z is the standard deviation on the 
C-002 bond. 
Ile- 08 - le-08zl 
a level = -r========== 
Equation 5.1: Formula for calculating standard unc('rtainty 1I(.'l\w('n 2 bond Il'ngths 
For the positive assignment of an aspartatie or glutamic acid residue a standard 
uncertainty on each bond length of less than 0.024A is required (see Table 5.1). 
Given the high precision of protein X-ray crystallographic structures, bond lenbJth 
standard uncertainties for aspartic and glutamic acid residues can average 0.03A 
(derived from previous calculations3) if complete data is available to a diffraction 
resolution of around 1.25A. These values are also dependent on the residue of 
intere t' Atomic Di placement Parameters (ADPs) as more mobile groups have 
larger ADP and hence larger standard uncertainties (see Daopin et al.
C-Ool 1.300A 
C-002 1.200A 
l(C-O) O.lOOA 
a(l[C-O]) 
Table 5.1: alculHtion of coordinate and bond length error required to obtain a 3a protonation 
tate determination for a normal case. 
The general procedure for obtaining the standard uncertainties on atomic positions, 
bond length and bond angle is to calculate the covariance matrix or full matrix 
inver ion3 of the least quares refmement matrix. This is a computationally intensive 
calculation which ultimately yields the estimated variances and co-variances for each 
refinement parameter. For the full matrix inversion to be successfully computed, and 
hence a re idue protonation state to be determined there are a number of 
r qUlr ment , the fir t of which is that ani otropic refinement is required . Secondly, 
the X -ray data to parameter ratio must be at least 3: 1 for the full matrix inversion to 
be succe fully computed (~75,OaO reflections for a 35kDa protein). This means that 
a minimum of 1.2-1.3A data is required
. Thirdly, the residue of interest must be a 
single conn rmer and finally the bond lengths must be in agreement with dictionary 
bond length (either Engh and Huber
or values from the CSD). Comparison of bond 
length against dictionary values used a 1 a distribution to determine whether they 
w re in agr ement or not thus allowing the bond lengths to vary between 1.31  
a.o2A and 1.21  a.o2A a shown in Figure 5.2. 
1.310 (a = 0.017) 
1.276 
1.327 
1.344A 
1.210A (a = 0.016) 
1.194A 
1.178A 
1.226A 
1.242A 
Figurc 5.2: Dictionary bond lcngth allies for C=O and C-Oll bonds with error distribution 
If these requirements are fulfilled then the protonation states can be determined using 
the following step wise procedure: 
1. Normal refmement until convergence (REFMAC5, SHLEX97, PHENIX) 
2. Refmement of multiple conformer occupancies using SHELX97 
3. Unrestrained refinement of aspartate and glutamate C-Oo 1 and C-002 bonds 
using SHELX97 and extraction of bond lengths using the CCP4 program 
DISTANG. 
4. Calculate bond length differences between C-Oo 1 and C-002 bonds 
5. Compute full matrix inversion using SHELX97 L.S. 1 and ACT A keywords 
and extract standard uncertainties on C-Oo 1 and C-002 bonds 
6. Check C-Oo 1 and C-002 bond lengths against dictionary values. 
7. Compare residue B factor with average B factor to assess if radiation damage 
has occurred. 
8. Calculate significance level using Equation 5.1. 
9. If significance level is greater than 30', residue is likely to be protonated. 
Although the primary focus is on aspartate and glutamate residues, both histidine and 
arginine could be analysed using similar methods, although higher resolution data is 
required due to the smaller difference in bond lengths between the protonated and 
detprotonated forms of these residues. These two residues are discussed below in 
turn. 
Histidine 
Figure 5.3 shows the imidazole ring bond lengths for a histidine sidechain. The 
difference between the protonated and deprotonated bond lengths is o.04A and for a 
30' confidence level the standard uncertainties on each bond length would need to be 
around 0.0 13A, therefore positive assignment would be very difficult. Consequelltly 
for histidine, assignment using electron density maps is generally preferred to that of 
bond length analysis, Berisio et al.6 note however that bond angle analysis can also 
be used to identify protonation states in histidine residucs. 
l.?d 9( 11) U42(lO) 
HN N NH 
\ " , ' \--/ U78( 10) 1.:'78(7) 
\ ... _. / U70(l1) 
I "~7( 10) U58(l3) 
U25(7) U71( l) 
-- ,< 
\ U71(8) 1 __ / 
\ ---------< j 
B 1.355(6) 
U7H(7) 
Fi~\II'l' 5.-': ('SI> ,ahll'S for histidine bond kngths of the imidawle ring (A) shows both 
talltollll'"'' of a histidilll' imidalOk rin~ (H) shows the protonated imidazole ring 
Arginine 
Figure 5.4 shows results from initial data mining of the CSD for guanidinium bond 
lengths, the functional group in arginine. A much smaller sample of guanidinium 
functional groups are found in the CSD compared to the carboxyl groups data mined 
for the aspatarte and glutamate residues, and as such the spread of values are not 
quoted. 
Fi~lIn' 5.4: ('SI> ,alu{'s for arginine hond kngths of the gllanidiniulll group shown (A) 
deproton8h'd, and (8) protonated 
In order to determine whether arginine is protonated or not the C-N bond lengths 
must be compared between the protonated and deprotonated forms. This is in 
contrast to aspartate and glutamate residues where the bonds are compared within the 
protonated form of the residue. In the deprotonated form of arginine, the bond 
lengths are distinct, however in the protonated case the charge is delocalised to each 
nitrogen atom. This results in average bond lengths in the protonated cases of 
between 1.321 A and 1.351 A. Therefore the difference between protonated and 
deprotonated forms will be somewhere in the region ofO.0l-0.03A, this means for a 
30 confidence level standard uncertainties would need to be of the order of 0.003-
o.oIA. 
These factors make protonation state determination more difficult for arginine than 
for aspartate and glutamate residues, except in circumstances where the residue of 
interest is particularly static, or ultra high resolution data has been collected. 
Nevertheless bond length analysis may still provide useful information for ultra high 
resolution data sets where it is unlikely that all of the protons bonded to arginine 
residues will be visible in electron density maps. 
The protonation states of aspartate and glutamate residues in two proteins, subtilisin 
Carlsberg and bovine pancreatic trypsin, have been determined using bond length 
analysis of X-ray data collected at resolutions of 1.26A and 1.20A with almost 100% 
completeness. In order to determine the protonation states, the standard uncertainty 
of each bond length has been calculated from the refmement covariance matrix. For 
the majority of the results, protonation states can only be determined to around 211 
and not 311. Therefore the resolution and completeness limits required to determine 
protonation states to 311 have been extrapolated using the Cruickshank DP. This is a 
method to quickly determine the average standard uncertainty in a structure based on 
readily available crystallographic parameters. 
Simultaneously, when determining protonation states in proteins, it is important to 
assess whether the X-ray data shows signs of radiation damage. This is particularly 
important when looking at the bond lengths of aspartate and glutamate residues, as 
these residues can often be completely destroyed by radiation damage. Hence any 
bond length values may be compromised as the structure will show the average of 
carboxylated and decarboxylated residues, thus providing incorrect bond lengths. 
5.2 The Luzatti Plot 
In the days before computing power allowed for the full matrix inversion of a 
refinement matrix to be calculated, one of the most commonly used methods to 
determine the error in protein structure was that of the Luzzati plot7 Luzzati 
proposed a theory which determined the R factor as a function of (Llr), the average 
radial error of an atomic position (see Equation 5.2). He showed that the R factor is a 
linear function of 5 = 2sin8 / A and (Llr) for a substantial range of S. 
R (5, (r)) = 2rr2 5( (r)) 
bluation 5.2: Luzzati's R factor as a function of S (I1dmin) 
Plots of theoretical R factors vs. S are nearly linear for small to medium values of S. 
By comparing the theoretical functions with real R factors it is possible to determine 
the real value of (Llr), see Figure 5.5. 
0.5 .:1, = U.35 A 
A,;; (Un 
.1, = n.?~ 
A, = 0.20 
... 0.3 
Ar ::;.. n.IS :; 
et:: 0.2 A, "" 0.10 
AI = f).OS 
H.l 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 H.b 0.7 H.g 
2sinfflA 
Fi~un' 5.5: LUlI.ati pInts showing the rl'fined R factor as a function of resolution for t TG I (solid 
squan's) and tTGF (open squares) from Oaopinl't al.4 
However, as Cruickshank
discusses, the Luzzati plot was not intended for 
determining the positional errors at the end of a normal refinement, it was designed 
to determine the positional changes required in a further idealized refinement in 
order to reach R = O. As such the Luzzati plot does not give a good representation of 
the positional errors, and therefore other statistical methods for determining these 
errors arc recommended such as the Cruickshank DPI and sigma a plot. 
5.3 The Cruickshank DP): An alternative to the full matrh inversion 
The standard uncertainties in positions, bond length, and angle are generally 
computed using the full matrix inversion, however thi i computationally inten ive. 
Consequently, Cruickshank introduced the Diffraction-independent Preci ion Index 
(DPI)9, to as an indicator of the average uncertainty of a coordinate of the atoms 
within a protein structure as an alternative to the full matrix inversion. This method 
is based on a rough approximation of the lea t quare method u ed by the full 
matrix inversion, and a an approximation it can be computed quickly. The DPI u es 
the R or Rfree refmement factor, completene s, diffraction re olution, dmin , and the 
olvent content in order to e timate an overall coordinate uncertainty. It i critical 
that the distinction between the average coordinate error (ax which i ba ed n a 
ingle coordinate), and the average bond length error (at which i ba ed n tw 
average coordinate in the direction of the b nd) is made. If an atom i a umed to 
be i otropic then these parameter can be readily equated a hown in quati n 5.3. 
Equatioll 5.3: Rclatioll'lhip bt' t\\Cl'1I (1 , and (11 
The differentiation between ax and at i imp rtant, a the mm nly u ed r finement 
program R FMA 5 calculate OPI coordinate error during refmement wher a the 
full matrix inver ionfi'om HELX-97 calculate coordinate, b nd I ngth and b nd 
angle error. In orderfc r compari on to be made the err r mu t be fa c nit nt 
type. 
ruick hank' form fthe OPl ba ed on the Rand Rfrcl fact r 1 wn In quati n 
5.4, where a(x, BaY?,) i the OPI fi r an atom with an a rage B fact r Bo,'K)' 11th 
number of fully occupied atoms of type i p - n obs - nparoms the c mplctcnc f 
the data, R i the R fact rand dmin in the diffracti n r luti n. 
a(x, Bavg) = 1.0(Ni/p)zC-"3Rdmin 
a(x, Bavg) = 1.0(Ni/nObS}ZC-"3R,reedmin 
Equatiun 504: Crukkshank UPI has('d on tll(' R factor and RI,..'" 
In this fonn it is difficult to assess how the DPI is related to resolution or 
completeness due to the dependencies of nobs, C and dmin  Blow
ll re-arranged these 
fonnulae in order to relate them to parameters that are readily available to an 
experimental user, as shown in Equation 5.5. The DPI now depends on the solvent 
content s (= N.mil' / Natoms), the Matthews volume, VM
, completeness, Rfree and 
resolution. Direct comparisons against resolution and completeness can now be 
made. 
1 1 5 5 
O'(x, Bavg) = 0.18(1 + S)zVm -zC-'6R,reedminZ 
Equatiun 55: B1uw's rl'arranl'nl('nt of th(' Cruikshank UPI formula bas('d on RI,..'" 
Equation 5.6 shows Blow's re-arrangement for the DPI based on the R factor instead 
of R(re<', where w is the average molecular weight of an amino acid (generally taken 
to be 13.9) and q is the number of parameters to be refined (10 for anisotropic and 4 
for isotropic refinement). 
Equation 5.6: B1ow's n'arranement of the Cruikshank UPI formula based on R 
This fonn of the equation is less convenient than Equation 5.5, however it is useful 
for low resolution structures, as it includes a correction (the second term in the 
bracket) which becomes increasingly important with deterioration of the diffiaction 
resolution. At high resolution however, the difference between the DPI calculated on 
R and R(ree is minimal, as shown in Table 5.2. Therefore from here on the DPI based 
on Rfrt't' is used for convenience. 
l.3A (A) l.2A (A) o.6sA (A) 
DPloDR 0.0594 0.0276 0.0092 
DPI OD R/rff 0.0615 0.0296 0.0093 
A(lDPIRrl'ft-DPIRI) 0.0021 0.0020 0.0001 
Tahll' 5.2: Uiffl'rrnn' hl'hwen IlPI hased on Rand R{T/.r for three structures at different 
diffraction resolutions 
5.4 Radiation Damage 
5.4.1 Introduction 13 
The occurrence of radiation damage during macromolecular crystallography 
experiments using X-ray sources was first noted before the use of cryogenic cooling 
was common place, where samples were readily damaged. However it has once 
again become more widely noted over the last few years as the flux of X-ray sources 
increases13 Radiation damage causes general degradation of diffraction properties as 
well as specific structural damage at lOOK. This occurs in a well defmed sequence 
consisting of the disordering and eventually breakage of disulfide bonds, 
decarboxylation of aspartate and glutamate residues 14, reduction of metals in binding 
sites1s and more general active site damage
 These effects are clearly important 
when considering the protonation states of aspartatic and glutamic acid groups which 
are some of the first affected by radiation damage. 
The symptoms of radiation damage include
: (i) a decrease in diffraction intensity 
and resolution, (ii) an increase in Wilson B factor, (iii) an increase in the unit cell 
volume, (iv) colour changes in the region of the crystal irradiated, and (v) site 
specific damage (listed above). Furthermore non-isomorphism can be introduced into 
the data set obscuring the dispersive signal needed for MlR phasing and the 
anomalous signal needed for SAD phasing. 
The easiest method for evaluating the extent of radiation damage is a measure of the 
absorbed dose; however this value is not immediately available to the expcrimcntal 
crystallographer. For this reason the increase in Wilson B factor is used to evaluate 
the extent of adsorption damage. A number of other crystallographic statistical 
parameters can be used to monitor the extent ofradiation damage. These include the 
per image merging R factor (Rmerge) and the scaling B factor per diffraction image, 
both of which increase with radiation damage. The scaling B factor is strongly 
correlated with the dose but is however also temperature dependant. Furthermore the 
individual atomic B factors can be compared with the average protein B factor in 
order to assess whether site specific damage has occurred (although an increase in B 
factor can also be due to disorder). The overall Rmerge increases and <J/(J(1 
decrease with rad iation damage, especially at higher reso lution 17. 
The fir t studie into radiation damage were conducted in the 1960s by Blake and 
Phillip I on myoglobin. They found that for each 8keV photon, around 70 
molecule were di rupted and 90 were disordered at room temperature. The now 
tandard lIection of data at lOOK effectively increases the crystal lifetime by a 
fact r f 70, long enough for the collection of a complete data set, and 0 the 
problem of radiation damage e entially disappeared. However with developments in 
ynchr tr n t chnology and the advent of third generation sources in the 1990s 
radiation damag i again becoming a more widespread problem due to the increa e 
in flux. B r k et al.
tudied Gluco e Isomerise (GI) crystals between 15 and 200K 
and found that th teepe t increase in B factor occurs above 140K, and that above 
200K the B fact r in rea dramatically. 
Th f radiation damage can be seen as positive and negative peaks in the Fo-
I tr n d n ity map. Figure 5.6 shows the destruction of a disulphid 
b nd peak n the ulphur atom. Figure 5.7 shows the decarboxylation 
f an a partat r idu ible as a large negative peak on the oxygen atoms. 
l igllrc 5.6: Hadilltion d:lluagcd di",llfidc bonds in hCII cgg whitc Iysozymc at 12AkeV. 2F .. -Fc 
e1cctron cl ' '''it~ lIIap ill greclI, and F,,-Fe diffel'cllce elecll'oll dCII~ity Illap sho\\1l ill red 
(lIl'gati'l') and hlue (po'litivc). Reprodllced f"olll himizu et 01.1 7 
l. igllJ'l' 5. \ radiati () n dlllllagl'C1 a'p:lItatc rc~idlle frolll 11111 M:lIOII. egathe F,,-Fc difference 
l'Il'Ctl"(lIl d l' '''it~ IIIl1p ,ho\\1I ill Il'd. Rl'prodllccd fl'om Fiol'avanti et 01. 20 
5.4.2 Physics of Radiation Damagel6 
Around 2% of the primary X-ray beam at 5-17keV interacts with the organic sample 
via three possible processes (i) elastic scattering, 8%, (ii) inelastic scattering, 8%, 
and (iii) the photoelectric effect, 84%. Furthermore each incident photoelectron can 
produce up to 500 secondary, lower energy electrons. Complex heat transfer studies 
have shown that the temperature rise in the crystal at cryo-temperatures on more 
powerful beamlines is unlikely to exceed 15K21 , and therefore sample heating is not 
responsible for radiation damage. It also appears that the time interval over which the 
total dose is received is not important, hence the dose and not the dose rate is the key 
factorl8 
Radiation damage studies rely on the accurate determination of the dose received, 
normally measured in the unit of Grays (Gy = Joules/kg). The dose can be calculated 
from the beam parameters, the crystal size, and crystal components. Henderson22 
calculated that crystals would lose 50% of their diffraction intensity on receiving a 
dose of2x107Gy at 77K based on analogies with electron microscopy. More recently 
this threshold dose has been determined experimentally, resulting in a proposed limit 
of3xl07Gy for macromolecular crystallographyJ. This corresponds to a reduction in 
diffraction intensity by 30%, after which point biological information may be lost. 
The damage does appear to be dependent on the X-ray wavelengthls, although more 
studies of this are needed, notably with more careful dose correction and more 
efficient detection of shorter wavelengths24 
504.3 Chemical Effects of Radiation Damagel6 
The secondary photo-electrons produced on collision of the primary photo-electrons 
with the protein are of lower energy and are mobile even at cryo-temperaturcs. They 
gencrally migrate to sites of highest affmity, namely metal centres and disulfide 
bonds, causing important changes to occur in these areas well before ovcrall crystal 
diffraction is lost. Disulfide bonds for example are easily altered by photon 
absorption. Borek et al. 19 found that in some cases all disulfide bonds are damaged 
equally, as is the case for thaumatin, whereas for bovine pancreatic trypsin they find 
that one disulfide is damaged much more quickly than any others. 
A further effect of radiation damage is decarboxylation of aspartate and glutamate 
residues 14. This process results in the formation and loss of carbon dioxide, as shown 
in Figure 5.8. 
R-- + 11 c 
Figure 5.H: Ill'carboxylation of acidic residues 
With regards to aspartate and glutamate residues, Fioravanti et al.20 have extensively 
studied the effect of radiation damage on acidic residues. They found firstly that 
acidic residues located in the active site are most sensitive, possibly due to the 
special environment afforded to residues in the active site. Secondly, that acidic 
residues on the surface of a cavity are more radiation sensitive than those facing into 
large solvent channels, and finally that radiation damage is not directly related to 
solvent accessibility. 
5AA ('onclusions 
For work such as bond length analysis, where high and ultra high data resolutions are 
required it is important to properly consider radiation damage. This is especially true 
in the case of aspartate and glutatmate residues discussed here due to the severe 
effect ofradiation damage on these particular residues. If the residues analysed have 
been dccarboxylated it is impossible to accurately determine their associated bond 
lengths. Therefore the Rmerge per-image and individual residue B factors for each of 
the structures used in this work have been carefully considered to ensure that data is 
free from radiation damage. This of course means that a compromise must be made 
between the resolution limit and the extent of radiation damage; however that is 
necessary to ensure that the analyses are meaningful. 
5.5 Protonation State Dcterminations 
The protonation states of aspartate and glutamate residues have been determined 
from high resolution X-ray crystallographic data for two proteins, subtilisin 
Carlsberg and bovine pancreatic trypsin. Alongside these data sets, the protonation 
states in Lysozyme at o.6sA resolution (data from the PDB, Wang et al.25) have been 
analysed as a comparison case. 
5.5.1 Subtilisin Carslhcrg 
Serine proteases are common in nature and have functions in digestion, as. 
neurotransmitters, hormones and in blood coagulation (see Chapter 1.1.1). Subtilisin 
Carlsberg is a 274 amino acid enzyme and belongs to the serine protease clan of 
subtilisin BPN' and the endopeptidase superfamily. It is isolated from Bacillus 
subtilis. Subtilisin exists in many variants but contains the same active site as the 
chymotrypsin and wheat germ serine protease clans; namely the catalytic triad 
involving a histidine (64), serine (221) and aspartic acid (32) residue and an oxianion 
hole, it is however otherwise structurally unrelated to the chymotrypsin and wheat 
germ clans26. 27. These key residues are involved in a charge relay pathway which 
ultimately cleaves a peptide bond. 
Subtilisin has been characterised by ultra high resolution X-ray studies to a 
diffraction resolution of O.78A27, however this latest study primarily focuses on the 
structure and protonation states in a non aqueous medium, in this case acetonitrile28 
Crystals of subtilsin were prepared by Michele Cianci by dissolving lS.7mg of 
recombinant subtilisin Carlsberg (from Bacillus subtilis) into I.S7ml of a 330mM 
cacodylate butTer at pH 5.6 resulting in a IOmglml solution. This solution was then 
made 13% Na2S04 w/v by addition of 204mg of Na2S04. The solution was left to 
rest at 20C for a period of2 weeks, after which needle like crystals were observcd
5.5. 1.1 Data ('ollectioll 
Data were collected on Beamline 10 at the Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation Source 
(SRS) by Michele Cianci in a long and quick pass, with the detector at 90 and 140cm 
from the crystal respectively, all data were collected at a wavelength of 0.98A. The 
long pass diffracted to a nominal resolution of 1.26A and the quick pass was 
truncated to 2A, with 360 degrees of data being collected for the long pass and 180 
degrees for the quick pass. Both sets of data were independently indexed and 
integrated at Manchester using MOSFLM3o giving the same space group, namely 
P2,2,2, with unit cell parameters of a = 52.21A, b = 55.21A, c = 75.54A. The two 
data sets from MOSFLM were concatenated together using CAD31 and merged using 
SCALA 31 giving a fmal Rmergc value of9.1 %. Full integration statistics are shown in 
Table 5.3. 
Mer2edSet 
Resolution (A) 1.26A 
Reflections 518 151 
Unique Reflections 59740 
Completeness (%) 100 (100) 
Multiplicity 8.7 (6.9) 
Rmrrw 9.1 (57.0) 
<I> /<0'(1 5.5 (1.2) . . ... 
Talllt' ~ . .l: Data colll'ctlon and processlIIg statIstics for sllhtihslIl Carlsherg 
I\'allll's show" in parenthl'ses are for the outer shell resolution bin of 1.33-1.26AI 
5.5.1.2 Structllr(' Sollltio" 
Initial phases were calculated from Protein Data Bank (PDB) model code I C3L32 
after removal of the Xe atoms and water molecules present, this model was then used 
with the molecular replacement tool PHASER33 giving a solution with Rotation 
Function Z-score (RFZ) of 23.8, a Translation Function Z-score (TFZ) of 37.1 and 
an R factor of 37.7% (A TFZ greater than 8 indicates that PHASER has found a 
correct solution). Initial rigid body refinement was then conducted using REFMAC 
53' to a resolution of 2.5A yielding an R factor of 31.0% and an Rfree of 28.9%. A 
restrained refinement was then carried out and the reSUlting Fo-Fc electron density 
difference map was contoured to 3a and used to assign 189 water molecules. 
Another stage of refinement was carried out and the resulting Fo-Fc map was again 
contoured to 3a and used to locate 6 disordered amino acid side chains. A number of 
acetonitrile molecules were also visible in the Fo-Fc difference map, restraints for 
such molecules were generated using the PRODRG serv~4 and assigned using the 
molecular model building tool COOT35 
After updating the water molecules and carrying out an anisotropic refinement, the 
refmement program was switched to SHELX-9i in order to refme the multiple 
conformation occupancies of the disordered amino acid side-chains using the normal 
CGLS refinement type. A fmal refmement was conducted after adding hydrogen 
atoms in riding positions resulting in an R factor of 12.1 % and an R&ee of 15.3%. The 
full refmement procedure is detailed in Table 5.4. A cartoon representation of the 
fmal structure is shown in Figure 5.9. A summary of refmement statistics and 
parameters can be found in Table 5.5. 
Resolution NRef R R'rre Nw Comments 
(A) Working Set (%) (%) 
(Nr.' Rrr .. ) 
1 00- 2.5 7496 (381) 31.0 28.9 0 REI-MAC: Rigid body refinement 
2 00- 1.1 83 300 (4400) 25.2 24.8 0 REFMAC: Restrained refinement 
3 00- 1.1 " 20.6 20.8 177 REFMAC: Add waters 
4 00- 1.26 56345 (3014) 19.4 19.9 177 REFMAC: Add multiple 
conformations for 6 disordered 
sidechains 
S 00- 1.26 " 18.9 19.3 171 REFMAC: Change CalNa atom 
sites. Update waters 
6 00- 1.26 " 18.8 19.0 171 REFMAC: Add 4 acetonitrile 
molecules 
7 00- 1.26 " 18.3 18.3 235 REFMAC: Add waters 
8 00- 1.26 " 17.3 17.7 229 REFMAC: Anisotropic refinement 
9 10 - 1.26 56261 (3011) 13.1 16.5 229 SllELX-97: CGLS refinement, 
multiple conformation occupancy of 
6 sidechains 
10 to - 1.26 .. 12.1 15.3 229 SllELX-97: CGLS refinement, add 
hydrogen atoms in riding positions 
Table 5.4: Structure refim'llIl'nt statistics for subtilisin Carl .. blrg 
Figllre 5.9: ' Iueo\ ien of Ihe ,Irnclllre of the final relined structure of sllbtili~iJl arl berg to 
1.26"\ re olutioll. 
1.26A Structure 
Sp ace gr oup P2 12121 
Unit-cell p a rameter s 
a lA} 52.21 
b (A) 55 .2 1 
c (A) 75 .54 
Resoluti on (A) 1.26 
R mfrur (% ) 9. 1 (57.0) 
Completeness (%) 100 ( 100) 
<l/u(D> 5.5 ( 1.2) 
M ultiplicity 8.7 J6.9) 
No. of uniq ue re fl ec tions 59740 
R factor (%) 12. 1% 
Rrr  (% ) 15.3% 
Ra macha ndran core/additional (% ) 96.7/3 .3 
C ruickshank's OPI (A) (Rru.) 0.04 18 (0.0389) 
No. of a toms in protein 195 1 
Mea n B factor of protein (Al) 9 .9 1 
Bond-di stance r . I11.S. deviation (A) 0 .007 
Bond-angle r .lII .s. devia tion (0) 1.274 
No. of wa ter 1110lecules 229 
Mea n B factor of water molecules (A l ) 26.83 
\lean B factor for all side-chain atollls (A z) 15.99 
Mean B factor for all m ain-chain atoms (AL) 8.64 
Mea n n factor for a1l side chains and water s (AL) 16.46 
To tal No. of a toms 2275 
Mea n B factor for all atoms (Al) 12.66 
Larg t r idll ll l cliff r enc cl etron den ity peak 0.50 
(S II ELX, eh\.J) 
Larg t r id ual dif~ r nee electroll den ity hole -0 .36 
(S II ELX, elk') 
I ahle 5.5:  \llIIlI\ar~ of diffraction and '" Iincl1lent data stati.tic ... 
1\ alII " ,111)\\ n in p:tn~nthl',e, arc for the olltt'r ~hell re~ollltioll bin of 1.33-1.26~ I 
5.5.1.3 Determinatio/1 of prolollalioll .,;tates 
Proton vis ibility of the carbon alpha backbone was initially assessed vi ually u ing 
COOT and an appropriate ly contoured difference electron den ity map. This showed 
that 10-15% of hydrogen ato ms were vis ible at 2. 5a, giving a fIrst indication that it 
wou ld be unl ikely that protonation could be determined fro m electron den ity maps 
alone. 
After the fma l stage of refm ement, the C-Oo 1 and C-0 02 bonds of aspartic and -
OE 1 and C-OE2 bo nd o f glutamic acid re idue were unre tra ined and another cycle 
of CGLS refin ement was run in order to determine the actual -0 bo nd length . 
Following thi a fu ll matrix invers io n wa carried out u ing the L. . I re fin ement 
parameter in SH ELX-97, in order to calculate the standard uncerta inty on each bond 
length. From thi info rmation the protonatio n of each A p and G lu re idue wa 
asses ed by carefu l cons ideration of bond length di fference and a ociatcd tandard 
deviations. Table 5.6 show the bond length and tandard deviatio n fo r the 
aspartate and g lutamate res idue studied. 
Asp C-Oo l (A) B Factor (A.2) C-002~J n Factor (A 2) L\(C-O) (A) a(MC-O)) 
14 1.202 17.75 1.244 37.75 0.04 0.59 
32 1.3 10 14.30 1.232 13.09 O.OX 1.3 X 
41 1.284 9.22 1.23 1 9.44 0.05 1.25 
61 1.286 9.06 1.262 9.00 0.02 0.57 
77 1.245 19.79 1.233 15.29 0.01 0.2 1 
121 1.23 1 15.54 1.291 12.46 0.06 1.06 
141 1.305 15.43 1.266 16.65 0.04 0.69 
173 1.170 n.73 I 141 24.61 0.23 3.24 
IX2 1.35X 15,49 1.1 XS 12 .3 1 0. 17 1.06 
Glu C-OEl (A) B Factor (A2) C-OE2 (A) B Factor (A2) L\(C-O) (A) a(MC-O)) 
Sol 1.172 19. 14 1 J9-l 19.60 o~ 192 
113 1.353 27 .02 1.134 32.83 0.22 2.80 
196 1.277 25 .19 1.243 16.89 0.03 0.48 
198 1.168 13.12 1.329 13.56 0.16 2.85 
272 1.357 29.50 1.192 28.40 0.17 1-94 ' ; -
' I ahl(' 5.6: 1 a bl~ uf ( -0 hOlld 1('11 /.:111 .. "illt a I('H I .. fur .. uhlili , ill a rl , hl'r g al 1.26 \ n " "IIIIiulI. 
\gr~~ III ~ 1I1 \\illt diclioJlar) \alll~" \ 11()\\1I ill r~ c\ alld Ju c\ (' I(' rmill alioll' ill blll~ 
Figure 5. 10 h ws the re ul t fi r the a parti acid r idu at 1.2 with tandard 
deviati n plotted as err r bars. a hed line h w dicti nary nd length a lu ' und 
the grey haded area a I a dcviati n fr m th c aluc. Th 
number of r idu are deprotonated, with bond length differences less than 0.1 A. 
Howe er there i good evidence for Asp 182 to be protonated with a significance 
level of3.06a and bond lengths in reasonable agreement with dictionary values (1.6a 
fr m =0 and 2.8a from C-OH bond lengths). Asp 173 also shows significant sign 
of pr tonation ( .24a) however bond lengths lie well outside those of dictionary 
alue (4.3a from C=O and 3.Sa from C-OH bond lengths). Given the large B factors 
a ociated with thi r idue it is po sible that radiation damage has occurred. The 
acti e ite (see Figure 5.13) aspartic acid residue Asp 32 is showing good evidence 
fi r pr tonation with bond lengths almost identical to those of the dictionary values 
(both <1.Sa fr m dictionary values) ; however the standard uncertainty level (1.38a) 
i not high n ugh t iti ely identify this residue as being protonated. 
 -001 - C-002 
I I  B ( -00 I)  B (C-002) 65 
~  ----- -1-------I 
-- -1 45 ... 0 -u 
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
   15     
41 R 71 121 141 173 182 CSI ue 14 
Iiglll"l.' 5.10: -0 hond length,; for Asp residue in subtilbin Carlsbuj. 
B:,,~ 15.9 2, UI (a, g) = 0.04 
Figur th r ult fi r the glutamic acid re idue at 1.26A with tandard 
d iati n pI ttcd a 
tl1 g lutami a id r 
4 and 1I th 
di ti nor 
b nd I n th 
ntra t to the a partic acid residue, almo t all of 
ar h wing ign of protonation except for Glu 196. G lu 
tandard unc rtaintie of roughly 3a; 3.92a and 2. Oa 
and -OE2 bond length lie out ide tho e of 
n 2. an 4a from dictionary value ). Glu 272 has a C-OEl 
th d i ti nary a lue (I .1 a from C=O and 2. a from C-OH 
bond lengths) but a standard uncertainty of only 1.94a meanmg that definitive 
identification of protonation is not possible. Glu 198 how rea onable evidence for 
protonation with bond lengths close to those of dictionary value (2.6a from C=O 
and 1.1a from C-OH bond lengths) and a tandard uncertainty of 2.85a. Relaxation 
of the la distribution for agreement with dictionary values would allow more 
confident ass ignment of both Glu198 and Glu272. Glull3 and 272 both have B 
factors significantly larger than the average B factor and a such may be radiation 
damaged. 
 -OE l  -OE2 70 
IAO t  
10 B ( -Oel)  B ( -O(2) 
I 1.35 
.: 1.20 
I OIl .. ~ 1.15 0 ... 
..J 40 ~ 
'0 1.10 ~ 
~ 1.05  
0.90 20 
 ------ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
0.80 10 
54 11 3 198 Re I ue 19 272 
Figllre 5.11: C-O bond Icngth, for Gill rc\iduc\ ill \ubtili,in Carl"')lrg. 
HI/I}: 15.9 \ UIf.'d 0.04 \ 
De pite the be t protonation state determination are at 3a for me r idue , th 
associated bond length do not agree well with dictionary alue. In th of Asp 
32 bond length are in good agreement with dictionary value but the tandard 
deviation do not allow a definitive protonation tate t be inferr d. Th re~ re higher 
re olution data i required in order to determine prot nati n tat a. 
Although electr n den ity map cann t be u d to identi fy pr t nati n tat at thi 
re lution (1.26A) reliably, Figure 5.12 h w 2 re idue that d w vid 'nc fI r 
prot nati n in the 2Fo-Fc electron den ity map, p 173 and lu I I th r ' iduc 
h w map c ntoured t 2.25a and it can be cl arly een that a larger am unt r 
electron den ity i pre ent on the shorter C-O bond indicating the presence of a 
double bond and hence protonation on the opposite oxygen atom. 
Figure 5.12: R ,iduc (\) \sp 173 and (B) and GIll 113 in subtilisin Carlsberg contourcd at 2.2Su 
5.5.1..J Key ata~l'tic Residue." 
h k at Iyt i r idu f p 2 in ubtili in i known to be deprotonated from 
. I and Ko iakoff and Spencer36) . Howe er the 
how that the re idue ha a lightly lengthened 
- 02 b nd (1.24A ee Figure 5.13). Although the 
nfid nt1 infi rrcd a being protonated (1.38a) th e re ult may 
t ntially p iti ned in between A p32 and Hi 64 in 
uhn ,{ al. -ray r ult from the 0.7 A tructure of Subtili in27 . 
hi r ' ult i a l 111 ntr t ( human a-thrombin which contain the ame acti e 
site as subtilisin. At pH 7.0 the relevant aspartic acid re idue (Asp 102, PDB code 
2UUF) appears to be deprotonated2 (compared with pH 5.6 in ubtilisin). 
5.5.1.5 CruikslUlIlk DPl COllsideratiol1s al1d quality ofstruclllre 
The coordinate (ax) opr values for ubtilisin Carlsberg calculated using REFMA 5 
are 0.041SA (based on the RJree factor) and 0.0393A (based on the R factor). The e 
values are slightly higher than those obtained from the SHELX full matrix inversion 
which average ax = 0.0260A. Cru ickshank
9 notes that the OP] can differ ITom the 
full matrix inver ion by around 10%. For a partate and glutamate re idue with 
favourable C-O bond length difference of around ~0.133A (la from dicti nary 
value ), a a) of 0.031 A, and therefore ax of 0.023A is required in order to po itively 
determine the protonation states. 
0.040 
0.035 
""' 0.030 
b 0.025 
0.020 
-- ubtili in(IOO%) 
30' (Nonnal) 
~-.---~-----~----------------
1.30 1.28 1.26 1.24 1.22 1.20 1.18 1.16 1.14 1.12 1.10 1.0 1.06 1.04 I. 2 1.00 
Re ollltion (A) 
J igllrr 5.14: Extr:IJ)()latcd u(x, /JUl') H'n\l~ rc.,olllti()J1 al IOou/o cOlllpll'lrlll' ., lur .,lIhtili.,in 
ar.,lhcrg. 
Figure 5.14 hows an extrap lation fax vcr u re luti n ~ r utili in arl berg. 
Thi how that a re olution of around 1.04 would bc needed bring the 
coordinate err r to ar und 0.024 6 r at m with B B OI'K and hcnc all w ~ r (J 
protonati n tate determination . 
5.5.2 Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin 
Trypsin is also a member of the serine protease family; it is involved in digestion and 
is used in numerous biotechnological processes. It is produced in the pancreas as the 
inactive pro-enzyme trypsinogen and contains the classic catalytic triad active site of 
Asp 102, His 57, and Ser 195. The resultant charge relay pathway primes Ser 195 for 
nucleophillic attack which ultimately cleaves a peptide bond. Subtilisin is discussed 
in further detail in Chapter 1.1.1. 
S. S. 2.1 I)lllll Collectioll 
Data were collected on 1023-2, the microfocus beamline at the ESRF by Sean 
McSweeney in a short and long pass with the detector at 350cm and 89cm from the 
crystal respectively. All data were collected at a wavelength ofO.98A. The long pass 
diffracted to a nominal resolution of 1.2A and the quick pass was truncated to 2.5A, 
with 108 degrees of data being collected for the slow pass and 30 degrees for the 
quick pass. Both sets of data were independently indexed and integrated using 
MOSFLM30 giving the same space group, namely P2,2,2, with unit cell parameters 
of a = 54.57A, b = 58.33A, c = 67.18A. The two data sets from MOSFLM were 
concatenatcd together using CAD
' and merged using SCALA
giving a final Rmerge 
value of5.3%. Full integration statistics are shown in Table 5.7. 
Data to 1.2A 
Resoludon 44 - 1.2 
ReOecdons 212032 (28919) 
Unique 65730 (9282) 
Completeness (%) 97.4 (95.5) 
Muldplicity 3.2(3.1) 
Rmel'ft (%) 5.3 (14.9) 
<I> / 1(1 6.3 (4.5) 
Tahk :'.7: Dala colkclion and processin~ statistics for bovine pancreatic tr)'psin 
IValm's shown in parl'llthesl's are for the outer shell resolution bin of I.26-I.20AI 
5.5.2.1 Strllt'llIrt' SO/III;Oll 
Initial phases were calculated from PDS model code IN6X. The model coordinates 
wt,"fe initially random atom shifted by 0.15A using MOLEMAN237 in order to 
remove any model bias. This model was then used with the molecular replacement 
tool PHASER giving a solution with RFZ=26.6 and TFZ=29.2 and an R factor of' 
33.3%. Rigid body refinement was then conducted to a resolution of 2.sA using 
REFMACS yielding an R factor of 29.4% and an Rjree of 30.0%. Following this a 
restrained refmement was carried out to I.sA yielding an R factor of 24.8% and an 
Rjree of 27.4%. The resulting electron density map was contoured to 30' and used to 
identify 21S water molecules and series of amino acid side chains in multiple 
conformations. A further series of restrained refmements were carried out and used 
to assign more water molecules and multiple conformation side chains as well as 
assigning a number of sulphate ions. 
Resolution NRef R Rrroe N" Comments 
(A) Working Set (%) (%) 
(Nrer Rrr...,) 
1 44 -2.5 7175 (389) 29.4 30.0 0 Rigid lxxIy to 2.5A from phaser I N6X 
2 44 -1.5 32181 (1723) 24.8 27.4 0 Extend resolution to 1.5A 
3 44 -1.5 32181 (1723) 17.9 20.5 215 Add waters and rotamers 
4 44-1.5 32181 (1723) 16.2 18.7 275 Added more water, multiple 
confonnations, rotamers and sulphates 
5 44 -1.5 32181 (1723) 13.4 16.9 304 Added more water, rotamers, 
Anisotropic refinement 
6 44 -1.2 61631 (3299) 13.3 15.9 310 Extend resolution to 1.2A 
7 44 -1.2 61631 (3299) 12.8 5.0 310 Water modifications, add multiple 
con fonnations 
8 10-1.2 61500 (3293) 11.5 14.1 310 To shelx, minor modifications 
9 10 - 1.2 61500 (3293) 11.1 14.3 306 Unrestrained Asp and Glu 
10 10 -1.2 61500 (3293) 12.9 15.4 306 Full matrix inversion 
11 44 -1.2 61631 (3299) 10.9 13.5 306 Final REFMAC for OPI 
Cruickshank's OPI for 0.0306 
coordinate error 
OPI based on free R factor 0.0312 
Table 5.8:Structure refinement statistics for bm'ine pancrt'atic tr)'psin 
After updating the water molecules and conducting anistropic refinement the 
refmement program was switched to SHELX-97 in order to refine the multiple 
conformation occupancies of the disordered amino acid side chains using the CGLS 
refmement type. A fmal refinement was conducted after adding hydrogen atoms in 
riding positions resulting in an R factor of 10.9% and an Rjree of 13.5%. The full 
refinement procedure is detailed in Table 5.8. Full refinement statistics and 
parameters can be found in Table 5.9 and a cartoon view of the final refined model is 
shown in Figure 5.15. 
1.2A Structure 
Space group P 2,2,2, 
Unit-cell parameters 
a (A) 54.57 
b (A) 58.33 
c (A) 67.18 
alpha (0) 90 
beta (0) 90 
gamma (0) 90 
Resolution (A) 1.2 
Rmrl1l. (% ) 5.3 (1 4.9) 
Completeness (%) 97.4 (95.5) 
< Uu(J 6.3 (4.5) 
Multiplicity 3.2(3. 1) 
No. of unique r efl ections 61 500 
R factor (%) 12.97% 
Rrrr  (% ) 15.4 1% 
Ramachandran coreladdi tional (%) 87 .2112.2 
Cruickshank' s OP] (A) (Rrr  ) 0.03 12 (0.0306) 
No. of atoms in p rotein 1706 
Mean B factor of protein (N) 11 .80 
Bond-distance r.m.s. deviation (A) 0.011 
Bond-angle r.m.s. deviation (''} 0.027 
No. of \Va ter molecules 306 
M ean B facto r of water molecules (A l) 
Mean B factor fo r all side-chain atoms CA l) 15.9 1 
Mean B fac tor for all main-chain a toms (A') 6.21 
Mea n B factor for all side chains and wa ters (Al) 15 .91 
Total No. of atoms 2069 
Mean B fac tor for all a toms (Al) 11 .80 
Larg t r idual difference electron den ity peak 
(S HELX, e/AJ) 1.89 
Large t re idual difference elec tron density hole 
(S lI ELX, e/}..J) -0.99 
1 able 5.9: SUIllIll:1I"~ of diffraction and refinement data tati tics. 
I' aim'" ho'". in pan' nthe\e .. arc for Ihe oulet" shell resolution bin of 1.26-1.20AI 
I igulc 5.1:: . tl' I ' () \ic\\ ()f tht' final refilled lIIodel of bovine panCl"calic tryp"in 
5.5.2.3 Determillatioll o/protOl1atioll Mates 
After the final stage of refinement the C-OO 1 and C-002 bond of a partic and 
OE I and C-OE2 bonds of glutamic acid residues were unre trained and another round 
of CGLS refmement was run in order to determine 'real C-O bond length . 
Following this a full matrix inver ion wa carried out to calculate the tandard 
uncertainties a sociated with each bond length. sing thi data the protonation tate 
of the aspartate and g lutamate residue wa determined. Table 5.10 shows the 19ma 
le els and i1( -0) for each res idue studied. 
Asp C-Ool (A) B Factor (A l) C-002JAl B Factor (N) Li{C-O~) a(Li(C-O)) 
71 1237 6.47 1.295 7.02 0.06 2.0'i 
102 1.228 4.00 1.292 4.06 0.06 2.26 
189 1.251 4.85 1.297 5.22 0.05 1.6}_ 
194 1.224 4.00 1.263 4.03 0.04 1.38 
Glu C-Od (A) B Factor (Al) C-Of2m B Factor (Al) ~-O~) a (Li(C-O)) 
70 1.253 5.86 1.258 5.74 0.01 0. 18 
77 1.240 8.03 1.272 11 .54 0.03 1.13 
80 1.253 6.29 1.273 6.20 0.02 0.71 
IXIl 1.432 27.95 1.252 25.54 O.IX 6.36 
" ab l ~ 5.1 0: '( a bl~ of C-O bond I~n g lhc; \\ ith a 1 (, \l'I ~ for Ixl\ inc pallcr('atic tr~ p,ill. Agr (,(, Ill (, lIt 
"ith dictiona .. ~ \alll (, ' ,ho\\ n in r('d and 2a d('( ' rlllinatioll' ill him' 
 -001  - 02 70 
.. B (C-OO I)  B ( - 02) 
1.30   0 
-= 1.25 I I OIl 40 ~ :: ... -..J u cc 
-g 1.20 '"" 0 O~ 
1.10 10 
1.05 0 
7 1 102 
R idu 
189 19 
I ig llr~ 5. 16: '0 hUlld 1 ~ lIg th, f()r \ ' p n ', idll l.''i ill h()\ i/lt.' pa/lt. r~a t ic It) p, ill . 
/JUI" 1".9 \ 2, all \ 1 (U12 \ 
Figure 5.16 how the results for the 4 aspartic acid residues which are in single 
conformation . Standard deviations are plotted as error bars. Asp 153 and 165 are 
both in multiple conformation and have therefore been excluded from analysis. The 
re ults how that both A p71 and 102 show signs of being protonated with bond 
lengths clo e t dictionary va lue (~la for Asp 102 and 1.7a for Asp71). Even 
though the tandard deviation are good with al of about 0.02A, the bond length 
differen e ar only of the order of 0.06A and therefore the best protonation state 
determination are 2.3a. 
..c:: 
0'.0 1.25 
'0 1.20 
co I. 1 
+ C-OE 1 - C-OE2 
.. B (C-OEI) - S (C-OE2) 
 w 0 
30 ~ .. c.. 
+------------,-----------.------------.-----------+ 0 
70 77 80 186 
Residue 
l<igll"l' 5.17: -() hOlld Icngth, for GIll rcsiducs in bovine pancreatic trypsin 
BU1~ 15.9A , al(3\~l = 0.02;\ 
igur .17 th re ult for th glutamic acid residue with standard d viations 
II fth r idue except for Glu186 appear to be deprotonated 
th d protonated valu of 1.25A. Glul86 however has 
ignificantly from the protonated values (2.7a from the 
fr m the - H value), and it also ha large B factor m 
pI II 
mpan n t lh th r r idu . Thi 1 mo t likely because thi re idue i on the 
urfa fth in and i th r fc r likely to be more mobile than buried r idu 
Despite very good standard deviations, averaging around o.02A, the majority of 
protonation state detenninations are below 3a. This is mostly due to the bond length 
separation of the two bonds being significantly smaller than 0.1 A. In these cases it is 
most likely that the associated proton is positioned between the aspartate and and an 
adjacent residue in a low barrier hydrogen bond. 
5.5.2.4 Key Catalytic Residue." 
Figure 5.18: 11 i\57 and A\p I 02 in bovine pancreatic tr) p .. in with unre.,trained -0 bond 
length .. 
The key catalytic residue of Aspl02 in tryp in i equivalent with A p32 in ubtili in 
and is known to be deprotonated from neutron studie 36. Again however, the re ult 
from bond length analysis how that the re idue ha a lightly lengthened - 02 
bond (1.29A) and shortened -001 bond (1.23A, ee Figure 5.1 ). Alth ugh the 
re idue cannot be confidently inferred a being protonated (2.26a) the c re ult may 
indicate that the proton i potentially po itioned in between A pl02 and Hi 57 again 
agreeing with Kuhn et al.'s results. 
5.5.2.5 Cruickslzallk DPI COllsideratiollS 
The coordinate (ux) DPI value for bovine pancreatic trypsin calculated using 
REFM 5 ar 0.0312A (based on the R ji-ee factor) and 0.0306A (ba ed on the R 
factor). Thes alue are very imilar to those obtained from the SHELX full matrix 
in er i n which average u = 0.031 ok 
Figur 5.19 how an extrapolation of Ux versus resolution for bovine pancreatic 
tryp in. Thi h w that a re olution of around 1.08A would be needed to bring the 
ordinate err r to around 0.024A for atoms with B=Bavg and hence allow 3u 
protonati n tate d termination for A p and Glu residue. 
--Trypsin (J 00%) 
- - - - 3(1 (NonnaJ) 
0.0 0 
0.0 0 
1. 0 1. 1. 1. 4 1.22 1.20 1.18 1.16 1.14 I. 12 1.1 0 1.08 1.06 1.04 1.02 1.00 
Resolution (A) 
FillJn~ 5.19: I "\trapo\att'd a(x. Bu lI ) versus resolution lit 100% eompletene<;<; for bO\'ine 
pa lIerell tic trypsin. 
5.5.3 Triclioic Lysozyme 
Lysozyme is a 129 ammo acid residue enzyme with its catalytic activity 000-
specifically targeted to bacterial cell walls and related with general non-specific 
organism defence. The active site contains two residues Asp52 and Glu35; Glu35 is 
known to be protonated (as deuterium) from neutron studies38 The 0.65A resolution 
structure oftriclinic lysozyme (POB code 2VBI) by Wang et al.25 was selected from 
the PDB as a comparison case due to its excellent diffraction resolution and 
completeness. 
5.5.3.1 Data/rom the PDB 
Structure factors and model file for PDB code 2VB I were downloaded and 
converted into a convenient format for data processing. Full integration statistics are 
shown in Table 5.11. The pH of crystallisation was 4.7. 
Data to O.65A 
Resolution 30-0.65 
Reflections 1331953 (12764) 
Unique 187165 (6563) 
Completeness {%) 97.6 (67.3) 
Multiplicity 7.1 (2.7) 
Rm~rRe (%) 4.5 (18.4) 
<I> I <0(1 36.2 (4.2) 
Table 5.1 I: Data colll'ction and processing statistics for Iysolyme at 0.65,\ resolution 
(Values shown In parentheses are for the outer shell resolution bin of 0.67-0.65,\1 
5.5.3.2 Structure Solutioll 
PDB code 2VB I was re-refmed using data published on the POB in order to 
calculate the full matrix inversion and the relevant Cruickshank OPI values. Table _. 
5.12 shows the refinement dctails and statistics, and a cartoon representation of the 
structure is shown in Figure 5.20. Refinement with SIIELX97 became unstable when 
extending the data to 0.65A due to the complex nature of refining protein structures 
at ultra high resolution, consequently the data was truncated to 0.8A. A full summary 
of diffraction data and protein model refinement statistics is given in Tablc 5.13. 
Resolution NRef R Rfree Nw Comments 
(A) Working Set (%) (%) 
(N ref Rfree) 
20 - 0.8 97263 (5105) 9.7 10.6 169 Final REFMAC for OPI (truncated) 
Cruickshank's OPI for 
coordinate error 0.0105 
OPI based on free R factor 0.0107 
20 - 0.65 177403 (9366) 10.1 10.8 169 Final REFMAC for OPI 
Cruickshank's OPI for 
coordinate error 0.0064 
OPI based on free R factor 0.0066 
Tahk ~.12: Strllcturl'-rdim'l1Ient statistics for 2\,B I and associated Cruickshank l>PI values 
O.SA Structure 
POB code 2VBl 
Space group PI 
Unit-cell parameters 
a (A) 27.07 
b(A) 31.25 
c (A) 33.76 
alpha (9) 87.89 
beta (9) 108.00 
gamma (9) 112.11 
Resolution (A) 0.65 
Rmrae (%) 4.5* 
Comj)leteness (%) 99.39* 
<l/u(I 20.4* 
Multiplicitr 5.3* 
No. of unique reflections 97263 
R factor(%) 8.91 
Rfrw (%) 9.9 
Ramachandran core/additional (%) 87.6112.4 
Cruickshank's OPI (Al (Rfr .. ) 0.0107 (0.0105) 
No. of atoms in protein 1256 
Mean B factor of protein (A~) 7.81 
Bond-distance r.m.s. deviation (A) 0.015 
Bond-al12le r.m.s. deviation _e) 0.036 
No. of water molecules 169 
Mean B factor of water molecules (A~) 10.31 
Mean B factor for all side-chain atoms (A~) 9.75 
Mean B factor for all main-chain atoms (Al) 4.79 
Mean B factor for all side chains and waters (Al) 9.75 
Total No. of atoms 1504 
Mean B factor for all atoms <Al) 7.81 
Largest residual difference electron density peak 
jSHELX, e/A3) 1.02 
Largest residual difference electron density hole 
(SHELX, el A 3) -0.7 
Tahll' 5.13: Summary of diffraction and refinement data statistics for 2VB I 
I*indicatl's ,alues that have been interpolated to o.sAI 
Figure 5.20: tel-eo (cl-o'i'i-cye viewing) view of Iy<;ozymc (P OB code 2 BI ) a t 0.65 resoluti oJl 
5.5.3.3 Determillatioll OJ'protollatioll states 
The coordinates of POB code 2VB 1 were random atom shifted by O.15A u ing 
MOLEMAN2 and re-refined to convergence while the Asp C-Ool /2 and Glu 
Of 112 bonds were unrestrained in order to determine 'real' C-O bond length. 
Following this a full matrix inversion was carried out to calculate the tandard 
uncertainties associated with each bond length. Using this data the protonati n tat 
of the Asp and Glu res idues were determined. Table 5.14 sh ws the igma level and 
( -0) for each residue tudied. 
Asp C-Ool D\) B Factor <A2) C-002 (A) B Factor CA2) A(C-O) (A) u(MC-O 
18 1.249 12.54 1.259 8.36 0.01 0.50 
52 1.206 4.79 1.252 5.19 0.05 4.99 
66 1.251 3.33 1.269 3.36 0.02 2.55 
10 1 1.172 7.5 1 1.323 6.41 0.15 10.6X 
119 1.249 11.17 1.275 11.96 0.03 1.05 
Tahle 5.1 4: 'I a hle of ' -0 bond l e Jl g th ~ with u leveh for tri clinic 1 ~'()/ } JlI e. \ gl"l'l' JII cJlI "ith 
d ic tionary va lue, 'i h()wJI in r cd a lld 3(1 determination in him' 
Figure 5.21 shows the re ult for the a partic acid r idue with tandar d iati n 
pI ttcd as error bar . The maj rity of the p r idue appear t e dcpr nat d 
with difference in bonds length f around . 2A  r p I and I I . 
doe show a 3a a ignment, however the difference in the two bond lengths is only 
o.osk The 3a as ignment arises due to the very small standard deviations thanks to 
the very high re olution structure used on average a, = o.01A. In these case it is 
po ible that the proton is positioned in between the Asp and an adjacent residue 
r ulting in the light lengthening of one of the bonds and shortening of the other. 
A pi 01 d how significant sign of protonation; with bond lengths do e to those 
of dictionary alue (0. a from the dictionary C-OH bond length and 2.4a from the 
= b nd length). 
 -00 '  -002 ... B (C-Oo ' )  B (C-002) 40 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - .- - - .- - - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 10 
+---------~--------.---------~--------~---------+ 0 
l' ilIrc 5.2 1: 
52 66 
Residue 
101 119 
-0 bond Icngths fOl' Asp rc iducs ill triclinic h soymc. 
2   
8 '/1'/1 9.7A, (11( :,, ~) = o.olA 
r ult for the glutamic acid re idues with standard deviation 
IT h w excellent ign of protonation with a s igma level 
nd I ngth in agr ement with dictionary values (0.6a from the C-
H alu and p rfl t agr m nt with the =0 bond length value). Glu7 al 0 how 
f pr t nali n \ ith a igma level f 3.2a, however the bond length difference 
indi ating th t i it unlikely that thi re ide i in fact protonated. Thi 
a imil r itu ti n t m of the A p re idue , where the proton i 
P it i n 111 n th lu and an adja ent re idue. 
~1 .25 
---------I 
 -0101 
 -0102 2 
 B ( -0102) .to B ( -OEl) 
1.15 +-------- ------.-------------+ 0 
Residue 
Jt'iJ.:urc 5.22: -0 hond ICIlJ.:th., for Gill rc.,iduc., ill triclillic I~ .,("~ mc. 
BU I'II 9.7 2, (JI( ,,, ~ , O.OIA 
Although Glu35 show good SIgns of being protonated in agreement with the 
neutron results of Ma on et al. 39, Asp52 al 0 how Ign fbeing pr t nated d pite 
being known to be deprotonated from the neutron re ult . 
Figlln' 5.23 Bond Il'ngth .. for (a) (,11135 ancl (h) ,\\p52 in I~\II" IIIl' 
ft i unclear a to why Asp32 den t how nd length d pr tonal d 
value. Both sample were cry talli ed at the am pI I 4.7) and in dium a ctal' 
buffer. However for the X-ray structure, ethylene glycol was used as the cryo-
protectant whereas the neutron structure was collected at room temperature. 
5.5.3.5 Cl'lIickslwllk DPI COllsideratioll." 
The coordinate (ax) DPI values for lysozyme calculated using REFMACS are 
0.0 107 (ba ed on the Rjree factor) and 0.01 osA (based on the R factor) at 0.80A 
r o lution and 0.0066 and 0.0064A at 0.6sA resolution. The values at 0.8A 
re luti n are ery imilar to those obtained from the SHELX full matrix inversion 
at O. r lution which average ax = 0.0116A. It can be expected that if the full 
matrix 10 er 1 n wa ca lculated at 0.6sA resolution the average ax values would 
mat h th 
Figure 
btained from REFMACS. 
achi a 
an extrapo lation ofax versus resolution for triclinic lysozyme. 
mparatively mode t resolution of around 1.14A is needed to 
rdinat rr r fO .024A for atoms with B=Bavg 
0.0 5 
b.O 0.020 
b O.OI 
--Lysozyme (100%) 
- - - - 30" (Normal) 
-- ... ~-
I. 0 1.2 I. 0 1.1 1.10 1.0 1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 
Resolution CA) 
l jJIII'l' :.~4: r\tlllpolated q(.\". II,,,~) \cnu'i resolution at 100% completcness for triclinic 
IYMuyruc. 
5.6 Comparisons & Key Factors 
5.6.1 Quality of the Cruickshank OPI 
The Cruickshank DPI provides a useful estimate of the coordinate error for atoms 
with B=Bavg within a protein molecule and hence the quality of the structure. It is 
however important to consider the accuracy of the Cruickshank DPl. Here the 
SHELX full matrix inversion values ofax and those obtained from the Cru ick hank 
OPI are compared. 
:(0.11 
'-' ... 
~ 0.09 ... 
--Average (S ff ELX) 
--OPf (R) 
--OPI (Rfrec) 
--Slf ELX 
~ 0.07 iIj~~.~=; 
~h~al=~~ 0.0675 H 0.0628 
g 0.05 
0.0550 
- - - - - - - - - N ~ N N N N N N N N N N N 
Cl UOUCl UUU U Cl O I-LlO Cl l-Ll~ 
U U U ;Z; 
"igure 5.25: Compari.,on (If u, ca lculated from thc J)PI ill IU,F"A and fullll1alri" iIl\CI.,ion 
ill SIIELX for '\JyBP-
Figure 5.25 shows a pi t of each atom and it a sociat d rdinate err r fi r My P-
, along with the average H LX value and b th fi rms f the rui k hank PI. It 
can be seen that the ruickshank OPl and X alue agr e re nably well. 
There is variation in the HELX value ant all at hav B.;:Bt/I'g' 'rtain ly 
atoms on the surface r in mobile regi n are likely t ha e ignift ant ly larger 
c rdinate err r . 
0. 11 
<,0 .09 
~ -o -~ 0.07 
Q) ... 
5 0.05 
--Average( II ELX) 
--DPI (R) 
--OPI (Rfree) 
-- HELX 
8 :8j8~ 
0.0259 
Figure 5.26: olllpari , oll of (J, calculated frOIll the DP) in REFMA and full matri'\ inH'r<.ioll 
ill SIIELX for subtilisin arlsberg. 
--Average ( II ELX) 
--DPI(R) 
--DPI (Rfree) 
0.0312 
0.0310 
0.0306 
, 11Ft. for Ixl\ I Ill: pancreatic tryp,ill . 
~ I a pi t fah at m and it as ociated coordinate rror for 
ubtili. in arl 'rg, al n v ith th a rag HELX value and b th fonus of the 
Cruickshank DPI. ]n this case the Cruickshank DPI values are about 0.0 I A larger 
than those from the SHELX full matrix inversion 
Figure 5.27 shows a plot of each atom and its associated coordinate error for bovine 
pancreatic trypsin, along with the average SHELX value, and both form of the 
Cruickshank DPl. In this case the Cruickshank DP] value are almost identical to the 
values obtained from the SHELX full matrix inver ion. 
3:0.05 ... 
o ... wO.04 
~ 0.03 
:a ... 
g 0.02 
-0.01 
--Average ( IIELX) 
--DPI (R) 
-- OPI (RfTcc) 
-- 11 ' LX 
f' igure 5.28: ' ompari.,oJ1 ofu, calculated frOJ1llhe 1)PI in REI" IA and fullmatri'\ illver.,iOIl 
in SlmLX for Iriclinic 1)"o/)lIle. 
Figure 5.28 shows a plot of each atom and it as ociated c ordinat rr r r r triclinic 
lysozyme along with the average HELX value, and both fi r rui k hank 
DPI. Once again the ruick hank DPI value are aim t identical t th e btained 
from the HELX full matrix inversion. 
Overall the ruick hank OPI doe in general give a g d e timate the c ord inate 
error and hence i a useful parameter fi r r ughly d t rmining the r luti n required 
for a 3a protonation tate determination. It cann t h we er be u ed to detcnnin the 
coordinate error peeifie residue a it i an average alue. 
5.6.2 E~t..apolation 
The extrapolation of resolution of completeness rcquired in order to achieve a 
coordinat ITor of 1 than o.o3A and hence allow 3a determination of protonation 
tate for p and Glu re idue have been compared for the four protein studied. 
The c re ult highlight th effect the different data collection resolutions have had on 
the xtrapolated DPI alue . 
5.6.2. I Completelless 
--MyBP- ( I.3A) 
-- ubtili in ( 1.26 ) 
--Trypsin ( 1.2 ) 
-- Lysozyme (0.8 
- - - 3<1 
O. 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 
Completenes 
I-iglll' . 5.29: I: trapolll tcd U(x. Hu.,;:) \'e rsu~ complelene. s for the four protei ns itlldicd. 
igur a graph f trapolated a(x, BOI'g) against completene for all four 
tudi d. hi h w the dependence of the Cruick hank DPI on 
Fr ail th protein tudied except for ly ozyme it i not 
p IT r below O.024A by increasing the completen 
f th data l al n , furt h r impr ment in the data must b made. 
5.6.2.2 Resolutioll 
Figure 5.30 shows a plot of extrapolated a(x, Bavg) against resolution for all four 
proteins studied assuming 100% completeness. This shows the dependence of the 
Cruickshank OPl on resolution (ex: d 2  ). Re olution ha a much more ignificant 
effect on the coordinate error than completeness and this parameter alone can be 
used to bring the coordinate error below ax = 0.023A thus allowing for 3a 
protonation state assignments. 
0.065 --MyOP-C (100%) 
0.060 
-- ubtili in ( 100%) 
--Trypsin (100%) 
0.055 
-- Lyso/ymc ( 100%) 
31 ( rmal) 
0.050 
0.045 
-pD0.040 ., 
~ 0.035 
~0.030 
0.025 
0.020 
0.015 
0.010 
0.005 
1.30 1.25 1.20 1.15 1. 1  1.05 1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 
Resolution (AJ 
IOO., cOlllpletelle" 
Furthermore by impr ving the diffraction re o lution thi will urely impr ve the 
refinement parameter R and R[ree, which w uld h pefully r duce the c rdinatc 
error further given that the OP[ depend on the R r R[rce fact r well re luti n 
and completenes . 
5.7 Conclusions 
Overall bond length analysis provides a method to determine protonation states 
without necessarily needing sub Angstrom resolution data. High completeness is 
advantageous and should in most cases be achievable, especially if collecting high 
resolution data. Small increases in resolution can have a large impact on the 
coordinate errors and as such the highest resolution data should be aimed for. 
Clearly there is a compromise to be made between the attainable resolution and the 
associated radiation damage. Radiation damage limits the amount of data that can be 
collected and can adversely affect the coordinate errors on residues of interest such 
as aspartates and glutamates. Therefore a modest resolution allowing for the best 
coordinate errors possible should be used without damaging the sample. 
For the cases of aspartate and glutamate it is possible to infer protonation states if the 
X-ray data to parameter ratio is greater than or equal to 3, the residue of interest is in 
a single conformation and the bond length error is less than or equal to al = 0.031 A 
(equal to ay' = 0.023A). 
The best case situation is to use bond length analysis in conjunction with other 
protonation state methods such as neutron protein crystallography where the position 
of the protons (as deuterium) can be determined to a very high confidence level. This 
approach provides two independent methods and two independent crystal samples. 
5.8 References 
1. CCDC, hftp:lll1'lvw.ccdc.cam.ac.uk, 2007. 
2. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. Helliwell and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
3. G. M. Sheldrick, T. R. Schneider, C. W. J. Carter and R. M. Sweet, in 
Methods in Enzymology, Academic Press, Editon edn., 1997, vol. Volume 
277, pp. 319-343. 
4. S. Daopin, D. R. Davies, M. P. Schlunegger and M. G. Grutter, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 1994, 50, 85-92. 
5. R. Engh and R. Huber, Acta Crystallographica Section A, 1991,47,392-400. 
6. R. Berisio, F. Sica, V. S. Larnzin, K. S. Wilson, A. Zagari and L. Mazzarella, 
Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D-Biol. Crystallogr., 2002,58,441-450. 
7. V. Luzzat~ Acta Crystallographica, 1952,5, 802-810. 
8. A. Messerschmidt, X-Ray Crystallography 0/ Biomacromolecules, Wiley-
VCH, Weinheim, 2006. 
9. D. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 1999,55,583-601. 
10. D. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 1999, 55, 1108. 
11. D. Blow, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2002, 58, 792-797. 
12. B. W. Matthews, Journal o/Molecular Biology, 1968,33,491-497. 
13. E. F. Garman and S. M. McSweeney, Journal o/Synchrotron Radiation, 
2007, 14, 1-3. 
14. M. Weik, R. B. G. Ravell~ G. Krygcr, S. McSweeney, M. L. Raves, M. 
Hare~ P. Gros, I. Silman, 1. Kroon and J. L. Sussman, Proceedings o/the 
National Academy o/Sciences o/the United States 0/ America, 2000, 97, 
623-628. 
15. G. I. Berglund, G. H. Carlsson, A. T. Smith, H. Szoke, A. Henriksen and J. 
Hajdu, Nature, 2002, 417, 463-468. 
16. R. B. G. Ravelli and E. F. Garman, Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 
2006, 16,624-629. 
17. N. Shimizu, K. Hirata, K. Hasegawa, G. Veno and M. Yamamoto, Journal 0/ 
Synchrotron Radiation, 2007, 14, 4-10. 
18. C. Blake and D. C. Phillips, Proceedings 0/ the Symposium on the Biological 
Effects 0/ Ionising radiation at the Molecular Level. Vienna, 1962, 183-191. 
19. D. Borek, S. L. Ginell, M. Cymborowski, W. Minor and Z. Otwinowski, 
Journal (~(Synchrotron Radiation, 2007, 14,24-33. 
20. E. Fioravanti, F. M. D. Vellieux, P. Amara, D. Madem and M. Weik, Journal 
(~( Synchrotron Radiation, 2007, 14, 84-91. 
21. S. Kriminski, M. Kazmierczak and R. E. Thome, Acta Crystallographica 
Section D, 2003, 59, 697-708. 
22. R. Henderson, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 1990,241, 6-8. 
23. R. L. Owen, E. Rudino-Pinera and E. F. Garman, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2006, 103, 
4912-4917. 
24. M. S. Weiss, S. Panjikar, C. Mueller-Dieckmann and P. A. Tucker, Journal 
q(Synchrotron Radiation, 2005, 12,304-309. 
25. 1. Wang, M. Dauter, R. Alkire, A. Joachimiak and Z. Dauter, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 1254-1268. 
26. D. J. Neidhart and G. A. Petsko, Protein Eng., 1988,2,271-276. 
27. P. Kuhn, M. Knapp, S. M. Soltis, G. Ganshaw, M. Thoene and R. Bott, 
Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 13446-13452. 
28. M. Cianci, B. Tomaszewski, 1. R. Helliwell and P. 1. Halling, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc., 2010, 132,2293-2300. 
29. M. Cianci, Personal Communication, 2007. 
30. A. G. W. Leslie, Joint CCP4 + ESF-EAMCB Newsletter on Protein 
Crystal/ography, 1992, 26. 
31. Collaborative Computational Project 4, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
1994, 50, 760-763. 
32. T. Prange, M. Schiltz, L. Pemotm, N. Colloc'h, S. Longhi, W. Bourguet and 
R. Fourme, Protein..\': Structure, Function, and Genetics, 1998, 30, 61-73. 
33. L. C. Storoni, A. 1. McCoyand R. 1. Read, Acta Crystallographica Section 
D, 2004, 60, 432-438. 
34. A. W. Schuttelkopf and D. M. F. van Aalten, Acta Crystallographica Section 
D, 2004, 60, 1355-1363. 
35. P. Emslcyand K. Cowtan, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2004, 60, 
2126-2132. 
36. A. A. KossiakotT and S. A. Spencer, Nature, 1980, 288, 414-416. 
37. G. Kleywegt, http://xray.bmc.uu.selIs(, 2003. 
38. C. Bon, M. S. Lehmann and C. Wilkinson, Acta Crystallographica Section 
D, 1999, 55,978-987. 
39. S. A. Mason, G. A. Bentley and G. 1. Mclntyre, Neutrons in Biology, p323-
334, Plenum Press 1984. 
6. Myosin Binding Pl'otein-C: An investigation into protonation 
tate u ing high resolution X-ray crystallography 
6.1 Introduction 
My in Binding Protein C (MyBP-C) is a myofibril associated protein present in 
cardia and kel tal mu cle (cMyBP-C). The cardiac muscle i o-form is subject to 
pho phorylation and i a substrate in vivo and in vitro for cAMP 
dep ndant Pr tein Kina e (PKA) and calcium/phospholipid dependant Protein 
Kina (PK I. Mutation of MyBP3 , which encodes cMyBP-C, can re ult in the 
fi rmati n ftruncat d protein lacking the C terminal domains necessary for binding 
t th thi k filam nt backbone or to mi -sense mutation 2. Together these mutations 
arc a maJ r au f Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM), a disease in which a 
p rti n f th m cardium thicken unusually without an obviou cause. These 
mutati n ar b li ed t account for at lea t a quarter of individuals affected by the 
it fMulati n 
I igllrl' 6. 1: Po"ihlc hindilll \lf 'l~ BP- to actin filaments. j\lyosin subfl'agment and motor 
hl'ad ho',,' in \l'cI. :IclinnulII(lmer, ill grey, Iropolllyo>in slnmd in green, esscntia lligh t chain 
(1' 1 ) lInd n'gllllllUr~ light chai n (RI, ) ill orange,and c lyBP- in gr en. Reproduced from 
Govada e/ al.1 
The surface charge state of the Cl domain of cMyCP-C is of keen interest in 
understanding the inter-protein interactions implicated in its function. The C tenninal ' 
of the Cl domain is believed to be highly charged and expected to result in an 
electrostatic interaction with the connecting C2 domain. Two of the four known 
mutations of Cl domain of cMyBP-C alter the surface charg of the C tenninal 
region and hence this results in disruption of the interaction between the C l and C2 
domains. Figure 6.1 shows a cartoon representation of the possible binding of 
cMyBP-C with the myosin ubfragment 2 (S2) and actin filament. The region 
where mutations occur in the Cl domain are shown in green. 
Govada et al. 2 have reported the X-ray crystal structure fthe Cl domain of cMyBP-
C at 1.ssA within which a protein charge urface repre entation wa giv n ba ed n 
the as umption that each aspartate and glutamate re idue is deprotonated ( ee Figure 
6.2). 
Terminu 
Figure 6.2: Surface charge repn',ell(utiulI of thl' I dOll1ain of c\l~ BP- . I he '-(crmilla l clld i, 
hi~hl~ acidic (rcd). Reproduced frllm GCI' ala {'I Ill.' 
The experimental prol nati n late f lhe c y p- I d maIn ha e been 
examined via b nd length analy is r a partate and glutamate re iduc u ' in a 
recently collected 1.3A X-ray data set. The difference between the two c-o bond 
lengths has been calculated for each aspartate and glutamate residue along with the 
standard uncertainties of each of the c-o bond lengths. These values were used to 
determine whether each residue can be confidently inferred as being protonated or 
not. The best protonation state determinations were only at 2(1 and therefore an 
extrapolation is given based on the Cruickshank DPI of the resolution and 
completeness required in order to determine the protonation states to a 3(1 confidence 
level. Furthermore a proposed neutron experiment is presented which could directly 
determine the proton positions and hence the protonation states of the aspartate and 
glutamate residues. 
6.2 Data Collection 
The CO-C I sequence (residues 1-2S8) was amplified from full length Human 
cMyBP-C. Native protein was isolated by Charles Redwood, and recombinant 
protein was expressed and purified by Lata Govada and Naomi Chayen. The purified 
protein was dialysed into 10mM imidazole, SOmM sodium chloride, O.5mM 
dithiothreitol, SOmM Tris at pH7.0 and concentrated to at least 20mglml (More 
detail of the preparation and purification is described in Govada et al.2). The crystals 
were grown in 2J.L1 drops at 20C by the microbatch under oil technique, in Nunc 72-
well plates that were incubated in an inverse position. The crystallisation conditions 
were: 7.S mg/ml protein, 8.5% PEG 33S0 and O.OSM HEPES pH 6.8. Crystals were 
taken out of the drops with a loop and flash frozen with no cryo-protectant. 
The data for the experimental protonation state determinations were collected on 
bcamline 10.1 3 at the Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) at a 
wavelength of 1.283A by Lata Govada and Naomi Chayen. The crystal diffracted to 
a nominal resolution of 1.20A, into the corners of the detector and 180 degrees of 
data were co 11 ect ed. The diffraction images were indexed and integrated using 
HKL2000
, confirming the space group determined for the l.SSA data set, 14, and 
with unit cell parameters a = b = 48.848A, and c = 9S.132A. 
Data to 1.20A 
Resolution CA) 1.20A* 
Reflections 380249 
Unique Reflections 26342 
Completeness (%) 79.9 (33.3) 
Multiplicity 3.9 (1.2) 
Rmer  (%) 4.6 (64.0) 
<I> /<0'(1 14.0 (1.3) 
Table 6.1a: Summary of data coll{'ction and processing parameters for c:,\I)'BP-C Cl domain. 
*The resolution where </>/<u(/ crossed 2.0 was 1.30A. 
IValues shown in parentheses are for the outer shell resolution bin of 1.24-1.20AI 
1.3A Structure 
PDB code 3CX2 
Space~roup 141 
Unit-cell parameters 
a (A) 48.848 
b (A) 48.848 
c(A) 95.132 
Resolution (A) 1.3 
Rmere (/0) 4.6 (50.0*) 
Completeness (%) 88.4 (93.0*} 
<lIu(I 14.0 (2.0*) 
Multiplicity 3.9 (2.7*) 
No. of unique reflections 22822 
R factor (%) 16.4 
Rrree (%) 20.9 
Ramachandran core/additional (%) 96.7/3.3 
Cruickshank's DPI (A) (Rrree) 0.0675 (0.0628) 
No. of atoms in protein 866 
Mean B factor of protein (A') 18.2 
Bond-distance r.m.s. deviation (A) 0.025 
Bond-angle r.m.s. deviation (0) 2.043 
No. of water molecules 176 
Mean B factor of water molecules (Az) 28.4 
Mean B factor for all side-chain atoms (A') 24.4 
Mean B factor for all main-chain atoms (A') 16.6 
Mean B factor for all side chains and waters (Az) 24.4 
Total No. of atoms 1024 
Mean B factor for all atoms CA') 21.3 
Largest residual difference electron density peak 0.28 
(SII ELX, el Al) 
Largest residual difference electron density hole -0.26 
(SII ELX, el A3) 
Table 6.1 b: Summary of diffraction and refilll'ment data statistics. *Interpolllt{'d valu(s. 
IValu('s shown in parentheses are for the outer shell resolution bin of t.24-1.20AI 
The resulting data were then merged using SCALAs giving an overall Rmerge of 4.6%. 
Ice rings were present in the diffraction images and data affected by these were 
automatically removed using HKL2000 resulting in a slightly lower completeness. 
Full X-ray data integration statistics are shown in Table 6.1 a. The resolution for the 
fmally deposited structure was truncated to 1.3A. A full summary of diffraction data 
and protein model refmement statistics to 1.3A is given in Table 6.1 b 
Rmerge, completeness, multiplicity and <J>/aJ for the outer shell at 1.3A were 
interpolated using the 1.2A statistics from SCALA. Figure 6.3 shows the 
interpolations for <J>/aJ , Rmerge and completeness, 
6.0  
~ 4.0 
1.0  
1.10 1.20 1.30 1.40 1.50 
Resolution (A) 
loo.. 
~ 20% e 
~ 10% 
1.25 1.35 1.45 1.55 1.65 1.75 
Resolution (A) 
90 ,-., 
80 ~ ... 
'-' 70 
'" '" 60 ~ 
50 ~ -~ 40 
8' 30 
0 20 U 
1.20 1.30 1.40 1.50 1.60 
Resolution (A) 
FigUl'c 6.3: Intcrpola ted values for (A) <l>/(J l and (8 ) Rmcr[lc and (C) Complete ness at 1.3 
6.3 Structure Solution 
The previously solved model for cMyBP-C Cl at a resolution of l.SSA2 (POB code 
2V6H) was used with these extended resolution data. The starting model coordinate 
were initially random atom shifted by o.lsA using the program MOLEMAN26 in 
order to remove any model bia . Rigid body refinement was then conducted using 
REFMACS 5 to 2.soA yielding an initial R factor of 2S.7% and an RfTee of 26.2%. 
After this a restrained refinement was carried out u ing REFMAC S, the re ulting Fo-
Fe difference electron density map was used to locate a serie of water molecules and 
assign several multiple conformations as well as modelling a serie of di ordered 
residues located at amino acid sequence positions 181-184. Another stage of 
refmement was then carried out and the re ulting Fo-Fe difference map contoured to 
3a was used to identify a mutation at residue 248 from a glutamic to an aspart ic acid 
sidechain (see Figure 6.4). 
Figure 6.4: ,\ll1tation at re~idlle 248 in c,\ly8P- frolll a glutamic acid to all a'partic acid 
r e.,idue. (A) "o-Fc difference map' contoured to.tu (negative; rNI) and 3.2u (po ithe; green) 
"hen refined :I, a Gill .,idcchain, (B) 21',,-1'. llIap contourcd to 2nm for the "p ""ignlllcllt 
After final refmement using R FMA 5 the POB file wa LX-97 
1 S format and refmement wa carried out u ing HELX-97 in ord r to r fin the 
multiple conformation occupancie . Refmement pr ceed d u ing the tandard L 
refmement keyword and hydr gen at ms were added in riding p iti n r ulting in 
a fmal R factor f 17.8% and an Rfrcc f20.0%. A a te t the data wa al truncated 
to 1.30A and another cycle f refinement wa carried ut u ing H LX-97 r u Iting 
in an R factor of 16.4% and an Rrrec f 1 .6%. Th fmal m del i dep it d in th 
POB with model code 3 X2. The full refinement pr c dure i wn in Tabl .2. 
Figure 6.S shows the structure of cMyBP-C to 1.30A in simplified ribbon view with 
the determined multiple occupancy side chains indicated in cyan. 
Figure 6.5: Cartoon ,ic\\ of the structlllc ofcMyBP-C I to 1.30Awith multiple occupancy ide 
chains indicated ill cyan. 
Re olution Nlttf R Rfr  Nw Comments 
( ) Working et (%) (%) 
(N~r Rrr  ) 
1 00 - 2.50 2807 (287) 25 .7 26.2 162 REFMAC: Rigid body refinement 
to 2.50A 
2 00 - 1.20 26339 (1364) 24.3 25.6 162 REFMAC: Restrained refinement 
to 1.20A 
3 00 - 1.20 23.5 25 .1 172 REFMAC: Add multiple 
con formations for 7 di ordered 
sidechain , updated water , 
mutation ofG1u248 to Asp 
4 00 - 1.20 " 23.1 25.2 174 REFMAC: Model 3 residue In 
the disordered region between 
residues 180 - 184 
5 00 - 1.20 " 19.4 24.4 177 REFMAC: Anisotropic 
refinement, adjust weighting 
factors 
6 10- 1. 20 26 304 ( 1362) 17.8 20.0 177 SHELX-97: CGLS refinement 
multiple conformation occupancy 
for 7 idechains, add hydrogen 
atoms at calculated positions 
7 10- 1.30 22822 (11 84) 16.4 18.6 176 SHELX-97: Truncate to 1.30A 
1 abll' 6.2: : truc turc Rcfincmcnt tati tics for M BP-C C l domain. 
6.4 Results and Discussion 
The 1.3A structure is very similar to the 1.55A structure2 with root mean squared 
(RMS) deviations on Ca of 0.079A and 0.192A on all atoms. The increase on all 
atoms is caused by a change in conformation of the Gln205 and Lys190 sidechains. 
There are 7 mUltiple occupancy side chains (ThrI67, Ser171, Ser200, Ser236, 
Va1241, Ser242, Phe247) in the 1.3A structure versus 5 (Lys195, Ser236, Va1241, 
Ser242, Phe247) in the 1.55A structure. Not excluding the split conformations from 
the RMS deviation calculation increases the RMS deviation on all atoms to 0.43A. 
6.4.1 Determination of Protonation States 
After the fmal stage ofrefmement the C-081 and C-082 bonds of the aspartic, and 
C-OE 1 and C-OE2 bonds of glutamic acid residues were unrestrained and another 
cycle ofCGLS refmement was carried out in order to determine the actual C-O bond 
lengths. The SHELX-97 refmement parameter "L.S. 1" was then used in conjunction 
with the "ACT A" keyword in order to perform a least squares full matrix inversion 
which calculates the standard uncertainty for each bond length. Despite data to 
parameter ratios of2.9 (27666 reflections; 9485 parameters) at 1.2A and 2.5 (24006 
reflections; 9485 parameters) at 1.3A, it was not necessary to include the Rfree 
reflections in the full matrix inversion calculation. 
These values were then used to calculate the standard uncertainty on the bond 
distance difference between the C-Ool and C-002 bond lengths for each of the Asp, 
and C-OE I and C-Ol2 bond lengths for each G lu residue7 In order to positively infer 
the protonation state where ~(C-O) is O.IA, a u(~(C-O less than or equal to 0.033A 
is needed, which represents a 3u difference. These quantities were calculated using 
both the original 1.2A and also the 1.3A truncated data for comparison so as to judge 
the effective resolution from this point of view. Engh and Huber8 dictionary bond 
length values are taken to be 1.20sA for the c=o bond, 1.304A for the C-OH bond 
and 1.249A for the deprotonated C-O' bond. The CSD values differ slightly from 
these with a c=o bond length of 1.21OA and C-OH bond length of 1.3 lOA. 
However, as Ahmed et al. 7 discuss in detail, the value for a C-OH bond distance can 
be affected by the micro environment ofthe hydrogen. 
Table 6.3 shows the carbonyl bond lengths, B factors and sigma level of significance 
for each residue studied at 1.2A resolution and Table 6.4 shows these values at 1.3A 
resolution. 
Asp C-Ool (A) B Factor (AI) C-002 (A) B Factor (AI) A(C-O) (A) u(A(C-O 
152 1.~()9 27.31 1.321 30.IR O. \I 072 
163 1.190 17.91 1.280 22.03 0.09 0.91 
198 1.221 21.43 1.272 29.31 0.05 0.45 
211 1.171 19.35 1.292 21.63 0.12 1.22 
214 1.125 25.95 1.356 28.04 0.23 1.81 
228 1.227 30.80 1.262 33.09 0.03 0.25 
245 1.104 42.77 1.438 50.67 0.33 1.43 
248 1.196 17.25 1.215 17.20 0.02 0.16 
Glu C-OEl (A) B Factor (AI) C-OE2 (A) B Factor (AI) A(C-O) (A) u(A(C-O 
165 1.230 29.74 1.237 38.09 0.01 0.05 
223 1.250 18.35 1.263 18.65 0.01 0.13 
240 1.235 19.82 1.246 20.84 0.01 0.11 
258 1.198 45.21 1.367 49.91 0.17 0.63 
Table 6.3: Table of C-O bond lengths with sigma levels for cMyBP-C C I at 1.2A 
Asp C-Ool (A) B Factor (AI) C-002(A) B Factor (AI) A(C-O) (A) u(A(C-O 
152 1.200 20.24 1.319 29.20 0.11 0.73 
163 1.181 17.48 1.289 21.57 0.11 1.09 
198 1.241 20.46 1.259 29.11 0.02 0.16 
211 1.151 19.03 1.295 21.09 0.14 1.45 
214 1.135 25.52 1.352 27.38 0.22 1.61 
228 1.228 30.64 1.265 32.66 0.04 0.26 
245 1.098 42.83 1.451 49.90 0.35 1.51 
248 1.198 16.72 1.218 17.28 0.02 0.16 
Glu C-OEl (A) B Factor (AI) C-Od(A) B Factor (A 2) A(C-O) (A) u(A(C-O 
165 1.227 28.79 1.229 37.67 0.00 0.01 
223 1.247 17.85 1.260 18.21 0.01 0.12 
240 1.237 19.37 1.244 20.02 0.01 0.07 
258 1.203 44.60 1.367 49.33 0.16 0.58 
Table 6.4: Table ofC-O bond lengths with sigma levels for cMyBP-C Cl at 1.3A 
Figure 6.6 shows the results for the aspartic acid residues at 1.2A resolution with 
standard deviations plotted as error bars. A number of the residues appear to be 
deprotonated. Asp 152 has bond lengths in excellent agreement with dictionary 
values, but the tandard deviations are too large to positively infer this re idue as 
being protonated, a determination at O.72a. Asp214 which how ome evidence of 
protonation with a standard uncertainty of 1.81a however these bond length lie 
outside those of dictionary values. Asp245 also shows some evidence of protonation; 
however it has very large thermal motion parameter ultimately re ulting in large 
standard deviations on the bond lengths. The large B factor indicate thi re idue 
may well have been radiation damaged, given that the average ide chain B factor is 
24A2 compared with around 50A2 on Asp245. A discu sed in hapter 5.3, A P and 
Glu re idues are readily decarboxylated when exposed to large do e fX-ray . 
..c: 1.20 
CiJI . 15 
~ 1.10 
..J 1.05 
-g 1.00 
~0 .95 
 -00 1  - 02 
A B ( -00 I )  B ( -002) 
 .to 
0.50 i----,----,-----.------.----,,----..---,.---
152 163 198 2 11 214 22 245 24 
Re idue 
Joi l-: Ufl' 6.6: ('-() Bond Lcnl-: th" f()r \.,p n ,.,idul'., in c'I~IW-C ' I dOlllain at 1.2A. 
/JIII' , 24.4\1,0'11,1\ 11 0.09\ 
o -50 ~ 
Figure 6.7 show the re ult for the glutamic acid re idue at 1.2 re luti n with 
standard deviation pi tted a err r bar ,all f the re idu e pt lu25 app ar t 
be deprotonated h wevcr lu25 uffcr fr m th ame pr in that it 
ha large B fact r and hence large tandard deviati n meaning thc pr t noti n tat 
of thi re idue cann t be accurately inferr d. lu25 i the terminal re idu f th 
protein and a uch i not as tatic a other re idue in the pr tcin thereforc it i 
m re likely t have highcr B factor a' a eiated tandard dc iati n '. 
..cl. 0 
~1. 2 5 
~ 1.20 
 1.1 5 
~ 1.10 
+ C-Oe l 
... B (C-Oe I) 
. C-Oe2 
 B (C-Oe2) 
70 ,-
O. 0 ~----------.-----------.-----------.-----------+ 10 
Figurc 6.7: 
I igllrl' 6.8: 
 ... 
Re idue 
-0 Bond Lengths for GIll rcsidllCs in cl\lyl3P-C 
8 U1"1: 24.4N , UI (",~) = 0.09A 
+ - 0 I  -002 
... B ( -0 0 I)  B (C-0 02) 
I I 1 
1 at 1.2,,-\ 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 ... 
211 214 
Re iduc 
-0 BOlld Lellth, for Alp J'cliduc ill cM~ BP-
IJ,""".: 24.4A, ul(" , ~) 0.09;\ 
245 248 
th r ult fi r the ame a partic acid re idue but at 1.3 
n \ pi ttcd a error bar . A number of the r idue 
t natcd in agr ement with the 1.2A resu It. p 152 till 
ha nd I' ll th in agr m nt ith di ti nary value, but al 0 ha large tandard 
deviations. Asp214 again shows signs of being protonated but till has a re latively 
small significance level of only 1.6 1 a. It is interesting to note that the precision has 
worsened for this particular residue when the diffraction re olution i truncated to 
1.3A even though the data quality indicators show that data beyond 1.26A should not 
be used as the Rmerge in this shell is greater than 50% and the <l >/al i le than 
2. However this is not the ca e with all re idue both A p2 11 and A p245 how an 
increase in precision when the data is truncated . 
.c 1.30 
~1 .25 
~ 1.20 
g 1.15 
~ 1.10 
1.00  
0.95 ... 
 -OE I  -OE2 
... B ( -OE 1)  B ( -OE2) 
Residue 
240 258 
70 J... 
o ..-
F i~un' 6.9: ('-0 Bond LeJl~th" for Gill re.,iduc., in c'" BP- I at 1.3A 
H,li}: 24.4 ,0'1(", I 0.119 \ 
Figure 6.9 show the re ult fi r the glutamic acid re iduc at I. with tandard 
deviation pi tted a error bar and once again m t re idue e m t be 
deprot nated. Glu25 again h w ignilicant 19n [pr t nation but ha largc 
[actor and a ciated tandard deviation ~ r r as n 
Figure 6.10 hows A p214 with electron den ity map nt ured t 2 and RM' 
thi re idue ha highe t probability f being pr t nated with a igma level f 1.6 1. 
Thi figure how that electron den ity i ncentratcd on the h rtcr f the two -
b nd indicating again that thi i a - nd and n t a - H nd. 
Figurt' 6.10: .\.,p214 \\Hh 2Fo-F< electroll density maps contoured to (A) 2 rms and (B) 3 rms. 
D pit high re lution data being available and reasonable B factors 30A2) on 
man f th at the tandard uncertainties associated with each of the Asp and 
lu = and -OH bond lengths are relatively high; on average o.o9A. This is 
partly du t th c mpleten of the data being low. The ice rings present in the 
diffTa ti n Imag hown in Figure 6.11, have resulted in section of data being 
r m and a u h ha e impacted the overall completeness. 
I iglln' 6.11 : lel' dng~ prc'l'1I1 ill olle of Ihl' cMy8 P- C I diffraction image 
6.4.2 Cruickshank DPI Considerations 
Using Blow's re-arrangement of the Cruikshank DPI fonnula it is possible to 
extrapolate the completeness and resolution required in order to bring the coordinate 
error down below 0.03A. Coordinate (ax) DPI values calculated using REFMAC 5 
are 0.063A (based on the R factor) and 0.065A (ba ed on the Rfree) at 1.2A and 
0.068A (R factor) and 0.06sA (Rfree) at I.3A. These values are reasonably consistent 
with the calculated bond length errors from the full matrix inversion, which average 
o.loA (the DPI can vary by about 15% from full matrix inversion9) equivalent to ax 
= 0.07lA. 
Figure 6.12 shows ax versus completeness calculated for 1.2A and 1.3A reso lution. It 
can be seen that even at a compl teness of a 100% it is sti ll not possible to reach a ax 
of <o.03A. Figure 6. 13 a, however, shows ax versus re olution and a uch it can be 
seen that a resolution of roughly o.s9A would be required for the current data 
completeness. However, as Figure 6.13b shows, for 100% data cornpletenes , 0.92A 
resolution would be needed for standard 3a determination and 1.0sA for favourable 
cases where i1(C-O) i around O.14A and therefore ax = - 0.033A. 
0.095 -- 1.3A 
-- 1.2A 
0.090 
0.085 
0.080 
0.075 
en 0.070 
~ 0.065 
'b0.060 
0.055 
0.050 
0.045 
0.040 
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 
omplctcnc 
I' igun 6.12: I,,"\trapolatcd u(x, B,";:) Hr., .. ., cllmpll'll' IIt' '''' for c\.l)BI'- 1 dOlllain al 1.2 \ and 
1.1 n,.,ululion. 
0.060 
0.055 
0.050 
0.045 
Xl 0.035 
0.0 0 
0.025 
0.060 
0.055 
Xl 0.035 
0.0 0 
0.025 
0.020 
1.25 1.20 1.1 5 1.1 0 1.05 I ~ OO 
Resolution (A) 
1.2 1. 20 1.1 5 1.10 1.05 1 ~00 
Resolution (A) 
-- 12A (79.9%) A 
- - - 3<1 
0.90 0.85 0.80 
__ 12A(IOO%) B 
- - - 3<1 
0.90 0.85 0.80 
I'igurc 6.13: I<: ,trapolated u(x, B'/I -':) VCI"'US resolution for cMyBP- Cl domain: (a) 
c'\pcrimclltlll complctcllc>., of this study (79.9% at 1.2 ); (b) if 100% data complctencss could 
be obtained. 
tra lated alu fi r the re o lution u ing Figure 6.1 2 indicate that expected DPI 
uld b - .05 at 1.2A compared with - 0.064A calculated from REFMAC 5 
ind i at ing that th data d n t really extend to 1.2A. However it i inter ting that 
th parameter ratio fo r the 1.2A dataset of2.92 and for the 1.3A 
data f t imated tandard deviation from the fu ll matrix in er ion 
being beneficially improved (1.6a at 1.3A vs 1.81a at 1.2A for Asp214, see Table 
6.3 and Table 6.4) for some residues but not for others (1.51a at 1.3A vs 1.43a at 
1.2A for Asp245). 
6.4.3 Proposed neutron protein crystallography experiment 
Given that protonation states could only be determine to around a 2a significance 
level, the feasibility of a neutron protein crystallography experiment has been 
assessed, the results of which could directly determine the protonation states of the 
aspartate and glutamate residues in question. 
tOOr--------------------------------r------~ 
(27.lh)4) 
e (lO.lIl1l7) B12 ;::::.. . . 
-:::: ~cyclodelllrin -~ 
E = "0 
~ 0.1 
('9619h66)  
Haemoglobin 
(l~l~" 
(224.2241114) TBSV 
PRe Viridis _ 
Nucleosome 
 PRC Malril( 
Spheroid porin 
10S 106 
cell volume (Vc )/A
tRNA 
  SINV 
f'igure 6.14: Scattl'r plot of the examples of protein crystals investigated at ILL on the 
monochromatic nl'utron instruml'nts 1119 (e). IlU21 (_) and LAIlII (0). Rl'prodllced from 
lIabash et ul. III 
Figure 6.14 is a plot of feasible neutron protein crystallography projects over many" 
years up to 1997. The line through the origin shows the empirical limit and the open 
circles show examples where the LADI I instrument brought into range the more 
challenging projects of the time. Added with a triangular symbol and arrowed is the 
cMyBP-C Cl protein crystal with a unit cell volume of 230,OooA3 and an indicative 
specimen crystal volume of Imm3 
Since then two major developments have occurred. Firstly the Deuteration 
Laboratory (DLAB)II for producing fully deuterated protein leads to enhanced 
neutron diffraction and consequently greatly improved resolution for a given 
specimen volume. For example neutron data to 1.8A was collected from a 0.15mm3 
crystal of perdeuterated aldose reductase12 Such a radically smaller crystal volume 
than the previous typical required I mm3 would likewise benefit a project such as 
cMyBP-C C I where un-optimised crystal volumes are of the order of 0.1 mm3. 
Secondly LADI I has been superseded by LADI III with a threefold enhancement of 
detector sensitivity, which translates into a threefold further reduction in typical 
specimen volume (to about 0.IOmm3). 
6.5 Conclusions 
The protonation state determinations of the aspartate and glutamate residues in the 
Cl domain of cMyBP-C were not above 20-, the best case was 1.810- for Asp214. 
Therefore an extrapolation is given based on 100% data completeness, that a 30-
determination should be possible for favourable residue cases if X-ray data to 1.08A 
is measured. This might be possible via improved crystallisation or multiple sample 
evaluation which could be achieved using for example, robotics or a yet more intense 
and/or collimated X-ray beam. Furthermore crystals could be screened for a better 
cryo-protectant that may allow the collection of a higher resolution data set. An 
alternative would be to use neutron protein crystaUography where it is estimated that 
for this unit cell volume a crystal volume of 0.1 Omm3 would be needed with fully 
deuterated protein in order to definitively determine the protonation states. These 
efforts would ideally be combined in a joint X-ray and neutron model refinement 
strategy. 
6.6 References 
1. A. S. Mohamed, J. D. Dignam and K. K. Schlender, Archives of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, 1998,358, 313-319. 
2. L. Govada, L. Carpenter, 1. HeIIiwell, P. Fonseca, E. Flashman, N. Chayen, 
C. Redwood and J. Squire, Journal of Molecular Biology, 2008, 378, 387-
3. M. CiancL S. Antonyuk, N. Bliss, M. W. Bailey, S. G. Buffey, K. C. Cheung, 
J. A. Clarke, G. E. Derbyshire, M. J. EIlis, M. 1. Enderby, A. F. Grant, M. P. 
Holbourn, D. Laundy, C. Nave, R. Ryder, P. Stephenson, J. R. HeIIiwell and 
S. S. Hasnain, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 2005, 12, 455-466. 
4. Z. Otwinowski and W. Minor, Methods in Enzymology, 1997,276,307. 
5. Collaborative Computational Project 4, Acta Crystal/ographica Section D, 
1994, 50, 760-763. 
6. G. Kleywegt, http://xray.bmc.ull.selus{1, 2003. 
7. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. BlakeIey, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. HeIliwelI and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
8. R. Engh and R. Huber, Acta Crystal/ographica Section A, 1991,47,392-400. 
9. D. Blow, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2002, 58, 792-797. 
10. J. Habash, J. Raftery, S. Weisgerber, A. Cassetta, M. S. Lehmann, P. Hoghoj, 
C. Wilkinson, J. W. Campbell and J. R. HeIIiweI~ Journal of the Chemical 
Society, Faraday Transactions, 1997,93,4305. 
11. M. Haertlein, hftp:llwy,'l1'.ilI.frlYello"WBookldellterationl, 2007. 
12. I. Hazemann, M. T. Dauvergne, M. P. Blakeley, F. Meillcur, M. Haertlein, A. 
Van Dorsselaer, A. Mitschler, D. A. A. Myles and A. Podjarny, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2005, 61, 1413-1417. 
7. Predicted protonation states from estimated pKu values 
7.1 Introduction 
Although protonation states can be detennined experimentally using a number of 
techniques such as X-ray and neutron crystallography, and NMR spectroscopy, there 
are cases out of reach of these techniques. This can be due to the fonnation of very 
small crystals, making neutron experiments unfeasible, or due to limited diffraction 
resolution. In some cases it may not be possible to crystallise the system of interest 
at all and so these cases are limited to NMR techniques where there is a finite limit 
on the molecular weight of a sample that it is possible to study. In cases like these it 
would be beneficial if it were possible to predict the protonation states of key 
residues based on other experimental results, from for example moderate resolution 
X-ray structural data or NMR solution ensemble structures. 
By using the pKa of a residue and the pH of crystallisation, it is possible to infer 
whether or not a particular residue is protonated, given that when the pKa equals the 
pH, 50% of the residues are protonated. The pKa values for amino acids are well 
defined in solution, however incorporation of an amino acid into protein involves the 
relocation from a solution to a three dimensional environment. In the 3D 
environment each residue may be involved in interactions with other residues, water 
molecules and ions. These interactions influence the associated pKa value for each 
residue. 
There exist a number of programs for calculating the estimated pKa values of 
titratable residues in proteins using structural information from the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB). These programs take into account nearby residues that may cause a 
shift in the pKa value and in some cases adjust for solvent and ions in close 
proximity. Here three programs are considered, two web accessible programs, 
PROPKA and H++ and one standalone program, MCCE. Another program is a 
customised version of WHAT IFI specifically for the calculation of pKa values, 
however this is not freely available and so is not considered further. 
A number of previous studies focus on the prediction of hydrogen atom position in 
proteins, particularly methyl, amino and hydroxyl hydrogen atoms, these include  
studies by Forrest and Honig2, Brunger and Karplus3 and Engler et al.4 These 
studies do not however focus on the protonation states of residues involved in 
catalytic mechanism, such as aspartate and glutamate, and histidine. There are a 
number of programs specifically targeted at calculating the positions of hydrogen 
atoms in proteins, these include HAADs and Protonate3D6 These programs focus on 
placing hydrogen atoms based on geometrical restraints, and energy minimisation, 
and once again not on the protonation state oftitratable residues involved in catalytic 
mechanisms. 
The protonation states of aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and arginine obtained 
using X-ray and neutron crystallographic data have been studied in four proteins 
using the three pKa calculation tools listed above. Predicted protonation states have 
been determined from the estimated pKa and associated pH values. Comparisons of 
these predictions with the results from neutron and X-ray crystallography as well as 
NMR spectroscopy have been carried out to assess if the results are of sufficient 
quality to validate their use in predicting the protonation states of the potentially key 
histidine residues in lobster carapace protein /3-crustacyanin. 
It should be noted that each of the pKa calculation tools used has made careful self-
validation tests. The results here however not only includes a comparison of all three 
calcu]ation tools but also focuses on an expanding crystallographic test set of 
proteins including larger molecular weight proteins and specifically the 
determination of protonation states of ionisab]e residues rather than just the 
calculation ofpKa values. 
Crystallographers interested in using ultra-high resolution X-ray and/or neutron 
-" protein crystallography will be interested in the quality of the estimation tools, 
notably for the ionisab]e residues such as Asp, Glu and His, which are the subject of 
an increasingly large number of protein studies with neutron macromo]ecu]ar 
crystallography (see B]ake]ey, 20097 for a recent review). Furthermore feedback 
from results of predictions versus the experimental results will hopefully help 
improve the accuracy of the pKa calculation tools. 
Initial calculations using H++ and PROPKA on the protein test set consisting of 
lysozyme, concanavalin A and d-xylose isomerase, and the specific example of 
crystacyanin were conducted by masters student James Wilkinson8 at the University 
of Manchester. These studies were extended by inclusion ofresults from the program 
MCCE. Furthermore another protein was added to the test set and another specific 
example, that of RNase was added, all figures and data representation were produced 
after inclusion of these extra data 
7.2 Protein chemistry and ionisable amino acid residues 
A number of amino acid side chains in a protein are classically regarded as charged. 
These include aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and arginine. Of these, lysine 
and arginine are generally not of interest since they titrate outside the range of 
physiological pH values. Serine, threonine, tyrosine and cysteine can titrate at 
physiological pH values if they are located in special environments and hence are 
sometimes charged. In addition the N- and C-termini of the polypeptide chain can 
titrate as well. 
The three dimensional position of a proton on a particular side chain can be 
interesting in determining the exact details of an enzyme mechanism In the case of 
aspartate and glutamate, they have symmetrical carboxyl groups and so associated 
hydrogen bond donor and acceptors determine which oxygen is protonated in the 
folded protein state. In the case of lysine however this exact position is uninteresting 
since all the protons are located on the same nitrogen atom 
Metal ligands in proteins strongly affect their immediate environment. They bind to 
deprotonated, charged, residues including aspartate, glutamate, histidine and 
cysteine. Histidine usually binds in its neutral form (singly protonated) but in 
exceptional cases histidine can bind between two metal atoms. In such a case it is 
non-protonated and negatively charged. Metal ions wil~ like other charged groups, 
affect the pKa values of their neighbouring groups. Standard pKa values of the free 
amino acids are summarised in Table 7.1. 
R('sldue pK. 
Asp 3.9 
Glu 4.1 
Arg 12.5 
L~ 10.5 
His 6.0.14.5 
Cys 8.2 
Tyr 10.5 
Tahle 7.1: Standard pKu "Hlut's fur Rmino aelds In sulution. Rl'l'rodured from 1.lIju ('1ul.'. pi". tahl" 2.1 
7.3 pKI/ \'alues in proteins and calculation of estimated values 
Proteins possess ionisable groups, which can be protonated or deprotonated 
depending on their associated pKa values and the solution pH. pKa values of amino 
acid side chains play an important role in defming the pH-dependent characteristics 
of proteins (for example see Li et al. 10). When amino acid sidechains associate 
during protein folding, the titratable amino acid groups in the protein are relocated 
from a solution environment to an environment determined by the 30 structure of 
the protein and as such the associated pKa value is perturbed by interactions with the 
local environment. 
7.:'.1 Experimental determination of pKa values 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is commonly used for 
detennining pKa values experimentally via titration. For a review, including NMR 
studies applied to the well known topic of the serine proteases, see Steitz & 
Shulman ll . In another example transient hydrogen bonds were identified using 
solution NMR on the surface of hirudin I2. A very recent example that includes pKa 
calculations of protonation populations compared with NMR titration results is that 
of Sendergaard et al. 13. Furthennore Powers & Jensenl4 have used estimated pKa 
values of Asp and Glu residues to validate which structures in an NMR ensemble 
structure determination are the most accurate. Their PROPKA program is quoted as 
being "particularly accurate in the case of Asp and Glu residues". Overall, NMR 
experimental methods and results have fonned a platfonn for validation of the 
predictive tools. NMR spectroscopy is however limited to smaller molecular weight 
proteins due to the complex spectra obtained when studying larger proteins. 
The Protein pKa Database (PPO) (http://www.jenner.ac.uk/PPO/pKahomepage.htm) 
is a compilation of protein pKa values, derived for example using NMR and other 
spectroscopic techniques but thus far excluding crystallography. The PPO's aim is to 
serve as a standard for benchmarking of calculational methods and strategies. The 
PPD data was sourced from the primary literature and contains in excess of 1400 
entries based on 157 proteins, including lysozyme and myoglobin which are reported 
here. The PPO database contains pKa values for amino acid side-chains, as well as  
the N and C termini. Over 75% of the entries focus on glutamate, lysine, histidine 
and aspartate. These four residues are all key ionizable residues, and therefore the 
preponderance of these in the PPO is not driven by the PPO's selection, but by the 
available experimental data. For example, very little data is currently available for 
arginine due to its pKa value (-12) which essentially precludes measurement by 
titration, as proteins will denature at highly basic pH. Clearly the PPO is an 
important database. Since the pKa estimation tools take input in the form of POB 
coordinate files, often from crystallographic experiment, the results presented here 
provide a further significant cross check between experimental and predicted results 
which complement the NMR experimental results available in the PPO. 
7.3.2 Methods for calculating estimated values 
The mathematical methods that exist to calculate estimated pKa values calculate the 
pKa shift from the free energy of the protonated and unprotonated structures with an 
implicit solvent modell S-2 I , although useful results may still be obtained without any 
solvent term22 Perturbation methods such as thermodynamic integration can 
evaluate the pKa shift in the presence of explicit solvent23 Calculating the pKa 
directly requires more demanding methods that can model the electronic structure 
such as quantum mechanical'molecular mechanicat24 or Car Parrinell02s methods. At 
the other extreme are the empirical methods that fit to known pKa values lO Much 
effort has reccntly bcen put into accounting for conformational flexibility and thc 
coupling betwccn multiple titratable rcsiduesl6-ls. 26. Nielsen et a/.27 have shown the 
importance of optimizing the hydrogen bond network prior to electrostatic 
glutamine side chains can lead to changes in calculatcd pKa values of up to 2.0 units. 
7.3.3 Tools for calculating estimated pKa values 
7.3.3.1 PROPKA 
PROPKA is a FORTRAN based, web-accessible, program, which uses a set of 
empirical rules relating the protein structure to the pKa values of ionisable residues 
for rapid predictions ofpKa values. This method was demonstrated by the developers 
to predict pKa values with an overall Root Mean Square (RMS) deviation of 0.79 pH 
units based on calculations for five proteins; turkey ovomucoid third domain, bovine 
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, hen egg white lysozyme, RNase A and RNase H. 
PROPKA uses three different kinds of pKa perturbations: desolvation, hydrogen 
bonding and charge-charge interactions. Hydrogen bonding is the most common 
source of pKa perturbations for Asp and Glu residues, while charge-charge 
interactions only contribute in about 10% of cases. Catalytic residues however 
appear to fall in this 10% of cases 10. Currently the PROPKA program ignores 
possible pKa shifts due to bound ligands, ions, or water molecules. The PROPKA 
program is freely available to the scientific community through a web interface at 
http://PROPKA.chem.uiowa.edu. 
7.3.3.2 The 1/++ web .\'en'er 
The H++ server provides a tool that uses the finite difference Poisson-Boltzmann 
method, which is a modification of Po is son's equation that incorporates a description 
of the effect of solvent ions on the electrostatic field around a molecule. H++ 
computes pKa values of amino acid side chains as well as other related 
characteristics of biomolecules such as isoelectric points, titration curves and 
energies of protonation microstates. Protons are added to the user's input protein 3D 
structure according to the calculated ionization states of its titratable groups at the 
user-specified pH. This approach is different to the PROPKA programme, which 
does not allow a user-specified pH to be input into the calculation's. The H++ web-
server is freely available to the scientific community through a web interface at 
http://b~mb~ics.cs.vt.cdu/H++. 
7.3.3.3 JICCE - JIlIlti-Collformer COll1illlllllll Electrostatics 
MCCE also uses the Poisson-Boltzmann method, however unlike PROPKA it allows 
for multiple conformations of hydroxyl and water protons, side chain rotamers, and 
ligands, in the calculation of the pH dependence of the ionization equilibria of 
titrable groupSl6. 28, The program's computations are broken down into three stages: 
(i) selection of conformers; (ii) calculation of energy look-up tables; and (iii) Monte 
Carlo sampling and calculation of pKas. The program outputs a calculated pKa value 
for each ionisable residue as well as the stepwise values (pH 0-14 in steps of 1 unit) 
for the titration curves. MCCE is believed to provide better accuracy for prediction 
of histidine residues than the predictive tools discussed above
, RMS deviations are 
of the order of 1 pH unit. The program has been previously tested using 166 residues 
in 12 proteins; the rms error was 0.83 pH units, where 90% have errors <1 pH and 
only 3% have errors> 2 pHI6, MCCE is freely available for download for academic 
usage at the following location: http://www.sci.ccny.cuny.eduJ-mcce/. 
7.304 Prediction of protonation states and general points 
For each of the titratable residues of interest (histidine, aspartic acid and glutamic 
acid) a protonation state and an occupancy value have been calculated. Occupancy 
values have also been calculated for arginine and lysine, however these are not 
shown in the results tables as these residues are almost always protonated at 
physiological pH. The results for these residues can be found in the supplementary 
tables in Section 7.8, page 274. 
The acid dissociation constant (Ka) of a weak acid is defined as: 
Equation I: ;\cid dissociation constant 
Taking logs of both sides and substituting for pH yields the familiar Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation which relates the pH, the pKa and the ratio of dissociated to 
associated acid:-
pH = pKa + 101 [A-]] 
,[HA] 
Equation 2: Uenderson-lIasselbalch equation 
Rearrangement of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation30 results in a percentage of 
protonation for each residue at a given pH or an occupancy value, where, as a 
fraction. [A-)=l-[HA):-
% - ( (HA] - 1 +lOpH-pKu ) 
.:quation 3: Occupancy determination 
Each residue of interest has been examined and considered protonated if the %[HAJ is 
greater than 50%. 
Using pKa estimation tools it is only possible to detennine whether a particular 
residue has an attached proton or not, it is not possible to detennine which particular  
atom the proton is attached to or where it is physically located in three dimensional 
space; for example in the case of the singly protonated histidine (Figure 7.1) residue, 
which nitrogen atom is concerned and for aspartic acid residues (Figure 7.2), which 
oxygen atom is involved (glutamic acid not shown in the figure explicitly since it 
also has a carboxyl side chain). The chemical diagrams for the cases of lysine and 
arginine are also shown in Figure 7.3 and Figure 7.4. 
OH OH 
Figure 7.1: Chemical dillgrams of (A) a singly protonated and (B) a douhly protonated histidine amino 
acid sidechain. 
OH OH 
.'igure 7.2: Chemical dillgrams of (A) dcprotonated and (8) protonated aspartic acid amino acid sidl'chllin. 
H~ ~N 
Figure 7.3: Chemical dillgrams of (A) dcprotonated and (Il) protonated lysine amino acid sldcchllln. 
OH OH 
."il:ure 7.4: Chemiclll dlllgram~ (If (A) dl'IJrlltonah'd and (Il) prot()nllted arginine alllino acid sidechllin. 
7.4 Protein crystal structures test set 
Proteins for which the hydrogen positions have been determined experimentally (as 
deuterium) to a very high confidence level by using neutron protein crystallography 
are especially favourable for inclusion in this study. Within the PDB a number of 
such structures have been identified. The following proteins have been selected from 
the PDB as the test set, Hen Egg White Lysozyme (HEWL), d Xylose Isomerase (d-
XI), concanavalin A (conA), and myoglobin. MCCE requires separate pre-
calculations for bound ligands prior to pKa calculation and therefore proteins with 
bound organic ligands, such as aldose reductase have been excluded. 
The file format is important as there is currently no consistent standard for labelling 
hydrogen atoms in a PDB file and MCCE is unable to process files that do not 
conform to its own internal standard, meaning it was unable to process the neutron 
PDB input files for all four proteins ofthe test set: these were 2YZ4 for concanavalin 
A, 2GVE for d-xylose isomerase, 1 LZN for lysozme and 1 L2K for myoglobin. 
Therefore in order to compare results between the protonation predictions and 
experimentally known states a number of very high resolution X-ray structures have 
been selected for study alongside the neutron structures. In order to keep these 
selections as consistent as possible, only X-ray crystal structures with the same pH 
as the neutron crystal structure have been selected and furthermore carbon alpha and 
all atom RMS deviations have been calculated. 
The crystal structures selected are all final refined and validated protein crystal 
structures deposited with the PDB. The summary tables below give the diffraction 
resolution and the R and, where available, Rfree reliability factors. The spread of 
resolutions, between O.65A up to 3.23A, is the main reason for the spread of R and 
R(m' values in the X-ray cases. In the case of 1 XIB, an Rfree value is not available. 
The quoted R and Rfree factors for the neutron structures are the final neutron data 
refinement values and since neutron data are weaker in intensity than X-ray data the 
R and Rfrl'l' values are higher than X-ray values at equivalent diffraction resolution. 
There arc currently two refinement protocols in use for the refinement of neutron 
protein crystal structures. The first, and older method is to fix the heavy atom (for 
example carbon, nitrogen, oxygen in this context) positions at the X-ray structure 
refmement positions and refme the hydrogen and deuterium atom positions using the .. 
neutron data. The second, newer protocol is to use the X-ray and neutron data 
simultaneously in a so called joint refmement protocol; in this case the R factors tend 
to be lower than for the fIrst protocol. Hence there is also a spread of R and R/ree 
factors within the neutron protein crystal structures. 
For each of the four proteins estimated pKa values have been calculated and a 
predicted protonation state determined for each residue. The results tables show 
residues that are catalytically interesting or that have been highlighted in the 
respective publications for each protein. A full list of protonation states for every 
residue in each protein can be found in supplementary table in Section 7.8, page 274. 
Likelihood statistics have been calculated for each program, for each residue type 
based on the complete set of re si dues. 
7.4.1 Concanavalin A 
Concanavalin A is a 237-amino-acid lectin from the jack bean (Canavalia 
ensiform is), see Kalb (Gilboa) & Helliwe1l31 for a review. It is by far, one of the 
most thoroughly studied members of the legume lectin family of proteins32 It is a 
saccharide-binding protein although with no certain biological function33 The 
structure of the concanavalin A monomcr is dominated by an extensive l3-sheet 
strand arrangement, the so-called jellyroll motif, which associates as a dimer of 
dimers to form a tetramcr of 100 kDa, and has been the study of numerous 
crystallographic researchers from the 1970s onwards, and with crystals flfst grown 
decades earlier by Sumner in 191934 The protein has been studied at 'chemical 
crystallography precision' and contains two metals, namely a transition metal ion 
and a calcium ion, both necessary for saccharide binding33 _,. 
2YZ4 INLS IJBC 
Radiation Probe Neutron X-ray X-ray 
Resolution (A) 2.2 0.94 1.15 
Reference Aluned et al.
) Deacon et al.
Parkin et al.
pH 6.S 6.8 6.5 
RMSCa (A) Reference Structure 0.003* 0.286 
RMS All (A) Reference Structure 0.306 0 .863 
R Factor (%) 28.1 13.2 14.2 
Rfr (%) 31.3 14.8 16.2 
Table 7.2: Details for the three concana\alin A structures used for this study. R I differences "ere 
calculated lI\ing the P~ program PERPO E37. *The structure 2YZ4 \\asderhed from 1 'L and all 
lIon-h~drogen atom "crc thcd hence thc small RI\1S deviation. 
Thr e diff r nt con ana alin A tructures were selected from the PDB: these were 
PDB cod: 2YZ4, the neutron diffraction study by Ahmed et al. 35 ; 1NLS from the 
0. 4 re lution -ra tudybyDeaconetal.33 ; and IJBCthe 1.15 A resolution X-
ray tud by Parkin l al. 36  Protonation states of Asp82, His180, His24 and His51 
wer 2.2A n utron structure via direct inspection of the model 
fil ith h dr gnat m (detennined as deuteriums) while Asp28 and Glu102 are 
d t nrun prot nat d via bond length analysis (for the methods see Ahmed et 
al. 5 and hapt r 5) fthe 0.94 X-ray structure. Table 7.2: shows further details for 
th tru tur fil and Figure 7.5 haws their superposition. 
HJ.\Ifl .5:. 1I111' rpo\itioll of CrY atolll' for the thrcc cOllA structures: n Z4 in green, IJBC in tllrquoi e 
anrl I NLS in purple 
r m ur 7. 
pr t noti n tal 
ml ul 
IT In th n 'utl n 
it an 
tud hi 
n that all three program fail to predict the correct 
hi h i hydrogen bonded to a number of water 
t i that all three tool predict Hi 24 as being doubly 
ha been found to be only ingly protonated 
u r ult i likely to be cau ed by the cia e 
proximity of the manganese metal ion. Other results of significance include HisSI, 
which is correctly predicted by PROPKA but not by H++ or MCCE, this residue  
appears to be hydrogen bonded to Thr194 which could influence the predictions. All 
three estimation tools correctly predict His 180 as being doubly protonated in all 
three cases. This residue has four hydrogen-bonded water molecules, which are held 
in a cleft at one end of the molecule by a series ofresidues36 
DDeprotonated (Singly protonated in the 
i-----...----n----i case of histidine) 
 Protonated (Doubly protonated in the 
case of histidine) 
~NO data (either out of range or 
incompatible input file) 
Figure 7.6: Graphical presentlltion of the predictions for the three concannalin A coordinate 
set by each of the three predictive tools are compared. The nidl'nce for Asp28 and Glul02 
being protonated most firmly stem from ultra high resolution X-ray data bond distance 
analysis with the neutron evidence being weaker-l.ll~. 
Both PROPKA and MCCE also correctly predict Asp28 as being protonated, but 
H++ fails to predict this in all but the case of UBC. Glu102 is correctly predicted as 
being protonated by all three programs except the case of 1 NLS for PROPKA. 
Total PROPKA 11++ Total MCCE 
residues 
Asp" 16 48 85% 92% 30 100% 
AspH 2 6 50% ]7% 4 50% 
Glu" 6 ]8 89% 83% ]0 ]00% 
Glull I 3 67% ]00% 2 ]00% 
Hi 5 15 73% 33% 10 30% 
Hisll+ I 3 100% 100% 2 I 100% 
Tllble 7.3: Ukelih(HHI or the three predidion prOJ.:rllm'l correctly predicting the sh residue tH)l'~ fur 
eoncllnll\'alin A. -. 
Table 7.3 shows the prediction likelihoods of the three estimation programs for 
concanavalin A. All three programs successfully predict the majority of the 
dcprotonated Asp and Glu residues with likelihoods of 83-100%. The programs are 
less accurate at predicting the protonated states of As pH with likclihoods of 17-50%. 
The case for GluH however is better with a likelihood of 67-100%. In this particular 
case the programs are better at predicting the doubly protonated state of HisH+ 
compared with that of His with likelihoods of 100% and 30-73% respectively. 
7.4.2 D-Xylosc Isomerase 
D-Xylose Isomerase (d-XI) is an enzyme from the bacterium Streptomyces 
rubiginous, which catalyzes the interconversion of the aldo-sugars d-xylose or d-
glucose to the keto-sugars d-xylulose and d-fructose, respectively. It is a 
homotetramer of molecular mass 173 kOa that requires two divalent metal ions for 
function. The fold of its backbone, that of a ({3a)s barrel which was first determined 
in 1984 by Carrell et al. 38. One metal ion (M 1) binds four carboxylate groups 
(GluI81, Glu217, Asp245, and Asp287). The other metal ion (M2) binds three 
carboxylate groups (Glu217, Asp257, and bidentate Asp255), and a His residue 
(His220). The carboxylate group ofOlu217 is shared by both metal ions
2GVE lXIB 2GLK 2GUB 
Radiation Probe Neutron X-ray X-ray X-ray 
Resolution (A) 1.8 1.60 0.94 1.80 
Reference Katz et al.j~ Carrell et al.4u Katz et al.' Katz et al:' 
pH 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 
RMSCo(A) Reference Structure 0.167 0.258 0.181 
RMS All (A) Reference Structure 0.419 0.793 0.670 
R Factor (%) 27.1 15.2 11.5 16.0 
Rrree (%) 31.9 N/A 12.8 19.3 
Table 7.4: netails for the four d-xylose isomerase structures used for this study. 
Four different O-xylose isomerase structures were selected from the POB, these were 
20VE, the neutron study by Katz et al.39; 20LK the 0.94 A resolution X-ray study 
by Katz et al.39; 20UB the 1.80 A resolution X-ray study by Katz et al.39; and IXIB 
the 1.60 A resolution X-ray study by Carrell et al. 40. Table 7.4 shows further details 
for the selected structure files and Figure 7.7 shows their superposition. 
From the neutron study of d-xylose isomerase39 (POB code: 20VE) it could be seen 
visibly that all the aspartic and glutamic acid side chains at the pH of measurement 
(crystallization at pH 8.0) were deprotonated. All ten histidine residues present 
within the protein were examined and placed into two groups, singly (His49, 71, 96, 
243) or doubly protonated (His54, 198,220, 230, 285, and 382). 
Figure 7.7: uperpo\ition ofC" atoms for the four D,ylo~e i~omerase ~tructur s u\cd in this stud)-: 2CVE 
in green, I 113 in tur<luoise, 2 LK in purple and 2 Bin )1'110\\. 
Figure 7.8 shows the protonation prediction re ult for d-xylo e i omeras . Jt can be 
seen that all three programs correctly predict all four ingly protonated hi tidine 
residues in all four cases. 
HIS 54 
HIS 198 
HIS 2 
l"igurc 7.8: Graphical pr".,('utatioll of (he prediclioll" for the fOllr I)-X) lu,e i"()/lIl.'ra~t' coordi ll a lc 
"1'1, by each or Ih" Ihrc(' pn'dictiH' tool\ compared. 
Il three to I struggle at predicting d ubly pr t nated hi tidine re idue . Hand 
M E appear more likely t predict when a Hi r idue i d ubly pr t nated a can 
be een fr m the re ults fHis54 and His220. H + predi t the c rrect re ult D rail 
four of the POB files for these two residues. Even so these programs still only 
manage to predict the doubly protonated residues in 2 ofthe 6 cases. 
His220 binds one of the metal ions (M2) and as such is interesting in that H++ takes 
into account binding sites whereas PROPKA ignores nearby water, ions and ligands, 
and therefore it would be expected that H++ would be more accurate at predicting 
residues in these situations compared with PROPKA. PROPKA does however 
manage to predict the doubly protonated nature of His220 in one of the four cases. 
His54 is similar in that it is held in a rigid orientation by hydrogen bonds to a series 
of water molecules at the end of the active site near M241 and so H++ would be more 
likely to correctly predict the doubly protonated state of this residue. 
Figure 7.9: (;ntphical prcscntation of the predictions for the four D-xylose isomerase coordinate 
Sl'ts by cach of the three predictive tools compared. 
It is interesting to note that the residues Glu181, 217, Asp245, 257, and 287 all are 
involved in metal binding with the Ml or M2 metal ions and although the programs 
should predict these residues are deprotonated they do in fact in some cases predict 
them as being protonated, as shown in Figure 7.9. This again illustrates that metal 
binding is an important, disruptive, factor in pKa calculation. 
No of 
Total PROPKA R++ Total MCCE 
resldues 
Asp' 37 148 86% 95% 141 8<)010 
AspH 0 - - - - -
Glu' 28 112 85% 96% 108 90% 
GluH 0 - - - - -
His 4 16 100% 100% 16 100% 
HisH' 6 24 4% 33% 8 33% 
Tahle 7.~: Lil.elihood of the thrl'l' prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for d-
Xylose Isomerase. 
Table 7.5 shows the prediction likelihoods of the three estimation programs for d-
xylose isomerase. Once again the three programs successfully predict the majority of  
the deprotonated Asp and Glu residues with likelihoods of 86-95% and 85-96% 
respectively. The programs also successfully predict the correct protonation state of 
all of the neutral His residues with a likelihood of 100%, however the predictions of 
the double protonated cases fair much worse with likelihoods in the range of 4-33%. 
7.4.3 Triclinic lien Egg-\Vhite Lysozyme 
Lysozyme is a 129 amino acid residue enzyme with its catalytic activity non-
specifically targeted to bacterial cell walls and related with general non-specific 
organism defence. The main objective of the neutron-diffraction study42 of tricIinic 
hen egg-white lysozyme was to create a picture of the water molecules but in 
addition it was also found, as expected from various earlier studies, that the Glu35 
residue was protonated and Asp52 was deprotonated at the crystallization pH of 4.7. 
lLZN 2VBl 3LZT 
Radiation Probe Neutron X-ray X-ray 
Resolution (A) 1.7 0.65 0.93 
Reference Bon etaC
l Wang et al.4J Walsh et al.44 
pH 4.7 4.7 4.5 
RMSCa(A) Reference Structure 0.304 0.296 
RMSAU (A) Reference Structure 1.002 0.339 
R Factor (%) 20.4 8.48 9.3 
R'rre (%) 22.1 9.52 11.4 
Tahle 7.6: Ol'tails for the thrl'e Iyso/yml' structurl'S used for this study. 
Three tricIinic lysozyme structures were selected from the POB; these were the 
quasi-Laue neutron diffraction study by Bon et al.42 (PDB code: 1 LZN), the O.65A 
X-ray structure by Wang et al.43 (PDB code: 2VBl) and the O.93A X-ray structure 
Walsh et al.44 (POB code: 3 LZT). Table 7.6 shows further dctails for the selected 
structure files and Figure 7.10 shows their supcrposition. A search of the PPD 
database ofGlu and Asp reveals a pKa of6.2 for Glu35 and 3.7 for Asp52 in chicken 
lysozyme from IH NMR spectroscopl5. 
Fi~lIre 7. 10:  lip rpo\i ti on of " atom~ for the three Iysol.yme structures used in this st u d~: I LZ, in 
( rce n, 2\'BI in turquoi e, a ncl3LZT in purple. 
Figur 7.11 h w the protonation prediction results for lysozyme. In all cases 
ZT fi r H++ the active site glutamic acid residue, Glu35 i corr ctly 
b ing pr tonat d. These results are consistent with both the neutron 
p rim nt and data a ailable from NMR titrations. All three tools correctly predict 
th th r ata lyti r idue namely Asp52 as being deprotonated in all but the ca e of 
PR P fi r 1 LZ . 
~ Predicted 
:..: PROPKA H++ MCCE 
Fig ll l' .11 ( , raphical pre"c lltatioll of the predictions for the three lysozyme coordinate se ts b~ 
{'ac h or thc threc pn 'dictiH' tools compared. NMR results a l'e reproduced from Bartik et 01.45 
With I 
1 Z , n 
pr t nati n 
ing a r lati ely mall enzyme with only 129 re idues there are few 
t w ith nl 2 protonat d glutamic r idues acid (Glu7 and 35). 
tl pr di ted a being protonated by PROPKA in the case of 
f th case manage to correctly predict thi residu ' 
a lth ugh known to be deprotonated from neutron 
a b ing d ubly protonated in almost all ca e except 
hi r idu uld b affected by hydrogen bonding to nearby 
No of 
Total PROPKA 11++ Total MCCE 
residues 
Asp- 7 21 95% 100% 21 100% 
Asp 11 0 0 - - 0 -
Glu- 0 0 - - 0 -
Glull 2 6 67% 33% 2 50% 
His 1 3 33% 0% I 0 0% 
llisll+ 0 0 - - 0 -
Tahle 7.7: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types for 
Lysozyme. 
Table 7.7 shows the prediction likelihoods of the three estimation programs for 
lysozyme. Again all three programs have a very high likelihood of predicting the 
deprotonated Asp residues with likelihoods in the range of 95-1 00%. The likelihood 
ofGluH being correctly predicted ranges between the three programs, for PROPKA 
it is 67%, for H++ 33% and for MCCE 50%. All three programs struggle to correctly 
predict the neutral protonation state of His with likelihoods in the range of 0-33%. 
7.4.4 l\Iyoglobin 
Myoglobin is a 156 amino acid residue protein. The biological role of myoglobin as 
an oxygen storage protein is well known, and will not be reiterated here. Three 
myoglobin structures were selected from the PDB; these were the neutron study by 
Ostennann et a/.46 (PDB code: IL2K), the 1.40A study by Arcovito et a/.47 (PDB 
code: 2JHO) and the 1.10A study by Vojtchovsky' et a/.48 (PDB code: lA6K). Table 
7.8 shows further details for the selected structure files and Figure 7.12 shows their 
superposition. A search on the PPD database reveals pKa values for the histidine 
residues from 2D homonuclear double quantum NMR49, so and 1 D and 2D NMRsl  
JL2K 2.JII0 JA6K 
Radiation Probe Neutron X-ray X-ray 
Resolution (A) 1.5 1.40 1.10 
Reference Ostermann et al.4 1> Arcovito et aC Vojtchovsky' et al."" -, 
pH 6.8 6.5 7.0 
R:vtS Co (A) Reference Structure 0.447 0.222 
RMS All (A) Reference Structure 0.R69 0.996 
R Factor (%) 20.1 lR.O 13.1 
R'rH (%) 23.8 23.4 15.2 
Tahle 7.8: ()l'tails for the thrtc m~(~lohin structure' u\l'<lln this 'Itudy. 
Figur .12: ' upe r po ilion of '" atoms for the three myog lobin structures used in this study: 1 L2K in 
gree n, 2JIIO in purple, a nd l A6 K in turqllo i ~e. 
Th P and Glu re idue are all determined to be deprotonated from the neutron 
tud and all thre tool predict all of these residues as being deprotonated ( ee 
uppl m ntar Table, page 274) in all but the case of Glu59 for lL2K using 
. abl 7. 1 h w the protonation prediction re ults for myoglobin. 
~ Predicted 
::2 PROPKA H++ MCCE 
, igun.- .13: (;raphiclI l pre,entation of the predictions for the three myoglobin coordina te ets b) 
:lch of the th ree predie th e toolo; compared . NMR results al'e reproduced frol1l Dahit & 
\\ ri~ht, Osapay et al. 4'uo and occo elIlIY . 
d ubly pr tonatcd histidine re idues, Hi 36 and 48. Hi 36 i 
pr t nat d by b th H++ and MCCE, but it i predicted as 
a e by PROPKA. Hi 48 i in close proximity to 
inding it , and a uch thi may influence the accuracy of it 
pr gram pr di t H is4 a being only singly protonated in all 
fc r th ca e f 1 L2K. 
There are also a number of singly protonated histidine residues: three of these are 
interesting in that the prediction tools have predicted them in a number of cases as  
being doubly protonated. Of particular interest are Hisl2, 81, and 116. Both His12 
and 116 are hydrogen bonded to other residues; Gln128 in the case of Hisl16 and 
Asp122 in the case of Hisl2. His81 does not appear to directly interact with any 
other residues. Interestingly the results from NMR titration and the neutron study 
differ in that the neutron study fmds His48 to be protonated whereas from the NMR 
titration this residue has a pKa of 5.3 which at the pH of crystallisation would be 
singly and not doubly protonated. In this case the prediction programs agree with the 
NMR titration result and not the neutron crystallography result. 
Also of interest is His81, which is known to be singly protonated from neutron' 
studies; but the NMR titration finds this residue to have a pKa of 6.6 which at the pH 
of crystallisation would make it doubly protonated. Again a number of the prediction 
programs agree with the NMR titration result instead of the neutron crystallography 
result. The risk of protein structure change due to deuteration is small but not zero 
(see Chapter 4). 
Total PROPKA 11++ Total MCCE 
residues 
Asp 7 21 . 100% 100% 21 100% 
AspU 0 0 - - 0 -
Glu' 14 42 98% 100% 42 100% 
Glull 0 0 - - 0 -
His 10 30 80% 90% 27 63% 
llis 11 + 2 6 17% 50% 3 33% 
Tahle 7.9: Likelihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the six residue types fur 
m~'()gl()hin. 
Table 7.9 shows the prediction likelihoods of the three estimation programs for 
myoglobin. Once again all three programs successfully predict the deprotonated state 
of Asp and Glu residues in almost all cases with likelihoods in the range of98-
100%. For the case of the neutralllis residucs the programs manage to predict this 
state in a number of cases: the likelihoods range from 63-90%. HisH+ residucs again 
show mediocre results with likelihoods in the range of 17-50%. 
7 AoS Ovcra 11 statistics 
Table 7.10 shows the overall prediction likelihoods for each of the three pKa 
calculation tools as well as the total overall likelihood for all three programs 
combined for the above protein test set. 
PROPKA H++ MCCE OveraU 
Total 0/0 Total 0/0 Total 0/0 Total % 
Asp- 238 88% 237 96% 169 93% 644 92% 
AspH 6 50% 6 17% 4 50% 16 38% 
Glu- 172 88% 172 96% 122 93% 466 92% 
GluH 9 67% 7 71% 6 67% 22 68% 
His 64 81% 62 77% 40 63% 166 75% 
HisH+ 33 15% 33 42% 23 39% 89 31% 
Tahlt' 7.10: OwrallliJ..elihood of the three prediction programs correctly predicting the sh residue types 
for all four proteins studied. 
All three pKa prediction tools show consistency at predicting the deprotonated 
charged states of both Asp and Glu residues. All three tools are relatively good at 
predicting the protonated state ofGlu but less so for Asp with average likelihoods of 
68 and 38% respectively. It is clear however that the prediction of these two residues 
can be affected by proximal metal and water binding sites. Examples of this can be 
seen for d-xylose isomerase, in particular residues Glu18l and 217, and Asp245, 257 
and 287. 
All three programs in the majority predict singly protonated neutral His residues 
correctly as well with an average likelihood of 75%, but this being the default state 
for a histidine residue is maybe not the best test case. The case of doubly protonated 
His residues is more complex and the three programs struggle to predict the double 
protonation of many of these residues. H++ and MCCE on average seem to be more 
successful at this than PROPKA with likelihoods of 42 and 39% respectively versus 
15%. There are a number of cases where the programs have correctly predicted 
doubly protonated histidines, these include His180 in concanavalin A, His54 and 220 
in d-xylose isomerase. Again metal and water binding sites could be important for 
the correct prediction of these residues. His220 in d-xylose isomerase is involved in 
the binding to metal M2 which can clearly influence the pKa value. 
Based on the statistics from Table 7.10 two more cases are now evaluated. One is 
ribonuclease A where very high resolution X-ray crystal structures at multiple pHs, a  
neutron macromolecular crystallography structure at an identical pH as one of the X-
ray crystal structures and an NMR titration curve for the catalytic Hisl2 are 
available. A second case is that of crustacyanin where the key histidines, His90 and 
His92, are of wide interest to understand the basis of the bathochromic colour shift 
that occurs upon cooking a lobster from slate blue to red. 
7.5 Prediction for cases of interest 
7.5.1 Ribonuclca cA - An example at multiple pH values 
Pancreatic bo ine Ribonuclease A (RNa e A) is a 124 ammo acid residue 
end rib nucIea e that cl aye and hydrolyzes single-stranded RNA. Due to the ready 
a a il ability of prot in material RNase quickly became a protein standard te t case. 
RNa ha b n exten ively tudied using X-ray diffraction to atomic resolution
and neutr n d iffra tion
th Hi 12 and Hi 119 ar implicated in the catalytic mechanism. Beri io et al.
highlight Hi 12 ( ee Figure 7.14) to study the protonation equilibrium present in 
th a ti 119 i found to be in mUltiple conformations at atomic resolution 
and it i unlik Iy that the hydrogen atom would be vi ible on such a residue. 
Thu Hi 12 i the fo u ofB ri io et al. and in this section. 
I iJ. lIll' . I~ : (<tlll' nel' of \11:1 p\hoh \htm illg t hl' cleprotonation of the illlida/ole ring of t h(' IJ i~ 12 '\('2 
at urn : thl' diffl' ll'n l' l1I '1>\ IIn' rClll'C\entecl "ith a pll-~ealc colour cooe from red/acid to hlue/ ba\ic 
(Rcproduccr) from Bcri~io et (/I.~~) . 
Beris io et al. comment that: "The sequence of snapshot in Figure 7.14 shows the 
presence of hydrogen linked to the proximal Ndl atoms over the whole pH range. In 
contrast, hydrogen linked to Ne2 is present at acidic pH*, but disappears at higher 
pH* (pH* is the apparent proton activity of aqueous-organic solutions55 . This 
provides further experimental support for the proposed mechani m, which uggests 
that the Ne2 atom of His 12 exchanges a proton with the sub trate (see the review by 
Cuchillo et al. 56) . To our knowledge, this is the fif t direct structural evidence for the 
deprotonation of a res idue in a crystalline environment.' 
For a prediction test, seven ribonuclease A structure were elected iT m the POB 
the neutron study by Wlodawer & Sjolin53 , PDB code SR A, and the multiple pH 
X-ray studies at atomic (1.0S to 1.ISA) re 0lution
, 54 with pH va lue and 
respective POB reference of:- pH 5.2, I KF2 ; pH 5.9, I KF3; pH 6.3 1 KF4' pH 7.1, 
1 KFS ' pH 8.0, 1 KF7 and pH 8.8, I KF8. Rfree factor were unavailable for each ft he 
structures. Further detail of the tructure elected are h wn in Table 7.1 1 and their 
superposition in Figure 7.15. A search of the PPO reveal pKa value for Hisl2 IT m 
IH MR spectroscopY7. 
I i " ure 7.1 5: SUp{' qw\itic/II 01 ( " utC"II\ lor thl' 6 It'lI\t \tructult\. 5HS \ 11l j. ITl' Il, 11 12 ill hllll', I h.1-1 ill 
pint.., I h.F" ill ~l- lIcm, I h.I ,e; ill rcel, I h.17 11Ij.lt~, I h.11I ill hhll 
5RSA lKFl lKF3 lKF4 lKF5 lKF7 lKFS 
Radiation Probe Neutron X-ray X-ray X-ray X-ray X-ray X-ray 
Resolution (A) 2.0 1.10 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.15 1.15 
Reference 'K 'l 
pH 5.3 5.2 5.9 6.3 7.1 8.0 8.8 
RMS Ca(A) Reference 0.149 0.146 0.145 0.177 0.195 0.203 
Structure 
RMS All (A) Reference 0.705 0.703 0.725 0.690 0.737 0.798 
Structure 
R Factor (%) 18.3 10.3 10.2 10.4 10.6 10.6 10.6 
Rrr~(%) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
Talllc 7.11: Ill-tails for thc scwn ribolluclcase ;\ structures used in this study. 
The results in Figure 7.16 show that both H++ and MCCE correctly predict His12 as 
being doubly protonated at pH 5.3 (5RSA and 1 KF2) which agrees with the neutron 
and NMR results. Furthermore H++ and MCCE both predict Hisl2 to be protonated 
up to a pH of5.9 which agrees nicely with the electron density maps in Figure 7.14. 
i Predicted 
a PROPKA H++ MCCE 
I I I I I I I I I I I I 
Fijun' 7.16: Grnphical preSl'lltatioll of the predictions for the seven ribonuclease A coordinate 
Sl'tS by l'8ch of the three predictive tools compared. NMR results are reproduced from ~7 
Table 7.12 shows the actual estimated pKa values from the three programs. It can be 
seen that in all cases PROPKA predicts unusually small pKa values for each of the 
His 12 residues, even though histidine would be expected to titrate in the neutral 
range. 
PROPKA Occupancy H++ Occupancy MCCE Occupancy 
5RSA 0.32 0% 7.2 99% N/A N/A 
lKFl 2.18 0% 6.2 91% 8.52 100% 
lKF3 2.66 0% 6.0 56% 5.28 100% 
IKF4 2.41 0% 6.0 33% 4.90 9010 
IKF5 1.4 0% 5.4 2% 5.32 2% 
lKF7 1.44 0% 5.1 0% 5.11 0% 
lKFS 2.96 0% 6.5 0% 5.42 0% 
Tabl,- 7.12: t:stimaled pKu values for Hisl2 in ribonuclease A. 
Closer inspection of the X-ray structures reveals a bound phosphate (in the case of 
the neutron structure) or sulphate (in the case of the X-ray structures) group adjacent 
to His 12 and His 119. This bound ligand could impact the calculated pKa value. 
Unusually small pKa values for histidine have been reported before59 60 for example 
Ruiz et al. 6O find for the case of aldose reductase that if the inhibitor i deleted (its 
volume is considered as a high dielectric region during the calculations) the pKa 
value for Hisl10 is 0.7. 
Further inspections of the relevant titration curve from H++ show ome unusua l 
behaviour. The titration curve for His12 in the neutron structure 5R A doe not 
show normal Henderson-Hasselbalch behaviour. It in tead has a plateau region; 
Table 7.13 shows this titration curve. 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Table 7.13: alculatcd litralioll cune for lI i\12 ill SR.'\ u\il1j.: 11 ++ 
Ondrechen et al.61 report that such a plateau regi n i characteri tic f active ite 
re idue , and that by considering the titration curve ftitratable re idue in pr tein , 
the active site can be identified. 
7.5.2 Crustae, anill 
a-crustacyanin is the colouration protein complex present in the lobster carapace 
which ha b en implicated in the bathochromic shift and colour change that occurs 
upon cooking a lob ter from slate bluelblack to orange/red. a-crustacynain consists 
of an arrang ment of 8 tJ-crustacyanin subunits and the octameric unit of dimers 
con i ts of a mixture of five distinct chains AI, A2, A3, Cl, and C2. These can be 
cIa ified into two groups xhibiting similar physical properties: type I sequences 
Al I and C2 and type II sequences A2 and A362 . 
Figurc 7. 17: Stru ct urc of as la'\a nlhin 
Determination of the X-ray structure of tJ-crustacyanin63 enabled the identification of 
the tru tural fi ature of the protein-bound chromophore astaxanthin (AXT see 
Figur 7.17). tJ-cru tacyanin exists as a heterodimer of Al and A3 subunits with two 
AXT m lecul bound between the two dimers positioned close to one another ( ee 
Figur 7.18). Key interaction include those between His92 in the Al sub unit and 
Hi 0 in the ubunit ach binding to one of the end rings of an AXT molecule 
(c Figur 7.1 ). 
liig ll re 7. 18: ,' I rll l ure of tl-U U\ laC)lInin ,ho" ing I he h' 0 bound i\XT molec ules beln('e n t he I" 0 dimcr~ 
HIS92 \ 
\ 2.78 
286 ... -. -- - . 
Figure 7.19: Dhtance bCI\Hen the lIi\ 92 re\idue and one of the \ \. 1 molecule\ in p. ru\tac:.anin \ho" Ing 
that the keto-o'\~gen\ of the A '('I' arc \\ithin h~drogen honding c1i\tullce of 111\ 92, ~r9.t lInd \\n86 (\\ hich 
could be incorrectl~ orientated in the '(.ra) \tructure). ' I he \ame \ituutioll aPI)lie\ 101' the ecolld A '('I' 
"ith re\pcct to lIi\ Q(). 
Two main mechanism for the bathochromic I ur hift ha be n ugg t d' fir tly 
that the hift occurs due t polari ati n of the b und AXT m lecule nd ly 
that it occur due to an exciton interacti n between th tw . The 
polari ation effect can occur via interaction f a nearby pr tonat d re idu with the 
keto end ring of the AXT m lecule, in thi ca e Hi 90 and 2 re p ctively. 
econdly the exciton interaction ption can ccur due t the cl e p iti ning f the 
two AXT molecule 64. alculati n by urb ej & rik n6 n AX pr vid 
upport that the bathochr mic hift i due t the chr m ph re ing p lari d via 
hydrogen b nding interacti ns fr m a prot nat d hi tidin re idue. 
The X-ray cry tal tructure den t d t rmine dir t1y the pr t nati n tate r the 
hi tidinc residue due t the re luti n ( .2 f the cry tal tructur. Furthcrm r 
the protein is likely t bc ut f reach r ultra high re luti n -r y r ncutr n 
crystallography due to the large unit cell, high lent nt nt and mall ry tal izc. 
he corre p nding pKa value have n t ccn dctermined u ing MR titrati n cith r. 
F r thi rea on it i f intere t t be able t predict pr tcin pr t nati n lalc flh 
histidine residues in particular. A prediction of a doubly protonated histidine residue 
for these two residues would further support the polarisation hypothesis. 
There are six different PDB entries for the various subunits of a-crustacyanin (AI, 
Cl, and C2) and one PDB entry for (j-crustacyanin. Details for these seven crystal 
structures can be found in Table 7.14. 
Heterodimer Homodimer 
IGKA 1I4U IH91 IS44 IS2P IOBQ 10BU 
Dimer Sub AlIA3 Cl/Cl AI/AI C2/C2 C2/C2 Cl/Cl Cl/Cl 
Units 
pH 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 7.0 9.0 9.0 
Resolution 3.23 1.15 1.40 1.60 1.30 1.85 2.0 
R Factor (%) 21.33 15.0 17.66 20.3 18.9 16.9 17.4 
Rfree (%) 25.15 18.8 22.93 24.7 21.5 21.0 22.7 
Tuble 7.14: Details for the seven crustacyanin structures used in this study. 
p..Crustacyanin 
The only available structure of (j-cryustacyanin is the X-ray diffraction study at 3.2 
A resolution by Cianci et al.63 (PDB code: IGKA). This structure was processed 
using the three pKa estimation programs in order to evaluate the protonation state 
predictions ofthe two key His residues (His92 on Chain A (AI) and His90 on Chain 
B (A3 in (j-crustacyanin. 
AHis 92 I I 
BHls 90 I I 
Figure 7.20: The pKu predictions of the key His residues in ~-crustacyanin for the PDB code: 
I GKA. IThe experimental protonation state of these two residues is not known from 
crystallographic experiment or NMR spectroscopy). 
The estimated pKa values (see Figure 7.20) from all three prediction tools predict 
that both His90 and His92 are singly protonated. 
Apo-crustacyanin 
The apo-crustacyanin subunits have been studied at a much better X-ray resolution 
compared with that of (j-crustacyanin. This results in improved accuracy of atom 
placement within the apo-crustacyanin structures if not yet experimental protonation 
states. The selected apo-crustacyanin structures all exist as homodimers with the key 
residue being His92. The six different PDB entries of the apo-crustacyanin subunits 
are 1I4U studied at an X-ray resolution of 1.15A by Gordon et al.41 , IH91 studied at 
1.40A by Cianci et al.66, IS44 studied at 1.60A and IS2P studied at 1.30A by 
Habash et al.67, and 10BQ studied at 1.85 A and 10BU studied at 2.00 A by Habash 
et al.68 
Predicted 
PROPKA H++ MCCE 
~:>~.o..g~ 
l)~I~Cfoo 
~J~.ll.g~ 
c)~I;7;Cjoo 
~:>~.o..g~ 
c)~I;7;Cfoo 
AHis 92 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
BHis 92 I I I I J I 111111 I I I I I I 
figure 7.21: The pKu predictions of the key IIis residues in apocrustacyanin  
The pKa predictions for the apo-crustacyanin structures (Figure 7.21) agree with the 
predictions for (j-crustacyanin in that none of the His92 residues are predicted to be 
doubly protonated. 
Residue PROPKA 11++ MCCE 
lU4U Chain A His92 5.04 5.50 1.34 
Chain B His92 4.87 1.70 2.14 
11191 Chain A His92 1.24 -3.70 2.01 
Chain B His92 1.24 -4.00 1.70 
1S44 Chain A His92 1.12 -4.50 1.22 
Chain B His92 1.09 -4.30 2.93 
IS2P Chain A His92 1.28 -4.40 2.35 
Chain B His92 1.31 -4.20 0.95 
tOBQ Chain A His92 5.30 4.60 2.00 
Chain B His92 4.97 0.40 2.50 
tOBU Chain A His92 5.38 4.70 2.76 
Chain B His92 5.21 1.20 OOR 
Table 7.15: pKu prediction values for the si" apocrystacyanin structures studied. *OOR'" Prediction Out 
of Range. 
Since apo-crustacyanin is a homodimcr, related by a non-crystallographic 2-fold 
symmetry axis in the crystal form studied, both His92 residues should be in 
chemically identical environments. Therefore the predictions for both His92 residues 
should be very similar if not identical (see Table 7.15). H++ however shows large 
differences in pKa values between the two chains. PROPKA shows the smallest 
deviations in pKa values between the two chains, and in the case of IH91, PROPKA 
actually predicts a pKa of 1.24 for both residues. All of the MCCE pKa values for 
each of the two chains are within one pKa unit of each other, except the results for 
the POB code: 1 S44 where the deviation is 1.7 pKa units. 
Many of the pKa values for His92 in apo-crustacyanin are outside the normal range 
for histidine titration. In the case of the apo-crustacyanin structures the region where 
the chromophore would be bound is replaced by a large solvent region and 
proximally bound sulphate ion. As previously mentioned, Ruiz et a/.60 see similarly 
small pKa values for a histidine residue in aldose reductase when the nearby inhibitor 
is removed. H++ has estimated very unusual, negative pKa values for His92 on both 
chains A and B. 
From the predictions by all three tools for the His90 and 92 residues in {3-
crustacyanin it suggests that both residues are only singly protonated. However, as 
described for the test set of structures (summarised in Table 7.10) these three 
programs appear to have problems predicting when a residue is doubly protonated. 
Therefore whilst this study does suggest that these key histidine residues are singly 
protonated, and thereby supporting the exciton theory put forward by Wijk et a/.64, it 
does not discount the theory65 that the bathochromic shift could arise from the 
chromophore being polarized by a hydrogen-bonded doubly protonated histidine 
residue due to the low certainty in predicting doubly protonated His residues as 
evidenced by the Table 7.10 statistics. 
7.6 Cases for comparison with other protonation state determination 
techniques 
In addition to the two specific selected cases above, protonation states have been 
predicted for the three extra proteins studied previously using bond length analysis in 
order to compare the protonation state determination methods with prediction 
methods. 
7.6.1 cMyBP-C Cl domain 
Myosin Binding Protein C (MyBP-C) is a myofibril associated protein in cardiac and 
skeletal muscle and is discussed in further detail in Chapter 6. Predicted protonation 
states for PDB Code 3CX2 were determined using PROPKA and MCCE. H++ was 
unable to process the structure due to a break in the peptide chain. This is because of 
a disordered region in the protein structure between residues 181 and 184, and as 
such residue 182 has not been modelled. 
A full list of the predicted protonation states 
for all residues in cMyBP-C can be found in 
the supplementary tables on page 274. 
Figure 7.22 shows the protonation 
prediction results. PROKPKA and MCCE 
have both predicted that all aspartic and 
glutamic acid residues are deprotonated at 
the crystallisation pH of 6.8. This is in 
correspondence with the previously 
generated surface by Govada et al. 69. 
However, in contrast to the protonation 
predictions, bond len,'1:h analysis of the 
aspartate and glutamate residues in the 
cMyBP-C structure (see Chapter 6) indicate 
that Asp 152, 214 and 245 may be 
tj Q.. 
0 + u 
:E Q.. J: 
ASP 198 
ASP 211 
ASP 214 
ASP 228 
ASP 245 
ASP 248 
GlU 165 
GlU -. 
"'igure 7.22: Graphical representation of the 
protonation prediction results for the 
(:\1) 8P-C structure. 
protonated. Asp 214 and 245 do show significant signs of radiation damage 
however. Glu 258 also shows signs of protonation, however this is the terminal 
residue and therefore the associated standard deviations are large. 
7.6.2 Suhtilisin Carlsbcrg 
Subtilisin Carlsberg is a serine protease and belongs to the serine protease clan of 
subtilisin. Subtilisin Carlsberg is discussed in further detail in Chapter 5.4.1. 
Predicted protonation states for the final refined structure from Chapter 5.4.1 were 
determined using the three pKa estimation programs. 
A full list of the predicted protonation states 
for all residues in subtilisin Carlsberg can be 
found in the supplementary tables on page 
274. Figure 7.23 shows the predicted 
protonation states for subtilisin Carlsberg. 
All aspartate and glutamate residues are 
predicted to be deprotonated with the 
exception of Asp41 in the case of MCCE 
and H++. His65 and 239 are both predicted 
to be doubly protonated by all three 
estimation programs, except His239 in the 
case ofH++. 
In contrast to the predicted protonation 
states, bond length analysis of aspartate and 
glutamate residues (see Chapter 5.4.1) 
indicate that Asp32, 173, and 182 may he 
protonated. Asp 173 and 182 do show signs 
Figure 7.23: Graphical representation of the 
protonation prediction results for the 
subtilisin Carlsberg structure 
of radiation damage however. Glu 198 also shows signs of proton at ion. In agreement 
with neutron studies 70, the estimation programs have predicted the correct 
protonation states for the key catalytic residues. His 65 is predicted as being doubly 
protonated, and Asp32 as being deprotonated, although more recent X-ray studies?1 
indicate that there may be a short hydrogen bond between Asp32 and His64. 
7.6.3 Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin 
Bovine pancreatic trypsin is another serine protease and belongs the the serine 
protease clan of chymotrypsin. Trypsin is discussed in further detail in Chapter 5.4.2. 
Predicted protonation states for the fmal refmed structure from Chapter 5.4.2 were 
determined using the three pKa estimation programs. 
A full list of the predicted protonation states 
for all residues in trypsin can be found in the 
supplementary tables on page 274. Figure 
7.24 shows the predicted protonation states 
for bovine pancreatic trypsin. All of the 
aspartate and glutamate residues are 
predicted to be deprotonated with the 
exception ofGlu70 in the case ofMCCE. 
In agreement with the neutron studies of 
KossiakofT and Spencer?O, the estimation 
programs correctly predict Asp 102 as being 
deprotonated, however only H++ correctly 
predicts His57 as being protonated. 
~ + u + 
Fi~ure 7.24: Graphical representation of the 
protonation prediction results for the bovine 
pancreatic trypsin structure 
Bond length analysis of the aspartate and glutamate residues in the trypsin structure 
(see Chapter 5.4.2) indicate that Asp71 and 102 may be protonated although the 
standard deviations are not small enough to positively infer these residues as being 
protonated. The predicted protonation states for the glutamate residucs due however 
agree with bond length analysis, except for Glu70 which bond length analysis 
indicates is deprotonated. 
7.7 Conclusions 
The predictive likelihoods of the three programs, PROPKA, H++ and MCCE have 
been calculated with a test set of proteins, where the protonation states of Asp, Glu 
and His residues were well determined from very high resolution X-ray and neutron 
macromolecular crystallography studies, and in some cases from NMR spectroscopy 
as well. These proteins provided a reasonably large number of Asp, Glu and His 
residues for assessment; the weakest part of the test set however was the rather few 
AspH and GluH cases, at least however, their protonation states were well 
established. Overall the pKa estimation tools show good predictive likelihoods 
(>90%) for deprotonated Asp and Glu residues and singly protonated His residues. 
Furthermore the programs successfully predicted a number of the protonated GluH 
residues. 
Following this the three programs were then used to evaluate the protonation states 
of His 12 in ribonuclease A, for which multiple atomic resolution X-ray crystal 
structures were available at six different pH values. The protonation states were 
known from neutron protein crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. Interestingly 
the pKa calculation tools successfully predicted His 12 as being protonated up to pH 
5.9 in agreement with the electron density maps from Berisio et al. 
Another example was then considered, that of crystacyanin, the protein responsible 
for the colouration of the lobster carapace. The protonation states of the key 
histidine residues His 90 and His 92 implicated in the colouration mechanism were 
predicted and whose protonation states remain out of reach of experimental 
determination. The results are unfortunately inconclusive in that the statistical 
likelihoods of predictive ability show that doubly protonated histidines are the 
poorest in terms 0 f predictive confidence. The value 0 f these studies in this case is 
therefore to encourage improvements in the predictive methods themselves. 
Finally the protonation states of Asp, Glu, and His residues in trypsin, subtilisin and 
cMy8P-C have been predicted for comparison with other protonation state 
determination techniques. The three programs utilised show good predictive 
consistency in the majority of cases. For the majority of the key catalytic residues the 
predictions agree with results from previous studies. 
The results presented confIrm that even though the pKa estimation programs can 
result in the correct pKa values and hence predict the correct protonation states in a 
number of cases, experimental determination of protonation states of ionisable 
groups in proteins such as from crystallography remains paramount. Furthermore 
prediction methods do not predict which particular atom the hydrogen atom is bound 
to in the case of a singly protonated histidine or a protonated carboxyl group. Even 
for crystallography however there are risks and possible pitfalls. For example, the 
use of crystallisation chemical conditions may be at a pH remote from the 
physiological pH. Also kinetic and resonance effects of a key hydrogen atom may 
change upon deuteration, this can include pKa shifts, thus affecting 3D structure. The 
prediction tools can help add insight into all of these effects. 
7.8 Supplementary Tables 
Figure 7.25: Complete list ing of predicted and known protonation states for all residues in concanavalin A 
and cl-xylose isomerase 
Figure 7.26: Complete listing of predicted and known protonation states for all residues in Iyso.lyme and 
myoblogin 
cMyBP-C Trypsin Subtilisin 
4( 4( 
~ a. ~ U 0 ~ u ~ 
lx: ... 
~ I a. I 
ASP 76 
ASP 120 
ASP 140 
ASP 1n 
ASP 181 
GLU GLU 54 
GLU GLU 112 
GLU GLU 195 
GLU GLU 197 
HIS GLU 271 
HIS HIS 39 
HIS HIS 
HIS HIS 
LYS HIS 
LYS HIS 
LYS LYS 
LYS LYS 
LYS LYS 
lYS lYS 
LYS LYS 
LYS LYS 
ARG LYS 
ARG LYS 
ARG ARG 
FiJ.:ure 7.27: Complete listinJ.: of predicted protonation states for all rcsiducs in cl\1~8P-C. bm'inc 
pancreatic trypsin, and subtilisin Carlsberg 
7.9 References 
1. G. Vriend, J. Mol. Graph. Model., 1990, 8, 52-56. 
2. L. R. Forrest and B. Honig, Proteins: Structure, Function, and 
Bioi1formatics, 2005, 61, 296-309. 
3. A. T. Briinger and M. Karplus, Proteins: Structure, Function. and Genetics, 
1988, 4, 148-156. 
4. N. Engler, A. Ostermann, N. Niimura and F. G. Parak, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2003,100, 
10243-10248. 
5. Y. L~ A. Roy and Y. Zhang, PLoS ONE, 2009, 4, e6701. 
6. P. Labute, Proteins: Strncture, Function, and Bioin/ormatics, 2009, 75, 187-
7. M. P. Blakeley, Crystallography Reviews, 2009, 15, 157-218. 
8. J. Wilkinson, MSc Chemistry, The University of Manchester, 2007. 
9. A. Liljas, L. Liljas, 1. Piskur, G. Lindblom, P. Nissen and M. Kjeldgaard, 
2009, p14. 
10. H. Li, A. D. Robertson and J. H. Jensen, Proteins: Strncture, Function, and 
Bioinformatics, 2005, 61, 704-721. 
11. T. A. Steitz and R. G. Shulman, Annual review of biophysics and 
bioengineering, 1982, 11, 419-444. 
12. T. Szypersk~ W. Antuch, M. Schick, A. Betz, S. R. Stone and K. Wuthrich, 
Biochemistry, 1994, 33, 9303-9310. 
13. C. R. Sendergaard, L. P. McIntosh, G. Pollastri and 1. E. Nielsen, Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 2008, 376,269-287. 
14. N. Powers and 1. H. Jensen, Journal of Biomolecular NMR, 2006, 35, 39-51. 
15. 1. C. Gordon, 1. B. Myers, T. Folta, V. Shoja, L. S. Heath and A. Onufriev, 
Nucl. Acids Res., 2005, 33, W368-371. 
16. R. E. Georgescu, E. G. Alexov and M. R. Gunner, Biophys. J., 2002, 83, 
1731-1748. 
17. J. Mongan and D. A. Case, Curr. Op. Str. BioI., 2005,15,157-163. 
18. X. L~ M. P. Jacobson, K. Zhu, S. Zhao and R. A. Friesner, Proteins, 2007, 
66, 824-837. 
19. D. Bashford, Frontiers in Bioscience, 2004,9, 1082-1099. 
20. B. Kuhn, P. A. Kollman and M. Stah~ J. Comput. Chem., 2004, 25, 1865-
1872. 
21. M. D. Liptak and G. C. Shields, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 
2001, 123, 7314-7319. 
22. J. E. Nielsen, Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling, 2007, 25, 691-
23. T. Simonson, J. Carlsson and D. A. Case, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 
4167-4180. 
24. A. Shurki and A. Warshel, Adv. Prot. Chem., 2003, 66, 249-313. 
25. I. Ivanov, 8. Chen., S. Raugei and M. L. Klein, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 
6365-6371. 
26. J. Warwicker, Prot. Sci., 2004, 13,2793-2805. 
27. J. E. Nielsen, K. V. Andersen, 8. Honig, R. W. W. Hoofi, G. K1ebe, G. 
Vriend and R. C. Wade, Protein Eng., 1999, 12, 657-662. 
28. E. G. A1exov and M. R. Gunner, Biophys. J, 1997, 72, 2075-2093. 
29. M. Davies, C. Tose1and, D. Moss and D. Flower, BMC Biochemistry, 2006, 
7,18. 
30. K. A. Hasselba1ch, Biochemische Zeitschr~ft, 1917, 78, 112. 
31. A. J. Ka1b (Gi1boa) and J. R. Helliwell, Concanavalin A. Handbook q{ 
Metalloproteins, John Wiley, 2001. 
32. W. I. Weis and K. Drickamer, Annual Review 0/ Biochemistry, 1996, 65, 
441-473. 
33. A. Deacon, T. G1eichmann, A. J. Kalb (Gilboa), H. Price, J. Rafiery, G. 
Bradbrook, J. Yariv and J. R. Helliwell, J. Chem. Soc .. Faraday Trans., 
1997,93,4305. 
34. J. 8. Sumner, J Bioi Chem, 1919,37, l37-141. 
35. H. U. Ahmed, M. P. Blakeley, M. Cianci, J. A. Hubbard, J. R. Helliwell and 
D. W. J. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 906-922. 
36. S. Parkin, 8. Rupp and H. Hope, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 1996, 
52, 1161-1168. 
37. Collaborative Computational Project 4, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
1994, 50, 760-763. 
38. H. L. Carrel~ B. H. Rubin, T. J. Hurley and J. P. Glusker, J. Bioi. Chem., 
1984, 259, 3230-3236. 
39. A. K. Katz, X. L~ H. L. Carrell, B. L. Hanson, P. Langan, L. Coates, B. P. 
Schoenborn, J. P. G1usker and G. J. Bunick, Proceedings o/the National 
Academy o/Sciences, 2006, 103, 8342-8347. 
40. H. L. Carrell, H. Hoier and J. P. G1usker, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
1994,50,113-123. 
41. E. J. Gordon, G. A. Leonard, S. McSweeney and P. F. Zagalsky, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2001, 57, 1230-1237. 
42. C. Bon, M. S. Lehmann and C. Wilkinson, Acta Crystallographica Section 
D, 1999,55,978-987. 
43. J. Wang, M. Dauter, R. Alkire, A. Joachimiak and Z. Dauter, Acta 
Crystallographica Section D, 2007, 63, 1254-1268. 
44. M. A. Walsh, T. R. Schneider, L. C. Sieker, Z. Dauter, V. S. Larnzin and K. 
S. Wilson, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 1998, 54, 522-546. 
45. K. Bartik, C. Redfield and C. M. Dobson, 1994, 66, 1180-1184. 
46. A. Ostermann, I. Tanaka, N. Engler, N. Niimura and F. O. Parak, Biophysical 
Chemistry, 2002, 95, 183-193. 
47. A. Arcovito, M. Benfatto, M. Cianci, S. S. Hasnain, K. Nienhaus, G. U. 
Nienhaus, C. Savino, R. W. Strange, B. Vallone and S. Della Longa, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2007, 104,6211-6216. 
48. J. Vojt chovsky, K. Chu, J. Berendzen, R. M. Sweet and I. Schlichting, 1999, 
77,2153-2174. 
49. C. Dalvit and P. E. Wright, Journal of Molecular Biology, 1987, 194, 313-
50. K. Osapay, Y. Theriault, P. E. Wright and D. A. Case, Journal of Molecular 
Biology, 1994,244, 183-197. 
51. M. J. Cocco, Y. H. Kao, A. T. Phillips and J. T. J. Lecomte, Biochemistry, 
1992,31,6481-6491. 
52. R. Berisio, F. Sica, V. S. Larnzin, K. S. Wilson, A. Zagari and L. Mazzarella, 
Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D-Biol. Crystallogr., 2002,58,441-450. 
53. A. Wlodawer and L. Sjolin, Biochemistry, 1983, 22, 2720-2728. 
54. R. Berisio, V. S. Larnzin, F. Sica, K. S. Wilson, A. Zagari and L. Mazzarella, 
Journal of Molecular Biology, 1999, 292, 845-854. 
55. R. F. Tilton, J. C. Dewan and G. A. Petsko, Biochemistry, 1992,31,2469-
2481. 
56. C. M. Cuchillo, M. Vilanova and M. V. Nogues, Pancreatic ribonucleases in 
Ribonucleases: Structures and functions, Academic Press, New York, 1997, 
271-300. 
57. D. J. Quirk and R. T. Raines, 1999,76, 1571-1579. 
58. A. Wlodawer, N. Borkakot~ D. S. Moss and B. Howlin, Acta 
Crystallographica Section B, 1986,42,379-387. 
59. P. Varnai and A. Warshel, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2000, 
122, 3849-3860. 
60. F. Ruiz, I. Hazemann, A. Mitschler, A. Joachimiak, T. Schneider, M. Karplus 
and A. Podjarny, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D-Biol. Crystallogr., 2004, 60, 
1347-1354. 
61. M. 1. Ondrechen, 1. G. Clifton and D. Ringe, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2001,98, 12473-
12478. 
62. R. Quarmby, D. A. Nordens, P. F. Zagalsky, H. 1. Ceccaldi and R. Daumas, 
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part B: Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, 1977,56, 55-6l. 
63. M. Cianci, P. J. Rizkallah, A. Olczak, J. Raftery, N. E. Chayen, P. F. 
Zagalsky and 1. R. Helliwell, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 2002, 99, 9795-9800. 
64. A. A. C. Wijk, A. Spaans, N. Uzunbajakava, C. Otto, H. 1. M. deGroot, 1. 
Lugtenburg and F. Buda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1438-1445. 
65. B. Durbeej and L. A. Eriksson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys, 2006, 8, 4053. 
66. M. Cianci, P. J. Rizkallah, A. Olczak, J. Raftery, N. E. Chayen, P. F. 
Zagalsky and 1. R. Helliwell, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2001, 57, 
1219-1229. 
67. 1. Habash, 1. R. Helliwell, 1. Raftery, M. Cianci, P. 1. Rizkallah, N. E. 
Chayen, G. A. Nneji and P. F. Zagalsky, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 
2004, 60, 493-498. 
68. J. Habash, T. J. Boggon, 1. Raftery, N. E. Chayen, P. F. Zagalsky and J. R. 
Helliwell, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 2003, 59, 1117-1123. 
69. L. Govada, L. Carpenter, 1. Helliwell, P. Fonseca, E. Flashman, N. Chayen, 
C. Redwood and 1. Squire, Journal of Molecular Biology, 2008, 378, 387-
70. A. A. Kossiakoff and S. A. Spencer, Nature, 1980, 288, 414-416. 
7l. P. Kuhn, M. Knapp, S. M. Soltis, G. Ganshaw, M. Thoene and R. Bott, 
Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 13446-13452. 
8. Concluding Remarks and Future Prospects 
8.1 Evaluation of Methods 
The protonation states of aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and arginine residues 
have been determined in a number of proteins using three techniques. Initial results 
from diffraction tests on perdeuterated crystals of the PqqC protein indicate that it 
should be possible to determine the protonation states of the bound intermediate 
using neutron protein crystallography at around 2-3A resolution. Protonation states 
in subtilisin, trypsin and cMyBP-C have been determined using bond length analysis 
of high resolution X-ray data. The results indicate that at least 1.2A resolution X-ray 
data is required to determine protonation states of aspartate and glutamate residues to 
a 30- confidence level. Protonation states have been predicted based on estimated pKa 
values for a test set of proteins with protonation states known from NMR 
spectroscopy and neutron crystallography. Following this the protonation states for 
the three proteins studied using bond length analysis have also been predicted for 
comparison. Results show that although the pKa estimation programs can predict the 
correct protonation state for a number of re si dues, the overalllikelihoods are not ofa 
high enough level to confidently predict the protonation states of residues that are of 
crucial importance 
8.1.1 Neutron Protein Crystallography 
Neutron protein crystallography provides a definitive method for directly locating 
the position of hydrogen atoms (as deuterium) in the resultant nuclear density maps, 
even at moderate diffraction resolutions of 2-3A. However, despite technological 
advancements, sample preparation is complex, especially in the case of perdeuterated 
samples. Furthermore the technique requires sample volumes of around O.15mm3, 
large in comparison to those required for X-ray crystallography. However, 
significant technological advancements m neutron protein crystallography 
instruments has meant that it is becoming more feasible despite these limitations. 
The crystal volume requirement has been significantly reduced since the days of 
monochromatic neutron beams and non perdeuterated samples, where volumes 
considerably greater than 1 mm3 were required. Furthermore, the replacement of 
photographic images with image plates and the use of longer wavelengths, have 
improved data collection times enormously from several months to somewhere 
between a few weeks to days. 
The deuteration of protein samples for neutron crystallography work can itself cause 
complications, as described by Kuhn et al. 1 with regards to the serine protease 
subtilisin: "The replacement of hydrogen with deuterium is well known to affect 
kinetics, but it can also effect the proton position. The deuterium atom being heavier 
is defmitively fixed to a single position, whereas hydrogen can be shared between 
two positions in the catalytic triad". However, a recent study comparing 
hydrogenated and perdeuterated small molecule structures determined using X-ray 
and neutron crystallography via data mining of the Cambridge Structural Database 
(CS D) extensively surveyed the risk of structural change upon deuteration (Fisher 
and Helliwelf), and found very limited deuteration effects. Very few structures in 
the analyses showed structural changes between hydrogenated and perdeuterated 
forms, the worst case being a bond angle change of 20. Furthermore, it is widely 
known that bond distance changes upon deuteration are very small, for example the 
C-H bond length in ethane is 1.1 03A versus the C-D bond length of 1.099A3 
Neutron protein crystallography continues to progress towards becoming a usable 
technique for a greater number of researchers. With the development of new 
instruments like those at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in the US, 
resulting in an increase in neutron flux, the sample volume requirement for neutron 
protein crystallography experiments should be further reduced. This should make 
neutron protein crystallography, a relatively niche technique to date, available to a 
much wider audience. In the last two years, the number of neutron protein structures 
deposited in the Protein Data Bank (POB) has already almost doubled that which 
was there from the previous 30 years, and it is expected that this trend will continue. 
These factors mean that neutron protein crystallography should not be neglected as a 
technique for protonation state determination. 
8.1.2 Bond Length Analysis 
Bond length analysis provides a method to infer the protonation states of amino acid 
residues from X-ray crystallography data without needing sub-Angstom resolution. 
As such, bond length analysis provides useful information at resolutions at which 
hydrogen atoms might not be visible in electron density maps. Furthermore, even 
when ultra high resolution X-ray data is available, hydrogen atoms are often still not 
visible due to their associated thermal motion. In these cases, bond length analysis 
can provide details of proton at ion states at a good significance level due to the small 
standard deviations associated with ultra high resolution data. It should be noted 
however that the afore mentioned thermal motions can increase the standard 
deviation values. 
In the current analysis, only two states for each residue are considered, either 
protonated or deprotonated, however in more complex situations it is possible that a 
proton may in fact be positioned between two residues. Therefore, the key indicator 
in the case of bond length analysis should be the check against dictionary values, as 
deviation from these can indicate a shared proton, or radiation damage. 
The major focus in Chapter 5 of this thesis was the determination of protonation 
states in aspartate and glutamate residues as these are the easiest to determine given 
the 0.1 A difference between the two carbonyl bond lengths. In the case 0 f histidine, 
the bond distance differences are too small to use to use this technique reliably. 
However, Beriso et al.4 have shown that in this case bond angle variations upon 
protonation can be exploited in an identical way. 
8.1.3 Protonation Prediction 
Prediction of protonation states using estimated pKa values in proteins is a valuable 
tool, especially for cases where large nicely diffracting crystals cannot be obtained 
and therefore protonation states cannot be determined from structural studies. 
Although the three dimensional location of a proton cannot be predicted using 
estimated pKa values, its presence or absence can. However the methodology is 
based on assuming the exact pH of the crystal is known, which is not experimentally 
the case. Nevertheless it has been estimated that the pH in the crystal is unlikely to 
differ by more than 0.3 units from the crystallisation buffer. 
The results presented in Chapter 6 indicate that further development of the pKa 
estimation tools is required before good predictions can be obtained. Current 
predictions show poor agreement with protonation states known from neutron 
structures, especially for key residues 0 f interest such as histidine. The predictions of 
aspartate and glutamate deprotonated states agree better with neutron and NMR 
results, although a larger test would be beneficial for the analysis of these residues. 
In order to further validate the estimation tools, a greater number of neutron 
structures ideally accompanied by ultra high resolution X-ray, and NMR titration 
data are required. 
8.2 Future Prospects 
With regards to the specific example of cMyBP-C it is hoped that a higher resolution 
X-ray data set will be obtained and used to determine the protonation states of the 
surface aspartate and glutamate residues to a better confidence level. Furthermore a 
neutron experiment has been proposed which could determine the protonation states 
of the surface residues in cMyBP-C directly as deuterium. 
Preliminary results from the PqqC project show that the expressed protein is readily 
crystallised, and that these crystals diffract well at the ESRF. The immediate future 
plans are frrstly, to collect a high resolution X-ray data set from the hydrogenated 
crystals, if possible at a resolution of 1.2A or better, where protonation states could 
be determined from bond length analysis. Secondly, to test the diffraction of some 
recently produced perdeuterated crystals in preparation for the allocated neutron-" 
crystallography beam time. 
The bond length analysis methods presented in Chapter 5 have been primarily 
focused on the determination of protonation states in aspartate and glutamate 
residues. However, this methodology could be extended to lysine residues which 
show significant differences in bond length between deprotonated and protonated 
forms. Furthermore, although histidine cannot be analysed via bond length analysis, 
due to the small difference in bond lengths, bond angle analysis (as described by 
Berisio et al.
) could be used. As the results from the full matrix inversions used in 
the bond length analysis also contain standard deviations for bond angles and atomic 
positions, this analysis could be readily extended to consider the bond angles in 
histidine and therefore the protonation states in such residues. 
8.3 Conclusions 
The determination of protonation states in proteins is a challenging and exciting 
topic. This thesis has presented a number of methods which can be used to determine 
such protonation states, each with their own advantages and disadvantages. The 
results from these experimental methods can provide crucial details with regards to 
the particular workings of enzymatic mechanisms. These results are of interest to 
numerous groups including academia and industry. 
With the technological advances at large scale facilities, collection of X-ray 
crystallographic data to high resolution is becoming more common. Furthermore it is 
becoming increasingly possible to collect neutron data from smaller samples with 
larger asymmetric-unit cells. These advancements make the determination of 
protonation states easier and more readily available to a larger user base. 
The results from protonation prediction using estimated pKa values indicate that the 
determination of protonation states from experimental crystallographic methods still 
remains paramount. Although protonation states can be predicted using pKa values, 
the results from such calculations are currently not accurate enough to positively 
predict protonation states. However, there are also drawbacks to crystallography 
experiments, as crystals are often prepared at pH values well removed from the 
physiological value, and therefore results obtained are not representative of the real 
system. Furthermore the replacement of hydrogen with the heavy atom deuterium 
can in some circumstances have structural effects. 
The analysis presented in this thesis has shown that it is important to use a 
combination of experimental methods such as NMR spectroscopy, neutron and X-
ray crystallography, and bond length/angles analysis. A number of projects use such 
a combination of methods, including the investigation into aldose reductase by 
Howard et al.s, and the results of Deacon et al.6 for concanavalin A. 
8.4 References 
l. P. Kuhn, M. Knapp, S. M. Soltis, G. Ganshaw, M. Thoene and R. Bott, 
Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 13446-13452. 
2. S. J. Fisher and J. R. Helliwell, Acta Crystallographica Section A, 2008, 64, 
359-367. 
3. N. E. Heimer and D. L. Mattern, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 
1993, 115, 2217-2220. 
4. R. Berisio, F. Sica, V. S. Lamzin, K. S. Wilson, A. Zagari and L. Mazzarella, 
Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D-Biol. Crystallogr., 2002,58,441-450. 
5. E. Howard, Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinjormatics, 2004, 55, 
792-804. 
6. A. Deacon, T. Gleichmann, A. J. Kalb (Gilboa), H. Price, J. Raftery, G. 
Bradbrook, J. Yariv and J. R. Helliwell, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 
1997,93,4305. 
9. Related Publications 
9.1 An investigation into structural changes due to deuteration 
Authors: Stuart 1. Fisher3 ,b and John R. Helliwe1l3 
a. School of Chemistry, Brunswick Street, The University of Manchester, Manchester Ml3 
9PL, UK 
h. Institut Laue-Langevin, BP 156, 6 rue Jules Horowitz, 38042, Grenoble, CEDEX 9, France. 
Journal: Acta Crystallographica Section A 
Reference: Volume 64, Issue 3, Page 359-357,2008 
Contribution to publication 
I was responsible for carrying out the data mining of the Cambridge Structural 
Database I (CSD) and subsequent data processing. I analysed the data and prepare 
tabulated forms of it for publication. I superposed the hydrogenated and deuterated 
forms of each compound and prepared the relevant figures. I accounted for about 
80% of the content of the paper draft. The general conception for the work and 
overall supervision was by John R. Helliwell and who was also the corresponding 
author. 
9.2 An investigation into the protonation states of the Cl domain of 
cardiac myosin-binding protein C 
Authors: Stuart J. Fishera,b, John R. Helliwella,c, S. Khurshidd, Lata Govadad, Charles 
Redwoodd, John M. Squired.e and Naomi E. Chayend 
a. School of Chemistry, Brunswick Street, The University of Manchester, Manchester Ml3 
9PL, England 
b. Institut Laue Langevin, BP 156,6 Rue Jules Horowitz, 38042, Grenoble, CEDEX 9, France 
c. STFC Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, Cheshire WA4 4AD, England 
d. Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Division of SORA, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, Sir Alexander Flerning Building, London SW7 2AZ, England 
e. Muscle Contraction Group, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1 TD, England 
Journal: Acta Crystallographica Section D 
Reference: Volume 64, Issue 6, Page 658-664, 2008 
PDB Code: 3CX2 
Contribution to publication 
The protein was expressed by Charles Redwood and crystallised by S. Khurshid with 
Naomi Chayen. X-ray data were collected by Lata Govada at station 10.12 at the 
Daresbury SRS. John R. Helliwell processed the diffraction images using 
HKL20003. I was responsible for the subsequent processing of said X-ray data and 
refmement of the model (using the previously determined 1.55A mode14 as a starting 
point). I determined the protonation state level of confidence using bond length 
analysis and prepared all graphs and tables for publication. I prepared the 
Cruickshank DPIs calculations and graphical representation of the results. I was 
responsible for about 70% of the content of the paper draft. The PDB deposition was 
done jointly by me with John R. Helliwell. The overall supervision of the structural 
biology was by John Squire and the crystallography by John R. Helliwell. 
9.3 An evaluation review of the prediction of p"otonation states in 
proteins versus crystallographic experiment 
Authors: Stuart 1. Fisher3 ,b, lames Wilkinson3 , Richard H. Henchmanac and John R. 
HelliweW 
a. School of Chemistry, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 
b. Institut Laue Langevin, 6 rue Jules Horowitz, BP 152, Grenoble, Cedex 9,38042, France; 
c. Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, The University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, 
Manchester M 1 7DN, UK 
lournal: Crystallography Reviews 
Reference: Volume 64, Issue 6, Page 658-664,2009 
Contribution to publication 
I was responsible for initially extending the previous study conducted by master's 
student lames Wilkinson that made use of H++ and PROPKA, to include the pKa 
estimation program MCCE. I was responsible for all additional calculations on the 
extended test set that included myoglobin and the extra specific case of ribonuclease 
A. Furthermore I generated all figures for the publication as well as contributing a 
large amount of work to the text of the article. 
9.4 Science experiments via telepresence at a synchrotron radiation 
source facility 
Authors: John E. Warrena, G. Diakuna, G. BushneIl-Wyea, Stuart J. Fisherbc, A. 
Thalald, Madeline HeIliweUb and John R. HelliweUab 
a. STFC, Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, Cheshire WA4 4AD, UK 
b. School of Chemistry, Brunswick Street, The University of Manchester, Manchester Ml3 
9PL, England 
c. Institut Laue Langevin, BP 156.6 Rue Jules Horowitz. 38042 Grenoble CEDEX 9, France 
d. Laboratoire des Sciences des Materiaux, Faculty of Sciences, Semlalia, Marrakech, Morocco 
Journal: Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 
Reference: Volume 15, Issue 2, Page 191-194,2008 
Contribution to publication 
John Warren and his team were responsible for setup and operation of the 
telepresence equipment at station 9.8 of the Daresbury SRS. During the telepresence 
experiment John and Madeline Helliwell were present at the station for the test 
experiment and I was in contact with the station from the University of Manchester 
via audio and visual feeds using the telepresence software. 
9.5 References 
1. CCDC, http://>>'l1'W.ccdc.cam.ac.uk, 2007. 
2. M. Cianci, S. Antonyuk, N. Bliss, M. W. Bailey, S. G. Buffey, K. C. Cheung, 
1. A. Clarke, G. E. Derbyshire, M. 1. Ellis, M. 1. Enderby, A. F. Grant, M. P. 
Holboum, D. Laundy, C. Nave, R. Ryder, P. Stephenson, J. R. Helliwell and 
S. S. Hasnain, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 2005, 12, 455-466. 
3. Z. Otwinowski and W. Minor, Methods in Enzymology, 1997,276,307. 
4. L. Govada, L. Carpenter, 1. Helliwell, P. Fonseca, E. Flashman, N. Chayen, 
C. Redwood and 1. Squire, Journal of Molecular Biology, 2008, 378, 387-
5. D. Cruickshank, Acta Crystallographica Section D, 1999, 55, 583-601. 
