Unionism and Human Rights in Northern Ireland
Unionism and Human Rights in Northern Ireland 
Peter Munce LL.B. (Hons) 
Faculty of Social Sciences of the University of Ulster 
Thesis Submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
September 2010  
Contents  
Title Page           i 
Contents                  ii  iii  
Acknowledgments                    iv  
Thesis Summary                v  vi  
Note on Access to Contents         vii 
Introduction           1 
1 What are Human Rights?         
Introduction          15 
Origins         18 
Justification          26 
Proliferation and indeterminacy       35 
Constitutional Charters of Rights       42 
The Court Sceptic concern        46 
Conclusion          53 
2 Unionist Political Thought in Northern Ireland  
Introduction          54 
The search for coherence        55 
Fatalism, fear and alienation        62 
Unionism as a living tradition       69 
Conclusion          80 
3 Unionist Responses to the Protection of Rights in Northern Ireland 1921   
Introduction          83 
Origins          86 
Unionist support for Bill of Rights 1972  1984     96 
Brooke/Mayhew and the start of the peace process    102 
Multi  party negotiations        107 
Conclusion          110 
4 Unionism and the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights Debate 1998  2010  
Introduction          113 
Overview of post Agreement Bill of Rights process     114 
Post Agreement unionist responses      118 
(1) Absence of cross community support for Bill of Rights proposals  119 
(2) Human Rights Commission have exceeded their mandate   122 
(3) Impact on equal citizenship within the UK     137 
(4) Transfer of power from the legislature to the judiciary   141 
Cleavages and convergence in Unionist responses      146 
Explaining Unionist anxiety and suspicion      152 
Conclusion          160 
5 Unionism and the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission  
Introduction          163 
Context, powers and remit       164 
Human Rights  an anti  unionist agenda?      169 
Representativeness of the NIHRC       174 
The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission and the CAJ  187 
Conclusion          197 
Conclusion           207 
Bibliography           223 
Acknowledgements  
I would like to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to both my doctoral 
supervisors  Professor Arthur Aughey and Professor Henry Patterson. It would not 
have been possible to complete this thesis without their knowledge, experience, 
patience and academic and intellectual insight guiding me along the way. Both are 
outstanding academics in their respective fields and I was extremely fortunate to have 
come under their supervision.  
I would like to thank the University of Ulster for funding this research through the 
provision of a Vice Chancellors Research Scholarship (VCRS). Sincere thanks are 
also due to Dr. Jackie Reilly and the rest of the Research Graduate School of the 
Faculty of Social Sciences for their help  particularly in the provision of financial 
assistance, which enabled me to attend and present my work at a number of academic 
conferences. I also appreciate greatly the support provided by other colleagues in the 
school of Criminology, Politics and Social Policy at the University of Ulster, 
particularly Carol in the office. I would like to thank Carmel Roulston, Dr. Fidelma 
Ashe and Dr. Paul Hainsworth for their helpful comments on this research at key 
points in the process and for the teaching opportunities they so graciously afforded 
me. I express sincere gratitude to those people who gave of their time to be 
interviewed for this project.  
I thank my close friends for always being interested in this research, its progress and 
my general wellbeing. I thank God for His grace which helps me deal with the 
stresses and strains of daily existence. Apart from Him I can do nothing. My brothers 
and sisters in Christ who belong to Muckamore, Killead and Gartree Parishes I thank 
for their prayers, encouragement and friendship. I thank my brother, Andrew, for 
providing vital distraction at important moments. I thank my parents for always 
believing in me and for their help in so many practical ways, small and large, over the 
years. Finally, two people deserve special mention: my wife Celia and my daughter 
Olivia who was born towards the final stages of this research. I am truly blessed to 
have the love, joy and peace they bring to the often chaotic state of my daily life. I 
love them both more than words can say.  
Thesis Summary 
According to Richard English, one of the most conspicuous features of the scholarly 
literature in recent years has been the lack of scrutiny which certain subjects have 
received  subject(s) which the explosion of the Northern Irish conflict might have 
been expected to stimulate (English, 1996, p.221). One subject, which has received 
little academic consideration, despite recent developments, has been the area of 
unionism and human rights in Northern Ireland. The overall aim of this thesis is to 
investigate and consider the attitudes of influential strands of unionist opinion towards 
the concept of human rights as that narrative as been applied and interpreted in 
Northern Ireland.  
In order to consider fully the position of influential strands of unionist opinion on 
human rights, the thesis does this firstly, through theoretical engagement with what is 
meant by the concept of human rights and an examination of unionist political 
thought. Secondly, through examining the practical application of human rights in 
Northern Ireland, which means investigating the position of influential strands of 
unionist opinion on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights (pre and post Belfast 
Agreement) and the relationship of key unionist elites with the Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission (NIHRC). 
The thesis poses four interconnected and overlapping questions. Firstly, are influential 
strands of unionist opinion sceptical and suspicious of human rights as that concept as 
been interpreted and applied in Northern Ireland? Secondly, if unionists have 
expressed anxiety, what aspects of human rights discourse in Northern Ireland are key 
unionist elites sceptical of? Thirdly, is this anxiety universal or do significant 
cleavages within unionism exist? Fourthly, why are unionists anxious about human 
rights discourse in Northern Ireland? 
This thesis aims to address the absence of any research or academic study of this area 
of Northern Ireland politics and in doing so increase our knowledge and 
understanding of unionisms relationship with this particular aspect of the peace 
process in Northern Ireland and of recent debates about the protection of human rights 
in Northern Ireland. It also aims to move beyond the anecdotal and rhetorical manner 
in which this area has been presented in the academic literature and in popular 
political discourse and develop a deeper understanding than currently exists about the 
nature of the relationship between key unionist elites and human rights in Northern 
Ireland.   
Note on Access to Contents  
I hereby declare that for 2 years following the date, on which the thesis is deposited 
in the Library of the University of Ulster, the thesis shall remain confidential with 
access or copying prohibited. Following expiry of this period I permit 
1. The Librarian of the University to allow the thesis to be copied in whole or 
in part without reference to me on the understanding that such authority 
applies to the provision of singe copies made for study purposes or for 
inclusion within the stock of another library.  
2. The thesis to be made available through the Ulster Institutional Repository 
and/or EThOS under the terms of the Ulster eTheses Deposit Agreement 
which I have signed.  
IT IS A CONDITION OF USE OF THIS THESIS THAT ANYONE WHO 
CONSULTS IT MUST RECOGNISE THAT THE COPYRIGHT RESTS WITH 
THE AUTHOR AND THAT NO QUOTATION FROM THE THESIS AND NO 
INFORMATION DERIVED FROM IT MAY BE PUBLISHED UNLESS THE 
SOURCE IS PROPERLY ACKNOWLEDGED. 
Introduction 
One of the most significant characteristics of the peace process in Northern Ireland 
has been the profound importance attached by a range of academic, political and non 
governmental actors to the concept of human rights. Human rights have, as one 
scholar puts it, moved from the margins to the mainstream (Harvey, 2001, p. 342) 
of political life in Northern Ireland and in so doing have become a predominant 
feature of contemporary political discourse there (Mageean 1999; Kavanagh, 2004). 
The Belfast Agreement/Good Friday Agreement of 1998 marked a watershed for the 
emergence of human rights in Northern Ireland. As the former President of Ireland 
and former United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson 
observed, the 1998 Agreement was, conspicuous by the centrality it gives to equality 
and human rights concerns. Few documents emerging from divisive and difficult 
political negotiations have so well captured the importance of fairness in creating 
right relationships (Speech at the Stormont Hotel, Belfast, Robinson, December 2
1998). Indeed, one of the distinctive features of the Belfast Agreement compared with 
previous attempts at finding a solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland lies in the 
fact that human rights were afforded such a central status in the final text of the 
Agreement. As the late QUB human rights academic Stephen Livingston commented,  
while many have commented on the fact that, unlike the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973, the 
Belfast Agreement of 1998 included all the parties to the conflict and made more extensive 
provisions on North  South and East  West relationships, few have observed that it also contains a 
much more extensive set of provisions on rights (Livingston, 2001, p. 279). 
The Belfast Agreement, given statutory form by the Northern Ireland Act 1998, 
created an entirely new framework for human rights protection in Northern Ireland 
that included a new Human Rights Commission, an Equality Commission and under 
the St Andrews Agreement of 2006, a Forum to consider a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland. According to Stephen Livingstone because of the history of the conflict in 
Northern Ireland there was a need for additional rights to be reflected in Northern 
Ireland law, particularly if the protection of human rights is recognized as an 
important element of the political settlement (2001, p.269). This idea was reflected 
in the Agreement, which instructed a newly constituted Human Rights Commission 
Consult and to advise on the scope for defining, in Westminster legislation, rights supplementary to 
those in the European Convention on Human Rights, to reflect the particular circumstances of 
Northern Ireland, drawing as appropriate on international instruments and experience. These 
additional rights to reflect the principles of mutual respect for the identity and ethos of both 
communities and parity of esteem, and - taken together with the ECHR - to constitute a Bill of 
Rights for Northern Ireland (Belfast Agreement, April, 1998, Cm. 3883: Rights, safeguards and 
equality of opportunity, human rights, section 4). 
For Brendan OLeary, the explicitly liberal consociationalist nature of the political 
settlement reached in the Belfast Agreement required a strong Bill of Rights to 
reinforce the consociational settlement,  
what system of human rights provision does this liberal consociation require? The answer most 
obviously, is: a Bill of Rights and a legal system that is consistent with it. That in turn implies that 
each of the four elements of the consociational system must be appropriately protected where 
necessary (OLeary, 2001, p. 354). 
The new human rights culture in Northern Ireland has been strongly supported by 
three key groups. Firstly, within scholarly circles  particularly amongst a particular 
group of Northern Ireland based legal academics who argue that the post conflict 
circumstances of Northern Ireland and the constitutional, legal and political changes 
that have occurred there are more appropriately explained, analysed and reflected 
upon using the analytical frameworks offered by transitional justice discourse (Bell, 
2002; Bell, Campbell and Ni Aolain, 2004; Campbell & Ni Aolain, 2005; Harvey, 
Campbell & Ni Aolain, 2003; McEvoy, Morrison and Anthony, 2007; McEvoy, 
2007).  Secondly, by Irish Nationalist and Irish Republican political parties in 
Northern Ireland (SDLP and Sinn Fein) who have a long tradition of expressing 
political preferences and positions during the conflict in Northern using the language 
of human rights. Thirdly, by human rights activists in non  governmental 
organisations such as the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) who have 
long argued for a rights based solution to the seemingly intractable problem of the 
conflict in Northern Ireland (Mageean 1997, 1999). Moreover, the persuasiveness of 
human rights discourse in the politics of Northern Ireland is, in many ways, merely a 
reflection of the fact that over the past sixty years human rights have established 
themselves as one scholar puts it, the coin of the normative realm, the lingua franca 
of moral and political claim making (Ingram, 2008, p.41) in three principal ways. 
Firstly, in the way individuals and communities deploy the language of human rights 
to make what are essentially political claims about their respective needs, interests 
and entitlements and to articulate a vision of what human beings require to live a 
conception of the good life (Dworkin, 1978; Shue, 1996). Secondly, in the tendency 
for states to enshrine these individual human rights in the form of a constitutionally 
entrenched charter of rights to be interpreted and applied by the judiciary (Hirschl, 
2004) and thirdly, alongside these developments has been the rise in the number of 
international human rights NGOs involved in monitoring the implementation of 
international human rights obligations, reporting on alleged human rights abuses and 
lobbying for more effective international and national human rights protections. 
In many ways the narrative about human rights protection in Northern Ireland 
presented in the academic literature and popular political discourse has suffered 
because of a lack of serious critical reflection about the utility of human rights based 
arguments in Northern Ireland and about the benefit of a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights. For example, consider this statement from one scholar who has published 
extensively in the area of human rights in Northern Ireland: 
One of the most important functions of the Commission is its work on a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland. The Bill of Rights exercise follows the conclusion of a constitutional settlement for 
Northern Ireland. It is from this settlement, and thus the Agreement, that the exercise derives its 
legitimacy. A vote for the Agreement can be read as consent for the adoption of a Bill of Rights 
(author emphasis) (Harvey, 2001, p. 126). 
To argue that A vote for the Agreement can be read as consent for the adoption of a 
Bill of Rights represents one of two things; either the scholar is offering a simplistic, 
but honest, assumption of the justification for pursuing a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights, ignorant of the realities of the circumstances of politics in Northern Ireland 
and the deeply contested nature of support for the Agreement, particularly amongst 
unionists or he is deliberately ignoring the political realities because they are too 
uncomfortable and contain some inconvenient truths about the nature of political 
disagreement in Northern Ireland about rights. As a consequence, human rights 
discourse has, therefore, lacked a critical edge in Northern Ireland. Indeed, one of the 
significant difficulties associated with the human rights narrative is that, if one 
reflects upon the academic literature on human rights in Northern Ireland and the 
political discourse of Irish Nationalist and Irish Republican political representatives, it 
could easily be concluded that the importance of human rights to the peace process in 
Northern Ireland was axiomatic and that the proliferation of rights based arguments 
and the development of human rights institutions in Northern Ireland was accepted 
universally by all political actors when an alternative to this seemingly imperious 
narrative has been expressed by influential strands of unionist opinion. This section of 
society in Northern Ireland, more so than other elite political actors in Northern 
Ireland, have expressed scepticism about many of the institutional developments in 
human rights protection that have occurred as a result of the Belfast Agreement, have 
been suspicious of the political claims that human rights discourse has made in 
Northern Ireland since 1998 and are anxious about the attempt to create a new 
orthodoxy in the body politic of Northern Ireland which places human rights at the 
apex and pinnacle of political discourse.  
The anxiety felt by unionism is neatly encapsulated in this statement from a unionist 
Member of the Northern Ireland Assembly, who in a contribution to a debate in the 
Assembly about a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland argued that,   
Unionists, however, became detached  or more accurately, dislodged from the rights process. That 
was understandable in Northern IrelandIt was sickening for many Unionists to hear the clamour 
for rights coming most loudly and frequently from those who denied basic rights to people in our 
country. It was nauseating to hear how barristers or solicitors who defended terrorists or suspected 
terrorists were referred to as human rights lawyers. That caused great unease in our community 
(DUP MLA, Simon Hamilton, 27
 October 2007, Northern Ireland Assembly debates, 15
 October 
2007, last accessed 30
 August 2010.) 
At the heart of this statement lie claims of alienation, mistrust and suspicion of human 
rights based arguments in Northern Ireland but, as this thesis will come to show, the 
words from this unionist politician tell only a partial story. What influential strands of 
unionist opinion think about human rights as that term has been interpreted in 
Northern Ireland is considerably more nuanced and complicated than the narrative 
often presented in academic literature and in popular political discourse. There is the 
distinct possibility that scholarly reflection might conclude that unionist recalcitrance 
when it comes to human rights in Northern Ireland is indicative of a wider ideological 
malaise within unionist political thought and yet further evidence to support the claim 
often made by Unionisms political opponents that it is a profoundly backward 
looking, regressive and incoherent tradition of political thought. In other words, that a 
study of unionism and human rights in Northern is futile because the reasons for the 
attitudes held by influential strands of unionist opinion towards human rights in 
Northern Ireland are axiomatic  that unionist suspicion about human rights is merely 
another example of unionist myopia similar to the attitudes held my many unionist 
politicians during the years of single Unionist party rule at Stormont from 1921 until 
1972 and reflective of the feeling held by unionisms political opponents that in terms 
of the peace process unionists have been seen asreluctant participants 
(Farrington, 2006a, p.182). However, this would subscribe to a caricatured and 
distorted conception of the history of unionist political thought.  As we shall discover 
in Chapter two of this thesis, whilst there is a sense that over the course of recent 
history Unionisms political representatives have been guilty of scoring intellectual 
own goals and guilty of finding themselves in a condition of ideological stasis, 
Unionism has always been capable of embracing a range of ideas, opinions, political 
outlooks and classes  the origins of Ulster Unionist ideology lie within a complex set 
of historical circumstances that cut across a range of socio  economic factors (Todd, 
1993).  
According to Richard English, one of the most conspicuous features of the scholarly 
literature in recent years has been the lack of scrutiny which certain subjects have 
received  subject(s) which the explosion of the Northern Irish conflict might have 
been expected to stimulate (1996, p.221). Whilst much scholarly work exists 
considering the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights process (significantly: Livingston 
(2001 & 1999), Harvey (2007, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c), Kavanagh (2004), Meehan 
(2004), Harvey and Livingston (1999), Mageen and OBrien (1999), Harvey and 
Schwartz (2009), Murray (2001), Bell (2000), Smith (2004, 2006) and also to a lesser 
extent on unionisms engagement with the peace process (for example, Farrington, 
2006b) and its ideological condition (for example, Aughey, 1989; 1991; 1998; 2000, 
Cochrane 1997 & Porter; 1996) one subject, which has received little academic 
consideration, despite recent developments, has been the area of unionism and human 
rights in Northern Ireland.  
The overall aim of this thesis is to investigate and consider the attitudes of influential 
strands of unionist opinion towards the concept of human rights as that narrative as 
been applied and interpreted in Northern Ireland. In order to consider fully the 
position of influential strands of unionist opinion on human rights, the thesis does this 
in two ways. Firstly, through theoretical engagement with what is meant by the 
concept of human rights and an examination of unionist political thought. Secondly, 
through examining the practical application of human rights in Northern Ireland, 
which means investigating the position of influential strands of unionist opinion on a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights (pre and post Belfast Agreement) and the relationship 
of key unionist elites with the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission (NIHRC). 
In doing this, at various points in latter part of the thesis unionisms relationship with 
the influential human rights NGO the Committee on the Administration of Justice 
(CAJ) who have been involved in human rights advocacy and campaigning since their 
inception in 1981 will also be considered to the extent that it is relevant to the thesis.  
The thesis poses four interconnected and overlapping questions. Firstly, are influential 
strands of unionist opinion sceptical and suspicious of human rights as that concept as 
been interpreted and applied in Northern Ireland? Secondly, if unionists have 
expressed anxiety, what aspects of human rights discourse in Northern Ireland are key 
unionist elites sceptical of? Thirdly, is this anxiety universal or do significant 
cleavages within unionism exist? Fourthly, why are unionists anxious about human 
rights discourse in Northern Ireland? 
This thesis aims to address the absence of any research or academic study of this area 
of Northern Ireland politics and in doing so increase our knowledge and 
understanding of unionisms relationship with this particular aspect of the peace 
process in Northern Ireland and of recent debates about the protection of human rights 
in Northern Ireland. Indeed, despite the existence of a considerable amount of 
academic reflection, analysis and research on human rights in Northern Ireland, it is 
very surprising that there has been no academic work in this area, which in and of 
itself is a depressing indictment of the existing body of academic literature in this area 
that it has failed to consider or investigate in a more meaningful way the position 
adopted by key unionist elites on human rights in Northern Ireland  one of the most 
significant aspects of the political settlement reached in the Belfast Agreement. It also 
aims to move beyond the anecdotal and rhetorical manner in which this area has been 
presented in the academic literature and in popular political discourse and develop a 
deeper understanding than currently exists about the nature of the relationship 
between key unionist elites and human rights in Northern Ireland.   
The research aims to build upon Christopher Farringtons (2006) extensive study of 
unionisms wider engagement with the peace process in Northern Ireland not in the 
literal linear sense that it aims to begin where he left off but that this research aims to 
complement and enrich our understanding of one particular distinctive feature of the 
Northern Ireland peace process  that of human rights and unionisms relationship 
with this significant aspect of the peace process. The research, as a starting point for 
analysis, relies heavily on the seminal work of a Northern Ireland think tank, the 
Cadogan Group (Taking Liberties, February, 2002), comprised of economic, political 
science and historical scholars from the University of Ulster (UU) and Queens 
University Belfast (QUB) who, in the initial Bill of Rights consultation process, were 
the only organisation to submit a robust, thoughtful and substantial critique of the 
NIHRC proposals. Furthermore, whilst both unionist parties and other influential 
organisations within the unionist community such as the Orange Order expressed their 
anxiety and suspicion about the draft proposals very forcefully in a number of public 
platforms, none of these organisations, in their various submissions articulated their 
concerns in quite the same profound and coherent manner as the Cadogan group did. 
Indeed, one political party within unionism, the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP), did not 
even manage to make a formal written submission to the NIHRCs consultation 
process. Consequently, this thesis, in chapters 4 and 5 specifically, aims to develop 
further and expand upon a number of themes contained in the Cadogan groups 2002 
submission to the Bill of Rights consultation process particularly its critique of the 
manner in which the NIHRC interpreted its statutory mandate to consult on a Bill of 
Rights, the utility of rights discourse in Northern Ireland and the ideological 
underpinnings of some human rights NGOs in Northern Ireland. It also aims to 
contribute in a broader sense to scholarship on human rights by highlighting a 
practical example of a political community who have expressed anxiety about the 
false hope often associated with human rights and the lessons that can be learned for 
human rights advocacy.  
A significant empirical challenge this research has encountered is the fact that the 
narrative of human rights is still unfolding and developing in Northern Ireland. For 
example, during the course of this research the Bill of Rights Forum published its 
final report in March 2008, the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 
(NIHRC) issued its long awaited advice to the Secretary of State in December 2008  
fulfilling its statutory duty under the Northern Ireland Act 1998, The UK Government 
responded to the NIHRCs advice by issuing a document for public consultation in 
November 2009 and alongside these developments there was a significant shift in the 
position of the two principal unionist parties  the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) 
and the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, which we 
shall we consider in chapter four of the thesis. Therefore, the research has been 
conducted against a political background that has been fluid, dynamic and ever  
changing. However, whilst this situation has posed significant challenges, I submit 
that the fluidity of the context in which the thesis has operated has, nevertheless, 
enriched and enhanced the research project by allowing new angles and insights to be 
pursued and examined.  Consequently, the thesis is contributing to an empirical and 
not necessarily a strictly theoretical gap on the peace process and conflict in Northern 
Ireland. A further challenge the thesis has encountered is the cross  disciplinary 
nature of the analytical frameworks used to understand the concept of human rights. 
For example, as we shall see in chapter one, insights from political, legal and moral 
philosophy have been borrowed to enrich our conceptual understanding of human 
rights. Alongside this, insights from political science and constitutional legal theory 
have been borrowed to help arrive at a clearer understanding of the nature and basis of 
constitutional charters of rights. Nevertheless, as chapters three, four and five will 
show, this study is firmly located within the discipline of political science. Indeed, as 
Todd Landman points out it is clear,  
that focussing on human rights as an object of inquiry for political science is a fruitful area of 
research since it combines such traditional concerns of the disciple with the realities of the 
contemporary world. Political science can make a substantial contribution to the field, which has 
long been dominated in the academy by the discipline of law (Landman, 2005, p551) 
Academics working in the field of human rights such as Michael Freeman 
acknowledge and indeed advocate an interdisciplinary approach to the study of human 
rights to help rescue the field from the dominance that law has acquired. As Freeman 
observes, the legal approach to human rights cannot adequately analyse the ethical, 
political, sociological, economic and anthropological dimensions of human rights 
(2002, p.78). I submit that grounding this thesis within the discipline of political 
science brings the advantage of allowing one to borrow insights from other disciplines 
without sacrificing the central place given to the analytical frameworks of political 
science in chapters three, four and five. Indeed, as this thesis is investigating a 
political community with a critical standpoint on human rights it makes sense to 
approach the task of analysing that criticism from this perspective because, as David 
Beetham observes, out of all the different sources of scepticism about human rights, 
that of political theory has the longest history dating from a variety of critical 
responses to the declaration of the rights of man in the French Revolution (Beetham, 
1995, p.1). Furthermore, the implementation of the architecture for the protection of 
human rights in Northern Ireland envisaged in the Agreement has, potentially, 
profound implications for constitutional matters in Northern Ireland and as one public 
law scholar admits the study and academic research of these issues cannot be left to 
lawyers or legal academics alone,  
Constitutions are not value  neutral legal documents, dry as dust and dull as ditchwater: they are 
living representations of the politics which made them and which consume them. Lawyers can find 
this uncomfortable and embarrassing. It is as if our subject (public law) is somehow to be regarded 
as being above all this, that law is not only autonomous from but also superior to and purer than 
mere politicsours is inescapably and deeply a political subject (Tomkins, 2003, p.5). 
There are three aspects to the methodological approach used in the collection of data 
in this thesis, which has been exclusively qualitative in nature. Firstly, an extensive 
review of existing literature was conducted in the following areas; human rights 
theory, unionist political thought, theoretical/philosophical ideas behind Bills of 
Rights, theoretical perspectives on and interpretations and explanations of the conflict 
in Northern Ireland, political/legal constitutional theory, transitional justice, human 
rights in Northern Ireland and developments in UK rights protection. Secondly, 
through the collection and analysis of a range of primary source data such as policy 
documents produced by political parties/organisations within unionism on the subject; 
manifestos from unionist political parties; written submissions made to various 
consultation processes ran by the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission and 
the NIO; oral submissions made to parliamentary committees; press releases issued by 
political parties/organisations within unionism; parliamentary debates and committee 
deliberations in the House of Commons, House of Lords, and Northern Ireland 
Assembly and in old Northern Ireland Parliament and newspaper reports and 
interviews. Thirdly, between April 2009 and October 2009 twenty two semi  
structured interviews were conducted with a number of key actors in the Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission, the Bill of Rights Forum and within influential 
strands of unionist opinion. The purpose of these interviews was to supplement the 
material collected and identified above. The individuals interviewed from the unionist 
community represented a range of unionist opinion and were chosen because of their 
engagement with human rights. Those interviewed included; David Trimble, 
Professor Monica McWilliams, Professor Brice Dickson, Peter Weir MLA, Nelson 
McCausland MLA, Dermot Nesbitt, Dawn Purvis, Trevor Ringland, Daphne Trimble, 
Brian Kennaway, Cannon Ian Ellis, Bertie Campbell, Lee Reynolds, Peter King, Dr. 
Brian Crowe, Jim Allister Q.C., Dr Chris. McGimpsey, Drew Nelson, Professor Chris 
Sidoti, Dominic Grieve Q.C. MP, Aideen Gilmore and Kevin Hanratty. For the 
purposes of the project I have defined influential strands of unionist opinion to 
include the following: elite actor elected representatives, representatives from the 
Loyal Institutions and representatives from the main Protestant churches in Northern 
Ireland. 
As intimated previously there are two sections to the thesis. In the first section, there 
are two chapters. Chapter 1 addresses the two principal ways in which political, legal 
and constitutional theory conceive of human rights. Firstly, it consider the increasing 
tendency within political theory to make political and moral claims about individual 
needs, desires and interests and to articulate a conception and vision of what is 
required to live the good life with an appeal to human rights. Secondly, it will 
examine some of the theoretical and practical arguments, which underpin explanatory 
justifications for Charters of Rights generally  in other words why, having 
established the existence of individual rights, should these rights be enshrined in a 
constitutional charter of rights. The chapter will examine the origins of the concept of 
human rights within the history of political theory and address some of the 
philosophical and theoretical controversies associated with the concept of human 
rights. The central argument of this chapter is that if there are no limits to what human 
rights are in theory then the risk is that there are no limits to what human rights are in 
practice. This key theoretical point will be particularly relevant to chapters 4 and 5. In 
other words, just as within the realms of political philosophy and theory there is 
profound disagreement over the nature of human rights and what rights should be 
protected in a constitutionally entrenched Charter of Rights, so too is there profound 
disagreement when we move from the abstract to the concrete to consider the 
practical implications of rights protection.  It is therefore too simplistic to describe 
key unionist elites as being opposed to human rights precisely because it depends on 
what conception of rights is offered and what one means by the term human rights. 
Different political actors in Northern Ireland have very different conceptions of 
human rights, their operation in practice and the boundaries of what is attainable 
through their incorporation in a constitutional document. Considerable disagreement 
exists in Northern Ireland over the nature of rights, the definition of what constitutes a 
right, who the holders of such rights are, the utility of rights discourse and the need 
for a culture of human rights in Northern Ireland. Chapter 2 explores the history of 
political thought within unionism and introduces some of the key political 
interpretations and ideological accounts of what it means to be a unionist. 
Additionally it will expand upon some themes in this discourse that are relevant to the 
thesis and which might help to contextualise further the issue of unionism and human 
rights. In terms of constitutionalism, the thesis argues that unionism is more 
comfortable within a discourse of political constitutionalism, which respects the 
sovereignty of Parliament and where rights are protected through the processes of 
Parliament and not the judiciary. This therefore explains a reason why foundationally 
unionism may not support the constitutional entrenchment of rights in a document like 
a Bill of Rights.  
Unionisms experience of rights discourse since 1998 has been shaped through the 
prism of three things: the debate over a bill of rights, the work of the Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission and of the human rights NGO the CAJ. It is the 
engagement of key unionist elites with these issues and these organisations and the 
interpretation of human rights that they have advanced, which has contributed towards 
unionist scepticism and suspicion. Therefore, the second section of the thesis 
addresses these key empirical issues in the interpretation and application of human 
rights in Northern Ireland. Chapter 3 will consider Unionist responses to proposals for 
a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland prior to the Belfast Agreement. It will introduce 
the historical context of human rights issues in Northern Ireland offering a brief 
overview from Partition to the peace process and the Belfast Agreement and begin by 
looking at the statutory protections contained in the Government of Ireland Act, the 
attempts by the Liberal MP, Sheelagh Murnaghan to pass a human rights Bill in the 
Stormont Parliament during the 1960s, the Civil rights movement and work of the 
Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights (SACHR) on the issue. It will 
examine and analyse the position of key unionist elites towards a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights from parliamentary debates, policy papers and interviews. The central 
proposition advanced in this chapter is that despite the recent scepticism expressed by 
unionist elites about the issue of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, unionism has not 
always been against the idea of a Bill of Rights conceptually. Evidence will be 
presented, which proves that historical support within unionism for a Bill of Rights 
existed from the early 1970s onwards. However, whilst unionists were prepared to 
support a Bill of Rights during this period, it is argued that one of the primary 
motivations behind this support was an attempt to mask unionisms failure to support 
power sharing at Stormont during this same period. Chapter 4 then moves to consider 
unionist responses to proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights since the Belfast 
Agreement. 
One of the key propositions of this chapter is that unionist scepticism about a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights is essentially a position that is traced to the 
implementation of the human rights provisions contained in the Belfast Agreement. It 
will introduce some of the theoretical justifications for a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights contained in the literature, including how it fits into wider debates on 
transitional justice theory and its application to Northern Ireland, in particular the link 
between Bills of Rights and conflict resolution and transformation. Chapter 5 
examines the relationship between unionism and the Northern Ireland Human Rights 
Commission with particular focus on analysing unionist concerns about the 
composition and representativeness of the NIHRC; the remit of the NIHRC including 
the nature and scope of its powers. Unionists have had a difficult relationship with the 
NIHRC since the inception of the organisation in 1999 mainly because of its position 
on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights but also due to concerns over how representative 
the organisation is and the work it has undertaken. This difficult relationship has 
contributed towards the suspicion that exists within unionism about human rights in 
Northern Ireland. This chapter will also, where such an examination is important for 
contextualising some of the key themes of the chapter, consider the uneasy 
relationship that exists between influential strands of unionist opinion and the 
Committee on the Administration (CAJ) particularly in the context of unionist 
concerns about the tendency for human rights discourse in Northern Ireland to focus 
on state violations of human rights and not on infringements carried out by 
paramilitary groups or non state actors.  
If the evolution and development of the debate about human rights protection in 
Northern Ireland during the period of the peace process and during the 
implementation of the Belfast Agreement has taught us anything it is that unionists 
and nationalists view human rights in very different terms. Indeed, in the terrain of the 
Northern Ireland peace process where the idea of constructive ambiguity has been 
influential in helping us to understand post Agreement political discourses in 
Northern Ireland (Aughey, 2001, 2005; Dixon, 2001 & Mitchell, 2009) the fact that, 
as Professor Tom Hadden puts it, the human rights agenda in Ireland, like most other 
things, can look rather different to Nationalists and Unionists (2003, p.6) should, 
perhaps, come as no surprise. Moreover, as we shall come to see in the next chapter, 
rights themselves can be considered as an extremely imprecise concept, ambiguous in 
nature and elusive in definition but this elusiveness, for some, is what constitutes their 
practical benefit. However, the fact that, as Gunnar Beck notes, there is no right 
answer to the question of what precisely is meant by the term human right (Beck, 
2008, p.314) merely reinforces the problem presented in this thesis that unionists and 
nationalists have competing conceptions of what is meant by human rights in 
Northern Ireland. Indeed, as one person interviewed for this thesis put it when it 
comes to rights and the differing views of unionists and nationalists on the matter, 
its a case of its not that were not on the same page, were not even on the same 
book (Interview with Lee Reynolds, 20
 May 2010). It is to that key issue of what is 
meant by human rights that this thesis now turns to.  
Chapter 1 
What are human rights? 
Introduction 
one of the most characteristic vices of the modern stateis the politicisation of legal 
processthis has occurred through a ruinous inflation of the rhetoric of rights, whereby every 
moral and political dispute and debate is cast in the legalistic idiom of rights discourse (Gray, 1993, 
p.14).  
The practical and philosophical difficulties presented by the concept of human rights 
are reflected in the proposition that what is meant by the concept in political, legal and 
constitutional discourses can be at once self  evident but yet remain elusive. To those 
activists who belong to one of the many human rights NGOs across the globe the 
axiomatic nature of what human rights are constitutes their practical benefit. Why 
philosophise about what we mean by human rights when peoples lives are at risk, 
when they are being denied due process of the law or their physical integrity is 
compromised by acts of torture or worse? Therefore, many human rights campaigners 
have often sought to eschew the type of conversations that seek to bring conceptual 
and analytical clarity to the concept of human rights. Concern about the elusive 
nature, however, of what is meant by human rights and the desire to articulate a 
defensible core of a theory of human rights is of profound concern to many 
contemporary scholars. For example, both Michael Ignatieff (2001) and James Griffin 
(2001 & 2008), motivated by a desire to defend human rights as a valid, important 
and relevant part of our political discourse and to mitigate against the worst excesses 
of rights inflation, have both addressed this issue. 
Whilst fundamental disagreement may exist over what is meant by the term human 
rights, we can agree that regardless of their metaphysical, epistemological or political 
and legal standing, rights talk is an ever present feature of contemporary political 
discourse. Long lists of political, legal and moral claims are made using the language 
of rights. Indeed, human rights language has acquired such a hegemonic status in 
discourses of international law and politics and domestic law and politics that to a 
large extent the triumph of human rights as the idea of our age appears almost 
complete. However, despite the pervasiveness of human rights in our political, 
philosophical and legal discourse many doubts (Douzinas, 2000 & 2007) still persist 
at a practical and theoretical level. The paradoxical status of human rights is 
encapsulated in this caustic observation from the critical legal scholar Costas 
Douzinas,  
The collapse of communism and the elimination of apartheid marked the end of the last two world 
movements which challenged liberal democracy. Human rights have won the ideological battle of 
modernity. Their universal application and final triumph appears to be a matter of time and of 
adjustment between the spirit of the age and a few recalcitrant regimes. Its victory is none other that 
the completion of the promise of the Enlightenment, of emancipation through reason. Human rights 
are the ideology after the end, the defeat of ideologies, or to adopt a voguish term the ideology at 
the end of history. And yet many doubts persist. (Douzinas, 2000, p.219) 
This chapter has two interconnected and overlapping purposes. Firstly, it will consider 
the increasing tendency within political theory to make political and moral claims 
about individual needs, desires and interests and to articulate a conception and vision 
of what is required to live the good life with an appeal to human rights. What the 
first part of this chapter is not about is proposing a new theory of human rights or 
indeed for that matter a comprehensive deconstruction of what we mean by the term 
right. In more modest terms it will confront four primary issues: origins; 
justification; proliferation and indeterminacy. For the purposes of the overall thesis it 
is important that we become acquainted with the controversies that lie at the heart of 
the concept of human rights before the thesis turns to consider the application of 
human rights in Northern Ireland and the way in which influential strands of unionist 
opinion have engaged with the issue of human rights there. It is necessary to devote 
part of this thesis to uncovering some of the controversies associated with human 
rights (to ask questions about what we mean by human rights and establish that there 
are profound theoretical and philosophical disagreements about what is meant by 
human rights) because if there are disagreements at a theoretical and philosophical 
level about what human rights are then it follows that there will be disagreements at 
the level of praxis when it comes to considering what rights we have or in the case of 
a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights what rights should be protected by the Bill.  
Secondly, it will examine some of the theoretical and practical arguments, which 
underpin explanatory justifications for Charters of Rights generally  in other words 
why, having established the existence of individual rights, should these rights be 
enshrined in a constitutional charter of rights. This section of the chapter will 
introduce some of the theoretical and philosophical ideas behind the introduction of 
constitutional charters of rights and introduce the debate between competing visions 
of constitutionalism  the legal and the political. It will also make brief reference to 
the current mechanisms for rights protection in the United Kingdoms constitution 
and in the context of the debate between legal and political constitutionalists refer to 
the fluidity of the future debate over rights protection in the UK. It will also examine 
the basis of scepticism expressed in political theory and philosophy about Bills of 
Rights outlining what is meant by court sceptic theory in so far as it is relevant to 
explanations of unionist responses to a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland.  
There is often a tendency when human rights are deployed either in popular political 
discourse, in the media or in parliament to conflate and confuse the term. As noted 
above there are two primary ways in which the term is used; to refer to the ethical and 
political claims one asserts as human rights and to the constitutional entrenchment of 
these individual rights in a Bill of Rights. However, sometimes we use the term 
human rights interchangeably to mean both the former and the latter when there is 
actually a profound difference conceptually between the different uses of the term. By 
the end of the chapter one should have an awareness of the two distinct senses in 
which the concept is used. 
Human Rights 
Origins  
Considering the origins of human rights is, in the words of one scholar, invariably 
complex (Guess 2001, p.132). The question, where do rights come from? refers not 
just to the abstract metaphysical debate about what the foundations of human rights 
are; but also to debates about the historiography of human rights. When did this term 
begin to emerge within political discourse? To what period can we trace the 
emergence of rights in political thinking? Reflecting about the intellectual origins of 
any concept within normative political theory such as human rights invites just as 
much controversy as questions about the end of history, in the sense that Hegel, Marx 
and Fukayama theorised. Indeed, questions about the origins of human rights will 
invariably invite a number of highly subjective considerations and examinations. For 
example, for those political actors, human rights activists and academics that support 
a strong theory and account of human rights, examining the intellectual origins of 
human rights through any deep historical excavation may not seem a particularly 
fruitful exercise, especially as doing so may reveal some unhelpful truths about the 
concept of human rights.  Primarily, because the deeper one explores the issue of 
human rights within the history of political thought, the more one discovers the 
existence of profound disagreement about whether human rights even have deep 
roots in the history of political thought in the first place and the essentially contested 
nature of what is meant by human rights (Gallie, 1956).  
Significantly, there is widespread scholarly agreement that the concept of human 
rights became prominent in political discourse around the time of the early 
enlightenment period. A number of scholars, within the disciplines of constitutional 
law and theory (Loughlin, 2000, 2003; Gearty, 2006; Morsink 2009), critical legal 
studies Douzinas (2000a, 2000b),  political science (Fields, 2006; Freeden, 1991; 
Ishay, 2004), moral philosophy (Griffin, 2008; Mahoney 2007) and political 
philosophy (Waldron 1984, 1987) trace the emergence of human rights thinking to the 
emergence of natural rights discourse in the political theories of Thomas Hobbes from 
his reflections in Leviathan and De Cive and John Locke in his influential work Two 
treatises of Government. Indeed, according to Waldron, Lockes work serves as the 
paradigm of a theory of natural rights (1987, p.7) and in the words of Costas 
Douzinas, Hobbes is the founder of the modern tradition of individual rights, the 
first philosopher to replace fully the concept of justice with the idea of rights. (2000, 
p.69) Natural law scholars such as Richard Tuck (1978) highlight two periods of 
history: the late medieval period and the 17
 century political writings of John Locke 
as being of profound importance to understanding how we have arrived at the notion 
of human rights deployed by political actors in contemporary political discourse.  
Locke published his Two treatises of Government in 1689; the year after the Glorious 
Revolution and in the same year as the English Bill of Rights was passed by 
parliament creating a constitutional monarchy in Britain. The telos of Lockes 
political philosophy can be viewed as a response to questions about political authority 
at the time, which challenged the divine right of the monarch to govern the affairs of 
the state (Waldron, 1987 p.7  22). If monarchs were no longer divinely entitled to 
rule, on what basis does political authority therefore rest? Lockes response was to 
argue that political authority should now rest upon the natural rights that individual 
citizens brought with them from the theoretical state of nature into the social and 
political world. Locke believed that from natural law flow natural rights. In many 
ways, the main force in moving the law towards a theory of natural rights was its 
gradual Christianisation (Douzinas, 2007 p.17) and in Lockes political writings we 
see evidence of this. For Locke, the state of nature was heavily grounded in the Judeo 
 Christian tradition of thinking about divine natural law which ultimately informed 
his conception of what natural rights meant (Waldron, 2002). As Waldron puts it, 
according to Locke, Rights represented the respect owed by ourselves and others to 
our nature and status as creatures of God (1987, p.13). Both John Locke and Thomas 
Hobbes before him begin their account of natural rights within the pre  political state 
of nature. As Locke observed,  
The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, which obliges everyone: and reason, which is 
that law, teaches all mankind who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one 
ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty or possessions (Locke, 1980, p.9). 
However, the Hobbesian conception of the state of nature differs from Lockes 
conception. The Hobbesian view on human nature is more profoundly sceptical and 
pessimistic than the conclusion Locke arrived at.  Mans purpose was to ensure his 
physical protection  as Loughlin puts it, Hobbes derived natural law from the most 
powerful of all passions  that of self preservation (Loughlin, 2003, p.116). In the 
Hobbesian state of nature as Hobbes writes, it is manifest that during the time men 
live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition 
which is called Warreof every man against every man (1991, p.88). In the 
Hobbesian conception man comes together in society to guarantee his physical 
protection by assigning the rights he held in the state of nature to protect his life to a 
central, sovereign power. In the words of Martin Loughlin, the Hobbesian covenant, 
it must be emphasised, is an act of alienation in which natural rights are relinquished. 
It is therefore not strictly a contract between rulers and ruled, but it is better 
understood as a covenant through which the authority of rulership is established. 
(2003, p.163) Whereas Locke believes that the transfer of rights from nature to the 
political is qualified in the sense that it is the governments obligation to protect these 
natural rights therefore enhancing individual freedom and that a failure to do this 
empowers people to withdraw their consent to be governed, Hobbes argued that the 
transfer of rights to an ultimate political sovereign was absolute as an essential way of 
protecting social order. Contrasted with Hobbes the Lockean state of nature is not one 
of perpetual war but one of equality and freedom. According to Locke,  
To understand political power right, and derive it from its original we must consider, what state all 
men are naturally in, and that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions, and dispose of 
their possessions and persons as they see fit, within the bounds of the law of natureand a state 
also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than 
another (1980, p.8) 
According to Locke in the state of nature rights are inherent, inalienable and 
universal. In this sense natural rights were in Lockes sense pre  institutional 
inhering in individuals independently and irrespective of what the political and social 
order declared. Hobbes argued that within this state of nature everyone possessed the 
natural right to preserve his or her life, the liberty each man hath, to use his own 
power, as he will himself, for the perseveration of his own nature(1991, p.91). John 
Locke took these two steps further. In Lockes state of nature everyone possessed the 
natural right to life, liberty and property. Not only did they have the obligation and 
duty to protect this for themselves but there was a reciprocal obligation to help others 
to do the same. Therefore, when one uses the term human rights in contemporary 
political discourse, one is referring to a term that has been synthesised and 
extrapolated from the tradition of reflection on the nature of natural law and the use of 
natural right in the political discourse of the enlightenment. This concept of natural 
rights therefore informs our contemporary understanding of what human rights are. 
One finds the articulation of natural rights in the canonical texts of John Locke, 
Thomas Paine and Jean Jacques Rousseau and explicitly in the late enlightenment 
French and American revolutionaries who expounded their cause with an appeal to 
the rights of man. As the Declaration of Independence of the Thirteen US Colonies 
stated, 
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of 
Happiness. (The Declaration of Independence of the Thirteen Colonies in Congress, July 4th, 
1776). 
Moreover, in the foundational texts of the French and American Revolution one finds 
reference to natural, inherent and inalienable  that natural rights can be located in all 
individuals, universally or as one scholar put it,  
all men have inherent and inalienable rights because these rights are natural ones, meaning that 
people have them by nature, or by their own nature, and not  and this is the revolutionary point  
as the result of social custom, judicial announcement, or act of some parliament, whether British or 
one of those created in the American colonies (Morsink, 2009, p.21)  
However, the naturalistic foundations upon which these canonical texts of the 
enlightenment were built did not escape robust criticism. One of the most forceful and 
robust critiques of the French Revolution is found in the work of the Conservative 
Whig Edmund Burke who in his Reflections on the Revolution in France argued 
against the pretended theorists of the French Revolution whose conception of rights 
was, according to Burke all extremes; and in proportion as they are metaphysically 
true, they are morally and politically false (2009, p.62). In one sense, however, 
Burkes critique does not necessarily have to be viewed as an attack on human rights 
themselves but on the particular conception of rights that was articulated in the French 
revolution (Freeden, 1991, p.16). As the Burkean scholar Russell Kirk notes,  
The Whig statesman did not look upon natural right as a weapon in political controversy: he had too 
much reverence for its origin. Whether in the role of reformer or of conservator, he rarely invokes 
natural right against his adversaries measures or in defence of his own (Kirk, 1951, p.442). 
Burkes point was that you cannot have natural and civil rights together  meaning 
that the rule of law in any society required the transition from the absolute of 
natural/human rights to the practical enforcement of civil rights. Similarly, for Burke, 
the natural law and the tradition of reflection about natural law upon which natural 
rights are constructed was important. Nevertheless, there is much scholarly 
disagreement about Burkes conception of and attitude to the metaphysical and 
epistemological basis of natural law (Stanlis, 2003). Indeed, at the heart of Stanliss 
thesis is the argument that Burkes conception of natural law is firmly located within 
the inherited tradition of reflection on natural law within Western political philosophy 
and that Burke did not represent a utilitarian repudiation of that body of thought. 
Rights, according to Burke, could not be conceived of in isolation of the particular 
traditions, customs and habits of the body politic (Fields, 2003). Burke, in rejecting 
the revolutionaries rights of man as an abstraction, thought that politics should be 
viewed in the words of one scholar, as a concrete and delicate process of evolution 
that is driven by dynamic within the bodies politic (Fields, 2003, p.25). Therefore 
within specific and distinct national traditions rights would evolve organically. The 
radical imposition of long lists of the rights of man or in modern terms the imposition 
of constitutional charter of rights runs counter to the type of conservative thinking that 
stresses the organic evolution of ideas, concepts and practices. Burke observed that,  
Government is not made in virtue of natural rights, which may and do exist in total independence of 
it; and exist in much greater clearness, and in a much greater degree of abstract perfection: but their 
abstract perfection is their practical defect. By having a right to everything they want everything 
(Burke, 2009, p.60).  
This account of human rights then considers rights not in abstract isolation to the 
particular customs, habits and traditions of a particular society but only in reference to 
these particular customs, habits and traditions. It is also grounded in a pragmatic 
assessment about whether these rights can be actually be delivered by the body politic 
(ONeill, 2005). As Burke argued,  
what is the use of discussing a mans abstract right to food or medicine? The question is upon the 
method of procuring and administering them. In that deliberation I shall always advise to call in the 
aid of the farmer and the physician, rather than the professor of metaphysics (Burke, 2009, p.61). 
Burkes opposition to the ideology of the French Revolution was based, as Noel 
OSullivan states on, "a philosophy of imperfection, committed to the idea of limits, 
and directed towards the defence of a limited style of politics (1974, p.4). 
Furthermore, the entire edifice of the revolutionarys claims was almost as foreign to 
Edmund Burke as it was to the father of utilitarianism Jeremy Bentham who robustly 
challenged the natural rights theories of the French and American revolutionaries. For 
legal positivists like Bentham (Bedau, 2000), without a foundation in the laws of a 
legitimate government, there can be no such thing as rights,  
from real laws come real rights; but from imaginary laws, from laws of nature, fancied and 
invented by poets, rhetoricians, and dealers in moral and intellectual poisons, come imaginary 
rights, a bastard brood of monsters (Bentham cited in Waldron, 1987, p.69) 
Bentham sought to establish law on a rational basis. For him that meant the 
elimination of all vague and abstract concepts and for Bentham natural rights were all 
three (Waldron, 1987). He recognised that the only rights were legal rights, not 
natural or universal human rights. Therefore he could not conceive of rights existing 
before government or law in the state of nature associated with the Hobbesian or 
Lockean conception of government.  Bentham sought to distinguish between the logic 
of legal rights and the innate utopianism and indeterminateness of natural rights,  
..when a man has a political caprice to gratify, and is determined to gratify it, if possible, at any 
price, when he feels an ardent desire to see it gratified but can give no reason why it should be 
gratified, when he finds it necessary to get the multitude to join with him, but either stoops not to 
enquire whether they would be the better or the happier for doing so, or feels himself at a loss to 
prove it, he sets up a cry of rights (Bentham cited in Waldron, 1987, p.36). 
Some scholars (Ishay, 2004; Morsink, 2009) argue that the concept of human rights 
stretches further into history than simply the late medieval or enlightenment period 
and that the ancient ethical discussions about the good life beginning with the 
reflections of Aristotle and Plato are extremely important for reaching a deeper 
understanding of the concept of human rights. Indeed as Morsink argues when the 
Greeks reflected about justice  what it meant and why it was important  in 
contemporary political discourse what the Greeks called justice we would call human 
rights (2009, p.14). Agreement on this fact is far from universal. Scholars (Guess, 
2001, 2008; MacIntyre, 1981; Weil, 1948) argue that despite their considered 
reflection on issues such as justice, the good life, reason and the nature of the polis the 
ancient Greeks appear to have had no conception of what we today regard as universal 
human rights. As the late French philosopher Simone Weil tells us, the Greeks had 
no conception of rights. They had no words to express it. They were content with the 
name of justice (Weil, 1948 cited in Fields, 2003, p.1). Similarly, Raymond Guess 
argues that it is, clear that the ancient Greeks had no concept at all that correspond to 
this conception. It is not even linguistically possible to formulate the statement I 
have a right to in fifth century B.C. Greek in any natural or transparent way. 
(Guess, 2008, p.65) It is a consistent theme in the recent work of Geuss (2001, 2008) 
that political philosophy should avoid becoming excessively ahistorical and take 
seriously the historic foundations upon which many contemporary normative political 
concepts are constructed. As Guess argues,  
rights discourse itself is not a very old feature of Western political thought and the idea that such 
a rights discourse could be the free  standing and universal framework for much of politics is a 
very recent idea indeed (Guess, 2001, p.132). 
Implicit in this statement is the idea that the social contract theories of John Locke 
and Jean Jacques Rousseau never imagined that human rights would form the 
normative framework in which much of contemporary political theory and practice 
takes place  that whilst human rights has a richer historical narrative than is 
sometimes presented in much of the law literature, the normative hegemony human 
rights have acquired in politics is a recent phenomenon. Moreover, if one examines 
one of the strongest philosophical and theoretical accounts of human rights found, for 
example in the work of the libertarian American philosopher Robert Nozick (1977) in 
his seminal publication Anarchy, State and Utopia that individuals have rights and 
there are things no  one can do to them without violating those rights is not just as 
Roger Scruton puts it, a disputed thesis of philosophy but is a profound 
philosophical claim that is not supported by the history of political thought. In the 
words of Hannah Arendt, inalienable political rights of all men by virtue of birth 
would have appeared to all ages (before the 18
 Century in Europe) a contradiction in 
terms (1963, p.45). 
The dominance the discipline of law has acquired in the theoretical and practical 
academic study of human rights has further contributed to the sense of ahistoricism 
often present in the work of some human rights scholars (Henkin, 1990; Nickel, 
2007). Indeed, because, as Richard Rorty puts it, human rights have become a 
welcome fact of the post-Holocaust world (1993, p.72) legal academics tend to 
consider 1948 as a conceptual year zero for human rights ushering in the human 
rights intoxicated era inaugurated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(Tasioulas, 2010, p.1). Therefore, when, as one scholar argues, that, the 
contemporary idea of human rights was formulated and given content during the 
Second World War and its aftermath (Henkin, 1990, p.1  2) it ignores not only the 
rich narrative of philosophical enquiry and practical reflection that occurred about the 
nature of rights from the period of enlightenment onwards but implies that a 
historiography of human rights is irrelevant for contemporary discussions and 
controversies about human rights. According to Mazower the explanation for the 
emergence of rights discourses in the post Second World War can be attributed to two 
related and overlapping reasons: the Eleanor Roosevelt version and the Adolf 
Hitler version. The former sees human rights emerge in political thinking because of 
a strong commitment by a noble number of visionaries to implement the concept and 
enact the UN Declaration on human rights whilst the latter stresses the reaction of 
widespread revulsion to the Nazi atrocities acting as a catalyst for a strong emphasis 
on human rights protection (Mazower 2004, p.380). In many ways international law 
has been the primary factor in pushing human rights towards the normative place it 
has acquired in contemporary political discourse.  It has played an extremely 
significant role in shaping the form and content of contemporary human rights 
discourse but one should be careful to avoid the presupposition that widespread 
agreement exists about the nature and content of the rights contained in international 
human rights treaties simply because certain rights have been enunciated in 
international human rights treaties. As Griffin puts it,  
widespread doubts about certain reputed civil rights, objections to the lavishness of some welfare 
rightshave a rational force that can not be countered simply by showing that these rights appear 
in international treaties (Griffin, 2008, p.204). 
Justification 
At the beginning of this chapter it was stated that what is meant by human rights in 
contemporary political discourse can be at once self  evident but yet remain elusive. 
Let us return to that conundrum. How can a concept such as human rights that has so 
pervasively invaded the normative language of political, legal and constitutional 
discourses in Western liberal democracies be in such a philosophical and theoretical 
muddle? For example, when an international human rights NGO calls for an illiberal 
political regime to pay greater respect to the fundamental rights of its citizens a 
seemingly innocuous statement can produce endless disagreement. What are 
fundamental human rights? Do they refer to what are sometimes called first 
generation civil and political rights such as due process, fair trial, freedom of religion, 
expression, privacy and assembly, right to life and rights to participate in the political 
process or do they refer to second and third generation human rights such as rights to 
healthcare, education, housing, an adequate standard of living and environmental 
rights? Charles Beitz warns those engaged in considering the nature of human rights 
to be clear about what it is one is asking for or seeking conceptual clarity about. As 
Beitz notes, philosophical investigations of human rights often begin by asking what 
are human rights? But it is not always clear what would count as an answer (2009, 
p.48). One might for example interpret the question as asking for an analysis of the 
nature of human rights, or what would constitute a list of human rights or asking 
about the values rights protect. It could also be asking why rights are significant, why 
we should care about them or their normative basis (Beitz, 2009, p.48). In this section 
of the chapter some of these questions will be considered highlighting the wide range 
of theoretical and philosophical accounts of human rights, which exist and the 
widespread disagreement amongst scholars about what is meant by human rights and 
whether human rights even exist at all.  Moreover, we should also consider what are 
we talking about when we talk about rights? Are we talking about legal rights, human 
rights or moral rights? Should we be more explicit in political discourse about the 
types of rights we are talking about?  
For the purposes of analysis it is sometimes convenient to categorise rights as either; 
first generation civil and political rights reflected in the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights; second generation socio  
economic rights such as rights to health, education and housing or third generation 
rights such as environmental, development and minority rights. This categorisation 
still, however, tells us nothing about the nature of rights or their justificatory basis. 
Recent scholarly reflection (Dembour 2006 & Evans 2004) has made some important 
advances in deconstructing the different ways in which we use human rights in 
political discourse. Dembour identifies four ways in which we use human rights; the 
natural, deliberative, protest and discourse schools of human rights (2006, ch 8) whilst 
Evans identifies three overlapping, but analytically distinct, discourses, each with its 
own language, concepts and normative framework (2004, p.156)  the theoretical, 
the legal and the political. The theoretical discourse is concerned with uncovering the 
foundations and justificatory basis for human rights whilst the legal discourse focuses 
on the intricate web of international human rights treaties and domestic charters of 
rights and the political discourse attempts to place human rights within the context of 
power, hegemony and interests (2004, p.158). Evans argues that a failure to 
recognise the different narratives of human rights which exist can lead to the 
premature claim that the human rights movement has achieved amazing progress 
since the adoption of the Universal Declaration (Evans, 2004, p.159). Evans 
framework for understanding human rights discourse leads to the more accurate 
proposition that human rights have made huge advances in the legal discourse, less so 
progress in the political discourse and very little progress in the theoretical discourse.   
Whilst contemporary human rights discourse has deep theoretical roots within the 
early modern period of the enlightenment, that same discourse tends to eschew 
naturalistic justifications for human rights in favour of constructing an account of 
human rights based on values such as dignity, equality, needs, capabilities, worth, 
utility, interests and autonomy. Indeed we see many of these values expressed in the 
theoretical account of human rights offered by James Nickel who argues that human 
rights are,  
basic moral guarantees that people in all countries and cultures allegedly have simply because 
they are people. Calling these guarantees rights suggests that they attach to particular individuals 
who can invoke them, that they are of high priority, and that compliance with them is mandatory 
rather than discretionary. Human rights are frequently held to be universal in the sense that all 
people have and should have them, and to be independent in the sense that they exist and are 
available as standards of justification and criticism whether or not they are recognised and 
implemented by the legal system or officials of a country (Nickel, 1992, p.561-2). 
This account of the justificatory basis for human rights offered by Nickel is, in many 
cases, the paradigm which human rights practitioners work from. Rights, conceived of 
in this account, are therefore pre  institutional in the sense that they exist before and 
irrespective of whether they are ever created or recognised by the particular legal and 
political apparatus of a country; they are universally valid  applying at all times and 
in all places to individual agents and their violation or abrogation is serious. As one 
academic points out, it is these characteristics that provide, 
one of the initial attractions of theories of moral and human rightsthat they appear to give 
secure and objective criterion beyond the whims of human will or the contingencies of particular 
historical and cultural situations, in virtue of which we can be sure of what we ought to do (Young, 
1978, p.71). 
In many ways, the growth of rights discourse can be viewed as correlative to the 
prominence the individual has acquired in Western political thought and the desire to 
protect and maintain individual autonomy. The prominence of the individual has deep 
roots in the political thought of the enlightenment  the period of modernity from the 
last twenty or so years of the seventeenth century to the end of the eighteenth century 
known as the enlightenment. In the previous section we considered how the concept 
of human rights used in contemporary political discourse was shaped by the political 
thought of the enlightenment and how, as James Griffin puts it, the notion of human 
rights that emerged by the end of the enlightenment  what can be reasonably called 
the enlightenment notion - is the notion we have today (2008, p.13).  
The purpose of the enlightenment project is neatly encapsulated in the words of the 
German philosopher Immanuel Kant who made such a profound contribution to the 
intellectual reflection on the ethics and political philosophy of the enlightenment 
when he posed the question Was ist Aufklarung? (What is enlightenment?) He 
answered, Enlightenment is mans emergence from his self-imposed immaturity. 
Immaturity is the inability to use ones understanding without guidance from another 
(http://www.english.upenn.edu/~mgamer/Etexts/kant.html, last accessed, 17
2010). Reason, according to Kant, was to be the guiding principle for human action 
and the primary way in which the individual could break free from the bonds and 
chains of tradition. As Foucault commented when he posed the same question as Kant 
did exactly two hundred years later,   
Kant indicates right away that the 'way out' that characterizes Enlightenment is a process that 
releases us from the status of 'immaturity.' And by 'immaturity,' he means a certain state of our will 
that makes us accept someone else's authority to lead us in areas where the use of reason is called 
for (1984, p 34). 
The enlightenment project, however, is not without its critics in contemporary 
political thought and in Alasdair MacIntrye (2007) one finds both robust criticism of 
the philosophical foundations of the enlightenment and the concept of natural rights 
which, came from modernity. According to MacIntyre there were three primary tasks 
of the enlightenment; firstly, to become enlightened; secondly providing a single set 
of universal moral prescriptions, compelling to all rational individuals and thirdly 
identifying in detail the nature and content of the moral rules that universal reason 
requires and that of bringing into being and sustaining a set of social, economic and 
technological institutions designed to achieve the enlightenments moral and political 
goals (2006, p.173).  MacIntyres robust criticism of human rights must be 
understood within the wider context of his critique of the enlightenment and its failed, 
as he argues, attempt to find and justify an independent, universal and rational model 
for individual morality,  
The utilitarianism of the middle and late nineteenth century and the analytical moral philosophy of 
the middle and late twentieth century are alike unsuccessful attempts to rescue the autonomous 
moral agent from the predicament in which the failure of the enlightenment project of providing 
him with a secular, rational justification for his moral allegiances had left him (MacIntyre, 2007, 
p.68).  
Despite MacIntyres early post Marxist criticisms of the excessive individualism 
associated with enlightenment political thought he himself was uncomfortable with 
the communitarian label other scholars have portrayed him, preferring to be 
associated with the recovery of the Aristotelian and Thomistic accounts of virtue in 
the restoration of social, political and moral communities. Similarly, MacIntyres 
position on human rights is equally unorthodox. On the one hand he makes one of the 
most forceful and robust claims about the nature of human rights in the post World 
War II period in denying that human rights exist at all whilst on the other in following 
Burke and Bentham before him does not preclude the existence of rights conferred 
by positive law or custom on specified classes of person (2007, p.68). As so often is 
the case, it is not legal rights  that is rights conferred by statute or the rule of law in 
the particular political and legal structures of a State that causes philosophers like 
MacIntrye problems but the universal, abstract human rights which are claimed to 
exist independent and before the concrete circumstances and custom of the body 
politic. In his seminal publication After Virtue MacIntyre challenges the notion that 
human rights exist at all as a category of ethical discussion, moral or political 
philosophy. He states,  
the truth is plain: there are no such rights, and belief in them is one with belief in witches and in 
unicorns. The best reason for asserting so bluntly that there are no such rights is indeed of precisely 
the same type as the best reason, which we possess for asserting that there are no witches and the 
best reason which we possess for asserting that there are no unicorns: every attempt to give good 
reasons for believing that there are such rights has failed (MacIntyre, 2007, p.69) 
In many ways some scholars view human rights as the completion of the promise of 
the Enlightenment, of emancipation through reason (Douzinas, 2000, p.1). 
Therefore, if conceived in this sense, the attempts to universalise rights outside the 
particular circumstances, traditions and customs of various political communities 
represents the logical extension of the enlightenment project. Human rights, in this 
sense, therefore can be seen as helping Kantians find a way out of the immaturity, 
Kant argued was imposed upon man by tradition and orthodoxy. Conceived in this 
way human rights then are capable of forming the moral foundation for the modern 
conduct of politics and ethics. Indeed, according to Edwards, unlike needs, wants 
or interests, rights have a morally compelling component (2006, p.277) at its core 
to the extent that its non  fulfilment or abrogation constitutes a wrong that ought to 
be corrected (Edwards, 2006, p.277). Increasingly, the search for a moral basis to 
political action is found by an appeal to human rights. Indeed as one religious leader 
in the UK put it, the language of rights emergesat a time when people need a fresh 
moral compass in the wake of the dissolution of much traditional morality (Williams, 
2009). Francesca Klug calls human rights values for a godless age. In her view 
human rights are capable of filling the morality gap of our so called post secular age 
which is searching for a new morality,  
This search for new political values has coincided with a quest for new moral values by a number of 
commentators, politicians, educators and religious leaders over recent yearsThere is a view that 
in an era where deference has declined and no single dominant religion or other world view binds 
the vast majority of individuals in the UK, we have lost the basis we once had for shared moral 
valuesEnter human rights; an idea whose time has come (Klug, 2000, p.2). 
According to this view it is human rights which form the basis or starting point for 
political morality. Indeed, nowhere, is this tendency more prominent than in 
international relations when the morality of a states actions is judged against the 
benchmarks of normative standards of human rights. According to Raz, however, 
neither morality nor political morality can be based on a conception of human rights  
that if morality has a foundation it includes, duties, goals, virtues etc (1988, p.193) 
not human rights. However, how can a concept such as human rights form the basis of 
political morality when what is meant by that term is essentially contested? As Susan 
Mendus argues, theories of human rights purport to provide a foundation for moral 
and political thinking, but the foundation is elusive and precarious (Mendus, 1995, 
p.12) 
Other scholars explain the nature of rights as providing a minimum standard of global 
justice (Beitz 2003); as trumps over other moral considerations and values (Dworkin 
1977); as part of the reasonable law of peoples (Rawls, 1993) or as entitlements to 
capabilities (Sen, 2004; 2005). However, in many ways the legal theorist Wesley N. 
Hohfeld has provided what is almost certainly the paradigmatic analysis and 
deconstruction of what is meant by a particular class of right  that of the legal right 
(Hohfeld, 1913). What does it mean to hold a legal right to x? To answer this question 
and summarise Hohfelds thesis, he produced a scheme, which identified four types of 
right (claim, liberty, power and immunity) each of which has a corresponding jural 
correlative and jural opposite. The Hohfeldian definition has formed the basis for so 
much of the analytical thinking about rights that has taken place in twentieth century 
political and legal theory. Hohfelds work in this area, as one scholar reminds us, was 
motivated by a profound conviction that the notion of a legal right was ambiguous 
and that he himself believed the ambiguity was so endemic and productive of 
confusion that we should cease to speak of legal rights altogether (Knowles, 2001, 
p.138). Hohfelds claim right is arguably the right most discussed in political theory 
(Waldron, 1984). At this point it is necessary to note the distinction between legal 
rights and human rights, legal rights being the product of a particular legal and 
political system and human rights a particular kind of moral appeal about the interests, 
needs and desires of an individual inherited from the natural rights tradition of the 
early modern period. Legal rights and human rights are often conflated and it is the 
case that many human rights have been translated into legal rights within particular 
legal and political systems. As one scholar puts it, there has undoubtedly been a far 
more thorough mapping of the concept of legal rights than has been the case for moral 
or human rights (Young, 1978, p.64). 
For an individual to enjoy a legal right is really another way of saying that that 
individual is in a position to lay claim to something - that ones possesses a valid 
claim (Feinberg, 1973). Indeed, according to Waldron Hohfelds claim right is 
generally regarded as coming closest to capturing the concept of individual rights 
used in political morality (1984, p.8). Hohfelds classification is often the classic 
starting point for the analysis of rights. However, following on from that the will (or 
choice) and interest theory of rights have featured prominently over the past twenty 
five years in discussions about the nature of rights  particularly from a 
jurisprudential perspective. One of the leading exponents of the will theory was the 
late legal philosopher H.L.A Hart. The central thesis of the will theory is that it gives 
the individual right holder the power to demand or control over the performance of a 
duty by another person or at a minimum the power to relinquish the performance of a 
duty. In many ways, therefore, the right holder according to Hart is a small scale 
sovereign (1982, p.183). Put differently, one only has a right when one may 
exercise a choice in respect of the way the duty may be performed (Penner, 1997, 
p.301). Nevertheless, the will theory has been criticised on a range of grounds 
(Graham, 1996) but perhaps the most notable criticism is to do with its capacity to 
embrace the full account of legal rights in existence. The late legal philosopher Neil 
MacCormick is amongst one of the most robust critics of the Hartian conception of 
rights who, in an oft quoted passage, said, We are all accustomed to talking and 
thinking about some rights as inalienable. But if the will theory is correct, the more 
they are inalienable, the less they are right (1977, p.198  99)  the point being that if 
the inalienability of rights means the right  holder has no control, then the choice 
theorist is unable to accept that many fundamental human rights are rights at all 
(Penner, 1997, p.301).  
MacCormick and the legal and moral philosopher Joseph Raz are amongst the most 
prominent advocates of the alternative, and often cited in contrast to the will theory, 
of rights  the interest theory. The central proposition of the interest theorys account 
of a right, according to Raz, is that X has a right if an only if X can have rights, and, 
other things being equal, an aspect of Xs well being (his interest) is a sufficient 
reason for holding some other persons to be under a duty (Raz, 1986, p.168). Some 
scholars (Cruft, 2004 eg.) have rejected outright both the will and interest theoretical 
account of rights in the sense that neither can accurately encapsulate the way in which 
the term right is used in popular and technical political discourse  in the sense that 
the ways in which the term is used cannot be explained by either theoretical account. 
An essential feature of both accounts is the relationship between right and duty. In the 
Hohfeldian classification a duty is conceived of as the jural correlative of a right. 
However, as the interest theory conceives it the relationship between right and duty is 
a justificatory one  rights justify the imposition of duties but not vice  versa 
(Marmor, 1997, p.3).  However, duty and right, according to the interest theory of 
rights, are not unilaterally connected. The existence of a duty does not necessarily 
mean the imposition of a right. As Penner argues, 
The interest theory avoids making it an axiom that whenever someone benefits because of a duty, 
the beneficiary is said to have a right. If a duty is imposed on A for some reason other than to 
secure or protect an interest of Bs, but which nevertheless benefits B, then B is merely the 
beneficiary of a duty without having a right (1997, p.302).  
The nexus between duties and rights is a familiar theme in contemporary debates 
about rights at both a philosophical and practical level often becoming entangled in 
debates amongst political actors and political philosophers about the relationship 
between the individual and society and between those who advocate a communitarian 
or liberal approach to reflecting about this relationship. The essence of the 
communitarian concern is that an excessive focus on rights at the expense of duties is 
one of a number of significant factors leading to the further fragmentation of society 
and community where the autonomy of isolated individuals is elevated beyond the 
bonds of fraternity and community within society. The communitarian stresses the 
cost to community that rights talk causes through its excessive individualism that 
focuses on what I can claim and not on what duty I owe. This critique finds 
philosophical expression by scholars such as Onora ONeill, who argues that,  
We fantasise irresponsibly that we can promulgate rights without thinking carefully about the 
counterpart obligations and without checking whether the rights we favour are consistent, let alone 
set feasible demands on those who have to secure them for others (ONeill, 2002, p.18  19)  
That rights talk can lead to excessive individualism, which encourages and fosters 
selfishness and egoism is also found in the reflections of Karl Marx in his early 
writings. For example in his early polemic On the Jewish Question he warned that 
none of the so called rights of man goes beyond egoistic man, man as he is in civil 
society, namely an individual withdrawn behind his private interests and whims and 
separated from the community (Marx cited in McLellan, 1977, p.54). However, 
Marx distinguished between the rights of man and the rights of citizens. For Marx, the 
rights of citizens, which would include matters such as the right to vote and the right 
to freedom of political expression far from being egotistic, selfish, individualistic 
rights were political rights that are only exercised in community with other men 
(Marx cited in Waldron, 1987, p.144). The Harvard Law professor Mary Ann 
Glendon laments the missing language of responsibility (Glendon, 1991, p. 76  
108) from contemporary western political discourse arguing that, the exaggerated 
absoluteness ofrights rhetoric is closely bound up with its other distinctive traits  a 
near silence concerning responsibility, and a tendency to envision the rights bearer as 
a lone autonomous individual (Glendon, 1991, p.45). For the French philosopher 
Simone Weil obligation and duty comes before that of rights. Weil argues that a right 
is not effectual by itself, but only in relation to the obligation to which it corresponds, 
the effective exercise of a right springing not from the individual who possesses it but 
from other men who consider themselves as being under a certain obligation towards 
him (Weil, 2002, p.3) Connecting rights with duties can militate against some of the 
worst excesses of rights discourse but duties themselves do not set limits on rights  
they might bring some measure of analytical or philosophical clarity but that does not 
solve the indeterminateness of human rights themselves  an issue we shall turn to in 
the next section of this chapter. Just because you connect rights with duties doesnt 
stop the expression of an endless list of socio  economic, political and moral claims 
using the language of rights. 
Proliferation and Indeterminacy  
As we have seen, western political thought from the end of the enlightenment contains 
much scepticism about human rights from Burke and Benthams robust attacks on the 
rights of man through Marxs nineteenth century critique to more contemporary 
concerns (Vincent, 2010; Brown, 1997 & Dembour 2006) about the alleged 
universalism of human rights. The utility and the pervasiveness of rights talk in 
contemporary political discourse has also been criticised by scholars (Ignatieff 1984; 
2001 & 2007; Glendon, 1991). As Glendon argues,  
rights talk in its absoluteness, promotes unrealistic expectations, heightens social conflict, and 
inhibits dialogue that might lead toward consensus, accommodation or at least the discovery of 
common ground (Glendon, 1991, p.14). 
However, there is, arguably, no more significant criticism of human rights, both 
philosophically and practically than the profound concern articulated by some 
scholars most notably, the political scientist Michael Ignatieff and the moral 
philosopher James Griffin that human rights are indeterminate and that political 
discourse has been invaded by the problem of rights inflation defined by Michael 
Ignatieff as the tendency to define anything desirable as a right (2001, p.90), which 
according to Ignatieff erodes the defensible core of a theory of human rights. Put 
differently, Griffin argues that human rights are,  
nearly criterion less. There are usually few criteria for determining when the term is used 
correctly and when incorrectly  and not just among politicians, but among followers, political 
theorists and jurisprudentialists as well. The language of human rights has, in this way, become 
debased (Griffin, 2008, p.14). 
This sense of elusiveness associated with attempts to bring analytical and 
philosophical clarity to what is meant when one uses the term human rights and the 
elasticity and indeterminateness of when that term can be applied in political 
discourse has resulted in the widespread proliferation of the use of human rights in 
moral, legal and political discourse. There are two significant consequences of this 
theoretical and practical position; firstly, in theory, any interest, need, desire, want or 
good can become a right. As Ignatieff argues, good causes are not made better by 
confusing needs with rights. Rights inflation reduces the real value of rights 
language. (Ignatieff, 1999, p.60) Secondly, this sort of conceptual indeterminateness 
poses problems when one comes to reflect and consider some of the profound 
questions about rights such as why certain rights are important; why an interest, need, 
or desire should become a right in the first place; what happens when rights conflict; 
what rights are absolute; what rights do individuals have? Scholarly reflection on the 
problem of rights inflation did not, of course, begin with the work of Ignatieff or 
Griffin. The problem was first identified by Jeremy Bentham, who, as is already 
highlighted, was, along with Burke, one of the most forceful critics of natural rights 
theory. The late political theorist, Maurice Cranston (1967) also identified that the 
proliferation of rights was becoming a major problem to be confronted by political 
theorists. Cranston argued that the only authentic rights were essentially first 
generation civil and political rights and that it was a profound inflation of the concept 
to argue that socio  economic claims, interests and needs could be asserted as human 
rights. As Cranston argued,  
some politicians, indeed, have a vested interest in keeping talk about human rights as 
meaningless as possible. For there are those who do want to see human rights become positive 
rights by genuine enactments, hence the more nebulous, unrealistic, or absurd the concept of human 
rights is made out to be, the better such men are pleased (Cranston, 1967, p.45). 
Similarly and echoing the criticisms of Burke earlier, Oneill argues that,  
The rhetoric of rights lends itself all too easily to vague substantive claims: we can speak of rights 
to free speech and food, to health and association, and we can formulate suggestive phrases such as 
right to a liveable climate, right to clean air, right to potable water, and cultural rights. 
Unfortunately this way of thinking shows nothing about who should do what for whom: it is 
rhetorically impressive, if one likes that sort of thing, sometimes politically useful, but practically 
indeterminate (ONeill, 2010, p.166).  
The problem of rights inflation is the central theoretical problem caused when one 
resorts to axiomatic arguments to defend the use of human rights in political 
discourse.  Moreover, despite the fact that many writers advise us to stop debating 
questions about the foundations of human rights (OConnell, 2005, p.484) this 
debate about foundations should be considered absolutely critical whilst human rights 
continue to have normative force within political and legal discourse and whilst the 
use of human rights language remains so widespread. Indeed, because the definition 
of what human rights are is so elastic, elusive, subjective and sensitive to culture, 
place and time the pursuit of conceptual clarity should be a constant and relentless 
pursuit otherwise rights end up becoming even more indeterminate and the language 
of human rights becomes even more debased. Foundations and conceptual precision 
matters because if there are no limits to what human rights are in theory then the risk 
is that there are no limits to what human rights are in practice. As Michael Freeman 
argues, it is not enoughto know that we support human rights. We need to know 
why we do so (Freeman, 1994, p.514). The problem of rights inflation is lamented as 
one of the most profound issues facing human rights, both in theory and practice. 
However, it is important to note that neither Ignatieff nor Griffin comes from the 
MacIntyrean school of thought about human rights, which denies that human rights 
can exist all or even from a Burkean or Benthamite perspective, which criticises 
natural rights. In both Ignatieffs (1999, 2001) and Griffins (2001, 2008) scholarly 
reflections about the problem of rights inflation they are motivated by a desire to 
suggest ways in which a defensible and legitimate account of human rights can be 
constructed to protect the concept from attack by sceptical political actors and from 
philosophical attack by scholars such as Alasdair Macintyre. Ignatieff constructs a 
minimalist account of human rights that he anchors in a robust conception of human 
agency,  
Human rights matter because they help people to help themselves. They protect their agency. By 
agency, I mean more or les what Isaiah Berlin meant by negative liberty, the capacity of each 
individual to achieve rational intentions without let or hindrance (Ignatieff, 2001, p.57) 
Griffins account of human rights is not far from this theoretical framework. What 
Ignatieff calls agency, Griffin calls personhood. The essence of the personhood 
account of human rights is that it protects human dignity  in particular our capacity 
to act as human agents (Griffin, 2008). It is precisely because they believe that human 
rights are important that they propose a limited account of what is meant by that term.  
At this juncture, it is possible to discern five primary reasons to help explain why 
rights within political theory and practice have arrived at the challenging and 
problematic situation caused by rights inflation. Firstly, the search for an ethical and 
moral foundation for political and legal discourse in our post secular and postmodern 
age, as discussed above, has meant that rights have acquired a normative 
pervasiveness as the alternative foundation upon which to base political morality. As 
a consequence, therefore, we see the indeterminate range of human needs, interests 
and desires asserted as rights. The reason for this may be, as John Gray caustically 
suggests, because of the manifest absence of any coherent alternative (Gray, 1996, 
p.144) to human rights upon which to base political morality and whilst there is some 
truth in that statement a more accurate explanation is offered by the legal scholar 
Conor Gearty who argues, that, where once we had ideas like socialism, social 
justice and fairness, nowadays increasingly human rights is being called upon to do all 
the moral work (Gearty, 2006, p.9).  Secondly, a consequence of the subsequent anti 
 foundational turn in philosophical discussion, exemplified by the late American 
philosopher Richard Rorty, is the problem of rights inflation. This discourse eschews 
foundational philosophical debates such as the search for the foundations upon which 
a theory of human rights can be constructed because, it is argued no agreed, objective 
basis can be said to exist. However, if debates about the foundations of human rights 
are not pursued, then the risk is that analytical and theoretical clarity will be lost and a 
possible consequence is the proliferation of the claims asserted as rights. Rights, 
according to Rorty (1993), do not require philosophical reflection about their 
foundations. Nonetheless, some scholars reject the anti  foundationalism of Rorty 
and the practical expediency of some human rights activists and agree with the 
approach of continuing the debate about the justificatory basis and foundations of 
human rights (Campbell, 2000; Sen, 2004). Sen, like Ignatieff and Griffin, is 
motivated by a desire to defend human rights from scepticism and cynicism, however, 
his motivations lead him to adopt an expansionist theoretical account of human rights 
which conceives of human rights as primarily ethical demands (Sen, 2004, p.319), 
universal in nature and offers a strong defence of socio  economic rights. As Sen 
argues,  
the conceptual doubts must also be satisfactorily addressed, if the idea of human rights is to 
command reasoned loyalty and to establish a secure intellectual standing. It is critically important to 
see the relationship between the force and appeal of human rights, on the one hand, and their 
reasoned justification and scrutinised use, on the other (Sen, 2004, p.317).  
Similarly, Tom Campbell agrees that the foundational theoretical debates should not 
be so easily dismissed,  
philosophical problems should not be ignored because they are expressed in an abstract and 
theoretical manner. Putting such issues to one side because there is general agreement that there is a 
role for human rights discourse in contemporary political systems ignores the practical problems 
which arise from genuine controversy over the content and form of human rights (Campbell, 2000, 
p.13).  
Thirdly, the tendency of legal positivism to present rights as a fait acompli means that 
the debate about foundations is often bypassed. For example, if a right, which existed 
in a theoretical pre institutional state or as a moral imperative, is translated into a legal 
right in the political and legal code of a state, what requirement is there to reflect upon 
its particular foundations if it is already asserted within a piece of legislation, a 
constitutional charter of rights or in a human rights treaty in international law? As one 
academic points out the process of the positivisation of human rights might be 
thought to resolve many of the theoretical questions of legal and political 
philosophers (OConnell, 2005, p.485). However, ultimately, whilst offering 
possibilities for resolving the problem about what the foundations of human rights 
are, the positivisation of human rights leaves unresolved many important questions 
about the justificatory basis of human rights. As he argues, relying on positive law 
fails to provide us with a critical edge; it fails to tell what rights we should legislate 
for. (OConnell, 2005, p.500) Fourthly, in the shift from what Griffin has called the 
enlightenment notion of human rights to our contemporary notion of human rights, 
an increasingly frequent occurrence was the invocation in academic literature of a 
rhetorical, not philosophical justification for human rights  a problem encapsulated 
in this statement from the American legal scholar Louis Henkin,  
The idea of human rights that has received currency and universal (if nominal) acceptance in our 
day owes much to these antecedents but it is discrete and different from them. The contemporary 
version does not ground or justify itself in natural law, in social contract or in any other political 
theoryThe justification of human rights is rhetorical, not philosophical. Human rights are self  
evident, implied in other ideas that are commonly intuited and accepted (Henkin, 1990, p.1-2). 
As James Allan argues,  
Clearly, rights claims are to many people intuitively appealing; the generally absolutist and forceful 
manner in which they are expressed has normally been sufficient to mask seeming deficiencies, 
indeterminateness, and inadequacies associated with the concept of rights (Allan, 2006, p.260).  
Some scholars (e.g. Ingram, 2008) distinguish between philosophical and political 
approaches to considering human rights  that philosophical approaches ask what 
these rights are, why we have them, what they are based on, how they can be justified, 
which are the most fundamentalPolitical approaches, in contrast, start with the 
problem of putting rights into practice (Ingram, 2008, p.402). Rights, in the political 
sense, are said to exist as an empirical fact of the world in which we live. The political 
approach, or what Bufacchi calls the pragmatist theory of rights (Bufacchi, 2008) is 
an attempt to reconcile and address the paradox at the heart of the concept of human 
rights exemplified by the growing chasm and discrepancy between the ever expanding 
realm of human rights in practice within the disciplines of politics, international 
relations and the growing theoretical and philosophical concern about human rights. 
As Susan Mendus notes,  
these philosophical reservations have increased rather than diminished against a political 
background wholly hospitable to the defence of human rights. Influential strands within political 
theory thus run directly counter to influential strands within political practice (Mendus, 1995, p.11). 
The pragmatist theory of rights, however, according to Buffachi finds its classical 
exposition in the work of Attracta Ingram, who states that,  
My present argument is not that there is a shared basis for a universalism of liberal rights. Instead it 
is the argument that the shared practice of human rights evaluation makes universalistic evaluations 
in terms of our theory of rights intelligible to others even if they disagree with us. This shared 
practice is then the basis for another  a practice of intersocietal debate about rights in which 
various theories are pitted against each other. This latter practice is an aspect of one of the central 
practices of our tradition  the practice of debating and contesting theories of justice (Ingram, 1994, 
p.201).  
To avoid the abandonment of foundational arguments altogether Bufacchi maintains 
that the pragmatist theory advanced by scholars such as Mendus and Ingram is a type 
of quasi foundational argument  a third way between the metaphysical and 
epistemological debate between foundationalists and anti  foundationalists; the 
essence of which is to accept as its starting point the anti  foundationalist critique 
(Bufacchi, 2008, p.323) but maintain the belief in foundationalism without having to 
provide the sort of evidence as solid grounds for human rights that anti  
foundationalists denounce as illusory (Bufacchi, 2008, p.313). Fifth, often human 
rights activists and practitioners in the face of a serious humanitarian situation caused 
by violent conflict for example will argue that the philosophical niceties of 
foundational debates are totally irrelevant when faced with the practical reality of a 
humanitarian disaster or a violent armed conflict or civil war. As a consequence the 
debate about the foundational and justificatory basis is often eschewed. A position 
endorsed by the anti foundationalism of the philosopher Richard Rorty, who argues 
that, we pragmatists argue from the fact that the emergence of the human rights 
culture seems to owe nothing to increased moral knowledge, and everything to 
hearing sad and sentimental stories (Rorty, 1993, p.119). The intellectual 
complacency at the heart of this position, however, is captured by this statement from 
James Ingram who argues that, the development of human rights regimes and 
instruments has fostered a spirit of pragmatism. For practitioners, it is enough, to 
assume the validity of the rightsin various agreements and focus on implementing 
them (Ingram, 2008, p.402). The reasonableness of this statement, prima facie, is 
perhaps undisputed but the central theoretical problem caused by such a position is 
that if there isnt some degree of philosophical clarity  even in the negative sense of 
realising what human rights are not  then how can one expect to achieve clarity at a 
practical level? Perhaps it would be more prudent for those scholars and practitioners 
who adhere to an expansive definition and account of human rights in theory and in 
practice to be altogether more cautious in how they use human rights as a theoretical 
and practical tool. Just because one eschews justificatory debates about human rights 
does not mean that one has a blank cheque to use human rights in any conceivable 
way. The risk is that if human rights mean anything and everything, they end up 
meaning nothing  their value becomes debased and their worth irrelevant. The issue 
of rights inflation and the conceptual indeterminateness and definitional elasticity of 
human rights poses profound theoretical and practical problems for those interested in 
articulating a defensible core of what human rights are and what we mean by that 
term. The first part of this chapter has presented a number of theoretical accounts of 
human rights and highlighted the wide ranging theoretical disagreements within 
scholarly circles about some of the big questions about human rights. However, what 
happens, when these disputed rights are translated not just into legal rights by positive 
law but into constitutional rights in a constitutionally entrenched Bill of Rights to be 
interpreted and adjudicated by a judiciary which has the power to invalidate the 
legislation from the elected legislature because that legislation does not comply with 
the rights enumerated in the constitutional charter of rights? In this next section of the 
chapter the issue of Constitutional Charters of Rights will be considered.  
Constitutional Charters of Rights  
The second section of this chapter will now consider the issue of constitutional rights 
and examine some of the theoretical and practical arguments, which underpin 
explanatory justifications for Charters of Rights generally. Constitutionally enshrined 
charters of rights have become the normative standard by which the adequacy and 
robustness of a nations constitution and commitment to democratic values is judged. 
Indeed, what we have witnessed across the globe since the end of the Second World 
War is the inexorable march of a myriad of international human rights treaties and the 
building of human rights cultures in sovereign states through the incorporation of 
international human rights norms in the form of constitutionally enshrined and 
entrenched charters of rights. In the words of Jeremy Waldron, the 
constitutionalisation of basic rights together with a practice of judicial review tends, 
nowadays to be seen as a global model of democratisation (Waldron, 1998, p.335). 
Respect for and protection of human rights in the form of a Bill of Rights is 
considered one of the fundamental ingredients for a healthy democracy. As James 
Allan argues,  
Todays liberal world is predominantlyone in which rights have been have been 
constitutionalised; their protections of the individual have been entrenched against mere legislative 
change and handed over to the judiciary to be interpreted, expanded, narrowed and applied  even 
altered and created de novo  as particular cases arise (Allan, 2001, p.34  35).  
Indeed, constitutionalism and the study of constitutions is so bound up and 
intrinsically connected, according to some constitutional scholars, with theories of 
individual rights and their protection that the two cannot be separated. As Ronald 
Dworkin argues, constitutionalism is the theory that the majority must be restrained 
to protect individual rights (Dworkin, 1977, p.142). This nexus is meant to serve as a 
constraint on legislative power and majority rule and in this sense a constitutionally 
entrenched Charter of Rights has come to be viewed as an essential 
countermajoritarian device (Elster, 1993), which can be used to protect individual 
rights from the will of the majority. As Cecile Fabre states, 
The constitution and, more specifically, the Bill of Rights thus serve as such legal constraints on 
citizens and members of the legislature in that they hold them under legal duties to respect 
individual rights and in that they legally prevent them from violating these rights (Fabre, 2000, 
p.87) 
Why, however, should individual rights be enshrined in a Bill of Rights in the first 
place? One of the primary reasons for doing so is to codify the fundamental rights of 
citizens and place these rights beyond the whims and emotional impulses of the 
ordinary legislative process and prevent them from becoming entangled in the 
political process of power, compromise and disagreement. In addition, as one of the 
current US Supreme Court Justices points out, Bills of Rights can be either 
amendatory or confirmatory (Scalia, 2001). Amendatory Bills of Rights are not 
meant to confirm and preserve the past, but to repudiate it whilst confirmatory Bills 
of Rights are meant to preserve, consolidate and build upon the past (Scalia, 2001, 
p.9). A document like the Canadian Charter of Fundamental Rights might be said to 
be confirmatory, a document like the South African Bill of Rights would be 
considered amendatory. Scholars such as Kavanagh (2004 and Raz (2001) have 
identified five normative features and characteristics of a Bill of Rights: 
1) Durable, part of the stable framework for the political and legal institutions of 
the country. 
2) Written, In the sense that it is enshrined in one of a small number of written 
documents. 
3) Superior law, all laws which are contrary to it are rendered invalid or 
inapplicable. 
4) Justiciable, judicial processes to test the compatibility of ordinary 
legislationin other words judges, implement the superiority of the 
constitution 
5) Entrenched, amendments to it are more difficult to secure than ordinary 
legislation. 
There are two narratives which shape our approach to understanding constitutional 
discourse generally and in particular discourse about the protection of rights in the 
British constitutional tradition. One narrative views the constitution as inherently 
political suggesting that individual rights are more adequately protected through the 
political process: the political constitution. The other suggests that individual rights 
can only be protected through constitutional entrenchment and interpretation by the 
judiciary: the legal constitution. During New Labours time in office there have been 
profound changes in the UKs constitution (Norton, 2007) and in UK constitutional 
discourse as the traditional, political constitution, has come under increasing strain 
from the new, more radical, legal constitution. As Adam Tomkins argues, orthodox 
understandings of the UKs political constitution have over the past thirty years, 
come under increasing pressure from the rival theory of legal constitutionalism. 
(Tomkins, 2003, p.21) Indeed, according to Tomkins (2003 and 2005) the distinction 
between visions of the political constitution and the legal constitution is of more 
profound significance to understanding constitutionalism in the twenty first century 
than the more familiar distinction often made in public law scholarship between 
written and unwritten; codified and uncodified constitutions. Colm OCinneide has 
also identified this shift towards legal constitutionalism in the UK as a major axis of 
constitutional tension, change and development over the next ten years (OCinneide, 
2008, p.161). At the heart of discourses of legal constitutionalism lies a commitment 
to the constitutional entrenchment of individual rights and as Richard Bellamy argues, 
nothing has been so influential in driving constitutionalism along the paths of legal 
rather than political thought than the emphasis on rights, their entrenchment in a 
constitutional document and their interpretation and elaboration by a supreme or 
constitutional court (Bellamy, 2007, p.15) The classical scholarly statement of 
political constitutionalism is often associated with the work of JAG Griffith (1979, 
2000) who warned that the problem with constitutionally entrenched charters of rights 
is that they facilitate the judicialization of the body politic and the legalisation of 
political discourse. Griffith argued that, what are truly questions of politics and 
economics are presented as questions of law (1979, p.12). According to Griffith, the 
defining characteristic of the UKs political constitution is contained in his famous 
dictum that the constitution of the United Kingdom lives on changing from day to 
day for the constitution is no more and no less than what happens (1979, p 19). One 
scholar has referred to this UK constitutional tradition as pragmatic empiricism 
(McCrudden, 2003)  in other words, as Foley argues, the constitution is simply 
assumed to be present. In this light, a constitution is a presupposition  there to be 
discovered rather than devised (1999, 13). In more recent times political theorists 
(Bellamy, 2007) and public law scholars (Tomkins, 2003, 2005) have sought to build 
upon Griffiths original work and attempted to outline a more normatively grounded 
theoretical statement of what constitutes a discourse of political constitutionalism. 
Bellamy (2007) argues that political constitutionalism is superior both normatively 
and empirically to the legal constitutional devices that are imposed as essential 
constraints upon democracy and majority rule arguing that legal constitutionalism 
subverts these democratic protections, creating sources of arbitrariness and 
dominance of their own in the process (Bellamy, 2008, p.2). Tomkins (2003) laments 
legal constitutionalists for turning their back on politics and consequently democracy 
and states that the reality of the political constitution is seen in the governing principle 
of British constitutional affairs that, the Government of the day may continue in 
office for only as long as it continues to enjoy the majority support of the House of 
Commons (Tomkins, 2005, p.2). This beautiful rule as Tomkins describes it is 
reflected in the views of Vernon Bogdanor who has argued that the British 
Constitution is essentially a political constitution, one whose operation depends upon 
the will of its political leaders (Bogdanor, 1993, p.70). According to Tomkins, 
a political constitution is one in which those who exercise political power are held to constitutional 
account through political means and through political institutionsA legal constitutionis one 
which imagines that the principle means and the principal institution through which the government 
is held to account is the law and the court room (Tomkins, 2003, p.19).  
For Bellamy the legal constitution makes two significant claims, which the pragmatic 
political constitution argues against. Firstly, that as a political community we can 
arrive at a rational consensus on the substantive outcomes that a society committed 
to the democratic ideals of equality of concern and respect should achieve. (Bellamy, 
2007, p.3) Secondly, the more familiar claim, for the purposes of this thesis, that the 
judicial process and not the political or the legislative process is a more reliable and 
adequate forum for identifying these outcomes (Bellamy, 2007, p.3). Setting out and 
distinguishing between the legal and political constitutional narratives is of profound 
importance for contextualising the current debates about rights and the question of 
whether they should be constitutionally entrenched in a Charter of Rights. It is to that 
specific issue, which this thesis will now turn to consider.  
The court sceptic concern 
In countries who have inherited their legal, political and constitutional experience 
from the British constitutional tradition, with its strong support for, following Dicey, 
legislative supremacy and the sovereignty of Parliament as one of the fundamental 
guiding principles of the constitution, there are increasing levels of concern, and a 
profound scepticism expressed by politicians in these countries and by an emerging 
body of academic scholarship from the disciplines of legal and political philosophy 
and political theory and science, about judicial involvement in the adjudication and 
resolution of some of the significant questions we have about rights. In chapter 4 we 
will consider the arguments advanced by unionists in response to proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights as an example of one such political community who 
have expressed scepticism about a constitutionally entrenched charter of rights in 
these terms but at this juncture let us consider the nature and basis of the court sceptic 
concern. The idea and scholarly expression of these sentiments in Western legal and 
political philosophy and theory can be traced to a period at the very end of the 
twentieth Century in the work of political scientists, as we have noted, such as JAG 
Griffith (1979) and more systematically in 1993 when the legal philosopher Jeremy 
Waldron published a seminal article, a rights based critique of constitutional rights 
(Waldron, 1993). Despite, Griffiths (1979) earlier critique, it wasnt until Waldrons 
work in this area emerged in the 1990s that a court sceptic narrative began to be 
articulated in any systematic fashion within the academic literature. Waldron, 
according to one academic who would share his scholarly analysis of Bill of Rights, 
is without doubt, the leading Bills of Rights critic writing today (Allan, 2008, 
p.161). To summarise, there are four main elements to Waldrons argument. Firstly, 
as he argued in 1993 and developed further in a detailed exposition of his position in 
the 1999 book law and disagreement, there is no necessary connection between a 
rights based moral or political theory or the identification of a certain political, moral 
or social value as a right and the consitutitonalisation of that right in an entrenched 
Bill of Rights. In other words, just because one believes in the value of human rights 
does not necessarily mean that, as a consequence, it is desirable to have these rights 
entrenched in a bill of rights. Secondly, participation in the democratic process is the 
right of rights according to Waldron but a constitutionally entrenched charter of 
rights limits and precludes citizens ability to participate in the democratic process. 
Thirdly, we disagree about rights but the resolution of these disputes should not be 
left to a judiciary to decide upon. As Waldron points out, 
It is puzzlingthat some philosophers and jurists treat rights as though they were somehow beyond 
disagreement, as though they could be dealt with on a different plane in law  on the solemn plane 
of constitutional principle far from the hurly burly of legislatures and political controversy and 
disreputable procedures like voting (Waldron, 1999, p.12).  
Fourthly, Waldron argues against the precommitment view of constitutional rights, 
which presents constitutional constraints as a form of immunization against 
madness (Waldron, 1999, p.306) and which ultimately leads to citizens becoming 
further alienated and disenfranchised from the political process. Scholars who share 
Waldrons views are, for a variety of circumstances and reasons, within the minority 
in academia. A substantial majority of political theorists, political scientists, legal 
philosophers and political philosophers do not subscribe to Waldronian arguments 
about the value of Bills of Rights. However, that is not to say that scholarly support 
does not exist. Arguably, the most forceful supporter of Waldrons position is the 
Canadian legal academic James Allan (1996, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2006 &2008) 
who in addition to adopting a court sceptic position is also a rights sceptic who 
questions the value of a liberal rights discourse, unlike Waldron who is a committed 
advocate of a rights based political morality. In addition court sceptic arguments are 
also made from perspective of political theory (Bellamy, 2001 & 2007), from public 
law scholars (Ewing, 1999, 2001; Griffith, 1979, 2000; Loughlin, 2000, 2001 & 2003, 
Tomkins, 2003, 2005) and from legal philosophy (Campbell, 2000, 2001).  
The term court sceptic was first used by the Canadian political scientist Janet 
Hiebert in a 2006 Modern Law Review article and is a phrase which neatly 
encapsulates the most important aspects of the critique offered by Waldron and others 
about the entrenchment of rights in a constitutional charter. In her words, a court 
sceptic is someone who accepts the legitimacy of individual rights but doubt the 
prudence of giving courts final responsibility for interpreting and resolving political 
disagreements involving rights, for a range of reasons such as democratic concerns or 
institutional competence (Hiebert, 2006, p.10). In other words these scholars are 
troubled by the implications for liberal democratic communities of structuring and 
evaluating political debates through a judicially interpreted bill of rights (Hiebert, 
2006, p.24). Hiebert distinguishes the sceptical positions in the academic literature 
between those who are rights sceptics and those who are court sceptics. As Hiebert 
argues,  
Rights sceptics criticise the ways in which a bill of rights influences notions of citizenship and 
political communityCourt Sceptics argue that a bill of rights will distort debates about contested 
issues the very notion that judicial interpretation replaces debate contradicts the democratic 
imperative of ongoing deliberations about the role of the state, the nature of problems that affect a 
polity and the propriety of specific social policies (Hiebert, 2006, p.10). 
However, within scholarly circles there are obviously those academics, as we have 
seen in the case of Professor James Allan, who articulate both a rights sceptic and 
court sceptic position. Other scholars such as Professor Martin Loughlin and JAG 
Griffith would to a large extent share this position but whether one is a rights sceptic 
or a rights advocate is largely irrelevant to the issues court sceptics seek to address. 
Therefore, at its core, there are three elements to the theoretical concerns expressed 
about bills of rights within a thick conception of the court sceptic narrative. Firstly, to 
paraphrase Jeremy Waldron, there are many of us and we disagree about rights  in 
other words the court sceptic concern questions the desirability of taking an individual 
human, moral or legal right and translating it into a constitutionally entrenched right 
given the profound disagreement, as this chapter has already examined, which exists 
about what precisely is meant by a human right, what needs, interests or entitlements 
constitute human rights and about what the foundations of human rights are. As one 
scholar argues is it desirable to protect human rights in a constitutionally entrenched 
mechanism that assumes certainty and infallibility, when in fact human rights prove 
to be sites of fundamental uncertainty (Adjei, 1995, p.24). As Michael Perry puts it,   
Is it a good idea or a bad idea for the citizens of a liberal democracy to give to politically 
independent courts the power to protect entrenched, indeterminate human rightsbecause to 
empower courts to protect indeterminate human rights norms is necessarily to empower them to 
specify the concrete meaning of the norms in the various contexts in which the norms are invoked 
(Perry, 2003, p.18) 
Secondly, because of the considerable disagreement, which exists, within the spheres 
of political science, philosophy and law about the nature, scope and foundations of 
human rights court sceptic discourses argue that the judiciary should not have the 
final say in the resolution of these arguments  that it is profoundly inappropriate to 
privilege judges over elected legislators under this process. Court sceptics question 
why the judiciary are better placed to resolve these disagreements. As JAG Griffith 
argues,  
The trouble with the higher order law is that it must be given substance, be interpreted, and be 
applied. It claims superiority over democratically elected institutions; it prefers philosopher kings to 
human politicians; it puts faith in judges whom I would trust no more than I trust princes (Griffith, 
2000, p.165). 
Put a different way, the issue can be conceived as one of institutional morality 
(Phillipson, 2007): who should have the power and authority to decide on what human 
rights are and resolve and adjudicate on disagreements about this issue? The judiciary 
or the legislature? One scholar (Garbaum, 2001) argues that the UK example of the 
Human Rights Act (HRA) 1998 and the New Zealand example of the New Zealand 
Bill of Rights Act (NZBORA) 1990 have both attempted to preserve parliamentary 
sovereignty by trying to strike the appropriate institutional balance between the 
legislature and the judiciary. Both Garbaum (2001) and Hiebert (2004) argue that the 
UK and New Zealand examples represent a half way house between an American 
model of rights protection, with strong judicial review over legislative actions and the 
constitutionalism exemplified by the UK model where rights are guaranteed through a 
pragmatic compromise between the legislature and the courts. Garbaum (2001) refers 
to this model as commonwealth constitutionalism and argues that this third model 
of constitutionalismstands between the two polar models of constitutional and 
legislative supremacy (Garbaum, 2001, p.876). This attempt is, as Gardbaum argues, 
an attemptto create institutional balance, joint responsibility and deliberative 
dialogue between courts and legislatures in the protection and enforcement of 
fundamental rights (Garbaum, 2001, p.710). Under this model, Parliament, not the 
courts has the final word. As Gardbaum observes, most noticeably, while granting 
courts the power to protect rights, they decouple judicial review from judicial 
supremacy by empowering legislatures to have the final word. (Garbaum, 2001, 
p.709) Hiebert argues that the Parliamentary rights model is fundamentally different 
from an American style system of judicial review because of political rights review 
and institutional dialogue it creates (Hiebert, 2004, p.82).  
Some academic commentators argue that the current arrangements under the HRA 
preserve the supremacy of Parliament  that the courts use of a declaration of 
incompatibility creates inter  institutional dialogue leaving the final decision with the 
legislature. For example, as Jenkins argues, Incompatible legislation remains in force 
unless and until such a declaration can embarrass Parliament and the Government of 
the day into amending the law thus bringing it into compliance with the UKs human 
rights obligations under the Convention (Jenkins, 2009, p.184). Nichol (2006), 
however, disagrees with this reasoning and that in practice, the very fact that judges 
now grant a remedy which is essentially political in character rather than legal, must 
itself raise doubt as to whether there can be any longer be a bright line between the 
judicial and the political (Nichol, 2006, p.3). Indeed, this question will continue to 
dominate UK Constitutional thinking in the future and will be a very real source of 
dialectical tension played out in the competing debates between political and legal 
constitutionalists. Indeed, as one scholarly expert on legislatures points out,  
These developments are problematic for one fundamental reason. The doctrine of parliamentary 
sovereignty underpins the constitution. It is, though, a judicially self-imposed doctrine. In the event 
of extreme tension between the executive and the courts, it may not survive the pressureIf the 
courts start to question the doctrine, and we can see it being chipped away in practice, then we are 
in a constitutional black hole (Norton, 2007, p.274). 
However, the issue remains that for those court sceptics who have a deep inherent 
scepticism of judicial activism does the hybrid or commonwealth approach do 
enough to address their concerns because in theory Parliament retains ultimate power 
and the final say? Professor James Allan argues that the Parliamentary Bill of Rights 
compromise exemplified by New Zealand, which supporters argue respects 
Parliamentary Sovereignty by affording courts judicial penultamcy not judicial 
ultimacy (Perry, 2008) still leads to judicial activism. In his strong view, a statutory, 
unentrenched Bill of Rights Act does not provide some sort of desirable half way 
house alternative to constitutionalisation (Perry, 2001, p.332). Disagreement in 
democracies manifests itself in a range of different forms and on a range of social, 
economic, political and legal matters. Bills of Rights ultimately place the resolution 
on these matters in the hangs of judges.  As James Allan observes,  
When decisions about rights are handed over to the judiciary, it is not a matter of giving the 
judiciary power to protect some value on which we all agree. Even if we can all agree upon some 
list of rights to be protected in a bill of rights, there will be controversies about the meaning of 
rights in specific circumstances. Precisely because of these controversies, bills of rights are 
expressed in general terms. Thus judges are left with the difficult and controversial task of deciding 
what rights mean in concrete circumstances and weighing them against other rights, as well as other 
kinds of interests (Allan, 2004, p.27).  
The third aspect of the court sceptic narrative is that judicially enforceable bills of 
rights result in a loss to democracy because, and this, as we have noted, is one of 
Waldrons most profoundly argued points that, participation in the democratic process 
is either limited, precluded or both because under a Bill of Rights, constitutionalising 
rights and making them justiciable hands much power  social policy making power 
that would have otherwise rested with elected lawmakers  to unelected judges 
(Waldron, 2001, p.42). In other documents that enshrine rights in a higher form of 
constitutional law are by their very nature undemocratic because they involve the 
transfer of power over social policy and other political matters from elected 
legislatures to an unelected judiciary. Participation in the democratic process is the 
right of rights according to Waldron but a constitutionally entrenched charter of 
rights limits and precludes citizens ability to participate in the democratic process. As 
Waldron argues, 
there is something democratically incomplete  certainly something unpleasantly condescending 
 about a constitution that empowers a small group of judgesto veto what the people or their 
representatives have settled on their answers to disputed questions about what democracy involves 
(Waldron, 1999, p.303).  
Entrenching a Bill of Rights within a nations constitutional system would, in 
Professor Griffiths words, mean that political questions of much day to day 
significance would, even more than at present, be left to decision by the judiciary. 
(Griffith, 1979, p.14) The fundamental question is what impact a Bill of Rights has 
for the democratic process, for deliberation, participation and accountability if debates 
that were previously left to the legislature, now take place within the judiciary. Is it 
healthy for democracy to follow the American route of a deeply entrenched 
constitutional Bill of Rights that ultimately leads to the resolution of deeply contested 
issues of social policy taking place in courts and not in democratically elected 
legislatures? The judicial route will always limit participation but the legislative route, 
however flawed Parliaments may be, has participation at its core. Jeremy Waldron 
argues that the right to democratic participation is subverted by the transfer of powers 
from the legislature to the judiciary. As Waldron argues, 
Some of us think that people have a right to participate in the democratic governance of their 
community, and that this right is quite deeply connected to the values of autonomy and 
responsibilityWe think moreover that the right to democracy is a right to participate on equal 
terms in social decisions on issues of high principle and that it is not to be confined to interstitial 
matters of social and economic policy. I shall argue that our respect for such democratic rights is 
called seriously into question when proposals are made to shift decisions about the conception and 
revision of basic rights from the legislature to the courtroom (Waldron, 1993, p.221). 
Precommitting a set of rights against changes in the future through the legislative 
process has been criticised by Allan (2001) as paternalism. As he argues, what is the 
basis for thinking such rights should and must be constitutionally locked in? Why 
does the generation doing the locking in think itself wiser, calmer, less susceptible to 
demagogues and emotional over  reactions than later generations? (Allan, 2001, 
p.38) 
Conclusion  
Despite the increasing sense that there is a profound weariness with human rights 
discourse generally in Western democracies (Baxi, 2002 p.51  53) the constitutional 
legal scholar Vernon Bogdanor has observed that the Human Rights Act in the UK is 
now one of the significant cornerstones of the new British constitution (Bogdanor, 
2009). We may be weary with the way in which human rights have pervaded political 
argument and debate over the past fifty years but as Bogdanors observation reminds 
us citizens are merely reaping the effects of the age of rights. The warning from the 
American scholar Mary Ann Glendon (1991) that, at some point one must ask 
whether an undifferentiated language of rights is really the best way to address the 
astonishing variety of injustices and forms of suffering that exist in the world 
(Glendon, 1991, p.16) is as profoundly relevant now as it was then  if not even more 
so given the astonishingly rapid transition to what may be called juristocracy 
(Hirschl, 2004, p.1), which has occurred as liberal democracies witness the expansion 
of judicial power at the expense of the legislature. Increasingly, the controversies and 
abstract debates about the fundamental foundations of rights and indeed the debate 
about the role of judiciary in the protection of rights are such that, in both instances, 
they transcend ideology and indeed other ideological, philosophical and practical 
disputes between left and right over their respective competing visions of the good 
society. With the former, it is a profound concern about the morally and politically 
impoverished nature of rights discourse  a sentiment accurately encapsulated in the 
words of Michael Ignatieff,   
I am saying that a decent and human society requires a shared language of the good. The one our 
society lives by  a language of rights  has no terms for those dimensions of the human good 
which require acts of virtue unspecifiable as a legal or civil obligation (Ignatieff, 1984, p.14).  
In the case of the latter, it is a fundamental debate about where accountability should 
lie and who should exercise it in our democratic system. These debates, both about the 
nature of rights and their constitutional protection are of profound significance for 
Northern Ireland, as we move in chapter 3, 4 and 5 to address the practical 
significance of the theoretical problems this chapter has identified.  
Chapter 2 
Unionist Political Thought in Northern Ireland 
Introduction 
In the previous chapter we considered issues around the origins, justification for, and 
proliferation of rights discourse in contemporary political thought. In doing so we 
mapped some of the theoretical and philosophical debates taking place within human 
rights discourse in order to help us to arrive at a point where, for the purposes of the 
thesis, we have a richer understanding of what we mean by human rights. The purpose 
of this chapter is to explore some of the issues in unionist political thought that will 
hopefully bring further context to the ideas and arguments this thesis will engage with 
and explore in chapter 3, 4 and 5. The conservative philosopher Roger Scruton once 
suggested that liberalism, 
Is a term with many overlapping senses. In one use it denotes an attitude towards the state and its 
functions; in another use it denotes a moral outlook, which sometimes rises to the level of theory, 
but which for the most part remains hidden in the crannies of everyday existence (Scruton, 2001, 
p.182).  
Similarly, unionism can be conceived of as a term with many overlapping senses. On 
a broader level, it refers to the commitment of citizens across the United Kingdom to 
support and maintain the idea that four distinct regions of these islands should coming 
together to form a state of unions between four countries (Aughey, 2010). However, 
on a more specific level it refers to the political preferences, cultural and religious 
identity of the pro  union community in Northern Ireland. Scruton has also argued of 
conservatism that it is a stance that may be defined without identifying it with the 
policies of any party. Indeed it may be a stance that appeals to a person for whom the 
whole idea of party is distasteful (Scruton, 2001, p.4). For many, the actions of 
unionist politicians and the political parties they represent, in particular the 
development of a toxic culture of intra party backbiting and the inarticulateness of 
many unionist politicians, is an anathema to a large section of pro  union citizens in 
Northern Ireland. There is no doubt that over the course of recent history Unionisms 
political representatives have been guilty of finding themselves in a condition of 
ideological stasis  motionless and unable or unwilling to find depth within its own 
political thought to articulate what Unionism in Northern Ireland stands for in a 
coherent fashion. For scholars such as Aughey it is clear where the blame for 
Unionisms inability to articulate a coherent political argument lies. As he points out, 
if Unionism is a much misunderstood political doctrine then unionist politicians must 
carry most of the burden of culpability (Aughey, 1989, p.2).  
The search for coherence  
To a large extent fear, confusion and intellectual paucity have been the defining 
characteristics of Unionist political thought in Northern Ireland since partition and 
there has been a general unwillingness and reluctance to engage in the kinds of 
theoretical and philosophical discussion that have enriched so many other traditions of 
political thought across the political spectrum. Because of this, unionism has been 
guilty of scoring intellectual own goals that have allowed its political opponents to 
control political discourse and leave itself open to charges of intellectual 
impoverishment and disengagement. More often than not, Unionism has been 
portrayed by its political opponents on these islands, as a profoundly back  ward 
looking, regressive and incoherent tradition of political thought. This led one 
sociologist who has reflected on the nature of Unionism to contrast the accomplished 
ideological combatants of Irish nationalism with the inarticulate and introspective 
ideology of unionism (Coulter, 1994, p.2). This culture of profound intellectual 
complacency at the heart of political thinking by unionist politicians has also been 
highlighted by Aughey, who argues that,   
Unionism has been noted for its inarticulateness. This has little to do with the rhetorical skills of 
unionist politicians. It has to do with the ability of unionists to convey to others in an intelligible, 
defensible and coherent manner what they believe (Aughey, 1991, p.1).  
It is worth considering several reasons, which help explain the failure of political 
actors within unionism to significantly engage with the theoretical and philosophical 
underpinnings of unionist political thought. Firstly, unionist politics have been 
characterised since the prorogation of Stormont by increased levels of unionist 
division, fragmentation and intra unionist electoral competition, which intensified 
with the advent of the peace process and the multi party negotiations at Stormont. 
This fragmentation and intra unionist bitterness has been profoundly distracting for 
unionist politicians, which leads to a second reason: because the energies of unionist 
politicians have been devoted to the endless internal wrangling, arguments and 
debates over the peace process and the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement 
(negotiationalism) there has been little time for genuine intellectual reflection. 
Perhaps, with the return of stable political institutions at Stormont, there will be more 
space for serious philosophical and political reflection  a theme that we will return to 
at the end of the chapter. Thirdly, the impoverishment of the unionist political class 
and the absence within both unionist parties of substantial numbers of professional, 
well  educated and articulate political representatives has contributed to a culture of 
parochialism and profound insularity from intellectual trends and currents. The nature 
of politics in Northern Ireland, during the period of unionist hegemony at Stormont 
and during the period of the troubles, including direct rule and the IRAs terrorist 
campaign meant significant numbers of the professional class chose to opt out of 
political life in Northern Ireland. Indeed as Farrington notes, Fifty years of devolved 
Government in Stormont has inculcated insularity within Unionism. Over this period 
the Unionist case became implicit, in that it was no longer seen as important to 
articulate Unionist arguments (Farrington, 2006, p.3). Furthermore, there is an 
absence of any tradition within unionist politics of encouraging work by public 
intellectuals unlike the main political traditions in British politics, which although 
subject to the ebb and flow of intellectual and electoral trends and currents, has 
always encouraged public intellectuals to contribute to and enrich debates those 
political traditions were engaged in. As Todd argues, this failure is a challenge for 
scholarly reflection on this subject,  
because there have been few unionist intellectuals and they have not developed systematic 
theories of political obligation, the aims of government, the basis of citizenship or the rights and 
liberties of citizenship. It has to be pieced together from politicians statements  often strategic 
rather than principled theoretical discussions  and from the writings of unionist historians, 
biographers, auto biographers and novelists and the speeches of clergy (Todd, 1993, p.190).  
However, this does not tell the entire story and whilst the Anglo  Irish Agreement, 
signed in November 1985, and its immediate aftermath, may have represented the 
personal and collective nadir for unionisms political representatives, the period was 
also marked by the emergence of, to paraphrase the historian, Alvin Jackson (when he 
made the distinction between Unionist historian and historian of Unionism 
(Jackson, 1996, p.121) a number of unionist scholars making a significant and 
profoundly important contribution to the development of unionist political thought 
and also scholars of unionism whose analysis of unionist political thought has 
enriched our understanding. According to one scholar, for those academics and others 
engaged in charting a new intellectual path for unionist political thought the purpose 
was to to challenge an undercurrent of defeatism and fatalism in unionism in the 
wake of sustained political pressure. (ODowd, 1998, p.74) Richard English has also 
charted the growth of new unionism (Patterson, 2004) in a recent essay. He defines 
the most important change to have taken place within unionism as the emergence of 
a significant section of the unionist family looking to make a new deal with Irish 
nationalism. (2002, p.97). English too locates a renaissance in unionist political 
thought in the post Anglo  Irish Agreement period and identified an urgent need to 
relate unionism  in particular in its intellectual variants  to wider patterns of 
political thought and practice. (English, 2001, p.215) The most prominent and also 
distinguished contributions in this search for coherence amongst pro  union scholars 
was the work of academics such as Arthur Aughey (1989, 1991, 1997 & 2005), Henry 
Patterson (1999 2001, 2004 & 2006) Paul Bew (1993, 2006) and Norman Porter 
(1996). Whilst in the latter category of scholars of unionism, the most prominent and 
influential work has came from Bruce (1986; 1994), Todd (1987), and more recently 
Cochrane (1997) and Farrington (2006). A central element of the discourse associated 
with pro  union scholars was the construction of an argument, which proposed as its 
central thesis that unionism, could not be understood on the same conceptual terrain 
as nationalism. In other words, the purpose was to establish, methodologically 
speaking, that unionism should not be examined, analysed or discussed on the same 
normative grounds as nationalism. In other words that Ulster unionism is not just a 
subset of nationalist ideology. As Farrington notes,  
For scholars examining unionism the orthodoxies to be challenged were not unionist ideas about 
their own past but nationalist interpretations of unionism. Nationalists denied both the legitimacy 
and sincerity of the unionist case, and for scholars these perceptions seemed unsatisfactory. Indeed 
unionism seemed like a conundrum that needed to be solved (Farrington, 2003, p.252). 
Scholars such as Arthur Aughey (1989, 1990 & 1995) and Patrick Roche (1994), at 
that time, made very significant contributions to this particular debate. Roche argued 
that nationalist interpretations of unionism were based upon the foundational idea that 
there is one nation in Ireland (1994, p.70) but as he points out, Unionists do not 
regard themselves as part of an Irish Nation and neither can they be included in an 
Irish Nation defined in terms of ethnicity, language or other objective criteria. 
(Roche, 1994, p.70) Indeed as Roche perceptively argues, Unionists have a localised 
territorial identity (Ulstermen) but their political self perception is of belonging to a 
British nation constituted by a shared allegiance to the state. (Roche, 1994, p.71) 
Following this argument, Unionism, therefore, in the words of Arthur Aughey, had 
little to do with the idea of the nation and everything to do with the idea of the state 
(Aughey, 1989, 1990, 1991). In challenging conceptions and interpretations of 
unionism, which relied upon the conceptual and ideological tools offered by Irish 
Nationalism, unionism, through the work of these scholars, discovered a political 
discourse which affirmed the importance of concepts such as citizenship, rights and 
responsibilities in the context of the United Kingdom over concepts such as the 
nation, race, religion and other ethno  nationalist considerations. As Aughey argues, 
The idea of the Union is the willing community of citizens united not by creed, colour or ethnicity 
but by recognition of the authority of the union. Its relevant concept is citizenship and not 
nationThe notion of the crown is as close as one can get to a working theory of the British 
stateUnionism too has celebrated loyalty to the crown and distinguished this from loyalty to the 
actions of particular governments. This is not peculiar self  indulgence at all. It is an 
understandable and rational distinction and underlies the practice of modern political life. Thus 
Ulster Unionism, far from being a historical curiosity, expresses self consciously the operative 
values of the British state (Aughey, 1995, p.12). 
At this juncture, it is pertinent at this point to examine in further detail the scholarship 
of Arthur Aughey. As Richard Bourke has remarked, Unionism after the Agreement 
went into a kind of free  fall. After the fall, the process of recovery began (Bourke, 
2003, p.288). If any publication could be considered as encapsulating the sentiment 
behind that process of recovery, then Augheys seminal publication, Under siege: 
Ulster Unionism and the Anglo  Irish Agreement, published in 1989, would be the 
publication to do so. Indeed, as Farrington notes,  
Under Siege should be seen as a product of the particular circumstances of the late 1980s and many 
have pointed to the flaws in Augheys argument, some of which will be considered below, but the 
argument advanced is important for understanding the development of subsequent unionist 
discourse. The argument was that the nature of unionist nationality is and was very different from 
nationalisms nationality (Farrington 2003, p.256). 
Furthermore, Aughey tried to move unionist political thought beyond the three 
dominant interpretations or definitions of unionism that existed at the time: religion, 
identity and loyalty to achieve a greater connection between unionist political thought 
and contemporary political ideas (Aughey, 1990, p.188). As he argued, Unionist 
politicians have been very bad at arguing the case for the maintenance of the Union of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. They have neglected to explore the positive 
virtues of the idea of the Union and allowed their opponents to take the ideological 
initiative (Aughey, 1990, p.188). The Union, however, in Augheys opinion 
remained the appropriate principle for the accommodation of communal difference 
in Northern Ireland (Aughey, 1990, p.188). Augheys scholarly reflections have tried 
to take unionism out of the ideological parameters set by nationalism into the 
parameters set by political theory and philosophy in the modern state. Indeed as 
Anthony Alcock states, today there are two ways of ascertaining what a unionist is. 
One is in terms of perceived cultural identity  which people really are what they 
perceive themselves to be: the other is in terms of relationship to the state. (Alcock, 
1994, p.76) Aughey criticises those who talk of unionist self determination arguing 
instead that equal citizenship in the UK is a more appropriate phrase to use. As he 
argues,  
That idea is only obscured by the use of the term self  determination. It is best illuminated by the 
unionist claim to the right of equal citizenship within the United Kingdom, a right which can 
accommodate the differences as well as the common ground between Protestant and Catholic in 
Ulster (Aughey, 1991, p.16) 
The Belfast Agreement and subsequent political developments may have superseded 
this debate. Notwithstanding that, however, in taking unionism outside the discourse 
of self determination, Aughey was attempting to ensure that unionism could not be 
examined on the same conceptual grounds as nationalism. Elaborating further on this 
point Aughey has argued that within unionism both the constitutional people and the 
sovereign people exist. The constitutional people are defined mainly by the status 
and the durability of its institutional life (Aughey, 1997, p.20) it is a constitutional 
tradition or patriotism that defines unionism not in ethnic and traditional terms but by 
the acknowledgment of the authority of the constitutional relationship of Crown in 
Parliament. (Aughey, 1997, p.20) The sovereign people is the idea of unionism 
conceived apart from all institutions and conventional practice (Aughey, 1997, 
p.22). 
Scholars such as Coulter (1994), OFlynn (2003), OLeary and McGarry (1995) and 
Porter (1996) have critiqued Augheys work. Coulter, in particular, argues that it 
provides an abstract and idealised characterisation of unionism that fails to take on 
board the realities of unionist motivation and political practice (Coulter, 1994, p.12). 
OLeary and McGarry, however, have refused to accept theoretically that unionism 
should be identified on any other conceptual ground but nationalism and state 
unequivocally, Unionism is a type of nationalism, a variation of British nationalism, 
and it has both civic and ethnic dimensions, just like its Irish nationalist counterpart. 
(OLeary and McGarry, 1995, p.92) For Norman Porter (1996) Augheys thesis failed 
to take account of the layers of substantive ethnic and cultural identity, which as he 
argued formed an essential part of unionist political identity. Similarly, Ian OFlynn 
criticises Augheys work as entirely specious, based as it is on a wholly 
unsupportable opposition between a universalistic politics of citizenship and a 
particularistic politics of identity (OFlynn, 2003, p.131). Indeed, a common theme 
through the work of those scholars is that Augheys work fails to pay sufficient 
attention to the importance of cultural and religious identity, which, according to them 
lies at the very heart of unionist political thought.   
Within unionist politics there have also been periods, which have provided a glimpse 
of what a rich, engaged and thoughtful intellectual debate could produce in terms of 
coherent political thought and progressive political action. However, the history of 
unionism is littered with examples where assimilatory unionism (Mulholland, 2000) 
has been rejected, both by the profound myopic institutional culture of the Ulster 
Unionist Party (UUP) and by the wider unionist population in Northern Ireland. As 
Patterson remarked of the UUPs capacity to accept the change associated with the 
Belfast Agreement,  
The residues of habits of mind and the organisational practices associated with the monolithic 
domination of the Stormont period and the defensive conservatism of the seventies and eighties 
remained powerful obstacles to the only sort of deal available for stabilising the Union (Patterson, 
1999, p.110) 
The liberal, progressive unionist political tradition had, as Patterson insightfully 
observed, become all too accustomed to noble failure, in a good cause (1999, p 
110). However, there are individual characters within unionism, such as the former 
Unionist MP at Stormont, Finance Minister, Minister for Home Affairs and Attorney 
General Brian Maginess who Patterson describes as a largely forgotten figure in the 
history of Ulster Unionism (1999, p 95). Maginess was fully convinced of the need 
for a more progressive and intellectually coherent response to nationalist grievances 
than the Unionist government at the time were offering. Alongside this, one could 
point to the task force report produced by prominent members of both the DUP and 
UUP, Deputy Leader, Peter Robinson MP, Upper Bann MP, Harold McCusker and 
UUP General Secretary, Frank Millar, which sought to move the debate within 
unionism after the Anglo  Irish Agreement beyond the politics of protest. In addition, 
one could also highlight the work of the McGimpsey brothers, Michael and Chris, 
who both would go on to be unionist councillors in local government and Michael a 
Minister in the Stormont Executive and Chris a human rights Commissioner. They 
engaged with an audience in the Republic of Ireland and took unionisms case to areas 
of public life there, that otherwise would not have heard unionist arguments. They did 
this through their engagement with the New Ireland Forum when they were the only 
unionists to make a formal written submission to the Forum, which was created by the 
former Irish Taoiseach Garret Fitzgerald in 1983 to enable politicians from across the 
island of Ireland to discuss ways in which peace and stability might be brought to the 
island. Their most significant contribution, however, was the 1990 Supreme Court 
case they brought against the Irish Government challenging the constitutional validity 
of Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish Republics constitution, which made a territorial claim 
over Northern Ireland that so irritated Northern unionism. The impact the emergence 
of a more inclusive, pluralist Unionism could have had in helping to mitigate against 
some of the worst aspects of the Troubles that was experienced in Northern Ireland 
may just be one of those great hypothetical historical what if questions but at the 
same time it may serve as an important warning against future unionist myopia in 
Northern Ireland, especially when it comes to serious intellectual reflection.  
Fatalism, fear and alienation  
One the of the most distinctive aspects of unionist political discourse since the time of 
the Anglo  Irish Agreement has been the profound sense of fear, anxiety and 
alienation expressed by unionist politicians, which they claim reflects a widely held 
belief within the unionist community that politics in Northern Ireland is a practice, 
which is inherently inimical to unionism. Alienation from the political process is a 
central part of this narrative. Indeed, in one of the earliest empirical studies conducted 
on the extent of Protestant alienation in Northern Ireland it is pointed out that, not all 
that long ago the word alienation was used in Northern Ireland almost exclusively 
with reference to Catholics (Dunn and Morgan, 1994, p.5). However, as Neil 
Southern argues Protestant alienation is a term which has gained currency in media 
and political circles in recent years where it has been used in an attempt to account for 
a general mood within the Protestant community in Northern Ireland. (Southern, 
2007, p.8) Furthermore, as a 2005 report, conducted by a group of local academics, on 
the alleged alienation of the Unionist community in Londonderry argued, the,  
Evidence presented here demonstrates that many Protestants do feel a general sense of uneasiness 
which stems from the loss of a confident identity and ideology. The Protestant community in 
Derry/Londonderry has experienced a weakening in relation to its claim to territory and has 
difficulty in sustaining a strong sense of belonging to, and being a political and cultural part of a 
city undergoing major social and economic change (Population change and social inclusion study  
Derry/Londonderry, OFMDFM research report, 2005) 
Within the literature this phenomenon has been examined by scholars such as Aughey 
(1995, 2001, 2002 & 2005), Dixon (2002), Finlay (2001) and Southern (2007) who 
have made a profoundly significant contribution to increasing our understanding of 
why the unionist community has often expressed itself with such a pessimistic 
political narrative. Aughey (2001) has perceptively labelled this cycle of despair, 
sense of exclusion and anxiety that exists within unionism as a culture of political 
fatalism. As he argues, fatalism also has its psychological consolations in that it 
provides a ready excuse for both political failure and for political indolence  and the 
two may be related (Aughey, 2001, p.185). This culture of fatalism places into 
context unionist responses to the Agreement that have led, as Aughey argues, to lower 
electoral turn outs and a profound resistance to change amongst the pro  union 
community. Similarly, David Christopher, a prominent Southern unionist activist once 
remarked that he has always regarded it as almost tragic that so few unionists seem 
to have confidence in their own future (Christopher, 2001, p.158). He describes 
himself as a unionist, but I am not a defeatist (Christopher, 2001, p.159) and resents 
the fact that defeatism seems to permeate right through unionism  crippling the 
ability to think and act imaginatively (Christopher, 2001, p.159). Neil Southern 
argues for a thicker understanding of the concept of unionist alienation, which for 
him, conceptually speaking, remains imprecise. Southern offers a scheme and 
framework within which we can gain a deeper understanding of unionist alienation 
that considers the political, cultural and geographical alienation felt by unionism. He 
traces a genealogy of political alienation that begins with the prorogation of Stormont 
in 1972, through Sunningdale, the Anglo  Irish Agreement, the peace process of the 
mid nineties finally culminating in the Good Friday Agreement, which Southern 
argues may be considered to represent the final chapter in the chronology of 
Protestant political alienation. (Southern, 2007, p.170) Alongside Aughey and 
Southerns influential analysis of the problem, are the reflections of the political 
sociologist, Andrew Finlay who has also engaged in a detailed examination of 
unionist fatalism, fear and anxiety. According to Finlay, these characteristics are 
amongst the constitutive factors of unionist political thought. Increasingly, unionist 
communities are identified and identify themselves in terms of tradition, defeat and 
associated emotions such as confusion, alienation, fatalism, resentment, fear and 
cognates such as anxiety and paranoia. (Finlay, 2001, p.2)  
At this juncture there is value in highlighting two significant manifestations of the 
culture of fatalism within unionism. Firstly, to a large extent this culture of insecurity 
and defeatism within unionist communities is one of the more dangerous legacies of a 
peace process, the benefits of which were not perceived to have been felt within the 
unionist and loyalist community. As Farrington points out Unionists have been more 
divided over the Belfast Agreement than Nationalists and those Unionists who 
support it are more ambivalent in their support than Nationalists (Farrington, 2006, 
p.122). Indeed, the uncertainty, suspicion and insecurity felt by many non  elite 
unionists in the political process are encapsulated in this 2005 report prepared by a 
Government funded think tank established to undertake work in Protestant, Unionist 
and Loyalist (PUL) communities which argued that,  
The group agreed that PUL communities perceive themselves to be alienated from the governance 
of Northern Ireland, because of: The behaviour of the Police during recent violence in Belfast. The 
lack of any progress in dealing with disputed parades, especially in North Belfast. The 50/50 
recruitment policy to the PSNI discriminates against Protestants. The destruction of security 
installations reinforces Protestant fears of a sell-out. The disbandment of the RIR leaves Northern 
Ireland without adequate security. The lack of Peace money going into PUL communities means 
they fare less well (Community Convention Conference Report, 2005, p.32). 
In Northern Ireland a lack of trust and confidence in the political process has been a 
prominent feature of unionist responses to the peace process and the political process 
that followed. Patterson has pointed out that the lack of unionist trust and confidence, 
Did not stem simply, as some commentators claimed, from unwillingness to accept equality with 
Catholics. Rather, it rested on a perception that the new dispensation was based on the steady 
dilution of the Norths Britishness as reflected in changes in the name and symbols of the RUC and 
disputes over the flying of the Union flag on public buildings (Patterson, 2007, p.347) 
Both Aughey (2002) and Dixon (2000, 2001 & 2002) have written about the lack of 
trust and confidence felt within the wider body politic of Northern Ireland and 
attribute partial blame for the attitude to the carefully crafted choreography of the 
peace process that has left members of both the nationalist and unionist community 
increasingly sceptical and cynical of political machinations in Northern Ireland. As 
Paul Dixon states, manipulation and deceit eats into the culture of democracy, 
producing cynicism and resentment. (Dixon, 2001, p.307) Indeed Dixon has argued 
that the,  
Political capital of key pro-Agreement politicians and parties has been eroded as the choreography 
of the process and the use of political skills have been publicly exposed. This exacerbates the 
political environment of public scepticism and distrust of the political process that was the 
justification for the use of manipulation by elites in the first place. The result is that the Agreement 
is balanced precariously on a still polarised population (Dixon, 2002, p.739  740).  
One could argue that in recent years, unionism in Northern Ireland has never been in 
as strong a position as it presently finds itself. The IRA has decommissioned its 
weapons, accepted the war is over whilst those who, in the past, may have questioned 
the legitimacy and authority of the Northern Ireland state and opposed its very 
existence have been reconciled to its constitutional status as an integral part of the 
United Kingdom. There is a Unionist First Minister, the majority of Northern Ireland 
seats in the House of Commons are held by Unionist parties and for the first time 
since the old Northern Ireland Parliament, unionists are exercising political power in a 
locally elected devolved institution. Unionism should have much to celebrate. 
Alongside these political triumphs, in constitutional terms, Northern Irelands 
uncertain place within the union, after a period of violent conflict, has been injected 
with a relative measure of certainty through the amendment of Articles 2 & 3 of the 
Irish Constitution and to a lesser extent through the legal entrenchment of the consent 
principle whereby the constitutional position of Northern Ireland will remain a matter 
for the people. Reaching this point, however, has not been an easy journey for 
Unionism, both intellectually and politically. As we have noted, the constant round of 
negotiations, debates over implementation of the Belfast Agreement and external 
pressures from the British & Irish Governments and from Irish Republicans 
reluctance to engage faithfully in the political process from the outset have left deep 
intellectual and political scars on a political community that has never been 
particularly good at expressing in a coherent, intelligible and defensible manner 
what it actually stands for, (Aughey, 1989, 1991, 1995) In theory, the Belfast 
Agreement, should have instilled in the unionist community a profound sense of 
confidence and optimism about the future but yet doubt, fear and anxiety was one of 
the significant characteristics of unionist responses to the peace process in Northern 
Ireland.  
The second manifestation of the culture of fatalism is in the bitter political exchanges 
and parochial arguments between the two largest pro  union political parties in 
Northern Ireland; the DUP and UUP; over the nature and implementation of the 
Belfast Agreement. This intra unionist competition and rivalry has perpetuated and 
sustained a fatalistic, defeatist and fearful discourse within unionism as both parties 
have engaged in a tactical and strategic battle for the hearts and minds of the 
unionist people, which often saw both parties institutionalise a fatalistic discourse in 
the pursuit of this battle. This ideological divide about the Agreement has been at the 
heart of unionist politics since 1998. As Farrington states, the fruitless but relatively 
amicable debate over integration or devolution has been replaced by a vicious 
confrontation over the merits of the Good Friday Agreement. (Farrington, 2001, 
p.68). Gladys Ganiel has analysed extensively DUP discourses on their road to 
political hegemony within the unionist community. She points to the dismal vision 
painted by the DUP. However, crucially it was the DUPs dismal vision coupled, 
arguably, with UUP incompetence and division which secured and sustained the 
DUPs position as the lead political party within unionism. According to Ganiel the 
DUP, tell unionists that they have been lied to and betrayed by immoral politicians, 
that they face an ever-present security threat, and that they suffer from victimisation 
and discrimination (Ganiel, 2007, p.312). DUP discourses therefore focussed on how 
the UUP had acquiesced in institutionalising through the structures of the Belfast 
Agreement a nationalist agenda and on how the Agreement had resulted in the 
supposed marginalisation of Protestant and unionist values and culture (Patterson, 
2006, p.347). In other words, the DUP sought to articulate a counter narrative of 
political developments in Northern Ireland centred around the creation of the 
impression that the unionist community was excessively victimised through the 
interventions of the British Government on matters such as policing reform, parades, 
victims issues and prisoner releases. According to Ganiel,  
The DUP also have depicted Protestants as victims of the peace process. Use of the term 
victimisation here is not intended to minimise the suffering of those from all quarters who have 
been victims of violence in Northern Ireland; rather it is used to emphasise the extent to which the 
DUP portrays Protestants as not having benefited from the peace process (Ganiel, 2007, p.310). 
In other words, that, as Finlay puts it,  
defeatism is deliberately orchestrated by cynical political activists who use traditional forms of 
mobilisation that evoke a backs-against-the-wall siege mentality to mobilise Protestants against 
change (Finlay, 2001, p.3- 4). 
In a 2005 public attitudes survey (Northern Ireland Life and Times (NILT), 2005,) 
conducted before the 2005 UK general election when the DUP had already 
established itself as the lead unionist party following the 2003 Assembly election 
unionist dissatisfaction with the political process was evident. For example, when 
respondents to the NILT survey were asked whether the Belfast Agreement had 
benefited unionists more than nationalists, nationalists more than unionists, or that 
unionists and nationalists have benefited equally? (NILT, 2005) 49% of respondents 
replied that it had benefited nationalists. However, 68% of respondents who replied 
that the Agreement had benefited nationalism were from the unionist community. 
Therefore as unionist dissatisfaction with the political process flowing from the 
Agreement increased, the more the process of ethnic outbidding (Gormley  Heenan 
and MacGinty, 2008) between the DUP and UUP over who could best represent the 
pro  union community became further entrenched in a fatalistic and defeatist 
discourse. According to Gormley  Heenan and MacGinty, ethnic outbidding is 
defined as the,  
Processes through which parties within the same ethno national bloc seek to portray themselves as 
the true defenders of the group position while simultaneously undercutting the legitimacy of in-
group rivals. Claim and counterclaim may result in an ethnic auction, whereby attempts at inter-
group rapprochement are made impossible by intra-group accusations of treachery and betrayal 
(Gormley Heenan and MacGinty, 2008, p.44). 
An initial consideration of post Agreement unionist discourses about human rights in 
Northern Ireland may lead one to conclude that the culture of fatalism within 
unionism has significant explanatory value when it comes to analysing the issue of 
unionism and human rights in Northern Ireland. It could be argued that unionist 
discourse on human rights is a further symptom of a defeatist, fatalistic and ever  
anxious political tradition and a further illustration of unionist alienation from the 
political process in Northern Ireland. Indeed, this is an argument that is pursued by 
some unionist politicians. As we shall come to see in chapter 4 when we consider post 
Agreement unionist responses to proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, the 
Progressive Unionist Party (PUP) have, unlike the UUP and DUP, expressed effusive 
support for the idea of an expansive, maximalist Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. One 
element of the PUPs narrative on human rights in Northern Ireland has been to 
criticise unionism for not embracing, more effusively, human rights based arguments 
and to encourage unionist communities to be more pro  active in pursuing rights 
based arguments to their tactical and strategic benefit.  As the former PUP leader, the 
late David Ervine argued,  
Perhaps we should take ownership of an element that would assist our institutions to function more 
practically. In the words of Edwin Poots, the Unionist community has had no ownership of this. 
Why has it had no ownership? What are we afraid of? Are we afraid to defend a human beings 
rights? What is there to be frightened about? That is a sign of the insecurity that permeates our 
society, an insecurity that is not in the first instance proffered to us by our enemy. It is proffered to 
us often in the first instance by our leadership: be afraid of this; be afraid of that; be afraid of the 
dark...It seems that all Prods are clairvoyant - and there is never any good news. They are afraid of 
the dark and rather than switch on the light - take ownership of something and be part of it, so that it 
would be the way that they wanted it to be - they run away from it. That is what is happening today. 
The refusal to allow or encourage the Unionist community to take ownership of the Human Rights 
Commission makes it difficult for all of us to sell the concept of human rights (25
 September, 
2001,  http://www.niassembly/record/reports/010925c.htm). 
However, this thesis argues later that unionist responses towards human rights 
discourse in Northern Ireland, far from being a mere symptom of a fatalistic attitudes 
within unionism, have been characterised, in more recent times, by a depth and 
sophistication which suggests more than mere fatalism. A further problem with 
labelling unionist discourses about human rights as fatalistic is that such a narrative 
overlooks the support that existed, as the next chapter will consider, within unionism 
for a Bill of Rights from the early 1970s until the immediate post Belfast Agreement 
period.  The findings of this thesis together with other external considerations of the 
political landscape in Northern Ireland will lead the thesis to argue in chapter 4 that 
the support expressed by Loyalist representatives such as Ervine is not considered to 
be representative of unionist opinion on this issue. 
Unionism as a living tradition  
The concept of tradition within political philosophy is conceived of in two principal 
ways within political philosophy. Firstly, in the way that we might understand how 
the conservative Whig Edmund Burke reflected upon tradition as the organically, 
accumulated body of wisdom and knowledge inherited and passed on through the 
generations. Often, in this sense, tradition is associated with conservative political 
thought and as such is contrasted with the rationalistic reforming or revolutionary 
plans of other political philosophies. As Oakeshott argued, what I mean by 
rationalism is the doctrine that nothing else has a place in politics (Correspondence 
between Michael Oakeshott and Karl Popper, 28
 January, 1948). In other words that 
rationalism demands and assumes such a hegemonic position within political 
discourse that the voices of the living and the dead are not heard. Following on from 
this conception, the second way in which we conceive of tradition is as a set of 
practices and as a way of understanding and communicating the value and worth of 
these practices and beliefs to future generations. This conception of tradition, which 
Hobsbawm labelled as invented (1983), within political philosophy, is largely 
associated with the philosopher Alasdair MacIntrye, who in his seminal publication 
After Virtue argues that,  
A living traditionis an historically extended, socially embodied argument and an argument 
precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition. Within a tradition the pursuit of 
goods extends through generations, sometimes through many generations (MacIntyre, 2007, p.222). 
MacIntyre was motivated by a profound desire, however, to rescue the study and idea 
of tradition from the grip that Burkean perspectives had held on the idea since the 
enlightenment. MacIntrye argues that the enlightenment had no use for the concept 
and so all too willingly abandoned it to the Burkeans (MacIntyre, 2007, p.222). 
MacIntyre is heavily critical of the Burkean conception of tradition forcefully arguing 
that, when a tradition becomes Burkean, it is always dying or dead (MacIntyre, 2007, 
p.222). For MacIntyre, Burke ascribed to tradition wisdom without reflection (1987, 
p.353). The Oakeshottian conception of tradition can also be distinguished from 
MacIntyres reflections because whilst MacIntyre argues that a tradition is an 
argument, Oakeshotts notion was that traditions embodied more a politics of 
conversation than the politics of argument, which he argued was excessively 
rationalistic (Oakeshott, 1948, 1951). In many ways, unionism in Northern Ireland 
would be associated with both ways in which we conceive of tradition in political 
philosophy. Firstly, in the Burkean sense, unionist politicians often display a 
reverence for the past  for social, cultural and historical traditions and practices that 
critics of unionism might argue exercise a negative influence on unionist political 
thought. Secondly, in the MacIntyrean or Oakeshottian sense where unionism can be 
conceived of as a living tradition with a number of different social, cultural and 
political influences in conversation, tension and dispute with one another. Unionism 
has often been most associated with the Burkean conception and not enough with 
MacIntyres or Oakeshotts therefore leading to the conclusion that unionism is 
caught up with debates about the past, incapable of looking to the future and that very 
little debate exists about what constitutes unionist political thought in Northern 
Ireland. However, if conceived of as a living tradition, unionism can therefore be 
capable of embracing a range of ideas, opinions, political outlooks and classes. This 
has been at once its main strength but main weakness. The vibrancy of recent 
historical and ideological conversations underlines just how alive unionism, as a 
tradition of political thought, actually is. The historical conversation about the origins 
of unionist political thought in the work of scholars such as Bew (2009), Boyce 
(1996), Hennessey (1993), Jackson (2003), Loughlin (1995), Stewart (1977) and 
Walker (1996, 2000) provides an important backdrop for understanding where 
contemporary debates within unionist political thought have come from. As Gibbon 
argues, the origins of unionist political thought lie within a complex set of historical 
circumstances that cut across a range of socio  economic factors,  
Ulster Unionism did not spring perfect and complete, as Athena from the head of Zeus, from the 
home rule crises of 1886, 1892 and 1912. On the contrary, like all substantial social movements, it 
has been prepared for historically by the development albeit by divergent paths  of all the 
elements it was to combine. The most significant empirical characteristics of Ulster Unionism were 
its regional status, the uniformly sectarian character of its following and its integration of all the 
major classes in Protestant Ulster (Gibbon, 1972, p.11). 
Indeed, as Todd argues the intellectual strands alive in the origins of unionist political 
thought during the home rule crisis were various and diverse  the mobilization 
against home rule as she argues was one of the great cross  class alliances,   
There was the settler emphasis on threat, covenant and public banding. There was the variety of 
Reformation religious tendencies, which took as central concepts of religious liberty, Protestant 
identity, and the role of the individual conscience: within this broad framework, interpretations of 
political authority, liberty and the role of reason differed radically. Liberals and conservatives allied 
in defence of the union and unionism incorporated elements of liberal and conservative political 
thought (Todd, 1993, p.192). 
A significant characteristic of much of the literature on the origins of Ulster unionism 
lies in that fact that its focus has been primarily on the periods of crisis in Ulsters 
history from the first struggle against Home Rule of 1884  86 through the second and 
third Home Rule crises to the establishment of the Northern Ireland state in 1921. 
Academics such as John Bew (2009), Alvin Jackson (1992, 2000) and Brian Walker 
(1996, 2000 & 2007) have been heavily critical, however, of this tendency to overlook 
the periods in the eighteenth century before the Home Rule crisis. As Bew notes, for 
the most part, it remains the case that the historical understanding of unionism is 
firmly grounded in the period during which unionism emerged as an organised 
electoral forceas a coordinated response to the Home Rule Movement of the 1880s 
(Bew, 2009 p.1). Bew argues, however, that a fuller understanding of the genesis of 
unionismshould also be firmly grounded in the context of the pre  Home Rule 
experience (Bew, 2009, p.1). For Brian Walker the issue is not that the political events 
of the late 19
 century and early 20
 century such as Partition, the Home Rule crisis 
and the Easter rising were not important or significant but that, it should be realised 
that they influenced a political situation that had already emerged in its essential form 
at the general elections of 1885 and 1886. (Walker, 1996, p.15). According to 
Walker the period from 1868  86,  
proved to be a watershed in the history of Ulster, especially of the six countries which now 
make up Northern Ireland. The period witnessed key changes at elections and in the nature of party 
politics that have had very considerable influence right up to the present. The conflict that emerged 
at this time between the powerful forces of unionism and nationalism, with their associated 
religious divisions, led to partition in 1921 and has provided the basic source for the troubles today 
in Northern Ireland. (Walker, 1989, xii)  
Similarly, Alvin Jackson has warned against the monolithic presentation of a history 
of unionist political thought and has been critical of the historical confusion 
demonstrated by unionist politicians. For example as Alvin Jackson highlights,  
Celebrating its fiftieth anniversary in 1971, Unionist Ministers could only express their anxieties 
and loyalty through the model of the solemn League and Covenant. In a confused historical analogy 
these men defended devolved Government by reference to an integrationist text, and 
commemorated 1921 by evoking 1912: this was indeed pissing in the gale of history (Jackson, 
1992, p.185). 
The problem according to Jackson is that many unionist politicians have created a 
false narrative or memory of this period as a great victory and heroic age for unionism 
with heroic political leaders and figures. Similarly Brian Walker argues that this 
historical narrative is selective and contains various myths (Walker, 2007, p.108) 
and argues that,  
The unionist sense of history, therefore, with its great emphasis on 1641, 1689 and 1690, and with 
the accompanying idea of constant conflict between protestant and catholic is highly selective. The 
marked lack of interest in these events during the eighteenth century and much of the nineteenth, 
along with information about sharp protestant division at some times and Presbyterian-catholic 
alliance at other times, is conveniently forgotten about in this historical account. (Walker, 1996, 
p.10) 
As Aughey points out, claims that the partition of Ireland represented an historic 
victory for Unionism need to be severely qualified (Aughey, 1996, p.31) For 
Aughey, the partition of Ireland should be conceived of as a victory for unionists but 
not unionism (1989, 1991 & 1996). As Jackson notes, Unionism neither supplies nor 
demands a complex vision of its own pastThe historical and historiographical 
legacy is rich and complex, but the legatees squander their inheritance by their very 
frugality (Jackson, 1996, p.121).  
If one considers MacIntryes and Oakeshotts interpretation of what a political 
tradition is then unionist political thought can be defined as a vibrant conversation as 
to the set of beliefs and practices which are constitutitive of it. In other words 
unionism is rarely merely civic', 'liberal' or 'cultural' but there are competing 
emphases within a debate (or conversation) about what best serves the particular 
circumstances of the times. We have already noted Augheys influential statement of 
liberal unionist political thought but in the literature there are a number of other 
intepretations of unionist political thought. Amongst the most influential and 
prominent of these statements are Norman Porters conception of civic unionism 
(Porter, 1996), David Millers Queens Rebels thesis, which stresses the highly 
conditional nature of unionist loyalty to the British state (Miller, 1978), Steve Bruces 
focus on unionisms Protestant identity (1986, 1994 & 1998), Fergal Cochranes 
ideological deconstructing of unionist political thought into three distinct traditions: 
the ethno  nationalist, the secular rationalist and the contractarian (Cochrane, 1997, 
p.55) and Jennifer Todds influential ideological Ulster British/Ulster Loyalist 
dichotomy of unionist political beliefs.  
Porters civic unionism (1996), much like Augheys ideas in Under Siege, must be 
contextualised by the particular political circumstances of the time. Whilst Aughey 
was writing in the intellectual and political morass of post Anglo  Irish Agreement 
unionist politics, Porter was writing at a time when the IRA had just ended its first 
ceasefire with the bomb at Canary Wharf in London and the fledgling peace process 
was in difficulties. Porter identified three strands to unionist political thought: cultural 
unionism, liberal unionism and a third normative strand he argues for: civic unionism 
(Porter, 1996). Porter warned that Unionisms most urgent task must be to heal its 
own divisions and shore up its collective resources in order to defend itself against 
blatant and subtle attempts to undermine the justness of its cause (Porter, 1996, 
p.60). As a methodological device Porter admits that his work operates mostly in the 
realm of political philosophy (Porter, 1996, p.3). Farrington has commented on this 
aspect of Porters work. In his words, Porters reformulation of unionism through a 
philosophical device he terms due recognition has been found sufficient, by some, to 
satisfy normative political theory, but has been found wanting by many unionists, one 
of whom described it as intellectual Lundyism. (Farrington, 2003, p.258) Porter 
appears to have been motivated by the general problems of unionist inarticulacy that 
we have identified. As he argues,  
Unionism suffers from a lack of vision. In part this is a consequence of the minimalism of 
unionisms creed, which insists on little more than a commitment from its adherents to strengthen 
and maintain the Union. What shape the Union itself might take, or what goals might define its 
politics, are matters left to the British government of the day to decide (Porter, 1996, p.8). 
He highlights the dichotomy between new, liberal and traditional cultural unionism 
which he argues, for some unionists a political identity relates primarily to a legal 
status and a set of procedural rights and entitlements, whereas for others it also relates 
to a series of substantive cultural or religious commitments and attachments. (Porter, 
1996, p.55) For Porter, cultural unionism was a tradition that derives from an Ulster 
unionist way of life, which is characterised by institutions and practices reflecting a 
Protestant  British ethos. (1996: 72) In this regard his conception of cultural 
unionism is, as we shall come to see, conceptually close to Todds ideal theoretical 
type the Ulster Loyalist. Porter describes liberal unionism as offering a rational 
political position unhampered by sectarianism and uncluttered by esoteric 
interpretations of history and religion (Porter, 1996, p.111). Porters normative 
concept of civic unionism is instrumental in terms of its view of the union. Its not an 
end in itself but according to him but among one of other ends. Indeed Porter is 
inclined to link civic unionism within a broader conception of civic republicanism 
within political theory, the implications of which dont always necessarily lead to the 
conclusions that Porter arrives at. Porter talks of civic unionism having a thicker 
conception of citizenship that involves a more expansive notion of politics. Porters 
civic unionism has been criticised for failing to be sensitive enough to empirical 
realities. As Neil Southern points out,  
unfortunately, Porters philosophical insights do not find an easy entry point into the realpolitik 
of a divided society like Northern Ireland: it is an ideologically contested place where diametrically 
opposed national ideas and political objectivesalthough presently less violently expressed and 
pursuedcontinue to exist in competition (Southern, 2007, p.96).  
Just as Porter criticised Augheys thesis for failing to consider the substantive ethnic 
identities within unionism so too does Southern criticise the civic unionist thesis in 
similar terms. As Southern states,  
His recommendation is premised on the requirement for unionists to narrow their sense of identity 
in order to cultivate a shared Northern Irish identity with non-unionists, namely, Irish nationalists 
and republicans. Unionists, however, might be inclined to point out that part of the unattractiveness 
of Porters thesis lies in its confinement of unionist identity to Northern Ireland and the fact that the 
realization of his recommendations would only serve to cut deeper into the already frayed tendons 
which connect Northern Ireland to the United Kingdom. All said, it would seem that Porter does not 
grapple satisfactorily with the emotionality ingrained in unionists Britishness (Southern, 2007, 
p.96).  
As Steve Bruce points out, there is a nervous strand in unionism that has never been 
confident of the permanency of the partition settlement (Bruce, 1994, p.66). This 
nervousness is captured somewhere within the scheme of David Millers influential 
thesis on unionism. Miller argues that the conditional loyalty exhibited by Ulster 
unionists expressed a venerable theory of political obligation  that of social contract 
thinkers who flourished at the time when Ulster was being colonised (Miller, 1978, 
p.5). Hennessey has pointed out that the Queens Rebels thesis advanced by Miller is 
one of the most influential interpretations of Ulster unionist political ideology 
(Hennessey, 1993, p.21).  Neil Southern has identified the fact that Miller feels that 
unionist loyalty to Britain has never been given unconditionally leads him to conclude 
that loyalty defined an external relationship to the British state, not a wholehearted 
sense of incorporation into the British nation. (Southern, 2007, p.78) Southern has 
tested the Queens rebels thesis against empirical observations and found there is 
much more richness to unionist political thought than the Miller critique would 
suggest. As he argues, Certainly there is more to the unionism of respondents than 
the contractarian theory of Miller allows for, and there is also much greater 
sentimental depth and substance to the Britishness of, in particular, Todds Ulster 
loyalist group than the shallowness she suggests. (Southern, 2007, p.96)  
In many ways the questions asked by the political theorist Michael Freeden of 
conservative political thought have much relevance for those reflecting on what 
constitutes unionist political thought. As Freeden laments, Why is there such a dearth 
of capable, sophisticated enquiry into the nature of conservatism, by comparison with 
the reams of print on liberalism or socialism? (Freeden, 1996, p.318).  Freeden 
highlights that it is often those from a conservative disposition who write about 
conservatism and indeed the same point could be made of unionist political thought in 
the sense that a number of the scholars referred to in this chapter would broadly 
identify with the pro  union tradition in Northern Ireland.  However, in Jennifer 
Todds work on the subject, there is a notable exception to that tendency. Todd could 
be described as a scholar of unionism  that is an intellectual not from the unionist 
tradition in Northern Ireland who, nevertheless, is engaged in work on the nature of 
unionist political thought  as opposed to a unionist scholar  an intellectual self 
identified as pro  union working on more abstract conceptions of what unionist 
political thought might constitute. Her 1987 work Two traditions in unionist political 
culture published in Irish Political Studies has been of profound importance in 
helping to increase our understanding of the ideological complexities of unionist 
political thought. The Ulster Loyalist tradition according to Todd identifies 
primarily with a regional Northern Ireland or Ulster identity and has a secondary 
engagement with Britain that involves only conditional loyalty. The Ulster British 
tradition has as its imagined community Great Britain and a secondary regional 
identification with Northern Ireland. Todd argues that Ulster loyalist ideology 
approximates a self  contained closed system whilst Ulster British ideology in 
contrast is not a closed ideological system (Todd, 1987, p.21  22). Ulster Loyalist 
ideology is identified by Todd has being exemplified within organisations like the 
orange order, within the DUP and secular Loyalist groups. Ulster British ideology 
Todd argues can trace its intellectual and political roots to 19
 Century liberal 
thought. In the words of Jennifer Todd, the origins of Ulster British ideology lie with 
the late nineteenth century British Empire when British industrialists in particular 
expressed a modernising Unionist ideology in imperial terms. (Todd, 1987, p.12) 
More recently, this theme of has been investigated by John Bew (2009) in his book 
The Glory of Being Britons  a substantial and profound contribution to the debate 
about the origins of Ulster unionism. Bews study covers, as we noted earlier, 
unionisms pre home rule experience arguing that during this period from the Act of 
Union to the first Home Rule crisis that, unionism amounted to something more than 
pan  Protestant mobilisation or the political expression of siege mentality (without 
denying the existence of either) (Bew, 2009, p223). According to Todd the Ulster 
British tradition emphasises the benefits of modernity in cultural, political and 
economic terms and at the level of political programmes can favour devolution or 
integration. Liberty is valued by the Ulster British tradition argues Todd understood 
in the traditional sense of the negative freedom of individuals to choose their life plan 
and reach their own conclusions free from outside authorities by their conscience 
alone. (Todd, 1987, p.13) The appeal to enlightenment rationality, which appears to 
be an essential part of the Ulster British tradition offers a framework within which 
unionism could be conceived of in rights based terms. Indeed McCartney (1986, 
2001) in a number of publications has attempted to link unionist political thought with 
the rational, universal tradition of enlightenment political thinking characterised by 
such concepts as liberty, truth, justice and freedom. In Todds opinion her dichotomy 
contains,  
two seemingly incompatible emphases and ideologies, the British orientated and those primarily 
concerned with Protestant interests and argues that these two strands coexisted albeit in tension 
because the Protestant position in Northern Ireland was not only defended by but to some extent 
reflected British socio  political and cultural hierarchies (Todd, 1993, p.187). 
Both Farrington (2001) and McAuley (2007) have criticised Todds ideological 
framework as insufficiently placed to capture the cleavages within post Agreement 
unionist political thought. However, Todd recognises herself the flaws in her own 
analysis. For example as she states, Many Northern Protestants cannot so easily be 
categorised for they have a foot in each camp and share aspects of each ideology. 
Unionist politicians, in particular play to both audiences. (Todd, 1987, p.2) She 
admits that her definitions may be ideal theoretical types that may not be sufficiently 
sensitive to empirical subtleties. Farrington criticisms of Todds ideological 
dichotomy focuses on the inability of the model to account for recent divisions within 
unionism in Northern Ireland over the Belfast Agreement and the subsequent debates 
that have followed. Farrington provides a useful framework for analysing divisions 
within Ulster Unionism over the Agreement by deploying a multi axis model to 
organise Ulster unionist responses to the Agreement on several dimensions. He 
differentiates between a dogmatic and pragmatic response to the Agreement from the 
differing perspectives of secular and religious unionism. Farringtons thesis argues 
that Todds dichotomy cannot detect the ideological subtleties contained within the 
Unionist response to the agreement and argues that if we applied Todds binary model 
to unionist responses to the agreement,  
we would see that the latter is unable to detect the difference in position between the DUP and 
the PUP or the DUP and Dennis Watson as they all come from the same Ulster Loyalist tradition. It 
is incapable of adequately accounting for the UUP split or why Robert McCartney and the DUP are 
on the same side of the y-axis. Moreover, on this representation the DUP and the UUP are not the 
logical poles of two traditions and this allows a better understanding of the actual political divisions 
between the two parties (Farrington, 2001, p.63). 
Farrington seeks to account for fluidity and flexibility (2001, p.67) within unionist 
ideology in order to arrive at a more layered account of unionist political thought. 
Farrington points to a blurring of ideological differences within unionism that 
makes a reinterpretation of Todds 1987 model necessary.  As Farrington argues 
Todds account fails in two further respects  its inability to appreciate the 
crosscutting currents within unionism and to understand divisions within the actual 
groupings themselves. (Farrington, 2001, p.68) McAuleys critique of Todds work is 
on the basis that contemporary unionist politics have changed with the ascendancy of 
the DUP to a hegemonic position within the unionist community and that the very 
notion of Britishness has become much more problematic and contested since Todd 
wrote her piece (McAuley, 2007, p.130). As a consequence, this makes it harder to 
apply Todds dichotomy. In McAuleys words the strength of the ideological 
dichotomy she identifies within unionism has been weakened greatly. Today political 
unionism displays growing indications of political disengagement and a lack of 
confidence with the ability of the broader political process, and a strong perception 
that the British state cannot assure a future for unionism. (McAuley, 2007, p.131) 
However, those words could be applied to describe the state of unionism in Northern 
Ireland since the prorogation of Stormont. Unionist ideology in the 1990s increasingly 
became defined against the notion of inclusivity. Support for an accommodation with 
Irish Nationalism and Irish Republicanism became the yardstick against which all 
unionist political thought was judged. This feature is not accounted for in Todds 
model although given the particular circumstances of the time in which Todd was 
writing what else could be expected? Perhaps recent changes in unionist political 
thought represent the diminishing influence of Ulster Loyalist political thought within 
unionist ideology and the hegemony that Ulster British political thought has now 
acquired. According to Todd, Ulster British ideology was not closed but open and 
receptive to new adherents to the tradition. It was also based at an empirical level on 
the fact that those who identified with the tradition could either support devolution or 
integration.  
In Northern Ireland, unionist political actors often rely upon excessively utilitarian 
arguments to make the case for the union. However, the durability of a unionism built 
upon the principle of the greatest happiness for the greatest number is highly 
questionable particularly if at some point the continued existence of the UK no longer 
provides the basis or socio  economic conditions for maximising the greatest 
happiness for the greatest number in Northern Ireland. The danger for unionists of an 
excessively utilitarian approach to justifications for the union can be highlighted by 
considering the work of McLean and MacMillan (2005) in their recent study of 
unionism in the UK, State of the Union. In this work, these scholars have 
distinguished between primordial and instrumental unionism.  According to 
McLean and MacMillan, a unionist (person or attitude) is primordial if he/she/it 
regards the Union as a value in and of itself. A Unionist is instrumental of he/she/it 
regards the Union as good because it has consequences (Mclean and MacMillan, 
2005, p.135). Furthermore, they argue that primordial unionism with its strong 
intellectual roots in 19
 Century Britain, exemplified in the work of scholars such as 
the legal and constitutional theorist, A.V Dicey (1886), has long ceased to exist and 
that instrumental unionism is the dominant justificatory basis for why the UK should 
continue to exist. However, the utilitarianism of instrumental unionism (a union of 
good consequences) favours short term appeal over long term sustainability. In 
addition and relying on Oakeshotts distinction between civil and enterprise 
(Oakeshott, 1975) Aughey (2010b) has argued that the instrumentalism of McLean 
and MacMillans unionism is partial in both the academic and the political senses of 
that term (Aughey, 2010b, p.409). Aughey connects instrumental unionism with 
Oakeshotts enterprise association arguing that,   
To understand the UK exclusively as an enterprise association would mean that when the common 
purpose (for example, the project of empire) has terminated the parties to itScotland, England, 
Wales and Northern Irelandare no longer bound by its instrumental rules. As a project of fixed 
duration, the ending of the project ends the political relationship (Aughey, 2010b, p.415) 
He also attempts to offer a thicker conception of what primordial unionism means by 
connecting it with Oakeshotts civil association.  As Aughey argues,  
To understand the UK as a civil association, however, means that it is not concerned with any 
particular project, is not dissolved by any particular projects ending, is not dependent on any 
substantive outcome but is sustained by the common acknowledgement of its legitimacy. The 
authority of the association continues so long as there is public consent to its procedures. This is not 
primordial in the sense of an exclusive ethnic identity or of an Ulster-style unionist fundamentalism 
(though some people may think or behave accordingly) but in the very specific sense of consent to 
which Oakeshott referred (Aughey, 2010b, p.415) 
Conclusion  
We began this chapter outlining how, mindful of unionisms historic problems 
articulating its political beliefs in a coherent, thoughtful manner, a number of scholars 
sought to add new levels of coherence and depth to unionist political thought. In 
doing so they sought to remind themselves and the rest of the body politic that 
unionism can be considered a living political tradition where the different conceptions 
of unionism (e.g. liberal, civic, progressive, cultural, left, right) remain in 
conversation with one another as to the set of beliefs and practices which are 
constitutive of unionist political thought. For the first time in, at least, a generation 
this conversation takes place within a relatively stable political and institutional 
environment in Northern Ireland where all political parties have been operating, with 
all its imperfections and difficulties, devolved Government since May 2007. To a 
large extent many of the divisions and tensions of the peace process still pervade 
unionist political narratives. Indeed, in recent times, unionism has almost been 
exclusively defined by the peace/absence of violence orthodoxy (Farrington, 2006, 
p.121) in Northern Ireland. However, as we noted earlier, the space created by this 
stability means that unionism, both from an academic and a party political 
perspective, has the opportunity to engage in serious intellectual reflection about the 
future of unionist political thought free from the limitations, which the endless rounds 
of negotiations and wrangling over the implementation of the Belfast Agreement 
imposed.  
This conversation will require a much more mature and coherent engagement from 
unionist political parties than has previously been the case as both main political 
parties within unionism seek a new modus vivendi. In the aftermath of the 2010 UK 
general election, much of the discourse within unionism about a new modus vivendi 
has centred around the idea of unionist unity  that is the idea that the UUP and 
DUP should join together to form one political party to represent the pro  union 
community in Northern Ireland. Historically, the pro  union community in Northern 
Ireland had, until the 1970s, been represented by one unionist movement. There are 
other precedents too over the past thirty years of unionist politics, which support the 
idea of a single unionist political party. For example, the United Ulster Unionist 
Coalition (UUUC), which came to prominence after the Sunningdale Agreement and 
the cross party cooperation, which occurred after the Anglo  Irish Agreement. 
However, the particular circumstances in which unionist cooperation operated in the 
past speaks very much to those specific examples and framing the current debate 
about unionist unity in those terms may obfuscate the real ideological dividing lines 
that exist at present within unionism and whether the divisions between unionist 
political parties actually reflect what these dividing lines are. These ideological 
divisions may centre on attitudes to power sharing at Stormont, the appropriate 
ideological (e.g. left/right, communitarian/liberal) insights, which should be brought 
to the debate about the social and economy policy decisions politicians at Stormont 
must make or the dynamics of the relationship between Northern Ireland and the rest 
of the UK. Conceptualised in this way then, the more appropriate debate about the 
future of unionism is not unionist unity, but unionist realignment. For example, as this 
thesis will highlight in chapters 4 and 5 there is significant convergence between the 
DUP and UUP in their attitudes to proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights and 
to the protection of rights in Northern Ireland generally. However, does this finding 
provide further evidence to support the case for the DUP and UUP to form one 
political party or does it, at a more profound level, suggest that the real ideological 
dividing lines within unionism are something more significant than the existing party 
political differences allow for?  
An important aspect of both the DUP and UUPs narrative about the future has been 
the desire to see the creation of normal politics in Northern Ireland. In other words, 
that political discourse in Northern Ireland should begin to reflect the types of debates 
about social and economic policy that occur in other devolved regions of the UK and 
other modern democratic states. This objective, whilst laudable in itself, faces a 
significant challenge due to the fact that the extent to which unionist political parties 
have either the intellectual and practical capacity, in terms of policy development, to 
deliver this objective is debatable. Furthermore, whilst both political parties within 
unionism, particularly the UUP despite its electoral link up with the conservative 
party, continue to maintain that in their respective parties a range of often conflicting 
political ideologies can co  exist then it is difficult to see how a coherent political 
agenda informed by an underlying and consistent political philosophy can be 
constructed.  The transition to normal politics in Northern Ireland will require 
intellectual and ideological honesty within unionisms political parties to assist with 
the greater reflection on the substantive and often complicated discussions around 
social and economic policy that normal politics demands but it will also require vast 
changes in the internal cultures of both parties. Alongside these internal matters, 
unionism also has the dilemma of how to engage with the external  its relationship 
with the rest of the United Kingdom, how unionist identity relates to British identity 
and the idea of what Britishness stands for in the twenty first century. One of the more 
significant arguments advanced by Bew (2009) in his study of unionism from the Act 
of Union 1801 until the first Home Rule crisis was the depth of Ulsters engagement 
with the British political nation (Bew, 2009, p.223) which meant that, the use of 
shared language and labels was an unconscious reflex, the natural corollary of 
political integration (Bew, 2009, p223). As unionism in Northern Ireland 
comprehends this issue, it may be served well by reflecting on Bews argument and in 
doing so perhaps find a way of re  connecting with the historic model of how 
unionism in Northern Ireland related to wider British society. Indeed, the extent to 
which unionist political thought grasps the opportunity to engage with both these 
debates about the idea of normal politics in Northern Ireland and the relationship 
with the rest of the UK will have a profound effect on the extent to which unionist 
political culture can exhibit a new self confidence and escape the fatalism, fear and 
pessimism that has been one of its most significant defining characteristics in the past.  
Chapter 3 
Unionist responses to the protection of rights in Northern 
Ireland 1921  1998 
Introduction 
The previous chapter concluded that, whilst one of the significant problems for 
Unionism has been the pervasiveness of philosophical and political inarticulateness 
amongst its political representatives and within influential strands of unionist opinion, 
unionism is a living tradition of political thought capable of embracing a range of 
ideas, opinions, political outlooks and classes. This next section argues that 
unionisms experience of rights discourse since 1998 has been shaped through the 
prism of three things: the debate over a bill of rights, the work of the Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission and of the human rights NGO the CAJ. This section of 
the thesis will now consider the engagement of key unionist elites with these issues 
and these organisations to examine the anxieties and suspicion experienced by 
influential strands of unionist opinion. As we shall consider further in the next 
chapter, the theoretical justification for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights has often 
presented in the literature using the framework of transitional justice discourse Bell 
(2002), Bell, Campbell and Ni Aolain (2004), Campbell & Ni Aolain (2005), Harvey, 
Campbell & Ni Aolain (2003) and McEvoy, Morrison and Anthony (2007), McEvoy 
(2007). However, in this literature and in other scholarly work on a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights the unionist position on a Bill of Rights for Northern is often 
overlooked, ignored and misrepresented. The unionist position on a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland is more nuanced and complicated than the narrative often presented 
in the literature. This narrative is neither empirically accurate nor sufficiently nuanced 
enough to explain the position of influential strands of unionist opinion on the issue. 
Much of the literature, (Bell, 2000, Harvey 2001) uses the prima facie support of the 
political parties for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights as a starting point for analysis 
and so whilst in the words of Arthur Aughey, the idea of a Bill of Rights had been 
for long common amongst the Northern Ireland parties (Aughey, 2005, p.94) the 
precise meaning of what a commitment to enacting a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland means in practice is problematic. 
There is an extensive body of literature on the human rights provisions of the Belfast 
Agreement (Livingston (2001 & 1999), Harvey (2007, 2001a, 2001b, 2001c), 
Kavanagh (2004), Meehan (2004), Harvey and Livingston (1999), Mageen and 
OBrien (1999), Harvey and Schwartz (2009), Murray (2001), Bell (2000), Smith 
(2004, 2006) but where the issue of unionism and human rights is highlighted in this 
literature, it is usually brief and refers only to three issues; the criticisms made by 
unionist politicians about the NIHRC (Smith, 2004, Meehan, 2004, Livingston, 1999), 
a perceived Republican/Nationalist bias in human rights discourse in Northern Ireland 
(Smith 2006, McEvoy, 2003 & Murray 2001) and thirdly to unionist support for the 
UK and Irelands ratification of the Council of Europes Framework Convention for 
the Protection of National Minorities discussed briefly by (Bell, 1999 & 2000, 
McCrudden, 1999 & 2007, Mageen & OBrien, 1999). Furthermore, the tendency to 
overlook, oversimplify or ignore the position of influential strands of unionist opinion 
on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights is not limited to scholarly literature examining the 
idea of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights but also includes academic work analysing 
and considering unionism and the peace process in Northern Ireland. Much of the 
academic work deconstructing and interpreting unionist political thought, as we have 
seen in an earlier chapter, occurred before the signing of the Belfast Agreement in 
1998.  In the period after the Belfast Agreement scholarly literature on unionism and 
the Belfast Agreement tended to focus on intra and inter unionist divisions on the 
agreement (Patterson & Kaufman 2007, Tongue & Evans 2001, 2005), explanations 
and analyses on why unionism decided to reach agreement in 1998 (Aughey 2001, 
Godson 2004, Farrington 2006), deconstructions of new unionist ideology 
(Patterson 2004 & Coakley 2003), cleavages in unionist identity (Ganiel 2005 & 
Southern 2007a) and unionist alienation (2007b). In many ways Christopher 
Farringtons work (2006a, 2006b) on unionism and the Northern Ireland peace 
process offers a useful framework for understanding unionist responses to the peace 
process but fails to engage adequately or sufficiently with unionist responses to a Bill 
of Rights. 
This chapter begins by considering the debate about the constitutional protection of 
human rights in Northern Ireland from partition and the passage of the Government of 
Ireland Act 1920 to the Belfast Agreement of 1998. It then examines unionist 
responses to the idea of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights from the early 1970s until 
the Belfast Agreement of 1998 and to the issue of discrimination in Northern Ireland 
against the nationalist community during the period of unionist rule at Stormont, 
which is a rhetorical feature of nationalist discourses about the justification for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. The central proposition advanced in this chapter is 
that despite the recent scepticism expressed by key unionist elites about the issue of a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, unionism has not always been against the idea of a 
Bill of Rights conceptually. The evidence produced in this chapter will show that 
historically unionist political parties were indeed supportive of a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland. Indeed, for some political representatives within unionism who have 
been involved with the issues around the implementation and application of human 
rights in Northern Ireland and who argue that unionists should be more robust in 
articulating their position with an appeal to human rights, the support that influential 
strands of unionist opinion expressed or a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights from the 
early 1970s onwards is, in many ways worn like, a badge of honour. This point has 
been made emphatically by UUP spokesperson for human rights and former member 
of the Standing Advisory Commission for Human Rights (SACHR) Dermot Nesbitt 
who in responding to evidence given by the former Chief Commissioner of the 
NIHRC, Brice Dickson to a Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee investigation 
in 2009 into a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights said, 
The Ulster Unionist Party had in its election manifesto predating 1981: we wish for a Bill of 
Rights. So Brice while you may seem to wear on your shoulders the wonderful pedigree of how 
you were really going for and supporting a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, sorry Brice we 
predate you (Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 20
 May 2009). 
However, one significant caveat to this position must be noted and recognised at this 
point: unionist support for a Bill of Rights was not matched by a corresponding 
expression of support for power sharing with nationalists in Northern Ireland. Indeed, 
in many ways unionist support for a bill of rights could be considered a convenient 
mask to conceal this position. Whilst unionist politicians such as Dermot Nesbitt will 
argue that from 1972 onwards they supported power sharing and the failed attempts 
by Brian Faulkner to reach a power sharing accommodation with Irish nationalism 
and did so whilst supporting the idea of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, at the time 
within unionism, this position was very much in the minority.   
Origins 
The idea of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland is not a new one but in fact has a 
long history of debate and consideration in the context of Northern Ireland politics. 
Indeed, as Harvey and Schwartz point out, the idea of a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland predates the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement by over thirty years (Harvey 
and Schwartz, 2009, p182). Much of the scholarly literature, identified, previously is 
cognisant of this fact and traces the emergence of debates about a bill of rights for 
Northern Ireland to the failed attempts by Liberal MP Sheelagh Murnaghan during the 
1960s to introduce a human rights bill at Stormont. We shall come back to 
Murnaghans attempt on four occasions to introduce such legislation. However, for 
the former UUP Leader, David Trimble, the debate about the protection of rights can 
be traced further than the turbulent period of Northern Irish politics in the late 1960s 
but to the Government of Ireland Act passed in 1920. Trimble, who was a member of 
the 1975 Constitutional Convention, makes the point that Unionisms support for 
section 5 of the Government of Ireland Act meant that Unionisms support for a Bill 
of Rights in the early seventies was entirely logical. He argues that,  
If, they (unionists) were familiar with the Government of Ireland Act, then they were familiar with 
the idea of entrenched rights. For me, its part of the reason why within unionism the adoption of a 
Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland as policy objective by unionism in the early seventies is not 
controversial. (Interview with David Trimble, 28
 May 2009) 
To assess Trimbles assertion it is necessary to consider briefly what section 5 of the 
Government of Ireland Act was and whether it was actually used as the basis for any 
legal action in Northern Ireland. The Act itself at the time was just as much a matter 
of controversy for unionists, as it was for the British Government and Irish 
nationalists. As Paul Dixon notes, the partition of Ireland was an unhappy 
compromise between contending interests (Dixon, 2001, p.47). Partition was neither 
the desired, nor aspired to position of either Unionism (at least in public anyway), 
Nationalism or the British Government, yet as Henry Patterson argues, Unionisms 
ambivalence about the terms of partition and the constitutional framework provided 
for in the Government of Ireland Act 1920 soon began to erode even before the 
Northern Ireland Parliament had shifted from its temporary accommodationthe 
attractions of devolution for the Unionist Party had been compelling. (Patterson, 
2006, p.1) For Bryan Follis, the significance of the 1920 Act lay in the fact that, 
against a background of ethnic tension, hostility and violence, the Government of 
Ireland Act, 1920, can be seen as an attempt to deal with conflicting political 
ambitions and national aspirations (Follis, 1995, p.188). However, despite, 
unionisms stated opposition to partition, home rule for Ulster and the terms of the 
1920 Act, the unionist establishment soon moved to embrace the reality of partition 
and the implications it had for governance in Ireland. As the distinguished historian 
ATQ Stewart states,  
Home rule for Northern Ireland was a solution which no  one wanted in 1920Ultimately, 
however, home rule came to seem to them (Unionism) to be the life raft on which they escaped 
when the unionist cause foundered (Stewart, 1977, p.159).  
Section 5 (1) (2) of the Government of Ireland Act contained, in the words of Alvin 
Jackson, an expansive prohibition on all forms of legislation that impinged upon 
religious beliefThe wording of the clauseconstituted in theory, a powerful 
protection for minority religious interests. (Jackson, 2003, p.220). The legislation 
stated that,  
(1)In the exercise of their power to make laws under this Act neither the Parliament of Southern 
Ireland nor the Parliament of Northern Ireland shall make a law so as either directly or indirectly to 
establish or endow any religion, or prohibit or restrict the free exercise thereof, or give a preference, 
privilege, or advantage, or impose any disability or disadvantage, on account of religious belief or 
religious or ecclesiastical statusAny law made in contravention of the restrictions imposed by this 
subsection shall, so far as it contravenes those restrictions, be void.  
(2) Any existing enactment by which any penalty, disadvantage, or disability is imposed on account 
of religious belief or on a member of any religious order as such shall, as from the appointed day, 
cease to have effect in Ireland. 
According to Jackson (2003) the clause was originally intended as a means of 
reassuring Unionists during the debates on the third Home Rule Bill that their civil 
and religious liberty would be protected under the settlement but as Jackson notes the 
legislation, was eventually incorporated into the constitution of Northern Ireland as a 
protection against Unionist infringement of Catholic rights (Jackson, 2003, p.220).  
However, if the success of the provision in protecting minority interests is measured 
by the volume of cases, which were brought to the courts using the legislation, then it 
would be deemed to have been a major failure. Maguire highlights that only one case 
(Londonderry County Council v. McGlade [1929] N.I. 47.) came before the courts 
concerning religious discrimination, which as he argues was, the area of more 
obvious public concern. (Maguire, 1981, p.33) This lack of judicial awareness by 
citizens who felt aggrieved by the actions of the state, and who made claims of 
discrimination, was a precedent that Trimble hoped would not be repeated under the 
new architecture for the protection of human rights in Northern Ireland contained in 
the Belfast Agreement. As he argues, there is here a precedent that I hope will not be 
followed. The Government of Ireland Act 1920 contained a few sections that operated 
as fundamental law for the Northern Ireland Parliament. There was very little 
litigation based on them. (Trimble, 1999, p.1160) A similar point was made by the 
UUP in 1972 document toward the future: a Unionist Blueprint:  
It has often been overlooked, but we have had in Northern Ireland a comprehensive Bill of Rights 
concerning religious discrimination, contained in Sections 5 and 8(6) of the Government of Ireland 
Act. The fact is that these have existed for over fifty years without being resorted to (for instance, 
alleged acts of housing discrimination could easily have been tested in court as could the validity of 
endowing Church schools or R.I. in State Schools). 
In theory, at least anyway, the Nationalist minority in Northern Ireland had strong 
statutory protection contained in Westminster legislation that their fundamental 
interests would be protected but the question must be asked, why were the courts not 
used more as a vehicle to pursue redress? Why did those who claimed such 
widespread and systematic discrimination not decide to pursue a judicial avenue in the 
courts as a way of redress for their grievances? Maguire has summarised reasons for 
this reluctance, which include,  
the difficulty of obtaining evidence to prove cases, doubts about whether the sections were 
available against local authorities as opposed to central government and allegations of lack of 
public law expertise on the part of the local legal profession (Maguire, 1981, p.33).  
Further to this, three additional reasons could be stated. Firstly, a general scepticism 
about the ability of the courts to be an instrument for progressive change in Northern 
Ireland in that many considered the judicial system to be yet another example of 
Unionist hegemony in the State. As Claire Palley emphasises there was a general 
tendency on the part of the political opposition to dismiss the courts as manifestations 
of the Unionist establishment and as therefore unlikely to deliver judgements adverse 
to the interests of the establishment (Palley, 1972, p.390). Secondly, it is also useful 
to place the paucity of legal challenges using section 5 to pursue judicial redress 
within the wider legal and political culture of the time in the UK which had a very 
minimalist conception of judicial review compared to how we understand the doctrine 
today and also a wider dissatisfaction within progressive circles about the courts 
capacity to act as a tool for social change exemplified in Professor JAG Griffiths 
(1997) Politics of the Judiciary. Thirdly, the fact that legal aid was not available until 
1965 meaning that pursuit of justice in the courts was simply too costly an exercise 
for the vast majority of citizens in Northern Ireland. Nationalists were also not helped 
by the reluctance of the Westminster Government to become involved in the domestic 
affairs of Northern Ireland exemplified by the constitutional convention that 
developed in the House of Commons where matters under the remit of the devolved 
administration in Northern Ireland would not be discussed in the House of Commons. 
As we have mentioned, the Liberal MP Sheelagh Murnaghan, on four separate 
occasions between 1964 and 1968, attempted to introduce legislation on human rights 
at Stormont. The introduction of such a Bill at Stormont found support in the Belfast 
Telegraph, which often found itself at the time as the lone voice of progressive 
unionism and amongst all the political parties except the UUP. As Constance Rynder 
highlights, Murnaghans first Bill was presented on June 16 1964 and was modelled 
on the Ontario, Canada human rights legislation, and owed much of its inspiration to 
the Civil Rights Bill just passed by the US Congress (Rynder, 2006, p.448). In 
introducing the Bill in Parliament, Miss Murnaghan stated that, one of the most 
terrible indictments on our community is that so many people here seem to regard 
religious discrimination as something which is natural and inevitable
(NIHC, vol. 57, 
col. 1989, 16
 June 1964) However, her efforts were met with characteristic 
indifference by the Government. The Unionist benches remained empty and during 
the first debate no Unionist backbench MP rose to speak on the motion. So when the 
Attorney General, Edward Jones MP, rose to respond for the Government during the 
first debate his response was indeed indicative of the myopic attitude held by the 
Unionist Government towards claims of discrimination by the Nationalist community, 
When one looks at the world at largewe are very fortunate that unfair 
discrimination arising out of race or colour, religion or political belief, is not a serious 
problem in this community (NIHC, vol. 57. col. 2022, 16
 June 1964). It is also 
evident during the debates on Murnaghans proposed human rights legislation how far 
the Unionist Government clung to the protections against discrimination contained in 
section 5 of the Government of Ireland Act 1920 as evidence that Northern Ireland 
already had statutory protections against discrimination and rights abuses of that kind. 
As Murnaghan lamented during the debate on the final attempt to introduce 
legislation,  
On almost every previous occasion when this subject has been debated here the Government 
spokesperson for the time being has referred repeatedly to our constitution, to the Government of 
Ireland Act 1920. He has pointed to the safeguards against discriminatory legislation in Section 5 of 
that Act. (NIHC, vol. 68 col. 575, 30
 January 1968) 
It was the controversial figure of Home Affairs Minister, Bill Craig MP who 
responded on behalf of the Unionist Government to the final debate in January 1968 
and who once again relied on the statutory safeguards contained in section 5 of the 
Government of Ireland Act as justification for dismissing the Bill,  
The constitutional law of the Northern Ireland State, the Government of Ireland Act, clearly 
provides that no executive action under the authority of legislation may be in any way 
discriminating from the standpoint of religion. Any such discriminating action could be challenged 
in the courts and accordingly in that respect this Bill is unnecessary. (NIHC, vol. 68 col. 602, 30
January 1968) 
Despite the failure of Murnaghans attempt to introduce a human rights bill at 
Stormont she had, as Brice Dickson notes, planted a seedthat seed has since been 
extensively watered, but the plant has not yet germinated (Dickson, 2010, p.17). Like 
the failure to address specific concerns about electoral practices, the Special Powers 
Act and the allocation of housing, the failure to even attempt to introduce a watered 
down version of the Bill can be seen as part of the wider failure of the Stormont 
regime to embrace any sort of reform or change in its practice. However, in some 
ways, the reliance by key unionist elites at the time on the provision can arguably be 
attributed to the fact that not just did it give unionisms response to claims of 
discrimination during that period a cloak of respectability but also that the provisions 
contained in the Act were consistent with the orthodox way in which Britains 
political constitution (Griffith, 1979) addressed the protection of the rights and 
liberties of UK citizens. Murnaghan may have relied on the Canadian experience in 
articulating her case for the introduction of a human rights bill but during this period 
of unionist rule at Stormont, developments in international human rights law had next 
to no effect on the situation in Northern Ireland. Both the European Convention on 
Human Rights, signed in 1953 and the UN Declaration of Human Rights, signed in 
1948 had little influence on politics in Northern Ireland during this period. One 
exception to this rule within the unionist administration was the liberal unionist and 
former Minister for Home Affairs, Brian Maginess, who appeared acutely aware of 
the pressure that could be brought to bear, indirectly at least, through developments in 
human rights internationally. Indeed as Patterson points out when he became Minister 
of Home Affairs in 1949 he was,  
Concerned to lessen the occasion for such criticism. He began to withdraw many of the regulations 
made under the Special Powers Act and in 1950 came to the Cabinet with a proposal to repeal the 
Act in its entirety.  He was particularly concerned that the Council of Europe would soon ratify a 
convention on human rights and that this would present major opportunities for critics of the Act. 
(Patterson, 1999, p.115) 
In many ways, unionism has always found it difficult to deal with the claims made by 
the nationalist community that widespread and systematic discrimination occurred 
during the time of unionist hegemony at Stormont. As John Doyle argued in an article 
exploring unionist discourses on equality and fair employment in Northern Ireland, 
there has been a profound paradox at the heart of unionist discourses on the issue  
strongly denying that discrimination exists at a significant level while at the same 
time justifying its use (Doyle, 1994, p.42). Indeed, the nationalist experience during 
that period of Northern Irelands history and the need to ensure that the same mistakes 
are not repeated forms one of the most prominent political narratives to justify why 
Northern Ireland should have a Bill of Rights. As we shall come to see in chapter 5 
the claims of discrimination that were forcefully made at this time also provide an 
historical starting point for Irish Nationalisms use of rights discourse as an essential 
part of their political vocabulary. Nationalist narratives about the need for a Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights are based upon a sense that the injustices, which were 
committed against the Nationalist community during 50 years of unionist rule at 
Stormont must be compensated for and a Bill of Rights is one public policy tool that 
can be used to guarantee that such abuses never occur again. This point has been 
made forcefully by Sinn Fein who in a submission to Strands One and Two of the 
Multi Party Talks dealing with justice issues, rights and safeguards said,  
Nationalists in the North of Ireland have suffered a compound set of denials of rights. Cultural 
rights have been systematically trampled upon, national and economic rights have been denied, 
rights of democratic participation have been withheld, and individual rights have not only been 
curtailed, but curtailed in a discriminatory and frequently brutal fashion. The root cause of these 
violations has been partition; resting as it does on the denial of the right of the people of Ireland as a 
whole to national self-determination...The six county state has never been able to afford its citizens 
the justice and equality fundamental to a peaceful and democratic society. The consequence has 
been a cycle of repression, conflict and resistance (http://www.sinnfein.ie/peace/documents/85) 
 However, as Thomas Hennessey notes, there were differences of emphasis between 
the SDLP and Sinn Fein on the issue of discrimination in Northern Ireland during the 
multi party negotiations leading to the Agreement in 1998  whilst the former 
acknowledged that there had been significant reforms, the latter held that such 
reforms were only cosmetic in what was an inherently sectarian state (Hennessey, 
2000, p.145). This narrative, however, has caused profound unease within the unionist 
community. One scholar points to recent statements by prominent politicians in the 
Unionist community such as the DUP MP, Gregory Campbell and comments that 
unionist politicians have,  
articulated a profound sense of unionist dissatisfaction with the tendency of the policy agenda to 
assume that inequality, disadvantage and discrimination only worked one way. Moreover, he 
captured a growing mood of resistance to the notion that each and every nationalist demand was 
justified because of unionist majority rule of Stormont between 1921 and 1972 (Aughey, 2005, 
p.127). 
The issue of discrimination and the actions of the unionist Government at Stormont 
during this period remains as Paul Dixon puts it, highly politically charged and 
deployed in the propaganda war between the competing parties (Dixon, 2001, p.67). 
For example, to this day, the debate is still characterised by a myopic unionist 
narrative, which denies that discrimination even took place, exemplified by the claim 
from former prominent unionist politician, A J Walmsley who wrote in 1959 that 
claims from the minority that were suffering discrimination was entirely without 
foundation (Walmsley, 1959, p.20) and an exaggerated nationalist narrative which 
claims that discrimination was nothing less than widespread and systematic. As the 
1984 New Ireland Report stated,  
for over 50 years they lived under a system of exclusively unionist power and privilege and 
suffered systematic discrimination meaning that they were deprived of the means of social and 
economic development and have always been subject to high rates of unemployment (New Ireland 
Report, 1984, para 3.9: http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/issues/politics/nifr.htm). 
In the space between the competing unionist and nationalist narratives, much balance 
has been brought by academic debate on the matter (Hennessey, 2005; Mulholland, 
2000; 2004; Patterson, 2006 & Whyte 1983) and as Paul Dixon highlights the 
academic debate centres around, the extent of discrimination against Catholics 
(Dixon, 2001, p.68) not debating whether it even took part in the first place or 
subscribing to the nationalist narrative that it was widespread and systematic. The 
benchmark for academic investigation of the matter can be traced to John Whytes 
seminal work in 1983, which investigated claims of discrimination within the context 
of six areas of alleged discrimination: electoral practices, public employment, private 
employment, public housing, regional policy, and policing (Whyte, 1983). 
Discrimination was practiced by the Unionist government at Stormont but it is 
disingenuous to overstate the extent to which discrimination took place and to use this 
overstatement to justify why Northern Ireland should have an extensive bill of rights. 
The perpetuation of a narrative where the Unionist Government during fifty years of 
Stormont rule was responsible for systematic discrimination, oppression and 
inequality, and that the British Government has still not adequately addressed the 
injustices perpetrated by the unionist government is a key component of justificatory 
arguments for a maximalist Bill of Rights. However, as scholarly reflection concludes 
most of the demands of the civil rights movement were addressed by the British 
Government before the peace process began in the mid 1990s. As the Queens 
academic and former chief commissioner of the NIHRC Brice Dickson puts it,  
By the end of the 1970s, indeed, the demands of the initial civil rights movement in the late 1960s 
had effectively all been met: the electoral system had been reformed, the power to allocate public 
housing had been removed from local councils and given to an unelected body called the Northern 
Ireland Housing Executive, the Special Powers Act had been repealed and replaced with a 
somewhat less draconian anti  terrorist legislation (Dickson, 2010, p.21).   
A similar point is made by the Cadogan group who argued in their Northern Limits 
paper of 1992,  
In the event the civil rights demands were largely satisfied by the early 1970s. In addition to the 
measures mentioned above, the B-Specials were abolished, the RUC reformed and unionists 
effectively removed from power by the abolition of Stormont and by the emasculation of local 
government. Despite these radical changes, nationalist alienation has persisted, as has a sense of 
grievance. This continued alienation is sometimes ascribed to accumulated historical grievance, but 
also supports the counter view that alienation reflects more a rejection of partition than a reaction to 
economic or social disadvantage. It is certainly, and unfortunately, true that any attempt today to 
measure the more sweeping charges of discrimination against the facts as they have been 
established is met with an almost hysterical reaction from nationalists as an attack upon a 
fundamental article of faith (http://www.cadogan.org/gpubs/north.html). 
Unionisms rule of the Northern Irish state is equated with the worst aspects of 
contemporary politics - dictatorship, oppression, suppression of basic liberties and 
denial of fundamental freedoms. Recently, however, respected scholars of Irish 
history such as Paul Bew and Thomas Hennessey have questioned this assessment. 
For example as Bew highlights: 
Northern Irish Catholics clearly suffered discrimination: though core political and socio  economic 
rights (as delivered by the UK state, much superior to those on the rest of the island) and religious 
freedoms were not denied (Bew, 2006, p.487  488). 
More emphatically Hennessey states,  
So Catholics were discriminated against. But did this mean that they were oppressed. To claim that 
they were devalues the term and the experience of the oppressed the world over. Core political and 
socio  economic rights and religious freedoms were not denied them (Hennessey, 2005, p.386). 
Discriminated against, but not oppressed. That is an important distinction to make and 
one that is relevant for contemporary debates about human rights in Northern Ireland 
because if we trace the ideas advanced by Hennessey and Bew above to their logical 
conclusion then the justificatory basis for a maximalist Bill of Rights in Northern 
Ireland is built upon less than solid foundations. Much of the argument in favour of a 
maximalist Bill proceeds from the assumption that there was oppression and that core 
political and socio  economic rights were denied to them. Bew and Hennessey also 
make a further important point about the potential impact that a more civic, liberal or 
what Mark Mulholland (2000) calls assimilatory Unionism could have had in 
Northern in terms of adequately addressing discrimination and other demands of the 
Northern Ireland Civil Rights Movement. As Bew states, the texture of political life 
was set by the dominance of an ethnically determined Protestant unionism: only the 
development of a more civic, liberal unionism could have conceivably reduced the 
Catholic sense of alienation. (Bew, 2006, p.488). However, there is no escaping the 
inadequacy of the unionist establishments response (Dixon, 2001 & Patterson, 2006) 
to the demands of the Civil Rights Movement and their failure to respond in any 
meaningful way to the nationalist sense of grievance. Despite unionist inaction, 
however, the British Government following the prorogation of Stormont, as we have 
noted had begun to address the central demands of the civil rights movement and the 
1970s saw many developments in human rights and equality legislation. As Brice 
Dickson notes,  
Possibly the most significant human rights development in Northern Ireland in the 1970s was the 
enactment at Westminster of the Fair employment (NI) Act 1976, the first law anywhere in these 
islands to make religious and political discrimination unlawful in the private as well as the public 
sphere (Dickson, 2010, p.20)   
Alongside these developments in the protection of human rights in Northern Ireland 
key unionist elites also began to express support for the idea of a Northern Ireland Bill 
of Rights. As we shall come to see, however, unionist support for a bill of rights 
masked a deeper reluctance to support the notion of power sharing with nationalists.  
Unionist support for Bill of Rights 1972  1984  
In 1969 the Ulster Unionist Partys manifesto for the Stormont election affirmed a 
commitment to support human rights in Northern Ireland,  
The Ulster Unionist Party believes in an Ulster in which the obligations and rights of all the citizens 
will be fully recognised. (Ulster at the Crossroads, Unionist Party, Stormont election manifesto, 
1969)  
The failure, however, to address adequately the issue of discrimination in Northern 
Ireland at the time exposes this statement for the exercise in political rhetoric that it 
represented. However, by the time Brian Faulkner had taken over the leadership of the 
UUP from James Chichester Clark, the statement from the 1969 manifesto had been 
replaced with a specific commitment by unionism to support the introduction of a Bill 
of Rights for Northern Ireland. The UUPs 1972 document, Towards the future: A 
Unionist Blueprint, published in the aftermath of the prorogation of Stormont, was the 
first document to do this. Set within the section of the document addressing minority 
concerns, section 9 outlined the UUPs support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, 
which would include the following five rights, freedom of speech, freedom of 
political association, freedom of practice of religion, freedom from discrimination on 
religious grounds and the freedom of the person and the right to a fair trial. The 
proposals also included support for the introduction of finance for legal aid to ensure 
adequate access to justice for plaintiffs. The UUPs response to the Governments 
Green paper in 1972 the future of Northern Ireland reaffirmed their support for a 
Bill of Rights whilst in the UUPs 1973 manifesto, Peace, Order and Good 
Government for the 1973 election to a new Northern Ireland Assembly, envisaged in 
the White Paper, again reaffirmed their commitment to support a Charter of Rights. 
Support for the idea of a Bill of Rights was also expressed by the future DUP leader, 
Rev. Ian Paisley who in the House of Commons in 1972 stated that,  
.the majority of people in Northern Ireland are not against a guaranteed Bill of Rights for the 
whole CommunityWill he keep in mind that all right-thinking Protestant people believe in the 
fullest possible civil and religious liberty and that a proper Bill of Rights would be welcomed by all 
right-thinking people in the community? (HC Deb 03 August 1972 vol. 842 c946) 
The most significant statement in the early 1970s of unionist support for a Bill of 
Rights came when the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention was established in 
1975 by the Labour Government. The UUUC, an electoral coalition between the 
UUP, DUP and VUPP of unionists opposed to the Sunningdale Agreement proposed 
in their 1975 manifesto for the elections to the Constitutional Convention the idea of 
Bill of Constitutional Rights which would establish the relationship between the Westminster 
Parliament and each devolved Parliament and would also guarantee that all citizens are equal under 
the law and are equally subject to the law. 
The aim of this would be, in the context of devolution in the UK, to protect the 
stability and maintain the integrity of the union. Seventeen paragraphs of the 
Conventions report were devoted to examining the issue of human rights in Northern 
Ireland and the UUUCs idea for a Bill of Rights to protect the constitutional integrity 
of the UK and a Bill of Rights and duties to protect citizens fundamental civil and 
political rights are reflected in the final report of the Convention. The Conventions 
report was published in November 1975 and contained extensive discussion on 
mechanisms for the protection of human rights in Northern Ireland. Paragraph 141 of 
the report recommended, a Bill of Constitutional Rights to guarantee the stability and 
integrity of the Northern Ireland Constitution and a general Bill of Rights and Duties 
to protect the rights of the individual citizen (1975). The UUUCs preference was for 
a Bill of Rights to be introduced, not just for Northern Ireland, but for the entire 
United Kingdom to ensure the uniformity of rights protection across the UK. What 
precisely, therefore, were the reasons and motivation behind unionisms support for a 
Bill of Rights during this period? Arguably, the onset of the Troubles and the 
increased attention given to the veracity of the nationalist communitys claims of 
discrimination as evidenced through the policy and legislative interventions of the UK 
Government may all have been contributory motivating factors towards the strong 
commitments that were contained in the UUP and UUUC policy documents and 
manifestos. The Unionist MP Jim Kilfedder underlined UUUC support for the idea 
Bill of Rights contained in the 1975 Constitutional Convention Report in a debate in 
the House of Commons where he argued that,  
the rights of everyone in the community will be fully protected by an entrenched Bill of Rights. 
That is the desire of the Ulster Unionists in the Convention, and that shows their sincerity in 
wanting to open a new page in the history of the Province, with politicians and people working 
together. (HC Deb 12 January 1976 vol 90, 132)  
However, as stated at the beginning of the chapter there is a significant caveat 
attached to unionist support for a bill of rights during this period, which to a large 
extent may help clarify why key unionist elites adopted the policy at the time. The 
final report of the UUUC dominated Northern Ireland Convention rejected power 
sharing with Irish nationalists in Northern Ireland as an acceptable form of 
government for the Province reflecting profound unionist unease with the concept, 
which had led to the failure of the Sunningdale power sharing experiment in 1974. 
After Faulkners resignation in the wake of the Ulster Unionist Councils rejection of 
the Sunningdale accord he was replaced as leader of the UUP by the Fermanagh 
Unionist MP, Harry West who as Kaufman and Patterson point out refused to share 
power in Northern Ireland in any foreseeable conditions (Kaufman and Patterson, 
2007, p.173). Kaufman and Patterson detail a meeting of the UUC Executive 
Committee of 7 June 1974 in which Wests position on power  sharing is recorded, 
he could not see how any Unionist administration could be carried on having 
amongst its ranks members of the SDLP or any other type of Republican (UUC 
Executive Committee, 7 June 1974 as cited in Kaufman and Patterson, 2007). This 
thinking encapsulated the profound unease within unionism at the time towards the 
idea of power  sharing. Even before the Loyalist Ulster Workers Council (UWC) 
strike in the Spring of 1974 the idea of sharing power with Irish nationalism at 
Stormont had been rejected by the overwhelming majority of the unionist electorate in 
the 1974 Westminster elections when Faulkners Unionist Party of Northern Ireland 
(UPNI) was comprehensively defeated when the various components of the Unionist 
right won eleven of the twelve Northern Ireland seats (Bew, Gibbon & Patterson, 
2002, p.189). According to these scholars the anti  power sharing candidates had 
successfully depicted power  sharing as an integral part of a republican agenda 
and not as a means of consolidating the state (Bew, Gibbon & Patterson, 2002, 
p.189). Just like unionist views on discrimination in Northern Ireland, the concept of 
power sharing at Stormont has always been a profoundly difficult issue for unionists 
to accept and there is a deep sense that the explicit support expressed by key unionist 
elites in the Convention report for a Bill of Rights represented an attempt to 
compensate for their refusal to share power with nationalism in Northern Ireland. 
Unionist support at that time could therefore, arguably, be conceived as an attempt to 
conceal their illiberal policy of refusing to share power with Irish nationalism with a 
more liberal policy of providing safeguards for the minority in a Bill of Rights.  
The failure of the Sunningdale power sharing experiment in 1973 and the shelving of 
the report of the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention, which was suspended in 
March 1976, were the last of British policy initiatives in Northern Ireland until the 
Prior Assembly was established in 1982. However, despite the stalemate efforts to 
address the legacy of discrimination in the Province continued and the Standing 
Advisory Committee on Human Rights (SACHR), established by the Northern Ireland 
Constitutional Act 1973, began its work in what were harsh and terribly unfavourable 
and difficult political circumstances. Firstly, with the security situation and levels of 
violence in Northern Ireland at a high level and secondly, as Maguire points out 
SACHR commenced its work in a context which was never the original design. 
Originally it was designed as an element in a new constitutional settlement but that 
settlement failed and the Commission has had to carry on, not in a context of 
devolution, but in one of direct rule (Maguire, 1981, p.31). In 1977 the Standing 
Advisory Commission on Human Rights published a report, the protection of human 
rights by law in Northern Ireland (Cmnd. 7009, 1977), which recommended the 
incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights into domestic law as the 
basis for any Bill of Rights whether for Northern Ireland or for the United Kingdom 
(paragraph 4.08, Cmnd. 7009, 1977). In the context of the continuation of Direct Rule 
the SACHR report advised that human rights in Northern Ireland would be best 
protected through the incorporation of the ECHR on a UK wide basis. The report 
noted that, there is widespread recognition that those who live in the United 
Kingdom should so far as possible share similar fundamental rights and freedoms 
regardless of the place in which they reside. Any other approach would underline 
differences in the nature of citizenship and might prove counter-productive 
(paragraphs 3.01 and 4.07, Cmnd. 7009, 1977). 
Interestingly, however in July 1975, whilst still a member of the UUP, the North 
Down MP Jim Kilfedder, a practicing barrister before entering a career in politics 
introduced a motion in the House of Commons this House urges HM Government to 
recommend the setting up of a Royal Commission to investigate and report upon the 
subject of a Bill of Rights extending to the whole of the United Kingdom. (HC Deb 
07 July 1975 vol. 895 col. 31) Kilfedder effusively stated his support for a Bill of 
Rights using a language and tone of discourse not dissimilar to that used by supporters 
of recent proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights,  
I do not believe that this nation can refrain any longer from taking the historic and significant step 
of placing the liberties of its citizens in the safe keeping of a Bill of Rights. I am not advocating a 
change for the sake of change. Far from it. The common law is supposed to protect the rights of the 
individual. But those rights are being steadily eroded. Often the ordinary individual does not know 
that those rights have diminished over the years (HC Deb 07 July 1975 vol. 895 col. 31). 
Kilfedder lamented the failure of the UK Government to incorporate the ECHR into 
domestic law. Kilfedder might have been consistent with unionist thinking at the time 
on a Bill of Rights but during the course of his remarks in the debate, he was careful 
to frame his arguments within the context of wider concern for British 
constitutionalism and avoided making reference to Northern Ireland or the issue of 
discrimination. However, Enoch Powell, by that stage a UUP MP for South Downs 
opposed Kilfedders suggestion arguing that he felt a Bill of rights would be 
incompatiblewith the thing we call parliamentary democracy. (HC Deb 07 July 
1975 vol.895 col. 48) Indeed, in a prefiguration of contemporary debates about the 
Human Rights Act and in particular debates about the tension between combating 
terrorism whilst maintaining respect for basic civil liberties and the appropriateness of 
the judiciarys role in this adjudication Powell argues that,  
Let us supposethat a court found an inconsistency between the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1974 
and the constitutional Bill of Rights. In that case the legislation would be invalidated by the 
courtsHer Majesty's Government, supported by this House and the representatives of the people 
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/acts/prevention-of-terrorism-act-1974
have decided that in their view, for the protection of the citizen in the national interest, it is 
necessary to have such legislation, but the court rules it to be null and void. Let us suppose that a 
series of disasters follows which, it is believed, would have been avoided if that legislation had, as 
Government and Parliament wished, been on the statute book. Who is to bear the responsibility? 
(HC Deb 07 July 1975 vol.895 col. 50) 
Throughout his political career Kilfedders commitment to enacting a Bill of Rights 
remained genuine and consistent. He raised the issue, when he had the opportunity 
(For further examples please see, HC Deb 25 March 1982 vol. 20 c108, HC Deb 05 
April 1982 vol. 21 cc692-702, HC Deb 10 March 1988 vol. 129 cc521-33 and HC 
Deb 12 July 1989 vol. 156 cc967) reminding his fellow MPs that he had been a long 
and consistent advocate of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights,  
It is 15 years or more since I moved a motion urging the establishment of a Bill of Rights for the 
United Kingdom and, failing that, for Northern Ireland, so there is nothing new in that suggestion, 
although no doubt it will take the Secretary of State by surprise, as so many other matters take him 
by surprise. Surely the people of Northern Ireland are entitled to decide this matter by a referendum. 
Let us have a Bill of Rights based on the United States constitution and the amendments thereto 
(HC Deb 22 June 1989 vol. 155 col. 479). 
During the Northern Ireland Assembly established in 1982 under the Secretary of 
State, Jim Priors plans for devolution both the DUP and UUP Assembly groups 
published for restoring devolution to Northern Ireland, which included proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, consistent with earlier commitments made by the 
UUUC in the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention although now the UUP was 
explicitly considering the issue within the context of providing statutory protection for 
the minority. The DUP stated in their policy proposals Ulster the future assured 
(1984) that,  
while holding that a Bill of Rights is desirable for the whole of the United Kingdom, we would 
be prepared if such is not available to accept a proposal for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights which 
would Incorporate a range of statutory safeguards against abuse of power. 
The UUP stated in The Way Forward (1984) that,  
Although there is no significant pressure in the United Kingdom taken as a whole either for a 
written constitution enshrining citizens rights nor for a codification or listing of such rights in one 
Act of Parliament, this does not mean that a case cannot be made out for the specific entrenchment 
of citizens rights (with adequate machinery to protect them) as a component of a package for 
devolved government for Northern Ireland. The effects of such legislation would be to provide 
machinery whereby (a) any action on the part of the Northern Ireland devolved institution 
conflicting with any listed right would be declared void and (b) any act of the Northern Ireland 
administration conflicting with any such right would be declared unlawful. It is an essential 
ingredient of an effective Bill of Rights that it be enforceable at the suit of the individual citizen as 
simply, cheaply and expeditiously as possible through the established courts of law. It goes without 
saying that although the desirability of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland as part of a scheme for 
devolved government has been discussed in terms of the advantages to the minority, the rights listed 
would, of course, be conferred on every citizen in the Province and it would be just as open to a 
member of the majority community to seek and obtain redress for infringement. 
Brooke/Mayhew and the start of the peace process 
The Northern Ireland Assembly was abolished by the Government in 1986 after a 
failure to reach agreement on how devolution would be restored and a boycott by the 
Nationalist parties represented in the Assembly removed any modicum of legitimacy 
that existed. The Anglo Irish Agreement committed the British and Irish Government 
to consider the advantages and disadvantages of a Bill of Rights in some form in 
Northern Ireland but it would not be until the early 1990s that the issue of a Bill of 
Rights would come back onto the political agenda again during the Brooke/Mayhew 
talks of 1991 and 1992. Ultimately the talks produced very little in terms of political 
agreement. However, both the Brooke and the Mayhew talks established a sub 
committee to consider the matter of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland chaired by 
the NIO Minister Jeremy Hanley MP. The sub  committee, according to one member 
of the UUP talks team, was treated seriously by unionist negotiators at the talks,  
We put together, Ken Maginnis and me, with the help of Cleaver, Fulton and Rankin solicitors, a 
substantial folder of proposals and recommendations for a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. The 
SDLP, who had always talked about a Bill of Rights, came with a page and the Alliance Party 
produced nothing. We spent about 5,000 on thisOf all the parties; the one party who made the 
real effort on a Bill of Rights during Brooke/Mayhew was the UUP. (Interview with Dr. Chris 
McGimpsey, 1
 July 2009)  
Ulster Unionist politicians heavily criticised both the British and Irish Governments 
and the other parties at the Brooke and the Mayhew talks for failing to take their 
proposals for a Bill of Rights seriously. Speaking in the House of Commons the 
former Ulster Unionist MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone Ken Maginnis argued 
that,   
the Ulster Unionist party tabled specific and detailed proposals for a Bill of Rights at the very 
start of the 1992 inter-party talks and was the only party to do so, but that neither the Irish 
Government nor the leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party showed any interest in 
discussing those proposals? (HC Deb 29 June 1995 vol. 262 cc1070-2) 
Nationalisms reluctance to engage with the UUP at the time may be attributed to the 
fact that as one scholar notes, One of the problems for the UUP was that Northern 
Nationalists did not regard themselves as a minority. The SDLP regarded both 
communities in Northern Ireland as equal; Sinn Fein saw unionists as an Irish national 
minority in Ireland (Hennessey, 2000, p.148). For UUP negotiators involved in the 
Brooke/Mayhew negotiations such as Ken Maginnis and Chris McGimpsey, who 
would have been identified with the more liberal and progressively minded wing of 
the party, introducing a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland would have helped to 
reassure the Nationalist community in Northern Ireland that unionism was sincere 
about recognising the legitimacy of their beliefs and historic concerns they had about 
discrimination in Northern Ireland. There appears to have been, however, a lack of 
any sustained campaigning or advocacy of the issue by either of the Unionist party 
leaders or other institutions within unionism such as the Orange Order. The idea that 
there could be a human rights element to any future political settlement did not 
disappear from unionist discourses altogether during this period. Indeed, renewed 
interest in the issue appeared to have coincided with the election in September 1995 
of the Upper Bann MP and former QUB law lecturer, David Trimble as the new 
leader of the UUP. Despite, Trimbles reputation as a hardliner within unionist 
political circles, he was an intellectual and there was a sense that he was open to ideas 
and new approaches to the seemingly intractable issue of political accommodation in 
Northern Ireland. On the issue of human rights specifically, Trimble indicated early 
on in his leadership that he was aware of the complexities of the issues surrounding 
human rights. In the foreword to the publication Unionism Re  stated authored by 
UUP human rights and equality spokesman and former colleague of Trimbles at 
QUB, Dermot Nesbitt, Trimble reflected on the importance of European human rights 
standards to any future political settlement in Northern Ireland,  
Dermots study is also very important for its consideration of the real European context, which 
extends beyond inter-regional linkages within the European Community to the protection of 
minority rights. This is an area where we tried to open up discussion in the 1992 inter-party talks to 
find that the other parties were not prepared to engage in seriously. It is too important to continue to 
be neglected (Trimble, 1995, p.5).  
Indeed, Trimble reiterated this point in an interview with the author,  
Unionism has used rights language in the past. There was a focus on it in the 80s when we were 
looking at what was happening in terms of the Helsinki process and what developed from that and I 
was thinking that this may be a way of resolving the matter and we found that those who wanted to 
have a political dialogue in Northern Ireland did not want to use this language or these concepts 
(Interview with Lord Trimble Thursday 28
 May 2009) 
With the exception of Bell (2000), Cowell and Cowell (1999) and McCrudden (2007) 
it is often overlooked in accounts of the peace process that during the period after 
Trimbles election as leader, the UUP began to rely on the use of human rights 
language, in particular how international human rights standards in the form of the 
Council of Europes Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities 
(signed in 1995 by 22 members of the Council of Europe but not ratified by the UK 
Government until the beginning of 1998) could be applied to Northern Ireland to 
accommodate the rights of the nationalist minority in Northern Ireland. Indeed, the 
failure of the UK Government to ratify the Framework Convention was consistently 
criticised by Nesbitt who was responsible for introducing the issue into the political 
negotiations,  
I wrote it about first in November 1995, in the book Unionism Restated. I introduced it in the talks 
process and publically put pressure on the Government to ratify the Framework Conventionand 
then the Irish Government said it would ratify it alsoon paper it is very good for 
unionism(Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 18
 June 2009). 
Writing in 1997 during the political negotiations that were taking place he argued,  
It is thus timely to reflect and ask, is the Government living up to its human rights commitments 
with respect to Northern Ireland? The clear answer is noDemocrats throughout Europe accept 
that the foundations for peace and justice are best maintained by effective democracy and a 
common understanding and observance of human rights. They reject aggressive nationalism and 
they accept and respect territorial borders by way of the institutions of governmentOur vision is 
clearwe want to see the same rights, same stability and same principles of government, including 
structures of government to accommodate minorities that operate everywhere else in the democratic 
world (Belfast Newsletter, 15
 December 1997). 
For Nesbitt, the framework offered by his interpretation of the international human 
rights law standards could be of huge significance and benefit to unionism  so much 
so that when the Northern Ireland Forum for Political dialogue was established after 
elections in 1996, Nesbitt brought forward a motion to the forum which called on 
delegates to recognise,  
the importance of human rights and the international rule of law and calls on the Secretary of 
State, in person, to indicate to the Forum what steps the Government will take to promote respect 
for these rights and secure their application within and relating to Northern Ireland (Official Record 
of the Northern Ireland Forum, 6 December 1996, p 3). 
The core of Nesbitts argument centred around two issues; the importance of the 
territorial integrity of the state and the fact that the accommodation of differing 
groups in a state should tale place within the territorial borders of that state (Dermot 
Nesbitt, Official Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 6 December 1996, p 4). 
According to Christopher McCrudden, the UUPs support for the Framework 
Convention appeared to be based on two aspects of the Convention. First, as 
interpreted by them, the Convention guaranteed minority rights but these guarantees 
had a quid pro quo: that existing national borders should be guaranteed and that 
advocacy for minority rights should always be peaceful. Second, placing the Northern 
Ireland discussions in the Convention context strengthened the UUP argument that 
Northern Ireland was not unique, could be dealt with using existing methods of 
minority rights protections, and therefore did not need to have extraordinary methods 
applied to it, such as joint sovereignty between the UK and Ireland (McCrudden, 
2007, p.333). According to Dermot Nesbitt the important section of the Framework 
Convention for unionists is article 21 which states that,  
Nothing in the present framework Convention shall be interpreted as implying any right to engage 
in any activity or perform any act contrary to the fundamental principles of international law and in 
particular of the sovereign equality, territorial integrity and political independence of States 
(http://www.conventions.coe.int./Treaty/EN/Treaties/html/157.htm).  
For Nesbitt, there was a convergence between international human rights law and the 
aims and objectives of the UUP,  
Because most of the rights organisations that draw up protective rights draw them up in the context 
of state implementation of rights and they have as a fundamental principle of international law, 
which is the way its phrased in the Council of Europe Framework Convention...the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and political independence of states is to be protected; now sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and political independence of states as a fundamental principle of international 
human rights law and then you say what has been the fundamental principle of unionism  it has 
been to protect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of the United 
Kingdomthe fundamental principle of the UUP is the fundamental principle of the Framework 
Convention  in other words we provide for accommodation, diversity of different groupings within 
the state and thats why from day one right back in 1995 and right back through the talksI have 
been consistent in saying rights is good for unionism (Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 18
2009) 
The significance of the UUPs reliance on the Framework Convention was also 
highlighted by McCrudden who argued, that the UUP has rarely relied upon 
international or European human rights standards to this degree, so it is particularly 
noteworthy that the Party found the Framework Convention to be something it could 
comfortably support, and indeed promote (McCrudden, 2007, p.333). Indeed, whilst 
Bell and McCrudden imply that UUP support for the Framework Convention was 
isolated in terms of unionist discourses during the peace process at that time, the 
thesis advanced by two American scholars David and Kimberly Cowell (1999) is 
much more ambitious in scope. They argue that from the early 1990s onwards 
unionism began to articulate its position and reframe political discourse with an 
appeal to human rights  as they put it, a guarded acceptance of civil rights language 
occurred as the Anglo Irish conflict was in the process of being reconfigured; it is a 
symptom of the conflicts recontextualisation beyond its traditional borders (Cowell 
& Cowell, 2000, p.2  3). They also point to unionist support for the incorporation of 
the ECHR into domestic UK law as evidence that the Unionist leadership has begun 
to reconstruct Unionist identity by framing the relationship between Unionism and 
human rights in a new way in political discourseand using the language of human 
rights more consciously (Cowell & Cowell, 2000, p.22). The UUP, alongside its 
reliance on the Framework Convention also expressed its support for the 
incorporation of the ECHR into domestic law. As one UUP talks bulletin from the 
negotiations stated,  
The UUP supports the full inclusion of the ECHR into UK domestic law. Its application and 
enforcement in Northern Ireland should be exactly the same as applies on the mainland. Our 
submission held up the proposition that Northern Irelands rights culture could be the envy of 
Western Europe (UUP Talks bulletin, 14
 November 1997). 
As the UUP entered multi  party talks at Stormont in 1997 and engaged in the Forum 
for political dialogue it is clear that there was a profound change in human rights 
thinking within the UUP leadership at the time as Trimble, supported by other 
intellectuals in the party who were gaining prominence under his leadership such as 
University lecturers Dermot Nesbitt and Professor Anthony Alcock, began to engage 
in a more serious and reflective manner with the issue of human rights than had 
previously been the case.  
Multi party negotiations  
In addition to support for the incorporation of the ECHR into domestic UK law and 
advocating that the British and Irish Governments ratify the Framework Convention 
as momentum developed in the multi  party negotiations at Stormont in the latter half 
of 1997, it also became clear that the UUP had reaffirmed its support for a Northern 
Ireland specific Bill of Rights. Indeed, in a speech delivered by David Trimble in New 
York in June 1997 where he offered an assessment of the four key elements of any 
potential political deal at the talks, the third ingredient for Trimble was the creation of 
a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights,  
Thirdly, a Bill of Rights to guarantee fairness. Following the proposals of the Organisation for 
Security and Co  operation in Europe, this could b e extended to cover issues of identity and group 
rights. These have worked in the South Tyrol and are working for the peoples of Hungary, 
Romania, Slovakiaovercoming divisions much greater than ours (Wednesday 18
 June, 1997). 
This support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights also found cross  party unionist 
support in the Northern Ireland Forum for Political Dialogue where, for example, in a 
debate on a motion brought by DUP North Antrim representative Ian Paisley Jnr 
which called for the establishment of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland urging 
the Government to action this proposal given the general all  party support for the 
principle of a Bill of Rights (Official Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
September, 1997). The motion was supported by all the Unionist parties represented 
in the Forum. Jim Shannon, a DUP representative for Strangford, argued that a Bill of 
Rights would consolidate democracy and, at the same time, assert the rule of law by 
putting emphasis on human dignity and respect for human rights. (Official Record of 
the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
 September, 1997) Speaking for the UUP in the 
debate Anthony Alcock remarked that, What is important now is to have a special 
Bill of Rights for Northern Irelandwhich will reflect the changes in society and will 
check abuse by any regional Assembly that may result from these talks (Official 
Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
 September, 1997). Indeed, for one UUP 
representative a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights was one method of asserting Northern 
Irelands equal citizenship with the rest of the United Kingdom,  
The purpose of a Bill of Rights is to establish a common set of entitlements and obligations for 
people and state. Such a measure is about establishing a covenant between those who are governed 
and those who govern. A Bill of Rights would bring true parity of esteem  certainly in Northern 
Ireland, and I like to think, throughout the United Kingdom (Peter King, UUP representative on NI 
Forum, (Official Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
 September, 1997, p 547). 
During this debate in the Northern Ireland Forum, unionist discourses, particularly 
from DUP representatives did focus on the fact that paramilitary organisations and 
terrorist groupings in Northern Ireland were, as they saw it, the greatest abusers of 
human rights in Northern Ireland through violations of the right to life and the 
ongoing so called punishment attacks on individuals. As the DUP North Belfast 
representative, Nigel Dodds argued,  
We want to see political progress being made which will involve having democratic institutions of 
government here in Northern Ireland with a bill of rights to protect our fundamental freedoms and 
liberties. But the way the present talks set  up has been rigged, with unrepentant IRA murderers 
brought to the table, is not the way to make that political progress. You cannot negotiate things like 
democracy and devolution and a bill of rights with those whose very existence is contrary to 
democracy and contrary to the very notion of a bill of rights, fundamental freedoms and liberties 
(Nigel Dodds, DUP, Official Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
 September, 1997, p 564).  
This concern, as we shall come to see in chapter 5, remains central to unionist 
discourses about human rights in Northern Ireland. However, it did not preclude 
unionist political parties expressing their support for a Bill of Rights. According to 
Harvey and Livingstone, most of the discussion of the human rights elements 
appears to have occurred in the final two weeks of the negotiations and although some 
ideas for strengthened human rights protection were rejected, a substantial amount 
survived to the final document (Harvey and Livingstone, 1999, p.168). However, it 
has been suggested by some scholars that the Irish Nationalist parties in the 
negotiations would have placed more importance on the final Agreement reflecting a 
more comprehensive framework for the protection of human rights than the unionist 
parties (Hennessey, 2000, p.145  149; Mageean 1999). As Mageean argues, perhaps 
least surprising is the weight that the nationalist participants in the process attached to 
the protection of rights (Mageean, 1999, p.1503). Whilst the UUP were content in 
the end with the rights provisions of the Agreement, in the sense that they didnt 
oppose them in the final draft, it is clear that the focus and attention of UUP 
negotiators in the final weeks of the multi party negotiations at Castle Buildings was 
on other institutional and symbolic issues such as the operation of the Assembly, cross 
border cooperation, policing and IRA decommissioning. As one unionist negotiator 
put it, there were bigger issues to fry in the negotiations (Interview with Dermot 
Nesbitt, May 20
 2009). However, given the UUPs tacit approval of the human 
rights provisions in the Agreement, one may wonder why did unionist negotiators 
agree to the Agreement containing such extensive provisions on human rights in the 
first place  particularly the section on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights? The answer 
to this question relates to a central argument of this thesis that for unionists, the 
human rights provisions of the Belfast Agreement were not, in and of themselves, 
controversial, but that their subsequent implementation and interpretation in the post  
Belfast Agreement period is where unionist anxiety and suspicion is mostly directed. 
As Dermot Nesbitt  the negotiator during the 1998 political talks who led for the 
UUP on human rights issues recalls,  
On the Thursday night before Good Friday he (David Trimble) gave me the rights bit and I with 
him went to meet Jonathan Powell and I expressed reservations but my only real reservation was 
the bit about the unemployment differential in the rights and equality sectionas regards the rights 
issue I was quite content. There was a sentence which said these rights to reflect identity, ethos of 
the two communities and parity of esteem. That was a discrete sentence. It was very clear what it 
was to reflectso I was happy basically with what was in it on the Thursday night before it was 
signed (Interview with Dermot Nesibtt, 20
 May 2009).  
In other words, it is clear that UUP negotiators did not envisage rights becoming such 
contested terrain in Northern Ireland. In their view, the Agreement is very clear in 
providing the basis for a modest interpretation of what should constitute the particular 
circumstances. As David Trimble said, all these matters were not controversial in the 
talks themselves, Unionists having been committed to the concept of a judicially 
enforceable Bill of Rights since the early 1970s (Trimble, 1999, p.1158). One could 
point to the fact that because what is meant by the concept of human rights is 
essentially contested, vague and ambiguous there is a certain degree of inevitability 
that we have arrived at a situation in Northern Ireland where rights have become so 
disputed, but there is a sense that the UUP genuinely did not envisage the inflation of 
this particular section of the Agreement. Indeed, that in not subscribing to an inflated 
notion of what constitutes the particular circumstances it is unionists, and not 
nationalists, who are sticking to the terms of the Agreement. This sentiment was 
expressed by Dermot Nesbitt, who argued that,  
I would still come back to my basic position if you look at the interpretation of the Agreement if 
you look at what the rights agenda properly articulated by unionism and properly implemented to 
reflect international legal standards; unionism has nothing to fear (Interview with Dermot 
Nesbitt, May 20
 2009). 
Conclusion  
Nesbitt, more so than anyone in the UUP at the time including Trimble, was 
singularly responsible for the greater emphasis put by the UUP on human rights 
during the talks. Beyond Nesbitt and perhaps Alcock and a few of the younger 
members of the UUP talks team such Peter King, Arlene Foster and John Hunter  all 
qualified and practicing members of the legal profession  the issue of rights does not 
appear to have been taken seriously within the wider UUP talks team or the UUP at 
the time. As Nesbitt reflects,  
At times I feel like Ive been a lone voice  Ive been there at it for fifteen yearsAt times through 
those talks I felt that people were saying theres Nesbitt going on about his rights again I would 
say that people saw it as Nationalists are gaining by it and therefore we want nothing to do with 
itand I take the opposite view (Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, June 18
 2009). 
One of the controversies associated with Nesbitts and subsequently the UUPs 
reliance on the Framework Convention on National Minorities during the political 
talks, as we have noted, is that the status of a national minority was not part of Irish 
Nationalisms self  understanding. The UUP could also be accused of being highly 
selective when it comes to international law, relying on the Framework Convention 
and the ECHR but ignoring other international human rights treaties such as the 
International Covenant for Social and Economic Rights, which contains extensive 
protection for reference to social and economic rights. In the next chapter we will 
consider unionisms engagement with the Bill of Rights process in the post 
Agreement period including the Bill of Rights Forum in Northern Ireland. The issue 
of the Framework Convention was raised by unionists on the Forum as potentially 
providing a common reference point for participants to deal with rights issues they 
disagreed about. According to one DUP representative on the Forum, however, 
nationalist political parties and civil society representatives neither saw the value of 
the Framework Convention nor wanted it to be part of rights discourse on the Forum,  
If there was one other document that really has relevance it is the Framework Convention because 
that is about national minorities and this is a conflict over the years in Northern Ireland between 
differing national minorities in a UK context, whether it is the unionist community or nationalist 
community it constitutes a minority in a national sense. Therefore accommodating cultural and 
other divisions is what the Framework Convention is about. But when you actually try and get into 
that they shied away from a lot of it because the key point about it is youre not to use that and your 
rights to undermine the state and so they had no real interest in it (Interview with Nelson 
McCausland MLA, October 5
 2009). 
Establishing that unionist political parties have supported a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland from the period of the early 1970s onwards is important for contextualising 
the contemporary position of key unionist elites. However, given the caveat identified 
earlier in the chapter that unionist support for a Bill of Rights in the 1970s should 
perhaps be understood as an attempt to conceal unionisms refusal to share power 
with Irish Nationalist in a devolved Executive at Stormont, more significance should 
be attached to unionisms support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights from the early 
1990s to the multi  party negotiations. Unionist support for a Bill of Rights as 
evidenced in the deliberations of the Northern Ireland Forum may be dismissed by 
some because the Forum lacked wider credibility and legitimacy due to the nationalist 
partys boycott of it. However, because unionist discourse on this issue in the Forums 
deliberations was merely reflective of a wider shift in unionist discourse on human 
rights, it can not be so easily dismissed. Establishing unionisms tacit support and 
acceptance of the Belfast Agreements human rights provisions is particularly 
important as we turn to the next chapter and examine how what was a relatively 
uncontroversial area for unionism subsequently became controversial and a major 
anxiety for unionists in the implementation of the Belfast Agreement.  
Chapter 4 
Unionism and the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights debate 
1998  2010 
Introduction  
I think it would be very foolish of the unionist community right now to say no to a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland because that will be read across to the other community as here we go again 
(Interview with Professor Monica McWilliams, September 16
 2009).  
The sentiment expressed in the above quote from the current Chief Commissioner of 
the NIHRC is indicative of a wider view held by human rights activists in Northern 
Ireland that unionist anxiety about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights lacks sincerity 
and is grounded less in a convinced, well thought out political narrative and more in 
unionisms unwillingness to embrace wholeheartedly the political and constitutional 
change which has taken place in Northern Ireland since the Belfast Agreement. 
However, unionist responses to proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights post 
1998 require a much closer examination than has occurred to date. Indeed, on closer 
inspection, unionist narratives about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights are much more 
nuanced and complex than is implied by above quote from the NIHRC Chief 
Commissioner. This chapter will examine post Agreement Unionist responses to the 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights debate. Having examined this discourse, it will then 
analyse the reasons why unionism has become anxious about the proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. The chapter will conclude by arguing that alongside 
the significant convergence between the two principal political parties within 
unionism that unionist discourse on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights has acquired a 
coherence and intelligibility not always acknowledged in the academic literature and 
public discourse on this issue.  
Overview of post Agreement Bill of Rights process  
The NIHRCs mandate to begin an initial consultation process on proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights came from the Belfast Agreement, and given further 
statutory effect by Section 69 (7) of the Northern Ireland Act 1998, which instructed 
the newly constituted Human Rights Commission to: 
Consult and to advise on the scope for defining, in Westminster legislation, rights supplementary to 
those in the European Convention on Human Rights, to reflect the particular circumstances of 
Northern Ireland, drawing as appropriate on international instruments and experience. These 
additional rights to reflect the principles of mutual respect for the identity and ethos of both 
communities and parity of esteem, and - taken together with the ECHR - to constitute a Bill of 
Rights for Northern Ireland (Belfast Agreement: Rights, safeguards and equality of opportunity, 
human rights, section 4). 
This process began in 2000 with the establishment of nine working groups to assist 
the Commission in their work of identifying which rights would be suggested for 
inclusion in any future Bill. In September 2001, the Commission officially launched a 
public consultation document Making a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and in 
2004 issued a document Progressing a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland: an update 
for public consultation. The failure to make progress on the issue was criticised by 
human rights NGOs in Northern Ireland such as the Committee on the Administration 
of Justice (CAJ), the Human Rights Consortium and both the SDLP and Sinn Fein. 
However, as Murray and Livingstone (2005) highlighted in a report into the 
effectiveness of national human rights institutions, the NIHRC was plagued by the 
uncertain political context in which it operated. The frustration experienced by some 
about a lack of progress on the issue of a Bill of Rights was reflected in the Joint 
Declaration of the British and Irish Governments issued in April 2003 in an attempt to 
reach agreement with the political parties after the Northern Ireland Assembly was 
suspended in October 2002. The joint communiqu noted the progress that had been 
made in implementing the human rights aspects of the Agreement such as the 
incorporation of the ECHR into UK and Irish law and the creation of the Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission and proposed the establishment of a round table 
Forum comprising of representatives from the political parties and civil society with 
an independent chairman of proceedings. However, it would not be until December 
2006 that a round table Forum was established to examine the issue fulfilling a 
commitment in the St Andrews Agreement (2006), which created the context for the 
return of devolved Government to Northern Ireland in May 2007. When the need for a 
round table Forum was first discussed in the transitional Assemblys Committee on 
the Preparation for Government during August 2006, the DUP, SDLP, Sinn Fein and 
the Alliance Party were supportive of the idea. As DUP MLA Edwin Poots stated at 
one Committee meeting, the DUP was supportive of establishing a round table Forum 
once the Assembly had been restored under the Committee of the Centre, which is an 
all  party Committee (Minutes of Committee on the Preparation for Government 
meeting, 18
 August 2006). Whilst the DUP did not get their way in terms of who 
should convene the Forum, they managed to stop the Forum process from getting 
underway and carrying out any substantive business until after the Assembly elections 
in March 2007 and the agreement of that same month between the DUP and Sinn Fein 
to share power in a devolved Executive for Northern Ireland,. The UUP, however, 
opposed the creation of a round table Forum, arguing that to establish such a body 
would only prolong the Bill of Rights process further without any guarantee that it 
would come to a conclusion. However, it did state that if a Forum was established by 
the UK Government it would participate in the body and put its arguments forward.   
The Bill of Rights Forum held its inaugural meeting on 18
 December 2006 under the 
Chairmanship of the NIO Minister David Hanson MP. The Forum consisted of three 
representatives each from the DUP, Sinn Fein, UUP and SDLP together with two 
representatives from the Alliance Party and 14 Civic Society representatives. 
However, in fulfilling a commitment in the St Andrews Agreement (2006) and the 
Joint Declaration (2003) to appoint an international, independent chairman of the 
Forum, the Australian human rights lawyer Chris Sidoti was appointed on March 15
2007 and chaired his first meeting on April 4
 2007. The Forum met on eighteen 
occasions from December 2006 until March 2008 and seven working groups were 
established in July 2007 to consider in further detail the nature, scope and detail of the 
substantive rights proposed. The Bill of Rights Forums final report of March 2008 
made 41 substantive proposals and 216 secondary recommendations. It was objected 
to by the DUP, UUP and the Orange Order. North Down DUP MLA, Peter Weir, a 
DUP representative on the Forum argued that the absence of cross community support 
for the proposals was the key reason why they rejected the report, cross 
community support is the key to moving this issue forward. We want to see a Bill of 
Rights which can command that support across the population of Northern Ireland. 
What has been produced does not even come close to representing that. (DUP Press 
Release, 31
 March 2008). Both the UUP and DUP engaged fully in the process 
sending their full complement of representatives to the plenary session and 
nominating representatives to sit on the Forum working groups. At this juncture, 
however, there are two significant observations worth considering about the Bill of 
Rights Forum. Firstly, the concerns highlighted by the DUP about the composition 
and representativeness of the Forum and secondly, the outreach report commissioned 
by the Forum into unionist communities and the Bill of Rights process. On Monday 
 October, 2007, the DUP introduced a Private Members Motion in the Northern 
Ireland Assembly expressing concern about the membership of the Bill of Rights 
Forum and the lack of any representation within the civil society sector of any groups 
from the broad unionist tradition. The Ulster Unionists supported the motion, which 
stated, 
This Assembly acknowledges that the unionist community has been largely excluded from the 
human rights process in Northern Ireland and under-represented within the human rights sector, 
resulting in the Bill of Rights Forum having a clear imbalance in the composition of its 
membership; believes that without the support of all sections of our community any Bill of Rights 
process is fundamentally flawed; and calls upon the Secretary of State to address these problems 
urgently. (http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3) 
During that debate the DUP MLA Michelle McIlveen caused controversy because of 
the direct criticisms made, by name, of many of the civil society representatives on 
the Forum in terms of their claim to be representative of the community. This 
argument was reinforced by the DUP MLA Peter Weir, who argued that the 
representativeness of the civil society groups on the Forum was a key concern of the 
Clearly there were concerns amongst the Unionist representation about the civil society 
representatives. Firstly, over how widely and representatively drawn they actually were and 
secondly, there was a slight degree of tension because many people in unionist politics were 
resentful of people who portray themselves as being representative of a particular sector or section 
society. For example there was a clash because one of the representatives on the Forum 
representing older people made a comment that they represented 300,000 older people across 
Northern Ireland and I think that the unionist tradition is based very much based upon a democratic 
analysis and that was clearly undemocraticespecially when there is no democratic mandate for 
their claims (Interview with Peter Weir MLA, Friday 3
 July 2009). 
These forceful claims, as we shall see in a later chapter, are not made in isolation but 
fit into a wider critique offered by unionisms political elite of human rights NGOs in 
Northern Ireland. Secondly, the Bill of Rights Forum identified a number of groups 
within society in Northern Ireland which have been marginalised from the Bill of 
Rights debate in Northern Ireland. 100,000 was allocated by the Secretary of State 
for this task and as the Forums Chair Chris Sidoti argued, The additional 
supportwill make it possible for the Forum to engage groups that previously found 
it difficult to contribute to thinking on the Bill of Rights. (Bill of Rights Forum, press 
release 7
 September 2007) The unionist community was identified as one such group 
and an outreach worker was commissioned in November 2007 to consult with the 
unionist community over a three month period. Arguably, the fact that the unionist 
community was identified as a section of society previously marginalised from the 
Bill of Rights debate is partial vindication of an argument pursued by influential 
strands of unionist opinion that unionism has largely been excluded from the debate 
on human rights in Northern Ireland. This view is illustrated in these comments by the 
DUP MLA Michelle McIlveen in the debate she secured in the Northern Ireland 
Assembly about concerns the DUP had about the composition of the Bill of Rights 
Forum,  
Over the years, Northern Irelands human rights sector has been hijacked for political purposes by 
anti-unionists. People who would not have been elected are given equal, and sometimes greater, 
status than those who have been mandated by the electorate of Northern Ireland. The NIHRC was 
meant to reflect the community make-up but does not, and neither does the Bill of Rights Forum. 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3) 
In December 2008, nine months after the Forum had published its report, the NIHRC, 
after almost ten years of deliberation delivered its advice to the Secretary of State for 
Northern Ireland. It proposed the inclusion of 27 substantive rights in a Northern 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3
Ireland Bill of Rights together with 78 provisions. The advice included a wide range 
of socio  economic proposals such as the right to health, the right to an adequate 
standard of living, the right to accommodation, the right to work, environmental 
rights, social security rights, childrens rights, education rights, property rights and a 
whole range of other more traditional civil and political rights. It was proposed in the 
advice that all these rights would be justiciable. In a move which some unionist 
politicians claimed vindicated their position on the NIHRC proposals for a Bill of 
Rights, and to the consternation of nationalist parties, the NIHRC and a number of 
human rights NGOs, the Northern Ireland Office issued a formal response to the 
NIHRCs advice in November 2009 through the document issued for public 
consultation, A Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland: Next Steps. The Government 
explicitly recommended that only two of the provisions proposed by the NIHRC 
should be included in any future Bill of Rights; the right to vote/ be elected and the 
right to identify oneself and be accepted as British or Irish or both and out of the 78 
provisions in the NIHRCs original advice, has only recommended that 31 of those 
provisions should be considered by the public. The Government rejected over half the 
proposals contained in the advice received from the Human Rights Commission. 
Human rights organisation such as the Committee on the Administration of Justice 
(CAJ), nationalist political parties and the NIHRC have all heavily criticised the UK 
Government for issuing, in their opinion, such a weak document for the delay in 
beginning the consultation and for the short time period allocated for the consultation. 
According to the CAJ,  
what they have offered in their consultation document on a Bill of Rights does not come close to 
what is required, either by the governments international human rights obligations or under the 
terms of the Good Friday/Belfast Agreement. What has been produced by the government should 
be seen as an attempt to dishonour and disregard the spirit and letter of that Agreement, and could 
potentially undermine rather than advance the protection of human rights and equality in Northern 
Ireland (CAJ Press Release, 23
 February 2010).  
Post Agreement unionist responses 
As the Cadogan Group remind us, the sections of the Belfast Agreement dealing with 
rights were not major items of contention (Cadogan Group, 2002) and supporting 
what this thesis has established: for unionists during the multi party talks leading to 
the Belfast Agreement the idea of a Bill of Rights was not necessarily controversial. 
However, before this chapter considers the reasons why the idea of a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights became increasingly controversial for unionists in the post Agreement 
period, it will first consider what the essence of unionist responses to proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights have been. From the interviews conducted for this 
thesis, in Parliamentary debates, public comment and submissions to the Bill of 
Rights consultation process there are four significant characteristics of the responses 
of influential strands of unionist opinion to this debate. They can be summarised as 
follows: (1) Current proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights lack legitimacy 
because of the absence of cross community support for them. (2) In producing the 
proposals both the Bill of Rights Forum and the Northern Ireland Human Rights 
Commission went beyond the remit given to them in the Belfast Agreement. (3) 
Concern about the impact a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights would have for equal 
citizenship within the UK and Northern Irelands place within the union. (4) Profound 
concern about the potential under a Bill of Rights for power over public policy 
decisions to transfer from the legislature to the judiciary. This chapter will now 
consider each of these issues in turn. 
(1) Absence of cross community support for Bill of Rights proposals 
The need for cross community support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights was a key 
argument advanced by unionists, in response to both the Bill of Rights Forum and the 
NIHRC proposals. It was clear from 2001 onwards, in response to the NIHRCs first 
public consultation, that many unionists were unhappy with the draft NIHRC 
proposals. However, this concern was not an outright rejection of the concept of a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. For example writing in the Belfast Telegraph in 
October 2001 the then Ulster Unionist MP Jeffrey Donaldson stated that his 
disappointment with the NIHRC proposals came from his commitment to the 
importance of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. (Belfast Telegraph, October 1
2001) In 2003 the DUP also highlighted the absence of Unionist support for the 
proposals, we believe that the draft produced by the Commission is fundamentally 
flawed and will not enjoy the confidence of the unionist community in Northern 
Ireland (A Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland? A Unionist Vision, DUP policy 
document, and 2003). This argument assumed central importance in unionist 
discourses during the work of the Bill of Rights Forum. Indeed, the issue was so 
fundamental that, according to one DUP representative on the Forum, it almost caused 
the DUP to walk out of the Forum at one particular meeting:   
There was a point at which we were on the verge of walking out at one meeting. It was to do with 
voting mechanisms on the Forum. We believed you needed cross community support and that there 
should be a voting mechanism put in place to ensure this. (Interview with Nelson McCausland 
MLA, 5
 October 2009)  
In April 2008 the Northern Ireland Assembly debated an Ulster Unionist motion 
which expressed its concern at the lack of cross community support for the Bill of 
Rights Forum report and urged the NIHRC to ensure that cross community support 
existed for the advice they would provide for the Secretary of State. According to one 
Ulster Unionist representative on the Bill of Rights Forum, one of the most significant 
and important consequences of the Bill of Rights Forum process was that, it showed 
there was no cross community/cross party consensus to move forward on a 
maximalist Bill of Rights (Interview with Dr. Brian Crowe, 30
 June 2010). The 
logic of the Ulster Unionist argument about cross community support appeared to rest 
on two foundations: firstly, that the essentially contested nature of what rights are, 
particularly within a divided society, means that cross community support is essential 
otherwise tensions will increase. Secondly, that the very notion that there should be 
broad cross community support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights was in and of 
itself an obvious and logical argument to pursue. As the UUP Deputy Leader, Danny 
Kennedy argued during the debate:   
From the outset of the forums work, my party emphasised the need to build cross-community 
political support for any recommendations that emerged from the forums deliberations. One would 
have thought that necessity to be self-evident. Some rights  often those particular to the 
circumstances of Northern Ireland  are contested in our society. Our conflicts and disputes have 
often been couched in terms of competing rights. Therefore, is it not reasonable, startlingly obvious 
even, that any statement of rightsmust have cross-community support? Without that support, such 
a statement of rights would increase, rather than ameliorate the division in our society. 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm#4) 
This point about a lack of cross community support for a Bill of Rights reinforcing 
societal divisions in Northern Ireland was also emphasised by the DUP during the 
debate on the Ulster Unionist motion. As the DUP MLA Nelson McCausland argued 
during the debate,   
If a bill or rights is to contribute to a shared and better future in Northern Ireland, and if it is to be a 
positive and cohesive force rather than a divisive one, it must secure cross-community support and 
endorsement in the Assembly. 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm#4) 
The warning from unionists was clear. If the NIHRC was to continue to interpret the 
mandate given to it under the Agreement in an expansive way, then unionism would 
not support any future proposals or advice they would provide to the Secretary of 
State. When the NIHRC published their advice to the Secretary of State in December 
2008, unionism rejected the proposals highlighting the absence of cross community 
support as a significant contributory factor in their reasoning. As the DUP MP Jeffrey 
Donaldson argued,  
At every stage in this process the DUP has made it very clear that the litmus test for any Bill of 
Rights will be the degree of confidence which it can command across the entire community in 
Northern Ireland. (DUP Press Release, December 10
, 2008) 
This point was reinforced by the UUP MLA Danny Kennedy during a debate in the 
Northern Ireland Assembly on an Ulster Unionist motion urging the Secretary of State 
not to implement the NIHRC proposals,  
Perhaps unsurprisingly and most disappointingly, the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 
arrogantly decided to ignore the views of the House and the need for cross-community support 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2009/091103.htm#5). 
However, some human rights NGOs in Northern Ireland (e.g. Amnesty, 
http://blogs.amnesty.org.uk/blogs_entry.asp?eid=3154) have questioned this aspect of 
unionisms narrative. They argue it is undermined by opinion poll evidence, which 
suggests that the unionist community is in favour of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
and more specifically that unionist support for the NIHRC and Bill of Rights Forum 
proposals does exist. For example, one particular opinion poll conducted by Milward 
Brown on behalf of the Human Rights Consortium found that 74% of Protestants 
interviewed said that a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights was important 
(http://www3.billofrightsni.org/documents/publications/Belfast_Telegraph_suppleme
nt_FINAL.pdf). There are two important points, however, to be made about this 
argument. Firstly, it is a highly specious argument to suggest that if a majority of 
unionist/protestant respondents reply in the affirmative to a highly subjective opinion 
poll question do you support a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland? that unionist 
politicians are wrong to argue that cross  community support for a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights does not exist, without further explaining both sides of the argument or 
adding substance to the question. Secondly, in pursuing this argument it is implied 
that opinion polls are a more accurate and authentic reflection of unionist attitudes on 
this issue than the democratic process. However, this argument pursued by some 
human rights organisations, is consistent with what Dixon (1997) has highlighted is 
the tendency by civil society groups in Northern Ireland to prefer opinion poll 
evidence over electoral behaviour. Dixon argues this is one of the defining 
characteristics of civil society based approaches to conflict resolution in Northern 
Ireland. According to Dixon, this approach demonstrates the accommodating nature 
of public opinion in Northern Ireland compared with the negative role the political 
elites in Northern Ireland have played in the search for accommodation. (Dixon, 
1997, p.10) 
(2) Human Rights Commission have exceeded their mandate 
There has been profound disagreement in Northern Ireland about whether the mandate 
given to the NIHRC to consult on the content of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
empowered the NIHRC to adopt a limited or expansive interpretation of their 
responsibilities. In many ways this argument has been a foundational issue for 
unionism since the NIHRC first issued draft proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights in 2001. As the former UUP MLA Esmond Birnie put it in a debate on the 
issue in the Northern Ireland Assembly in 2001, we do not criticise human rights 
per se; rather, we criticise the way in which the commission has so far chosen to 
interpret them. (http://www.niassembly/record/reports/010925c.htm) Whenever 
influential strands of unionist opinion have made the argument that the NIHRC has 
exceeded its mandate it does so not by rejecting outright the concept of a Bill of 
Rights for Northern Ireland but by rejecting the Commissions interpretation of the 
relevant section of the Belfast Agreement. As one UUP MLA, Tom Elliott, put it, 
The Ulster Unionist Party continues to recognise the scope for rights that are supplementary to the 
Human Rights Act, which address circumstances that are particular to Northern Ireland. Two 
examples are the right to parade and the right to protest, which  few Members would disagree  
have been among the most significant and divisive rights to be contested in recent years. 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm)  
There are two dominant narratives that shape the debate on a Bill of Rights in 
Northern Ireland: a maximalist and a minimalist narrative. Broadly the Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission itself along with a range of civil society 
organisations, human rights NGOs and the Irish Nationalist parties supports the 
maximalist narrative. The minimalist narrative is supported by the larger Unionist 
parties: the DUP and Ulster Unionists, the British Government and other faith based 
groups in the Unionist community such as the Loyal Orders, the Church of Ireland, 
Methodist Church, Presbyterian Church, CARE, Evangelical Alliance and think tanks 
such as the Cadogan group.  The maximalist narrative suggests that only through an 
extensive Bill of Rights, which protects a wide range of social, economic, civil and 
political rights can Northern Ireland truly move on from its divided and troubled past 
to a new future characterised by peace and stability. The proposals contained in the 
Bill of Rights would be consistent with international human rights law standards. This 
document should then be fully justiciable, enforced by the courts or a new 
Constitutional Court and fully constitutional in nature in that it should be afforded the 
status of higher law and placed beyond the reach of the democratically elected 
legislature. The minimalist narrative suggests that there should be a strict 
interpretation of the terms of the Belfast Agreement meaning that a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights should only contain measures, which reflect the principles of mutual 
respect for the identity and ethos of both communities and parity of esteem. As the 
Cadogan Group argue,  
This maximalist approach has ensured that Making a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland lacks a 
sense of proportion, a sense of where the boundaries of the attainable might lie.  The NIHRC tries 
to provide everything for everyone.  It has produced the most magnificent compendium of rights.  It 
has inscribed the most extensive raft of freedoms imaginable.  It is a bit like the legend of the 
ancient Greek who tried to make a statue more beautiful then Helen by taking the most alluring 
features of different women and adding them together.  The result was not beauty but contrived 
ugliness. (Cadogan Group, 2002) 
The highly contested nature of the NIHRCs mandate was noted by the Chair of the 
Bill of Rights Forum, Chris Sidoti who in the final report of the Bill of Rights Forum 
stated that,  
No issue divided Forum members more than the understanding of what constituted the particular 
circumstances of Northern Ireland. This challenging issue was discussed explicitly on many 
occasions and ultimately arose in discussion of almost every proposed recommendation. (Bill of 
Rights Forum Report, 2008, p.12) 
This disagreement has broadly reflected conventional political dividing lines with the 
two main unionist political parties in Northern Ireland, the DUP and UUP, on one side 
advocating a limited interpretation and the Nationalist and Republican political 
parties, the SDLP and Sinn Fein, on the other side supporting an expansive 
interpretation of the Commissions mandate. As the DUP MLA Peter Weir put it 
describing his experience of this debate on the Bill of Rights Forum, It became very 
clear early on that it wasnt simply a question of people having different positions 
they were very much operating from different ball parks (Interview with Peter Weir, 
 July 2009). Indeed, the issue has played such a profoundly significant role in post 
agreement unionist discourses on human rights in Northern Ireland that when Daphne 
Trimble, who along with Jonathan Bell was one of the two Commissioners on the 
NIHRC explicitly identified with the Unionist community, came to explain why she 
had rejected the Commissions 2008 recommendations for a Bill of Rights it was clear 
that the Commissions insistence on interpreting their mandate in an inflated fashion 
was at the centre of her reasoning. As she argued in her dissenting report, which 
significantly was not included in the final NIHRC report,   
 A fundamental difference arose in the Commission concerning its remit. In my view the rest of the 
Commission misinterpreted its mandate and many of the additional rights suggested by the majority 
have nothing to do with the required principles of mutual respect for the identity and ethos of both 
communities and parity of esteem. The other members of the Commission, however, took the view 
that they could go beyond the terms of the AgreementConsequently I am unable to endorse the 
report of the majority of the Commission. (Note of dissent by Daphne Trimble to NIHRCs advice 
to Secretary of State on a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, December 2009) 
Ultimately, there was no consensus on the Bill of Rights Forum between the various 
representatives of civil society and elected representatives but Sidoti did articulate a 
position on the matter, which subscribed to the expansive interpretation of the phrase 
articulated by the NIHRC, civil society and Nationalist and Republican politicians. 
His key argument was that the Belfast Agreement in many ways describes what the 
particular circumstances of Northern Ireland are. At one meeting of the Bill of Rights 
Forum he argued that the Agreement listed,  
five principles: mutual respect; parity of esteem; commitment to the principles of partnership, 
equality and mutual respect and to the protection of civil, political, social, economic and cultural 
rights; a culture of tolerance; and non-violence. (Minutes of the 9
 meeting of the Bill of Rights 
Forum, 5
 December 2007) 
Cognisant of the criticism made by unionist politicians and some academics 
(McCrudden, 2001) about the NIHRCs identification of supplementary rights for 
Northern Ireland, the NIHRC in the lead up to the presentation of its advice to the 
Secretary of State engaged in a detailed exercise to identify a methodology that could 
be used to take a position on what constituted the particular circumstances of 
Northern Ireland. The Commissions methodology applied a comprehensive and 
detailed seven step process that was applied to the consideration of each of the 
individual substantive rights and then the secondary provisions (See appendix 1, A 
Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland: Advice to the Secretary of State for Northern 
Ireland, 10
 December, 2008).  There is a sense within unionism that those who 
support a broad, maximalist interpretation of the phrase, particular circumstances 
have considered where the ECHR is deficient, in terms of particular rights, have taken 
these deficiencies and suggested that what constitutes the particular circumstances of 
Northern Ireland is where the ECHR could offer stronger rights protection in a range 
of socio economic, environmental and civil and political areas. As one DUP MLA put 
it there is a connection between this rewriting of the ECHR, to establish a maximalist 
interpretation and the pushing of a particular agenda by a number of civil society 
organisations who favoured this broad interpretation:  
One of the things that slightly took us aback that there was occasions that in terms of some of the 
stuff that was put forward many of it was reinventing the wheel of the ECHRso it seemed to us 
fairly pointless to be producing something which overlapped with the human rights actI think 
there were some people who looked at the rights they wanted in a Bill of Rights and effectively 
worked backwards towards the interpretation of the phrase particular circumstances.and there 
was a feeling that civic society and to some extent the Nationalist Parties were trying to push a 
particular agenda and to some extent were pursuing a few hobby horsesmany of them saw the 
Bill of Rights as a process where they could get various thing that they wanted to be enshrined in 
Northern Ireland but knew they werent going to achieve politically via the Assembly. This was an 
opportunity to get these things enshrined by the back door. (Interview with Peter Weir, 3
2009) 
However, the question remains what would a Unionist account of what the phrase 
particular circumstances means look like? Both the DUP and UUP argue that their 
interpretation of the Agreements mandate is the narrative that remains closest to the 
intention and the wording of the Agreement and is the most pragmatic, common sense 
position to adopt. As the former Ulster Unionist leader, Lord Trimble put it,  
I dont see how a fair reading of the Belfast Agreement takes you anywhere else other than a 
minimalist approach to the phrase particular circumstances. Its not just particular circumstances 
but particular circumstances within the context of parity of esteem etc (Interview with David 
Trimble, 28
 May 2009).  
This point was reinforced by one of the DUP representatives on the Bill of Rights 
Forum, who argued that,   
Both the DUP and the UUP took the view on the Bill of Rights Forum that the clear intention and 
wording of the remit of the Bill of Rights coming from the Belfast Agreement was to talk about 
supplementary rights that were particular to the circumstances of Northern IrelandWe took a 
pragmatic test of that which was if not quite unique but which would certainly have something that 
would have a particular impact on the man/women in the street in Belfast which wasnt the case in 
Birmingham/Bristol. (Interview with Peter Weir, 3
 July 2009) 
The concern expressed by unionist representatives about the necessity to maintain 
territorial integrity and equilibrium within the UK in terms of rights protection and to 
ensure that rights proposed were supplementary to what was required by specific 
situations elsewhere in the UK was also highlighted by the UUP. As the UUPs 
human rights spokesman Dermot Nesbitt argued,  
If its parity of esteem then I dont have a problem there because as I take it parity of esteem is 
within the state we should all have parity. But if we have a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights which 
gives us additional rights on health, economics, employment then what about Southampton, what 
about Shropshire? This is not giving parity of esteem within the stateChildcare, child poverty, 
disability, they list all these things as part of the particular circumstances, and Inner London has 
more child poverty than Northern Ireland. Its a particular circumstance of Inner London, not just 
Northern IrelandSo it wasnt just particular circumstances in the Belfast Agreement; it was these 
to reflectidentity, ethos of the two communities and parity of esteem. Child poverty is not just 
particular to Northern Ireland but the ethos of Irish vs. Britishthat is a particular circumstance of 
Northern Ireland  the identity, ethos and parity of esteem of the two communities (Interview with 
Dermot Nesbitt, May 18
 2009).  
Or as his UUP colleague Danny Kennedy put it in one Assembly debate,  
It is inconceivable that any part of any state should have a comprehensively different set of human 
rights to another. If that were the case, the fundamental constitutional integrity of the state would be 
significantly undermined, and people in different regions would have a markedly different set of 
rights under the law from citizens elsewhere in that state. That would be an intolerable position, and 
it would lead to major difficulties and problems in law (Monday 1
 March, 2010, Official Record of 
the Northern Ireland Assembly, Vol 49, No1, p 25). 
For Daphne Trimble, a UUP member of the NIHRC, the Agreement and its intention 
of seeking to move Northern Ireland beyond its violent past to a peaceful, democratic 
future was of paramount importance in interpreting the NIHRCs mandate and what is 
meant by the particular circumstances,  
I think people have interpreted the particular circumstances phrase to suit themselves. What I felt 
was that this phrase encapsulated 10 years referred to a region of a country coming out of a thirty 
year period of violent conflict (Interview with Daphne Trimble, May 20
 2009). 
Both the UUP and DUP would consider parading, culture, language and identity 
rights as issues, which as the DUP MLA Simon Hamilton puts it, go to the heart of 
the problem. (http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm) 
Furthermore, the DUP also considered the issue of reproductive rights and codifying 
pro life values in a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights by enshrining the right to life of the 
unborn child. The failure, however, to deal with these issues in the NIHRC and Bill of 
Rights Forum reports has been criticised by both unionist parties. As Simon Hamilton 
argues,  
I am concerned about the misrepresentation of the mandateMany of us engaged positively in the 
process because we did not rule out the idea of a bill of rights per seWhen thinking of particular 
circumstances, some of us might think of issues like parading, yet there is absolutely nothing in the 
advice about parading. We might think of things like the strong feeling in Northern Ireland about 
the right to life, particularly in relation to abortion, but there is nothing about that whatsoever 
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2009/091103.htm#5). 
At this juncture, there are three issues in the debate about the particular circumstances 
worthy of further consideration. Firstly, one of the inherent difficulties surrounding 
debates about what constitutes the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland is 
that answering this question involves coming to a position about what the conflict in 
Northern Ireland was about and where responsibility for the troubles lies. As we noted 
at the beginning of this section of the thesis, human rights have formed an essential 
part of conflict resolution discourse in Northern Ireland and consequently the 
theoretical justification for a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland is often presented 
using the analytical frameworks of transitional justice theory in the work of a number 
of Northern Ireland based legal scholars [Bell (2002), Bell, Campbell and Ni Aolain 
(2004), Campbell & Ni Aolain (2005), Harvey, Campbell & Ni Aolain (2003) and 
McEvoy, Morrison and Anthony (2006), McEvoy (2007)]. Within this discourse a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights becomes an essential part of dealing with the past and 
addressing the legacy of previous human rights abuses through the legal entrenchment 
of rights to safeguard against human rights abuses taking place in the future. As the 
current NIHRC Chief Commissioner argues, 
In the Commissions view, its a transitional justice mechanism which will help to deal with the 
past. Its one more of those legs of the stool that goes to make up the Agreement alongside good 
policing, the legacy of the past and good government. (Interview with Professor Monica 
McWilliams, 16
 September 2009).  
Kavanagh has argued ambitiously that a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland can 
reconstruct society in Northern Ireland by providing a common reference point, both 
for citizens and for politiciansIn light of this, it may be worth asking whether the 
Bill of Rights could help to generate a broader, more inclusive political identity in 
Northern Ireland that could receive allegiance from all citizens (Kavanagh, 2004, 
p.973). This ambitious, utopian reading of the possibilities that open up through a Bill 
of Rights appears to ignore the fact that there is no agreement on what should 
constitute a Bill of Rights. Jeremy Waldron (1999) has argued that disagreement is a 
basic characteristic of political life  it is an essential ingredient of what he has called 
the circumstances of politics but transitional justice theory, in its application in 
Northern Ireland, does not seem to have an answer for this. When disagreement exists 
on the methods for dealing with the past, transitional justice is silent. Instead of 
pausing for reflection on the practical implications disagreement has, discourses of 
transitional justice eschew political disagreement and instead focus on the 
transformative impact law can have in post conflict Northern Ireland. 
The debate over what constitute the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland is 
exactly the type of debate that a process of transitional justice facilitates. However, as 
this thesis has argued there are very differing and competing interpretations of what 
this phrase particular circumstances means with profound effects for the political 
process in Northern Ireland. The problem with rights discourse in Northern Ireland is 
that interpretations of the conflict, where responsibility lies for the troubles, are still 
essentially contested. There is a unionist narrative and a nationalist narrative. There is 
a narrative from the terrorists perspective and a narrative from the victims 
perspective. Applying human rights in this context of conflicting narratives over 
questions of fundamental importance is problematic because we know, from political 
theory, practice and philosophy that rights are contested. The debate about a Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights and the differing and competing definitions of what constitutes 
the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland go right to the very heart of 
contemporary issues about interpretations of the Northern Ireland conflict. Questions 
over where responsibility for the conflict and violence in Northern should rest, why 
the Troubles emerged at the time they did, when the conflict began and why it ended 
when it did require us to have a keen awareness of history in Northern Ireland. As 
Brian Walker argues,  
While history is not the cause of the problem in Northern Ireland, perceptions of that history are of 
considerable influence. Strong views of history are held by many in the various communities in 
Northern Ireland. These views are often selective, contain myths and have changed over the years. 
People use history to justify their positions and influence their actions. (Walker, 2000, p.121) 
Indeed to answer what the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland are 
necessarily involves an attempt at answering some of these profound questions about 
the nature of the conflict in Northern Ireland. This point was reinforced again by 
Dawn Purvis leader of the Progressive Unionist Party (PUP), who stated that,  
If the Bill of Rights is to be rights additional to and specific to Northern Ireland then you need to 
look at the causes of the conflict and because there is no agreement on the causes of the conflict that 
battle is being played out over a Bill of Rights (Interview with Dawn Purvis MLA, 11
 June, 2009). 
However, whether the Belfast Agreement is interpreted as a new beginning (Harvey, 
2001) or the modification of circumstances (Aughey, 2002, 2005, 2008) has 
profound implications for the application of transitional justice frameworks to 
Northern Ireland. Scholars such as Colin Harvey are fully convinced of the 
possibilities contained in the Agreement for the radical transformation and a 
transition of Northern Ireland to a new democratic polity. (Harvey, 2001, p.1) He 
argues for a new paradigm of constitutional law to be developed, which challenges 
orthodox understandings of British constitutionalism in Northern Ireland in order to 
fully explain and critique the legal, political and constitutional law changes that have 
occurred in Northern Ireland since the Belfast Agreement. (Harvey, 2001, p.1) The 
new beginning approach identifies transitional justice as the most appropriate 
framework for understanding these changes in the Northern Ireland polity. It views 
the Belfast Agreement as a conceptual year zero therefore creating according to 
Aughey, a new beginning in which a radically new political space opens up out of 
the process of conflict transformation. (Aughey, 2009, p.87) Associated with this 
approach is a robust critique of the British constitutional tradition, which according to 
Harvey has a habit of absorbing change and moving on largely unaltered in its 
basics. (Harvey, 2001, p.2) In Harveys view the Belfast Agreement represents a 
practical attempt to make a fresh start and break the hold of orthodox UK 
constitutionalism on Northern Ireland. (Harvey, 2001, p.173) The modification of 
circumstances approach exemplified by scholars such as Arthur Aughey suggests 
something quite different from the radical underpinnings of the legal theory 
articulated in the work of Harvey and others. According to Aughey, the Agreement is 
not a, 
new beginning or a re-foundation but a modification of circumstances in Northern Ireland, an 
adjustment of how practices stand in relation to one another. Some things come on to the agenda 
but some things also fall off it. Some things come up for debate but yet others are settled, at least 
for now. Some things may improve but others may get worse. (Aughey, 2009, p.88) 
Indeed, on this view the circumstances of politics in Northern Ireland are fully 
captured as Aughey argues, the eccentricities, irregularities, inconsistencies and 
some might think, absurdities are not defects or irrationalities but constitutive 
characteristics of its politics (Aughey, 2009,  p.89). Therefore, if one considers the 
Belfast Agreement and the recent political developments in Northern Ireland as 
merely a modification of circumstances and not as Harvey would suggest a 
conceptual year zero then the scope for developing radical legal mechanisms for 
dealing with the past and addressing past human rights violations in Northern Ireland 
becomes narrower creating a thin conception of what is meant by transitional justice 
in the Northern Ireland context.  
Scholars in the field of international human rights law such as Christine Bell have 
recognised how transitional justice discourse has significant potential to be the site of 
a powerful new battleground for the continuation of the old conflict. As Bell argues, 
for the parties to the conflict, however, in the short term, the new institutions are 
merely vehicles for pursuing the same old conflict, because whoever can win the 
transition can win the peace, and whoever can win the peace can win the war (Bell, 
2009, p.25). We are faced then with a situation where there is a conflict about the 
conflict  what Christine Bell calls the metaconflict, where competing voices seek to 
impose their own versions of what happened in the past in Northern Ireland. This 
metaconflict, however, as Brian Walker argues can lead to a dead locked situation as 
one side can always counter the other sides historical grievances with grievances of 
their own. (Walker, 1996, p.60) The Northern Ireland Bill of Rights is one such site 
for the continuation of the debate about the metaconflict. Human rights discourse, as 
it has evolved recently in Northern Ireland has become a fierce new battleground. Old 
ideological battles are now fought out on this subject  indeed far from forming a 
basis on which Northern Ireland can move forward together, as transitional justice 
theory would require, human rights discourse is facilitating a process where people 
are moving further apart. Why is this? In the Northern Ireland context, human rights 
arguments have been advanced all too easily as a tool, which can be used in the 
process of transitional justice to, in the words of the Chair of the Bill of Rights Forum, 
Chris Sidoti, cement the peace and address the legacy of the conflict. As the chair 
of the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights Forum argued,  
Many societies that have emerged from violent conflict, as Northern Ireland has, have incorporated 
effective protection for human rights in their laws as an essential element in securing the peace. It 
has re-assured everyone that patterns of human rights violation that might have preceded the 
violence or arisen during the violence would no longer be tolerated. In a post conflict society, a Bill 
of Rights can be an effective means of identifying and addressing the continuing issues relating to 
the conflict. The universal experience is that it is simply impossible to draw a line under the past 
and pretend that it never happened. Like it or not, societies ultimately are forced to confront their 
demons. (Sidoti, 2008)  
This issue came to the fore during a debate in the Northern Ireland Assembly in 
November 2009 on an Ulster Unionist motion calling on the Secretary of State not to 
proceed with a public consultation on a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. The 
debate quickly turned into an argument about the causes of the conflict in Northern 
Ireland encapsulated in the contribution from the former Progressive Unionist Party 
(PUP) MLA Dawn Purvis who posed the question during the debate what came first: 
stinking, polluted politics or bloody, awful violence? (Northern Ireland Assembly 
Official Report, 3
 November, 2009, Vol.45, No.2, p.90) Politicians in both the DUP 
and UUP reacted angrily accusing Purvis of trying to rewrite history and asserting that 
it was a vicious terrorist campaign pursuing a united Ireland, which was responsible 
for the conflict and violence in Northern Ireland (Unionists at odds over cause of the 
Troubles, Irish Times, 4
 November 2009). We will come back to the issue of PUP 
support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights later in this thesis.  
Secondly, unionists may consider the UK Governments response to the NIHRC 
advice and the shift in the position of the former NIHRC Chief Commissioner, Brice 
Dickson on a Bill of Rights as a vindication of their position on the particular 
circumstances debate. As the NIOs document for public consultation states, The 
Governments initial assessment is that over half of the rights proposed in the 
NIHRCs advice are equally as relevant to the people of England, Scotland and Wales 
as they are to the people of Northern Ireland (A Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland? 
Next steps, 2009, 17). Similarly, the evolution in the position of Brice Dickson, 
former Chief Commissioner of the NIHRC who presided over the initial public 
consultations on a Bill of Rights and was responsible for endorsing a maximalist 
interpretation of the NIHRCs remit, might also lead unionists to consider their 
position vindicated. In evidence to a Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee 
investigation in 2009 on a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, he stated,  
I have come to believe that the significance of having a broad  based Bill of Rights in Northern 
Ireland is just not as great as I once imagined it to be. I emphasise that I still want human rights to 
be very well protected in Northern Ireland and that I think a Bill of Rights should be put in place to 
help secure that protection; its just that I do not think the Bill of Rights needs to be the all singing 
all dancing variety that has been argued for by the Commission up to now 
(http://www.parliament.thestationeroffice.co.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmniaf/memo/billofrights/u
cm0202.htm). 
Indeed, this point was reinforced to the author in an interview with Professor Dickson, 
who stressed that,  
This is why Ive said recently that the debate on a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland has focussed 
on form far too much rather than on substance. It doesnt really matter whether its an Act of 
Parliament, an Act of the Assembly, a UK wide Bill or a Northern Irish Bill or an entrenched Bill as 
long as it provides decent protecting for rights, it doesnt matter how its done. (Interview with 
Professor Brice Dickson, 11
June, 2009) 
Thirdly, this thesis argues that, as the Cadogan group predicted, the Bill of Rights 
process in Northern Ireland has suffered from a phenomenon political philosophers 
have been acutely aware of since the explosion of the use of human rights discourse 
over the past fifty years: the issue of rights inflation  where desirable outcomes and 
desirable individual needs and interests have been confused and asserted as rights. We 
considered theoretical perspectives on this issue in chapter one and at this point it is 
useful to explore this issue in more detail. This problem has manifested itself at two 
levels; firstly, at a broader level, in the inflation of the original mandate given by the 
Agreement to the Human Rights Commission to consult and advise on the scope and 
content of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. The NIHRC has consistently interpreted 
their mandate under the Belfast Agreement in a maximalist and expansive fashion 
meaning that a wide range of additional civil, political, socio  economic and 
environmental rights have been proposed for inclusion in a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights. Therefore, once the Commissions mandate became inflated, the likelihood of 
rights inflation in a Bill of Rights increased. Indeed, the debate in Northern Ireland 
about the precise meaning of the phrase particular circumstances is, arguably, a 
logical consequence of the elasticity and indeterminateness of the concept of human 
rights itself. If there are no limits to what human rights are in theory then the risk is 
that there are no limits to what human rights are in practice. This leads to the second 
way in which the problem of rights inflation has manifested itself; at the level of the 
specific rights proposed for inclusion in a Bill of Rights. The NIHRC advice to the 
UK Government proposed the inclusion of twenty seven substantive rights in a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. Some of the proposed rights contained more 
provisions than others and broadly speaking each of the twenty seven substantive 
rights proposed maintains the existing human rights protection provided by the ECHR 
and the Human Rights Act (HRA) whilst doing two additional things. Firstly, the 
NIHRC proposes the inclusion of certain ECHR protocols that the HRA did not 
incorporate into domestic UK law. For example, the NIHRC propose the inclusion of 
the fourth protocol, article 1 ECHR, which states, No one shall be deprived of his 
liberty merely on the ground of the inability to fulfil a contractual obligation 
(NIHRC, p24) and the fourth protocol (parts 1 & 2) of Article 2 ECHR, which states 
that,  
1. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right to 
liberty of movement and freedom to choose his residence. 
4. The rights set forth in paragraph 1 may also be subject, in particular areas, to restrictions imposed 
in accordance with law and justified by the public interest in a democratic society (NIHRC, p39). 
Secondly, the NIHRC advice proposes the incorporation of twelve (from a total of 
twenty  seven) substantive rights with forty two provisions that are supplementary to 
both the ECHR and the HRA lending weight to unionist claims that the NIHRC have 
engaged in a process of re  writing the ECHR. However, whilst the Agreement does 
make reference to rights supplemental to the ECHR, mindful of the particular 
circumstances of Northern Ireland, arguably only three of these substantive rights 
could legitimately be considered as being constitutive of the particular circumstances 
of Northern Ireland and reflective of the principles of mutual respect and parity of 
esteem; the right to identity and culture, language rights and the right to civil and 
administrative justice. In the categories of rights already protected by the ECHR and 
HRA the NIHRC propose a further thirty three provisions supplementary to the 
content of those rights as defined by the ECHR. Out of the twelve substantive rights 
proposed for inclusion in a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights additional to the existing 
protections offered by the ECHR and HRA by the NIHRC, seven would be located 
firmly within the tradition of second and third generation socio  economic and 
solidarity rights: the right to health; the right to an adequate standard of living; the 
right to accommodation; the right to work; environmental rights and childrens rights. 
The values articulated by these rights are highly desirable political objectives to be 
pursued and could legitimately be considered as important ethical considerations that 
a democratic polity might seek to protect but it is questionable whether they are the 
specific categories of rights the Agreement envisaged when it made reference to the 
particular circumstances of Northern Ireland. Daphne Trimble argues that it is 
inconceivable that the process of fulfilling the statutory duty contained in section 69 
of the Northern Ireland Act to advise the Secretary of State on a Northern Ireland Bill 
of Rights should be used to propose a range of socio economic rights, 
There are some basic human rights within the socio  economic framework which arent 
encapsulated in the ECHR. Now, there will have been reasons why they werentbut I dont think 
it was for us to suddenly move from what is there into this whole new area for which there may be 
some legitimate rights based arguments for having but that is for a different forum, not this piece of 
work (Interview with Daphne Trimble, May 20
 2009). 
For example, the NIHRC propose that a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights include a 
right to an adequate standard of living defined by the NIRHC as,   
1. Everyone has the right to an adequate standard of living sufficient for that person and their 
dependents. Public authorities must take all appropriate measures, including legislative measures, to 
the maximum of their available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full realisation 
of this right. 
2. No one shall be allowed to fall into destitution (NIHRC, 2008, p46). 
The intention of a statement of human rights like this is in many ways understandable. 
Seeking to encapsulate a profound concern for social solidarity and express the 
desirability of some mechanism for distributive social justice is a highly desirable 
moral and political objective but does it serve the purposes of advancing social justice 
within society well to have these values expressed as rights? If this question is 
answered in the affirmative, then a further question could be stated  is it appropriate, 
if these values are expressed as rights, that they are incorporated in a constitutionally 
entrenched Bill of Rights? Similarly the NIHRC propose that a future Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights include a right to work reflecting article 23.1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), which states that, everyone has the right to 
work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to 
protection against unemployment. However, the NIHRC advice further defines the 
right to work as,  
2. Everyone has the right to enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work irrespective of the 
status of the worker, including: 
a) Remuneration which provides all workers, as a minimum with: 
i. fair wages and equal remuneration for work of equal value without distinction of any kind, in 
particular, women being guaranteed conditions of work not inferior to those enjoyed by men, with 
equal pay for equal work; 
ii. Decent living for themselves and their families; 
b) Safe and healthy working conditions; 
c) freedom from all forms of unfair discrimination and from harassment including taking all 
appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in the field of employment, 
including on the grounds of pregnancy or maternity; 
d) Rest, leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay, as well 
as remuneration for public holidays. 
3. Workers have the right to strike and the right to engage in collective bargaining. 
4. Everyone with caring responsibilities has the right to appropriate respite from those 
responsibilities. Public authorities must take all appropriate measures, including legislative 
measures, to the maximum of their available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the 
full realisation of this right (NIHRC, 2008, p48). 
The values of fairness and equality expressed by this right are ethically and politically 
desirable statements to be expressed but, as Griffin warns, there is no inference from 
something being a matter of justice or fairness to it being a matter of human rights 
(Griffin, 2008, p.198). There are a range of welfare and employment entitlements that 
are provided for in statutory form in the UK. Is it helpful to conceive of these 
entitlements as rights? In the circumstance of the proposed right to an adequate 
standard of living it is, prima facie, the Government, which is identified as the 
correlative agent for delivering the obligations required by this right but is that really 
the case? Can the Government fulfil the vast range of correlative obligations required 
to make these rights effective, especially in the global economic context in which 
Governments must make decisions about resources? Furthermore, how can one 
measure the sheer diffuse and competing correlative obligations of a right to be 
protected from falling into destitution? Unionists are not necessarily opposed to the 
existence of socio  economic rights in ordinary legislation but do not wish to see 
them enshrined in a legally enforceable constitutional Bill of Rights. This point has 
been reinforced by the UUP human rights spokesman Dermot Nesbitt,   
unionism sees the need for a bill of rights; unionism is not opposed to rights. I believe that people 
should have economic and social rights. Unionisms position does not mean that it is opposed to 
rights; it is notI agree that economic and social rights should be protected, but that is different 
from saying that it must be done through the bill of rights. I draw that distinction, but other parties 
have not, and some of their phraseology has been mischievous, as they have interpreted particular 
circumstances as meaning any particular circumstances. (Committee on the Preparation for 
Government minutes, 11
 August 2006) 
Indeed, when the issue of socio  economic rights was discussed in the Bill of Rights 
Forum the UUP stressed that they would be prepared to compromise and accept a non 
 justiciable charter of socio  economic rights,  
The UUPs position is that, where appropriate, economic and social (E&S) rights should be 
provided for in legislation. The report as drafted limits the options open to the Assembly and 
Westminster. The partys view on the inappropriateness of entrenching E&S rights reflects broad 
political opinion across the UK. An alternative acceptable to the UUP would be a nonjusticiable 
Charter of E&S rights (as in Canada) (Minutes of the 14
 meeting of the Bill of Rights Forum, 14
March 2008). 
(3) Impact on equal citizenship within the UK 
As we saw in the previous chapter when looking at unionist responses to the 
protection of rights before the Belfast Agreement there was, albeit qualified, support 
for the concept of a Bill of Rights and often in unionist narratives about human rights 
in Northern Ireland influential strands of unionist opinion have framed their support 
for the idea of a Bill of Rights with an appeal to UK constitutional history and the 
1689 Bill of Rights. For one DUP MLA, Nelson McCausland this forms an important 
strand of the unionist narrative about human rights in Northern Ireland, I would look 
back to the Bill of Rights of the Glorious Revolution. There are things in our history 
which show recognition of rights (Interview with Nelson McCausland 8
 October 
2009). This point was reinforced by the DUP MLA Michelle McIlveen who argued in 
an Assembly debate that,  
Throughout history, those of the unionist tradition have had no difficulties with the issue of human 
rights in general; we need only look at the Bill of Rights, which was enacted in 1689 as a result of 
the activities of King James II. That piece of legislation is so good that the Republic of Ireland 
decided to retain it under the Statute Law Revision Act 2007. Indeed, it remains in force in the 
United Kingdom. In fact, it formed the basis of that most vaunted piece of legislation, the US Bill 
of Rights, which was produced in 1789  
(http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3 
Similarly, as one Orange Order representative argued, Orangeisms commitment to a 
Bill of Rights is,  
An ideological commitment to human rights. One of the founding principles of orangeism is civil 
and religious liberty. We have some banners that show a British Crown and a Bill of RightsIn 
that sense to me the Orange Order should stand up for human rights. The protection of human rights 
and liberties is a natural corner for the Orange Order to be in (Interview with Drew Nelson 10
August 2009) 
Alongside this appeal by some unionists to the tradition of rights and liberty 
expressed in British constitutionalism, strands of unionist opinion have expressed 
anxiety that proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights pose a threat to the 
constitutional integrity of Northern Irelands place in the United Kingdom and the 
impact that a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights will have on equal citizenship within the 
UK. As the former UKUP Leader Robert McCartney puts it, the concept of 
provincial human rights violates two basic principles. First, there is the equality of 
citizenship. The rights and duties of all citizens in the United Kingdom should be 
equal. (NI Assembly, Tuesday 25
 September 2001) Whilst this concern has been 
expressed by both the DUP and UUP, the argument is much more prevalent in 
responses from organisations within the unionist community such as the Orange 
Order and Ulster Human Rights Watch, an explicitly unionist human rights 
organisation and political parties such as the Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV) 
through their leader Jim Allister, who argues that, 
fundamentally my view on a Bill of Rights is much like my unionism. I take the view that were 
unionists and therefore we shouldnt be terribly excited or side tracked by devolution of either 
Government or of rights. (Interview with Jim Allister, 30
 June 2009) 
The report conducted by the Bill of Rights Forums unionist outreach worker, Joe 
Law, neatly encapsulated the feeling of unionist communities he engaged with,  
Most groups and individuals I met expressed deep suspicion and apprehension regarding the need 
for a separate Bill of Rights for NI. They are not convinced by the argument of special 
circumstances for NI. (Final Report of Bill of Rights Forum, Outreach to Unionist communities, 
March 2008) 
An important element, therefore, of this part of unionist narratives about a Bill of 
Rights is a profound concern that it would contribute further to the erosion of British 
identity in Northern Ireland. It also rejects the idea that there should be a separate Bill 
of Rights for Northern Ireland. As one representative from Ulster Human Rights 
Watch  an organisation created post 1998 to promote the interests of victims rights 
within the unionist community  put it,  
We dont need a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. If there is going to be a Bill of Rights, it needs 
to be for the UK of which we would be an integral part (Interview with Bertie Campbell, Ulster 
Human Rights Watch, 16
 October, 2009). 
Indeed in Allisters view, the whole genesis of the idea of a separate Bill of Rights 
for Northern Ireland is quite an anti  unionist proposition designed to make us 
distinct from elsewhere in the UK. (Interview with Jim Allister, 30
 June 2009) 
Allister claims that a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland is used by Nationalism as a 
political weapon to dilute our Britishness (interview with Jim Allister, 30
2009). Allister also argues the Bill of Rights process for Northern Ireland is 
a means to drive a further wedge between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK because a 
parallel process is intended for the Irish Republic, it is part of the all  island harmonisation which 
is the means to the end of Irish unification. (Jim Allister, TUV press release, 3
 January 2008) 
This concern is also shared by representatives of the Orange Order and the DUP. 
Drew Nelson, Grand Secretary of the Orange Order, has claimed that the issue of a 
separate Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland was one of the major concerns raised 
internally by members of the institution. Nelson argued that he was not sure if, a 
specific Bill of Rights was needed for Northern Ireland because we have the human 
rights act.(Interview with Drew Nelson, 10
 August 2009)  
Or as the DUP MLA Peter Weir puts it, 
 there is a British dimension here which was if there is an argument to be made about things that 
should be in a British Bill of Rights certainly as unionists we would be deeply uncomfortable with 
actions that would in a very clear way direct society here away from the rest of the UK (Interview 
with Peter Weir MLA, 3
 July 2009). 
Other key media and religious institutions within unionism have also expressed 
concern about the impact a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights would have accusing a 
political agenda inimical to unionist interests of driving the debate forward. As a 
Newsletter editorial from 2
 January 2008 stated, 
.there is most certainly a political agenda driving this matter forward for when viewed in a 
United Kingdom scenario why there is a need for such a Bill when citizens here are fully protected 
by existing British and European human rights laws. (Newsletter editorial, 2
 January 2008) 
This response from the Newsletter was in reply to an editorial that appeared in the 
Church of Ireland Gazette arguing that Northern Ireland did not need a separate Bill 
of Rights from the rest of the UK,  
It is obvious that there are those in the Stormont establishment who want a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland, as opposed to the UK as a whole, because they want Northern Ireland to relate 
more closely to the Republic of Ireland than to the rest of the UK. That is an undemocratic and 
therefore unacceptable agenda. A bill of rights is such a foundational document that if there has to 
be one it should refer to the entire UK; it would be inconsistent for there to be different fundamental 
rights in different parts of the one country. (Church of Ireland Gazette, 28
 December, 2009)  
(4) Transfer of power from the legislature to the judiciary 
It is possible to locate the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights debate within the wider 
context of debates, which have taken place elsewhere in the common law world in 
countries with similar legal, political and constitutional traditions to the UK about the 
constitutional protection of human rights. In those countries such as Canada, Australia 
and New Zealand vigorous debate has taken place about the utility of constitutionally 
entrenched rights expressed as a profound concern about the potential under a Bill of 
Rights for decisions over public policy to transfer from the legislature to the judiciary. 
Until the Human Rights Act (hereinafter referred to as the HRA) came into force in 
2000, the UK was in Colm OCinneide words (2008), a partial exception to trends 
in other countries in Europe and in other countries such as New Zealand and Canada 
which have similar legal, constitutional and political traditions to the UK. 
Traditionally, until the advent of the Human Rights Act (HRA) the protection of 
rights and the expansion of the realm of individual freedom was realised in the UK 
constitutional tradition through the legislature and not through the judiciary. As 
OCinneide points out fundamental rights have historically been governed by 
political, not legal processes (OCinneide, 2008, p.159). The British experience of 
rights protection prior to the Human Rights Act was very much based on a Diceyean 
notion of negative liberty where citizens fundamental rights and liberties are best 
protected, defined and decided on through the legislative process, not by handing 
power over this area to the judiciary and unelected judges. The debate on a Bill of 
Rights for the UK gained momentum with the incorporation of the idea into Labour 
Party policy (Mandelson & Liddle, 1996) and with the election of a Labour 
Government in 1997 that were determined to bring British exceptionalism to an end in 
terms of the constitutional protection of rights. Analysis of the British constitutional 
tradition  what one commentator has referred to as pragmatic empiricism 
(McCrudden 2004)  has always taken place through the prism of political 
constitutionalism and the twin pillars of Dicyean constitutional thought: legislative 
supremacy and the rule of law. Because the sovereignty of Parliament has been one of 
the guiding theoretical underpinnings of the British constitutional tradition when it 
came to incorporation of the Human Rights Act how the Act would reconcile the 
judicial interpretation of the Act, through the new power given to the UK courts to 
issue declarations of incompatibility, with Parliamentary sovereignty was always 
going to be a matter of controversy.  
In chapter one, we introduced a number of theoretical perspectives on this debate. In 
particular, we highlighted how there was a growing body of academic literature, 
which gave theoretical and philosophical expression to the court sceptic position 
adopted by a number of political and academic actors in these countries. Through the 
public discourse of unionist politicians, Northern Ireland is one such place where 
court sceptic arguments have emerged as a central feature of unionist narratives in 
the post Agreement period about the protection of human rights in Northern Ireland. 
Court sceptic arguments, within unionist discourses on rights, tend to be advanced 
by key unionist political actors and not by other influential strands of unionist 
opinion. This view is encapsulated by the UUP Deputy Leader Danny Kennedy MLA, 
who in a contribution to an Assembly debate on the NIHRC proposals stated that,  
The agreement mandated the commission to engage in a modest task, not one of industrial 
proportions. The commission was merely invited to consult and advise on the scope for 
supplementary rights, nothing more. It was not mandated to devise a new bill of rights or to change 
our socio-economic context through the creation of numerous new rights; it was merely mandated 
to examine the scope for rights supplementary to the European Convention on Human Rights. Quite 
how we got from that very modest, realistic task to a 189-page document from the Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission that proposes to hand over significant sections of public policy to the 
courts  taking them from democratically elected representatives  is something of a mystery (3
November 2009, vol. 45, No 2, p 79  80)  
Some may view this as a cynical attempt to ensure power remains with elected 
politicians but that would deny the significant role court sceptic arguments have 
played in other jurisdictions. Court sceptic arguments began to play a central role 
within unionist discourses about the Bill of Rights during the time of the Bill of 
Rights Forum when unionist responses to the Bill of Rights process assumed an 
intellectual intelligibility and ideological coherence which previously was missing 
and which have remained central to unionist discourses since. This is not to say that 
there were not suggestions earlier on in the process that unionist were beginning to 
think along these lines. When the Northern Ireland Assembly debated the NIHRCs 
draft Bill of Rights in September 2001, concern was expressed by only one unionist 
representative, Esmond Birnie MLA, 
Every Member should pause before endorsing the commission's maximalist interpretation of human 
rights. A maximalist human rights culture is in danger of eclipsing this institution. Under direct 
rule, limited democratic accountability lasted for too long. The intervention of a massive bill of 
rights into all areas of policy-making would imply that judges would have decision-making powers 
that would otherwise rightly rest with this democratically accountable body. (NI Assembly debate, 
 September 2001) 
Furthermore, when a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights was debated in the Northern 
Ireland Forum for Political dialogue in September 1997 all the elected representatives 
from the unionist parties expressed their support for the general idea of a Bill of 
Rights and where scepticism was expressed, it was not on the basis of court sceptic 
arguments except for one Member, UUP East Londonderry David Brewster, who 
argued,  
Any judge worth his salt will realise that he has an opportunity to change this society for ever with 
his decisionsthe difference between a Bill of Rights for whose application a judge is responsible 
and what we have at present is that, for better or for worse, rights and responsibilities are laid down 
by Parliament, and any one of us can be elected to Parliament regardless of class, creed, trade or 
ability. We should be very loath to give more power to what, in effect, is ultimately a quango 
without counterbalancing it. This is why my support for the motion can only be lukewarm (Official 
Record of the Northern Ireland Forum, 19
 September, 1997). 
Since the Bill of Rights Forum began its deliberations, court sceptic arguments have 
become prevalent within unionist discourses about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
compared to earlier parts of the Bill of Rights consultation process. When the 
Northern Ireland Assembly debated the recommendations of the Bill of Rights Forum 
in April 2008 it was evident that court sceptic arguments were being used by both 
Unionist parties to express concern about the Forums recommendations. During the 
debate UUP MLA Roy Beggs Jnr explained that he was,  
Surprised that the group adopted such a maximalist approach. When I, as a member of the 
politicians grouping within the forum, expressed my concern that attempts were being made to 
take decision-making away from the political process and to create a legal or courtroom-based 
decision-making process, I was ignored (Northern Ireland Assembly official record 8 April 2008 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2008/080408.htm#4). 
Similarly DUP MLA Nelson McCausland argued that, 
Power, particularly over social and economic matters, must not be transferred from democratically 
elected representatives to the courts. The role of the courts is to interpret and apply law but not to 
make it The maximalist approach that was taken would, if implemented, disempower the 
democratic process. I fear that decisions would be made in the courts rather than in the Assembly 
and Parliament (Northern Ireland Assembly official record 8 April 2008). 
The use of court sceptic arguments within unionist discourses on a Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights are very much a response to the inflation of the phrase particular 
circumstances by both the NIHRC and the Bill of Rights Forum and a concern that if 
acted upon the NIHRC proposals would see power over these matters transfer from 
the legislature to the judiciary. As the DUP MLA Simon Hamilton argued,  
It should be in the domain of the Assembly, not the courts, to direct where our limited resources go. 
At times, I might have an argument with the Health Minister about his use of resources, but neither 
he nor any other Member would disagree that we all want the highest attainable standard of health 
for the citizens of Northern Ireland. However, I believe passionately that the decisions on where 
limited resources should go should lie with the Assembly and with other elected institutions; it 
should not be in the domain of unelected judges to make up laws and spend resources from the 
bench. I would oppose that very strongly (Tuesday 3
 November vol. 45, No 2, p 86)  
Daphne Trimbles opposition in her note of dissent to the NIHRC proposals was very 
heavily influenced by court sceptic arguments. Trimble was particularly concerned 
about the expansive ideas the NIHRC report contained on rules about locus standi, 
which refers to an individual or groups ability to bring a case to the courts. The 
proposals contained in the NIHRC report state that,  
1. Any person or body who has a sufficient interest in the matter may bring legal proceedings 
claiming that a public authority has acted incompatibly with a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. 
2. The question of whether a person or body has a sufficient interest will be determined having 
regard to the need to ensure access to justice. (NIHRC, 2008, p.154) 
Trimble argued that such expansive rules on who could bring a case to court under the 
Bill of Rights represented an attack on our democracy and would take so much 
power away from the political process and put it into the hands of our judiciary 
(Interview with Daphne Trimble, 20
 May 2009). According to Trimble this profound 
concern about the potential transfer of power that would take place from the 
legislature to the courts if these rules were enacted was the defining issue, which 
tipped her against the NIHRC proposals. As Trimble argued,  
That just widens the whole thing up so much so that any and every NGO who receives their funding 
from Atlantic Philanthropies or whatever will be able to go to a judge and say my little interest 
group in North Belfast or West Belfast who doesnt think their housing is adequate will be able to 
go to the court and seek a remedy. It will take so much power away from the political process and 
put it into the hands of our judiciary. For me, once I realised that was going to happen I felt that was 
the point at which I could no longer even look at what was being proposed in terms of individual 
rights and saying yes I could live with that one or no I cant live with that one. That was the point 
where I came to the view that I had to say no to everything (Interview with Daphne Trimble, May 
 2009). 
Unionism, because it is shaped by the British constitutional tradition in terms of its 
constitutional analysis, will arguably feel more comfortable within a discourse of 
political constitutionalism, where court sceptic arguments find their theoretical 
origins.  This discourse recognises and prioritises the sovereignty of Parliament and is 
sceptical of judicial processes for resolving matters of public policy. For Brian Crowe, 
the UUPs Policy Director and one of the partys representatives on the Forum 
framing unionist responses using court sceptic arguments plays an essential role in 
protecting unionism from claims that unionist discourses on a Bill of Rights look back 
to a sectarian past and connect unionism not just with a larger vision in the UK but in 
the rest of the common law world    
This clash of narratives regarding on the one hand courts and rights and on the other parliamentary 
experience has been replicated in other jurisdictions such as Australia and Canada where the left 
use the language of rights and courts and the right use the language of the parliamentary experience. 
So its not unique to Northern Ireland but has been reflected elsewhere. In other words it wasnt a 
sectarian debate in Northern Ireland but is part of a wider ideological debate about the British 
parliamentary experience replicated in other jurisdictions similar to ours (Interview with Dr. Brian 
Crowe, 30
 June 2010). 
Evidence of the pervasiveness of court sceptic arguments within unionist post 
Agreement discourses on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights can be found in an 
Assembly debate in March 2010 on a Sinn Fein motion criticising the British 
Government for their response to the NIHRC proposals when seven out of the eight 
unionist MLAs from the DUP and UUP who made contributions to the debate did so 
by relying partly on a court sceptic argument to express concern about handing 
powers away to judges to decide who receives what resources and when (DUP MLA, 
Simon Hamilton, Monday 1
 March, Official Record of the Northern Ireland 
Assembly, Vol 49, No1, p 42). Indeed, in one of the most explicit statements of the 
essence of court scepticism in post Agreement unionist narratives about human rights; 
DUP Leader Peter Robinson argued that he was,  
wary of an over  extensive Bill of Rights, which could usurp the role of democratically elected 
politicians and push judges into the political spotlightLet politicians make laws  even at times  
bad laws  and be accountable for them to the electorate, rather than leaving important decisions to 
those who have no democratic mandate. (Speech by First Minister, Peter Robinson MP, MLA to 
delegates at the World Bar Conference, press release, 30
 June 2008, www.dup.org.uk) 
Cleavages and convergence in Unionist responses   
The conclusion to Christopher Farringtons (2006) examination of unionism and the 
peace process returns to the issue of unity within unionism  now, in the aftermath of 
the 2010 UK General election, back on the political agenda again. This research 
shows that despite the intra unionist tensions and disagreements, which was one of the 
defining characteristics of post Agreement unionist politics, during the peace process 
and the implementation of the Belfast Agreement over issues such as power sharing, 
decommissioning and policing, there is a considerable amount of cooperation, 
cohesion and convergence between the DUP and UUP on the issue of a Bill of Rights 
for Northern Ireland. This ideological and policy convergence manifested itself in the 
close intra unionist cooperation there was on the Bill of Rights Forum and between 
the two unionist Commissioners on the NIHRC, Jonathan Bell and Daphne Trimble, 
who worked closely on a range of issues during their time on the Commission. 
Significantly, according to Dr. Brian Crowe, the cooperation between the two parties 
on the Forum was unprecedented in his experience of working for the UUP: 
Of the seven or eight years I have worked for the UUP, I have never experienced a closer degree of 
cooperation between the DUP and UUP as on this issue. I have seen nothing like it, it would be fair 
to say. The important thing is that it was not mere pragmatism, it was a shared centre right analysis 
of the significance of the British Parliamentary experience and what moving to a courts based rights 
analysis the impact that would have on our citizenship and political understanding (Interview with 
Dr. Brian Crowe, June 30
, 2010).  
On the Forum there was a constant exchange of papers, ideas and discussion of 
tactical and strategic approaches to the issues arising in the forum. Indeed, in the final 
report of the Bill of Rights Forum, one can see clear evidence of unionist convergence 
when on virtually every single recommendation proposed in the report; both the UUP 
and DUP shared the same position. As Crowe argues,  
Therefore cooperation was ideological, practical  it wasnt just that they worked together as a 
matter of convenience, there was a genuine convergence in opinion, values and 
outlookcooperation that flowed from a very quick understanding that we had a shared set of 
values and a shared ideological understanding on this issue (Interview with Dr. Brian Crowe, June 
, 2010). 
Whilst DUP responses to the Bill of Rights debate between 2001 and 2003 were 
connected to a wider DUP narrative about the failure of the Belfast Agreement and in 
particular how detrimental it had been for the unionist community, once the DUP 
found itself as the largest unionist party after the 2003 Assembly election and its 
position on the power sharing structures of the Belfast Agreement began to change, its 
narrative on human rights began to change. The narrative it previously deployed 
suggested that the maximalist interpretation the NIRHC had adopted was connected to 
the inherent failures of the Belfast Agreement. This analysis was shared by 
organisations such as Ulster Human Rights Watch, an anti agreement unionist human 
rights NGO who claimed  that a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights should be opposed by 
the unionist community because it reinforced the Belfast Agreement. This subtle shift 
in DUP thinking may be due to the fact that a number of influential thinkers in the 
UUP on this issue such as Peter Weir, Arlene Foster and Jeffrey Donaldson joined the 
DUP during this period causing a shift in the tone and emphasis away from critiques 
of a Bill of Rights connected to a critique of the Belfast Agreement.  
During the 2010 UK general election campaign, the UUP and DUP position on the 
fundamental question of whether Northern Ireland should have a Bill of Rights 
converged on the same policy measure when the DUP, in their response to the NIOs 
next steps consultation argued that they were,  
unconvinced of the necessity for a UK Bill of Rights but consider a UK Bill with a Northern 
Ireland chapter to be infinitely more appropriate than the Northern Ireland Bill envisaged by rights 
champions (DUP response to the NIO next steps consultation, March 30
, 2010).  
Prior to this policy change, the DUP, in Parliamentary and public discourse on this 
issue still, in public anyway, remained committed to an independent, stand  alone 
Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. This position was also supported by the Ulster 
Unionist Party until its electoral relationship with the Conservative Party appeared to 
cause a shift in the UUPs position from supporting a separate, distinct Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights to advocating that the issue be accommodated in a sub  section 
to a British Bill of Rights, which the conservatives had pledged to introduce to replace 
the Human Rights Act. As the Conservative Partys manifesto for the 2010 general 
election stated,  
Provision for supplementary rights for Northern Ireland was contained in the 1998 Belfast 
Agreement, though twelve years on Labour are still consulting on this. A Conservative and Unionist 
Government will not legislate for a separate bill of rights for Northern Ireland but will incorporate 
any Northern Ireland specific rights within the UK Bill of Rights. This will fulfil the obligations in 
the Belfast Agreement (2010, p 69).  
However, the extent to which the Ulster Unionist Party can claim to have had any 
influence on this significant shift in Conservative policy is minimal. It would appear 
that irrespective of the Conservatives Party electoral partnership with the Ulster 
Unionist Party, they would have arrived at this conclusion because of factors external 
to the circumstances in Northern Ireland. As the former shadow Justice Secretary and 
current UK Attorney General Dominic Grieve MP points out,   
I cant say that I havent discussed it with some Ulster unionist friends, but actually I think that the 
formation of that view, because its after all a United Kingdom Parliament to legislate on it, very 
much came internally within the conservative partyThe Belfast Agreement is distinctly silent 
about what it is that needs to be done or the way it needs to be done. What the Belfast Agreement 
said was that the parties agreed that consideration should be given to the NIHRC about what 
additional safeguards were needed to reflect the specific context of Northern Ireland additional to 
the rights in the European Convention. Now as you know whats happened, the NIHRC went off  
they took many, many years to consider the matter and they have come with an extraordinary 
ambitious set of proposals, which on the face of it the present Government have effectively rejected 
or at least have indicated that a large percentage of whats been put forward is not specific to 
Northern Ireland and goes a lot further than a UK Government would be willing to consider. We 
share that view (Interview with Dominic Grieve, April 9
, 2010). 
Whilst there is a high degree of convergence, albeit with slight differences in 
emphasis, between the DUP and UUP in terms of their respective positions on the 
issue of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, there is a strand of unionist opinion that has 
expressed very different views about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights: the Loyalist 
community and their political representatives. This divergence in opinion and 
emphasis is most apparent in the post Agreement period in responses to the Bill of 
Rights Forum report and the NIHRCs advice to the UK Secretary of State issued in 
2008. The Progressive Unionist Party provides the exception to the general rule about 
unionist engagement with the Bill of Rights debate post 1998. Indeed it is Loyalist 
organisations that since the early seventies have been the section of the unionist 
community most effusive in their support for a Bill of Rights. For the PUP, a Bill of 
Rights is an absolutely essential part of Northern Irelands future and in terms of the 
DUP and UUPs position on recent proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
they disagree with every part of their analysis. Purvis argues that when influential 
strands of unionist opinion express scepticism about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
there is little chance that non  elite and grassroots member of the unionist community 
will think any different. As Purvis puts it,  
when you have the Newsletter coming out opposed to a Bill of Rights, the Church of Ireland, the 
UUP and DUP, when you have pillars of unionist society opposed to a Bill of Rights, thats what 
people are going to read and thats what people are going to hear. (Interview with Dawn Purvis 
MLA, 11
June, 2009) 
As Graham Spencer points out however, its not just the PUP who have expressed 
support for a Bill of Rights but also the UDA and their political organisation, the 
Ulster Political Research Group, who in the their 1987 Common Sense document, as 
Spencer highlights advocated a Bill of Rights and a supreme court with powers to 
uphold constitutional law and safeguard the rights of the individual as represented in 
the Bill of Rights (Spencer, 2008, p.43). There are two significant questions worth 
considering at this point: firstly, why do Loyalist representatives, such as the PUP and 
the Ulster Political Research Group (UPRG), consider a Bill of Rights to be important 
and secondly, what are the implications of the cleavages that exist between the PUP 
and other unionist political parties for the overall findings of the thesis? Firstly, in 
many ways, the narrative of Loyalist political figures, such as Ervine and Purvis, 
about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights shares many similarities with the narrative of 
those who would advocate an expansive Bill of Rights. For example, according to 
Purvis,  
The DUPs arguments, and the basis of its opposition to human rights, rely on its blinkered view of 
the causes of the conflict in Northern Ireland. It denies that discrimination existed and that all 
working-class people, particularly Catholics, endured slums, squalor, poverty and unemployment to 
preserve the power of the political elite. ((Northern Ireland Assembly Official Report, 3
November, 2009, Vol.45, No.2, p.80 
Or, as Purvis argued earlier in that same debate in the Northern Ireland Assembly,  
The role that social and economic inequalities played in bringing about the Troubles and keeping 
them alive for more than 40 years is undeniable, and those enduring and remaining inequalities, 
including sectarianism, are the fault lines along which the potential for a return to violence sits. 
They are at the heart of the discontent, deprivation, anger and isolation that led to the conflict in the 
Province, and if they are not addressed with honesty and sincerity, they could be so again (Northern 
Ireland Assembly Official Report, 3
 November, 2009, Vol.45, No.2, p.80) 
In the same debate in the Northern Ireland Assembly, the Sinn Fein MLA Alex 
Maskey argued,  
A bill of rights should be the cornerstone of this society as we emerge from conflict. It should be a 
charter of all that we wish for the future and a crucial building block for remaking and reshaping 
society for future generations so that everyone can be treated equally in a society where there are 
strong and effective mechanisms to protect against the discrimination upon which this state was 
founded. It would be a society that recognises the right to housing, adequate healthcare, education, 
freedom from sectarian violence and fear and equality before the law. (Northern Ireland Assembly 
Official Report, 3
 November, 2009, Vol.45, No.2, p.86) 
This maximalist narrative, as we have seen, argues that a Bill of Rights is an essential 
part of dealing with the past in Northern Ireland, can be used to prevent 
discrimination against one particular community occurring in the future and can 
provide a common reference point around which society can unite. Alongside this, it 
could also argue that Loyalist support for a Bill of Rights is a legacy of the policy 
commitments made by unionism in the 1970s, particularly during the Constitutional 
Convention, to support the introduction of a Bill of Rights. However, of more 
profound significance is the fact that the shared narrative between the PUP and Sinn 
Fein on the issue of a Bill of Rights is rooted very much in a shared analysis both 
parties have of the peace process and the conflict in Northern Ireland. As Henry 
Patterson argues,  
It is little wonder that leading members of Sinn Fein have been so fulsome in their tributes to the 
late David Ervine and Dawn Purvis. For at the core of the PUP world view is the essentially self-
pitying and morally exculpatory mantra that the resort to violence by paramilitaries during the 
Troubles was an inevitable response to oppressive social and economic conditions and the sectarian 
rallying cries of politicians (Patterson, Belfast Newsletter, 11
 June, 2010). 
Furthermore, this shared narrative between the PUP and Sinn Fein has much wider 
implications for post peace process politics in Northern Ireland and can be applied to 
a much wider range of issues than just the narrow one of a Bill of Rights. For 
example, when it comes to the debate about dealing with the past in Northern Ireland, 
as Edwards and Bloomer argue, 
The so-called 'peace industry' has narrowed the gap between old foes to such an extent that only a 
cigarette paper now separates their political positions on 'dealing with the past'. Rather than using 
their position to warn future generations of the futility of violence, we are constantly being 
reminded of how these people gave up their campaigns of terror so that the rest of us could live in 
peace. (Edwards and Bloomer, Fortnight, July/August, 2010, p.11) 
Or, as Henry Patterson argues,  
With the Saville report about to be published we can be sure that the conflict over dealing with the 
past will intensify and the PUP has done nothing to challenge the dominance of republican and neo-
nationalist views on truth recoveryUnfortunately for Dawn Purvis and the PUP, despite a worthy 
commitment to improve the conditions of the worst off sections of the Protestant working class, 
they became de facto allies for the republican movements campaign to indoctrinate a new 
generation. (Patterson, Belfast Newsletter, 11
 June, 2010). 
Secondly, the implications for the overall findings of the thesis, it is argued, are not 
significantly affected by this cleavage within unionism because the shared analysis 
between the PUP and Sinn Fein about this issue and wider developments within the 
body politic in Northern Ireland is not considered to be representative of unionist 
opinion on those issues. The cleavage, therefore, takes the PUP beyond the 
mainstream of unionist opinion on human rights in Northern Ireland. As Edwards and 
Bloomer point out,  
The PUP's complicity in massaging the egos of those pushing the pro-republican narrative of 
'dealing with the past' has done injury to history, further marginalising the voices of working class 
Protestants who have borne the brunt of republican terrorism since the late 1960s. (Edwards and 
Bloomer, Fortnight, July/August, 2010) 
Its effect on the overall argument of the thesis is further diminished by the weakening 
electoral position of the PUP and serious questions about their future as a political 
party after their leader, Dawn Purvis resigned in the aftermath of the murder by the 
Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF)  the paramilitary organisation that the PUP were 
aligned with  of Bobby Moffett on the Shankill Road in Belfast in late May 2010 
(Dawn Purvis resigns as PUP leader, Irish Times, 3
 June, 2010).  
Explaining Unionist anxiety and suspicion  
To return then to the issue of why the proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, 
which during the negotiations leading to the Belfast Agreement were relatively 
uncontroversial for unionists became in the post Agreement period so controversial 
for influential strands of unionist opinion. Why, despite unionisms support for a Bill 
of Rights did key unionist elites become increasingly sceptical after 1998? This thesis 
has identified three important explanations for this shift. Firstly, the incorporation of 
the Human Rights Act 1998 and latterly the British Bill of Rights debate has reframed 
the debate about the protection of rights in Northern Ireland changing the dynamic of 
the discourse about rights protection. For unionists, it moved the debate beyond 
Northern Ireland into a wider UK context.  Incorporating the HRA was a key 
commitment of the Labour Party in their manifesto for the 1997 General Election that 
they would incorporate the ECHR into domestic UK law. This move was supported 
by both the main Unionist Parties. The UUPs manifesto for the 1997 General election 
stated that they were committed to seeing the European Convention on Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms incorporated into UK law in order to protect the basic 
civil and political rights of everyone. (UUP 1997, Secure the Union, Build your 
future) Indeed commenting on the Human Rights Act becoming law in 2000, David 
Trimble, who at that stage was First Minister in a devolved Executive, stated that,  
The core principles and values of the European Convention on Human Rights are woven into the 
fabric of the Belfast Agreement. At the heart of which is a commitment to 'mutual respect, and 'the 
civil rights and the religious liberties of everyone in the community.' The Human Rights Act 
contributes to the realisation of that commitment by incorporating the European Convention on 
Human Rights into our domestic law. Its implementation presents a challenging agenda for us all. 
In response I want to see the devolved administration embracing that challenge positively, 
recognising the benefits that it will bring for everyone in the community (OFMDFM News Release, 
October 2
, 2000). 
The passage of the Human Rights Act and significantly the strong support for its 
incorporation displayed by both Unionist parties, but in particular by the UUP, is one 
of the key reasons, paradoxically, why Unionism became increasingly sceptical and 
critical of proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, which emerged in the post 
Agreement period as unionist politicians became aware of the fact that the passage of 
the Act created a more robust framework for the protection of human rights in the UK 
that had previously existed and which citizens in Northern Ireland could use to assert 
their rights. By the time the NIHRC published their proposals in December 2008, 
support for the HRA had become so entrenched within influential strands of unionist 
opinion that Daphne Trimble, in explaining her opposition to those proposals, argued 
that she could not recommendations which advised leaving,  
The Human Rights Act to wither on the vine and that we re - enact all the current enactments of the 
Human Rights Act together with the new rights and that for all these rights we change the criteria 
for who can apply to the Court. Now I thought that was just a step too far for me (Interview with 
Daphne Trimble, May 20
 2009). 
When David Cameron, in a speech to the Centre of Policy Studies in June 2006, first 
committed the Conservative Party to repeal the HRA and replace it with a British Bill 
of Rights the UKs rights revolution was already well underway. Eight years had 
passed since the Human Rights Act (HRA) was passed in Parliament to give further 
effect to the rights enshrined the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). 
This legislation took full effect in October 2000 becoming in the words of Professor 
Vernon Bogdanor the cornerstone of the new British Constitution. (Bogdanor, 
2009, p.62) However, the Conservative Party has long had an uneasy relationship 
with the Human Rights Act and in the debates over its incorporation in the House of 
Commons Conservative MPs were amongst the most sceptical about the Labour 
Governments human rights bill. In recent times the issue of how the UK constitution 
protects human rights has returned to the political agenda. In July 2007 the Labour 
Government published a green paper on plans for further constitutional reform in the 
UK (The Governance of Britain, Cm. 7170) just after Gordon Brown became Prime 
Minister. Proposals for a British Bill of Rights and Responsibilities contained in the 
Governance of Britain were supplemented further by the publication in March 2009 
by another Green Paper (Rights and Responsibilities: developing our Constitutional 
Framework, Cm. 7577) which set out the Governments plans in more detail for a 
British Bill of Rights. In the intervening period between the two Government Green 
Papers reports were also published by Westminsters Joint Committee on Human 
Rights (A Bill of Rights for the UK, 29
 Report of the Joint Committee on Human 
Rights, Session 2007/08) and by the human rights organisation Justice (A British Bill 
of Rights: Informing the Debate, November 2007). Therefore, the discussion about a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights takes place, not in isolation but within the context of 
and reference to a wider debate taking place in the UK. Unionisms political 
representatives are aware of this changing dynamic and how it might contribute to a 
reorientation of the debate in Northern Ireland on a Bill of Rights towards the debate 
in the UK. The DUP Deputy Leader Nigel Dodds recognised this in his speech to the 
DUP annual conference in November 2009,  
no matter who the next government is, the United Kingdom will have a Bill of Rights. Ulster 
must make its full contribution to these debates and help shape the future of our national democracy 
(Speech by Nigel Dodds MP, MLA to the DUP Annual Conference, Belfast, 21 November 2009). 
However, the former NIHRC Chief Commissioner, Brice Dickson, was surprised that 
unionism did not connect with the British Bill of Rights debate sooner than it did in 
the debate about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights when it was obvious that this was 
an argument that sceptical unionist elites could pursue. Dickson argues that,  
I think unionists latched onto the idea of a British Bill of Rights quite late in the day. Even when the 
Forum was set up in December 2006, because in June 2006 Cameron had already made his speech 
about the need for a British Bill of Rights and it had always been in the Labour Party manifesto 
since 1997 that that was to be part two of their reform of human rights in the UK. But even at that 
stage it took some time for the unionists to latch on to the fact that oh theres going to be a UK Bill 
of Rights, lets plug into that debate because if we dont were going to end up with something that 
is separate for Northern Ireland and which will therefore will make Northern Ireland look like quite 
not a full part of the UK (Interview with Professor Brice Dickson, 11
June, 2009). 
This point is supported by the fact that it took unionist representatives on the Bill of 
Rights Forum, according to the minutes of the Forum, until its 12
 meeting on 8
February 2008 to actually raise the issue of the British Bill of Rights debate  almost 
two years after the debate began in Britain. According to the minutes of that meeting,  
This discussion focused on how the Forums work related to the current debate on a potential 
British/UK Bill of Rights and Duties. Dermot Nesbitt requested that this item be included on the 
agenda and also asked for two extracts that he sent to the Chair on 5 February to be recorded in the 
minutes: a statement made by Prime Minister Gordon Brown on 3 July 2007 on a British Bill of 
Rights and Duties (Hansard) and an extract from the document (Para 199 at page 59) (Minutes of 
the 12
 meeting of the Bill of Rights Forum, 8
 February 2008) 
A second reason for the shift can be found in the insistence by the NIHRC, Bill of 
Rights Forum, human rights NGOs and Irish Nationalist/Republican Parties on 
pursuing an inflated interpretation of the original mandate contained in the Belfast 
Agreement. This decision, sustained from the NIHRCs first public consultation in 
2001 through the Bill of Rights Forum to the NIHRCs advice delivered to the 
Secretary of State in December 2008 more so than any other action has contributed to 
increased unionist scepticism about a Bill of Rights. Unionists supported the idea of a 
Bill of Rights but not, as they saw it, the inflated interpretation of the NIHRC and 
other organisations. The DUP MLA Peter Weir highlights how starkly different the 
unionist interpretation of what constitutes the particular circumstances is from other 
maximalist narratives when he points out that if the DUP/UUP interpretation is 
accepted as being the remit, then immediately 80/90% of what was there in the Bill of 
Rights Forum report and NIHRC proposals becomes extremely difficult to justify 
being in there (Interview with Peter Weir, 3
 July 2009). It is not inconceivable that 
Northern Ireland could have had a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland by now if more 
efforts had have been made by the NIHRC to compromise on the issue of what 
constituted the particular circumstances. This argument was made by unionists in the 
aftermath of the NIHRCs first public consultation in 2001, was made during the Bill 
of Rights Forum and in the run up to the publication of the NIRHC recommendations 
to the Secretary of State in December 2008 yet it would appear that there was no 
significant attempt to take cognisance of Unionisms position. Indeed, Christopher 
McCrudden, in criticising the NIHRCs first public consultation in 2001 as being 
woefully under theorized (McCrudden, 2001, p.372), also warned the NIHRC that 
they had to find consensus on some of the issues which lie behind the profound 
disagreements about what should constitute the particular circumstances of Northern 
Ireland. The more a maximalist interpretation was pursued, the more sceptical key 
unionist elites became about the entire Bill of Rights process.  
As we noted earlier in the chapter the debate about the particular circumstances and 
the inflated mandate adopted by the NIHRC is, arguably, a manifestation of a deeper 
problem with human rights theory that if there are no limits to what human rights are 
in theory then the risk is that there are no limits to what human rights are in practice. 
A less benign view might suggest that with regard to the NIHRC and other civil 
society groups interpretation of the Agreements mandate on the scope for a Bill of 
Rights they constructed a narrative of what constituted the particular circumstances of 
Northern Ireland with an appeal to universal human rights. In doing so they sought to 
reconstruct Northern Ireland along the lines of a model human rights community that 
displaced the civil order of Northern Irelands body politic, the practical and the 
particular in favour of the universal. The discourse underpinning the maximalist Bill 
of Rights narrative in Northern Ireland found much support within civil society  
particularly amongst human rights NGOs in Northern Ireland such as the CAJ. 
However, why did this narrative become so pervasive in discourses of human rights in 
Northern Ireland and why was civil society so successful in advancing this agenda? In 
Northern Ireland, as a response to the dominant discourses of elite driven 
consociationalism, which broadly characterised approaches to the conflict in Northern 
Ireland, civil society discourses emerged as trade unions, business groups, community 
and voluntary organisations, human rights NGOs and other similar organisations 
began to articulate what kind of community they wanted for Northern Ireland. Paul 
Dixon has examined this debate between consociational (top down) and civil society 
(bottom up) approaches to resolving the conflict in Northern Ireland and outlines how 
a civil society narrative emerged in response to the consociational model of conflict 
resolution through advocating an extension of democracy and greater interethnic 
contact as a means for resolving conflict. (Dixon, 1997, p.3) The theory behind this 
approach advances the notion that the bottom up, civil society discourse will be 
inherently more compromising, moderate and inclined to unite disparate ethnic and 
religious groupings than their respective political representatives. Indeed, as we noted 
earlier when highlighting how human rights activists in Northern Ireland have 
challenged unionist narratives about human rights which claim there is a lack of cross 
community support for Bill of Rights by relying on opinion polls rather than electoral 
behaviour there is an apparent scepticism of traditional forms of democracy and 
robust debate over the place of traditional political parties within this discourse. As 
Dixon argues, civil society advocates therefore search for an alternative mechanism 
by which a more authentic reflection of the popular will can be obtained. (Dixon, 
1997, p.14) In Northern Ireland this anti partyism has become particularly more acute 
because of the democratic deficit that existed and the nature of the conflict. As 
Cochrane notes,  
The conflict in Northern Ireland gave rise to a polity in which normal democratic politics scarcely 
existed. Following the suspension of the devolved government in 1972, most of the day-to-day 
policy-making was in the hands of powerful civil servants and QUANGOs. The resulting 
democratic deficit meant that space opened up for the voluntary and community sector. This 
sector grew consistently in size, influence, and the scope of its responsibilities. As opportunities for 
participation in conventional political structures declined, the voluntary sector emerged as an 
alternative site for citizen activism, and there was a discernable shifting of human energies away 
from party politics and into civil society (Cochrane, 2006, p.253).  
The think tank, the Cadogan Group have supported Cochranes view arguing that,  
A significant part of the reason, we believe, can be found in the emergence of an alternative 
political class in Northern Ireland after 1972. In the absence of devolved government, following the 
removal of important powers from local government and in the absence of direct party political 
influence in national decision-making, an arena was created for professionalism to substitute for 
politics. In most cases, public administration was carried on in a spirit of remarkable equity and 
selflessness - much to the credit of those civil servants and those independents responsible for 
carrying out their duties in very difficult and often dangerous circumstances. 
However, a space was also created in which many of the normal distinctions between politics 
(ideology and advocacy) and administration (bureaucratic rationality and non-partisanship) broke 
down. This was the space in which private dreams were easily confused with public realities, in 
which it became possible to substitute what one wished for what was appropriate. The objective 
was to circumvent the obstacles of democratic politics. Fortunately, this influence was generally 
marginal and confined to the sort of political campaigning of groups like the Committee on the 
Administration of Justice (CAJ). Unfortunately, under the guise of the NIHRC, this style of 
disguised politics now threatens to invade and actually occupy the public realm. (Taking Liberties, 
Cadogan Group publication, February 2002) 
This view is also shared by the former UUP Leader David Trimble, who argues that 
the human rights community in Northern Ireland,  
 are dependent on and draw their status from things that are outside the democratic process and 
for them their future and their status and future prospects are dependent on somehow overriding the 
democratic process (Interview with Lord Trimble Thursday 28
 May 2009).  
Increasingly, politics in late modernity has been characterised by a profoundly 
disengaged citizenry who view the democratic process with scepticism and the world 
of party politics with incredulity. Hence, they are seeking alternative forms of 
political expression and in doing so have found welcome homes in the vast network of 
international and domestic civil society organisations. In the words of Costas 
Douzinas, the young people who join NGOs would have joined left  wing groups 
and campaigns a few years earlier. The quest for justice, the great motivating force of 
politics has become anti  political.  (Douzinas, 2007, p.81) Human rights NGOs 
internationally have been beneficiaries of declining citizen participation in traditional 
democratic institutions. In Northern Ireland, groups like the CAJ and the 
organisations represented by the human rights consortium have benefited in similar 
terms as Cochrane notes, those who wanted to make a contribution in the areas of 
social or economic policy during the 1970s and 1980s were often more likely to be 
attracted into NGOs rather than into political parties during this period (Cochrane, 
2006, p.256) An example of the phenomena referred to by Cochrane is found as 
Henry Patterson argues in the proposals of the recent Consultative Group on the Past 
established to produce proposals on how to deal with the legacy of conflict in 
Northern Ireland. As Patterson argues, 
The Eames Bradley groups orientation to these issues was heavily influenced by the peace and 
reconciliation industry which has grown up in Northern Ireland under more than 30 years of direct 
rule and the peace process. The place of a local political class was usurped by NGOs, community 
groups, former paramilitaries and academics. A key characteristic of this group was an ideology 
that fused in different combinations local versions of liberal theology, recycled 1960s Marxism, 
human rights absolutism and the utopian legal theory of transitional justice (Parliamentary Brief, 
February 9
, 2009 Truth and reconciliation in NI? Not much hope of either). 
In pursuing a maximalist Bill of Rights narrative the NIHRC and those within 
academia and civil society who have supported them in this pursuit and indeed the 
pervasiveness of human rights discourse in Northern Ireland appears to represent an 
attempt at the creation of a new political and legal orthodoxy in Northern Ireland 
where rights talk permeates every aspect of political discourse where political 
partisanship on this issue is presented as a neutral, objective appeal to universal 
standards of human rights. In the words of Michael Ignatieff, however,  
Human rights activism likes to portray itself as an anti  politics, in defence of universal moral 
claims designed to delegitimize political (i.e., ideological or sectarian) justifications for the abuse 
of human beings. In practice, impartiality and neutrality are just as impossible as universal and 
equal concern for everyones human rights. Human rights activism means taking sides, mobilising 
constituencies powerful enough to force abusers to stop. (Ignatieff, 2001, p.8-9)  
The problem facing the human rights community is that they, often unintentionally, 
raise expectations as to what can be legitimately achieved therefore creating a huge 
chasm between reality and utopia. Too often the human rights movement portrays 
itself as the only entity with the moral authority to act in the face of human rights 
abuses. As Professor David Kennedy has stated, perhaps most disturbingly, the 
international human rights movement often acts as if it knows what justice means, 
always and for everyone  all you need to do is adopt, implement, and interpret these 
rights. (Kennedy, 2006, p.5) In Northern Ireland there has been a systematic and 
repeated failure on the part of the NIHRC to impose limits on the boundaries of the 
attainable, particularly and most acutely in regard to a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
when as Ignatieff warns, human rights activism would be less insatiable, and less 
vulnerable to disappointment, if activists could appreciate the degree to which rights 
language itself imposes or ought to impose limits upon itself. (Ignatieff, 2001, p19)  
Thirdly, the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement meant that the issue of a 
Bill of Rights has become caught up in the type of symbolic, zero sum politics that 
has characterised other debates on issues in the peace process such as policing, 
decommissioning and power sharing. The process of implementation of the Belfast 
Agreement was met with increased hostility and disillusionment within the unionist 
community and increasingly a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland came to be viewed 
as another part of the symbolic, zero sum politics of the peace process particularly 
amongst unionists who expressed hostility about the Belfast Agreement. Drew 
Nelson, Grand Secretary of the Loyal Orange Institution encapsulates this difficulty,  
The Orange Order believes there are tremendous problems with a Bill of Rights. In fact in Northern 
Ireland society in particular any net gain by one community is seen as a net loss by the other 
community. I think its particularly difficult to construct a human rights bill for Northern Ireland 
because you would end up with a situation where two or three strands of society get what they want 
in the Bill and six or seven strands dont get what they want and you could end up making the 
situation worse (Interview with Drew Nelson, 10
 August 2009). 
Conclusion  
One of the most significant, yet virtually neglected aspects of post Agreement 
discourses about the protection of rights in Northern Ireland is how, irrespective of 
unionist suspicion of human rights discourse in Northern, the Bill of Rights process 
has helped to facilitate a profound shift in the intellectual and ideological coherence 
of unionist discourses about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. As Lee Reynolds, a 
community worker working with Protestant communities in Belfast argued,  
I think the Bill of Rights process is the only thing that has got unionists to engage with the idea of 
rights  if that hadnt have been on the agenda I dont think unionism would have had the slightest 
of discussions about rights (Interview with Lee Reynolds Wednesday 20
 May 2010). 
Despite, the fact that both Unionist parties rejected the report, which finally emerged 
from the Bill of Rights Forum, the process itself made a significant contribution to the 
development of Unionisms response to the concept of a Bill of Rights. The support 
that influential strands of unionist opinion had expressed for a Bill of Rights was often 
framed in a rhetorical, sometimes illogical and very generic fashion, whereas, the 
response of unionists from 2007 onwards displayed a coherence and intelligibility that 
is not often acknowledged. Indeed according to Crowe, unionist discourses about 
human rights during and after the Bill of Rights Forum process are one of the few 
examples of successful and convincing post Agreement  unionist political narratives,  
 If youre looking for a successful example of unionist political discourse in recent years I think its 
one of the few since the Agreement because we actually halted the Bill of Rights project. We 
showed in the Forum it didnt have cross community/cross party support to be able to proceed and 
we showed that unionism could articulate a stance that had much in common with the position of 
other centre right parties in other jurisdictions with similar traditions to the UK (Interview with Dr 
Brian Crowe, 30
 June 2010).  
There were three key drivers in this search for coherence. Firstly, for the first time in 
the history of the Bill of Rights debate in Northern Ireland specific proposals were 
being examined, which required a more nuanced and thoughtful response from 
unionist positions. Secondly, the structure of the Bill of Rights Forum forced unionist 
representatives to engage seriously with the issue because the Unionist position was 
subject to more critique and analysis than had previously been the case. Thirdly, the 
quality of both the DUP and UUP representatives on the Bill of Rights forum meant 
was of a sufficiently high standard. Both delegations consisted of lawyers, academics 
and those with public policy experience. For Crowe in the immediate post Agreement 
period in 2000 and in 2001 when the NIHRC began their first consultation, 
Unionism hadnt reached a maturity in terms of its discourse about rights at that 
stage compared to the Bill of Rights Forum (Interview with Brian Crowe, 30
2010). This point is illustrated by the failure of the UUP to even make a formal, 
written submission to the first NIHRC consultation process. As Brice Dickson, the 
former NIHRC Chief Commissioner recalls,  
 When it came to the production of the Human Rights Commissions 2001 document  the first 
draft bill of rights we were pressing and pressing the UUP to give us their advice in writing as to 
what they would like to see in that document and they never did produce it. The fact is they never 
submitted anything formally to us on a Bill of Rights (Interview with Professor Brice Dickson 11
June, 2009). 
Dickson questions the coherence and capacity of the UUP at the time to deal with 
these issues and argues that,  
The UUPs engagement was at a level that to me was confusing and not particularly helpful  
almost obstructionist. I didnt know whether it was because the persons we were dealing with didnt 
have the authority to state a position on behalf of the party as a wholeI did feel there was a lack 
of understanding and not nearly enough preparedness to engage (Interview with Professor Brice 
Dickson 11
June, 2009).  
The NIHRC since 2000, because of its statutory remit, has played an absolutely 
critical and central role in the deliberations about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. 
However, providing advice to the Secretary of State on the scope for additional rights 
in Northern Ireland has not been its only task since its inception and indeed 
unionisms relationship with the NIHRC is not defined exclusively by its role in the 
bill of rights debate but by a range of other factors that this thesis will now turn to 
address in the next chapter. 
Chapter 5 
Unionism and the Northern Ireland Human Rights 
Commission 
Introduction 
At this stage of the thesis hopefully a picture is starting to emerge of a highly 
complicated, controversial and contentious relationship between elite level political 
actors in the unionist community and human rights, both conceptually, in the claims 
of political morality rights make and institutionally in the proposals for a Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights. The controversy, anxiety and complications, which lie at the 
heart of this relationship can easily lead, as we have seen, in the previous chapters to 
an over simplistic account of what unionists think about human rights and how they 
engage with discourses of human rights in Northern Ireland. This same principle is in 
operation when it comes to considering the other primary institutional mechanism for 
protecting human rights in Northern Ireland  the Northern Ireland Human Rights 
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the NIHRC). The purpose of this chapter is to 
explore and assess the relationship between unionists and the Northern Ireland Human 
Rights Commission since its inception in 1999. Unionists represent a section of 
Northern Irish society that has expressed caution when it comes to the work of the 
NIHRC. Indeed, since the NIHRCs inception they have had a difficult relationship 
with this organisation primarily because of the position the NIHRC has taken on a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights and because of concerns they had about the 
representativeness of the Commission. Because of the prominence the Bill of Rights 
has assumed within human rights discourse in Northern Ireland and in analyses of the 
work of the Commission, it would be easy to conclude that this was the only issue 
occupying the relationship between unionism and the NIHRC. However, there are 
other ideological and practical factors underpinning this relationship. It is a central 
argument of this chapter that the difficult, uneasy relationship between unionists and 
the NIHRC has contributed significantly towards the suspicion that exists within 
unionism towards human rights discourse in Northern Ireland. This chapter will 
consider why there has been a difficult relationship through examining unionist 
responses to the work of the NIHRC, which have centred around three significant 
concerns: firstly, how representative the NIHRC is in terms of the composition of its 
Commissioners. Secondly, a perception that the NIHRC has excessively focussed on 
state violations of human rights in Northern Ireland and thirdly, a perception amongst 
key unionist actors that the NIHRC has been heavily influenced ideologically by the 
Northern Ireland civil liberties organisation the Committee on the Administration of 
Justice (CAJ).  
Context, powers and remit 
The NIHRC was in many ways the most important part of the new institutional 
architecture for the protection of human rights in Northern Ireland created by the 
Belfast Agreement. At the outset, human rights activists and academics in Northern 
Ireland invested much hope in the ability of the NIHRC to help deliver a new rights 
based approach to governance in Northern Ireland  the building of a rights culture in 
Northern Ireland to ensure that the mistakes of Northern Irelands past were not 
repeated (Livingstone, 1999 & Livingstone & Harvey, 1999). As the late human 
rights academic, Professor Stephen Livingstone argued, with the exception of the 
Policing Commission, none of the new institutions created by the Belfast Agreement 
is likely to have so many hopes focussed upon it (Livingstone, 1999, p.1465). This 
weight of expectation was always likely to cause problems for the fledgling Human 
Rights Commission both from those who had invested hope in its transformational 
possibilities and from those who adopted a more cautious and pragmatic approach to 
what the NIHRC could achieve, both in the delivery of the very grand strategic 
objectives of building a new culture of human rights in Northern Ireland and in the 
delivery of concrete, practical policy and legislative achievements. As Harvey and 
Livingstone argued, the Commission will face a need to establish its independence, 
accessibility and credibility relatively early in its life. (Harvey and Livingstone, 
1999, p.175)  
Despite the importance the NIHRC came to assume in Northern Ireland, particularly 
in the debate about a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, there has been an absence of 
much scholarly work on how the Commission operates, whether it has been an 
effective National Human Rights Institution (hereinafter referred to as NHRI) or on 
addressing some of the criticisms, which have been made by unionist politicians and 
by some human rights activists. It would appear that the central role given to the 
NIHRC by the Belfast Agreement to consult and advise the Government on the scope 
for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights and the dedication with which the NIHRC went 
about this task has obscured much of the other work the Commission has undertaken 
since its inception. To a large extent this has been reflected in the academic literature 
on human rights in Northern Ireland, which has, as we have seen, tended to focus on 
examining the development of human rights generally in Northern Ireland since the 
Agreement and on analysing and debating proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights rather than focus on the NIHRC. There have been some notable exceptions to 
this rule in the literature with some work analysing the contribution human rights 
commissions, particularly the NIHRC, can make to the protection of human rights 
(Dickson, 2003), the role the NIHRC can play in building a culture of human rights in 
Northern Ireland (Harvey, 2001), the role of the NIHRC in post Belfast Agreement 
Northern Ireland (Livingstone, 1999), the NIHRCs relationship with the Northern 
Ireland peace process (Harvey & Livingstone, 1999) and a comprehensive academic 
study analysing the effectiveness of the NIHRC as NHRI (Livingstone & Murray, 
2005). Most recently, the American academic Julie Mertus (2009) has analysed the 
NIHRC in the context of a wider comparative study of other NHRIs.  
The NIHRC derives its statutory power from section 68  72 of the Northern Ireland 
Act (NIA) 1998. The primary responsibilities of the NIHRC are, to promote 
awareness of the importance of human rights in Northern Ireland, to review existing 
law and practice and to advise government on what steps need to be taken to fully 
protect human rights in Northern Ireland. (NIHRC website, accessed 12th February 
2010) Specifically, and perhaps more significantly, this means that under section 69 
(4), the NIHRC is to advise the Northern Ireland Assembly of the compatibility of 
legislative bills with human rights. Human rights, under the legislation, does not just 
refer to the rights projected by the Human Rights Act (HRA) 1998 but the full range 
of rights protected by the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Under the 
NIA, the NIHRC also has the power to help potential litigants in bringing a claim of a 
breach of human rights before the courts and to carry out investigations into issues 
where human rights concerns arise. The NIRHC also had the job of advising the 
Secretary of State on the scope for the protection of additional rights in a Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights. In terms of the NIHRCs powers and its operation there was an 
international context to its development. The NIHRC was established at a time when 
there was an increasing global trend towards the creation of NHRIs and not long after 
a United Nations Commission on Human Rights conference in Paris, mindful of the 
need to stipulate the normative operational framework for what NHRIs should do, laid 
down a set of criteria to this end known as the Paris Principles, which were 
subsequently ratified by the UN General Assembly in 1993 (G.A. Res 48, UN. 
GAOR, 85
 meeting, U.N. Doc. A/Res/48/134, 1993).  
However, as Colin Harvey points out, the NIHRC does not operate in a legal or 
political vacuum (Harvey, 2001, p.188) but had a predecessor in Northern Ireland in 
the form of the Standing Advisory Commission on human rights (SACHR) which 
took an active role in the Northern Ireland Bill of Rights debate recommending in a 
1977 report that the ECHR be incorporated into UK domestic law as the most 
appropriate mechanism for protecting rights in Northern Ireland. The Standing 
Advisory Commission on Human Rights (SACHR) was established by section 20 of 
the Northern Ireland Constitution Act 1973 to advise the Secretary of State on the 
adequacy and effectiveness of the law for the time being in force in preventing 
discrimination on the ground of religious belief or political opinion and in providing 
redress for persons aggrieved by discrimination on either ground. However, SACHR, 
suffered from a number of institutional and political problems from its inception 
generally accepted by academic commentators (Maguire, 1981; Livingstone, 1999) to 
be around its limited and minimal mandate, insufficient powers to conduct 
investigations and assist in judicial work and inability to influence the policy and 
legislative agenda on how human rights in Northern Ireland should be better 
protected. Indeed, as successive annual reports from SACHR highlight acquiring a 
broader mandate with increased powers of investigation was a consistent demand of 
SACHR itself. In one of SACHRs final annual reports covering the period from 1996 
 1997, the chairman Michael Lavery stated in his letter to the Secretary of State,  
I would wish to raise with you the issue of SACHRs statutory remit. SACHR has since 1975, 
repeatedly raised concerns regarding its restrictive statutory remit. Members of the Commission 
consider that the content of this Annual Report alone demonstrates the usefulness of SACHRs 
advice on a comprehensive range of issues outside its statutory remit. The time is long past for this 
anomalous situation to be rectified (Michael Lavery, Chairman, SACHR, letter to the Secretary of 
State, 22
 report of SACHR, 1996-1997). 
The frustration and dissatisfaction felt by many about the lack of investigative and 
other substantial powers invested in SACHR by the Government meant that a 
significant improvement in the powers of SACHR was always going to be a litmus 
test for how human rights activists and human rights academics viewed the potential 
effectiveness of the Human Rights Commission. The powers finally given to the 
NIHRC under the NIA 1998 were a significant improvement on the situation under 
SACHR but under the NIA the door was left open for the NIHRC to receive more 
powers from the British Government as Section 69 (2) of the NIA 1998 required the 
NIHRC to make, within two years of its commencement, recommendations to the 
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland on how the NIHRC could improve its 
effectiveness. The NIHRCs report issued to the Government in February 2001 made 
twenty five recommendations calling for more powers to be granted to the NIHRC by 
the Government. Amongst these recommendations three proposals stood out. 
Recommendation 15 called on the Government to allow the NIHRC to intervene as 
interested third party in judicial cases, recommendation 24 called for the NIHRC to be 
authorised to compel the production of information during alleged human rights 
abuses whilst recommendation 5 called on the Government to make resources 
available to it to meet the growing demands on its work.  It was a constant source of 
internal tension amongst NIHRC Commissioners, appointed at the outset, like Dr Inez 
McCormack and Professor Christine Bell that the Government had not granted the 
NIHRC, as they saw it, sufficient powers. As they stated in a memorandum to 
Westminsters Joint Committee on Human Rights investigation into the work of the 
NIHRC,  
Sadly, one of the greatest obstacles to the Commission's operation has been the government's lack 
of commitment to ensuring that the Commission lives up to the vision set out in the Agreement of a 
Commission "independent of Government, with an extended and enhanced role beyond that 
currently exercised by the Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights . . . (Work of the 
NIHRC, Fourteenth Report, Joint Committee on Human Rights, 15
 July 2003)   
There appeared to be a feeling inside the NIHRC expressed most forcefully by its 
former Chief Commissioner, Professor Brice Dickson that somehow the issue of 
increased powers for the NIRHC was caught up in the zero sum politics of the peace 
process and was being used as a bargaining chip with Sinn Fein over the matter of 
IRA decommissioning and in securing further progress in the political process in 
Northern Ireland. As Brice Dickson put it in an interview in December, 2004,  
They have allowed, it seems to us, the powers of the commission to be used as one of the 
bargaining chips in the talks between the political parties. I wouldn't be surprised if the two prime 
ministers don't make some reference to the powers of the Human Rights Commission which they 
see as something they can give to Sinn Fein in return for concessions from the republican 
movement. The reality is that human rights should be above politics, and the Human Rights 
Commission needs effective powers whatever the political environment in which it is working. 
(Dickson, 2004) 
Indeed, it is easy to see why Dickson made that assertion when one considers the fact 
that when the Government agreed to grant extra powers to the NIHRC the response 
from UUP spokesman for human rights Dermot Nesbitt was to accuse the 
Government of responding yet again to the demands of the wider republican  
agenda on human rights. (Commission to get more power, Belfast Newsletter, p 9. 
November 17
 2005) The NIHRCs demand for extra powers, particularly in the areas 
of investigatory powers, was supported by two significant reports from the Joint 
Westminster Committee on Human Rights (2003) and an academic investigation 
conducted by Professor Stephen Livingstone and Dr. Rachel Murray evaluating the 
effectiveness of the NIHRC (2005). Both reports recommended that the Government 
revisit the recommendations of the NIHRCs 2001 review into its effectiveness and 
the adequacy of its powers and in the key area of the NIHRCs investigatory powers 
both Westminster Joint Committees and the Livingstone/Murray report 
recommended greater investigatory powers for the NIHRC: 
We recommend that the review of the Commission's powers should reflect the Paris Principles, and 
the powers available to the equality agencies, and should allow the Commission investigatory 
powers. We support the Commission's recommendations for amendment of the Northern Ireland 
Act to allow it to compel the production of evidence, and to have access to places of detention for 
the purposes of its investigatory functions. Such powers should not be lightly or routinely exercised. 
(Work of the NIHRC, Fourteenth Report, Joint Committee on Human Rights, pp 29, 15
2003)   
The demand for further powers, made primarily by the NIHRC itself, human rights 
NGOs such as the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) and by the 
SDLP and Sinn Fein was finally realised by the Justice and Security Act (Northern 
Ireland) 2007 (JSANI), which granted further powers to the NIHRC to enter places of 
detention and to compel individuals and agencies to give oral testimony or to produce 
documents.  
Human Rights  an anti  unionist agenda?  
If any issue came to dominate unionist discourses on the NIHRC, then it was the 
concern expressed by a range of key unionist actors that, as they perceived it, the 
NIHRC has been, since its inception, unrepresentative of society in Northern Ireland. 
Just as the debate about the interpretation of the particular circumstances became a 
foundational issue for influential strands of unionist opinion in the Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights debate so too has the issue over the composition of the NIHRC 
developed into a foundational issue for the engagement between unionists and the 
NIHRC. Indeed, in many ways the debate about the NIHRCs statutory powers, which 
we overviewed in the previous section, has been largely bypassed by unionists. But 
why is this the case? Why, when it comes to the NIHRC, have key unionist actors 
been unable to move beyond the debate about the composition of the NIHRC? An 
important issue we must consider, which is central to understanding their concerns 
about the representativeness of the NIHRC is the strongly held perception within 
unionism that the particular human rights language used by the NIHRC is inherently 
biased against unionist narrative self understandings  that discourses of human rights 
in Northern Ireland advance a Nationalist/Republican agenda in the political sphere. 
The strongly held perception that human rights are in some sense owned by the 
nationalist community in Northern Ireland was the unavoidable context in which the 
NIHRC was always going to have to operate in when it came to engagement with the 
unionist community. Broadly speaking we can consider this strongly held perception 
in three ways: historically, culturally and politically. 
Firstly, historically speaking Irish Nationalism has a long history of expressing its 
political preferences and positions during the conflict in Northern Ireland in the 
language of human rights and so historically as Mageean and OBrien have argued, 
the experience of the Nationalist community within the state of Northern Ireland was 
forcefully articulated in the language of rights as early as the beginning of the current 
conflict. (Mageean & OBrien, 1999, p.1499) Irish Nationalists have been more 
likely to appeal to universal notions of human rights than unionists have and in many 
ways there is a strong sense that when it comes to human rights history is not on 
unionisms side  that because of Irish Nationalisms historic use of the language of 
human rights in the Northern Ireland conflict human rights have come to be viewed 
by unionists as biased against unionism. Claims of discrimination, during the years of 
unionist majority rule at Stormont, go right to the very heart of Irish Nationalist and 
Republican discourses about the trajectory the conflict in Northern Ireland and whilst 
it is important to have a balance between the myopic, denials of some unionist 
politicians that discrimination even took place and the exaggerated, rhetorical claims 
expressed by some Irish Republican politicians, it is important to acknowledge that 
discrimination did take place during this period and that academic debate centres 
around the extent to which discrimination against the Catholic/Nationalist community 
in Northern Ireland took place (Dixon, 2001). It is in these claims of discrimination, 
especially with the emergence of the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland, that 
we find the origins of Irish Nationalisms use of rights language as an essential part of 
their political vocabulary as they began to use rights language to articulate their 
position. Indeed, for Drew Nelson, Grand Secretary of the Grand Orange Lodge of 
Ireland, the emergence of the civil rights movement and the historic use of rights 
language by unionisms political opponents is of central importance to understanding 
why unionists have not engaged with human rights in Northern Ireland,  
I think there is a natural disinclination within Protestant groups to engage with human rights issues, 
which is really an historic thing because of the civil rights movement and the human rights agenda 
is seen by many Protestants as a nationalist thing (Interview with Drew Nelson 10
 August 2009). 
Secondly, politically speaking, many of the difficulties and opposition the NIHRC has 
experienced within the unionist community find their origins in the strongly held 
perception that human rights is a nationalist/republican agenda (Murray, 2001) that is 
used as part of their tactical and strategic advancement in the political sphere. As the 
TUV Leader Jim Allister QC put it human rights have become seen now to be 
synonymous with nationalist advancement (Interview with Jim Allister QC 30
2009). The language of human rights has remained central to Irish Nationalist and 
Irish Republicans narratives of the peace process in Northern Ireland since they first 
began to articulate their political position in these terms in the late 1960s and 1970s. 
Irish Nationalism has, as the Northern Ireland based think tank, the Cadogan group 
have argued, persistently used the language of rights  human or civil  to forward 
what remains essentially a political case (Cadogan Group, 2002, p.4). This view is 
not just held by elite level unionist actors but also by grass roots unionist 
communities, as evidenced in this report from the Community Convention, which 
highlights comments made by a number of participants at a conference on building on 
capacity in unionist communities,   
A number of participants agreed that a view exists within the Protestant, Unionist and Loyalist 
community that the use of rights has been politicised due to a predominance of using the approach 
by the Republican/Nationalist community on issues that have been political/civil in nature. 
Participants felt that this has contributed to a lack of use of the approach within the PUL 
community... (Community Convention, Positive Voices report, p 32, November 2006)  
There is the suspicion within unionism that human rights discourse represents an 
extension of the Irish Republican struggle (McEvoy, 2003) and therefore a perception 
that if progress on human rights issues is made, that Irish Nationalists or Irish 
Republicans welcome, then this must be in some way a negative development for the 
unionist community. If, as Dermot Nesbit puts it, unionists see and hear nationalism 
always articulating it  equality and human rights: Gerry Adams used to have it in the 
same breath (Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 20
 May 2009) then they will come to 
see human rights as something which is opposed to their political position. However, 
this somewhat myopic attitude has been heavily criticised, not just by figures outside 
the unionist community who have been engaged in human rights issues but also 
within the unionist community by influential political actors. Professor, Brice 
Dickson, former NIHRC Commissioner attributes unionisms reluctance to embrace 
human rights language and discourse to a desire on the behalf of unionist politicians 
to define themselves in opposition to how Irish Nationalist politicians were framing 
the political debate. As Dickson argues,  
I was always surprised in the 1990s and since that unionist politicians here couldnt abstract 
themselves from their political position and judge issues on their own merit. They were almost 
adopting a view on human rights deliberately in opposition to the nationalists. They want to strike a 
pose in opposition to the nationalists and because they were in favour of human rights, the 
Unionists were against or were supposed to be against human rights. I think they painted 
themselves into a corner on that one and are still trying to get themselves out of it (Interview with 
Brice Dickson, 11
 June 2009). 
Dermot Nesbitt has argued against unionists adopting a fatalistic view on human 
rights language and discourse in Northern Ireland. Indeed Nesbitt is convinced that 
there is much for unionism to gain, tactically and strategically by using the language 
of human rights,  
I am very certain that the proper interpretation of the rights agenda protects unionism but will only 
protect them if they only would constantly articulate it. At times I feel Ive been a lone voice. Ive 
been there at this for 15 years. I have the feeling that when I was pushing thisUnionists believe 
this is a nationalist thing and therefore we want nothing to do with it but I take the antithesis 
viewsorry its not a nationalist thing it is something that if we would properly understand it, it is 
to the benefit of unionism and therefore you get stuck in, get down and dirty and fight your corner.  
But Of course, we have never, and this is my gripe (Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 20
 May 2009). 
Thirdly, in cultural terms we can also understand why influential strands within 
unionism strongly perceive human rights to be biased against unionist interests in the 
sense that whilst Irish Nationalism and Irish Republicanism continued to challenge 
the state in Northern Ireland and its actions using the language of human rights the 
situation within unionist political culture was somewhat different. As DUP MLA 
Arlene Foster puts it, When unionists were controlling Stormont it would have been 
something of an anathema for grassroots members of unionism to challenge the state 
with a claim for their human rights. (Fortnight, February 2003, p8) Human rights, in 
the unionist mind, therefore came to be associated with Irish Nationalisms political 
and constitutional criticism of the Northern Ireland and UK state. Indeed, as Drew 
Nelson argues, whilst Northern Ireland and other parts of the UK were under physical 
attack by physical force Irish Republicanism,  
I dont think it was possible to lead people into engaging in the human rights field whilst there was 
physical force Republicanism was rampant. Im sure many of them of thought about it sometimes 
but then just realised it wasnt possible (Interview with Drew Nelson, 10
 August 2009). 
Whilst the conditional character of Ulster Unionism has been highlighted (Miller, 
1978), it would appear that when it comes to human rights key unionist actors argue 
that to have challenged the state in these terms would be tantamount to what DUP 
MLA Peter Weir calls betrayal and the TUV Leader Jim Allister labels disloyalty: 
I think unionism would have associated itself more with the state and I suppose there was, at least 
amongst some unionists, a degree of reluctance to be too litigious particularly as regards human 
rights because I think on human rights issues for the most part that was seen as taking some degree 
of legal action either directly against the state or an organ of the state, particularly the security 
forces. I think there would have been a high level of reluctance from any unionist because they 
would have seen it to some extent as a form of betrayal. (Interview with Peter Weir MLA, Friday 
 July 2009) 
Unionists because they have an affinity with the state see taking on the state as something you dont 
really do. Taking on the state in judicial review and talking on the state about rights is not 
something you do. Especially within the context of Republicans attacking the state. There is 
something disloyal about going after the state. (Interview with Jim Allister QC 30
 June 2009) 
Furthermore, the unionist approach to matters of democracy and government was, as 
we have noted, and to a large extent still is, shaped by the Westminster model of 
constitutionalism, which traditionally eschewed a rights based approach to 
constitutional matters meaning that key unionist elites would be less inclined to use 
rights language. Therefore whilst, human rights, themselves make powerful claims of 
universality (Donnelly, 2001) it is clear that the use of human rights language in a 
specific context has very different consequences. Indeed, before one even considers 
specific matters of public policy in Northern associated with human rights such as the 
Human Rights Commission or the proposed Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, a 
problem is created by the mere invocation of rights language in political discourse 
because influential actors and grass roots communities within the unionist community 
view human rights as advancing the political agenda of Irish Nationalism and Irish 
Republicanism.  
Representativeness of the NIHRC 
To a large extent unionist concern about the composition of human rights 
commissions in Northern Ireland did not begin with the NIHRC. The seeds of doubt 
were sown by unionist politicians in their criticisms of the composition of the 
Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights (SACHR). For example, during a 
debate in the House of Commons on the new Human Rights Commission in 1998, 
unionist feeling about SACHR was demonstrable. The former Ulster Unionist Deputy 
Leader John Taylor MP criticised SACHR for lacking partiality and lacking respect 
(HC Debs 27 July vol. col. 80) within the unionist community whilst the DUP Deputy 
Leader Peter Robinson argued that,  
It is about time we had a body dealing with human rights in Northern Ireland that had some 
community balance. The Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights certainly did not have 
any community balance  it was very much weighted against the Unionist community. (HC Debs 
27 July 1998 vol col. 58) 
Writing in the Belfast Newsletter in February 1998 during the negotiations, which led 
to the Belfast Agreement the UUP Deputy Leader John Taylor argued that there was a 
credibility gap in the unionist community when it came to SACHR because of the 
imbalance in its membership,  
The Commission does not reflect Northern Ireland people and its membership is clearly biased 
against the aspirations of the greater number of people in Northern Ireland. SACHR has now lost all 
credibility due to the political/religious imbalance in its membership. (Belfast Newsletter, 3
February 1998, p 6)  
To a large extent these criticisms anticipated what was to come with the NIHRC but 
the attacks directed at SACHR were neither as personal, vociferous nor as sustained 
as the attacks on the NIHRC. However, what many unionist politicians overlooked 
was that certainly by the 1990s there were members of SACHR who were explicitly 
identified with the unionist community. From 1991 until March 1998, the former 
UUP MLA for South Down and UUP human rights spokesperson for human rights 
Dermot Nesbit and from October 1994 until June 1996, Sir Reg Empey, a future 
leader of the Ulster Unionists, both served on the Commission. Moreover, not all 
unionist politicians were critical of SACHR  indeed the former Ulster Unionist and 
then independent unionist MP for North Down, Jim Kilfedder, even supported 
SACHRs own calls for increased powers asking the Secretary of State for Northern 
Ireland in 1985 when he expects to introduce legislation to extend the scope of the 
remit of the Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights to include a broader 
range of human rights issues? (HC Deb 03 April 1985 vol 76 c638W). As we noted 
earlier unionist concern about the composition of the NIHRC is a foundational issue 
for unionists when it comes to engagement with the Commission. Indeed, if one were 
to outline the essence of the unionist position on this matter a number of things would 
be touched upon. Firstly, there is profound concern that the NIHRC Commissioners 
are not representative of wider Northern Irish society. In other words, on the NIHRC 
there is an insufficient number of Commissioners from an explicitly unionist 
background resulting in mainstream unionist views being disregarded and 
marginalised. This community imbalance therefore impacts upon the NIHRCs 
legitimacy in one section of the community in Northern Ireland. As former North 
Down MP Robert McCartney argued in comments indicative of the position adopted 
by many unionists,  
One of the disadvantages of the Human Rights Commission in Northern Ireland is the widespread 
view, which I share, that it is unbalanced, unrepresentative and has not devoted itself to the human 
rights of the entire community. Since it was instituted, and in its entire modus operandi, it has done 
nothing to obtain the support of the majority community. (Robert McCartney, Northern Ireland 
Grand Committee, Thursday 8
 February 2001) 
Secondly, this concern about community balance also manifested itself in the reaction 
of unionist leaders to the appointment in 2005 of former Womens Coalition MLA 
Professor Monica McWilliams as NIHRC Chief Commissioner. Thirdly, as we shall 
see there is a high degree of convergence between the UUP and DUP in the tone, 
content and emphasis of their criticisms of the NIHRC about how representative of 
the wider community it is. It is worth noting at the outset that the principle of having 
some form of independent statutory human rights body in Northern Ireland capable of 
providing advice to the Government on matters of human rights, promoting awareness 
of and education about human rights issues in and of itself does not appear to be 
controversial for key unionist actors. Therefore the controversy rests not with the 
principle of a body to protect human rights in Northern Ireland, but with the 
appointments to that commission and with some of the work it has undertaken.  
Under section 68 (3) of the NIA 1998, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is 
obliged, when making appointments to the Commission to ensure as far as 
practicablethat the Commissioners, as a group, are representative of the community 
in Northern Ireland. According to former UUP Leader David Trimble, unionists 
invested much hope in the statutory protection afforded by this section of the Act  
that it would help to ensure that the Commission was representative of society in 
Northern Ireland,    
We pressed for that phrase that its in the agreement about being representative of society. Duing 
the negotiations we pressed for that agreement seeing it as being a basic guarantee to ensure that the 
Commission didnt run off the rails and then one is left absolutely amazed at the behaviour of the 
Northern Ireland Office which has managed repeatedly to produce commissions that are not 
representative. It was quite a joke the first time round the first Commission had four or five 
supporters of the IRA on it and one of them we were told was treated by the officials as being 
representative of the protestant community, not the unionist community. This was just crazy. 
(Interview with Lord Trimble Thursday 28
 May 2009) 
The first NIHRC met on 1
 March 1999 under the stewardship of Chief 
Commissioner, Professor Brice Dickson. In terms of compliance with the UNs Paris 
Principles for the effective operation of NHRIs, Professor Dicksons credentials were 
impeccable. In many ways, he was the quintessential candidate for the position  an 
academic human rights lawyer with a long history of outstanding human rights 
scholarship and advocacy in Northern Ireland as a Professor of Law at the University 
of Ulster and as a founding member of the Committee on the Administration of 
Justice (CAJ). Indeed it was his background in the CAJ that very much shaped and 
informed his advocacy of human rights based arguments in Northern Ireland and 
which ultimately, as we shall come to see, caused much unease amongst unionist 
politicians in Northern Ireland. As Dickson effusively stated during a speech on 
human rights in London,  
It would not be fair to complete this survey of recent developments without paying tribute to the 
foremost civil liberties organisation in Northern Ireland - the CAJ. Although stubbornly 
misunderstood in some quarters - and unfairly maligned on occasions - the CAJ has fully deserved 
the recent award of the Council of Europe's Human Rights Prize. Its professional approach to issues 
and its unbending adherence to international principles have rightly brought it much praise and 
gratitude from governments, political parties, community and voluntary organisations and 
individuals. The dynamism of the CAJ played a crucial role in ensuring that human rights formed a 
central part of the 1998 peace settlement. (Dickson, 2000, Paul Sieghart Memorial Lecture) 
The NIA 1998 did not specify how many part time Commissioners there were to be 
appointed, unlike the Equality Commission, which the Act recommended had 
between 14 and 20 members. Initially there were nine part time Commissioners 
appointed by the then Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Mo Mowlam MP. In 
terms of gender and religious breakdown the first Commission (hereinafter referred to 
as the Dickson Commission) comprised five women and five men and six of the first 
Commissioners were from a perceived Protestant background and four from a 
perceived Catholic background. However, herein lies one of the first difficulties 
unionism had with the Dickson Commission. Unionisms problem was not with the 
religious composition of the NIHRC but with the fact that as unionist leaders 
perceived it, the Commissioners were insufficiently identifiable with the unionist 
community  that whilst they would be nominally Protestant for the purposes of an 
equality monitoring form it did not necessarily follow that they were representative of 
the unionist community at large.  According to Dr Steven King, a former advisor to 
UUP Leader David Trimble, the UUP took umbrage because while it was technically 
representative in terms of religion it was as far as we were concerned, in no way 
representative politically. (Interview with Dr Steven King as recorded in Livingstone 
and Murray, 2005, p.40) In line with the Paris Principles Members of Parliament and 
politicians can be appointed as members of NHRIs but in Northern Ireland this was a 
matter of controversy when it came to composition of the NIHRC. Indeed, it would 
appear that the controversy over political appointments was limited to the NIHRC. 
For example, the Policing Board has set aside 10 out of 19 places for political 
representatives as of right. However, Livingstone and Murrays 2005 report argued 
against following the precedent set by the Policing Board of giving elected 
representatives a place on the NIHRC as of right. Whilst MLAs and MPs cannot 
apply to be members of the NIHRC, local Councillors and members of the House of 
Lords can. At the present moment there are two Councillors on the NIHRC  one 
from the SDLP and one from the Alliance Party, which according to the Chief 
Commissioner Monica McWilliams is a positive benefit to the work of the NIHRC,  
I welcome the input from several of our Commissioners who are also local Councillors because 
they bring a practicality of lifes experience to the table. They are very thoughtful and insightful 
people because they have been around a few corners in Northern Ireland politics. (Interview with 
Professor Monica McWilliams, September 16
 2009) 
However, as the Joint Committee on Human Rights at Westminster, who examined 
the work of the NIHRC, in a 2003 report, stated the shortcomings of the numbers 
game approach to considering NIHRC appointments is that it is extremely difficult to 
please both sides of the community when it comes to the issue of community balance 
and that those who argue that the NIHRC is insufficiently representative of the 
community, either in the traditional unionist, nationalist divide or that is 
unrepresentative in the sense of age, gender, disability or ethnicity must remember 
that the legislation stipulates that the NIHRC be representative so far as practicable. 
A number of submissions to that inquiry from leading human rights NGOs involved 
in human rights campaigning and advocacy in Northern Ireland such as the CAJ, 
British Irish Rights Watch and Amnesty International to that Westminster inquiry, 
however, argued that experience and knowledge of human rights law and advocacy 
should be the overriding criteria for NIHRC appointments,  
Recent appointments to the Commission have appeared to have been made in reaction to political 
pressure and to have moved away from the principle that, while the composition of the Commission 
should reflect the community that it serves, its members should be selected first and foremost 
because of their knowledge of and commitment to human rights, rather than for any political 
reason. (British Irish Rights Watch submission to JCHR inquiry on the work of the NIHRC, 
Fourteenth Report, 2002  2003) 
Professor McWilliams concurred that she receives many complaints from NGOs in 
Northern Ireland about the excessive focus put on ensuring that the NIHRC is 
representative politically. As she argued, We get a lot of NGOs saying to us that they 
are sick to the teeth of political parties dominating these bodies. (Interview with 
Professor Monica McWilliams, September 16
 2009) She also raised the problem of 
political interference in the work of the NIHRC through Commissioners who have 
party political affiliations when human rights commissions are supposed to be 
apolitical and above and independent from the political arena,  
Equally I think its really important that the individuals sitting on the Commissions dont get phone 
calls from political parties telling them what there supposed to do on those bodies otherwise there is 
a severe danger of the democratic system breaking because politicians do what politicians are 
supposed to do. Human Rights commissions are supposed to be apolitical and having a diversity of 
opinion around the table is the importance of it being representative but then not having the position 
of the party being the only position being offered at the table. (Interview with Professor Monica 
McWilliams, September 16
 2009) 
By the time of the JCHR enquiry into the work of the NIHRC, the Government had 
begun to take steps to address unionist concerns about the NIHRCs composition 
through the appointment in 2001 of Dr Chris McGimpsey, a UUP Councillor in West 
Belfast and high profile progressive, liberal unionist, strong supporter of the Belfast 
Agreement. As we noted earlier, McGimpsey came to public prominence in 1990 
through his challenge along with his brother Michael, also a UUP Councillor and 
future MLA and Minister in the Northern Ireland Executive, to articles 2 & 3 of the 
Irish Constitution in the Irish Supreme Court. McGimpsey was the first obvious party 
political appointee to the Commission and whereas his appointment was welcomed by 
the UUP, unionists who opposed the Belfast Agreement were more cautious about his 
appointment whilst Sinn Feins then human rights spokesman Pat McNamee, 
criticised the Government for appointing someone with no track record on rights 
issues and that his background was likely to alienate Nationalists and Republicans in 
Northern Ireland from the NIHRCs work,  
Chris McGimpsey, in particular, with his membership of the Orange Order faces some challenge in 
convincing the people of the Springfield Road in West Belfast or the Garvaghy Road in Portadown 
 never mind the wider nationalist and republican community  of his commitment to human rights 
based on parity of esteem and equality of treatment. (SF slams appointments to human rights 
group, Irish News, November 23
, 2001) 
However, McGimpsey was not the first unionist with explicit links to political 
unionism to apply to the NIHRC nor was he the only unionist politician to apply in 
the 2001 round of appointments. In 1999, both the applications to join the 
Commission from Lady Sylvia Hermon (a future UUP MP), and Jeff Dudgeon (a 
successful plaintiff in the European Court of Human Rights and active in unionist 
politics) were turned down whilst in 2001 in addition to Chris McGimpsey both 
Arlene Foster and former Ulster Unionist MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone Ken 
Maginnis applied representing respectively the anti Belfast Agreement and pro Belfast 
Agreement strands of the UUP. Indeed, one unsuccessful applicant, Jeff Dudgeon, 
makes the point that the decisions should have been judicially reviewed,  
I was somebody who applied to join the first NIHRC, which was entirely anti  unionist or non 
unionist in composition, which was a disgrace and should have been judicially reviewed if anyone 
had the wit or the money. (Interview with Jeff Dudgeon 22
 May 2009) 
It was indicative of intra and inter unionist politics at the time that appointments to the 
NIHRC would inevitably become entangled in the debate about the Belfast 
Agreement. Both the DUP and anti  agreement strands of the Ulster Unionist Party 
coupled with Ulster Human Rights Watch argued that the appointment of McGimpsey 
would in no way assuage unionist concerns about the community imbalance in the 
NIHRC as he was pro Belfast Agreement and as they argued, the majority of the 
unionist community had in the years since the NIHRC was established become 
opposed to the Belfast Agreement and its institutions, particularly the human rights 
aspects of it. As Bertie Campbell, Chairman of Ulster Human Rights Watch argued 
there was,  
No representatives from those who had reservations about the Agreement. No one on the original 
Commission who was politically against the GFA. Everyone on it was a supporter of the GFA. Its 
a key pointand to this day it hasnt changed. (Interview with Bertie Campbell, Chairman of 
Ulster Human Rights Watch (UHRW), 16
 September 2009)  
Or similarly as a DUP policy document put it,   
We are concerned about the make up of the Commission and the activity of the Commission since 
its inception. We believe it has shown scant regard for the unionist community in general and the 
majority anti  Agreement opinion of that community in particular. (DUP Policy Document. A Bill 
of Rights for Northern Ireland: A Unionist Vision, 2003)  
In McGimpseys view Brice Dickson was searching for authentically unionist voice 
at the Commission and I was always giving it. I wasnt slow in expressing my views.  
(Interview with Dr Chris McGimpsey 1
 July 2009) and McGimpsey emphasised that 
Brice Dickson was extremely keen to involve him in all the work of the Commission 
from the outset. In many ways, McGimpseys appointment was a shrewd tactical 
move on behalf of the Government. McGimpsey was a strong supporter of the Belfast 
Agreement, was viewed as a progressive voice within unionism and had been 
involved with a number of UUP members in initiating contacts with political parties 
in the Republic of Ireland and as McGimpsey admits himself, his left wing, trade 
unionist background meant he had worked with people like Inez McCormack on 
health issues so I would have a relationship of sorts with some of the left wingers on 
the Commission (Interview with Dr Chris McGimpsey 1
 July 2009). Indeed, former 
NIHRC Chief Commissioner, Brice Dickson, was full of praise for his role on the 
Commission, 
Chris McGimpsey was a very good Commissioner  he made lots of good points. I dont know to 
what extent he was authorised to adopt certain positions by his party. I tried to make it clear to all 
Commissioners that they were there as individuals, not as representatives of any parties and I didnt 
want them going back and reporting to their constituency or consulting with their constituency. 
They werent there to represent any particular group but the whole of the community in Northern 
Ireland. (Interview with former NIHRC Chief Commissioner, Professor Brice Dickson 11
2009)  
McGimpsey denied that there was any party political interference in his role as a 
human rights commissioner  highlighting that the UUP itself of which he was a 
member never asked him to follow a party line on the Commission primarily because 
as McGimpsey argues, I dont think anyone was even interested enough in the 
unionist party to ask me to take a view on any issue (Interview with Dr Chris 
McGimpsey 1
 July 2009). Whilst organisations such as Ulster Human Rights Watch 
were not interested in engaging with him because of his politics and position on the 
Agreement whilst the Orange Order, despite during his tenure on the Commission 
organising a conference on human rights,  
Im an Orangeman and the Orange Order had a one day conference on human rights and never even 
invited me  didnt even invite me to go, never mind to speakThe whole time I was they never 
tried once to lobby me. They didnt say heres a man whos been in the Orange Order for 25 years 
so hes obviously a committed Orange man. Lets go an talk to him an explain our position to him. 
(Interview with Dr Chris McGimpsey 1
 July 2009) 
Not only was Brice Dicksons time as Chief Commissioner characterised by criticism 
from the unionist community but he also faced criticism from leading human rights 
NGOs in Northern Ireland, by nationalist and republican politicians and former 
Commissioners over his handling of the Holy Cross dispute exemplified in the 
comments from the former director of the CAJ, Martin OBrien when he argued that 
he was disappointed the HRC hasnt fulfilled its potential (Sunday Tribune, 20
July, 2003). In the same article the journalist Susan McKay echoed this conundrum 
facing Dickson that it was maintaining its enemies, and losing its friends. In 
September 2002 two Commissioners; Professor Christine Bell (a Professor of Human 
Rights Law at the University of Ulster) and Inez McCormack (a trade union activist 
and former President of ICTU) resigned from the Commission claiming that the 
Commission had become ineffective, was lacking in will and vision and was in danger 
of undermining key equality and human rights provisions of the Belfast Agreement 
(Sunday Tribune, 16
 September 2002) whilst in 2003 Patrick Yu (Director of the 
Northern Ireland Council for ethnic minorities) and University of Ulster law lecturer 
Angela Hegarty resigned from the Commission. Nationalist politicians were 
particularly critical of Dickson over his handling of the Holy Cross dispute in North 
Belfast where Loyalist protestors blocked the path of Catholic school children on their 
way to school. Initially the Commission had agreed to fund a parents legal challenge 
of the manner in which the PSNI handled the policing of the protest claiming that the 
PSNI did not sufficiently protect the childrens right not to be subjected to inhumane 
and degrading treatment but in December 2001, the Chief Commissioner Brice 
Dickson had written to the then Chief Constable Sir Ronnie Flanagan expressing his 
view that the case did not have merit under the HRA 1998 and might cause the 
Commission considerable expense. The decision angered the parents of the children 
involved in the Holy Cross dispute and organisations like the Pat Finucane Centre and 
the CAJ who would have been perceived to be strong supporters of Professor Dickson 
and the NIHRC. The Holy Cross dispute and Dicksons handling of it caused much 
anger and outrage from Nationalist and Republican parties such as the SDLP and Sinn 
Fein who both called on Dickson to resign from the Commission and for the NIHRC 
to be completely reorganised. However, by the time the Commission came to be 
reconstituted in 2005, only six part time Commissioners in addition to Dickson 
remained in office.  
Whoever was going to replace Dickson as Chief Commissioner faced a complex set 
of challenging circumstances to improve the legitimacy of the NIHRC in all sections 
of the community and steer a strategic path for the Commission out of some the more 
short term tactical issues the Commission had become stuck in. This was the context 
in which Professor Monica McWilliams (a former MLA for the Womans Coalition 
and Professor of Social Policy at the University of Ulster) was appointed as Chief 
Commissioner of the NIHRC in July 2005. However, if one issue could accurately be 
described as encapsulating the problem influential strands of unionist opinion had 
with the Commission then the appointment of Monica McWilliams as Chief 
Commissioner had all the characteristics of being that issue. Her appointment caused 
almost universal outrage and condemnation from key unionist figures who reacted 
with anger and consternation that the Government could appoint someone with her 
background.  Indeed, what Monicas appointment served to underline was the extent 
to which personality issues dominated how unionism came to engage with rights 
issues in the early part of the McWilliams Commission. McWilliams herself is 
insistent that her appointment was strictly independent and that, despite unionist 
claims that she was directly approached by the Northern Ireland Office and 
encouraged to apply for the post, she was involved in no preconceived plot or scheme 
to secure her appointment to the job (see correction in the Belfast Newsletter, 10
March 2005, Human Rights job offer for McWilliams). As McWilliams recounts,  
When I first applied to do this job, Lord Laird thought I was being headhunted. I hadnt heard a 
thing about the job. I didnt apply in the first appointment process when the NIO was seeking a new 
Chief Commissioner and they didnt make an appointment. I thought it was a terrible shame they 
didnt appoint someone. Someone said, look Monica why dont you apply for that? And I said Are 
you joking. Ive been in public life and Im not going back inI said on the day I was appointed 
that it was done independently and if it had have been done any other way I wouldnt have taken 
the post. No - one ever approached me from the NIO saying Would you think of going for this? It 
certainly didnt happen in my case (Interview with Professor Monica McWilliams, September 16
2009).  
There were a number of aspects to the unionist criticism of Professor McWilliams. 
Firstly, there was concern, expressed by former UUP MLA Esmond Birnie that a 
former leader of a political party should not be appointed to such a contentious and 
controversial position,  
It doesnt send out the right message for the new head of the NIHRC to be the former leader of a 
political party. Imagine the political outcry of David Trimble, who after all was an academic 
lawyer, had been appointed chief Commissioner? (UUP Press Release, June 16
 2005) 
Secondly, there was disappointment expressed by both the DUP and UUP that given 
unionisms experience of the NIHRC since its inception in 1999 that the appointment 
of Monica McWilliams was a missed opportunity to address unionist concern and 
reassure unionists that the NIHRC was a neutral public body. As Peter Robinson 
argued,  
The history of the Human Rights Commission to date has not been a happy one.  Whatever 
perspective one may take on the issue of Human Rights few could disagree that the work of the 
Commission has been dominated by controversy, resignations and an increasing isolation from the 
Northern Ireland community. We believed the appointment of new Commissioners presented the 
opportunity for a fresh start.  The Government had the opportunity to convince the unionist 
community, which has traditionally been sceptical about such matters, that the Human Rights 
Commission could be a positive force to protect fundamental rights and allow unionists to 
positively engage.   Unfortunately rather than create a Commission which can command the broad 
support of the Community, the Government has condemned the Commission to another five years 
of irrelevance and the unionist community to five more years of alienation from the HRC. (DUP 
Press Release, June 25
 2005)  
Similarly, former UUP Councillor and Chairman of the Young Unionists, Peter 
Bowles argued that,  
The Government, in appointing Monica McWilliams, have shown total disregard, as usual, for the 
view of those in the unionist community. The appointment will do nothing to alleviate Unionist 
fears about a one sided, nationalist driven, human rights and equality agenda. (UUP Press Release, 
June 16
 2005)  
Thirdly, there was the toxic and deeply unhelpful personal aspect to the appointment  
particularly with reference to the deep personal animosity that existed between 
Professor McWilliams and senior DUP members including then Leader Rev, Dr. Ian 
Paisley, his son and North Antrim MLA Ian Paisley Jnr and then deputy Leader, Peter 
Robinson MP. Dr. Paisley referred to the McWilliamss appointment as a personal 
insult, crass and warned the British Government that because of the appointment 
unionists will have nothing to do with the Commission (Paisley calls McWilliams 
appointment an insult, Irish Times, June 17
 2005). Most of the tension appeared 
to surround a difficult history which stretched back to the formation of the Womens 
Coalition and their involvement in the Northern Ireland Forum in 1996, the multi 
party talks in 1997/8 and the Northern Ireland Assembly from 1999  2003. As 
Professor McWilliams confirms, there was huge hostility from Paisley but that was 
personal history  absolutely nothing else. (Interview with Professor Monica 
McWilliams, 16
 September, 2009). The difficult relationship between Professor 
McWilliams and the DUP is exemplified by an incident recorded in one academic 
study of the Northern Irelands Womens Coalition where the writer highlights how 
during a debate in the Northern Ireland Forum for Political Dialogue Ian Paisley Jnr 
mooed at the Womens Coalition leader, Monica McWilliams (Murtagh, 2008, 
p.53). McWilliams, however, is relaxed about unionist criticism of her personally and 
of the Human Rights Commission generally and admits that despite the public 
criticism of unionist politicians, she still receives a lot of correspondence from 
unionist politicians seeking the Commissions help on constituency business,  
The very people that are critical of us in terms of some issues write to me the next day, unionist 
MLAs for example, saying Monica I need help on this. You cant afford to take it personally, even 
if theyre out publically saying one thing and then behind the scenes theyre saying Look I have 
got a difficulty here, can you help? It could be anything from education to health or whatever 
(Interview with Professor Monica McWilliams, 16
 September, 2009). 
However, despite the uneasy relationship between Professor McWilliams and key 
leading unionists, there was clearly an attempt by the British Government, in the 2005 
round of appointments, to address unionist concerns about the NIHRCs community 
balance through the appointment in the initial selection process of DUP Newtownards 
Councillor, Jonathan Bell and then in 2007 of UUP activist Daphne Trimble, wife of 
former UUP Leader and First Minister David Trimble (Jonathan Bell and Daphne 
Trimble both resigned in February 2010  Bell because he was chosen to replace Iris 
Robinson in the Strangford constituency in the Northern Ireland Assembly and 
Trimble because of her selection as the conservative and unionist candidate for Lagan 
Valley in the 2010 UK General). The appointment of Jonathan Bell to the 
Commission, who applied individually and not on behalf of the DUP, meant that 
some of the more hubristic comments about the McWilliamss appointment from 
DUP and UUP elected representatives appeared ill conceived. In many ways, the 
descent by unionist politicians into personality politics in 2005 characterised by 
rhetoric and hubris diminished the legitimacy of the unionist argument against the 
McWilliams appointment and substantiates further the claim made in the previous 
chapter that there was a profound triviality and juvenile aspect to unionist political 
discourse on human rights prior to the deliberations of the Bill of Rights Forum. As 
UUP Policy Director Brian Crowe remarks, Unionism had all the social graces of an 
awkward teenager in our initial conversations with the Human Rights Commission 
(Interview with Dr. Brian Crowe, 30
 June 2010). It would eventually transpire that 
the McWilliams Commission was an explicitly political Commission comprising 
three members with affiliations to the SDLP, one to the Womens Coalition, one to 
the Alliance Party, one to the DUP and one to the UUP meaning that seven out of the 
ten Commissioners had affiliations to political parties. According to TUV Leader, Jim 
Allister QC the Government deliberately intended to appoint an overtly political 
Commission exemplified by the appointment of Professor McWilliams,  
Monica was a prime political appointee  appointed for her politics rather than anything else. I 
think thats the problem. The NIHRC has only 2 unionists  they are a minority and I think it was 
designed to be that way. The Chairman, vice  chairman none of those posts go to representatives 
of the majority community in Northern Ireland and I think the Government wanted it that way. 
(Interview with Jim Allister QC 30
 June 2009) 
Despite claims from Monica McWilliams that the initial concern expressed by 
unionists about her was decreasing and that she was winning over unionists, 
Unionist support has gradually been increasing. I hope the concerns some people 
initially had have been alleviated now they have the opportunity to see our work 
(Belfast Telegraph, Rights boss is winning over unionists, 30
 December 2005) it 
would appear that the unease about her role has not diminished. This was exemplified 
by the NIHRCs highly symbolic and controversial intervention in the aftermath of 
the murders of PSNI officer Stephen Carroll and Army officers, Patrick Azimkar and 
Mark Qinsey in March 2009 when Monica McWilliams visited the detention facilities 
in Antrim police station where suspects for those murders were being held and 
expressed concern about how long they were being held and the conditions of the 
detention facility. Her intervention was condemned by Ulster Unionist and DUP 
members of the policing Board Basil McCrea and Ian Paisley Jnr but the significance 
of her intervention for reinforcing the perception amongst the unionist community 
that the NIHRC was biased against unionist interests was highlighted by UUP human 
rights spokesman Dermot Nesbitt,  
you see Monica McWilliams coming out and going to a Police Barracks in Antrim and outside 
being interviewed saying these guys must have proper cells etcyou see by the utterances of 
Monica McWilliams dovetailing into nationalism and unionism says well this is biased against us. 
(Interview with Dermot Nesbitt, 20
 May 2009)  
The issue of the NIHRCs composition is complex  particularly when there are two 
seemingly intransigent views on how the Government should ensure that the 
Commission is sufficiently balanced. There is a further aspect, however, to 
unionisms narrative on the representativeness of the Commission. Whilst unionists 
may believe that the Government should take positive steps to ensure community 
balance and unionist representation on the Commission, a second aspect to their 
narrative concerns the background of those members who were appointed to serve as 
Commissioners on the first NIHRC under Brice Dickson  that the first human rights 
Commission was disproportionately composed of people who were actively involved 
in the Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) and that this led to the CAJ 
having disproportionate influence on the work of the first NIHRC. It would appear 
that the basis for much of the criticism stems from the perception that in the words of 
DUP MP Jeffrey Donaldson, there is significant overlap between the membership of 
the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, and the Committee on the 
Administration of Justice. (Northern Ireland Grand Committee, Thursday 8
February 2001) The thesis will now consider the nature and basis of these claims.  
The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission and the CAJ 
The Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) is a human rights and civil 
liberties campaign and advocacy NGO based in Northern Ireland, The CAJ was 
established in 1981 to monitor the implementation of international human rights 
obligations, report on alleged human rights abuses and lobby for more effective 
international and national human rights protections. The CAJ was established at a 
time when, alongside the inexorable march of human rights treaties and domestic 
constitutional charters of rights across the globe there was also a corresponding 
increase in the number of international human rights NGOs. As the Secretary General 
of Amnesty International has stated,  
Over the past six decades there has an explosion of human rights NGOs, at the international, 
national and local levels, from small local community groups to large international organisations 
like Amnesty International with some 1.7 million members over 100 countries who fund AI and 
campaign for change. (Human Rights and civil society  the last frontier Public lecture delivered 
at the LSE, 19
January 2005 by Irene Khan, Secretary General, Amnesty International) 
Colm OCinneide has also argued that in the UK context Human Rights NGOs will 
play an important role in driving internal constitutional change and the shift towards a 
more robust human rights culture. Indeed, as OCinneide notes,  
Organisations such as Liberty and JUSTICE have proved very influential in shaping national debate 
on human rights issues. NGOs will remain a key change driver in this context in the years ahead, 
pushing, as with the EHRC, towards a greater legalisation of rights protection and an emphasis on 
compliance with international standards. (OCinneide, 2008, p.167) 
The CAJ supports a strong, extensive and robust Bill of Rights, fully justicable and 
enforceable in a separate human rights court for Northern Ireland. According to the 
CAJ, A Bill of Rights should be a forward looking and impactful document - 
therefore it must positively promote and advance the protection of rights, not merely 
adopt a lowest common denominator approach (Benchmarks for a strong and 
enforceable Bill of Rights, CAJ publication, October 2008). The creation of a human 
rights Commission for Northern Ireland was an important strategic public policy 
priority for the CAJ complementing their work on a Bill of Rights which began in the 
early 1990s. Mageen and OBrien (1999) have evaluated and identified the significant 
role played by local NGOs in helping to secure the prominence of human rights issues 
on the political and constitutional agenda in Northern Ireland. Indeed, they are 
convinced that through examining the human rights dimensions of the Agreement, 
one can conclude, 
That to a significant extent the proposals from the human rights community made in the 1994 
Declaration have been met, and there is little doubt that the broad agenda that the non  
governmental organisation (NGO) community was articulating emerged onto the political agenda in 
Northern Ireland. (Mageean and OBrien, 1999, p.1502 - 3)  
As we shall come to see influential and important unionist political and non political 
actors have had a very difficult and fractious relationship with this organisation 
largely because, as unionism perceives it, the CAJ in their campaign and advocacy 
work have focussed excessively on state violations of human rights in Northern 
Ireland and ignored the human rights abuses perpetrated by non state actors 
(paramilitary groups) in Northern Ireland. This view is perhaps best illustrated by 
former UUP Leader and First Minister, Lord Trimble,  
The CAJ take great care and are very anxious to portray itself as a standard civil liberties body but 
the CAJ has always had a track record of taking up issues of benefit to paramilitaries and of taking 
up issues that run counter of the wider community and certainly the state whose forces are there to 
protect the wider community. This is a dimension of things that human rights activists dont see and 
dont realise. (Interview with Lord Trimble, Thursday 28
 May 2009) 
According to Austen Morgan, a former legal advisor to former UUP Leader David 
Trimble, we cannot understand the first NIRHC either individually or ideologically 
without first addressing the issue of the CAJ (Morgan, 2001). Unionists argue that in 
the first Human Rights Commission there was a significant overlap in membership 
between the CAJ and the NIHRC. As one Ulster Unionist MLA, Esmond Birnie, put 
it, Persons with a CAJ background continue to have a disproportionate representation 
on the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission (NIHRC). (Northern Ireland 
Assembly, Tuesday 25
 September 2001) This basis of this claim was established in a 
in a Parliamentary Question (HL Deb 27 November 2000 vol 619 cc109-10WA), 
tabled by Ulster Unionist peer, Lord Laird when an answer from Home Office 
Minister Lord Falconer revealed that six out of the ten original members of the first 
Commission under Brice Dickson declared membership of the CAJ: Professor Brice 
Dickson, Professor Christine Bell, Professor Tom Hadden, Angela Hegarty, Paddy 
Kelly and Inez McCormack. This concern from unionists about the CAJs influence 
on the Commission manifested itself at the very outset of the Commissions work in 
1999. Commenting on the NIHRCs first draft strategic plan the UUP stated,  
because its initial membership is clearly identified with the CAJ. This causes genuine concern 
amongst particularly Unionists and some others and has a very damaging effect as regard the 
perceived independence of the Commission. This flaw is fundamental and unless remedied in some 
manner will seriously undermine the confidence of the unionist community in this body. (UUP 
submission to the NIO consultation on the NIHRC draft strategic plan 1999  2002, 18
 November 
1999) 
However, the desirability of having human rights NGOs involved in institutions for 
the protection of human rights is a principle endorsed by the UNs Paris Principles for 
the operation of NHRIs  a principle affirmed by Westminsters JCHR in their report 
into the work of the NIHRC. The JCHR also dismissed unionist arguments that less 
weight should have been given to applicants for the NIHRC who came with 
experience of campaign, advocacy and volunteer work with the CAJ. Indeed, as 
Livingstone and Murray point out it would have been totally inconceivable not to 
have included CAJ members in the first NIHRC given the CAJs wealth of experience 
and expertise,  
Given the CAJs local and international reputation, and as the principal NGO working on human 
rights for more than twenty years in the jurisdiction it would have been difficult to imagine how a 
credible body could avoid drawing on personnel that had at one time or another been members of 
the CAJ. It was highly desirable that the Commission includes people from this background. 
(Livingstone & Murray, 2005, p.44)  
A view taken by the first NIHRC Chief Commissioner himself, Brice Dickson writing 
in the CAJs Just News newsletter prior to taking office, Naturally I hope there will 
be excellent exchanges between the Commission and CAJ, where so much expertise 
already resides. For Dickson it would have been inconceivable not to have so many 
representatives from the CAJ involved in the work of the first Commission where 
there was a significant amount of expertise and experience in dealing with human 
rights issues. This view, however, that the expertise members of human rights NGOs 
bring is profoundly important for the successful operation of the NIHRC has been 
rejected by Lord Trimble who argues that expertise in matters of public policy, not in 
human rights advocacy and campaigning,  
The fundamental mistake the Northern Ireland Office are making is that they think the qualification 
for being on a NIHRC is that you are strong adherent and active supporter of the concept of human 
rights, which means you then get into these activists in the human rights industry. Whereas the 
primary qualification should be a clear understanding of the issues and of the public policy 
requirements because what the Commission has to do is balance between the views of human rights 
activists who want human rights all over the place  all singing, all dancing and someone who has 
got an understanding of the public policy issues and the governmental issues to know where to 
place the balance. (Interview with Lord Trimble Thursday 28
 May 2009) 
The question remains though, why does an uneasy and problematic relationship exist 
between key unionist actors and the CAJ? What has led unionist politicians in 
particular to be so forceful and robust in their criticism of the CAJ? Interestingly, as 
with most other areas of human rights in Northern Ireland there is a high degree of 
convergence between the DUP and UUP in their approach to human rights NGOs. For 
example the DUP MP Sammy Wilson labelled the CAJ as a Nationalist front 
organisation (Northern Ireland Assembly, Tuesday 25
 September 2001) whilst the 
Ulster Unionist peer, Lord Laird referred to the CAJ as a controversial Brit  bashing 
group.(Irish Times, August 11
 2003) Explanations coalesce around three main 
points. Firstly, because unionists and the CAJ disagree considerably on the nature, 
scope and content of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. Secondly, unionists perceive 
the CAJ to be pursuing an anti  unionist/anti  British agenda. This manifests itself in 
the opposing views between the CAJ and the unionist parties over policing issues and 
parading matters in Northern Ireland. Therefore, despite the fact that the CAJ stress 
that they take no position on the constitutional status of Northern Ireland 
(http://www.caj.org.uk/about.html) there is a strong perception amongst unionists that 
as the DUP MLA Michelle Mcllveen argued,  
the CAJ is no friend of unionismit styles itself as an independent, cross-community, human 
rights organisation, but its documents reek of anti-unionism and anti-Britishness. (NI Assembly 
debate, Tuesday 2
 October 2007) 
There appears to be an automatic assumption adopted by some within unionisms 
political elite that anything produced by the CAJ must inimical to the interests of the 
unionism  that what the CAJ say will always be as the DUP MLA Jimmy Spratt put 
it biased and jaundiced (http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/07100) 
against unionism and that the human rights community has deliberately exclude 
unionists from its ranks  a sentiment expressed by DUP Culture Minister Nelson 
McCausland who argues that this exclusion exacerbates the unrepresentativeness of 
the NIHRC,  
Unionists have been excluded from the human rights industry. How many unionists are employed 
in the human rights industry? Youre kept out. Your agenda is never recognised. Those agendas that 
are pursued are those that are of interest to those in the nationalist/republican communityBecause 
that whole industry  back through the CAJ and so on has been unbalanced when you come to 
create a NIHRC and employ staff in it because you are drawing from a pool of people whose 
background is in it  you then produce commissions that are unbalanced. (Interview with Nelson 
McCausland 8
 October 2009) 
His DUP colleague Peter Weir also suggests that the situation was a self perpetuating 
cycle of exclusion because unionists could not get past the perception that 
organisations like the CAJ were not acting in their interests and so excluded 
themselves often because of the perception that had arisen,  
A lot of the human rights groups at times were seen to be quite pro a Republican agenda and 
therefore there was a reluctance amongst many unionists to associate themselves with them. 
(Interview with Peter Weir MLA, Friday 9
 July 2009) 
The issue of policing and the differing views held by the CAJ and unionists also 
increases the mood of distrust between the two groups. The issue of 50:50 recruitment 
of Protestants and Catholics to the PSNI was and is sharply opposed by unionist 
parties on the grounds that it represents an unacceptable form of institutionalised 
discrimination. The CAJ, however, have been strong advocates of positive 
discrimination in recruitment to the Police Service of Northern Ireland in order to 
redress the historic underrepresentation of Catholics in the police. Indeed, it was in 
favour of extending the system to include women and ethnic minorities (CAJ 
Commentary on recommendations in the Patten report A new beginning: policing in 
Northern Ireland 9
, September, 1999). The rights and wrongs of this policy are 
beyond the scope of this thesis; suffice to say that within the unionist community the 
issue of police recruitment still remains an emotive issue as reflected in the statements 
of unionisms political representatives. As DUP MLA Jim Shannon stated on the 
issue it is perhaps the most disgusting and discriminatory such policy ever to have 
been introduced in a so called modern country. (Official Record of the Northern 
Ireland Assembly - 2007, October, 20
) The point is that on these emotive issues the 
CAJ and unionisms political elite operate within different discourses and 
interpretations of conflict related issues in Northern Ireland putting them on a 
collision course with unionisms political elite.  
Thirdly, and most significantly, when it comes to the uneasy nature of this 
relationship, nothing has contributed as much to the culture of suspicion and mistrust 
that exists within unionism about the CAJ than the perception that there has been a 
tendency for human rights discourse or more precisely for the agenda of human rights 
organisations in Northern Ireland to focus on state violations of human rights and not 
on infringements carried out by paramilitary groups or non  state actors. Indeed, it is 
the view advanced by this thesis that it this perception held by unionists about the 
focus of the CAJ and the NIHRC on state violations of human rights, which has 
significantly undermined the possibility of the CAJ and more importantly the NIHRC 
from having a constructive and positive working relationship with unionist 
representatives.  As Livingstone and Murray argue,  
Since most Northern Irish and international human rights NGOs focussed their concern primarily 
on alleged human rights abuses by state authorities and called for reforms designed to investigate 
their activities in the past or curb them in the future, many from a unionist background viewed any 
reference to human rights as being antheitical to their interests. (Livingstone and Murray, 2005, 
p.51)  
This reflects a tradition in international human rights law; post World War II, to focus 
on state abuses of human rights. The trend internationally has been for human rights 
organisations, to, in the words of Amnesty Internationals Secretary General, expose 
the hypocrisy, selectivity and double standards of governments. Consistent with this 
tradition the CAJ, as its current Director Michael Ritchie stated in a submission to the 
Form for Peace and Reconciliation,  
we have set ourselves up as a non  governmental organisation to comment on how the State 
deals with non  State violenceyou may not like it but it is our function. We are simply 
abstracting ourselves from the local situation and applying international law.
(Report of the 
Proceedings: volume 12: Friday 31
 March 1995, pp44 -5) 
Perhaps the CAJ is best known in Northern Ireland for its work and involvement in 
helping to bring a number of high profile cases to the European Court of Human 
Rights in Strasbourg engaging Article 2 ECHR in Shanaghan v UK, Jordan v UK, 
Kelly and Ors v UK, McKerr v UK. Each of theses cases was concerned with the use 
of force by the state resulting in a breach of the right to life Article 2 ECHR. In each 
case the UK was found to be in breech of the procedural aspects of Article 2 ECHR. 
In factual terms, however, paramilitary organisations were responsible for the vast 
majority of deaths and human rights abuses in Northern Ireland. Of the 3720 people 
killed in the Troubles from 1966 until 2006, 2152 deaths were caused by Republican 
terrorists, 1,112 deaths were caused by Loyalist terrorists and the Security forces were 
responsible for 361 deaths. In percentage terms this means that over 87.7% of killings 
were perpetrated by proscribed terrorist organisations. This means that the right to 
life, as defined in article 2 of the European Convention on human rights, was violated 
overwhelmingly during the Troubles by non  state Actors yet the focus of 
organisations like the CAJ and others has been and continues to be on the perceived 
human rights abuses of the state during the conflict with only passing mention made 
to human rights abuses conducted by non  state actors who in Northern Ireland 
became state actors after the return of devolved Government in 1999.  
In January 2004, David Trimble gave a keynote speech to the Council of Europes 
First International Congress of Victims of Terrorism in Madrid where afterwards he 
remarked to the press assembled that one of the great curses of this world is the 
human rights industryThey justify terrorist acts and end up being complicit in the 
murder of innocent victims (Human rights groups are complicit in murder, says 
Trimble, The Guardian, Thursday 24
 January 2004). This point was reinforced by 
former UUP MP Roy Beggs during a Northern Ireland Grand Committee debate on 
human rights in Northern Ireland,  
The human rights community appears to consider victims of non-state abuses to be only second-
class victims. Victims of paramilitaries are treated as second-class victims: as far as the human 
rights community is concerned, people who have received punishment without law, breaching 
article 7 of the convention, are second-class victims, unless that punishment involved the state. 
(Roy Beggs MP, Northern Ireland Grand Committee, Thursday 8
 February 2001) 
What the remarks reflect is the sense within unionism that human rights NGOs are 
pursuing an agenda inimical to unionist interests. Indeed, often unionist politicians 
will disparagingly refer to human rights NGOs in Northern Ireland as the human 
rights industry and we are therefore presented with two competing discourses 
regarding violations of human rights in Northern Ireland. One narrative, advanced by 
groups like the CAJ holds that the focus should be on the states abuse of human 
rights whilst the other narrative, advanced by unionism, holds that the focus of human 
rights NGOs should be on those paramilitary organisations that have been responsible 
for the vast majority of human rights violations, with regard to Article 2 ECHR, in 
Northern Ireland. The impression created within unionism is that this approach by the 
CAJ has created a hierarchy that privileges the actions of perpetrators of violence over 
victims of violence. The impression is given that the CAJ is in existence to defend 
terrorists and uphold their rights but not those of their victims. As the former legal 
advisor to UUP Leader, Austen Morgan has argued, 
The NI human rights community has exhibited nothing but bad faith. It has created a considerable 
hierarchy of victims. It went for the one in ten state killingsthe nearly nine in ten, who were 
killed by Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries were, and are ignored.(Do the Victims of 
terrorism have human rights? Speech delivered at FAIR victims conference, La Mon House Hotel, 
March 11
 2008) 
The tension between Unionist politicians and the NIHRC over this issue also came to 
the fore when it emerged that the IRA had brutally murdered Robert McCartney in 
Belfast in December 2004. The Ulster Unionist MLA Basil McCrea criticised the 
NIHRC for its silence over the controversial murder of Robert McCartney and for 
adopting an a la carte and selective approach to human rights in Northern Ireland,  
The Commission has always been extremely keen to comment on human rights abuses in Northern 
Ireland regardless of whether it was in their remit or not. Therefore, I was expecting it to comment 
on the murder of Robert McCartney and the events surrounding it. The subsequent cover  up and 
intimidation of witnesses represent a gross violation of human rights. Yet the Human Rights 
Commission to date has remained silent on the issue. It is clear the Commission has an a la carte 
approach to human rights, only commenting on the issues which suit their highly politicised and 
partisan agenda. It is about time that the Human Rights Commission got their priorities in order and 
focused on the paramilitary groups who alone are the greatest perpetrators of human rights abuses 
in Northern Ireland. (McCrea attacks human rights body, March 31
 2005, Belfast Newsletter)  
However, the NIHRC would, later confirm that they were to raise the murder at the 
United Nations Human Rights Commission at a meeting the Commission were having 
with the UN body in Geneva (Irish News, p22, April 13
 2005). As a Commission 
press release stated, The Commission will, in addition, highlight the continuing level 
of violence and systemic violations of human rights in Northern Ireland perpetrated 
by paramilitary organisations. (NIHRC Press Release, Tuesday 12
 April 2005) 
When it comes to this issue, Unionist politicians will often conflate and overlap their 
terminology using Human Rights Commission and human rights community 
interchangeably. In the unionist mind there is no difference in Northern Ireland 
between the two because, as they perceive it, the agendas of both the NIRHC and 
human rights NGOs are the same. For example as former UUP MP Roy Beggs stated,  
My lack of faith in the Northern Ireland human rights community in general and in the Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission in particular is founded on three issues: first, the selective 
attitude to human rights abuses; secondly, the attitude to police recruitment; and, thirdly, the 
attitude to parades. If time permitted, I would be more than willing and able to elaborate on all 
those issues. As it does not, I shall elaborate on the selective attitude to human rights abuses with 
reference to the human rights community's obsession with human rights abuses orchestrated by the 
state. (Northern Ireland Grand Committee, Thursday 8
 February 2001) 
Unionists argue that the ideological pattern of focussing on the human rights abuses 
perpetrated by the State set by the CAJ was continued by the NIHRC. As one Ulster 
Unionist MLA, Esmond Birnie, put it, the NIHRC has given privileged consideration 
to the perceived victims of state action as opposed to the greater number of victims of 
paramilitary abuse. Regrettably, they are again following the pattern set by the CAJ. 
(Northern Ireland Assembly, Tuesday 25
 September, 2001) There is an element of 
truth in this argument. The NIHRC under Brice Dickson and Monica McWilliams has 
to a large extent been involved in public and private calls for public, judicial inquiries 
into the murders of Pat Finucane (NHIRC Press Releases, Tuesday 09 May 2000, 
Monday 12
 February 2001, Tuesday 12
 February 2002), Rosemary Nelson 
(NIHRC Press Releases, Thursday 15
 March 2001 and Friday 14
 March 2003) and 
for the UK Government to generally improve the legal mechanisms and manner in 
which it conducts investigations of deaths caused by security forces and the state in 
Northern Ireland (NIRHC press release, January 2005).   
A problem arises for unionism therefore when it hears human rights or rights 
discourse used to criticise the state at the expense of terrorist paramilitary groups or to 
put another way sees human rights discourse in Northern ignore actions of non  state 
actors, it makes unionism suspicious and hostile of human rights. If it is paramilitary 
groups and terrorism that rights discourse aligns itself with, why would unionism 
want to be associated with such a discourse that is structurally biased against unionist 
interests? Therefore if human rights organisations in Northern Ireland perpetuate this 
discourse, it is inevitable that there will be collision with unionism at some point. 
Often, the matters raised are emotive which adds a further layer of complexity to the 
relationships unionism has with the CAJ and the NIHRC. However, as the evidence 
presented here suggests the perception within unionism that both the NIHRC and 
human rights organisations such as the CAJ have placed an excessive focus on state 
violations of human rights has had had a profound effect on unionisms relationship 
with the CAJ and on how unionism came to view the NIRHC.  
Conclusion 
The central question we must address as this chapter concludes is; have unionist 
perceptions about the NIHRC changed since its inception? Has the legitimacy of the 
NIHRC in the unionist community improved? A clearer picture has hopefully been 
presented about what unionists think about the NIHRC and why they have come to 
the positions they have. To summarise, in terms of the first Commission under Brice 
Dickson, unionists considered the Commission to be insufficiently representative of 
society in Northern Ireland largely because the body at that time was dominated by 
members of the CAJ. In terms of the second NIHRC under Monica McWilliams, 
whilst unionists acknowledge that the Government in appointing DUP Councillor 
Jonathan Bell and the UUPs Daphne Trimble were responding to unionist concerns 
about the Commissions composition, the appointment of Monica McWilliams was 
met with such hostility that the positive steps in the Bell and Trimble appointment 
were overshadowed by the appointment of Monica McWilliams. Overall, however, it 
is hard to argue that the Commissions legitimacy has increased. Indeed, as the clash 
between the NIHRC and both the DUP and UUP over proposals for Northern Ireland 
Bill of Rights illustrated, the Commissions standing within unionism may have 
actually diminished to the extent that the DUP in May 2009 proposed the 
amalgamation of the NIHRC, Equality Commission and Childrens Commissioner as 
part of broader proposals in an attempt at finding efficiency savings within the 
Northern Ireland budget.  However, whilst the Commissions legitimacy may not 
have improved in the eyes of the major unionist parties, there is evidence to suggest 
that other influential actors within the unionist community are more willing to engage 
with the Commission. For example, when it comes to the Orange Order there is 
evidence to suggest that they are more willing to engage with the NIHRC than in the 
recent past. Indeed, according to Drew Nelson, Grand Secretary of the Grand Orange 
Lodge  an extremely influential figure within the modernising wing of the Orange 
Order  he has actively encouraged Orange lodges and other groups within the 
Orange community to use the NIRHC to complain if they feel their rights,  
particularly over freedom of assembly have been infringed,  
I am aware that theres been a very recent complaint with the NIHRC in relation to an issue 
surrounding freedom of peaceful assembly of meetings of an orange lodge in a particular area. I 
have advised them to make a formal compliant to the NIHRC that their freedom of Assembly is 
being restricted because the police are not protecting them while they are meeting and they are 
being continually attackedyou get maximum return for minimum effort, in referring a case, and if 
they dont take it up youve got something to complain about. (Interview with Drew Nelson, 10
August 2009) 
According to Nelson the Orange Order have held several meetings with the NIHRC 
about a number of issues such as parading, the proposed Bill of Rights and as he 
states, our major issue with the NIHRC would be PSNI notifiable memberships 
which we believe is discriminatory against us and we think targets us and our 
members. (Interview with Drew Nelson, 10
 August 2009)  
Both the former Chief Commissioner and the current Chief Commissioner both 
highlighted their sense that there was insufficient capacity within the unionist 
community at both elite level and non  elite level to both deal with and understand 
human rights issues and human rights based arguments and that in some way this 
helps to explain unionist scepticism about the NIHRC and why there has been a lack 
of engagement. Therefore when it comes to the unionist claim that the NIHRC is 
insufficiently representative of the community Monica McWilliams argues that 
unionists must first start to apply in greater numbers and learn to fill in forms 
correctly,   
Its absolutely amazing that more members of the unionist community dont apply. Theres the first 
issue  theres a lack of applications that are coming. Secondly, since the applications are 
competency tested  this requires individuals to state examples of their skills or competencies and 
not just refer to their past experience  many applicants appear unaware of how to fill out the forms 
appropriately. (Interview with NIHRC Chief Commissioner, Professor Monica McWilliams, and 
September 16
 2009). 
Similarly, Brice Dickson compares and contrasts the capacity within the DUP and 
UUP to engage with human rights issues  that somehow there was an incoherence 
driven by an unwillingness to engage,  
The UUPs engagement was at a level that to me was confusing and not particularly helpful  
almost obstructionist. I didnt know whether it was because the persons we were dealing with didnt 
have the authority to state a position on behalf of the party as a wholeI did feel there was a lack 
of understanding and not nearly enough preparedness to engageThe DUP on the other hand when 
the Executive was first set up and the Commission met with Peter Robinson who was DRD 
Minister. He spent the first 10 mins telling us he didnt really approve of the NIHRC and didnt 
think it was necessary but then having stated that he got on with the business in a very matter of fact 
way and so there was engagement in that sense whereas there wasnt with the Ulster Unionists at 
any point. (Interview with Brice Dickson, 11
 June 2009) 
But there is a significant point to be made about the capacity of unionist communities 
when it comes to human rights issues and the lack of community capacity and 
infrastructure there is to take advantage of Government initiatives on victims issues 
and dealing with the past. As Drew Nelson argues,  
Where I have run across the issue of human rights NGOs most strikingly is on victims issues. The 
victims field of operation has developed differently in the two communities in Northern Ireland. In 
the unionist community the victims groups are mainly concerned with pastoral help and support for 
victims and survivors. In the nationalist community victims groups have tended to develop in terms 
of inquires, representation at inquires, calling for inquires and political lobbying. And so what has 
transpired is that as we come into the era now of the HET and Eames Bradley and other things that 
within the nationalist community they are very well placed to take advantage of those things 
because they have about four groups who are mostly identified with the nationalist community by 
our community like that even though one of them would deny that: Pat Finuance Centre, CAJ, 
British/Irish Rights Watch, Amnesty. So the nationalist community have got all those people who 
they can easily turn to and whilst some of our people would use them but the vast majority wont 
because of the history of Northern Ireland. But within the unionist community there is absolutely 
none. In the HET, our people are not generally represented and dont know what questions to ask 
and theyre not getting as much benefit out of it as people from the nationalist community and the 
same will happen with whatever comes out of Eames Bradley. (Interview with Drew Nelson, Grand 
Secretary, Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland, 10
 August 2009) 
There is a high degree of convergence within unionism about its engagement and 
relationship with the human rights Commission, particularly between the DUP and 
UUP  both have expressed, as we have seen, similar sentiments about a number of 
issues that we have addressed in this chapter such as the perceived bias in human 
rights discourse, the dominance of the CAJ in the first Commission, the appointment 
of Monica McWilliams and in their views of the CAJ. We have also seen how other 
influential organisations within the unionist community such as the Orange Order 
have significantly improved their engagement with the NIHRC. However, just as we 
discovered in the previous chapter exploring unionist views about the Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights, when it comes to exceptions to this narrative they can be 
located within the discourses of Loyalist representatives who take an altogether 
different opinion about the NIHRC. Indeed as Dawn Purvis pointed out the creation of 
the human rights Commission was an essential component of their agenda for the 
political negotiations that led to the Agreement,  
We do engage with the NIHRC and we engage continually with the NIHRCWe were one of the 
parties at the negotiations (GFA) who argued for a human rights commission. I have engaged with 
the human rights Commission from its establishment. We made a submission to them on the bill of 
rights. I would refer people to the human rights commission and I would meet with them on 
particular issues. (Interview with Dawn Purvis MLA Thursday 11
 June 2009) 
Purvis argues that there is tactical and strategic advantage for unionism in using 
human rights discourse and subscribes to the Universalist narrative that when it comes 
to human rights discourse in Northern Ireland, its not about looking at human rights 
being for unionism or human rights being for nationalism  human rights are for 
everyone. (Interview with Dawn Purvis MLA Thursday 11
 June 2009) However, 
the realities of the body politic in Northern Ireland would suggest that the problems 
with discourses of human rights are found in the fact that there are a number of 
competing and profoundly distinct interpretations of what human rights actually are. 
Mindful of this unionism, at both an elite and non  elite level is presented with a 
profound question - do unionists attempt to reclaim the language of human rights 
from its political opponents and articulate a narrative of human rights consistent with 
unionisms culture, identity and history and consistent with orthodox conceptions of 
British constitutionalism? In many ways there are some examples of key unionist 
actors deciding to follow this path. For example, firstly, as we explored in the 
previous chapter, key unionist actors have also begun to articulate a more nuanced 
and coherent position on proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. Secondly, in 
discussing the importance for unionists of remembering in 2012 the centenary of the 
Ulster covenant, the DUP MLA Nelson McCausland argued that in many ways the 
Covenant embodies a discourse of human rights that unionism can be comfortable 
with politically, historically and culturally,  
It speaks of civil and religious freedom  human rights.  This is not, of course, the human rights 
agenda of Monica McWilliams and the Human Rights Commission.  It is not the human rights 
agenda of the far left.  For that is simply the unelected and the unelectable seeking to impose their 
aims without the backing of the ballot box. (Speech to DUP Annual Conference, November 2009)  
Thirdly, despite the historic difficulties surrounding the relationship between human 
rights NGOs and unionist political parties, in 1999 former UUP leader put pressure on 
Amnesty International to send expert teams into Northern Ireland to observe on and 
monitor paramilitary attacks and punishment beatings and shootings. As Trimble 
argued in his correspondence to Amnesty International in London and New York,  
The mutilations are being carried out by the same organisations who signed up to the Good Friday 
Agreement and who are benefiting from the prisoner release schemes under it. Their activities are in 
clear breach of human rights and the commitments to non-violence and peace they made in the 
Agreement. The paramilitaries want to control their criminal rackets in their own areas by 
terrorising people. The recent horrific murder by republicans of the author and writer Eamon 
Collins underlines the threat to freedom of speech posed so brutally by republican and loyalist 
paramilitary groups and their members. (Belfast Newsletter, p6, February 3
 1999) 
Similarly, in response to the Governments proposed On the Run (OTR) legislation, 
which surfaced as a matter of political controversy in late 2005 that would have 
granted an amnesty to paramilitary fugitives in Northern Ireland, the DUP held 
discussions with Amnesty and the Human Rights Commission about the possibility of 
challenging any such legislation in the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) 
(DUP may make human rights challenge to On The Runs plan, Belfast Telegraph, 
 November, 2005). There is a difference, however, between articulating a more 
coherent and intelligible narrative about what unionists think about a Bill of Rights, 
attempting to advance a counter narrative to nationalist interpretations of human 
rights  challenging the status quo  and using the rights framework in the way it is 
currently expressed and deployed in Northern Ireland to, for example, encourage, as 
the Orange Order have done increasing numbers of individuals and organisations to 
use the human rights Commission to express grievances and make complaints. As 
Fealty, Ringland and Stevens argue,  
Already, some unionist groups are readying themselves to exploit the new legislation to show how 
their rights are being trampled, and how much worse Protestants are now treated than Catholics. 
Nationalists undoubtedly have similar plans. This is not a fresh, but a false start, and unionists must 
act quickly to suggest another direction. (Fealty, Ringland and Stevens, 2003, p.28) 
Unionism must not strive for the utopia when it comes to the human rights 
Commission. The realities and complexities of politics in Northern Ireland mean it is 
unlikely there will be ever be a Human Rights Commission that unionism will be 
entirely comfortable with. Are there any practical steps, which could be taken to 
improve the NIHRCs legitimacy within the unionist community? Firstly, the 
legislation does not limit the number of Commissioners who can be potentially 
appointed to the NIHRC and therefore would more Commissioners, as the DUP have 
suggested, improve the legitimacy of the Commission as it might allow 
Commissioners to be appointed from the unionist community or would that reinforce 
the two communities ethno  centric interpretation of post conflict politics in 
Northern Ireland? Secondly, as the DUP leader Peter Robinson argued, 
creating a role of Deputy Chief Commissioner would also be seen as a step to create balance with 
the Chief Commissioners post.  This is an approach which has been taken in the area of the Police 
Board and there is no reason why it could not be followed here. . (DUP Press Release, June 25
2005) 
However, before this chapter concludes, there is one further significant observation 
worth reflecting upon. After a closer examination of the tenure of Brice Dickson as 
Chief Commissioner, and with the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to conclude that 
unionist politicians were fundamentally wrong in the judgements and conclusions 
they came to about Professor Dickson both personally and professionally. As this 
chapter has argued, unionism has been extremely critical of the NIHRC during 
Dicksons period as Chief Commissioner. However, in Dickson, there was someone 
who had the potential to understand unionist narratives about human rights discourse 
in Northern Ireland  particularly with regard to the abuses of human rights carried 
out by paramilitary organisations. The essence of Dicksons position on the human 
rights violations conducted by paramilitary organisations was stated in a recently 
published book of his exploring the role of the ECHR in the Northern Ireland conflict. 
In it he argues that the refusal of groups such as the CAJ to condemn paramilitary 
organisations for the human rights abuses conducted in the name of justice is a stain 
on the history of human rights advocacy in Northern Ireland,  
By this time, however, the initial civil rights movement has been usurped by a paramilitary 
movement that had different aims and used different methodsthe consequence of this happening 
was that perfectly laudable demands for better protection of human rights were dreadfully 
contaminated by the employment of means to that end  shootings, bombings, kidnappings and 
intimidation  which were themselves very grave violations of human rights that were many times 
worse than the violations being complained about in the first place. 
One of the unfortunate features of the time was the refusal of many of those who continued to 
campaign for better human rights protection to recognise that what the paramilitaries were doing 
was denying the very human rights which the campaigners (quite rightly) were calling upon the 
government to uphold. It is hard now to remember that, in those relatively early days of human 
rights work, most of the activists believed that breaches of human rights were things which only 
governments could commit; atrocities perpetrated by paramilitaries were simply breaches of the 
criminal law. This was the position adopted by the organisation that in practice took over the mantle 
of campaigning for human rights from the NICRA, namely the CAJ (Dickson, 2010, p.21). 
For Brice Dickson there was absolutely no doubt that the actions of non  state actors 
should be classified as human rights abuses 
I was perfectly prepared to admit and proclaim the fact that other people apart from the state were 
abusing human rights. In that regard I was in the minority in the CAJ because at that time and still 
in fact I would go as far to say it doesnt actually believe or classify what non state actors do as 
human rights abuses. (Interview with Professor Brice Dickson, 11
 June 2009) 
Dickson argues that the actions of non  state actors in Northern Ireland are not 
abuses of human rights in some abstract sense but are violations of some of the civil 
and political rights enshrined in the ECHR. As Dickson points out,  
the one area which traditional human rights activists have been loathe to analyse in human rights 
terms has been that of criminality, particularly crimes of violence committed by or in the name of 
paramilitary organisationspunishment attacks, drug dealing, racketeering, fuel smuggling and 
armed robberies still abound in Northern Ireland seven years after the GFA but very few political or 
NGO commentators have condemned such behaviour as human rights violations. Yet that is exactly 
what they are: peoples rights to life, to be free from torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment, to respect for their private and family life and home, and to enjoyment of their own 
possessions, are all in play when these crimes are committed and it is pedantic if not positively 
misleading to describe them in any other way. (Dickson, 2007, p.163) 
Contrary to the perceptions held by many unionists Dickson was, early on his tenure, 
facing battles with his fellow Commissioners in attempting to convince them that 
paramilitary organisations should be condemned for human rights abuses  especially 
with regard to punishment attacks. As Dickson recalls,  
I had my own battles in the NIHRC in trying to persuade my fellow Commissioners that non state 
actors could be condemned for human rights abuses. One of the first arguments we had in the very 
early days of the Commission was over a punishment attack that took place on a minor in 
Newtownards and a couple of us on the Commission wanted to put out a statement condemning this 
as a human rights violation but I couldnt get agreement with other commissioners on that. 
(Interview with Professor Brice Dickson, 11
 June 2009) 
Furthermore, at this time Dickson was also trying to push forward within the 
Commission a more coordinated and strategic approach to the handling of human 
rights abuses perpetrated by paramilitary organisations. As Brice Dickson argued,  
Obviously the Human Rights Commission would unreservedly condemn all of these attacks as 
infringements of the most basic human rights. Violence of any kind is abhorrent, but when lives are 
put at risk it is all the more repugnant. The Commission is particularly appalled at the number of 
young people who are the targets of 'punishment' attacksMuch good work has already been done 
by individual agencies to combat paramilitary human rights abuses. It is work which is often 
dangerous and unappreciated. The Commission hopes it can stimulate even greater efforts in this 
area by listening to agencies from all quarters on how to address the relevant issues most 
effectively. People understandably expect the Human Rights Commission to play a role in this 
matter. (NIHRC press release, Friday 11
 May 2001) 
The comments from Brice Dickson about the human rights abuses carried out by non 
 state actors and indeed the robust nature of his condemnation is extremely 
significant and the importance of it should not be underestimated. It supports an 
argument advanced by unionism and by organisations such as the Cadogan Group that 
during the Troubles it was paramilitary organisations who were responsible for some 
of the worst human rights abuses carried out in Northern Ireland and that both the 
NIHRC and CAJ should be pursuing this argument and those organisations with as 
much vigour as it devoted to challenging the State over its actions. The perception 
arose, however, within unionist circles that because of Dicksons academic 
background and involvement with the CAJ, that he was not to be trusted and was 
pursuing a human rights agenda that was inimical to unionist self  interests. 
Unfortunately, but perhaps not surprising, unionist politicians seemed incapable of 
reaching any conclusion other than this and appeared either unwilling or incapable of 
stepping back, abstracting themselves from the situation and looking beyond 
Dicksons involvement with the CAJ.  Dickson recalls that with the UUP in particular 
there was a profound failure to step back from the situation and consider the facts 
independent of past prejudices and misconceptions,  
I worked with David Trimble in the QUB law school in the 80s when the CAJ was quite active and 
he considered me to be a Republican just because I belonged to the CAJ. There was an uneasy 
relationship with the unionist parties. There was a distinct coolness on the part of the unionist 
parties to us in the NIHRC which manifested itself in different ways. David Trimble, for example, 
when I first met him in my new capacity he wouldnt shake my hand and he is the only person I met 
during my six years at the Commission who wouldnt shake my hand (Interview with Professor 
Brice Dickson, 11
 June 2009) 
Dickson was also prepared to engage with unionist groups and saw profound value in 
engaging with organisations such as the Orange Order in encouraging them to engage 
with human rights issues. Indeed, as Dickson points out, he has always been 
surprised that they didnt bring certain cases to the courtsI was indirectly 
encouraging them to bring certain cases (Interview with Professor Brice Dickson, 
 June 2009). Indeed, the former human rights Commissioner, Chris McGimpsey 
supports this observation about Dickson by highlighting the fact that before his 
appointment, Brice Dickson was searching for an authentically unionist voice at the 
Commission (Interview with Dr Chris McGimpsey 1
 July 2009). With Dickson 
there was enormous potential for a better relationship to be constructed between 
unionism and the Human Rights Commission  not a perfect one, but a more 
constructive and fruitful relationship with the first Human Rights Commission than 
subsequently ensued. Conversely, however, the dominance of the bill of rights debate, 
the controversy around the definition of the particular circumstances and the 
Commissions pursuit of a maximalist narrative may have made it difficult for 
unionists to view the former Chief Commissioner positively. For many unionists this 
discourse emasculated much of the other work of the Commission meaning that 
perhaps a more positive view on Brice Dickson would have been difficult at the time 
to arrive at.  
Conclusion 
Amidst the haze of the debate about human rights in Northern Ireland it is possible to 
detect the emergence of a distinctive unionist narrative about human rights discourse 
in Northern Ireland. This narrative advocates a modest and minimalist conception of 
what human rights can achieve socially, politically and economically in Northern 
Ireland. Indeed, there is a strand of unionist political thought, particularly its more 
liberal and Lockean aspects, which would be theoretically speaking quite comfortable 
with a rights based political morality but that would not necessarily wish to see these 
rights translated into a constitutionally enshrined charter of rights. This thesis asked 
four interconnected and overlapping questions: Firstly, are influential strands of 
unionist opinion sceptical and suspicious of human rights as that concept as been 
interpreted and applied in Northern Ireland? Secondly, if unionists have expressed 
anxiety, what aspects of human rights discourse in Northern Ireland are key unionist 
elites sceptical of? Thirdly, is this anxiety universal or do significant cleavages within 
unionism exist? Fourthly, why are unionists anxious about human rights discourse in 
Northern Ireland? 
This thesis has attempted to address each of these questions and concludes that, 
firstly, within influential strands of unionist opinion there are profound anxieties 
about the application and interpretation of human rights based arguments in Northern 
Ireland. These anxieties centre around three areas; the expansive proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights; the work of the Northern Ireland Human Rights 
Commission and the campaign and advocacy work of human rights NGOs in 
Northern Ireland such as the Committee on the Administration of Justice.   Secondly, 
that there is a high degree of convergence, albeit with slight differences in emphasis, 
between the DUP and UUP in their position on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, their 
opposition to much of the NIHRCs work and in their relationship with human rights 
NGOs. The Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV), Orange Order and organisations such 
as Ulster Human Rights Watch (UHRW) would share similarities with the DUP and 
UUP in terms of their critique of key developments in human rights protection but 
would connect their critique more clearly with criticisms of the institutional 
arrangements for Government in Northern Ireland. Scepticism about current proposals 
for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights is not universal, however, as political parties 
such as the Progressive Unionist Party (PUP) have expressed effusive support for the 
work of the NIHRC and for their proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights.  
Thirdly, and more significantly this thesis has considered the reasons for unionist 
anxiety about rights discourse in Northern Ireland. It has established that unionist 
anxieties about the post Belfast  Agreement human rights agenda does not tell the 
full story about unionisms engagement with human rights in Northern Ireland. 
Indeed, in the period from the early 1970 until 1998 there is a different narrative of 
unionist support for the creation of for example a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, 
although as we have seen the major caveat to its support for a Bill of Rights during 
this period is that whilst supporting this idea, the majority of key actors within 
unionism at the time still failed to agree to sign up to a political settlement that would 
see unionists share power with Irish nationalism in a devolved administration. On the 
key issue, therefore, of why human rights  in particular the proposals for a Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights  became controversial post 1998 the thesis has identified three 
primary reasons to explain why unionisms positions shifted from one of passive 
support to explicit concern. Firstly, the incorporation of the Human Rights Act 1998 
and latterly the British Bill of Rights debate changed the dynamic of the discourse in 
Northern Ireland and in particular had an effect on influential strands of unionist 
opinion. Secondly, the insistence by the NIHRC, Bill of Rights Forum, human rights 
NGOs and the Irish Nationalist/Republican Parties on pursuing an inflated 
interpretation of the original mandate contained in the Belfast Agreement and thirdly, 
the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement meant that the issue of a Bill of 
Rights has become caught up in the type of symbolic, zero sum politics that has 
characterised other debates on issues in the peace process such as policing, 
decommissioning and power sharing. Furthermore we established that when it comes 
to the NIHRC, unionist anxieties centred around four issues: the representativeness of 
the Commission, the perception that it was pursuing an anti  unionist agenda, the 
influence of the CAJ and the excessive focus on state violations of human rights. 
Unionist anxiety is based upon genuine unionist concerns about the representativeness 
of the NIHRC and to a large extent, sadly, on personality clashes with key figures in 
the Commission. This thesis has, however, concluded that when it came to the first 
NIHRC under Brice Dickson, unionism has been guilty of profoundly misjudging his 
stewardship. In short, unionism fundamentally misunderstood Brice Dickson  a 
miscalculation, which needlessly compounded unionist anxiety about human rights 
discourse in Northern Ireland.  
At the time of writing, the human rights narrative in Northern Ireland remains 
incomplete. Whilst the Human Rights Commission will, in all likelihood, remain an 
important element of the new institutional framework for the protection of rights in 
Northern Ireland whether Northern Ireland will have a Bill of Rights is another 
matter. Whereas, once the question might have been what sort of Bill of Rights will 
Northern Ireland have, the question might now be put in a radically different way  
will Northern Ireland have a Bill of Rights at all? This assessment is neither an 
exercise in wishful thinking nor rhetorical excess but is grounded in a pragmatic 
assessment of the underlying political circumstances in which proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights are presently considered. 
Despite the fact that many human rights activists in Northern Ireland, at the time of 
the Agreement, invested much hope in the work of the Human Rights Commission, 
the Bill of Rights debate, is subsequently where most of their energy and attention 
became focussed. It assumed central importance in the human rights narrative that 
unfolded in Northern Ireland post 1998. However, despite the effort invested by these 
activists in campaigning for a Bill of Rights the process itself appears to be 
unravelling. When the Agreement was signed in 1998 there was little suggestion that 
over twelve years later this would be the case. After all, as is widely accepted, the 
idea of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights to address rights issues specific to the 
conflict had long been supported by all political parties in Northern Ireland. There are 
a number of aspects to that narrative worth considering which help to explain why the 
Bill of Rights process in Northern Ireland has arrived at this situation. Firstly, both the 
Labour and Conservative Governments have always been lukewarm about the idea of 
an expansive Bill of Rights. In 2004 the NIO Minister Des Browne MP wrote to the 
NIHRC expressing his opinion that the NIHRC had exceeded its mandate in 
proposing a long list of social and economic rights (Hadden, 2010). However, as we 
noted in chapter 4 the Labour Government in late 2009 dealt a fatal blow to the idea 
of an expansive Bill of Rights by rejecting over half the rights proposed by the 
NIRHC. Furthermore, before the Conservative Party came to office in May 2010 as 
part of a new coalition government with the Liberal Democrats it had expressed 
concern, as we saw in chapter 4, about the NIHRC proposals (Belfast Newsletter, 27
May 2009, Tories will not take McWilliams path  Cameron). The Conservatives 
were heavily criticised by human rights activists in Northern Ireland for proposing 
that Northern Ireland no longer requires a separate Bill of Rights but could be 
accommodated by a subsection to a wider UK Bill of Rights. 
Secondly, the apparent indifference displayed by Irish Nationalist and Republican 
parties in Northern Ireland who have traditionally been the most effusive supporters 
of a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights is one of the curious paradoxes at the heart of 
human rights discourse in Northern Ireland. Whilst the rhetoric of human rights 
remains central to Irish nationalist and Irish Republican narratives on the peace 
process in Northern Ireland, their actual support for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights 
in practice appears to be half  hearted. For example, during the negotiations at 
Hillsborough Castle in early 2010 between the British and Irish Governments, the 
DUP and Sinn Fein the Sinn Fein MP and Northern Irelands Deputy First Minister 
Martin McGuiness stated that, these talks were about equality. It was about rights. 
Your rights, my rights, our rights. These are not negotiable. They are entitlements 
(McGuinness, 28
 January, 2010) yet when it came to a Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland the issue did not feature as a significant issue during the negotiations. Sinn 
Fein wanted a date for the devolution of policing powers whilst the DUP pressed for 
the abolition of the parades commission resisting a date for justice powers to be 
devolved whilst the elusive concept of community confidence remained absent 
within the unionist community. However, after ten days of intensive negotiations an 
agreement was reached between the two largest parties and a date was given for the 
devolution of justice powers in return for Sinn Feins acquiescence to work towards 
the replacement of the parades commission. Other policy and institutional issues 
surfaced on the fringes of these negotiations also. Matters such as an Irish Language 
Act, reform of Northern Irelands post primary selection procedures and concern 
expressed by the UUP and SDLP that the Northern Ireland Executive was 
dysfunctional in terms of how it operated. However, when it came to the issue of a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, the significance lies in what the politicians didnt say 
rather in what they did say. None of the political parties used the issue of a Bill of 
Rights as a bargaining tool in those political negotiations. The creation of a human 
rights bill was neither used by any side as a precondition of support for the deal nor 
was it stated as a priority of any side during the negotiations who surely had the 
opportunity to place the need for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights higher on the 
political agenda during the talks. There was much talk by Sinn Fein leaders of putting 
the final pieces of the Agreement jigsaw together through the devolution of policing 
and justice powers but there was no mention that a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland 
represents one of those final pieces.  Both the British and Irish Governments regarded 
the transfer of policing and justice powers from London to Belfast as the final piece in 
the implementation of the Agreement, not the creation of a Bill of Rights. As the Irish 
Taoiseach, Brian Cowen commented as far back as November 2008, it is of great 
importance that devolution of policing and justice powers proceed. Its successful 
completion will be the final piece of the jigsaw of the peace process (The Guardian, 
 November, 2009). Similarly, as the then Secretary of State Shaun Woodward said 
in welcoming the Agreement reached between the DUP and Sinn Fein on policing, 
"This political agreement will be the last part of the jigsaw which is predicated on the 
entire peace process... (Daily Telegraph, 5
 February 2010). Significantly, nowhere, 
in the final text of the agreement reached at Hillsborough Castle is there any mention 
of the proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights. 
Thirdly, to a large extent, human rights activists in Northern Ireland expect criticism 
from the unionist community but they do not expect similar criticisms to be expressed 
robustly by academics and legal practitioners associated with human rights advocacy 
in Northern Ireland. However, from 2009 onwards this is exactly what occurred when 
the NIHRCs draft Bill of Rights proposals were criticised by Brice Dickson, the 
former NIHRC Chief Commissioner and current Queens academic, his academic 
colleague at Queenss law school and former NIHRC Commissioner, Tom Hadden 
(2010) and by the new Attorney General for Northern Ireland John Larkin QC. For 
Dickson, who as NIHRC Chief Commissioner for six years argued for an expansive 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, to support one now that is much less ambitious in 
scope than the Human Rights Commission has been arguing for since 2001 
(Dickson, 2009, HC 236) is of profound significance and appropriately illustrates the 
problem facing the strands of academic, political and community life in Northern 
Ireland who remain committed to Northern Ireland having nothing less than the 
expansive Bill of Rights proposed by the NIHRC. The shift in Dicksons thinking on 
the subject is encapsulated in these two paragraphs from evidence he gave to the 
Northern Ireland Affairs Committee at Westminster,  
Until I left the Commission I was firmly convinced that a broad-based Bill of Rights would be a 
great thing for Northern Ireland. It would symbolise the beginning of a new era for that part of the 
world, an era in which the very highest standards on human rights would be adhered to by every 
public authority and where everyone would accept that the whole of society benefits if the human 
rights of everyone are fully and impartially protected. Today, more than four years after leaving the 
Commission, I am not so sanguine. 
This is partly because the Forum for a Bill of Rights, which sat from December 2006 until March 
2008, produced such a non-consensual report, and the Human Rights Commissions advice to the 
Secretary of State, delivered in December 2008, met with such fierce opposition from unionist 
politicians. But a further reason for my change of position is that I have come to believe that the 
significance of having a broad-based Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland is just not as great as I once 
imagined it to beits just that I do not think the Bill of Rights needs to be of the all singing, all 
dancing variety that has been argued for by the Commission up to now. (Dickson, 2009, HC 236) 
Fourthly, nothing has contributed more to the unravelling of the Bill of Rights idea in 
Northern Ireland than the NIHRCs relentless insistence that Northern Ireland should 
have nothing less than an expansive Bill of Rights. They did this by constructing an 
idealised, universal narrative of human rights that overlooked and disregarded entirely 
the particular, specific and local context of human rights protection in Northern 
Ireland. As John Larkin, the first Attorney General at Stormont since 1972, argued in 
a speech delivered at the NIHRCs annual conference in September 2010,    
I think that among the present difficulties with some of the Bill of Rights discussion is the chasm 
that exists between what we actually need as individuals or communities and the Benthamite 
fantasy of making universal provision in a legislative code. The Belfast Agreement was right, I 
think, in Part 6 to use the phrase to reflect the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland to 
shape the role of the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission in advising the United Kingdom 
government on supplementary or additional rights to be defined in an Act of Parliament. It is 
doubtless a trite observation but rights have to fit the individuals and communities they are intended 
to serve. (Larkin, 2010)  
Political theorists such as Raymond Geuss (2001, 2008) have argued that attempting 
to construct a society along the lines of an idealised legal system structured around a 
set of rights (Geuss, 2008, p.59), like the NIHRC have sought to do in pursuing a 
maximalist Bill of Rights, is one practical manifestation of contemporary political 
theorys failure to be realistic. This failure of realism at a practical level in Northern 
Ireland about the rights that were being proposed for inclusion has indirectly 
contributed to the unravelling of the Bill of Rights process. The political philosopher, 
Robert Berki (1981), who reflected on the idea of political realism once argued that,  
the only kind of political realism which makes any sense is a realism that consciously relates to 
the whole of political reality, one that is based on reliable knowledge, on the acceptance of 
necessity and on a sense of practical possibilities. Political reality is defined by this whole 
spectrum: it is not anybodys subjective fancies or dreams; it is not a realm of infinite 
experimentation... (Berki, 1981, p.29)  
If the NIHRC had based their recent advice on reliable knowledge and a sense of 
practical possibilities rather than their own subjective fancies or dreams Northern 
Ireland, could possibly have had a Bill of Rights before now in line with the mandate 
of the Agreement. The NIHRC failed to take account of the realities of political life in 
Northern Ireland and completely disregarded the sharp political disagreements that 
exist about a Bill of Rights. As former NIHRC Commissioner Tom Hadden 
highlights,  
Instead of taking account of this serious division and clear signals from the British Government that 
it would only enact a Bill with cross communal support in the Assembly the newly appointed 
NIRHC led by Professor Monica McWilliams pressed ahead with a revised draft based almost 
exclusively on current international standards. (Hadden, Fortnight, September 2010, p.11)   
In many ways organisations such as the Cadogan group, whose original framework of 
analysis this research has drawn upon, will feel vindicated by recent events 
surrounding the Bill of Rights process in Northern Ireland. After all their critique and 
analysis of the NIHRCs initial proposals predicted much of what was about to occur, 
both, in terms of framing a more nuanced position that unionists could take about 
human rights in Northern Ireland, and the actual outworking of the Bill of Rights 
process. In the conclusion to their submission to the initial Bill of Rights consultation 
process they argued,  
Making a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland is, we fear, at best, a missed opportunity; at worst, it is 
a travesty. It reflects the self-importance of a self-important (if often well-meaning) community of 
advocates who are now attempting to extend their influence beyond the boundaries of their specific 
statutory remit. This proposed Bill of Rights does nothing to promote a stable and well-grounded 
culture of rights in Northern Ireland. It is not making any constructive contribution to the problem 
of sectarian division. (Cadogan Group, Taking Liberties, 2002) 
Before concluding, it is worth reflecting further on some of the theoretical insights 
identified in chapter 1 with the intention of connecting that discussion with the 
thesiss preceding empirical discussion. One of the key theoretical insights identified 
in chapter 1 was that the rigorous theoretical enquiry into the foundations and 
justification for human rights is important. If we eschew those debates because of 
practical urgency or philosophically, because we no longer think it is possible to 
provide an objective foundation for concepts such as rights a consequence is that, at a 
practical level, political discourse will suffer from rights inflation. Indeed, the 
theoretical insights from chapter 1 are meant to serve as a warning to the future 
development of a rights culture in Northern Ireland because whilst some may wish to 
see human rights provide the foundation for political thinking in Northern Ireland the 
foundations of human rights themselves are elusive and precarious making a future 
based on rights dangerously unstable. As we discussed in chapter 1 if there are no 
limits to what human rights are in theory then the risk is that there are no limits to 
what human rights are in practice. The practices of human rights activists in Northern 
Ireland since 1998 underline this need to pursue greater theoretical clarity about the 
limits of human rights and why we should not eschew theoretical and philosophical 
enquiry into their basis and justification. Human rights theory needs limits because 
without limits at the level of practice expectations will be raised about what human 
rights can achieve socially and economically and as a consequence there will be a 
stand off between opposing sides of the debate. In Northern Ireland this is precisely 
the situation that has occurred. In many ways human rights, because in political 
negotiations in Northern Ireland their advancement was always advocated by or 
associated with the SDLP and Sinn Fein, became entangled in the zero sum politics of 
the Northern Ireland peace process. Claims that human rights are universal and so 
consequently should be welcomed with open by arms by both sides to the conflict in 
Northern Ireland ring hollow in the highly subjective and contested world of Northern 
Irish politics. The idea that human rights could provide an objective, neutral starting 
point for the resolution of political disagreement in Northern Ireland is a dangerous 
fallacy that is merely an exercise in false hope and self delusion. Human rights have 
been set up in Northern Ireland as a pre  agreed existing set of political values that 
both Nationalists and Unionists could subscribe but this ignores the reality that there 
are sharp disagreements in political theory about what this pre  existing and agreed 
list of human rights are.  
The role played by unionist discourses in the unravelling of the Bill of Rights process 
can not be overlooked. Of particular significance is the aspect of their narrative that 
expressed concern about the impact of the NIHRCs proposals on the democratic 
process. Central to this court sceptic narrative is this claim  why when certain 
individual needs, interests and desires have been identified as a right should that right 
then be constitutionalised in the form of a Bill of Rights and the power to resolve, 
adjudicate and apply what is meant by a certain right be handed to the judiciary. The 
court sceptic narrative identifies the legislature and not the courts as the most 
appropriate place for the resolution of disagreement about rights. Furthermore, it is 
entirely possible to adhere to a strong theory of rights without supporting their 
constitutionalisation in a Bill of Rights (Waldron, 1993, 1999). On the other hand, one 
can also be a rights sceptic  adhering to a weak theory of rights and a court sceptic. 
In other words sceptical of asserting more and more individual claims as rights and 
equally sceptical about the implications when these disputed rights are translated not 
just into legal rights by positive law but into constitutional rights in a constitutionally 
entrenched Bill of Rights to be interpreted and adjudicated by a judiciary which has 
the power to invalidate the legislation from the elected legislature As we saw in 
chapter 4 this narrative began to emerge as one of unionisms central arguments 
against the proposed Bill of Rights from around 2007 onwards when the Bill of Rights 
Forum began to meet to deliberate on the issue. The Bill of Rights Forum process 
itself made a significant contribution to the development of Unionisms response to 
the concept of a Bill of Rights. The historic support that influential strands of unionist 
opinion had expressed for a Bill of Rights was often framed in a rhetorical, sometimes 
illogical and very generic fashion whereas, the response of key Unionist figures from 
2007 onwards displayed much more coherence and intelligibility than in the past that 
they are often not credited with.  
The central position court sceptic arguments assumed within unionist discourses 
appears to have been a reaction to the NIHRCs insistence on going beyond the remit 
of the Belfast Agreement in proposing such an expansive Bill of Rights. There is, 
therefore, a profound connection between the two arguments. It is worth considering 
why and how these two positions should be so closely connected. Indeed, answering 
this question involves returning to two key theoretical questions considered in chapter 
1 about the nature of human rights and Bills of Rights: Firstly, what are human rights? 
And secondly, why should human rights be constitutionalised in a Bill of Rights? 
Court sceptic theory recognises there is no agreed or universally accepted answer to 
the first question and because there is no right answer we should be careful, measured 
and modest in how we answer the second question. The court sceptic narrative 
suggests it is inappropriate for the judiciary to adjudicate on matters arising from 
contested conceptions and interpretations of what a particular human right means 
because of its impact on the democratic process. However, the converse to the court 
sceptic position  the court enthusiast position, underpinned by a strong theory of 
rights, suggests, in response to the first question, that there are a long list of individual 
needs, interests and desires, which should be classified as rights and that to answer 
the second question all these rights should be constitutionalised and included in a Bill 
of Rights. At the level of practice in Northern Ireland we make these theoretical 
scenarios intelligible by fitting the court sceptic position with the minimalist 
conception of human rights advanced by unionists and the court enthusiast position 
with the maximalist Bill of Rights proposed by the NIHRC.  
If theoretically, we have discussed what the outline of a court sceptic narrative might 
be and empirically we have outlined how one of the most significant characteristics of 
unionist responses to a Bill of Rights has been its tendency in recent times to 
articulate its position by appealing to the court sceptic narrative how does connecting 
these two propositions help us consider the appropriateness of conceptualising 
unionist responses as court sceptic. The instrumentalism of unionist reliance on 
court sceptic narratives suggested in the previous discussion masks a much deeper 
reality about why this argument assumed such central importance for unionist 
discourses about a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland. As the legal theorist Martin 
Loughlin argues there is no neutral language of public law. We can understand what 
a writer is saying only if we understand the political tradition within which the writer 
works. (Loughlin, 1992, p.230) In other words a deeper understanding of why 
unionists rely heavily upon court sceptic theory can only be acquired by considering 
the tradition of reflection about the British constitution in which unionism is 
grounded. Unionism is more comfortable within a discourse of political 
constitutionalism, which respects the sovereignty of Parliament and where rights are 
protected through the processes of Parliament and not the judiciary. In this sense 
unionism is very much rooted in the British Parliamentary experience. The evidence 
provided in chapter 4 was intended to re  enforce this view. This tradition in which 
unionism is grounded is vital for understanding why unionism relied on court sceptic 
arguments. Unionists value the sovereignty of Parliament not because of its 
longevitybut because it is considered to be appropriate to a democratic society. 
(Norton, 1982, 253) Therefore, as Turner argues, Democratic responsibility features 
predominantly in Unionist political thinking reflecting the primacy afforded to the 
position of Parliament as sovereign law making authority. (Turner, 2010, 454) To a 
certain extent, therefore, the narrative was there for unionists to discover, rather than 
invent because it is interwoven with the very essence of the British constitutional 
tradition of respect for the sovereignty of Parliament. Indeed, this court sceptic 
argument could have been pursued by unionists irrespective of the NIHRCs inflation 
of its own mandate. It is possible to conclude from this that the court sceptic narrative 
represents something more profound for unionists at the level of constitutional 
reflection than the mere instrumentalism of challenging the expansive Bill of Rights 
proposed by the NIHRC. The framing of unionists then as court sceptics adds a 
further layer to the unionist narrative on human rights  one that places Unionism 
within a broader tradition of political constitutionalism within the common law world. 
Indeed, when unionist responses to a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights are conceived of 
in these terms, unionism become part of a crucial and larger, broader narrative of 
commonwealth constitutionalism rather than as a marginal recalcitrant sectarian rump.  
The fact that unionisms political opponents have, since the earliest days of the 
troubles in Northern Ireland, adopted human rights language as part of their tactical 
and strategic advancement within the political sphere in Northern Ireland has caused 
many influential strands of unionist opinion to perceive human rights discourse in 
Northern Ireland as biased and inimical to unionist narrative self  understandings. As 
is the case with so many areas of political argument and contested concepts in 
Northern Ireland, unionism retreated from abstract debate and let its opponents claim 
use of the language of human rights in Northern Ireland. However, historians such as 
Brian Walker warn unionists and nationalists against relying on historical narratives 
which can provide grievances for contemporary usegive an influential 
deterministic view of things andcreate traditions which weigh heavily on current 
events.  (Walker, 1996, p.60) In some senses this helps to explain why unionists 
retreated from the debate about rights in Northern Ireland because how unionists 
interpret or view their historical experience of rights discourse in Northern Ireland 
reflected a tendency within unionism to react according to, how they saw it, assumed, 
pre  existing and unchangeable patterns rather than trying to set the agenda on 
human rights in Northern Ireland themselves. However, in many ways the court 
sceptic narrative created space for unionism to articulate a more nuanced and 
thoughtful argument about a Bill of Rights than had previously existed and directly 
challenged this retreat from abstract debate and the parochialism of unionist 
discourses about human rights. The argument advanced by unionists, however, must 
stretch to new levels of depth, complexity and nuance if it wants to challenge the new 
orthodoxy of rights thinking in Northern Ireland and the hegemony of one the most 
dominant narratives through which politics in Northern Ireland is viewed. The danger, 
however, as highlighted by Mick Fealty, David Stephen and Trevor Ringland in their 
study of the strategic future of unionism; is a state of mind within unionism, prevalent 
within elite and non elite unionist opinion which put crudely argues unionism should 
be playing nationalists at their own game in using rights discourse to assert various 
political, social and cultural claims. This approach will merely intensify the 
antagonism and conflict that rights discourse encourages. Evidence provided in 
chapter 4 through conversations with a senior figure in the Orange Order shows this is 
the direction that some wishes to promote. As they argue,  
Already, some unionist groups are readying themselves to exploit the new legislation to show how 
their rights are being trampled, and how much worse Protestants are now treated than Catholics. 
Nationalists undoubtedly have similar plans. This is not a fresh, but a false start, and unionists must 
act quickly to suggest another direction. (Fealty et. al, 2003, p.28)  
The evolution of the peace process in Northern Ireland from 1998  2007 was 
characterised by a decrease in support amongst unionists for the new political 
arrangements and institutions that were put in place by the political settlement in 
1998. Scholars such as Aughey (2001; 2005), Farrington (2006a, 2006b) and Tongue 
(2001; 2005) have examined the fragmentation and cleavages both within the Ulster 
Unionist Party and intra unionist disputes. During the high water of DUP opposition 
to the Belfast Agreement between 1998  2003, human rights, and in particular the 
work of the NIHRC and their proposals for a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights became 
another policy stick with which to beat the Ulster Unionist Party. The human rights 
aspects of the Agreement were just another reason why unionists should oppose the 
Belfast Agreement. However, this soon changed after the 2003 Northern Ireland 
Assembly elections when there was a distinct thawing of DUP discourse about the 
potential for an accommodation with Sinn Fein (now officially established as the 
largest Irish nationalist party). However, the DUP narrative on human rights is no 
longer connected in negative terms with the detrimental effects of the Belfast 
Agreement. As chapter 4 highlighted human rights is one area where there is a hugely 
significant policy convergence between the DUP and UUP. There are virtually no 
differences identified between the UUP and DUP on the big strategic issues of human 
rights protection in Northern Ireland; the work of the NIHRC and the proposals for a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights.  
In terms of practical policy proposals and suggestions for future academic research, 
this thesis proposes that in the Northern Ireland Assembly, a statutory human rights 
committee is established to operate in similar terms to the Joint Committee on Human 
Rights at Westminster. In doing this, deliberations about rights and the development 
of a rights culture is shifted from its juridical and legal constitutional mooring to a 
more political one where the role of elected representatives is enhanced. In terms of a 
Northern Ireland Bill of Rights, it is submitted that this process, after twelve years 
should come to an end. The remit contained in the Belfast Agreement to consider the 
creation of a Bill of Rights has been fulfilled and comprehensively explored to the 
conclusion that agreement between political actors and civil society in Northern 
Ireland is impossible. Moreover, the matter should also not be dealt with as a sub  
section to a UK Bill of Rights, as proposed by both the DUP and UUP and the new 
Conservative Government. The Human Rights Act is in the process of forming part of 
the settled law of the UK constitution and that process should not be upset by the 
repeal of the HRA and the creation of a UK Bill of Rights. If additional rights require 
further effect in law, this should be done as either an amendment to the Human Rights 
Act or in a separate piece of ordinary legislation in the UK parliament. There are a 
number of supplementary areas of investigation that can be pursued. This is the first 
academic study of unionism and human rights and the author looks forward to this 
research being refined, enhanced and developed by further research in this area. In 
particular, this could be done by moving beyond the focus on unionist elites that this 
study has had to explore the views of non elite unionist actors towards human rights 
in Northern Ireland that were beyond the scope of this study and to compare and 
contrast these views with the elite level actors views discussed and analysed in this 
research. In addition, there is scope to further develop research in this area through a 
comparative study with another political community in the common law world who 
have expressed similar anxiety to unionists about the growth of a culture of human 
rights and developments in human rights protection. This could be undertaken with 
reference to political opinion on these matters in places such as Canada, Australian 
and New Zealand. Perhaps more significant is the connection between this research 
and the further exploration of the issue of how Northern Ireland deals with the past. 
Together with Kirk Simpsons (2008, 2009) academic exploration of non  elite 
unionist views on truth recovery and the past in Northern Ireland it is hoped that this 
research helps to build a more comprehensive and holistic picture of unionist views 
on this significant area of post peace process politics in Northern Ireland.  
When it comes to the debate about human rights in the terrain of post peace process 
politics in Northern Ireland, unionism, for once, appears to be articulating its position 
on a Bill of Rights in an intelligible, defensible and coherent manner and has the 
outline of a coherent argument that it should continue to develop, consider and reflect 
upon. However, it took a considerable period of time after the prorogation of 
Stormont in 1972 for unionism to accept power  sharing with its political opponents 
as an acceptable form of devolved government for Northern Ireland and a laudable 
compromise worth putting into effect. If unionism in 1998 were reluctant participants 
in the power  sharing structures of the Belfast Agreement, in 2007 and 2010 they 
became relaxed and comfortable supporters of the concept. During this period, 
however, the rhetoric of unionist politicians has suggested that they remain committed 
to normal politics and to government at Stormont moving away from mandatory 
coalition to voluntary coalition. Unionism found oblique support for this idea when in 
September 2008 in a speech to the British  Irish Association, the then SDLP leader 
Mark Durkan speculated on the circumstances that could cause his party to move 
beyond the initial power sharing, architecture of the Agreement to a more organic 
form of Executive Government at Stormont. For him, a strong Bill of Rights would be 
key ingredient in such a shift. As Durkan argued,  
As we move towards a fully sealed and settled process we should be preparing to think about how 
and when to remove some of the ugly scaffolding needed during the construction of the new 
edificeProtections of rights, interests and identities will still be needed but not only for, or only 
as, either unionists or nationalists. In the stand-off over other issues recently, little attention is being 
paid to the rut that the Bill of Rights debate is stuck in. There are those who dismiss the need for 
such a bill or for it to be robust and extend to some social and economic issues. Maybe they and the 
rest of us need to start thinking about how a sound Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland might offer 
more productive and articulate protection for all our rights in a new democratic society than vote-
locks and tit-for-tat vetoes in perpetuity. (Durkan, 2010) 
Durkans speech was celebrated and criticised in terms familiar to close observers of 
the peace process in Northern Ireland. The DUP welcomed Durkans speech as 
support for its position of wanting to see the evolution at Stormont of mandatory 
coalition to voluntary coalition whilst Sinn Fein criticised the SDLP for seeking to 
abandon one of Northern Nationalisms sacred cows. Both parties, however, and not 
for the first time in Northern Irish political life, missed the real significance of 
Durkans speech.  As we saw in chapters 3 and 4, when unionists declared support for 
a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights in the late 1970s and early 1980s they did so whilst 
refusing to support a power sharing arrangement at Stormont  as a way of concealing 
their rejection of sharing power with Irish Nationalism  of making the illiberal seem 
liberal. However, what Durkans speech did and where its significance lies is that, in 
theory, it asks unionists to make a choice between continuing to support the idea of 
power sharing, something that had only fairly recently been accepted or to support 
abolishing or more appropriately, the withering away of power sharing structures at 
Stormont with the guarantee that a strong and inclusive Bill of Rights would be the 
countermajoriatrian device designed to insure nationalists against the wrongs of the 
past in Northern Ireland ever being repeated. Despite the unravelling of the Bill of 
Rights project in Northern Ireland it was and is an intriguing conundrum for unionists 
to consider. The question unionism should be asking itself, in the long term, however, 
is what is more likely to have the most profound negative effect on the constitutional 
governance of Northern Ireland and which option is likely to contribute to taking 
Northern Ireland further outside the UKs constitutional mainstream.  
Bibliography  
Adjei, C. 1995, "Human Rights Theory and the Bill of Rights Debate", Modern Law 
Review, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 17-36.  
Alcock, A. 1994, Understanding Ulster, Ulster Society, Belfast.  
Allan, J. 2008, "The Travails of Justice Waldron" in Expounding the Constitution: 
Essays in Constitutional Theory c, ed. G. Huscroft, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, pp. 161.  
Allan, J. 2006, "Thin Beats Fat Yet Again - Conceptions of Democracy", Law and 
Philosophy and Philosophy, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 533-559.  
Allan, J. 2004, "An Unashamed Majoritarian", Dalhousie Law Journal, vol. 27, pp. 
537-554.  
Allan, J. 2003, "A Modest Proposal", Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 23, no. 2, 
pp. 197-210.  
Allan, J. 2002, "Rights, Paternalism, Constitutions and Judges" in Litigating Rights: 
Perspectives from Domestic and International Law Hart Publishing, Oxford and 
Portland, pp. 29.  
Allan, J. 2001, "Take Heed Australia - A Statutory Bill of Rights and Its Inflationary 
Effect", Deakin Law Review, vol. 6, pp. 322-333.  
Allan, J. 1998, "Scepticism, Rights and Utility", Ratio Juris, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 413-
Allan, J. 1996, "Bills of Rights and Judicial Power - A Liberal's Quandary", Oxford 
Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 336-352.  
Allan, J. & Bagaric, M. 2006, "The Vacuous Concept of Dignity", Journal of Human 
Rights, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 257-270.  
Allister, J. 8th February 2008, Allister Faces Chief Human Rights Commissioner With 
Criticisms, TUV Press Release, Belfast.  
Anthony, G., McEvoy, K. & Morison, J. (eds) 2007, Judges, Transition and Human 
Rights, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Aughey, A. 7th July 2010, Unionists can add to vision of UK.  
Aughey, A. 2010b, "British Questions: A Non-Instrumentalist Answer", 
Parliamentary Affairs, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 407-424.  
Aughey, A. 2010b, Unionists can add to vision of UK.  
Aughey, A. 2009, "Wild catastrophism to mild moderation in Northern Ireland" in 
Breaking Up Britain: Four Nations After A Union, ed. M. Perryman, Lawrence & 
Wishart, London, pp. 104.  
Aughey, A. 2005, The Politics of Northern Ireland: Beyond the Belfast Agreement, 
Routledge, London/New York.  
Aughey, A. 2002, "The Art and Effect of Political Lying in Northern Ireland", Irish 
Political Studies, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1-16.  
Aughey, A. 2001, "Learning From 'The Leopard'" in Aspects of the Belfast 
Agreement, ed. R. Wilford, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 184.  
Aughey, A. 1999, "A New Beginning? The Prospects For a Politics of Civility In 
Northern Ireland" in After the Belfast Agreement, eds. J. Ruane & J. Todd, UCD 
Press, Dublin, pp. 122.  
Aughey, A. 1998, A Pragmatic Triumph, Fortnight Magazine, Belfast.  
Aughey, A. 1997, "The Character of Ulster Unionism" in Who are the People? 
Unionism, Protestantism and Loyalism in Northern Ireland, eds. M. McGovern 
& P. Shirlow, Pluto Press, London, pp. 1.  
Aughey, A. 1994, "Contemporary Unionist Politics" in The Northern Ireland 
Question: Perspectives and Policies, eds. B. Barton & P. Roche, Avebury, UK, 
pp. 53.  
Aughey, A. 1991, "Unionism and Self Determination" in The Northern Ireland 
Question: Myths and Reality, eds. B. Barton & P. Roche, Avebury, UK.  
Aughey, A. 1989, Under Siege: Ulster Unionism and the Anglo Irish Agreement, 
Hurst and Co./St Martin's Press, London/New York.  
Baxi, U. 2002, The Future of Human Rights, 1st edn, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.  
Beck, G. 2008, "The Mythology of Human Rights", Ratio Juris, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 
312-47.  
Bedau, H. 2000, "'Anarchical Fallacies': Bentham's Attack on Human Rights", Human 
Rights Quarterly, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 261-279.  
Beetham, D. 1995, "Human Rights in the Study of Politics", Political Studies, vol. 43, 
no. Special Issue, pp. 1.  
Beetham, D. 1995, "What Future For Economic and Social Rights?", Political 
Studies, vol. 43, no. Special Issue, pp. 41.  
Beitz, C. 2009, The Idea of Human Rights, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement April 1998. Cm 3883 edn, London: HMSO.  
Bell, C. 2009, "Transitional Justice, Interdisciplinarity and the State of the Field or 
Non Field", The International Journal of Transitional Justice, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 5-
Bell, C. 2008, On the Law of Peace: Peace Agreements and the Lex Pacificatoria, 1st 
edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Bell, C. 2003, "Dealing With the Past in Northern Ireland", Fordham International 
Law Journal, vol. 26, pp. 1095-1147.  
Bell, C. 2000, Peace Agreements and Human Rights, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.  
Bell, C., Campbell, C. & N Aolin, F. 2007, "Transitional Justice: 
(re)conceptualising the Field", International Journal of Law in Context, vol. 3, 
no. 2, pp. 81-88.  
Bell, C., Campbell, C. & N Aolin, F. 2004, ""Justice Discourses in Transition"", 
Social and Legal Studies, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 306-28.  
Bell, C. & Keenan, J. 2004, "Human Rights NGOs and the Problems of Transition", 
Human Rights Quarterly, vol. 26, pp. 330-374.  
Bellamy, R. 2007, Political Constitutionalism, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.  
Berki, R. 1981, On Political Realism, Dent, Suffolk.  
Bew, J. 2008, The Glory of Being Britons: Civic Unionism in Nineteenth-Century 
Belfast, Irish Academic Press, Dublin.  
Bew, P. 2007, Ireland: the politics of enmity, 1789-2006, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.  
Bew, P., Gibbon, P. & Patterson, H. 2002, The state in Northern Ireland, 1921-72: 
political forces and social classes, 2nd edn, Manchester University Press, 
Manchester.  
Bill of Rights Forum March, 2008, Recommendations to the Northern Ireland Human 
Rights Commission on a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, Belfast.  
Bill of Rights Forum 7th September 2007, Bill of Rights Forum Outreach Details, Bill 
of Rights Forum, press release.  
Birnie, E. 5th February 2005, Birnie Highlights 'Rights and Wrongs' Of Northern 
Ireland Human Rights Commission, UUP Press Release, Belfast.  
Bloomer, S. & Edwards, A. 2010, Dawn Purvis and the end of Progressive Loyalism, 
Fortnight Magazine, Belfast.  
Bogdanor, V. 2009, The New British Constitution, Hart Publishing, Oxford.  
Bourke, R. 2003, Peace In Ireland: The War of Ideas, Pimlico, Great Britain.  
Brown, C. 1997, "Universal Human Rights: A Critique", The International Journal of 
Human Rights, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 41-65.  
Bruce, S. 1994, The Edge of the Union: The Ulster Loyalist Political Vision, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.  
Bufacchi, V. 2008, "The Truth About Rights", Journal of Human Rights, vol. 7, no. 4, 
pp. 311-326.  
Burke, E. 2009, "Reflections on the Revolution in France" in Reflections on the 
Revolution in France: Oxford World's Classics, ed. L.G. Mitchell,.  
Campbell, C. & N Aolin, F. 2005, "The Paradox of Transition in Conflicted 
Democracies", Human Rights Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 172213.  
Campbell, C., N Aolin, F. & Harvey, C. 2003, "The Frontiers of Legal Analysis: 
Reframing the Transition in Northern Ireland", Modern Law Review, vol. 66, no. 
3, pp. 317 - 345.  
Campbell, C. & Turner, C. 2008, "Utopia and the Doubters: Truth, Transition and the 
Law", Legal Studies, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 374-395.  
Campbell, T. 1999, "Human Rights: A Culture of Controversy", Journal of Law and 
Society, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 6-26.  
Campbell, T., Ewing, K.D. & Tomkins, A. (eds) 2001, Sceptical Essays on Human 
Rights, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Coakley, J. (ed) 2002, Changing Shades of Orange and Green: Redefining the Union 
and the Nation in Contemporary Ireland, UCD Press, Dublin.  
Cochrane, F. 2006, "Two Cheers for the NGOs: Civil Society and the Good Friday 
Agreement" in A Farewell to Arms? From Long War to Long Peace in Northern 
Ireland eds. M. Cox, F. Guelke & F. Stephen, 2nd edn, Manchester University 
Press, Manchester.  
Cochrane, F. 1997, Unionist Politics and the Politics of Unionism Since the Anglo - 
Irish Agreement, 1st edn, Cork University Press, Cork.  
Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ) 1999, Commentary on 
recommendations in the Patten report A new beginning: policing in Northern 
Ireland, Belfast.  
"Committee on the Administration of Justice" February, 2010, CAJs submission to 
the NIO on a A Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland - Next Steps, Belfast.  
"Committee on the Administration of Justice" 2003, A Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland Through the Years: the views of the political parties, Shanway Press.  
Community Convention 2005, Protestant, Unionist, Loyalist Communities; Leading a 
Positive Transformation - Conference Report, Belfast.  
Convention, C. 2006, Positive Voices: A Vision For Renewal in PUL Communities, 
Belfast.  
Coulter, C. 1994, "The Character of Unionism", Irish Political Studies, vol. 9, no. 1, 
pp. 1-24.  
Cowell, D. & Cowell, K. 1999, "Human Rights as Conflict Management: The 
Unionist use of Human Rights Language in Northern Ireland", Nationalism and 
Ethnic Politics, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-28.  
Craig, B. NIHC, vol. 68 col. 602, 30th January 1968, Debate in the Northern Ireland 
House of Commons.  
Cranston, M. 1967, "Human Rights, Real and Supposed" in Political Theory and the 
Rights of Man, ed. D.D. Raphael, Macmillan, London.  
Crowe, B. February 2005, Author provided with a copy of an unpublished lecture 
delivered to the school of politics at University College Cork.  
Cruft, R. 2004, "Rights: Beyond Interest Theory and Will Theory", Law and 
Philosophy, vol. 23, pp. 347-397.  
Dembour, M. 2006, Who believes in Human Rights? Reflections on the European 
Convention, 1st edn, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
Dickson, B. 2010, The European Convention on Human Rights and the Conflict in 
Northern Ireland, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Dickson, B. 2009, Submission to the Northern Ireland Affairs Committee Inquiry on a 
Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, House of Commons: Northern Ireland Affairs 
Committee, London.  
Dickson, B. 2003b, "The Contribution of Human Rights Commissions to the 
Protection of Human Rights", Public Law, , pp. 272-285.  
Dickson, B. 2003a, "Unionism and Rights: An Answer for Arlene", Fortnight, vol. 
March, pp. 16.  
Dickson, B. 2000, The Protection of Human Rights: Lessons From Northern Ireland, 
Paul Sieghart Memorial Lecture, Available at 
http://www.bihr.org.uk/sites/default/files/Brice-Dickson-transcript.pdf.  
http://www.bihr.org.uk/sites/default/files/Brice-Dickson-transcript.pdf
Dickson, B. 10 December 2004, Interview with Brice Dickson, Chief Commissioner 
on International Human Rights Day, Available at 
www.nihrc.org/dms/data/NIHRC/attachments/.../ePolitix_interview_BD.doc.  
Dickson, B. & Osborne, R. 2007, "Equality and Human Rights since the Agreement" 
in Devolution and Constitutional Change in Northern Ireland, eds. P. 
Carmichael, C. Knox & R. Osborne, Manchester University Press, Manchester, 
pp. 152.  
Dixon, P. 2001, Northern Ireland: The Politics of War and Peace, 1st edn, Palgrave 
MacMillan, Basingstoke.  
Dixon, P. 1997, "Paths to Peace in Northern Ireland: Civil Society and Consociational 
Approaches", Democratization, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1-27.  
Dodds, N. Speech by Nigel Dodds MP, MLA to the DUP Annual Conference, DUP 
press release, Belfast.  
Donaldson MP, J. 2001, A Common Sense Bill of Rights For Northern Ireland. 
Belfast Telegraph  
Donaldson MP, J. 10th December 2010, DUP Rejects NIHRC Bill of Rights Report, 
DUP press release, Belfast.  
Donnelly, J. 2003, Universal Human Rights in theory and practice, 2nd Edition edn, 
Cornell University.  
Douzinas, C. 2007, Human Rights and Empire: The Political Philosophy of 
Cosmopolitanism, Routledge, London.  
Douzinas, C. 2000, The End of Human Rights, Hart Publishing.  
Douzinas, C. 2000, "Human Rights and Postmodern Utopia", Law & Critique, , no. 
11, pp. 219.  
Doyle, J. 1994, "Workers and Outlaws: Unionism and Fair Employment in Northern 
Ireland", Irish Political Studies, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 41-60.  
Dunn, S. & Morgan, V. 1994, Protestant Alienation in Northern Ireland: A 
Preliminary Survey, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Coleraine.  
DUP 2003, A Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland? A Unionist Vision, Ulster 
Democratic Unionist Party, Belfast.  
DUP 1984, Ulster The Future Assured: Proposals by the Ulster Democratic Unionist 
Party Northern Ireland Assembly Group, Ulster Democratic Unionist Party, 
Belfast.  
http://www.nihrc.org/dms/data/NIHRC/attachments/.../ePolitix_interview_BD.doc
Durkan, M. 8th September 2008, Speech to the British Irish Association, 
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/speech/leaders_speech_to_britis
h_irish_association/.  
Dworkin, R. 1977, Taking Rights Seriously, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Mass.  
Edwards, J. 2006, "Rights: Foundations, Contents, Hierarchy", Res Publica, vol. 12, 
no. 2, pp. 277-293.  
Elster, J. 1993, "Majority Rule and Individuals Rights" in On Human Rights: Oxford 
Amnesty Lectures 1993 Harper Collins, England, pp. 175.  
English, R. 2004, "Unionist Intellectuals and the Politics of Northern Ireland" in From 
the United Irishmen to Twentieth Century Unionism: A Festschrift for A.T.Q. 
Stewart, ed. S. Wichert, Four Courts Press, Dublin, pp. 207.  
English, R. & Walker, G. (eds) 1996, Unionism in Modern Ireland, Palgrave 
MacMillan, Basingstoke.  
Evans, J. & Tonge, J. 2001, "Faultlines in Unionism: Division and Dissent within the 
Ulster Unionist Council", Irish Political Studies, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 111-32.  
Evans, T. 2004, "Universal Human Right: 'as much round and round as ever onward'", 
The International Journal of Human Rights, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 155-158.  
Ewing, K.D. 2004, "The Futility of the Human Rights Act", Public Law, vol. Winter, 
pp. 829-852.  
Ewing, K.D. 2000, "The Politics of the British Constitution", Public Law, vol. 
Autumn, pp. 405-437.  
Ewing, K.D. 1999, "The Human Rights Act and Parliamentary Democracy", Modern 
Law Review, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 79-99.  
Fabre, C. 2000, Social rights under the constitution: government and the decent life, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Farrington, C. 2006, Ulster Unionism and the Peace Process in Northern Ireland, 
Palgrave MacMillan, London.  
Farrington, C. 2006, "Unionism and the Peace Process in Northern Ireland", British 
Journal of Politics and International Relations, vol. 8, pp. page 277.  
Farrington, C. 2003, "Ulster Unionism and the Irish Historiography Debate", Irish 
Studies Review, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 251-261.  
Farrington, C. 2001, "Ulster Unionist Political Divisions in the Late Twentieth 
Century", Irish Political Studies, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 51-71.  
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/speech/leaders_speech_to_british_irish_association/
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/speech/leaders_speech_to_british_irish_association/
Fealty, M., Steve, D. & Ringland, T. 2003, A Long Peace? The Future of Unionism in 
Northern Ireland, Slugger O'Toole, Dorset.  
Feinberg, J. 1973, Social Philosophy, Prentice Hall, USA.  
Fields, A.B. 2003, Rethinking Human Rights for the New Millennium, Palgrave 
Macmillan.  
Finlay, A. 2001, "Defeatism and Northern Protestant Identity", The Global Review of 
Ethnopolitics, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 3-20.  
Foley, M. 1999, The Politics of the British Constitution, MUP, Manchester.  
Follis, B. 1995, A State Under Siege: The Establishment of Northern Ireland 1920-25, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Foster, A. February 2003, Protestants Need Rights Explained to Them, Belfast.  
Foster, A. 2005, Human Rights Commission Needs To Make a Fresh Start.  
Fredman, S. 2000, "Judging Democracy: The Role of the Judiciary Under the Human 
Rights Act", Current Legal Problems, vol. 53, pp. 99-129.  
Freeden, M. 1996, Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual Approach, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.  
Freeden, M. 1991, Rights, 1st edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Freeman, M. 2002, Human Rights: An Interdisciplinary Approach, Polity Press, UK.  
Freeman, M. 1995, "Are there Collective Human Rights?", Political Studies, vol. 43, 
no. Special Issue, pp. 25.  
Freeman, M. 1994, "The Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights", Human Rights 
Quarterly, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 491-514.  
Gallie, W.B. 1956, "Essentially Contested Concepts", Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, vol. 56, pp. 167-198.  
Ganiel, G. 2006, "Ulster Says Maybe: The Restructuring of Evangelical Politics in 
Northern Ireland", Irish Political Studies, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 137-155.  
Gardbaum, S. 2001, "The New Commonwealth Model of Constitutionalism", 
American Journal of Comparative Law, vol. 49, pp. 707-760.  
Gearty, C. 2006, Can Human Rights Survive? Cambridge University Press.  
Geuss, R. 2008, Philosophy and Real Politics, Princeton University Press, New 
Jersey.  
Geuss, R. 2001, History and Illusion in Politics, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.  
Gibbon, P. 1975, The Origins of Ulster Unionism, Manchester University Press, 
Manchester.  
Glendon, M.A. 1993, Rights talk: the impoverishment of political discourse, 1st edn, 
Free Press.  
Godson, D. 2004, Himself Alone: David Trimble and the Ordeal of Unionism, Harper 
Collins, London.  
Gormley-Heenan, C. & Mac Ginty, R. 7, "Ethnic outbidding and party modernization: 
Understanding the Democratic Unionist Party's electoral success in the post-
Agreement environment", Ethnopolitics, vol. 1, no. 43-61.  
Government White Paper July, 2007, "The Governance of Britain", The Stationary 
Office.  
Gray, J. 1995, Enlightenment's Wake: Politics and Culture at the Close Of The 
Modern Age, Routledge, London/New York.  
Gray, J. 1993, Post Liberalism: Studies in Political Though, Routledge, London/New 
York.  
Griffin, J. 2008, On Human Rights, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Griffin, J. 2001, "First Steps in an Account of Human Rights", European Journal of 
Philosophy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 306-327.  
Griffith, J.A.G. 2000, "The Brave New World of Sir John Laws", Modern Law 
Review, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 159-176.  
Griffith, J.A.G. 1997, The Politics of the Judiciary, 5th edn, Fontana Press, London.  
Griffith, J.A.G. 1979, "The Political Constitution", Modern Law Review, vol. 42, no. 
1, pp. 19.  
Hadden, T. 2010, "How The Bill of Rights Was Lost", Fortnight, vol. July/August, 
pp. 5.  
Hadden, T. 2003, The Road to Island Rights. Fortnight Magazine, June, 2003 
Harvey, C. 2001c, "The Implementation of a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland", 
Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 3&4, pp. 342-371.  
Harvey, C. 2001b, "The Politics of Rights and Deliberative Democracy: The Process 
of Drafting a Northern Irish Bill of Rights", European Human Rights Law 
Review, , no. 1, pp. 48 - 70.  
Harvey, C. (ed) 2001a, Human Rights, Equality and Democratic Renewal in Northern 
Ireland, 1st edn, Hart Publishing, Oxford and Portland.  
Harvey, C. 2000, "Governing After the Rights Revolution", Journal of Law and 
Society, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 61-97.  
Harvey, C. & Schwartz, A. 2009, "Designing a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland", 
Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 181-199.  
Henkin, L. 1996, The Age of Rights, Columbia University Press, New York.  
Hennessey, T. 2005, Northern Ireland: The Origins of the Troubles, Gill and 
Macmillan, Dublin.  
Hennessey, T. 2000, The Northern Ireland Peace Process: Ending the Troubles? , 
Gill and Macmillan.  
Hennessey, T. 1993, "Ulster Unionist Territorial and National Identities 1886-1893: 
Province, Island, Kingdom and Empire", Irish Political Studies, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 
21-36.  
Hiebert, J.L. 2006, "Parliament and the Human Rights Act: Can the JCHR help 
facilitate a culture of Rights?", International Journal of Constitutional Law, vol. 
4, no. 1, pp. 1-38.  
Hiebert, J.L. 2006, "Parliamentary Bills of Rights: An alternative model?", The 
Modern Law Review, vol. 69(1), pp. 8.  
Hiebert, J.L. 2005, "Interpreting a Bill of Rights: The Importance of Legislative 
Rights Review", British Journal of Political Science, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 235-255.  
Hiebert, J.L. 2004, "New Constitutional Ideas: Can New Parliamentary Models Resist 
Judicial Dominance When Interpreting Rights?", Texas Law Review, vol. 82, no. 
7, pp. 1963-1987.  
Hirschl, R. 2004, Towards juristocracy: The origins and consequences of the new 
constitutionalism, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.  
Hobsbawm, E. & Ranger, T. (eds) 1983, The Invention of Tradition, 1st edn, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
Hohfeld, W.N. 1913, "Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as applied in Judicial 
Reasoning", Yale Law Journal, vol. 23(16),  
House of Lords and House of Commons Joint Committee on Human Rights 
Fourteenth Report of Session 2002-03, Work of the Northern Ireland Human 
Rights Commission.  
Huscroft, G. 2002, "Rights, Bills of Rights, and the Role of Courts and Legislatures" 
in Litigating Rights: Perspectives from Domestic and International Law, eds. G. 
Huscroft & P. Rishworth, Hart Publishing, Oxford and Portland, pp. 3.  
Ignatieff, M. 2007, "The Rights Revolution", 2nd edition edn, Anansi.  
Ignatieff, M. 2003, Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry, 3rd edn, Princeton 
University Press, New Jersey.  
Ignatieff, M. 1999, Human Rights: The Midlife Crisis.  
Ingram, A. 1994, A political theory of rights, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Ingram, J. 2008, "What Is a Right to Have Rights? Three Images of the Politics of 
Human Rights", American Political Science Review, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 401-416.  
Ishay, M. 2004, "What are Human Rights? Six Historical Controversies", Journal of 
Human Rights, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 359-371.  
Jackson, A. 2003, Home Rule: An Irish History 1800-2000, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 
London.  
Jackson, A. 1996, "Irish Unionism" in The Making of Modern Irish History: 
Revisionism and the Revisionist Controversy, eds. G.D. Boyce & A. O'Day, 
Routledge, London, pp. 120.  
Jackson, A. 1992, "Unionist Myths 1912-1985", Past and Present, vol. 136, no. 1, pp. 
164-185.  
James, S. 2003, "Rights as enforceable claims", Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 133-147.  
Jenkins, D. 2009, "Common Law Declarations of Unconstitutionality", International 
Journal of Constitutional Law, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 183-214.  
Jones, E. "Debate in the Northern Ireland House of Commons", NIHC, vol. 57. col. 
2022, 16th June 1964, .  
Kaufman, E. & Patterson, H. 2007, Unionism and Orangeism in Northern Ireland 
since 1945: The Decline of the Loyal Family, Manchester University Press, 
Manchester.  
Kavanagh, A. 2004, "The Role of a Bill of Rights in Reconstructing Northern 
Ireland", Human Rights Quarterly, vol. 26, pp. 956-982.  
Kennedy, D. Monday 1st March, 2010, Official Record of the Northern Ireland 
Assembly, Vol 49, No1, 25, Debate in the Northern Ireland Assembly.  
Kennedy, D. 24th March, 2006, Two Sides of the Coin: Human Rights Pragmatism 
and Idolatry: Keynote Address, Interdisciplinary Conference on Human Rights, 
Harvard Law School, Clement House, London School of Economics.  
Kennedy, D. 2002, "The International Human Rights Movement: Part of the 
Problem", Harvard Human Rights Journal, vol. 15, no. Spring, pp. 101-125.  
Kilfedder, J. HC Deb 22 June 1989 vol. 155 col. 479, Debate in the House of 
Commons.  
Kilfedder, J. HC Deb 12 January 1976 vol 90, 132, Debate in the House of Commons.  
Kilfedder, J. HC Deb 07 July 1975 vol. 895 col. 31, Debate in the House of 
Commons.  
Kirk, R. 2001, The Conservative Mind, 7th edn, Regnery, Washington D.C.  
Klug, F. 1997, "Can Human Rights Fill Britain's Morality Gap?", Political Quarterly, 
vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 143-152.  
Knowles, D. 2001, Political Philosophy, 1st edn, Routledge, London.  
Laird, L. 11th August 2003, Wanted: a Rights Commission for the Whole Northern 
Ireland Community, Irish Times, Dublin.  
Landman, T. 2005, "The Political Science of Human Rights", British Journal of 
Political Science, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 549-572.  
Larkin QC, J. 16th September 2010, Speech to the NIHRC Annual Conference, 
Belfast's Waterfront Hall.  
Law, J. 2008, Bill of Rights Forum Outreach Report to Unionist Communities, Bill of 
Rights Forum, Belfast.  
Little, A. 2004, Democracy and Northern Ireland: Beyond the Liberal Paradigm, 
Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke.  
Livingstone, S. 2001, "The Need for a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland", Northern 
Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 3&4, pp. 269-285.  
Livingstone, S. 1999, "The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission", Fordham 
International Law Journal, vol. 22, pp. 1465-1498.  
Livingstone, S. & Harvey, C. 1999, "Human Rights and the Northern Ireland Peace 
Process", European Human Rights Law Review, vol. 2, pp. 162-177.  
Livingstone, S. & Morison, J. 1995, Reshaping Public Power: Northern Ireland and 
the British Constitutional Crisis, Sweet and Maxwell, Great Britain.  
Livingstone, S. & Murray, R. 2005, Evaluating the Effectiveness of National Human 
Rights Institutions: The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission With 
Comparisons From South Africa, QUB, Belfast.  
Locke, J. 1980, in Second Treatise of Government (First Published, 1690), ed. C.B. 
MacPherson, Hackett Publishing, Indianapolis/Cambridge.  
Loughlin, J. 1995, Ulster Unionism and British National Identity Since 1885, Pinter, 
London.  
Loughlin, M. 2004, The Idea of Public Law, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Loughlin, M. 2000, Swords and Scales: an examination of the relationship between 
law and politics, Hart Publishing, Oxford and Portland.  
Loughlin, M. 1992, Public Law and Political Theory, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Lukes, S. 1991, Moral Conflict and Politics, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Lundy, P. & McGovern, M. 2008, "A Trojan Horse? Unionism, Trust and Truth 
Telling in Northern Ireland", The International Journal of Transitional Justice, 
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 43-62.  
Lundy, P. & McGovern, M. 2008, "Whose Justice? Rethinking Transitional Justice 
From The Bottom Up", Journal of Law and Society, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 265-92.  
MacCormick, N. 1977, "Rights in Legislation" in Law, Morality and Society, eds. 
P.M.S. Hacker & J. Raz, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
MacIntyre, A. 2007, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, 3rd (Revised) edn, Gerald 
Duckworth & Co Ltd.  
MacIntyre, A. 2006, Ethics and Politics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
MacIntyre, A. 1989, Whose Justice Which Rationality? University of Notre Dame 
Press, Notre Dame.  
Mageean, P. & O'Brien, M. 1999, "From the Margins to the Mainstream: Human 
Rights and the Good Friday Agreement", Fordham International Law Journal, 
vol. 22, pp. 1499-1538.  
Maginnis, K. HC Deb 29 June 1995 vol. 262 cc1070-2, Debate in the House of 
Commons.  
Maguire, P. 1981, "The Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights 1973-
1980", Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 32, no. Spring.  
Mahoney, J. 2007, The challenge of human rights: origin, development, and 
significance, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.  
Mahoney, J. 2008, "Liberalism and the Moral Basis for Human Rights", Law and 
Philosophy, vol. 27, pp. 151-191.  
Marmor, A. 1997, "On the Limits of Rights", Law and Philosophy, vol. 16, pp. 1-18.  
Mazower, M. 2004, "The Strange Triumph of Human Rights: 1933-1950", The 
Historical Journal, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 379398.  
McAuley, J. 2003, "Unionism's Last Stand? Contemporary Unionist Politics and 
Identity in Northern Ireland", The Global Review of Ethnopolitics, vol. 3, no. 1, 
pp. 60-74.  
McCartney QC, R. 2001, Reflections on Liberty, Democracy and the Union, Maunsel 
& Company, Dublin.  
McCartney QC, R. 1986, Liberty and Authority in Ireland, Field Day Theatre 
Company, Derry.  
McCausland, N. 2009, Speech to the DUP Annual Conference.  
McCrudden, C. 2007, "Consociationalism, Equality and Minorities in the Northern 
Ireland Bill of Rights Debate" in Judges, Transition and Human Rights, eds. G. 
Anthony, K. McEvoy & J. Morison, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 329.  
McCrudden, C. 2007, "Northern Ireland and the British Constitution Since the Belfast 
Agreement" in The Changing Constitution, eds. J. Jowell & D. Oliver, 6th edn, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 227.  
McCrudden, C. 2001, "Not The Way Forward: Some Comments On the NIHRC's 
Consultation Document on a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland", Northern 
Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 3&4, pp. 372-384.  
McEvoy, K. 2007, "Beyond Legalism: Towards a Thicker Understanding of 
Transitional Justice", Journal of Law and Society, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 411-440.  
McEvoy, K. 2003, "Beyond the Metaphor: Political Violence, Human Rights and 
New Peacekeeping Criminology", Theoretical Criminology, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 
319-336.  
McEvoy, K. 2000, "Law, Struggle and Political Transformation in Northern Ireland", 
Journal of Law and Society, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 542-71.  
McEvoy, K. & Morison, J. 2003, "Beyond the 'Constitutional Moment': Law, 
Transition and Peacemaking in Northern Ireland", Fordham International Law 
Journal, vol. 26, pp. 961-995.  
McGarry, J. & O'Leary, B. 1995, Explaining Northern Ireland: Broken Images, 1st 
edn, Blackwell Publishing, Cambridge.  
McGrath, C. & O'Malley, E. (eds) 2007, Irish Political Studies Reader: Key 
Contributions, Routledge, London/New York.  
McGrattan, C. 2009, "'Order Out of Chaos': The Politics of Transitional Justice", 
Politics, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 164-172.  
McGuinness, M. 31st January 2010, Martin McGuiness address to the annual Bloody 
Sunday Rally in Derry.  
McLean, I. & MacMillan, A. 2005, State of the Union, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.  
McLellan, D. 1977, Karl Marx: Selected Writings, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Meehan, M. 2001, "Towards a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights", Liverpool Law 
Review, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 33-56.  
Mendus, S. 1995, "Human Rights in Political Theory", Political Studies, vol. 43, no. 
Special Issue, pp. 10-24.  
Mertus, J. 2009, Human Rights Matters: Local Politics and National Human Rights 
Institutions, Stanford University Press, California.  
Miller, D. 1978, Queen's Rebels: Ulster Loyalism in Historical Perspective, 1st edn, 
Gill and Macmillan, Dublin.  
Mitchell, D. 2009, "Cooking the Fudge: Constructive Ambiguity and the 
Implementation of the Northern Ireland Agreement, 1998-2007", Irish Political 
Studies, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 321  336.  
Morgan, A. 2008, Do the Victims of Terrorism have Human Rights?, Speech at the La 
Mon House Hotel, Belfast.  
Morgan, A. 2001, "What Bill of Rights?", Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly, vol. 52, 
no. 3&4, pp. 234-268.  
Morsink, J. 2009, Inherent Human Rights: Philosophical Roots of the Universal 
Declaration, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.  
Mulholland, M. 2004, "Why Did Unionists Discriminate?" in From the United 
Irishmen to Twentieth Century Unionism, ed. S. Wichert, Four Courts Press, 
Dublin, pp. 194.  
Mulholland, M. 2000, Northern Ireland at the crossroads: Ulster Unionism in the 
O'Neill years, 1960-9, Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke.  
Murnaghan, S. NIHC, vol. 68 col. 575, 30th January 1968, Debate in the Northern 
Ireland House of Commons.  
Murnaghan, S. NIHC, vol. 57, col. 1989, 16th June 1964, Debate in the Northern 
Ireland House of Commons.  
Murray, R. 2001, "The Importance of a Bill of Rights in Northern Ireland as a 
Process: Comparative Reflections from South Africa", Northern Ireland Legal 
Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 3&4, pp. 385-406.  
Murtagh, C. 2008, "A Transient Transition: The Cultural and Institutional Obstacles 
Impeding the Northern Ireland Womens Coalition in its Progression from 
Informal to Formal Politics", Irish Political Studies, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 21  40.  
Nesbitt, D. 1995, Unionism Restated: An Analysis of the Ulster Unionist Partys 
Statement of Aims, UUP, Belfast.  
Nesbitt, D. & Birnie, E. 17th June 2005, Ulster Unionists Respond to new NIHRC 
Appointments, UUP Press Release, Belfast.  
News, T.I. 23rd November 2001, SF Slams Appointments to Human Rights Group, 
Belfast.  
News, T.I. 1st July 2004, Body Still Reeling From Holy Cross Affair, Belfast.  
News, T.I. 14th November 2003, Dickson Refuses to be Forced From Post, Belfast.  
News, T.I. 13th November 2003, Ghost of Holy Cross to Haunt Human Rights 
Commission, Belfast.  
Newsletter, B. 31st March 2005, McCrea Attacks Human Rights Body, Belfast.  
Newsletter, B. 27th May 2009, Tories will not take McWilliams path  Cameron, 
Belfast.  
Newsletter, B. 24th March 2009, Commissioner Under Fire On Detention Views, 
Belfast.  
Newsletter, B. 2008, Bill Is Not In the Interests of the Union.  
Newsletter, B. 1st July 2005, Unionists Feel Real Anger Towards Appointments, 
Belfast.  
Newsletter, B. 17th June 2005, Unionist Fury at McWilliams Appointment, Belfast.  
Nickel, J. 2007, Making Sense of Human Rights, 2nd edn, Blackwell Publishing, 
Oxford.  
Nicol, D. 2006, "Law and Politics after the Human Rights Act", Public Law, vol. 
Autumn, pp. 722-751.  
Northern Ireland Assembly Official Report, 25th September 2001, Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission, Available at: 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports/010925b.htm.  
Northern Ireland Assembly Official Report Tuesday 3rd November, Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission, Available at: 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2009/091103.htm#5.  
Northern Ireland Assembly Official Report 8th April 2008, Bill of Rights and 
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, Available at: 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm#4.  
Northern Ireland Assembly Official Report 15th October 2007, Bill of Rights Forum 
Membership, Available at 
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3.  
Northern Ireland Forum for Political Dialogue Official Record of the Northern Ireland 
Forum, 6 December 1996, 3-31, Debate about the protection of human rights in 
Northern Ireland.  
Northern Ireland Forum for Political Dialogue Official Record of the Northern Ireland 
Forum, 19th September, 1997 2-45, Debate about a Northern Ireland Bill of 
Rights.  
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission February, 2010, A Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland: Next Steps - Response to the Northern Ireland Office, Belfast.  
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 2008, A Bill of Rights for Northern 
Ireland: Advice to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Belfast.  
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 2004, Progressing a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland: an update, Belfast.  
Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 2001, Making a Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland, Belfast.  
Northern Ireland Office November, 2009, A consultation paper - A Bill of Rights for 
Northern Ireland: Next Steps, NIO, London.  
Norton, P. 2007, "Tony Blair and The Constitution", British Politics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 
269281.  
Norton, P. 1982, The Constitution in Flux, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.  
Nozick, R. 1977, Anarchy, State and Utopia, Basic Books, USA.  
Oakeshott, M. 28th January, 1948, Correspondence between Michael Oakeshott and 
Karl Popper,.  
Oakeshott, M. 1991, Rationalism in Politics and other essays, Liberty Press.  
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports/010925b.htm
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2009/091103.htm#5
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080408.htm#4
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/071015.htm#3
Oakeshott, M. 1991, Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays, 2nd edn, Liberty Fund 
Inc, London.  
O'Cinneide, C. 2008, "The New Human Rights Culture" in Constitutional Futures 
Revisited: Britain's Constitution to 2020, ed. R. Hazell, Palgrave Macmillan, 
London, pp. 159-177.  
O'Connell, R. 2005, ""Do We Need Unicorns When We Have Law?"", Ratio Juris, 
vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 484-503.  
O'Dowd, L. 1998, "New Unionism" in Rethinking Northern Ireland: Culture, 
Ideology and Colonialism, ed. D. Miller, Longman, London, pp. 71.  
O'Dowd, L. 1991, "Intellectuals and Political Culture: A Unionist - Nationalist 
Comparison" in Culture and Politics in Northern Ireland: 1960-1990, ed. E. 
Hughes, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 151.  
O'Flynn, I. 2003, "The Problem of Recognising Individual and National Identities: A 
Liberal Critique of the Belfast Agreement", Critical Review of International 
Social and Political Philosophy, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 129 - 153.  
OFMDFM 2005, Population Change and Social Inclusion Study Derry/Londonderry, 
http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/derryreport.pdf.  
O'Leary, B. 2001, "The Protection of Human Rights under the Belfast Agreement", 
Political Quarterly, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 353-365.  
O'Neill, O. 2010, "Rights, Obligations and Priorities", Studies in Christian Ethics, vol. 
23, no. 2, pp. 163 - 171.  
O'Neill, O. 2005, "The Dark Side of Human Rights", International Affairs, vol. 81, 
no. 2, pp. 427-439.  
O'Sullivan, N. 1976, Conservatism, St. Martin's Press, New York.  
Paisley, I. HC Deb 03 August 1972 vol. 842 c946, Debate in the House of Commons.  
Palley, C. 1972, "The Evolution, Disintegration and Possible Reconstruction of the 
Northern Ireland Constitution", Anglo American Law Review, vol. 1, pp. 368-
Patterson, H. April, 2008, Victims Who Must Wait For The Truth.  
Patterson, H. 2010, Republicans will mourn most at PUP's demise.  
Patterson, H. 2009, Is Report on Dealing With Ulster's Past Dead in the Water.  
Patterson, H. 2009, "Truth and reconciliation in NI? Not much hope of either", 
Parliamentary Brief, vol. February 9th.  
http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/derryreport.pdf
Patterson, H. 2006, "In the Land of King Canute: The Influence of Border Unionism 
on Ulster Unionist Politics, 1945-63", Contemporary British History, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 511-532.  
Patterson, H. 2006, Ireland Since 1939: The Persistence of Conflict, 1st edn, Penguin 
Ireland, Dublin.  
Patterson, H. 2004, "The Limits of 'New Unionism': David Trimble and the Ulster 
Unionist Party", Eire-Ireland: Journal of Irish Studies, vol. 39, no. 1&2, pp. 163-
Patterson, H. 1999/2000, "Brian Maginess and the Limits of Liberal Unionism", Irish 
Review, vol. 25, pp. 95-110.  
Penner, J.E. 1997, "The Analysis of Rights", Ratio Juris, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 300-15.  
Perry, M. 2007, Toward a Theory of Human Rights: Religion, Law, Courts, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
Perry, M. 1998, "What is the Constitution?" in Constitutions: Philosophical 
Foundations, ed. L. Alexander, 1st edn, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
pp. 99.  
Peter Jones 1994, Rights, Basingstoke: MacMillan.  
Phillipson, G. 2007, "Deference, Discretion and Democracy in the Human Rights Act 
Era", Current Legal Problems, vol. 60, pp. 40-78.  
Porter, N. 1996, Rethinking Unionism: An Alternative Vision for Northern Ireland, 
The Blackstaff Press, Belfast.  
Rawls , J. 1993, Political Liberalism, Columbia University Press, New York.  
Raymond Geuss 2001, History and Illusion in Politics, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.  
Raz, J. 1998, "On the Authority and Interpretation of Constitutions: Some 
Preliminaries" in Constitutionalism: Philosophical Foundations, ed. L. 
Alexander, 1st edn, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 152.  
Raz, J. 1996, "Rights and Politics", Indiana Law Journal, vol. 71, pp. 27-44.  
Raz, J. 1986, The Morality of Freedom, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
Raz, J. 1984, "Legal Rights", Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1-21.  
Report of the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention: Together With The 
Proceedings of the Convention and Other Appendices 1975, London: HMSO.  
Robinson, P. 30th June 2008, Speech by First Minister, Peter Robinson MP, MLA to 
delegates at the World Bar Conference, DUP press release.  
Robinson, P. 2005, DUP Respond to McWilliams Appointment, DUP press release, 
Belfast.  
Roche, P. 1994, "Northern Ireland and Irish Nationalism - A Unionist Perspective", 
Irish Review, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 70-78.  
Rorty, R. 1993, "Human Rights, Rationality and Sentimentality" in On Human 
Rights: The Oxford Amnesty Lectures 1993, eds. S. Shute & S. Hurley, Harper 
Collins, England, pp. 111.  
Rynder, C. 2006, "Sheelagh Murnaghan And The Struggle For Human Rights In 
Northern Ireland ", Irish Studies Review, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 447 - 463.  
Sandel, M. 1998, Liberalism and the limits of justice, 2nd edn, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.  
Scalia, A. 2002, "The Bill of Rights: Confirmation of Extant Freedoms or Invitation 
to Judicial Creation?" in Litigating Rights: Perspectives from Domestic and 
International Law, eds. G. Huscroft & P. Rishworth, Hart Publishing, Oxford and 
Portland, pp. 19.  
Scruton, R. 2001, The Meaning of Conservatism, 3rd edn, Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke.  
Sen, A. 2004, "Elements of a Theory of Human Rights", Philosophy and Public 
Affairs, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 315-56.  
Shestack, J. 1998, "The Philosophic Foundations of Human Rights", Human Rights 
Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 201-234.  
Shue, H. 1996, Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence and US Foreign Policy, 2nd edn, 
Princeton University Press, New Jersey.  
Shute, S. & Hurley, S. (eds) 1993, On Human Rights: The Oxford Amnesty Lectures 
1993, Harper Collins.  
Sidoti, C. 2008, Five Good Reasons Why Northern Ireland Needs a Bill of Rights.  
Simpson, K. 2009, Unionist Voices: The Politics of Remembering the Past in 
Northern Ireland, Palgrave MacMillan, Basingstoke.  
Simpson, K. 2008, "Untold Stories: Unionist Remembrance of Political", British 
Politics, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 465-489.  
Smith, A. 2004, "The Drafting Process of a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland", 
Public Law, vol. Autumn, pp. 526-536.  
Southern, N. 2007b, "Protestant Alienation in Northern Ireland: a Political, Cultural 
and Geographical Examination", Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, vol. 
33, no. 1, pp. 159-180.  
Southern, N. 2007, "Britishness, Ulsterness and Unionist Identity in Northern 
Ireland", Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 71-102.  
Spencer, G. 2008, The State of Loyalism in Northern Ireland, Palgrave MacMillan, 
Basingstoke.  
Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights (SACHR) 1977, The Protection of 
Human Rights by Law, Cmd 7009 edn, London: HMSO.  
Stanlis, P. 2003, Edmund Burke and the Natural Law, Transaction Publishers, USA.  
Stewart, A.T.Q. 1977, The Narrow Ground: Patterns of Ulster History, Pretani Press, 
Belfast.  
Tasioulas, J. 2010, "Taking Rights out of Human Rights", Ethics, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 
647 - 678.  
Telegraph, B. 7th November, 2005, DUP may make human rights challenge to On 
The Runs plan, Belfast.  
Telegraph, B. 30th December 2005, Rights boss is winning over unionists, Belfast.  
Telegraph, B. 2009, Purvis: Unionists 'lacking honesty' over Bill of Rights.  
The Cadogan Group 2002, Taking Liberties.  
The Cadogan Group 1992, Northern Limits: The Boundaries of the Attainable in 
Northern Ireland Politics, The Cadogan Group, Belfast.  
Times, T.I. 2009, Unionists at Odds Over Cause of Troubles, 4th November edn, 
Dublin.  
Times, T.I. 17th June 2005, Paisley Calls McWilliams Appointment an Insult (Gerry 
Moriarty).  
Todd, J. 1993, "Unionist Political Thought, 1920-72" in Political Thought In Ireland 
since the 17th Century, eds. D.G. Boyce, R. Eccleshall & V. Geoghan, 
Routledge, London, pp. 190.  
Todd, J. 1987, "Two Traditions in Unionist Political Culture", Irish Political Studies, 
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1-26.  
Tomkins, A. 2005, Our Republican Constitution, Hart Publishing, Oxford.  
Tomkins, A. 2003, Public Law, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Tomkins, A. 2002, "In Defence of the Political Constitution", Oxford Journal of Legal 
Studies, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 157-175.  
Tribune, T.S. 20th July 2003, Commission Tilting the Playing Field, Dublin.  
Trimble, D. 2008, Note of Dissent to the NIHRC's Advice to the Secretary of State on 
a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland, Author supplied with copy, May 2009.  
Trimble, D. 2004, Human rights groups are complicit in murder, says Trimble. The 
Guardian, 8
 April  
Trimble, D. 1999, "The Belfast Agreement", Fordham International Law Journal, 
vol. 22, pp. 1145.  
Trimble, D. 1997, Extracts From an Address of Mr David Trimble MP To The United 
States National Committee of Foreign Policy, New York.  
Tuck, R. 1978, Natural Rights Theories, 1st edn, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.  
Turner, C. 2010, "Political representations of law in Northern Ireland", Public Law, 
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 451 - 459.  
UUP 2000, UUP Response to the NIHRC Draft Strategic Plan 1999-2002.  
UUP 1984, Devolution and the Northern Ireland Assembly, The Way Forward, Ulster 
Unionist Assembly Party's Report Committee.  
UUP 1972, Towards the Future: A Unionist Blueprint, Unionist Publicity and 
Research Department, Belfast.  
Vincent, A. 2010, The Politics of Human Rights, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Waldron, J. 2006, "The Core of the Case Against Judicial Review", The Yale Law 
Journal, vol. 115, no. 6, pp. 1346-1406.  
Waldron, J. 1998, "Judicial Review and the Conditions of Democracy", The Journal 
of Political Philosophy, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 335-353.  
Waldron, J. 1998, "Precommitment and Disagreement" in Constitutionalism: 
Philosophical Foundations, ed. L. Alexander, 1st edn, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, pp. 271.  
Waldron, J. 1993, "A Right - Based Critique of Constitutional Rights", Oxford 
Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 13, no. Spring 1993, pp. 18.  
Waldron, J. (ed) 1987, Nonsense upon stilts: Bentham, Burke and Marx on the Rights 
of Man, Methuen.  
Waldron, J. (ed) 1984, Theories of Rights, 1st edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Walker, B. 2007, ""Ancient Enmities" and Modern Conflict: History and Politics in 
Northern Ireland", Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 103-128.  
Walker, B. 2000, Past and Present: History, Identity and politics in Ireland, 1st edn, 
Institute of Irish Studies, QUB, Belfast.  
Walker, B. 1996, Dancing to History's Tune: History, myth and politics in Ireland, 1st 
edn, Institute of Irish Studies, QUB, Belfast.  
Walker, B. 1989, Ulster Politics: The Formative Years, 1868-86, Ulster Historical 
Foundation and the Institute of Irish Studies, QUB, Belfast.  
Walker, D.G. 2004, The History of the Ulster Unionist Party: protest, pragmatism 
and pessimism, Palgrave Macmillan.  
Walmsley, A.J. 1959, Northern Ireland: Its Policies and Record, Ulster Unionist 
Council, Belfast.  
Weil, S. 2001, "The Need For Roots" in Routledge, London/New York.  
Whyte, J. 1983, "How Much Discrimination Was There Under the Unionist Regime, 
1921-1968?" in Contemporary Irish Studies, eds. T. Gallagher & J. O'Connell, 
Manchester University Press, Manchester.  
Wilford, R. (ed) 2001, Aspects of the Belfast Agreement, 1st edn, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.  
Wright, F. 1973, "Protestant Ideology and Politics in Ulster", European Journal of 
Sociology, vol. 14, pp. 213-280.  
Young, R. 1978, "Dispensing with Moral Rights", Political Theory, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 
63-73.  
Zander, M. 1997, A Bill of Rights? Sweet & Maxwell, London.  
