The Belfast Peace Walls: 
Problems, Politics and Policies of the 
Troubles Architecture 
Jonny Byrne 
Faculty of Social Sciences of the University of Ulster 
Submitted in accordance with the regulations for the Degree of Philosophy 
Submitted August 2011 
I confirm that the word count of this thesis is less than 100,000 words excluding the 
title page, contents, acknowledgements, summary or abstract, abbreviations. 
Footnotes, diagrams, maps, illustrations, tables, appendices, and references or 
bibliography 
Contents 
Declaration  
"I hereby declare that with effect from the date on which the thesis is deposited in 
the Library of the University of Ulster, I permit  
1. the Librarian of the University to allow the thesis to be copied in whole or in 
part without reference to me on the understanding that such authority 
applies to the provision of single copies made for study purposes or for 
inclusion within the stock of another library.  
2. the thesis to be made available through the Ulster Institutional Repository 
and/or EThOS under the terms of the Ulster eTheses Deposit Agreement 
which I have signed. 
IT IS A CONDITION OF USE OF THIS THESIS THAT ANYONE WHO CONSULTS IT 
MUST RECOGNISE THAT THE COPYRIGHT RESTS WITH THE AUTHOR AND THAT 
NO QUOTATION FROM THE THESIS AND NO INFORMATION DERIVED FROM IT 
MAY BE PUBLISHED UNLESS THE SOURCE IS PROPERLY ACKNOWLEDGED". 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my family and friends for all their 
support and guidance over the last three years. I especially want to mention Aisling, 
Rachel and Cathy and Neil, for without their patience, expertise and encouragement 
I would have struggled to complete the PhD.  
Summary 
Since the first paramilitary ceasefires in 1994 the peace and political processes in 
Northern Ireland have addressed several politically sensitive issues such as policing, 
paramilitary decommissioning, and power sharing. However, one issue that has 
been absent from both processes is that of the peace walls. These physical lines of 
demarcation were constructed by the British government from 1969 in response to 
sectarian violence and disorder. No peace walls have ever been removed, and they 
continue to dominate the landscapes of Loyalist and Republican working class 
communities. However, for the first time in recent history, Northern Irelands 
elected representatives, through the recently devolved Ministry of Justice, have 
policy responsibility for the peace walls. To date, there has been no locally 
developed policy framework or strategy on the peace walls, nor does it appear that 
peace walls are even on the NI Executives agenda.  
There is no evidence to suggest that the physical barriers will simply disappear and 
so public policy decisions will, at some point, have to be taken in relation to the 
future of these walls. Mindful of this reality, this dissertation seeks to place the issue 
of peace walls into the narrative of the Northern Ireland conflict and the subsequent 
peace and political processes through the lens of public policy theory and practice. 
Using Belfasts peace walls as a case study, the thesis applies Kingdons Multiple 
Streams Approach to explore the problems, policies and politics that surround the 
issue of peace walls, while also considering the necessary conditions required to 
generate a window of opportunity to place peace walls onto the decision-making 
agenda of the NI Executive.  
As the research shows, for a window of opportunity to emerge there needs to be 
collective agreement at the micro level between Loyalist and Republican 
communities that peace walls are a problem that require some form of government 
intervention. Furthermore, there needs to be a willingness to take ownership of the 
operational delivery and implementation of a policy process for the peace walls at 
the meso level involving local government and private investors with local 
knowledge, expertise and innovation driving the process. And finally, at the macro 
level there also needs to be a moratorium on the construction and strengthening of 
peace walls, along with and a cross party consensus on the need to develop a policy 
framework that provides communities and local government with the confidence 
and political legitimacy to participate in a policy process on peace walls.  
Tables 
Table 1 Peace walls constructed in 1969     32 
Table 2 Peace walls constructed in the 1970s    45 
Table 3 Peace walls constructed in the 1980s    51 
Table 4 Peace walls constructed in the 1990s    58 
Table 5 Peace walls constructed in the 2000s    62 
Table 6 Northern Ireland Government Departments   69 
Table 7 Key actors in the construction of peace walls   72 
Table 8 Elected representatives in Belfast     78 
Table 9 Government representatives in Belfast    79 
Table 10 Non-Governmental Organisations in Belfast   80 
Table 11 Community representatives in Belfast    82 
Table 12 Relationship between deaths and location to interfaces  117 
Table 13 North Belfast MLAs elected in 2011    219 
Table 14 West Belfast MLAs elected in 2011     219 
Table 15 Are you satisfied with how MLAs do their job?   238 
Table 16 Problematic nature of peace walls     278 
Figures 
Figure 1 Peace Wall in North Belfast      40 
Figure 2 Peace Wall dividing communities     43 
Figure 3 Peace Wall in West Belfast      48 
Figure 4 Peace Wall dividing property     54 
Figure 5 Peace Wall in West Belfast      56 
Figure 6  Location of peace walls in Belfast     63 
Figure 7 Analysis of the Problem Stream     115 
Figure 8 Specialists in the peace walls policy community   160 
Figure 9 Three Streams combine for window of opportunity  247 
Figure 10 Key actors in the interpretation of peace walls   249 
Figure 11 Influences on agenda-setting within Loyalist community  260 
Figure 12 Influences on agenda-setting within Republican community 262 
Figure 13 Influencing factors on interpretation of peace walls  264 
Figure 14 Perspectives on the development of a peace walls strategy 268 
Figure 15 Policy Entrepreneurs policy framework     281 
1. Introduction 
This is not simply a dissertation about the Northern Ireland conflict nor the peace 
process though the contexts of both are critically important for the emerging thesis. 
Its focus is Belfasts peace walls. Though initially constructed at the outset of the 
conflict by the British Army in 1969 as a temporary security response to sectarian 
violence and disorder their impact has been more enduring. Irrespective of the 
original intent, the impact of the construction of these peace walls has been the 
copper fastening of segregation and division between the working class 
Catholic/Nationalist/Republican communities and their Protestant/Unionist/ 
Loyalist neighbours. Despite the peace process and progress in the political process, 
these peace walls have multiplied in number, length and height, and continue to 
dominate the landscapes of working class communities in Belfast. The question of 
what to do about these peace walls is a vexed one. What should the devolved 
government in Northern Ireland do about Belfasts peace walls? Should they do 
anything at all? Do these walls need come down? Why? Why not? Who would 
decide? How would they decide? Who should be responsible for the actual 
dismantling of the walls? How are the peace walls interpreted? Is there a public 
policy framework that incorporates the peace walls? Can Northern Ireland claim to 
have made significant political progress while one of the most obvious physical 
manifestations of division remains? These are not easy questions to answer. To do 
so requires a careful consideration of the context in which they were first erected as 
well as consideration of the current political context beset with its various problems 
and possibilities. While Belfast and Northern Ireland is often seen as a place apart 
(Murphy, 1978), it is important to emphasize that many other cities and countries 
have also employed policies of segregation and division through the construction of 
walls, barriers and fences. Belfast is not unique in this regard.  Therefore, the 
purpose of this broad introduction is to firstly introduce the reader to the use of 
walls and barriers in an international context, before drilling down to the 
specificities of Northern Ireland in general and Belfast in particular. The focus then 
shifts to explaining the actual significance of these peace walls within the current 
peace and political process and providing a rationale for why this research is 
significant. 
1.1 Conflicted cities, walls and public policy 
There is a significant amount of literature addressing the subject of 
divided/contested cities from an international perspective (Sassen, 1994; Logan et 
al, 1994; MacGregor, 1994; Benvenisiti, 1986; Calame, 2005; Anderson, 2008). 
Collectively the literature highlights the importance the different ethnic, social and 
religious groups within all cities place on territory and space, and the subsequent 
manifestation of polarisation at an intergroup level as a result of these different 
dynamics. According to Goldsmith and Blakely (1992) cities are constantly divided 
geographically by ethnicity, race, religion, income and age. However, when that 
division and segregation transforms into violence it becomes urban polarisation 
which is viewed as a deep, intractable form of urban conflict experienced when 
ethnic and nationalist assertions come together and impact on the administration of 
the city at a local level (Bollens, 2000).  
Similarly, Brand (2009) has also considered the position that a contested city 
denotes a place where diversity is not viewed as an asset but as a source of 
competing territorial claims, segregation, intimidation and more often than not, 
violence and disorder. By reviewing the evidence it is clear that Belfast can be 
deemed a divided/contested city, where 98% of social housing is divided along 
community and religious backgrounds (Byrne et al, 2006), and where the highest 
numbers of deaths in the Troubles occurred (Fay et al, 1999).  
Belfast is not alone as being labelled a deeply divided city. The characteristics which 
define Belfast are also evident in cities such as Beirut, Nicosia, Jerusalem, and 
Mostar (Calame, 2005). These include populations where group ethnicity is tied to 
political affiliation; a history of institutional discrimination; issues and concerns 
around physical security; questions around the legitimacy of policing; and shifting 
relationships between the majority and minority ethnic communities (Calame, 
2005). Often these micro-level disputes played out in the geography of the city are 
reflective of the larger macro-level issues which in turn dominate issues of 
governance, politics and policy.  
International walls and barriers 
The subject of walls in partitioned and divided cities has been well documented, 
with specific attention placed on the social, economic and political segregation that 
is a direct outcome of the physical lines of demarcation (Klein, 2005; Papadakis, 
1998; Marcuse, 2002; Dunn, 1994; Boal, 1987; Bollens, 1999). For the purposes of 
this research it is important to highlight several of the key themes which surround 
the discourse on walls and barriers. From a theoretical perspective the idea of a 
wall assumes very different meaning and assumptions depending on ones 
discipline and field. However, there is a clear consensus that the term wall alludes 
to an element of separation, a border or boundary, whether it is in a tangible or 
intangible form (Atun, et al 2009).  
The use of walls by cities and countries to demarcate territory and provide 
defensible structures is not a new concept. Two of the most infamous walls 
throughout history have been the Great Wall of China, first constructed in 
approximately 228 BC as a form of defence against invasion (Armesto, 2004), and 
the Berlin wall, constructed in 1981 and dismantled in 1989 which separated a city 
and country as a result of an international dispute (Throgmorton, 2004). Walls and 
other physical structures are a visible manifestation of ones position and responses 
to specific issues and concerns. However, while the focus of this research is on 
physical barriers, it is not uncommon to locate populations, which have been 
bounded by invisible barriers, and walls, which are not simply physical in their 
design. These areas often experience similar rules and restrictions which are placed 
on groups surrounded by walls. Under apartheid in South Africa, there were no 
government constructed walls which separated blacks from whites from Indians 
and Coloureds, yet everyone knew where their boundaries were (Downing, 2005).  
Marcuse (1994) has consistently highlighted the relationship between walls and 
cities, and the significant role walls play in not only defining territory, but also 
shaping identity. Marcuse specifically refers to the ancient city of Babylon and 
indicates that aside from the hanging baskets the walls of the city served to keep 
people in as much as keep them out. They were for demarcation as well as defence, 
defining the city and generating civic spirit. Throgmorton (2003) has indicated that 
the objective meaning of a wall is not a fact, independent of interpretation. Instead, 
the meaning of a wall is dependent on the narrative which surrounds the wall. 
Essentially, in a divided city such as Belfast, the walls and barriers can be viewed 
and interpreted very differently by those that construct them, but more importantly 
by the people that live either side of them. They can represent power, but in a 
similar context insecurity; domination but also fear; protection but also isolation 
(Marcuse, 2002).  
The common denominator in the context of Belfast is that the physical lines of 
demarcation remain a tangible as well as a symbolic manifestation of division. The 
literature previously alluded to points to walls and barriers as short term policy 
fixes that have been designed as a response to specific emergencies. According to 
Calame and Charlesworth, (2008) there is often reluctance from policy makers and 
local administrators to address the subject of walls and barricades because they are 
a reflection of a failed policy and their own ability to address communal differences. 
In their defence, there is a consensus among advocates of partition that although the 
barricades are aesthetically unpleasing they address intercommunal violence 
quickly, and are more cost effective when compared to regular policing responses. 
What makes Northern Ireland unique is that the devolved administration has to 
respond to a security policy issue that was not conceived or implemented by local 
politicians. At this point it is worth noting that Northern Ireland is not the only 
country that has structures in place that separate and divide communities. On the 
international stage it is becoming apparent that policies of division through the 
construction of walls and fences for often different reasons are becoming ever more 
popular.  
Walls as a policy response 
According to Calame and Charlesworth (2008) physical segregation has emerged 
over the last fifty years as one of the most popular and myopic solutions to 
intergroup violence in the urban environment. The following section will bring 
together a number of examples of cities and countries which have adopted policies 
that have subsequently entailed the building of physical lines of demarcation. 
Regardless of the rationale, the construction of barriers and walls appears to instil a 
sense of safety and confidence, and is furthermore a visible and tangible response to 
a specific issue or problem. In recent years these issues have more often than not 
centred on concerns around terrorism, ethnic communal violence, and immigration.  
In relation to cities there are several examples that best illustrate the construction 
of barriers that separate different community and ethnic groups. These include, 
Beirut, the capital of Lebanon,  were widespread violence and an ensuing civil war in 
1975 involving Christians and Muslims resulted in the construction of a fortified 
path approximately 9km long known as the Green Line through the capital city 
(Nasr, 1996). The division followed the main North-South traffic corridor within the 
city, and it was not until 1990 after constitutional reforms that the civil war was 
concluded and the Green Line dividing Beirut was dismantled. Mostar, a city and 
municipality in Bosnia Herzegovina, experienced deep division as a result of the 
construction of physical barricades built in response to ethnic cleansing by Croatian 
paramilitary units against local Muslim residents in the early 1990s. A partition line 
was created, which followed the path of the river along with the main thoroughfare 
in the city, which separated the various ethnic groups. The barricades consisted of 
asphalt, concrete, sandbags, barbed wire, and derelict houses (Calame and 
Charlesworth, 2008). Since March 1994, upon the unification of the state, the 
partition line fortifications and checkpoints have been dismantled. The city of 
Jerusalem, positioned in Israel and Palestine, has a history of physical partition 
between the different religious and ethnic groups (Dumper, 2008). In 1962 the 
Green line constituted a physical barricade through the city consisting of barbed 
wire, defensive ramparts, corrugated iron fencing and land mines. These barricades 
were removed in 1967 following the conclusion of the Six Day War and brought the 
unification of Jerusalem after nineteen years of division (Benvenisti, 1976). 
However, since 2006 the Israel government has been constructing a separation 
barrier along its border which Palestine which has resulted in parts of Jerusalem 
once again being divided along religious lines (Sherwood, 2010).  It was interesting 
to note that this construction has been declared illegal in an advisory opinion 
delivered by the International Court of Justice in 2004 (McGreal, 2004). 
Other cities that are considered divided and contested include Nicosia, the capital of 
Cyprus, which has been divided along ethnic lines since 1964 when an International 
Peace Keeping Force established a ceasefire line (known as the Green Line) which 
separated the island into two distinct sides. By 1974 this barrier had become 
impassable and the country was governed separately in the North by Turkish 
Cypriot authorities and in the South by the Greek Cypriot government (Diez, 2002). 
Since 2004 it has been possible for people to walk across the Green Line at five 
different points across the island. More recently, Baghdad has witnessed an 
expansive construction of walls throughout the different ethnic neighbourhoods. A 
report by the Independent Commission on the Security Forces of Iraq (2007) 
established by the US Congress indicated that Belfast should be used as a policing 
model in the battle to secure Baghdad to address communal disorder and sectarian 
violence (Borger, 2007). The US army responded by constructing several miles of 
concrete walls throughout the city in an attempt to reduce the paramilitary violence 
and provide opportunities for political discussions. Interestingly, the Iraqi Prime 
Minister, upon taking full control of the city in 2009, ordered the removal of all US 
built barricades which lined shop fronts and ringed neighbourhoods (August and 
Haynes, 2009). However, it should be noted that although a number of walls and 
barricades were dismantled, an upsurge in paramilitary bombings resulted in those 
same barriers being erected again (Chulov, 2009).  
Less well known sites within Europe have also constructed barriers in response to 
communal disorder and ethnical violence. These have included Usti Nad Labem in 
the Czech Republic (Connolly, 1999), where in 1999 local authorities implemented a 
barrier to separate gypsy tenant dwellers from Czechs living in private homes (the 
barrier was subsequently removed after criticism from the EU and the Czech 
parliament). Also, in Padua, Northern Italy in 2006 the local government officials 
constructed a barrier around the Agnelli estate in response to violent confrontations 
between rival gangs (Musiani, 2007). Furthermore, there is a growing debate among 
residents of Rio de Janeiro around the motives behind government constructed 
walls surrounding the shanty towns. The locally dubbed eco-walls are intended to 
restrict the expansion of the shantytowns and address growing concerns of 
deforestation at the outskirts of the city. However, local residents maintain that the 
walls are a form of segregation, to isolate the poorer communities and protect the 
more affluent neighbourhoods in the city (Phillips, 2009). Similarly, in Argentina the 
government has been calling on local authorities to halt the construction of a 
separation wall intended to divide a middle class from the poorer districts in the 
outskirts of Buenos Aires. Issues of crime and security were employed by the 
government and policy-makers as the rationale for building the walls. However, for 
many within the communities most affected it was viewed as social apartheid based 
on a premise of elitism (Beaumont, 2009).  
It is not only cities where one can observe the implementation of policies on division 
and segregation through the construction of physical barricades. Over the last 
decade several governments and state administrations have chosen to construct 
fences and walls along their borders. For example, Thailand has recently begun the 
construction of a 50 mile barrier with Malaysia in response to increased terrorist 
activity (Dyer, 2007). India has begun building a 1,800 mile fence surrounded by 
barbed wire and mines along its border with Pakistan, and is also constructing a 
1,950 mile barrier alongside its border with Bangladesh in response to issues with 
illegal immigration (Waldman, 2004). Beijing in China is also constructing a number 
of barricades alongside its border with North Korea, amidst growing concerns 
regarding the influx of refugees. The Western Sahara is a further area which has 
become sealed off by Morocco through the construction of high sand and stone 
barricades, wire fences, mines and artillery bases.  
Other countries engaged in the construction of barriers include Pakistan and their 
1,500 mile fence along the border with Afghanistan; Uzbekistan and their newly 
developed barrier along its border with Tajikistan; while the United Arab Emirates 
has constructed a fence along its frontier with Oman, and Kuwait continues to 
expand its physical walls against the border of Iraq (Dyer, 2007). Saudi Arabia is 
also driving forward policies regarding division and segregation with the country 
currently engaged in an $8.5 billion project to fence off its entire border with Yemen 
and Iraq. The USA have also commenced building a 700 mile fence alongside its 
border with Mexico in response to growing concerns relating to cross-border 
immigration and drug smuggling (Glaister, 2008). There are less visible examples of 
barricades and fences being used in Europe, with the exception of the Spanish 
enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla on the Moroccan coast which have fences to limit 
illegal immigration (Bailey, 2005).  
This brief synopsis of walls and fences from an international perspective suggests 
that policies of separation and division implemented through the construction of 
physical barricades are often justified through a means to provide protection and 
address security concerns. Policies that advocate the building of walls have been 
pursued internationally at an increasing rate, with a growing sense that physical 
partition is an acceptable and normal response to security concerns.  Interestingly, 
the design and implementation of barriers and walls from these examples appears 
to be situated within a security policy framework, which lends support to the notion 
that civil society and non-governmental organisations have limited opportunities to 
participate or consult on the development of these policies. It is also important to 
refer to the research from Calame and Charlesworth (2009) who identified several 
cities that were currently on a potential path towards polarization and partition, and 
it is therefore not inconceivable that walls and physical barricades will also become 
a feature of their local environments. These include Montreal, Monrovia, Dagestan, 
Dili, Bunia, Novi Sad, Kigali, Singapore, Cincinnati, Kirkuk, and Oakland.  
The literature on the international employment of physical barriers would suggest 
that governments, administrations and policy makers are increasingly promoting 
segregation and division as a mechanism to control social order. However, what is 
absent from the international literature is a discourse that explores exit strategies 
that advocate the removal of barriers and other forms of physical lines of 
demarcation. The fall of the Berlin Wall, and the subsequent reunification of East 
and West Germany has provided a degree of knowledge on the practical processes 
associated with the removing of barriers (Buckley, 2004). Yet, considering the 
extent of barrier construction in the current global climate, there is limited 
knowledge of the processes required to de-construct barriers and walls if the 
context for their initial emergence no longer exists and there is some willingness for 
their removal.  
1.2 Northern Ireland:  conflict, peace and politics 
Whether there is willingness for the removal of such barriers in Belfast forms part of 
the focus of this dissertation. Before discussing the overall attitudes and 
interpretations towards peace walls, it is important to set the scene in terms of the 
context in which the walls, barrier and fences in Northern Ireland first existed. The 
origins of the most recent sustained period of violence, known as the conflict in 
Northern Ireland can be traced back to the Catholic civil rights movement that 
emerged in 1968, the coercive response by the Unionist government and 
communities, and subsequent armed Republican campaign against the British 
government and security forces (Oberschall, 2007). What followed was almost 
thirty years of sectarian violence (Holland, 1999), insurgency, terrorism, and 
counter-insurgency, marches and demonstrations, and the separation of 
communities through housing, education, sport and culture (Bell 1993; McGinty and 
Darby, 2002; Fitzduff and OHaggan, 2009) and the construction of 53 peace walls in 
Northern Ireland 42 of which where located in Belfast by the British military and 
government. The main actors in the conflict were the Irish and British governments, 
local politicians, the security forces, namely the British Army, Royal Ulster 
Constabulary (RUC), and the Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR); Republican 
paramilitaries such as the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) and Irish 
National Liberation Army (INLA); and Loyalist paramilitaries that included the Red 
Hand Commandoes (RHC), Ulster Defence Army (UDA), Ulster Volunteer Force 
(UVF), and the Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF). According to McKittrick et al (2007) 
from June 1966 to May 2006 there were 3,720 deaths as a result of the violence, 
3,453 of which occurred in Northern Ireland. Paramilitary organisations suffered 
562 deaths, the security forces 1,039 and 2,119 civilians were killed.  
From the early 1990s a peace and political process was initiated that culminated 
with the signing of The Joint Declaration (1993) by both the British and Irish 
governments which addressed issues of self-determination and the principle of 
consent with regards to the sovereignty of Northern Ireland. On the 12 August 1994 
the PIRA announced a complete cessation of its armed struggle and on the 13 
October the Combined Loyalist Military Command announced a cease-fire. What 
followed was a series of multiparty talks and negotiations involving the Irish, British 
and US governments, and local politicians that resulted in the signing of the 
Belfast/Good Friday Agreement on the 10 April 1998. The signing of the Agreement 
was not a conclusion to the conflict nor a resolution of the issues and problems that 
had been the catalyst for the violence and disorder. Instead, the Agreement provided 
a framework for the transformation of the conflict through a peaceful political 
process (Holloway, 2005). The document was characterised by three strands which 
were representative of the elements considered to be at the root of the conflict. 
Strand One was concerned with the establishment of a power-sharing assembly that 
required cross-party support in any decision-making (and would have responsibility 
for all devolved matters including that of peace walls following the devolution of the 
Department of Justice in 2010). Strand Two was focused on North-South relations 
through a North-South Ministerial Council with membership drawn from the 
Assembly and the Dail. While Strand Three involved the establishment of the 
British-Irish Council with representatives from the British and Irish governments, 
the Assembly and the devolved institutions in Scotland, Wales, the Isle of Man and 
the Channel Islands (The Agreement, 1998).  
This political breakthrough in April 1998 was followed by sporadic periods of 
devolved and direct rule administration. Issues surrounding policing reform, the 
decommissioning of paramilitary weapons, along with events such as the arrest of 
PIRA members in Colombia, an alleged Republican spy ring in Stormont, and PIRA 
gun-smuggling in Florida led to the continued collapse of the NI Assembly (Wolff, 
2005). In 2006 the British and Irish governments interjected again with the Inter-
governmental St Andrews Agreement that was signed on the 13 October 2006. This 
document resulted in Sinn Fin endorsing the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
(PSNI) and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) committing to power sharing with 
both Republicans and Nationalists in the NI Assembly. From May 8 2007 Northern 
Ireland experienced its most stable political period with devolution involving all of 
the major political parties running for a full four year term to April 2011. Despite 
this, the Northern Ireland Office (NIO) constructed the forty second peace wall in 
North Belfast in response to communal violence and disorder. The irony that this 
wall was built through the playground of one of Northern Irelands few integrated 
schools was not lost on anyone. 
Although it is important to recognise the success of the peace and political processes 
it is also necessary to acknowledge that several of the more contentious and 
politically sensitive issues of the conflict have either been addressed through third 
party intervention or else have been notably absent from the governments agenda. 
For example, paramilitary violence was dealt with through the International 
Monitoring Commission; paramilitary decommissioning was overseen by the 
Independent International Commission on Decommissioning; policing reform 
became the responsibility of the Patten Commission; the Victims Commission has 
been established to examine and support the needs of the victims; and the issue of 
parading has been placed under the authority of the Northern Ireland Parades 
Commission. A combination of factors including fixed political positions, fear of an 
electorate backlash, and focus on intra-group ethnic outbidding between the main 
political parties meant that the locally elected representatives were unable and/or 
unwilling to engage in processes associated with driving these contentious issues 
forward.   
One further aspect of the conflict that the local politicians appear unable to address 
is the underlying issue of segregation and division in Northern Ireland. This is best 
illustrated by the statistics on housing which show that 73% of all social housing in 
Northern Ireland is segregated along religious lines (Byrne et al 2006) despite the 
developments in the peace process and political process. In fact, 97% of social 
housing in Belfast is considered to be divided into either Catholic or Protestant 
neighbourhoods (Byrne et al 2006). There have, of course, been some attempts by 
the government and by local councils to focus attention on the levels of communal 
segregation and division that exist. The publication of A Shared Future (2005) aimed 
to establish policies and frameworks for the delivery of good relations programmes 
in Northern Ireland but was developed at a time when the Northern Ireland 
Assembly was in suspension and therefore the local politicians felt that they had no 
ownership over development of the policy framework. The European PEACE 
Programmes supported by all of the political parties provided financial assistance 
for peace and reconciliation programmes across Northern Ireland and the border 
counties from 1994. Several key indicators were identified by the programme as 
requiring immediate attention one of which included residential segregation (CRC, 
2010). In 2007, Belfast City Council adopted promoting good relations as a 
corporate objective which meant that good relations was given priority across the 
councils policy making processes. And most recently, the NI Assembly published for 
public consultation the Cohesion, Sharing and Integration document (2010). This 
was the devolved governments new strategy on community relations and set out 
the governments goals for addressing hate crime and developing positive 
relationships across society. At the time of writing the devolved government had yet 
to respond to the public consultation which was dominated by stinging criticisms of 
the document (CRC, 2010; Todd and Ruane, 2010) even though the British Prime 
Minister in an address to the Northern Ireland Assembly drew attention to the 
continued segregation and division that exists within Northern Ireland by noting 
that Northern Ireland needs a genuinely shared future; not a shared out future 
(Cameron, 2011). He also referred to the financial cost of delivering services within 
a society where too many Protestant and Catholic communities remained 
segregated. The Prime Minister challenged the local politicians to begin the process 
of addressing the legacies of the past and move the politics discourse beyond 
constitutional questions to one focused on social and economic issues.  
And so, despite the laudable progress that has been made in Northern Ireland since 
the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, there remains the danger that without a locally 
developed policy and strategic framework which aims to address the segregation 
and division, that the peace and political processes could stagnate and that Northern 
Ireland could once again retreat back to heightened periods of sectarian violence 
and disorder. Recent violence in East Belfast serves to reinforce this danger.  
Communities in East Belfast experienced two nights of extreme sectarian violence 
and disorder on the 22 and 23 of June 2011 that involved up to 500 youths from 
both Catholic and Protestant communities throwing paint and petrol bombs, rocks, 
bricks and the firing of guns across the interface between the neighbouring Catholic 
and Protestant homes. This was the worst communal violence and disorder in over a 
decade, and according to the Chief Constable of the PSNI the Belfast riots were a 
wake-up call for Northern Ireland and that there are communities where peace 
was fragile and required renewed political support and focus (Baggott, 2011). The 
Chief Constable was referring primarily to working class Loyalist and Republican 
communities that live cheek by jowl often separated by physical lines of 
demarcation referred to as peace walls. The violence in East Belfast took place 
across several notorious peace walls in the Short Strand and Lower Newtownards 
Road. The Nationalist/Republican community in the Short Strand is segregated from 
its Unionist/Loyalist neighbours in Inner East by peace walls first constructed in the 
1970s but which have grown considerably in size, often after sustained periods of 
sectarian violence (Byrne, 2005).  
1.3 Belfast: peace walls and policy 
The peace walls in Belfast were first constructed by the British army in 1969 in 
response to sectarian violence and disorder involving Catholic and Protestant 
communities (Dixon, 2001). They were initially considered a short-term policy 
response to issues relating to security and community safety. However, for the 
duration of the conflict the British government continued with policies of division 
and segregation through the construction of physical barriers. It was clear that 
during the conflict Belfast was synonymous with violence and disorder, 
sectarianism, division and segregation (Murtagh and Shirlow, 2006). The 
polarisation of both Nationalist and Unionist communities shaped the geography of 
the city, informed by a constant competition between these groups over space and 
territory (Byrne, 2006). Aside from the two cranes, Samson and Goliath, which 
dominate the citys skyline, the peace walls and interfaces, have recently become the 
iconic emblems of Belfast and the conflict. So much so that they have become an 
integral part of the tourist trail that has emerged within Belfast over the last decade 
(Murphy, 2010). These barriers have institutionalised the separation between the 
two communities, reinforced different cultural identities and continue to illustrate 
the deep enduring antagonisms that exist between communities (Jarman, 2008; 
Bollens, 1999). In recent years Belfast has emerged as a city of contradictions and 
anomalies. There are those that maintain the peace process has operated at two 
distinct levels. Murtagh (2002) contends that across Belfast specific communities 
have benefited more from the peace process than others, pointing to the growth in 
housing and commercial businesses in parts of South Belfast as opposed to the high 
levels of social deprivation that continue to exist within communities in North and 
West Belfast. It raises the question as to what type of city Belfast has become. 
According to one property developer the city can be described as:  
Belfast A vibrant and modern European city re-inventing itself as it develops 
its unique culture. A capital city offering a cosmopolitan mix of award 
winning restaurants, stylish shops and high quality hotels. A city which is 
confidently reflecting a new social and economic prosperity. It is a city of 
contrasts (St. Annes Square Advertisement, 2009). 
However, a journalist reflecting on the physical changes within communities only 
one mile from the city centre concluded that: 
In Berlin they have been marking 20 years without their wall, in North and 
West Belfast the division of the city remains set in concrete, wire and fencing 
(Strain, 2009). 
There are parts of Belfast which have expanded and developed new identities, such 
as the Titanic Quarter and Cathedral Square, creating a cosmopolitan environment 
and a new cultural and dynamic vision for Belfast. However, a note of caution is 
required, for there are large of parts of the city which claim to have been largely 
ignored in relation to the resource packages, employment opportunities and 
physical regeneration schemes which emerged in the late 1990s under the peace 
process banner. These inner city Loyalist and Republican communities remain 
trapped in an environment and mindset characterised by suspicion, fear, hatred and 
distrust of anything that disrupts the status quo within these neighbourhoods 
(Gallagher, 2008). It is within these areas that peace walls have been constructed, 
dividing and segregating the dominant working class communities within the city.  
Despite their physical presence within the city, there is a minimal amount of 
information on the peace walls. In fact, one could go as far as to suggest that there 
remains a lack of political knowledge and societal understanding and ambiguity 
about the peace walls. This is clearly evidenced by the lack of clarity on the actual 
number of peace walls that exist, or even what constitutes a peace wall. There is no 
definitive figure for the total number of peace walls in Belfast or Northern Ireland. 
In 2008 the Northern Ireland Office indicated that there were 53 peace walls in 
Northern Ireland (NIO, 2008). However, Prime Minister David Cameron in his 
speech to the NI Assembly referred to the 48 peace walls in Northern Ireland 
(Cameron, 2011). This is five less than the earlier estimate, yet no peace walls have 
been removed in Northern Ireland. Furthermore, research conducted by Jarman 
(2008) for the Northern Ireland Community Relations Council noted that there were 
88 security barriers and peace walls in Belfast alone. The author noted such a large 
number as he found it difficult to distinguish between peace walls and other forms 
of security architecture such as barriers protecting police stations. For the purposes 
of this thesis the NIO confirmation of 42 peace walls in Belfast will form the basis of 
the analysis. 
The confusion that surrounds the number and ownership of the peace walls is 
further exacerbated by the fact that there is no government policy, strategy or 
framework in place as this has been a policy area absent from the peace and political 
processes. The reality is that peace walls only became the policy responsibility of 
local politicians in Northern Ireland from April 11 2010 under the devolution of 
Policing and Justice Powers to the Northern Ireland Assembly. This is a subject area 
that is explored in more detail in chapter two under themes that consider 
ownership of the peace walls.  
1.4 The significance of peace walls  
The Belfast peace walls are the focus of this dissertation and the recent violence in 
East Belfast, alongside the comments from the British Prime Minister attests to the 
continued relevance of this topic. As a policy issue peace walls have been absent 
from the peace and political processes, yet they remain a significant issue that 
warrant a comprehensive review and analysis. Belfasts peace walls have structural 
significance, security significance, community relations/good relations significance, 
financial significance, and, of course, international significance not least because of 
how Northern Ireland is often held up as a model of best practice for other peace 
processes (OKane, 2010).  
To elaborate further, peace walls are structurally significant because their presence 
contradicts the British governments post-ceasefire attempts to introduce a range of 
normalisation policies in relation to security and community safety. In 2007 the 
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Hain, through the NIO commissioned 
the construction of the forty second peace wall in Belfast. This twenty-five foot high 
structure aimed to divide neighbouring Nationalist and Unionist communities that 
had experienced severe incidents of inter-communal violence and disorder. The wall 
was built within the grounds of an integrated primary school, despite serious 
concerns from the school authorities (Torney, 2007). The building of the peace wall 
as a structure to divide and separate communities was in stark contrast to the 
governments earlier attempts to redress the physical manifestations of its security 
policies. In a statement to the Commons on the 24 October 2011, Dr Reid the 
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland stated that:   
We will undertake a progressive rolling programme of security 
normalisation, reducing levels of troops and installations in Northern Ireland 
as the security situation improvesour aim is to secure as early a return as 
possible to normal security arrangements (Reid, 2001).  
Since 1994 the government has phased out permanent police checkpoints (Potter, 
2001), army patrols and the ring of steel that aimed to prevent terrorist attacks on 
Belfast city centre (Switzer and McDowell, 2009). There was also a concerted 
attempt to significantly reduce troop numbers within Northern Ireland, in line with 
the reduced level of threat (Gay, 2001). The removal of the last military watch tower 
along the border was a symbolism of the return to security normalisation (Sharrock, 
2006). Furthermore, the dismantling of the large police and army base in 
Crossmaglen in South Armagh was further evidence of the ending of the British 
military campaign in Northern Ireland. Therefore, the re-emergence of conflict 
architecture in 2008 appeared to contradict the governments attempts to 
implement normalisation policies in relation to security and community safety. 
Secondly, the construction of the peace wall in Hazelwood is significant from a 
security perspective. The peace wall has raised further questions regarding 
government responses to sectarian violence and communal disorder. Throughout 
the conflict, there was a necessity for building walls to address security concerns. 
The complexities of the conflict, combined with community attitudes towards 
policing structures, meant that division through walls and barriers was viewed as an 
acceptable response to the violence by both communities and the state. However, as 
the military and violent aspects of the conflict came to a conclusion, it became 
apparent that the government had no other policy response to address communal 
violence outside of the conflict, other than the construction of barriers and walls 
(Jarman, 2007). The absence of co-ordinated paramilitary violence removed the 
legitimacy previously attached to the construction of peace walls. Yet, as 
communities openly campaigned for new walls to be built, the NIO, were unable to 
suggest or implement security policies that did not constitute the construction of a 
physical partition.  
Thirdly, peace walls are significant within the context of delivering policies and 
strategies based upon a good relations ethos. In 2007 Belfast City Council (BCC) 
identified promoting good relations as a corporate objective, central to all of its 
policy making processes (BCC, 2007). The council are committed to working 
alongside public and private agencies to address public policy issues that relate to 
division and exclusion within the city. Recently, BCC through its Conflict 
Transformation Project commissioned a series of reports, which specifically 
examined the issues relating to separation within the city (BCC, 2007). These looked 
at issues such as the provision of shared services (Deloitte, 2008); good practice in 
planning (Bradley and Murtagh, 2007); creating shared space (Gaffikin et al, 2008) 
and the promotion of shared residential space (Trademark, 2008). These studies 
significantly enhanced understanding of policy responses to the division and 
segregation within the city and the formulation of good relations policies, along with 
the impact of the peace walls across local authority services throughout the city.  
Fourthly, from a financial position peace walls have proved to be highly significant. 
A number of academics and statutory organisations (Roche, 2008; Murtagh and 
Shirlow, 2006; Hewstone, et al 2005; CRC, 2009) have focused on the legacy of the 
conflict and its impact across society. It became apparent that sectarianism and 
segregation had significantly increased over the last thirty years, with just under 
73% of all social housing in Northern Ireland segregated on ethno-religious and 
ethno-nationalist grounds (NIHE, 2006) and levels of sectarian harassment and 
violence at a significantly high level (Jarman, 2005). Furthermore, social exclusion 
and deprivation continued to impact on those communities that experienced the 
highest levels of violence and disorder throughout the conflict. Out of the 100 most 
deprived wards in Northern Ireland, 56 of them could be found in Belfast (NISRA, 
2005). It is no coincidence that all of the peace walls are to be found within these 
same wards. A growing discourse began to emerge, not only around the social cost 
of division but also the financial implications on the local communities (Deloitte, 
2007). A report commissioned by the OFMDFM, concluded that division and conflict 
in Northern Ireland cost the taxpayer an extra 1.5 billion pounds a year (Deloitte, 
2007). Communities either side of the peace walls did not share or access 
neighbouring facilities and services, placing more pressure on the governments 
finances (Shirlow and Murtagh, 2004).  
Fifthly, peace walls have recently taken on an international significance in light of 
the global recognition the peace process has received, which has led some to 
question the validity of this process. On November 9th 2009, Berlin celebrated the 
20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall with a Festival of Freedom (Berlin 
Tourist Board, 2009). This wall had been constructed six years before the first peace 
wall had been built in Belfast, yet within Germany, they had managed to overcome 
all obstacles and develop a process which enabled its demolition. This episode 
brought increased attention to Belfast, with a specific focus on the purpose of peace 
walls in an apparent post-conflict society (Youthlink, 2009). A number of events 
were organised involving young people, which highlighted their interpretations of 
the walls, and provided them with opportunities to participate in their own 
facilitated process on addressing the emerging peace wall problem (McNeilly, 
2009). The international significance of the peace walls was also evident when the 
Mayor of New York indicated that the removal of the peace walls was linked in some 
way to renewed economic investment in the more deprived parts of the city 
(Graham, 2008). Finally, referring back to the earlier section on the international 
perspective on walls and barriers (1.1) it is obvious that segregation and division 
through physical constructs is a growing phenomena. Therefore, an understanding 
of the processes that are required to consider the de-construction of walls and 
barriers in Belfast may offer some element of policy learning for other jurisdictions 
on the global stage.   
Overall one can conclude that the peace walls are a highly significant subject both 
locally and internationally especially where progress in the Northern Ireland peace 
and political process may well be negated by a failure from government to address 
the policy vacuum that surrounds the peace walls. They are the most obvious visible 
manifestation of the conflict, and at a time when Northern Ireland is being 
applauded as a success story they are a daily reminder that fundamental issues 
relating to community identity, integration and sectarianism remain unresolved.  
1.5 Aims and Objectives  
The main aim of this dissertation is to place the issue of peace walls back into the 
narrative of the Northern Ireland conflict and the subsequent peace and political 
processes. Underpinning this aim is the acknowledgement that peace walls have 
been a subject largely absent from policy decisions made within the context of the 
peace and political processes. Even under the most recent period of devolved 
government there has been no evidence of local politicians engaging in a policy 
process that might incorporate the politically sensitive issue of peace walls. In fact, 
history tells us that sensitive and contentious issues such as parading, 
decommissioning of paramilitary weapons and policing have been deliberately kept 
off the political agenda and beyond the remit of local politicians and decision-
makers. Only recently the NI Executive failed to meet for 152 days because the two 
largest parties Sinn Fin and the Democratic Unionist Part were unable to agree an 
agenda because of issues pertaining to the devolution of Policing and Justice powers 
(Douse et al, 2008). Nonetheless, it is clear that the issue of the peace walls despite 
any sensitivities and contention that surrounds them, will not go away. The physical 
barriers will not simply disappear and so public policy decisions will, at some point, 
have to be taken in relation to the future of these walls. Mindful of this reality, this 
dissertation seeks to develop the following objectives through the lens of public 
policy theory and practice: 
 To identify the roles and responsibilities of those tasked with implementing 
policies that resulted in the construction of peace walls from 1969-2008; 
 To investigate why there has been no locally-created policy framework which 
seeks to address the issue of peace walls; 
 To consider the issues and dynamics that exist around the peace walls by 
assessing how they are interpreted by those that live beside them, by civil 
society and government representatives; by reviewing the impact of previous 
policies; and documenting the political influences that may shape any peace 
walls policy process;  
 To explore the factors and conditions that would support the emergence of a 
window of opportunity that might position peace walls onto the decision-
making agenda of the Northern Ireland Executive.  
A qualitative based methodology that includes interviews with elected 
representatives, government agencies, non-government organisations, and 
community representatives has been employed to fulfil these research objectives 
and will be discussed in greater detail in chapter three.   
1.6 Thesis structure  
The remainder of this dissertation is set out within eight chapters. Chapter Two 
provides a historical review on the construction of peace walls in Belfast. The 
analysis is framed through a policy theory lens, providing an insight into the policy 
rationale employed in the construction of peace walls by the decade. The review 
identifies those tasked with building the peace walls along with the impact of the 
division on those communities that reside adjacent to them. Chapter Three 
establishes the research design and methodological framework along with the 
research aims and objectives. The chapter also includes a full list of interviewees 
and an overview of the data collection and analysis processes. Chapter four is 
concerned with the development of the theoretical framework that underpins the 
research. After briefly considering various approaches to policy theory, the 
justifications for settling on John Kingdons agenda setting theory are put forward. 
The chapter concludes with an overview of how this approach is a suitable 
mechanism for analysing peace walls.  Chapter Five then considers whether peace 
walls are a problem that requires government intervention or a condition that can 
be absent from the policy-making process. It also examines how problems capture 
the attention of policy makers and determines the key actors responsible in a policy 
process on peace walls. Chapter Six reviews past and current policy thinking 
towards peace walls. The chapter considers the characteristics of the different 
alternatives and strategies, along with the role of policy entrepreneurs in focusing 
attention on specific policy issues. Chapter Seven focuses on the general public and 
the motivational factors that influence their thinking on peace walls. The role of 
politicians, elections and the mechanisms within government all come under the 
spotlight in the context of peace walls and the decision-making agenda. Chapter 
Eight is a review and interpretation of the empirical findings. It is also an 
opportunity to examine the necessary conditions for the opening of a policy window 
that would have the potential to raise peace walls onto the decision-making agenda 
of the NI Executive. Finally, Chapter Nine draws the thesis to a conclusion by 
answering the research questions, summarising the studys contribution to 
knowledge and presenting the implications for future research.  
1.7 Conclusion   
This introductory chapter has established that peace walls are the subject area 
under analysis throughout the dissertation. The peace walls are a physical 
manifestation of the division and segregation that continues to exist seventeen years 
after the first paramilitary cease-fires. Yet, they appear to be cast within a policy 
vacuum that has been facilitated by local politicians inability to take the role of 
decision-maker for contentious and sensitive issues. The following chapter offers an 
opportunity to locate the origins of the peace walls, and more importantly identify 
the types of individuals, structures and organisations that have been central to the 
development of peace walls as a policy response to the sectarian violence and 
disorder during and after the conflict.   
2. Belfasts Peace Walls 
When were the majority of the forty-two peace walls in Belfast built? And why were 
they constructed? More importantly who was responsible for them? The following 
chapter offers an opportunity to explore the development, implementation and 
impact of a policy that divided and segregated working class communities in Belfast 
from 1969. The analysis has been structured in such a way that the reader can 
observe the gradual increase in the construction of peace walls through the decades 
of the conflict which will allow for the identification of the range of actors and 
organisations involved.  
2.1 Belfast pre-1969  
Those living within interface communities surrounded by physical lines of 
demarcation could be forgiven for believing that the emergence of peace walls and 
security barriers during the conflict was the catalyst for residential segregation 
within the city. In fact, the reality is very different with research indicating that 
residential and territorial segregation was an accepted reality for many Catholic and 
Protestant working class communities in Belfast since the 17th Century (Jones, 
1960). According to Murtagh and Shirlow (2006) separation and communal division 
were key characteristics of the city since the onset of industrialisation. They point to 
the migration of Catholics into the city in search of employment and housing in 
which Protestants previously had been the dominant community (Boal, 2002). 
According to Murtagh and Shirlow (2006) the influx of Catholic families was 
considered both a threat and challenge to the Protestant community. For example, 
in 1800 there were 20,000 inhabitants in the city; by 1900 this figure had increased 
to approximately 350,000. The impact of this demographic change was that the 
Catholic population within the city rose from essentially one of non-existence to 
33% of the total population (Boal, 2002).   
There were numerous instances of inter-communal rioting on the basis of religion 
(Boal and Royle, 2006), which resulted in the polarisation of the two dominant 
communities along with the displacement of many Catholic and Protestant families 
as each group sought the safety of their own community (Boal, 2002). According to 
Smyth (1990) there were several episodes of sectarian violence that took place in 
the parliamentary elections of 1832, 1835 and 1852, all of which coincidentally took 
place on the 12 of July, a date synonymous with celebrations within the Protestant 
community. However, it wasnt until the summer of 1935 that one encounters the 
first case of a physical barrier being employed to provide social distancing and 
separation between Catholic and Protestant communities (Smyth, 1990). This was 
in the Sailortown neighbourhood which was part of the Docklands district in the 
North East of the city.  
From the late 19th Century the population within the Sailortown area had grown 
rapidly as a result of an inward migration of rural Catholics who were seeking 
employment in the expanding Belfast Port and an escape from the effects of the 
Great Famine (Smyth, 1990). Throughout the summer of 1935 there were regular 
occurrences of sectarian violence and incidents of snipers positioned in the 
Protestant community firing upon the predominantly Catholic neighbourhoods. The 
local residents were restricted in their movements, as access into the area was 
largely controlled by Loyalists residing in the Henry and Whitla Streets which 
formed part of the Docklands area. There was a significant upsurge in the violence 
after an Orange parade was attacked on the 12 of July, with a number of local 
residents being severely injured in rioting, and two losing their lives.  
The British Army were drafted into the area after accusations that the local police 
had failed in their duties to protect the residents of Sailortown. The Army returned 
fire into Loyalist areas on a number of occasions, killing two snipers (Smyth, 1990). 
In response to increased communal violence a military decision was taken to erect a 
large fence the full length of Nelson Street to divide the opposing communities 
(Smyth, 1990). The barricade, ironically in 1935 was seen as a viable and acceptable 
policy decision to address sectarian violence and disorder. It remained in place for 
approximately nine months and was only dismantled when there had been a 
significant decrease in the incidents and threats of violence and disorder.   
The period from the late 1930s until the middle of the 1960s saw minimal inter 
communal and sectarian violence in Belfast, with patterns of segregation remaining 
stable and consistent (Hepburn, 1994). During this period there was a growth in 
economic expansion, brought on by World War II and the subsequent rebuilding 
process that followed the conclusion of the war. A number of industries prospered, 
namely shipbuilding, engineering and aircraft production. Furthermore, foreign 
capital and industry were enticed to the country in the post-war years, which 
involved the creation of 150 new factories and 55,000 new jobs (Darby, 1976). 
Opinion is split as to whether these employment opportunities were accessible 
equally to members of both Catholic and Protestant communities. Darby (1976) was 
of the opinion that the new organisations were not tied to the same restrictive 
practices that limited promotions for Catholics that were common in more 
established lines of employment. However, ODowd et al (1980) maintained that 
new employers often came to adopt local practices and issues of religious 
discrimination continued and the status quo remained.  
There were also a number of legislative developments in the post war years which 
were aimed at addressing issues of poverty and social deprivation through the 
expansion of the social benefits of the welfare state, which ultimately benefited the 
minority Catholic community (Darby, 1976). Furthermore, the 1947 Educational Act 
provided new opportunities through the offer of free secondary education. By the 
1950s there was a sense from many in the Catholic community that their future was 
best served residing within Northern Ireland rather than in an all-Ireland state 
(Darby, 1986). In the 1960s there were a number of political developments at a 
government level which culminated with the promotion of Terence ONeill to Prime 
Minister of Northern Ireland. In 1964 he declared a new opportunity for Northern 
Ireland which involved the building of relationships between the two dominant 
Catholic and Protestant traditions (ONeill, 1969). One example of this process of 
bridge building was the meetings and exchange visits of Prime Minister ONeill and 
the Taoiseach Sean Lemass in 1965.  
One could be mistaken in thinking that by the mid 1960s Northern Ireland was a 
stable and cohesive society that had managed to address its inherent issues of 
discrimination and sectarianism. However, this was far from the truth and large 
areas of Northern Ireland were moving towards episodes of violence and disorder 
that had been synonymous with the 1930s (Hennessy, 2005). There was an 
undercurrent of tension emanating within working class Loyalist and Republican 
communities in Belfast and other cities and towns throughout the 1960s. Incidents 
such as the riots in the Falls area of Belfast in 1964 after the Royal Ulster 
Constabulary attempted to remove a Tricolour (the flag of the Republic of Ireland) 
that had been flying above the offices of the Republican candidate for the upcoming 
elections, Liam McMillan, raised levels of frustration and anger within Catholic areas 
in the city (Darby, 1983). Furthermore, Catholic residents in Derry/Londonderry 
maintained that the closure of the main rail service to their city, along with the 
building of a new University in Coleraine was proof that they were being 
discriminated against by the Northern Ireland government. Finally, Stormonts 
decision to criminalise Republican clubs, which had been used by the Republican 
community as a mechanism to participate in political debate incensed that 
community and simply perpetuated their sense of alienation and anger with the 
Unionist dominated government (Darby, 1976).  
In 1967 the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA) was formed to 
demand liberal reforms in relation to discrimination in housing, employment and 
electoral participation (McCann, 1993). The campaign was modelled on the 
American civil rights movement and involved numerous marches, protests, sit-ins 
and the use of the international media to highlight injustices (Gillespie, 2008). 
However, as the campaign became more popular, it attracted large numbers of 
people who were intent on using violence to either support or refute the idea of 
political and institutional reform. By 1968 communal and ethnic differences had 
once again begun to manifest into consistent violent exchanges across the various 
territorial boundaries that separated working class Catholic and Protestant 
communities in Belfast and other cities and towns throughout Northern Ireland 
(Murtagh and Shirlow, 2006).     
2.2 1969: The year of military intervention 
The following section documents events in 1969 and provides a contextual 
background to the conflict in Belfast and the subsequent security policy responses 
to the increase in violence and disorder.  
Context  
There had been a significant escalation in civil disorder throughout 1968 and into 
1969 (Sluka, 1989), to such an extent that the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) were 
unable to adequately address the violence and maintain order, especially in urban 
settings such as Belfast and Derry/Londonderry (Byrne and Monaghan, 2008). The 
catalyst for the breakdown in policing arose from riots in the Bogside area of 
Derry/Londonderry from the 12 to the 14 of August 1969 (Dewar, 1985). This was 
some of the most ferocious rioting ever experienced by the RUC, and resulted in 
officers from throughout Northern Ireland being sent to the area to support the 
police (Hamill, 1985). As news spread of the violence, Nationalists throughout 
Northern Ireland began to engage in civil disorder in an attempt to weaken policing 
resources (Hamill, 1985). In response to growing concerns around security and 
policing the Stormont administration requested that the British Labour Government 
commit the British Army to the streets of Northern Ireland to assist the RUC (Hamill, 
1985). On the 15 of August 1969 the British Army began to patrol the streets of 
Belfast with the sole aim of keeping the peace and maintaining order and to support 
the existing civil authority (Dewar, 1985). However, from the outset, there was a 
degree of confusion within the British Army as to their role and responsibility in 
relation to working with existing security and civil organisations. The army knew 
little of the sectarian geography of Northern Ireland or Belfast or the deep rooted 
mistrust of the Catholic community towards existing policing structures. 
Furthermore, the army were poorly prepared for their initial deployment, with 
tactics and equipment primarily based on previous campaigns in Aden and Cyprus 
( Dochartaigh, 1997).   
Throughout the summer of 1969 Republican and Loyalist communities in the two 
major cities of Belfast and Derry/Londonderry had responded to the increased 
sectarian violence by constructing their own informal barricades along the 
entrances and exits to their neighbourhoods. These first emerged within Catholic 
communities and consisted of burnt out cars, paving stones, household furniture 
and barbed wire (Calame and Charlesworth, 2009). For example, Farrell (1980) 
noted that Catholic residents in the Falls road area of West Belfast on the 14 and 15 
August 1969 constructed barricades in response to Loyalist incursions into their 
neighbourhoods. These informal, ad hoc methods of security were quickly adopted 
by Protestant communities, which resulted in large parts of working class 
residential areas of Belfast being closed off by unofficial security barricades (Darby, 
1986). Sections of Derry/Londonderry were also synonymous with community 
barricades, with worldwide attention focusing on the Free Derry corner, which not 
only highlighted the community tensions, but also illustrated the lack of state 
control in the Nationalist Bogside community in the city (McCann, 1980).  
By late August 1969 the British Army has been tasked by Westminister to assist in 
bringing about order and control to the streets of Belfast and Derry/Londonderry 
(Taylor, 2001). However, the informal, unofficial community barricades were 
viewed as problematic for the security services and government on a number of 
different levels. Firstly, they were viewed as a challenge to the authority of the 
Unionist dominated Stormont government, and were a visible reminder that they 
had no control in relation to law and order within significant parts of the city. 
Secondly, the barricades limited the British Armys capacity to move throughout the 
city, and were also a challenge to their power and authority (Hamill, 1985). 
Policy Response 
In response to the illegal community barricades, the British Army introduced a new 
type of security policy that resulted in the construction of officially sanctioned and 
authorised barricades. This was a security based policy, set by the British Army with 
the support of the Northern Ireland government. A review of the minutes from a 
Stormont cabinet meeting on the 26th September 1969 clearly show that the British 
Army were responsible for bring forward the suggestion that official barriers would 
provide the means to address the communal violence (CAB/4/1634). This policy 
was also implemented in response to local political calls for the removal of the 
informal barriers that communities had constructed in response to the increasing 
violence and disorder. Initially, the British Army had not anticipated direct action 
with regards to the removal of the community barriers. Instead they had proposed 
through negotiations with the communities the incremental removal of the fences 
and barriers. However, this approach was quickly replaced by one that proposed 
immediate intervention because of a political decision taken by the Stormont 
government. In August 1969, the Prime Minister for Northern Ireland, Mr 
Chichester-Clark, made a television broadcast, in which he stated that the informal 
community barricades must be removed immediately (Hamill, 1985).  
Here was evidence of the lack of communication between the Northern Ireland 
government and the British Army. The army had not been consulted about this 
political decision, and the administration had offered no alternatives to placate the 
community and address their fears of sectarian violence. So in response to the NI 
governments position the General Officer commanding the British Army decided to 
replace the community barricades with ones developed by the army, referred to as 
peace lines and/or peace walls. The first official line of demarcation, suggested 
and constructed by the British Army in Belfast, was located along the Falls and 
Shankill divide in Cupar Way and consisted of green corrugated iron sheeting ten 
feet tall (Hamill, 1985). Along with iron sheeting the barrier had observation posts 
and during the evening both sides were floodlit. Sections were opened during the 
day so that vehicles could pass from one area to another, but these were sealed at 
night (Barzilay, 1973). Interestingly, the army adopted similar tactics in 
Derry/Londonderry in response to the violence and disorder by taking the decision 
to construct a peace ring which consisted of army vehicles and barriers and 
separated the Catholic communities of the Bogside and Creggan from the city centre 
( Dochartaigh, 1997). 
It was initially conceived by the British Army that the communal violence in Belfast 
would be short lived, as had been the case with previous instances of ethno-
sectarian violence in the preceding years (Murtagh, 2002). There was a general 
consensus from the military that the initial peace wall in Cupar Way would be 
removed by Christmas and the city would return to a degree of normality within a 
few months. However, this was not the case, and as communal violence increased 
and sectarian gangs targeted neighbourhoods the army took the decision to 
construct a second peace wall close to the Crumlin Road area of North Belfast 
(Barzilay, 1973). Although the army were initially deployed to assist the RUC and 
aid the civil power, it soon became apparent that they were solely responsible for 
setting the agenda and implementing security policy both strategically and 
operationally (Hamill, 1985). A serving soldier involved in the construction of the 
first peace wall reinforced this position: 
 I witnessed the wall being built by the Royal Engineers with the aid of a fore 
 end loader called a Scooby Doo. Infantry and armour kept cover whilst they 
 were being built, but there was little trouble as the Catholics seen the wall as 
 protection from the Prods (British Soldier (1), 2009) 
It was clear that in those early months security policy was primarily reactive with 
the British Army taking responsibility for constructing the peace walls, even though 
the RUC and the Stormont administration had not initially supported the decision to 
construct official barricades in response to the civil disorder. A former British officer 
reaffirmed this position, and confirmed that:  
The peace walls were a military idea, sanctioned directly from Whitehall on 
advice from the army (Operation Banner Forum, 2009). 
In response to the deteriorating security situation the British government 
established the Hunt Committee to examine policing structures and the security 
apparatus within Northern Ireland (Ryder, 2000). By the end of 1969 the committee 
presented its findings to the British government and concluded that the 
maintenance of order and the conduct of internal security operations should 
become the central responsibility of the British Army (Murray, 1983).  
Policy impact 
From the outset peace walls were incorporated into the militarys strategy of 
reducing and restricting levels of violence between communities. They were also 
considered beneficial in instilling a sense of community safety, and providing 
opportunities for community and elected representatives to examine the rationale 
for the upsurge in violence. There is no doubting that there was an immediate 
decrease in incidents of communal rioting, and damage to properties as soon as the 
peace walls were constructed within those areas (Dunstan, 1984). There was a 
renewed sense of security, especially within the Catholic community (Hamill, 1985) 
and the walls were considered a tangible security policy response to their fears. In 
the first five months of deployment the army had constructed three peace walls 
within the city. Table 1 provides an indication of the location of the first peace walls 
in Belfast.  
Table 1: 1969  Peace walls constructed by the British Army  
Location  Material by 2008 
Cupar Way/Clonard High concrete wall topped with metal sheeting 
topped with weldmesh fence 
Alliance Avenue / Glenbryn Metal sheeting fence 
Cupar Street Upper High brick wall topped with metal sheeting 
Source: NIO Office 2009  
Although the British Army had constructed three peace walls within the first few 
months of their deployment, there was still a degree of optimism that they could 
reduce the violence without having to construct more barriers and fences. The peace 
walls were viewed as a provisional response, and not seen as an integral long-term 
military strategy to reduce community tensions. This was clear through the 
comments of a British Major who noted in August 1969 during the construction of 
the first wall in Cupar Way that, this is a temporary measure; we do not want 
another Berlin Wall situation on our hands (UTV, 2009).  However, by the end of the 
year, sixteen people had been murdered as a result of the conflict (Sutton, 2001) and 
there were strong indications that Republican paramilitaries were entering into a 
military campaign against the British security forces (Sluka, 1989). Furthermore, 
there were signs that Loyalist paramilitaries were going to embark on their violent 
campaign in response to the increase in Republican violence (Gillespie, 2008). By 
the start of 1970 the political environment in Northern Ireland had begun to change. 
According to Barzilay (1973) it was the beginning of a new stage in the cycle of 
violence, one that was defined by the gunman, planned riots and the destruction of 
city centre property and less concerned with large scale sectarian rioting by 
disorganised mobs.   
2.3 The 1970s: The decade of bombs and bullets  
Due to a number of significant political developments during the 1970s, this stage of 
the chapter has been divided into three succinct sections, which include, pre, during 
and post, the Northern Ireland Executive, which was in place for the first five 
months of 1974.  
Context 1970-1974 
By the beginning of 1970 tensions had begun to increase between the British Army 
and the Nationalist/Republican communities in the city. The intervention of the 
military had decreased the levels and frequency of communal violence and 
addressed concerns on the management of resources within the RUC. However, new 
problems arose as the army by their very nature were ill suited to the sensitive and 
diplomatic task of peace keeping and upholding the law and order (Buckland, 1981). 
Furthermore, according to  Dochartaigh (1997) the army quickly involved 
themselves in local issues without the necessary political support, leadership or 
direction. There were two events in 1970 which brought to the fore the growing 
animosity and distrust between the British Army and the Catholic community 
(Buckland, 1981). On the 2 April 1970 there was severe rioting in the Ballymurphy 
housing estate in West Belfast, with rioters throwing a number of petrol bombs at 
the army. This episode of violence resulted in the British Commander issuing a 
statement indicating that those engaged in throwing petrol bombs faced the risk of 
being shot (Hamill, 1985). The second major incident has become known as the 
Falls Road Curfew which took place over the 3 to 5 of July 1970. During this period 
the British Army placed approximately 20,000 members of the Catholic community 
in the Lower Falls area of West Belfast under a curfew. Over the course of the three 
days, six civilians were killed, a further sixty were injured, while the army suffered 
five casualties (Buckland, 1981). Together these events contributed to the 
realisation that any honeymoon period for the British Army was over and instead 
there was an increased sense of animosity and suspicion between the 
Nationalist/Republican community and the British troops (Buckland, 1981).  
In October 1970 in response to the violence and increased segregation and division 
within the city the Stormont government established a Joint Working Party to 
examine existing areas of confrontation and peace lines, and provide 
recommendations on these issues towards future government policy. This policy 
review group had representation from the Stormont administration, the British 
government, the RUC and the British Army (CAB/1634/1). The report completed in 
April 1971 noted that the peace walls had served their initial purpose of preventing 
major incidents between neighbouring communities and conserving security force 
resources. It was also noted that although the peace walls had not achieved an end 
to the violence and disorder, they had at least ensured that confrontations were 
between communities and the security forces, rather than inter-communal 
disturbances (CAB/1634/2). The report also made note of the negativities 
associated with the peace walls, concluding that they created an atmosphere of 
abnormality, which was psychologically damaging to local residents: 
 As it remains in place month after month (peace walls) it can too readily 
 become a crutch for the community. The abnormal can come to be taken 
 for granted, and the  search for fundamental solutions set aside for another 
 day (Final Report of  the Joint Working Party on Processions etc, 1971:11).  
The Working Group also considered the long-term practicalities of constructing 
more peace walls in the city, with the British Army and RUC indicating that any 
decision pertaining to security and the peace walls would be dependent on the 
outcome of the 1971 marching season. There security assessments noted a direct 
correlation between Unionist parades (Orange Institution, Apprentice Boys, and the 
Royal Black Institution) and the funeral processions of victims of the violence and 
levels of community tension and disorder. Therefore the Working Group were 
unable to speculate whether more peace walls would be needed, as any decision 
was dependent on the nature of the relationships between the Catholic and 
Protestant communities (CAB/1634/3).  
The Joint Working Group also examined the future structural planning of Belfast, 
considering the impact of urban regeneration programmes on both security and 
community relationships within the city. The group identified three areas of urban 
development that had the potential to facilitate opportunities for communal 
violence and disorder. Firstly, there was a general consensus from members that the 
new Belfast Urban Motorway design which was planned for construction in the late 
1970s should include a security review process. It was felt that there should be an 
avoidance to use materials which could be used as missiles or barricades, and that it 
may be appropriate to construct high fencing around the motorway to protect 
vehicles. Secondly, in relation to housing redevelopment it was maintained that the 
Minister of Home Affairs, along with the relevant security forces should be consulted 
at an early stage on new housing schemes. Thirdly, the group advocated the 
development of large urban spaces between neighbouring Protestant and Catholic 
residential areas as natural buffer zones, and where this was not possible then 
consideration should be given to the construction of physical cordon sanitaires in 
the shape of factories and warehouses (CAB/1634/1). The Working Group 
concluded that in the immediate months and years it would be necessary to 
facilitate rather than discourage segregation through city planning and the design of 
buildings because of the nature of the violence and the levels of mistrust that existed 
within communities.  
It is important to note that not everyone was supportive of the positions advocated 
within the Working Group (CAB/4/1634/1). The Office of the United Kingdom 
Representative in Northern Ireland disagreed with the view that division and 
segregation should be accepted as a feature of life in Northern Ireland and that it 
had the potential to persist well into the next century. There central criticism was 
that there was a policy contradiction in that the report advocated community 
regeneration plans alongside the approval for more peace walls and security 
barriers if required. The British representative maintained that this was 
counterproductive as the division was viewed as an issue that would negate the 
benefits of economic and social regeneration strategies. Furthermore, the 
representative articulated the view that the peace walls themselves may become 
sources of community discontent and indicated that in the future those communities 
that reside adjacent to the peace walls could become referred to as ghettos 
(CAB/4/1634/1).  
By late 1972 community tensions had significantly increased with Loyalist and 
Republican neighbourhoods in Belfast characterised by new informal barricades, 
masked gunmen and a lack of state control. According to Keane (1990) this violent 
transformation in the conflict coincided with the large-scale displacement of 
families, with approximately 60,000 people forced to relocate. The movement for 
the most part was concentrated in the working class areas of Catholic and 
Protestant neighbourhoods in North, West and Inner East Belfast (Murtagh, 1995). 
The majority of the city was characterised by segregation and division, and Smyth 
(1996) concluded that the reason people lived in single identity areas was for safety 
and protection, and the idea of living in mixed communities was simply not an 
option.  
Policy response 
In response to the collapse of social order evidenced by the significant increase in 
violence the British Prime Minister, Edward Heath, announced on the 24th March 
1972, the dissolution of Stormont and the introduction of Direct Rule from 
Westminster (Bew et al, 1996). The British government took complete 
responsibility for governing the territory (Loughlin, 1992), through the Secretary of 
State for Northern Ireland and the Northern Ireland Office (Connolly, 1990). 
Immediately public policy formulation, decision-making and implementation for 
Northern Ireland became the sole responsibility of the British government. 
According to Hadfield (1992) a direct impact of this shift in policy making was an 
almost complete absence of local representative participation and accountability. 
However, Douglas (1982) noted that this was a strategic manoeuvre by the British 
government to centralise the policy making structure and de-politicise local issues 
that were usually dominated by religious and community agendas. With regards to 
the peace walls, all policy making decisions were taken by the NIO in consultation 
with the RUC and British Army. The local community and politicians were only 
informed about the construction of a peace wall after the decision had been taken. 
The NIO did make attempts to develop relationships with local communities so that 
they could be kept informed of issues that related to their security policies and 
strategies. They established a network of local government representatives who 
were referred to as civil representatives. These civilians were tasked with 
developing relationships and partnerships in their own communities and using that 
knowledge to provide a direct link between the security services and local 
government representatives and the community (McLaughlin, 1991).  
From the British Armys perspective there was an acknowledgement at a senior 
level that their position in Northern Ireland was becoming more entrenched 
(Hamill, 1985). This view was perpetuated by a lack of co-ordination at a political 
level which resulted in many within the army complaining that there were no 
security plans or policies with defined objectives to establish their role and 
responsibility (Evelegh, 1978). By the end of their third year in the province, 243 
British soldiers had been killed (Wharton, 2008). In response to the increased threat 
and increase in casualties the British Army responded with Operation Motorman 
which began on the 31st July 1972 (Hennessey, 2007) and aimed to establish a 
military presence in all parts of Northern Ireland and remove all of the community 
barricades that had been erected by both Loyalists and Republicans in response to 
the sectarian violence. Surprisingly there was minimal resistance from the 
community to the influx of troops into the previous no-go areas. The reality was 
that many within the Loyalist and Republican communities were apathetic to the 
barriers and were content to see them removed:  
 People were anxious to find a way of removing these rat infested structures 
 which were not only unhealthy but were dangerous to children (Hamill, 
 1985:117).  
It is difficult to determine whether this was a widely held perception among 
communities towards the barricades, but the evidence shows that there was no 
significant interference or opposition from people in Derry/Londonderry or Belfast 
to their removal (Hamill, 1985). In response to local residents concerns about 
sectarian violence and incursions from neighbouring communities the British Army 
took the decision to once again replace the community barricades with their own 
official fences to alleviate the communities fears and prevent further communal 
rioting. The British Army employed the same procedures and materials that had 
been used to build the barriers in 1969. The walls provided physical lines of 
demarcation, and subsequently both Loyalist and Republican communities began to 
solidify into two homogenous ethnic groups (Boal and Royle, 2006). According to 
one soldier who served in 1972: 
 The communities naturally separated, they then reinforced this division 
 through their own barricadesover time the Army reinforced these lines of 
 demarcation to prevent localised attacks (British Soldier (2), 2009) 
As the PIRA bombing campaign against commercial, security force, and sectarian 
targets in the early 1970s gained momentum (White, 1983) peace wall construction 
increased, and the infamous ring of steel around the city centre emerged, where the 
city was surrounded by static security checkpoints, grills and fences (Jarman, 2008). 
Between 1970 and 1975 the IRA destroyed approximately 300 establishments in 
Belfast city centre and over a quarter of the total retail floor space (Brown, 1985). In 
response the British Army restricted the flow of traffic moving in and out of the city 
centre and divided the commercial district into segments that were sealed off with 
barbed wire. During the evening all entrances to the city with the exception of one 
were closed to the public (Barzilay, 1975). The military adopted a similar approach 
to securing the city as they had when constructing the peace walls in working class 
Loyalist and Republican communities. Once again, consultation with those most 
affected by the security measures was absent from the policy making process. A 
review of minutes from the security committee on Northern Ireland (INF/3/1/5) 
involving the Secretary of State and representatives from the Belfast Corporation 
revealed that shop owners and business had not been consulted on security changes 
that impacted on vehicular and pedestrian traffic, which was impacting on their 
ability to generate business in the city. In the early 1970s the British Army had 
taken up residence in the city centre. Sandbags and barbed wire dominated the 
landscape, and Brown (1985) concluded that the army had underpinned their 
tactics throughout Northern Ireland with a defensive approach towards the security 
of the city centre.  
Alongside the violence and disorder attempts were made by the British government 
to seek a resolution to the conflict. From the outset the government were clear that 
the political stalemate could only be broken by the co-operation of both the Catholic 
and Protestant communities. Therefore, they placed an emphasis on establishing a 
devolved government in Northern Ireland that had cross-community support 
(Birrell and Murie, 1975). This process began in June 1973 when the British 
government held elections in Northern Ireland for an Assembly (Connolly, 1990). 
Following the elections numerous meetings and debates involving both Nationalist 
and Unionist politicians took place. Eventually after a tripartite conference at 
Sunningdale Park (6-9 December) in England involving the British, Irish and 
Northern Ireland governments, agreement was reached on the formation of a 
Council of Ireland which was a key element of the negotiations on a political 
settlement (McGarry and OLeary, 1993). This led to the formation of a Power-
Sharing Executive with involved politicians from a range of political parties from 
across the Northern Ireland divide (Birrell and Murie, 1980).  
Figure 1: Peace Wall in North Belfast 
The Northern Ireland Executive - 1974 
The Northern Ireland (NI) Executive officially took office on January 1 1974, 
although powers relating to security and policing were retained by the NIO 
(Hillyard, 1983). As peace walls were considered part of the security response to the 
violence and disorder any policy decisions pertaining to their construction, 
maintenance or removal remained within the auspices of the NIO, and was not a 
concern of the NI Executive. However, a review of historical records provides an 
insight into how local politicians, the British Army and the NIO responded to issues 
relating to the construction of peace walls during the period of the devolved NI 
Executive. Communiqus between these parties (OE/1/9) relating specifically to the 
construction of peace walls illustrated how local politicians distanced themselves 
from the building of new peace walls. This communiqu refers to the possibility of 
constructing two security fences in West Belfast in early 1974. The British Army had 
made it clear to the NIO that new fences were required in Peters Hill and Unity 
Corner in West Belfast to avoid further rioting between the Protestant and Catholic 
communities. Although the NIO took this information to the NI Executive outlining 
the need for intervention, the NI Executive were keen to distance themselves from 
any proposal as they felt that there would be extreme difficulties in removing any 
physical structure after it had been built (OE/1/9).  
The NI Executive was a short lived administration as it collapsed on the 28 May 
1974 after the Unionist members of the Executive resigned (Aughey, 2005). This 
was largely due to increased pressure brought on from the Ulster Workers Strike, 
and the inadequate response to the strike from the NIO and the Secretary of State 
Merlyn Rees (Fisk, 1975). Essentially, there was strong opposition within the 
Unionist community to the sharing of power with the Nationalist SDLP which was 
evidenced by a petition with 300,000 signatures who indicated their non-acceptance 
of the legitimacy of the devolved government (Birrell and Murie, 1980). In response 
to the political chaos the British government reintroduced direct rule from 
Westminster, supported by the NIO (McGarry and OLeary, 1993).   
Context 1975-1979 
Throughout this period the security situation in Northern Ireland had deviated away 
from the level of violence perpetrated by Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries in 
the early 1970s (Dewar, 1985). The Secretary of State for NI at a meeting of the local 
government authorities in September 1975 indicated that the nature of the violence 
had significantly changed, and that it was no longer an organised urban guerrilla 
campaign, but instead a series of retaliatory sectarian killings (IBN/1/4/34). This 
position of the conflict had a direct impact on the security policies adopted by both 
the British Army and the RUC. Prior to 1976 the RUC had played a subordinate role 
to the army in relation to the operational and strategic development and 
implementation of security policy (McGarry and OLeary, 1999). However, in 1976 
the British government adopted a radical shift in policy following an internal review 
of the security situation in Northern Ireland (Gardiner Committee, 1975). This 
review concluded that the military approach had largely failed, and that the RUC 
should become more prominent in setting and implementing the security agenda. 
According to Weitzer (1995) the rationale behind this change in policy was so that 
the conflict could be redefined. The British government had come to realise that the 
security policies adopted by the British Army gave credence to the Republican 
paramilitary claims that they were in a war. Therefore a new policy of 
criminalisation (Murray, 1983) based upon a redefinition of the conflict as a law and 
order problem was implemented by the British government and delivered through 
the RUC and the Public Prosecution Service. This shift in security policy was referred 
to as Police Primacy and/or Ulsterisation (Mulcahy, 2006). It should be noted, that 
although the operational and strategic position of the RUC was strengthened under 
this new policy direction, the NIO remained responsible for the majority of security 
related matters, which included the construction of peace walls (NIO, 2009).  
Figure 2: Peace Wall dividing communities 
Policy response 
Throughout the later part of the 1970s there was an acknowledgement within the 
political establishment that a political breakthrough in Northern Ireland was a long 
way off. The British government and the army responded by adopting strategies and 
policies that reflected a longer term approach to the conflict. According to Jarman 
(2008) this shift in thinking was evident in the design and construction of the peace 
walls at the end of the 1970s. Gone were the light green corrugated fences, barbed 
wire and use of derelict homes that had been adopted as materials by the British 
Army over the previous decade. These structures were quickly replaced with large 
scale brick and concrete walls, metal bollards and steel gates to separate and divide 
Loyalist and Republican communities. The change in building materials did not go 
un-noticed, and according to one commentator was a visible indicator to 
communities and local politicians that the security services did not foresee an 
immediate end to the conflict:  
 Im sure a number of Belfast politicians could accept the row of corrugated 
 iron and crumbling brick. It served its purpose but looked so terrible it 
 seemed a temporary measure. A brick wall would be permanent, a 
 national monument to the failure of the Northern Irish state (Conroy, 
 1988:114).  
There is no evidence to suggest that local politicians were part of the process that 
resulted in the peace walls becoming more permanent structures. However, the 
status of the peace walls was a reflection of the British Armys approach to the 
conflict and the difficulties in developing a resolution to the violence.  
Policy impact  
The central element of the NIOs security policy from 1972 was the containment and 
management of civil disorder and paramilitary violence, often through the 
construction of peace walls. The NIO were guided primarily by the British Army 
along with the RUC and erected the walls in times of heightened conflict as a direct 
response to an immediate need to preserve life and property on security grounds 
(NIO, 2009). By the early 1970s the overwhelming majority of working class 
communities had become segregated along religious lines. This shift in 
demographics, and the hardening of single identity communities had a number of 
impacts on residents that included: 
 A willingness not to engage with the state and reliance on community based 
defence initiatives (Boal, 1972); 
 A strengthening of community solidarity, and disengagement with wider 
civic society (Hiro, 1973); 
 A preservation and promotion of ethnic group cultural heritage and identity 
(Dahya, 1974); 
 An increased support for military response against the state. Paramilitaries 
gain opportunities to operate and engage within the community (Kitson, 
1971). 
Although the negative impacts associated with peace walls were identified by 
academic and practitioners in the early 1970s (Boal, 1976), they continue to be 
relevant over forty years later. Throughout the conflict the negative impacts of the 
peace were apparent to the security forces and policy makers, however, as Murtagh 
and Shirlow (2006:34) have acknowledged in crude terms, segregation existed 
because it works. Throughout the 1970s, the British Army constructed a further 
fifteen peace walls in Belfast (NIO, 2009). These walls, along with the three built in 
1969 put the total number at eighteen by the end of 1979.  It appears that the policy 
of division was viewed at a political and military level as a necessary response to the 
increased threat of both communal rioting and paramilitary violence. Table 2 
provides an overview of the location of the fifteen peace walls that were constructed 
throughout the 1970s. It is important to note that the NIO have no record of the 
exact year when each of the peace walls was constructed during this decade.  
Table 2: Location and material used to construct peace walls in the 1970s 
Year Location Material by 2008 
1970s Bryson Street / Thistle Court Brick wall topped with open 
mesh fencing 
1970s Cluan Place / Clandeboye Gardens Brick wall topped with open 
mesh fencing 
1970s Mountpottinger Road / Woodstock 
Open mesh fence 
1970s Henry Street / West Link Brick wall topped with double 
steel palisade fence 
1970s Manor Street / Rosevale Street Brick wall topped with steel 
fence 
1970s Rosappenna Street / Oldpark 
Street 
Brick wall topped with metal 
fence 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / Halidays Road  
/ Newington 
Welded mesh fence on top of 
existing wall 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / South Side Brick wall / metal fence / 
pedestrian gates 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / North Side Brick wall / metal pedestrian and 
vehicle gate 
1970s North Queen Street / Duncairn 
Gardens 
High mesh penal fencing and 
brick wall 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / North Side Brick wall and metal sheeting 
1970s Malinmore Park / Oranmore Drive Double steel palisdale fence and 
steel sheeting 
1970s Ardmoulin Avenue / Beverley 
Street 
High gates at Percy Street and 
block wall with steel sheeting on 
top and weldmesh fencing 
1970s North Howard Street Metal pedestrian and vehicle 
gates 
1970s Northumberland Street Metal pedestrian and vehicle 
gates 
Source: Freedom of Information Request (NIO, 2009)  
By the end of the decade 2,092 people had been killed as a result of the conflict 
(Sutton, 2001). This period also saw the greatest number of peace walls constructed 
out of any other decade during the conflict. Across society there was a degree of 
pessimism surrounding the long term prospects for peace, with a realisation that by 
the beginning of the 1980s the conflict was nearing an acceptable level of violence 
(White, 1983). There was no evidence to suggest that the NIO or the British Army 
had examined alternatives to the construction of peace walls, or strategies that did 
not involve the separation and division of communities. Instead an acceptance of 
partition, segregation and division appeared to be underpinning security policy into 
the 1980s.  
2.4 The 1980s: The decade of an acceptable level of violence  
The following section will provide a general context on events during the 1980s 
along with a review of the continued construction of peace walls by the NIO in 
response to the increase in violence and disorder.  
Context 
Throughout the 1980s peace walls became part of the normal range of security 
policy interventions employed by the British government in response to communal 
violence and sectarian disorder (Jarman, 2008). During this period other statutory 
agencies and bodies also became involved in the building of peace walls. The 
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (NIHE), formed in 1971 as Northern Irelands 
strategic housing authority, was responsible for the construction of peace walls if 
there were security issues relating to any of their social housing developments. 
However, the final decision to fund, construct or maintain peace walls was the 
responsibility of the NIO (Murtagh, 2002). The 1980s was also the period when the 
NIO with the support of the British Army began to transform existing and new peace 
walls so that they became more aesthetically pleasing and less militaristic in their 
design. According to Bollens (2000) this was achieved through new landscaping and 
designs that created a form of invisibility over the peace walls. The NIO adopted 
several methods for transforming the peace walls, although two of the most popular 
included the planting of trees and shrubs around and on the walls, and also 
extending buildings and land redevelopments to that they became natural barriers 
between communities.  A NIHE (1991) publication into housing and regeneration in 
Northern Ireland drew attention to the architectural transformation of the peace 
walls during the late 1980s, noting that:  
 The stark concrete wall like Cupar Street provides an example of the earlier 
 design solutionsmore recently attractive environmental barriers, consisting 
 of ornate railings, low brick walls and planting, at places like the Upper 
 Crumlin Road and Newtownards Road have also proved successful (NIHE, 
 1991:48) 
Alongside the physical changes to the peace walls the NIO pursued a strategy that 
aimed to encourage the regeneration of wasteland close to the peace walls. A small 
number of new business development parks subsidised by the government were 
constructed which offered incentives such as low rent for new investors with the 
aim of revitalising stagnant communities (NIO, 1981). An illustration of this 
strategy was the Duncairn Business Park in North Belfast, which had been 
transformed from wasteland into commercial properties. Interestingly, there were 
those who maintained that this strategy was simply an attempt to divide and 
separate communities in a similar context to peace walls.  For although the business 
park created new employment opportunities for local communities it also provided 
a socially engineered buffer zone between the Loyalist Tigers Bay and Republican 
New Lodge housing estates. Neill (1993) contended that this planning strategy 
adopted by the NIO within Belfast throughout the mid 1980s had been to 
incorporate the physical planning of the city directly into the overall process of the 
political management of the conflict in a positive and constructive manner. These 
business parks were another type of barrier created through regeneration 
programmes, but their purpose was the continued division and separation of 
communities (Mitchell and Kelly, 2010). It is obvious that this policy of division 
through regeneration resonate strongly with the recommendations that emerged 
from the Joint Working Party Report on Processions (1971) which too advocated 
policies of separation and division. However, there is no evidence to suggest that the 
report influenced planning decisions or regeneration developments overseen by the 
NIO. However, it should be noted that there were strong similarities between the 
Joint Working Party recommendations and the development and re-structuring of 
the city a decade later. 
  Figure 3 Peace wall in West Belfast
Policy response 
At this stage of the review it is necessary to focus on the relationship between the 
security forces and city planners in the mid 1980s to determine what role, if any the 
security forces had in the planning of Belfast, aside from the construction of peace 
walls? There have been several claims from academic and media commentators that 
the security forces were involved in the physical planning of Belfast during periods 
of the conflict (Cowan, 1982; Hillyard, 1983). Although it is acknowledged that the 
British Army were responsible for the initial design and construction of the peace 
walls, other allegations infer that the military altered building plans, influenced the 
final location of the West link motorway, and recommended where new social 
housing developments could be built in the city (Scope, 1982). Furthermore, 
Hillyard (1983) maintained that the new housing estates were designed with only 
one entrance and exit to assist the security services monitor community activity. He 
also indicated that factories, business developments and arterial roads had been 
constructed to form barriers between neighbouring Protestant and Catholic 
communities. The construction of the West Link which separated North and West 
Belfast from the city centre was also considered to be a British Army tactic of 
facilitating surveillance and control over areas that experienced the worst of the 
violence (Blackman, 1991). In fact, Hillyard (1983) argued that this was an attempt 
by the British Army to ghettoise the conflict to specific Republican and Loyalist 
communities, away from the more middle class neighbourhoods and more affluent 
parts of the city centre. Furthermore, Dawson (1984) suggested that defensive 
planning overseen by the military, shaped the redevelopment of housing, and the 
road layout of the Catholic Short Strand in East Belfast. This restricted interaction 
between the neighbouring Protestant community and addressed the residents fears 
of communal violence and disorder. Further evidence has emerged from the work of 
Hall (2007) who through testimonies from displaced families in the 1970s 
documented a first hand account of the British Army supporting paramilitary 
attempts to segregate entire neighbourhoods in West Belfast. Taken together these 
different positions lend credence to the suggestion that the security forces 
manipulated the planning process in Belfast to assist in the policing and security of 
the entire city. This view was reinforced by the NIHE (1988) who noted that they 
were constantly advised by national agencies on security issues and concerns, and if 
notified by those agencies that physical barriers were necessary, then they had to be 
incorporated into existing housing designs. However, Murtagh (2002) has refuted 
these arguments and contends that there was no evidence of security force 
involvement in the design and building of new housing estates or the manipulation 
of territory and community boundaries within the city. Murtagh has indicated that 
during the 1980s a number of regeneration initiatives and new builds in Belfast 
were influenced by community household surveys along with community 
consultation programmes and not pressure from the security services. This brief 
overview has revealed that there are opposing views as to the extent if any of 
security force involvement in the design and planning of Belfast. However, it seems 
highly unlikely that at some level the NIO and the British Army were not involved in 
discussions on housing redevelopment schemes, road schemes and new builds 
because of their approach to keeping communities a part.    
Policy impact 
Throughout the remainder of the 1980s, the responsibility for the construction of 
peace walls continued to rest with the NIO who sought input from the British Army, 
the RUC, and the civilian representatives. However, local political representatives 
and statutory bodies were not formally part of this process (NIO, 2009). By the late 
1980s there were some who had begun to openly criticise the lack of local 
participation and the negativities of the peace walls on communities that lived 
beside them. According to a NIHE (1988) report on the issues facing urban renewal 
in Belfast:  
 The so-called peace lines are in fact a contradiction in terms. They are in 
 many instances characterised not by peace and harmony between 
 neighbours, but by conflict, tension, damage to property and continuing 
 instability (NIHE, 1988:34). 
Furthermore, service providers were also beginning to question whether the peace 
walls actually perpetuated the cycles of sectarian violence across the interface 
communities (Murtagh and Shirlow, 2006). As critics voiced concerns about the 
peace walls the NIHE were quick to state that the barriers, walls and fences did not 
directly affect everyone that resided in Belfast. They did not want the situation over 
exaggerated, and focused on the reality that although the city had over 100,000 
public and private sector dwellings, no more than 1200 houses, or just 1% of the 
housing stock was affected directly by peace walls (NIHE, 1988).  
Throughout the 1980s the NIO authorised the construction of a further seven peace 
walls in Belfast which brought the total number to twenty-five. Throughout this 
decade a total of 853 people were killed as a result of the conflict (Sutton, 2001). 
This coincided in late 1980s with a significant shift in the PIRA strategy, away from 
commercial bombings, and a more concerted focus on attacks towards the security 
forces and other state personnel (Neill, 1993). Table 3 provides an overview of the 
location and types of the seven peace walls constructed in this decade.  
Table 3: Location and material used to construct peace walls in the 1980s 
Year Location Materials used in 2008 
1980s Newtownards Road / 
Strand Walk 
Brick wall and steel slatted panel fence 
1980s Woodvale / Holy Cross Weld mesh fence 
1980s Torrens / Wyndham Street Steel fence with brick wall reinforcing 
another steel fence on top 
1985 Roden Street / Westlink Stone wall with steel fencing on top / 
metal sheeting and welded mesh in 
further places 
1988 Springfield Park / 
Springmartin Road 
Brick wall topped with metal sheeting 
1988 Lanark Way Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1989 Springfield Avenue / 
Springfield Road 
Brick wall with steel posts and railings 
Source: Freedom of Information Request (NIO, 2009) 
The peace walls were initially devised as a temporary measure, implemented in late 
1969 based on security force recommendations to address issues of communal 
violence and disorder. Initially they were considered an emergency response that 
would create the environment for community reflection and evaluation, and allow 
for government agencies to address societal and political concerns. However, this 
temporary outlook soon dissipated and as the security threat increased, the peace 
walls became the normal security response to the violence. The peace walls were a 
tangible government response to the communitys calls for action in response to 
increased community tensions, and alleviated incidents of paramilitary violence and 
eased pressure on policing resources.  
2.5 The 1990s: The decade of peace with violence  
The following section will provide a general context on events during the 1990s 
along with a review of the continued construction of peace walls by the NIO in 
response to the increase in violence and disorder.  
Context 
By the end of 1991, the Northern Ireland Tourist Board noted that it had been the 
best year for the province in terms of visitors since the beginning of the conflict 
(Brien, 1991). However, the paramilitary violence and sectarian rioting continued 
and from 1991-1993 the PIRA renewed a bombing campaign against commercial 
properties in the city centre, with the attack on the Grand Opera House a 
particularly symbolic moment (Neill, 1993). During this period tentative and 
secretive discussions took place between British government representatives and 
members of the PIRA (Darby, 2003) on a way to end the conflict. Alongside these 
back-channel conversations the British and Irish governments published the 
Downing Street Declaration (1993) which outlined the principle of consent in 
relation to the sovereignty of Northern Ireland, and paved the way for meaningful 
dialogue between the local political parties in Northern Ireland. On the 31 August 
1994 the PIRA declared a complete cessation of military operations. Following this, 
the main Loyalist paramilitary organisations declared a ceasefire on the 13 October 
1994 (Gillespie, 2008). The conclusion of paramilitary violence brought immediate 
rewards for the people of Northern Ireland and Belfast with the relaxation of several 
security measures, such as a significant decrease in the number of roadblocks and 
security checkpoints, and a reduction in the military presence on the ground 
(MacGinty and Darby, 2002). This was also an opportunity for reflection and a re-
evaluation of government policies and strategies developed in response to the 
violence and disorder. In this case one could argue that the construction of peace 
walls was simply a security response by the NIO to the fears, needs and demands of 
Loyalist and Republican communities in Belfast. However, this may have come at a 
cost, as it quickly became apparent that the peace walls had led to an immediate and 
conclusive distancing of social, political and cultural engagement between working 
class Protestant and Catholic communities in Belfast. According to research 
conducted by Feldman (1991) although the peace walls were aimed at reducing 
localised violence, they inadvertently facilitated the necessary conditions that 
fuelled sectarian violence between the Catholic and Protestant communities. Other 
publications by the NIHE at this time also raised concerns about the relationship 
between the peace walls and a long-term solution to the conflict:   
 Sadly, while the peace lines provide a physical barrier between both 
 communities, in reality they represent barriers to a permanent solution 
 (NIHE, 1991:22).  
The paramilitary ceasefires offered new opportunities for policy advisors, 
academics and community based organisations to begin the process of examining 
the impact of the peace walls and other security policies that were implemented by 
the British government from the beginning of the conflict (Jarman, 1996). For 
example the independent organisation The Cost of the Troubles Study (1996) was 
established to document the nature and extent of the violence, and the Belfast 
Interface Project (BIP) was created in 1996 to identify the key issues facing local 
communities living at interfaces and adjacent to the peace walls. Through the 
research conducted by the BIP it became apparent that residents living beside peace 
walls were experiencing issues such as marginalisation, poverty, social exclusion, 
limited or no access to resources, high unemployment, low educational attainment, 
and high levels of crime (BIP, 1998). These issues and problems were prevalent 
within both Loyalist and Republican working class communities and were 
continuously reinforced by the detrimental impact of the peace walls (Murtagh and 
Shirlow, 2006).  
Figure 4: Peace wall dividing property 
It also became apparent through other academic research that there was a direct 
relationship between politically motivated incidents and the peace walls. One third 
of all victims were murdered within 250 metres of an interface/peace wall, and 
approximately 70% of all deaths occurred within 500 metres of all segregated 
boundaries in the city (Murtagh and Shirlow, 2006). It seemed that although the 
peace walls were built to protect communities and instil a sense of security, they 
also became locations were the majority of deaths took place. Aside from the 
murders and paramilitary violence the peace walls also reinforced community 
identity and territory and inadvertently served as magnets for exploiting or 
expressing community tensions, or for youths to engage in what was frequently 
referred to as recreational rioting (Byrne, 2005).  
Policy response 
In 1993 the Springfield Inter-Community Development Project, a local community 
based initiative in West Belfast, brought together a number of residents from 
interface communities in the area to discuss the issues and concerns residents had 
about living beside peace walls. The participants indicated that they were living in 
real fear, and that the peace walls had gone some way to providing a sense of 
security and reduce the opportunity for sectarian violence. In fact many of the 
residents called for the peace walls to be strengthened, and in some cases replace 
the existing fences with brick walls and steel shutters. However, despite the 
understanding that the walls were constructed to protect communities, there was 
also an attitude projected that the peace walls were not the long-term answer. 
Interestingly, both Loyalist and Republican communities felt that the British 
government, regardless of the resources and expertise available to it, was incapable 
of developing alternatives to peace walls and segregation (Hall, 1993). Essentially, 
communities were under the impression that building peace walls were the only 
tools that the government had in response to the sectarian violence and disorder.  
The government during this period was also considering and reflecting upon its 
security responses to the paramilitary violence and communal rioting. In late 1993 
the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Patrick Mayhew established a working 
group to consider the issues that surrounded the peace lines (term often used in a 
similar context to peace walls) in response to the acute housing problem in North 
Belfast. The working group conducted their report internally so that fear or 
expectations were not raised within communities. The members concluded that 
each peace line was different in terms of physical appearance, security and housing 
management and that there was no single blueprint for action. In relation to a future 
peace lines policy, the Working Group indicated that any proposals for new peace 
lines would primarily depend on security considerations. However, it was also 
acknowledged that Ministers should be aware that the development of social, 
economic and environmental issues in the long-term could lead to the removal of 
barriers. The report concluded that in light of the political situation, segregation had 
to be accepted as a reality by urban planners (Working Group on Peace lines, 1994). 
So by 1994 prior to the paramilitary ceasefires there was a realisation that 
segregation and division was still a suitable policy response to the political and 
communal differences that existed in Northern Ireland.  
Figure 5: Peace Wall in West Belfast 
After the paramilitary cease-fires in 1994 the NIO took the decision to consult more 
widely with those who had a vested interest in the construction of peace walls. 
Although the NIO were ultimately responsible they began to include local elected 
representatives, community representatives, alongside the RUC in discussions about 
strengthening existing peace walls and building new ones. There was no formal 
requirement for the NIO to consult with any specific party in relation to the 
construction of a peace wall yet the immediate changes to the security situation 
allowed for a greater degree of consultation (Jarman, 2007). The construction of 
peace walls in response to localised violent incidents did not stop after the 
paramilitary ceasefires. In fact, less than twelve hours after the first PIRA ceasefire 
on the 31 August 1994 contractors were completing the lengthening of the peace 
wall on the Springfield Road in West Belfast (The Observer, 2000). In reality, the 
NIO throughout the latter part of the 1990s built at least a further five peace walls 
and strengthened a large number throughout Belfast in response to RUC and 
community concerns on safety and security (NIO, 2009). Several academics have 
considered why more peace walls were constructed after the armed military aspect 
of the conflict had been concluded. And according to ODowd and Kamarova (2009) 
the community joy which followed the ceasefires was soon replaced by the 
emergence of new struggles in working class Loyalist and Republican communities 
to symbolically claim and/or reclaim territories. This was played out in a number of 
arenas including parades, marches, the flying of flags, and community murals. 
Jarman (2007) maintains that by the late 1990s it was not uncommon for Loyalist 
and Republican communities to publicly call on the NIO to build new peace walls 
along the periphery of their neighbourhoods in response to ethnic violence and 
disorder. A review of local newspapers illustrated the community demand for new 
barriers and fences. Media stories and articles that focused on interface 
communities in Belfast often led with headlines such as Brick wall demanded to 
stop killer gangs (Belfast Telegraph, 1994), and Residents called for a Peace Wall 
(Irish News, 1996), and Both sides want new wall after riot (Irish Times, 1996).  
According to the Jarman (2007), it was Loyalists and Unionists that were more likely 
to argue in favour of peace walls and further segregation compared to their 
Republican and Nationalist neighbours. The Loyalist community maintained that 
calls for more peace walls were simply a response to Republican violence and 
disorder. Yet Republicans would argue that the real reason was that a decreasing 
Protestant population made them feel vulnerable and more peace walls would result 
in permanent territorial boundaries and limit the ability the Catholic community to 
expand.  
Policy impact  
It was evident that a security policy which was set out and implemented by the 
British Army in an ad hoc and sporadic manner had now become a core policy 
response by the NIO to a communitys fears of sectarian violence, threats and 
intimidation. The peace walls had become an acceptable and suitable policy 
response to the communal violence. Therefore, even after the paramilitary 
ceasefires had been established and the political parties had reached agreement on 
the sharing of power in a devolved administration with the signing of The 
Agreement (1998) the NIO continued to build new peace walls and strengthen 
existing walls, even though the justification and rationale for their existence used at 
the beginning of the conflict had now gone. The big difference in the building of 
peace walls pre and post ceasefires was that by the late 1990s Loyalist and 
Republican communities were primarily responsible for their construction. 
Divisions within the city became more entrenched, territory was more controlled, 
and competition for facilities and resources dominated the community landscape 
(Jarman, 2008). Table 4 provides an outline of the fourteen NIO peace walls that 
were constructed throughout the 1990s.  
Table 4: Location and material of peace walls constructed in the 1990s  
Year Location Material 
1990s Torrens / Oldpark Road  and 
Avenue 
Brick wall 
1990s Springfield Pde / West Circular 
Brick and block wall topped with 
chain link fencing , palisade fence 
and metal sheeting 
1990s Ballygomartin Road Steel fence with sections of palisade 
fencing 
1990 Workman Avenue Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1990 Springmartin Road Steel double gates and palisade 
fence 
1991 Moyard Pde 
Steel palisade fence 
1992 Townsend Street 
Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1993 Squires Hill / Hazel Brook Metal fence topped with weldmesh 
Drive fencing and brick wall 
1993 Serpentine Gardens / Gunnell 
Metal sheeting fence topped with 
open mesh sheeting 
1994 Ainsworth Avenue / Springfield 
Brick wall topped with mesh panel 
fencing 
1994 Flax Street 
Two metal barriers 
1994 Parkside Gardens / 
Mountcollyer Street 
High wall of  weldmesh and steel 
fencing 
1997 Mountainview Pde / 
Mountainview Park 
Steel mesh fence 
1998 Longlands Road / Arthur Bridge Palisade fence with metal sheeting 
attached 
Source: Freedom of Information Request (NIO, 2009) 
The total number of peace walls constructed by the British Army and the NIO 
totalled thirty-nine by the start of the millennium. A large number of these had been 
strengthened in height and length in response to community, policing and security 
agency requests (NIO, 2009). Throughout the 1990s there was a significant decrease 
in the number of people killed as a result of the conflict in comparison to previous 
decades, with a total of 530 reported deaths (Sutton, 2001). Although, the 1990s 
witnessed the paramilitary ceasefires and the growth of the peace and political 
processes, this new found optimism was not being reflected through security 
policies in working class Loyalist and Republican areas. The peace walls were still 
being constructed, none had been removed (Jarman, 2008), and there was growing 
levels of segregation and division across the city going forward into the next 
century.  
2.6 The 2000s: The decade of politics and devolution  
This section considers the various political developments that took place during the 
decade and the subsequent impact these events had on the construction of peace 
walls. 
Context 
There were several significant political events that occurred in this decade that 
included the St Andrews Agreement in November 2006; the decision by Sinn Fin to 
endorse the policing structures in January 2007; and the conclusion of Direct Rule 
and the devolution of powers to the Northern Ireland Assembly in May 2007, 
although, initially policing and justice powers remained within the NIO, including 
any policy decisions that related to peace walls (NIO, 2009). During this period of 
political change there were opportunities for local politicians and policy makers to 
reflect on the impact the armed violence and sectarianism had on communities 
across Northern Ireland. One of the most obvious assumptions was that religious 
and ethnic segregation and division had been cemented within large parts of the 
province: 
 Across the whole of Northern Ireland, 92.5% of all 100,000 public homes are 
 segregatedBelfast city was always pretty bad, but this is the worst ever, and 
 may be the worst in Western Europe. Polarisation is greater than it ever was 
  its a really tragic commentary on the state of the society (Belfast 
 Telegraph, 07.04.04) 
In relation to Belfast, the local Council (BCC) recognised the high levels of residential 
segregation that existed, especially in working class parts of East, North and West 
Belfast (BCC, 2007). Furthermore the NIHE acknowledged that the segregated 
nature of communities in the city impacted on their ability to address housing need, 
and concluded that they alone could not engineer territorial adjustments and that 
such a politically sensitive issue was beyond the ability of any agency to deliver 
(NIHE, 2000).  
Policy response  
Although the devolved institutions were restored in May 2007, local politicians were 
not responsible for the construction, maintenance or removal of peace walls. The 
NIO continued to manage this policy issue through legislation from The Justice and 
Security (Northern Ireland) Act 2007, Sections 29 and 30 (NIO, 2009). From the 
beginning of the devolved administration in Northern Ireland, the NI Executive 
appeared reluctant to address the subject of peace walls. In a speech by the Deputy 
First Minister, Mr McGuiness, it was obvious that the local administration did not 
want to be involved in matters arising from peace walls:  
 We can and should, only seek the removal of peace walls when local 
 communities feel safe and comfortableit is essential that plans to remove 
 peace walls must be community drivenpolicy responsibility for the erection 
 and removal of peace walls remains with the NIO (Deputy First Minister, 
 speaking in Assembly, 23.06.08)   
From this statement it is clear that the NI Executive envisage any future policy 
process on peace walls being shaped and contextualised within local communities. 
This position takes the onus of responsibility away from the political leaders and 
focuses attention onto communities that reside adjacent to the peace walls and most 
affected by any shift in policy:  
 But when those on both sides of the wall mutually come to an agreement and 
 say we are taking down these walls, then we will have won a great victory 
 (First Minister, speaking in Assembly 2008) 
In the early stages of the administration there was no reference to peace walls 
within the Programme for Government which established the strategic and 
operational aims and priorities for the Assembly term (2008-11). Or the Pubic 
Service Agreements at the Departmental level which included themes of 
reconciliation, peace building, regeneration and addressing social and economic 
deprivation, but failed to mention specifics on peace walls. However, as the devolved 
government became more established it began to publicly acknowledge the 
difficulties and challenges that exist in responding to the issue of peace walls. As one 
senior civil servant noted at a community conference on the subject of peace walls:  
 To some extent it was easy to put walls up because it was meeting a very 
 definite need at the time, but having put the walls up we didnt have a 
 strategy for how the walls would come down. What we need to  emphasise at 
 every stage of the conversation process iswe will not be doing this to 
 you (Tim Losty, speaking at Challenge for Change Conference 2009) 
One can conclude that although the peace walls were the policy responsibility of the 
NIO, it was clear that the devolved government had no coherent strategy or plan to 
respond to peace walls as a public policy issue.   
Policy impact 
The construction of peace walls in response to sectarian violence and disorder 
continued with the development of a further three peace walls in the city, which 
brought the total number up to forty-two. Table 5 outlines the location of these 
walls in Belfast.  
Table 5: Location and material of peace walls constructed in 2000s  
2002 Madrid Street  
East Belfast 
Steel gates topped with sheeting and weld mesh 
fencing 
2008 Graymount Metal pedestrian gate topped with palisade fencing 
2008 Hazelwood 
Integrated 
Primary School 
Weld mesh fence on top of existing school perimeter 
fence 
      Source: Freedom of Information Request (NIO 2009) 
It is also important to recognise that aside from the construction of three new peace 
walls, a number of existing walls were also extended in height and length (The News 
Letter, 2002). Figure 1 illustrates the positioning of the peace walls in Belfast, and 
clearly shows that there are no peace walls constructed in South Belfast. 
Figure 6: Location of NIO/DOJ peace walls in Belfast 
Source: Belfast Interface Project (2008) 
Recent research has also revealed that aside from the NIO constructed peace walls, 
there are several other barriers in the city that serve a similar purpose. A study by 
Jarman (2008) noted that organisations such as the NIHE, Belfast City Council and 
the PSNI had constructed security barriers in the course of regeneration and/or 
redevelopment or in response to safety issues, which puts the actual total of peace 
walls and security barricades within the city at eighty-eight. The study also 
concluded that there were issues surrounding the ownership of these structures, 
with a number of agencies unsure who built them, which has significant issues in 
relation to their upkeep and maintenance.  
Considering the large number of physical lines of demarcation in the city, academics 
and policy advisors in the last decade have conducted research into the social and 
economic costs of segregation in Northern Ireland and Belfast.  A report by Deloitte 
(2007) concluded that division and violence brought about as a result of the conflict 
in Northern Ireland was costing the taxpayer an extra 1.5 billion pounds every 
year. Of that figure segregated housing had increased costs annually by 24 million 
pounds. Furthermore, research conducted by Deloitte (2008) for Belfast City Council 
reviewed the levels of service provision within the city and concluded that although 
there was widespread spatial segregation there was growing potential for the 
segregation to increase. The research also found that there were strong perceptions 
among people within the city that geographical areas were designated Protestant or 
Catholic, and that subsequently mobility was an issue with people reluctant to enter 
areas perceived to be owned by people from another community. It was also noted 
that the benefits from the political settlements and agreements were not resonating 
down to those communities that experienced the worst of the conflict, which 
coincidentally are also the neighbourhoods in and around the peace walls. This 
resonates with the findings from Murtagh (2006) who noted that the peace 
dividend was absent from parts of the city and within local communities and that 
any benefits were disportionately administered throughout the city. One only needs 
to compare the Titanic and the Cathedral Quarters and large areas of South Belfast 
which have benefited from public and private investment, with inner city Loyalist 
and Republican communities in North Belfast were structural investment has 
largely been absent.    
Post-devolution 
Throughout the decade the British government, the NI Executive and Belfast City 
Council developed strategies and produced policy documents aimed at addressing 
the social and economic issues experienced by interface communities. Firstly, the 
British government with support from local civil servants published the A Shared 
Future document (2005) which was a policy and strategic framework for good 
relations in Northern Ireland, developed without input from local politicians. The 
document highlighted the need to develop a long-term approach to tackle the 
problems of interface areas and areas at risk of becoming flashpoints. Although A 
Shared Future identified the essential requirement of an integrated and co-
ordinated approach to interfaces, the subsequent Triennial Action Plan (2006) did 
little more than reconfirm the range of existing initiatives and projects supported by 
the various government departments, without any sign of joined up thinking or 
cross-departmental working. Secondly, in the Programme for Government 2008-
2011 developed by the NI Executive the overarching aim was to build a peaceful, 
fair, prosperous society in Northern Ireland with respect for the rule of law and 
where everywhere can enjoy a better quality of life (OFMDFM, 2008). The 
document identified the need to continue efforts to address divisions, and there was 
recognition that sectarianism, racism and intolerance continued to damage the 
reputation of the country and negatively impact on the potential for economic 
investment (OFMDFM, 2008). 
Thirdly, the Belfast City Council Good Relations Plan (2007) was developed in the 
context of A Shared Future (2005) and focused on two core ideas. The first was the 
development of a common citizenship based on civic not ethnic identity, and the 
second was the expansion of public spaces accessible to all (MacBride, 2008). 
Essentially there were four broad aims, which included, securing shared space; 
transforming contested space; developing shared cultural space; and building 
shared organisational space (BCC, 2007). The council were aware of the negativity 
associated with the segregation and division within the city, and pursued a 
corporate agenda which required crossed departmental collaboration and promoted 
the vision of sharing. 
Although peace walls remained within the remit of the NIO, events in 2008 forced 
the Secretary of State to reconsider their position and policy on the construction of 
peace walls. In a radio interview in 2008 the Security Minister for Northern Ireland 
outlined the NIO policy surrounding peace walls: 
 My first obligation is to protect peoples lives and to protect peoples homes. 
 Therefore it would be irresponsible for me to take down those barricades if it 
 exposed people to risk and to threat, and I cannot run that risk. And as much 
 as I want to see the end of these barricades I cant risk a family having their
 home  firebombed, losing their lives in the process and that has to be my 
 first and foremost responsibility (Paul Goggins, 2008). 
The reason for the Minister having to justify the construction of peace walls was   
because in 2007 the NIO after consultation with the PSNI, local communities and 
statutory organisations took the decision to construct a new peace wall in the 
grounds of the Hazelwood Integrated Primary School in North Belfast. This 
announcement was made just after the May 2007 local elections and the 
establishment of the devolved government. The media highlighted the contradiction 
of Sinn Fin and the DUP agreeing to go into government together, yet twenty miles 
away the NIO was constructing a barrier to prevent violence exchanges between 
Catholic and Protestant communities. It became apparent to the NIO and the PSNI 
that there was an absence of information or knowledge about alternatives to peace 
walls. In the preceding thirty-five years, during the conflict, physical structures had 
been considered viable solutions to the violence and disorder. However, the fact that 
it was over a decade since the paramilitary ceasefires, the Secretary of State 
indicated that alternatives to the peace walls should be considered. In response to 
this peace wall being built the NIO tasked the Community Relations Council (CRC) to 
review the implications of the peace wall at Hazelwood on an annual basis, and to 
also convene an Interface Working Group to examine in detail the different 
perspectives on peace walls. For the first time this was an opportunity to bring 
together all of the relevant statutory agencies, NGOs and key individuals with 
knowledge and experience of issues on peace walls. Since 2008 they have met 
regularly and shared information about existing and prospective new interfaces, 
relevant policies surrounding peace walls, and discussed the development of a 
strategic approach to the transformation of interface areas and peace walls. The 
group were in a unique position to report directly back to the British Minister with 
learnings that emerged from their discussions. This working group continues to 
meet and formulate ideas, strategies and plans with broad support across all of the 
partners involved in the process. This was a clear shift in the British governments 
policy and for this first time, other responses to peace walls were being analysed 
and other agencies and community groups had opportunities to influence 
government policy in this area.  
2.7 Developing perspectives in the emerging decade 
By the end of the decade there was a growing body of evidence which suggested that 
peace walls were becoming more of a public policy issue. Firstly, Macauley (2008) 
published a discussion paper based on a process for the removal of all peace walls in 
Northern Ireland. The document was primarily a mechanism to stimulate debate 
among local communities, politicians and service providers. The report suggested a 
process that would create the conditions that would make it safe enough for the 
peace walls to be removed. The paper proved a catalyst for informal discussions and 
talking-shops throughout inner city Loyalist and Republican communities in Belfast, 
and increased their general awareness on the current context of peace walls. 
Secondly, there has been recognition from across the media that the Belfast peace 
walls are not reflective of a society that has undergone a successful peace and 
political process. For example the BBC have done a number of feature stories, 
reports and articles on the peace walls, considering  whether they were here to stay, 
and their impact on international perceptions of Northern Ireland (BBC, 2009). 
Thirdly, international attention on the peace walls and the segregation and division 
has stimulated local debate on the peace walls. The comments from the New York 
Mayor, which linked economic investment with the removal of the peace walls, 
provided a catalyst for political and community reaction. According to the Mayor: 
 Northern Ireland has much to offeranother important step is needed. 
 Removing the barriers is in the interests of peace and prosperity and the 
 sooner the physical barriers come down, the sooner the flood gates of private 
 investment will open (Bloomberg, 2008). 
Fourthly, new academic research has energised discussions on the peace walls and 
their legacy in the context of a post-conflict city. In late 2007 Trina Vargo of the US-
Ireland Alliance held a series of discussions to explore the level of community 
interest in removing peace walls in Belfast. From the discussions a survey was 
conducted (Millward Brown Ulster, 2008) involving 1,037 individuals from six 
interface communities in Belfast. The overall findings from the survey revealed that 
local residents would be willing to have walls removed, but not necessarily 
immediately (60%). However, a large number indicated that the walls did provide 
some degree of security for people and for this reason it was still too soon to remove 
them. A further 21% indicated that they wanted the walls taken down immediately, 
while 17% noted that they were not bothered if the walls never came down. A 
majority (61%) felt that the politicians should do more to create the conditions for 
the walls to come down, and that the removal of the walls would also lead to an 
improvement in community relations (Vargo, 2008). Although this was innovative 
research at the time, it is important to acknowledge that this study only considered 
six interface communities in Belfast, and generalising across all interface 
communities in Belfast is problematic as each area has its own history, issues, and 
identity (NBIN, 2008). Fifthly, the Institute for Conflict Research (2008) published a 
report that brought together all of the existing information on interfaces in Belfast 
into a single document. The research mapped and logged all of the peace walls and 
security barriers within the city, and examined individual and local ways to facilitate 
community dialogue on the subject of peace walls. The report identified a number of 
circumstances and contexts in which some barriers and peace walls could be 
removed, either because the barrier no longer served a purpose due to the changing 
political context, a change in demographics, or because of local regeneration 
developments. Furthermore, the report concluded that over one third of barriers 
could be removed or transformed with minimal difficulty within a process of 
regeneration or normalisation, provided there was local support, political direction, 
and economic investment. It was seen as crucial that any approach was conducted in 
a joined up, co-ordinated manner with strong cross government departmental 
support (Jarman, 2008). These five distinctive developments illustrate the growing 
momentum that was being generated on the subject of peace walls by the end of the 
decade. However, although academics, practitioners, the media and politicians from 
the USA were raising the subject of peace walls, local politicians and the NI executive 
remained largely absent from this discourse on peace walls.  
NI Executive policy developments  
By May 2010 the NI Executive had been in place for three years and had managed to 
formulate and implement a number of policies and strategies that indirectly 
impacted on residents that lived close to and beside peace walls. Although there was 
no specific policy or strategy on peace walls, it was apparent that each of the 
departments, either directly or indirectly were responsible for policies that could be 
relevant to peace walls and the communities that lived in their shadow. Table 6 
illustrates the government departments and the policies relevant to peace walls. 
Table 6: NI government departments and policies  
Government departments Policies relevant to peace walls 
Department for Social Development People and Place  Neighbourhood 
Renewal 
Belfast Streets Ahead 
Areas at Risk Pilot Programme 
NIHE Shared Neighbourhood Prog 
Department of Culture, Arts and 
Leisure 
Re-Imaging Communities 
Positive Steps 
Renewing Communities 
Community Cohesion Strategy 
Community Sport 
Department of Justice Community Safety Strategy 
Department of Education Pupil Emotional Health/Well-being Prog 
Support Prog. Pupils at risk 
Community Relations  Diversity policy 
Sure Start 
Department of Health, Social Services 
and Public Safety 
Support Prog. Pupils at risk 
Department for Employment and 
Learning 
Provision of Learning and Skills for 
Employment 
Department for Regional 
Development 
Regional Development Strategy 
Department of Finance and Personnel NI Budget 2011-2015 
Department of the Environment Review of Public Administration 
Planning Policy Development 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and 
Investment 
Economic vision for Northern Ireland 
Department of Agriculture and Rural 
Development 
NI Rural development programme 2007-
2013 improving the quality of life 
Office of the First Minister and Deputy 
First Minister 
Cohesion, Sharing and Integration 
Programme for Government 
Social Investment Fund 
Racial Equality Strategy 
Ten Year Strategy  Children and Young 
People 
Anti-poverty/social exclusion strategy 
Victims and Survivors Strategy 
Although each department has some degree of policy responsibility for communities 
that reside close to and beside peace walls, there have been two political 
developments in the last eighteen months that have significantly influenced the 
policy discourse on peace walls. Firstly, on the 12 April 2010 the Department of 
Justice was devolved to the Stormont administration, providing a range of devolved 
policy and justice functions to the Justice Minister, David Ford from the Alliance 
Party. Aside from having to respond to the dissident terrorist threat, the reform of 
the prison service, and policing resources, the Minister also took over the 
responsibility for peace walls. Since his elevation to Minister for Justice, Ford has 
appeared to promote discussions and debate on the subject of peace walls by 
associating them with the past and the negative impact of segregation and division 
that is so prevalent in society today: 
 These walls, fences and gates are daily reminders of the huge challenge 
 ahead to break down the mistrust and separation that exists within our 
 community (Ford, 2011).  
Furthermore, in the Department for Justices consultation for the new community 
safety strategy Building Safer, Shared and Confident Communities (2011) there 
was a section on interfaces, peace walls and the development of shared space: 
 Work with communities seeking the reconfiguration or removal of physical 
 barriers and engage with other agencies to address inhibitors to progress 
 (Section 6, Consultation Strategy, 2011).  
The second major development has been the publication of the Cohesion, Sharing 
and Integration (CSI) public consultation document on the 27 July 2010. The 
purpose of this document was to provide the framework for co-ordination across all 
of the government departments for action against sectarianism, racism, and all 
forms of hate crime. Within the document specific reference was made to interface 
barriers and peace walls:  
 To this end, OFMDFM will lead in the development of a crosscutting 
 programme with departments, agencies and the community on how best to 
 work actively towards the removal of peace walls (CSI, 2011:41).  
However, there were a number of critics of the CSI document who felt that it failed 
to address the practical steps needed to facilitate a shared society (CRC, 2011). 
Furthermore, Todd and Ruane (2010) concluded that the document underestimated 
the difficulty in translating political change into better community relations.  
However, on a more positive outlook, for the first time, local politicians were 
developing strategies and draft policy documents that acknowledged the presence 
of peace walls and the negativity associated with them.    
2.8 Conclusion 
Throughout the duration of the conflict there was an understanding and recognition 
within the NIO of the need to construct walls and security barricades in response to 
communal violence and disorder. The evidence suggests that they were a practical 
and tangible response to the needs of both Loyalist and Republican communities 
who required safety and protection. However, since the paramilitary ceasefires the 
security policy that advocated the need for walls has not given way to new 
innovative approaches to addressing communal violence and disorder. Peace walls 
have continued to be built, as they remain a relatively quick and cost-effective 
response to sectarian violence.  
Although there is emerging evidence that in the last two years peace walls are being 
discussed and debated both in the media and government policies and strategies, 
there is still no specific government policy on peace walls. The legislation still 
remains that allows for the construction of peace walls, yet seventeen years after the 
paramilitary cease-fires the devolved government has still not developed a policy 
for the removal of peace walls. In fact, the Operation Banner report (2007), which 
was a comprehensive account of the British military campaign in Northern Ireland 
throughout the conflict, fails to provide any mention of peace walls in the entire 
report.  
This historical review has documented the broad range of actors that have been 
responsible for the formulation and implementation of a policy that resulted in the 
construction of forty-two peace walls in Belfast from 1969. This analysis has 
allowed for the last forty years to be categorised into four unique time periods that 
illustrate the gradual increase in the number of individuals and organisations 
involved in the building of the peace walls (Table 7).   
Table 7: Key actors in the construction of peace walls 
Periods of history Key actors 
The Conflict 
1969  1994 
British government through the NIO 
- Input from British Army 
- Input from RUC 
The Peace and Political Process 
1994-2007 
British government through the NIO 
- Input from RUC/PSNI/British Army 
- Input from local communities 
- Input from local politicians 
Devolved Government 
British government through NIO 
- Input from PSNI 
- Input from local communities 
- Input from local politicians 
- Input from service providers 
- Input from NGOs 
Devolution of Ministry of Justice 
2010 -  
NI Executive 
- Input from Minister of Justice 
- Input from PSNI 
- Input from communities 
- Input from service providers 
- Input from NGOs 
- Input from community/voluntary 
sector 
The identification of the key actors involved in the peace walls discourse from 2010 
onwards along with the information that emerged in relation to how peace walls 
have previously been constructed will guide the remainder of this thesis. At this 
stage of the thesis one can make several assumptions:  
1. For the first time, locally elected representatives have the policy 
responsibility for peace walls; 
2. There has never been a locally developed peace walls policy; 
3. There is no indication that the current devolved administration has an 
understanding on how to develop a new peace walls policy. 
So, to understand the factors that may influence the development of a policy process 
on peace walls one must consider how they are interpreted; what has been the 
impact of previous policies and strategies on those that reside beside them; and 
consider the political implications of engaging on this sensitive and divisive issue. 
The following chapter will explore in detail how these themes were explored in this 
thesis by introducing the reader to the research methodology employed to conduct 
the research.  
3. Methodology 
The following chapter will outline the research aim, objectives and research 
questions, along with the proposed research design and methodology, i.e. the 
logical structures and procedures of scientific enquiry (Andersen, 2003: 2) applied 
in this thesis.  
3.1 Introduction  
The central aim of this thesis is to place the issue of peace walls back into the 
narrative of the Northern Ireland conflict and the subsequent peace and political 
processes. Underpinning this aim is the acknowledgement that peace walls have 
been a subject largely absent from the community and politicians agendas within 
both the peace and political processes. Chapter Two has introduced the reader to 
the historical background of peace walls, outlining the central actors in the policy 
process over the last four decades along with the rationale attached to there 
construction. However, there was no evidence within the literature to suggest how a 
peace walls policy might be developed under the devolved government, or who 
would be involved in that process. To support this line of enquiry the following 
research question was designed to guide the research: 
What are the necessary conditions for the creation of a window of 
opportunity that would position peace walls onto the decision-making 
agenda of the Northern Ireland Executive? 
In order to answer this thesis question it was necessary to develop a series of 
subsidiary questions to frame the analysis and provide structure to the thesis. These 
questions included:  
 Are peace walls considered simply a condition that people can live with or 
something more of a problem that requires a degree of government 
intervention? 
 What are the underlying factors that influence and shape the policy process 
on peace walls? 
 What are the political factors that must also be considered in the context of 
this policy process?  
The remainder of this chapter will provide details on the methods employed to 
answer these research questions.  
3.2 Research Design 
Prior to the development of an appropriate research strategy a comprehensive 
review of previous research and the methodologies employed was conducted. In 
recent years there has been a significant amount of academic and practitioner based 
research on the subject of peace walls. However, these qualitative (Murtagh, 1995; 
Jarman, 1996; Byrne, 2005; Hall, 2007) and quantitative (Murtagh, 2002; Mesev et 
al, 2002) studies have primarily examined the social, political and economic issues 
prevalent in communities that have peace walls and interfaces located within and 
adjacent to them. Furthermore, large-scale surveys such as the Northern Ireland 
Social Attitudes Survey (1988-1998), and the Northern Ireland Life and Times 
Survey (1998-ongoing) that monitor the attitudes of people in Northern Ireland on a 
wide-range of social and political issues have focused their questions on community 
relations issues that have related to sectarianism, segregation, and employment, 
housing, and leisure time. The surveys have not included questions that have 
specifically related to the peace walls. 
However, there have been two smaller quantitative studies that have attempted to 
ascertain peoples views and opinions on peace walls in the Greater Belfast area. The 
first piece of research conducted by Millward Brown Ulster (2008) has been 
previously been discussed in Chapter Two. The research which involved a survey of 
1,037 residents from three interface areas in Belfast was the first poll to ask people 
about their views and positions on peace walls. The survey was conducted through 
face-to-face interviews and focused primarily on local residents views on whether 
the peace walls should be removed. Although, this was one of the first pieces of 
research to document specifically peoples views on the peace walls, there were 
issues surrounding the validity of the data. The fact that local residents were asked 
to complete a survey on a sensitive and highly emotive issue face-to-face with 
researchers may have led to subject bias. Furthermore, the survey provided 
participants with a scale for each of the responses that limited opportunities to 
develop an understanding of the meanings behind their answers. Although the 
findings have increased our knowledge on the issues pertaining to peace walls, there 
remains doubt as to whether the quantitative approach comprehensively 
documented the underlying factors and dynamics that shaped the views and 
opinions of participants. For example, 60% of respondents indicated that they 
thought the wall should not come down at present, but could be removed when it 
was safe to do so, however, there was no further information or examination as to 
what this would entail. A comprehensive understanding of the dynamics that 
motivate and influence interpretations on peace walls was absent, along with an 
identification of the actors required to participate in any process that could result in 
the removal of a peace wall.  
The second localised research study on peace walls was conducted by the North 
Belfast Interface Network (2008). This involved an Internet survey, which over 100 
residents from North Belfast completed. Residents at community meetings were 
informed of the survey and asked to complete it. The questions focused on whether 
peace walls should be removed and also if residents felt that they served a 
community safety purpose (NBIN, 2009). The results indicated that 85% of 
respondents would like to see the removal of peace walls in the future. However, the 
survey did not allow for the expansion of responses, or the opportunity to explore 
the rationale for peoples particular responses to questions.  
These two quantitative studies provide a tentative insight into the subject of peace 
walls from the perspective of local people that reside within the neighbourhoods 
that the peace walls are located. However, both pieces of research fail to examine 
the factors that determine the make-up of perceptions and opinions towards the 
peace walls. There is a clear and obvious gap in the academic research and literature 
in relation to a qualitative analysis on the peace walls. Therefore, there is an 
opportunity to conduct qualitative research that will examine the issues and 
experiences that individuals and organisations apply when formulating their views, 
opinions and ultimately agendas on the subject of peace walls.  
In response to the research aims and objectives (3.1) it is proposed to conduct a 
case study, which is a strategy for doing research which involves an empirical 
investigation of a particular contemporary phenomenon with its real life context 
using multiple sources of evidence (Robson, 1993:146). It is proposed that the case 
study will entail a qualitative study of the peace walls in Belfast. The historical 
review of the construction of peace walls outlined in Chapter Two revealed that the 
overwhelming majority (42), were built in Belfast, therefore Belfast is the most 
appropriate area to select as the case study.  
3.3 Selection of area and participants 
The case study centred on the peace walls in Belfast which had been constructed 
from 1969 by British Army and had been maintained and managed by the NIO. The 
previous Chapter (Two) identified the range of individuals and organisations that 
had been involved directly and indirectly with the building of peace walls over the 
last forty years. The review also revealed that since the forty second peace wall was 
constructed in 2008, and the establishment of the Ministry of Justice a number of 
actors have become prominent in a new and local peace walls discourse. These 
included: 
- Locally elected representatives 
- Northern Ireland Government departments and agencies 
- Non-Governmental Organisations 
- Loyalist community representatives 
- Republican community representatives 
Building upon this knowledge it was decided to conduct semi-structured interviews 
with representatives from across these constituencies (discussed in further detail in 
3.4). The remainder of this section will explain in more detail the methods employed 
in identifying participants:   
Elected representatives - 7 interviews 
In total seven interviews were conducted with elected representatives from the five 
main political parties represented within the Northern Ireland Executive from April 
to September 2010.  
Table 8: Elected representatives and geographical location in Belfast 
Name Political 
Party 
Position Area  Peace walls in 
electoral area 
*Naomi Long Alliance Party Member of 
Parliament 
East Belfast 4 
Conal 
McDevit 
Social 
Democratic 
Labour Party 
Member of the 
Legislative 
Assembly 
South Belfast 2 
*Dawn Purvis Independent 
Unionist 
Member of the 
Legislative 
Assembly 
East Belfast 4 
Tom Hartley Sinn Fin Member of the 
Legislative 
Assembly 
West Belfast 16 
William 
Humphrey 
Democratic 
Unionist Party 
Member of the 
Legislative 
Assembly 
North Belfast 20 
Reg Empey Ulster Unionist 
Party 
Member of the 
Legislative 
Assembly 
East Belfast 4 
Gerry Kelly Sinn Fein Junior Minister 
in NI Executive 
Belfast 42 
*Naomi Long was initially contacted as an MLA, but interviewed after she had become a MP 
* Dawn Purvis left the Progressive Unionist Party in June 2010  
Initially a review of Belfast MLAs and the number of peace walls in their 
constituencies was conducted. Once electoral areas had been determined a desk 
based review of newspaper articles, news reports and policy documents revealed 
those politicians that had commented on themes pertaining to segregation, division, 
interface violence and peace walls. Each of the elected representatives was then 
contacted by letter and/or email and a follow up telephone conversation to 
determine their participation in the research. Following this initial contact, 
interviews were conducted in the elected representatives offices. Permission was 
sought and granted for the digital recording of each interview.  The participants also 
indicated that it was appropriate to provide their name and party in the 
methodology of the thesis. An interview guide can be located in Appendix 2.  
 Government bodies and agencies  7 interviews 
In total five interviews were conducted with members of government bodies and 
agencies, and a further two interviews were held with former employees of the civil 
service (Table 9). Each of these interviewees was targeted because of their 
association with peace walls.  
Table 9: Government representatives and geographical location in Belfast 
Government organisation  Details Peace walls in area of work 
Community Safety Unit Male (40-45 
years) 
North Belfast Community 
Action Unit 
Male (40-45 
years) 
Belfast Regeneration Office 
 West 
Female (45-55 
years) 
Belfast City Council Male (40-45 
years) 
Northern Ireland Housing 
Executive 
Female (45-55 
years) 
Retired Civil Servant Male (55-65 
years) 
Retired Civil Servant Male (55-65 
years) 
The review of peace walls in Chapter Two revealed a number of organisations that 
responded to, and pro-actively engaged on issues pertaining to the peace walls. 
Building upon this knowledge, five organisations were contacted by letter and asked 
if they would be in a position to nominate an individual to participate in the 
research. Each of the five organisations identified below were willing participants in 
the research, and interviews were conducted in their offices. A further two 
interviewees who had recently retired from the civil service also participated in the 
research. The researcher became aware of them during his attendance at the launch 
of a programme that was aimed at addressing interface violence in March 2010. 
After initial conversations they agreed to participate in the research and the 
interviews were conducted at the University of Ulster. Permission was sought and 
granted for the digital recording of each interview. An interview guide can be 
located in Appendix 3. 
Non-Government Organisations  8 interviews  
In total eight interviews were conducted with non-governmental organisations that 
were working on issues pertaining to peace walls (Table 10).  
Table 10: Non-Governmental Organisations and geographical location to 
peace walls 
Non-Governmental 
Organisations 
Details Peace walls in area of 
Belfast Interface Project Male (45-55 
years) 
Forthspring Male (45-55 
years) 
Intercomm Male (35-40 
years) 
Community Relations Council  
Policy 
Female (45-55 
years) 
Community Relations Council  
Strategy 
Male (45-55 
years)  
Institute for Conflict Research Male (50-55 
years) 
Belfast Interface Trust Male (40-50 
years) 
McCauley Associates Male (45-55 
years) 
The types of engagement ranged from conducting research on the issues prevalent 
within communities that lived beside peace walls, to the operational design and 
implementation of programmes that aimed to improve the health and social 
wellbeing of communities. Each of the organisations that participated in the 
research had been identified through the literature review documented in Chapter 
Two. Furthermore, they were not all consigned to the one geographical area in 
Belfast. Instead they worked throughout the city which meant that each of the 
groups had an understanding of the unique issues that existed across interface 
communities. Initially letters and/or emails were sent to the organisations seeking 
their interest in participating in the research. Once this was obtained, interviews 
were conducted at the offices of the organisations. Permission was sought and 
granted for the digital recording of each interview. An interview guide can be 
located in Appendix 4. 
Community representatives  18 interviews 
In total eighteen Loyalist and Republican community representatives from interface 
communities in Belfast participated in the research (Table 11). An initial desk-based 
review of community and voluntary organisations that were located within 
neighbourhoods that had peace walls returned several names of individuals who 
were engaged in interface and community based work. Organisations such as the 
Northern Ireland Community and Voluntary Association (NICVA) and the 
Community Relations Council (CRC) proved invaluable in locating those groups that 
were responding to interface and peace wall related issues in Belfast. Discussions 
with these organisations led the researcher to a number of potential interviewees. 
Upon identifying potential interviewees, letters, emails and telephone calls were 
made to determine their participation in the research. The first ten interviewees 
(five Loyalist and five Republican) had been identified through the desk-based 
review of literature in this field. The remaining eight interviews were confirmed 
using the snowballing sampling technique. According to Bryman (2001) this is 
where the researcher makes contact with a small group of people relevant to the 
line of inquiry and then uses them to establish contacts with others. In this case a 
number of participants recommended other individuals who were involved in 
responding to peace wall related issues. They contacted the individuals in question 
and then after being granted permission passed on their contact details to the 
researcher. All of the interviews with community representatives were conducted in 
their place of employment or centre in which they volunteered. Permission was 
sought and granted for the digital recording of each interview. An interview guide 
can be located in Appendix 5.   
Table 11: Community representatives and contact with peace walls 
Community Background Details Location  Peace walls 
in the area 
Republican representative 1 Male (50-55) North Belfast 20 
Republican representative 2 Male (45-50) North Belfast 20 
Republican representative 3 Male (50-60) North Belfast 20 
Republican representative 4 Male (35-40) North Belfast 20 
Republican representative 5 Male (35-40) North Belfast 20 
Republican representative 6  Male (40-50) East Belfast 4 
Republican representative 7 Male (40-50) South Belfast 2 
Republican representative 8 Male (45-55) West Belfast 16 
Republican representative 9 Male (40-50) West Belfast 16 
Loyalist representative 1 Male (55-60) North Belfast 20 
Loyalist representative 2 Male (40-50) North Belfast 20 
Loyalist representative 3 Male (45-55) North Belfast 20 
Loyalist representative 4  Male (35-40) North Belfast 20 
Loyalist representative 5 Male (40-50) East Belfast 4 
Loyalist representative 6 Male (35-45) East Belfast 4 
Loyalist representative 7 Male (30-35) West Belfast 16 
Loyalist representative 8 Male (45-55) West Belfast 16 
Loyalist representative 9 Male (40-50) South Belfast 2 
In total forty interviews were conducted with representatives from government 
departments and agencies, members of NGOs, politicians, and Loyalist and 
Republican community representatives. At this stage it is important that the author 
address three key issues that relate to the number of interviews, along with the 
gender and location of participants. Firstly, there are a range of views and 
recommendations on the issue of saturation  how many interviews are sufficient 
in a qualitative research project? According to Guest et al (2006) the academic 
literature on this subject is diverse and a review of several studies revealed authors 
recommending anything from 15-60 as a suitable figure, with little rationale for 
these recommendations. Significantly, the figure depends on the types of themes 
being explored and the level of over-arching themes that emerge from the 
interviews. In the case of this research, similar stories, experiences and 
interpretations within the various groups began to emerge two thirds of the way 
through the fieldwork.  
Secondly, of the forty interviews, only five involved females and there were no 
female participants in the Loyalist and Republican group of interviewees. The 
researcher through informal and formal channels attempted to gain female 
participation in the study but it proved extremely difficult. A large number of those 
deemed community representatives were ex-combatants and/or ex-prisoners, and 
as Ashe (2007) has noted this aspect of the conflict was dominated by males. 
Furthermore, research by Jarman (2006; 2008), Shirlow et al (2010) and Goldie and 
Ruddie (2010) has highlighted the large number of males and those from a former 
paramilitary background that are and have been involved in peace building 
initiatives to address community issues across the interfaces. Therefore a large 
number of positions that are associated with community development, interface 
management, youth diversion, and build community capacity in working class 
Loyalist and Republican communities are dominated by males.  
Thirdly, it is important to acknowledge the rationale for not including those that 
resided adjacent to the peace walls in Belfast and instead focus on politicians, 
service providers, NGOs and community representatives. As noted in Page 82, the 
researcher spent twelve months attending community meetings, public 
consultations and workshops on the subject of interfaces and peace walls prior to 
the commencement of fieldwork. It was clear from these events that local residents 
were both suspicious and frustrated with researchers enquiring into the issues that 
surrounded the peace walls. This animosity was further compounded by the 
negative impact of the Trina Vargo research (previously discussed in Chapter Two), 
which for many residents was more about addressing the needs of politicians as 
opposed to assisting local communities. This initial insight into the views of local 
communities towards research on the subject of peace walls was one factor in not 
incorporating local residents into the fieldwork stage of the research. A further 
factor was based upon previous research conducted by Jarman (2006) along with 
the Dunlop Report (2002), which drew specific attention to the health and social 
wellbeing of residents that live closest to the peace walls. The research has 
consistently shown that many suffer from alcoholism and a dependency on 
proscribed medication and also suffer from mental health issues. Therefore, in line 
with the UU ethics policy on conducting research with vulnerable groups, it was 
deemed inappropriate at the time to incorporate residents that lived closed to the 
peace walls into the methodological framework. The following section will 
document in more detail the methods of data collection and analysis.  
3.4 Data collection  
The fieldwork element of the research involved the use of multiple methods in the 
form of observations and informal interviews. According to Robson (1993) there 
was no rule to suggest that only one method must be used in a research 
investigation. In fact, using more than one method can have advantages, namely, 
permitting triangulation, were there is a strong argument that through triangulation 
one is improving the reliability of a single method (Mason, 1996). However, 
Hammersley and Atkinson (1983) provided a note of caution and suggested that 
there was a tendency to place all your trust in the different methods, and actually 
fail to analyse the results from one method more stringently. The following section 
documents the two types of techniques considered for this research. 
Techniques under consideration  
Firstly, observation, as it suggests, is a technique, which involves the observation of 
the actions and behaviours of people, and the recording of this, along with the 
description, analysis and interpretation of what has been observed (Robson, 1993). 
Secondly, interviews are methods involving the formation of questions and then 
responses, which often produce powerful stories which both inform and inspire 
(Willis, 2007). A more comprehensive discussion around the two methods is 
provided below, with an explanation as to which elements of each technique were 
used in this research.  
Observational methods 
This is a method of recording conditions, events and activities through looking 
rather than asking (Walliman, 2006). Observation can be used to record both 
quantitative and qualitative data. There are a number of different types of 
observation method, based upon the level of involvement from the researcher. 
According to Gold (1958) the four main methods are: 
 Complete observer  the researcher is undetected and is not involved in any 
events; 
 Observer-as-participant  limited participation with the researcher focused 
on their aims and objectives with minimal participation in events; 
 Participant-as-observer  the group are aware of the motives of the 
researcher and the researcher engages fully in events; 
 Complete participant  the researcher is involved in all aspects of the group 
activities. The researcher is a covert operator, their motives undetected.  
For the purposes of this thesis the participant as observer approach was used 
throughout the research (September 2008 - September 2010). The researcher 
attended four public consultations on the topic of peace walls; participated in eight 
Loyalist and Republican community sponsored workshops on the subject of 
interfaces and peace walls; attended two conferences on themes aligned with peace 
walls; and participated in a residential with representatives from the public, 
community and voluntary sectors on issues pertaining to segregation and division. 
Those participating at each of these events were aware of the study and allowed the 
researcher to make notes and comments on issues developed within the forums.  
This enabled the researcher to become aware of the issues that surrounded the 
subject of peace walls and develop an understanding of the types of individuals and 
organisations that are part of the new discourse on peace walls. This information 
assisted the researcher in the development and construction of the research 
questions for the fieldwork aspect of the thesis.  
Interviews 
There are several different types of interview that can be categorised by the degree 
of structure or formality employed within the interview (Hall and Hall, 1996). At 
one level is the fully structured interview, which consists of predetermined 
questions, which are asked in a particular order. The second type of interview is the 
semi-structured interview, where the interviewer has a set of questions, but is 
under no restrictions to ask in a specific order; is able to modify the questions 
during the interview; change the wording of questions; leave out questions; add 
additional questions; essentially guide the interview on the responses from the 
participant. The third type of interview is referred to as an unstructured interview, 
where the interviewer has a general area of interest, but lets the conversation 
develop within that area (Powney and Watts, 1987).  
For the purposes of this research, the decision was taken that semi-structured 
interviews would be the most appropriate method of data collection. The rationale 
employed was because the the focus of enquiry was on the various issues and 
dynamics that contributed to the make up of the participants views and opinions on 
peace walls. The semi-structured format allowed for a degree of flexibility, which 
would be important when following a line of enquiry during an interview. It was felt 
that a structured format would restrict the conversations and potentially lead to the 
submergence of important issues and themes. Furthermore, an unstructured format 
may have lead to the respondents discussing unrelated issues which previous 
research had already alluded to i.e. conversations could have been dominated by 
housing and social deprivation issues as a result of the peace walls as opposed to 
exploring the motivations behind peoples interpretations of the peace walls.  
The semi-structured interview format allowed for a comprehensive discussion on 
the issues and themes, which together influenced respondents views and opinions 
on peace walls. The format created opportunities for different topics to be covered, 
but also sustained the structure, which constantly focused the discussions onto the 
subject of peace walls. The advantages of this approach have been well documented, 
especially around the flexible and adaptable nature of the interview process 
(Robson, 2002). However, as Sarantakos (2005) indicated, the general reflexive and 
open nature of semi-structured interviews has the potential to lead to an absence of 
standardisation where the interviewer is not careful in maintaining interview form. 
Furthermore, this method of data collection is influenced by the personal 
characteristics of the interviewer, including race, class, ethnicity and gender (Denzin 
and Lincoln, 1994; Adams, 2000; McNeill and Chapman, 2005).  
However, attempts were made to address the limitations identified. In relation to 
concerns about standardisation, an interview schedule was developed for each 
category of interview (Appendices 2-5) outlining the key themes and areas of 
discussion. Furthermore, the interviewer was fully conversant with the schedule as 
recommended by Bryman (2008) and the advice of Groves et al (2004) was adhered 
to at all times throughout each of the interviews. This included the interviewer 
refraining from expressing personal views and opinions on issues; the interviewer 
did not provide personal experiences that could lead to bias; and the interviewer did 
not deviate from the schedule aside from a little informal chat at the outset of the 
interview. 
Summary  
The data collaction stage of the research was completed in two distinct parts, with 
two very different approaches. The researcher applied the participant as an 
observer as one method of understanding the emerging issues and themes within 
the discourse on peace walls through his attendance at conferences, meetings and 
workshops. In the second phase, the semi-structured interviews allowed for a 
degree of flexibility along with a less formalised nature of discussion, which in turn 
produced very detailed views, opinions, interpretations and experiences on peace 
walls. 
3.5 Data analysis 
The important element of any methodology is highlighting the approaches applied 
in understanding and interpreting the collated data. According to Robson 
(2002:459) the central requirement in qualitative analysis is clear thinking on the 
part of the analyst, where the analyst is put to the test as much as the data. With 
this consideration, along with the amount of transcribed text that emerged from the 
semi-structured interviews it was felt that the most appropriate tool was a 
computer assisted qualitative data analysis (CAQDAS). There were numerous types 
of programmes available to the researcher. However, as the researcher had previous 
experience of using NVivo 8 it was felt appropriate to select this tool for the analysis 
of the data.   
NVivo 8 allows for the accurate recording and storing of qualitative data that 
emerged from the semi-structured interviews. Prior to the uploading of data into a 
format which the NVivo 8 programme can utilise, each of the interviews had to be 
transcribed. Once this was completed by the researcher the programme enabled the 
analysis of each of the recorded interviews into concepts, categories and themes. 
The researcher must then code the relevant data. This process begins loosely with 
open coding, which is often referred to as the development of nodes (Gibb, 2002). 
Upon completion of this stage, each node can then be further analysed until clear, 
coherent themes emerge. The key advantages of computer-assisted qualitative data 
analysis (CAQDAS) has been outlined by Silverman (2000) and Van Hoven (2003) 
who noted that this method enabled the analysis of large volumes of data, which in 
turn saved time and resources. Furthermore, this form of analysis provided an 
increased sense of rigour, providing evidence that the researcher had analysed 
extensively different emerging codes. Finally, this method allowed for a constant 
evaluation of the sampling methods, and meant that the researcher could adjust 
their sampling framework dependent on the emerging results.  
There are a number of limitations with CAQDAS, as Bazeley (2007) indicated by 
noting that such software cannot make good bad research. It has also been 
contended that this approach to data analysis is particularly narrow and can lead to 
ignoring important data sets (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996). Finally, Fielding (1993) 
noted that the researcher can potentially become removed from the data and 
misinterpret the meaning and contexts of specific details that emerge from the data. 
However, while acknowledging these limitations it was felt that CAQDAS was the 
most appropriate method of analysing the interview transcripts as it offered more 
opportunities for the researcher to be reflective about the findings (Bryman and 
Burgess, 1994) and was useful in allowing for connections to be made between 
emerging themes (Bryman, 2008).  
3.6 Ethical considerations  
There were three key ethical considerations within the research study that focused 
firstly, on the area of informed consent. Secondly, the participants right if requested 
to confidentiality and anonymity, and thirdly, the protection of harm with regards to 
the participant and the researcher responsible for conducting the interviews. During 
the participant observation stage of the research, which involved the researcher 
attending meetings conferences and working groups, the participants were made 
aware of the research and the reasons for the researchers attendance. They fully 
understood the context of the research along with the aims, objectives and possible 
outcomes. At all times, members co-operated fully with any requests from the 
researcher. The second element of data collection involved the forty-two semi-
structured interviews with government, NGOs, politicians and community 
representatives. The researcher used the work of Kent (1996) to develop a 
framework, which addressed any ethical concerns around informed consent: 
 Providing information about the research which is relevant to the subjects 
decision about whether to participate  Appendix 6 contains a copy of the 
information sheet each participant was given prior to the interview;  
 Making sure that subjects understand the information  prior to the 
commencement of each interview the participant and interviewer had a 
short conversation around the aims of the research and the purpose of the 
interview; 
 Ensuring that participation is voluntary  Appendix 6 contains a copy of the 
consent form that each participant signed, acknowledging that their 
participation was completely voluntary; 
 Where subjects are not competent to agree, obtain consent by proxy  this was 
not an issue as all of the participants were over eighteen years of age.  
In relation to the second ethical consideration which was concerned with 
confidentiality, the interviewee was supplied with two pieces of documentation 
prior to the commencement of the interview (Appendix 6). The first was a brief 
overview of the research including the aims and objectives, details about 
confidentiality and anonymity, along with the contact details of the researcher. The 
second document was a consent form, which they signed along with the researcher. 
During the interview a digital recording device was used to record the discussion. 
The researcher then transcribed all of the tapes himself. As Bryman (2004) has 
suggested, this is a lengthy process which results in large amounts of paperwork 
that needs to be analysed. However, the main advantage of recording the interviews 
is that it makes it easier to check exactly what was discussed in the interview. 
Furthermore, the raw data is also available for checks against researcher bias, along 
with secondary or different analysis by independent authorities. The recordings 
along with the confidentiality and consent forms were kept under lock and key in a 
filing cabinet in the researchers office. Aside from the elected representatives and 
the PSNI it is not possible to attribute an individual, government department or 
organisation to any of the quotes presented in Chapters Four, Five and Six. 
Comments from the politicians are assigned with the political party that they 
represent; in the case of the remaining participants a code was attributed to their 
quotes which allows for their grouping to be identified but not the individual or 
organisation.  
Thirdly, the issue of protection from harm for the participant and researcher was a 
central requirement throughout the duration of the data collection phase of the 
research. The methods employed to address any issues and concerns have been 
outlined below. 
Participant 
Recognition was given to sensitivities that surrounded the subject area, along with 
the divisive views and opinions that emanated within the interviews. However, each 
of the interviewees were selected as a result of their experience and knowledge of 
the topic. Firstly, those drawn from the political sector had all contributed in some 
capacity to the public debate, whether it was in the media, pubic forums or 
community consultations on issues pertaining to the peace walls. Each of the 
interviewees were confident discussing these issues during their interview. 
Secondly participants from NGOs had several years of experience addressing issues 
that had emanated from the interfaces and peace walls, and this was reflected in 
their comfortableness responding to questions on the subject. Thirdly, government 
representatives had regular experiences both operationally and strategically with 
interface issues, so were accustomed to discussing the subject. Fourthly, both the 
Loyalist and Republican community representatives were at ease discussing peace 
walls as the majority of their work transcended themes associated with the physical 
lines of division.  
Researcher 
The previous experience of the researcher had a significant impact on potential 
issues based on protection and participating in this sensitive piece of research. Prior 
to the commencement of this study, the researcher was employed with the Institute 
for Conflict Research (ICR) for six years as a research officer. ICR is an independent, 
not for profit research organisation based in North Belfast. It specialises in working 
on issues related to conflict, human rights, and social transformation. The 
researcher gained valuable experience and knowledge of conflict based issues while 
working as a researcher. Areas of study that the researcher was involved in 
included; young people and violence (Byrne et al, 2005); paramilitary exiling 
(Byrne, 2005); policing (Byrne and Monaghan, 2008); role of ex-prisoners in 
community based programmes (Byrne, 2007); racism (Byrne and Jarman, 2007); 
segregation (Byrne et al 2006) and sectarianism (Byrne 2005); bonfires (Byrne, 
2008) and interfaces (Byrne, 2005). The majority of the research was conducted 
within the Greater Belfast area, so the researcher had invaluable experience of 
operating within this environment and was familiar to a large number of community 
representatives and members of the public sector. This experience enabled the 
researcher to engage with interviewees on the subject of peace walls in a safe and 
confident manner. It is important to note that the University of Ulster Ethics 
Committee approved all elements of the research, prior to the commencement of 
fieldwork. 
3.7 Conclusion  
This chapter has introduced the central research question along with the aims of the 
thesis. Furthermore, the preparatory work that included the extensive literature 
review on peace walls that was framed through a policy lens, presented in Chapter 
Two, influenced the methodology employed for this research. A qualitative based 
study appeared the most appropriate method of ascertaining respondents views 
and opinions on peace walls. The literature review, together with the events, forums 
and discussion groups that the researcher attended provided the necessary 
information on the most appropriate participants for the field-work aspect of the 
research. Building upon the methodological frameworks that have been outlined in 
this chapter, the thesis turns towards the conceptual framework that will be 
employed to analyse the research findings. The following Chapter Four will 
illustrate the theoretical approach that underpins the qualitative research 
methodology that has been presented in this chapter.  
4. Agenda Setting in the Policy Process 
The following chapter considers several theoretical approaches and models 
associated with public policy theory, with the aim of determining a suitable 
theoretical framework to guide the case study analysis. The comprehensive 
literature review in Chapter two has established that the area of focus is on the 
peace walls in Belfast. This chapter first considers the various approaches and 
concepts within public policy theory and practice that may offer a specific model in 
which to frame an analysis on the peace walls. Following on from this, the rationale 
behind the selection of a framework in which to interpret the empirical data will be 
provided, while also alluding to its limitations.  
4.1 The policy process 
The policy process is often associated with confusion and suspicion and to those 
unaccustomed to the complex working of the policy process, it may seem to revolve 
around a black box of decision making (Hill, 2005: 20). Essentially, suggestions, 
ideas and views are put forward in various forms and eventually an output emerges 
that is referred to as a policy decision. However, scholars and theorists have 
developed models, theories and approaches in attempts to provide a clearer 
understanding of what occurs in the process. One of the first analytical moves to be 
made was to break up the policy process into discrete stages (Nakamura, 1987). 
This approach is synonymous with Lasswell (1971) who characterised policy 
making as a seven-part sequence in a policy life cycle, although more recent 
versions have reduced the process to fewer steps, varying between four and six 
stages. According to Porter and Hicks (1995) the policy cycle includes: 
1. The identification of policy problem or issues 
2. Agenda setting 
3. Formulation of Policy Proposals 
4. Adoption and rendering legitimate of policies 
5. Implementation of policies 
6. Evaluation process 
Critiques including Sabatier (1993) maintained that the model failed to account for 
causation or explain what pushed issues through the cycle. Furthermore, Stone 
(1989) felt that it provided an artificial view of policy making, and that issues did 
not simply move through set stages. However, there are still merits in this approach, 
with it now being referred to as a stages heuristic, in that it can only take one so far 
in really understanding how the policy process works, but it can enable one to make 
useful analytical distinctions (Ahearne, 2006). This is crucial for the purposes of this 
case study, as the stagist approach creates categories within the process, which 
allow for empirical analysis of very specific issues within the policy process. 
A number of other approaches to understanding the policy process have been 
developed. These have included rational theory, which maintained that 
policymakers had to know all of the societys value preferences and their relative 
weights, and following these assessments select the most efficient policy (Dror, 
1968). The central criticism of this approach was that the real world was very 
different in practice compared to theory (John, 2006). A further model was 
developed by Lindblom (1959), which advocated an incremental approach to the 
policy process. This was a rejection of the rational decision approach and instead 
concluded that policy makers were more concerned with coping with problems 
rather than solving them. Furthermore, policy makers preferred to remain with the 
status quo rather than develop innovative answers to their problems, this was 
referred to as the science of muddling through (Lindblom, 1959)  
Two further approaches worth mentioning in this discussion are the pluralist and 
elite theories, which both attempt to provide an analysis of the policy process. In the 
case of the former, Dahl (1958) contends that power is distributed among different 
groups within societies. No one group has a monopoly on power, yet all groups have 
some level of power to influence decision making in the policy process. Essentially, 
the policy process is about bargaining and negotiating between and within the 
groups, and people are not restricted to being part of one specific group. In relation 
to elite theory, there is a very different interpretation of power. According to Mills 
(1956) power is concentrated in the hands of a very small minority consisting of 
institutions and individuals, with those at the top having the power and the masses 
at the bottom having nothing. From the brief analysis of the different approaches 
and theories of policy theory and practice, and for the purposes of this research, one 
can conclude that a public policy process can incorporate four stages: (1) identifying 
the problem and setting the agenda; (2) adopting a particular policy; (3) 
implementing the policy through legislation or other action; and (4) evaluating the 
policy (Lindblom and Woodhouse, 1993).  
To understand why the issue of peace walls has largely been absent from the 
devolved governments political agenda, one must consider what the factors are that 
cause shifts in government policy? To answer this it seems that analytical 
frameworks of agenda setting which seek to integrate the interests, ideas, resources, 
along with the constrains of the relevant actors are the most appropriate 
approaches in which one can consider the question that has been posed. It has 
previously been noted that there is no devolved government policy on peace walls, 
and that any previous process involving the construction of peace walls involved a 
very small number of individuals and organisations. However, under the devolution 
of Policing and Justice, local elected representatives for the first time have policy 
responsibility for the peace walls. Therefore, an examination of peace walls through 
the lens of agenda-setting theory could significantly contribute to a new and 
previously ignored policy area. The following section lends further support and 
justification for adopting an agenda-setting framework as the basis for this analysis.  
4.2 Why agenda setting? 
The stop and start nature of devolution in Northern Ireland appears to have 
diminished and the five main political parties have consolidated their positions 
within the Stormont Executive. However, one could argue that in the context of 
formulating, developing and implementing policy the Ministers within the NI 
Executive remain relatively new and inexperienced. As a result of the conflict, 
Northern Ireland politicians have had minimal or no opportunities to develop the 
knowledge and experience on how to develop locally based policies or implement 
strategies and make decisions. Academics such as Birrell (2007, 2009) and Knox 
(2010) drew attention to the influence and power Direct Rule Ministers had on the 
policy agenda in Northern Ireland from 1972 to 2007, through their emphasis on 
cost efficiency as well as the cutting and streamlining of public bodies using the 
argument that Northern Ireland was over-administrated. Fawcett (2002) also noted 
that under Direct Rule, the British Ministers and officials took a colonial approach to 
governing Northern Ireland and this was very evident in how they administered as 
opposed to the development of new and innovative policy ideas. One further 
consideration was that under Direct Rule the British Ministers had no electoral base 
to consider, which removed the processes of normal political accountability (Knox, 
2009). One of the outcomes of this was that locally elected representatives and civil 
servants normally tasked with developing and implementing policy were largely 
absent from the agenda-setting and policy formulation stage of any process. 
Therefore, one might think that under devolution local Ministers and their 
Departments would be keen to pursue new agendas and design, develop and 
implement radical programmes and policies. However, Birrell (2009:45) recently 
concluded that the current  devolved administration has brought a lack of decision 
making and generalised statements with no agreed underpinning ideology and 
decisions made on a lowest common denominator basis or by ministerial 
bargaining.  
In the context of this thesis, it is important to acknowledge Farley et al (2006) who 
concluded that understanding how governments decide which alternative policies 
make it onto their agendas is one of the most difficult issues facing social scientists 
today. Essentially, this is what the following case study analysis is focused on, and 
the agenda setting stage of the policy process, which is discussed in further detail 
below, provides an opportunity to interpret the empirical data that has emerged 
from this thesis. According to Hayes (1992) the agenda setting stage is all about how 
issues are chosen for attention by government, why issues come up when they do, 
why some issues are acted upon while others are ignored, and who brings what 
problems up for government to resolve. These are the types and form of questions 
that underpin the thesis, and can be used to examine the relationship between peace 
walls and the NI Executive. The following section draws together the central models 
and approaches that attempt to explain and illustrate the different aspects of the 
agenda setting element of the policy process. By distinguishing between the 
numerous approaches it is possible to settle a model that will provide the 
conceptual framework that underpins the thesis and is used to examine, frame and 
interpret the empirical findings.   
4.3 Models and approaches of agenda setting 
As Baumgartner and Jones (1991) have suggested, in its most simplistic form, 
agenda setting is about issues gaining recognition that require government 
attention. There are numerous accounts, models and theories of agenda setting that 
primarily emphasise the importance of defining problems, framing the issues, and 
developing an understanding that surrounds the key actors in the policy process. 
The majority of literature on agenda setting has American roots, and many have 
questioned whether the agenda setting approach has much to offer those studying 
systems outside of the United States (Baumgartner et al, 2006). Although this has 
been recognised by the author, it is important to both consider and draw out the key 
thinking that surrounds the agenda setting element of the policy process even 
though much of the empirical research has been conducted in countries and regions 
very different to Northern Ireland.  
Early theories and approaches to agenda setting focused on the formation of 
problems. There were those that contended that the policy process was greatly 
influenced by the relationship between the economy (Wilensky, 1975) and political 
organisations (Howlett et al, 2009). This thinking led people to view agenda setting 
as an automatic process that was shaped largely by industrialisation and the market 
(Seeliger, 1996). This was quickly discounted and replaced by the resource-
dependency model, which treated political and economic factors as one entity. 
However, this was also criticised for being too abstract, and what followed was the 
political business cycle (Hancock, 1983). The common characteristic within all 
these approaches was that they portrayed the agenda setting stage as being shaped 
and influenced by the power that existed within the economic structures. However, 
those with contrasting views maintained that problems and issues were constructed 
within the individual and society, unrelated to economic conditions (Spector and 
Kitsuse, 1987). And that the ideas and experiences of policy actors ultimately 
shaped their own decisions and subsequent policy outcomes (Flathman, 1966).  
The early approaches to agenda setting provided the catalyst for critical debate, and 
this was evident in the early community power studies in the 1950s (Mills, 1956) 
which brought to prominence the role of power in agenda setting. Specific focus 
was placed on the relationship between defining problems and positions of power. 
As Goodin (1982: 71) noted power is the essence of politics, and the essence of 
power lies in restricting the choices available to others. According to Bachrach and 
Baratz (1970) problem identification and definition play a significant role in shaping 
any policy that emerges, or more importantly, influences the restriction of a specific 
policy development. The key to understanding the dynamics of problem 
identification is centred on notions of power. Bachrach and Baratz (1962) 
developed their idea of the two faces of power. The first was known as coercive 
power, where governments can impose policies on society through their position of 
strength. The second type of power is referred to as a blocking power. Those in 
control can prevent other groups from raising issues or participating in the agenda 
forming stage of the policy process. This has also been referred to as non-decision 
making, and it basically allows those with power to suppress conflicts and restrict 
others from entering the political process.  
Bachrach and Baratz (1962) go further and note that through non-decision making 
one can focus on safe and non-contentious issues by manipulating the dominant 
community values, myths and political institutions and procedures. Often termed 
the mobilization of bias (Schattschneider, 1960) it refers to those in power 
managing the situation, along with having ownership over the definition of 
problems. Often this means that it is extremely difficult for issues to be raised within 
the confines of the political system. Critiques of these positions mainly derive from 
the pluralist school of thought and contend that there is limited or no empirical 
basis for studying non-events, which would refute the emphasis on power during 
agenda-setting (Polsby, 1963). However, Crenson (1971) through his analysis of air 
pollution in American cities found evidence that supported the exercise of power. 
More recently, Bochel (2006) has noted that the role of power in the policy process, 
is when elites make decisions about the form and progress of specific initiatives in 
relation to whether they get on agendas, are implemented and the extent to which 
the outcomes of such initiatives may be translated into policies.  
One model that proved influential in creating debate and further analysis into the 
policy process, and was an early supporter of the idea that institutions, actors and 
ideas all have an impact on the agenda was the issue attention cycle model (Downs, 
1972). This approach likened the agenda setting stage to the media news cycle, and 
maintained that a major event could be the decisive factor in putting items onto the 
political agenda. Furthermore, as public awareness grows and the reality of the 
impact along with the cost of responding becomes apparent, the issues slowly slip 
down the agenda to be replaced by other issues. As Howlett et al (2009) concluded, 
the reality is that because public opinions would swing back and forth, the policy 
agenda would have to adapt, with the result often being limited or no policy inaction 
on the part of governments.  
On a more practical level Cobb and Elder (1972) proposed a four stage model which 
illustrated the levels in which issues had to travel to make their way onto the agenda 
setting platform. They distinguished between two agendas. The systematic agenda, 
which represented the general issues discussed within society, and the institutional 
agenda, which consisted of those discussed between the decision makers (Parsons, 
1995). This approach reflected early thinking that there were conflicts ongoing 
between key actors and institutions surrounding the placement of issues onto the 
agenda. This approach was built upon by Cobb et al (1976) who introduced three 
patterns of agenda setting based on their understanding of the different dynamics 
that exist between the systemic and institutional agendas. Together these 
approaches highlighted the importance of structures, institutions, actors and ideas 
within the agenda setting process.  
Alongside the varying pluralist and elitist positions over participation in 
administrative policymaking, a new model of organisational decision-making 
emerged (Robinson and Eller, 2010). The Garbage Can Model developed by Cohen et 
al (1972) contended that organisations do not reach decisions in a rational way, 
whereby the identification of policy solutions does not simply emerge from the 
recognition of a problem and the relevant analysis. Howlett et al (2009) has 
indicated that the policy process was extremely unpredictable and only slightly 
related to the idea of searching for means to achieve goals. The approach 
maintained that organisations, rather than acting out of rational self-interest, 
instead, acted haphazardly based on the confluence of a series of four streams of 
organisational inputs. They used the metaphor of a garbage-can where the streams 
of problems/issues, solutions, participants, and opportunities interact together to 
potentially result in an outcome (Davies et al, 2000).  
The Multiple Streams model (Kingdon, 1995) drew upon the Garbage Can Model of 
organisational choice (Cohen et al, 1972) and was concerned primarily with how 
issues come to be issues. Kingdon (1984) building on the work of Cohen et al (1972) 
moved away from organisational decision-making and instead shifted attention onto 
national policymaking processes in the United States through an analysis of the 
health and transport policy process throughout the 1970s. He did not suggest that 
the policy process could be understood in terms of a rational problem-solving model 
whereby a clearly defined problem emerges, solutions are developed, and a 
response is formulated and evaluated and incrementally adjusted when appropriate 
(Ahearne, 2006). Instead Kingdon (1995) maintained that organized anarchy was a 
more appropriate method of describing how the policy process functions. Within 
this process he considered the concept of an agenda to refer to the list of subjects or 
problems to which governmental officials, and people outside of government closely 
associated with those officials, are paying some serious attention at any given time 
(Kingdon, 1995:3).  
The key to Kingdons approach was the focus on the process that narrowed the set 
of conceivable subjects to ones that actually become the focus of attention. The 
driver for Kingdon was an apparent sense among policy makers of confusion around 
how to explain where policies emerged from, especially when they were asked to 
discuss the selection of one proposal over another (John, 2003).  At the time of his 
writing, Kingdon shifted the analysis of the policy process away from the popular 
ideas of power and influence, and refocused interest on to the world of ideas 
(Parsons, 1995). 
4.4 The Multiple Streams Approach  
In his 1984 book (updated 2nd edition published in 1995), Agendas, Alternatives and 
Public Policies, Kingdon proposed a very different answer to the question about why 
certain items reach the governments decision-making agenda and why other items 
fail (Saint-Germain and Calamia, 1996). By drawing a distinction between agendas 
and alternatives, the model proposed that the agenda referred to a cluster of issues 
considered as the pressing problems of the moment, and alternatives referred to 
the policy options available to solve these problems (Kingdon, 1995: 4). In order to 
understand this process he used the analogy of three normally separate and 
somewhat independent process streams of activities (Stout and Stevens, 2000). 
Essentially, agendas and alternatives are the product of the interaction between 
these three separate streams which different social and political actors participate 
in and attempt to pursue appropriate policy options or issues. The content and 
central actors within each stream have been outlined below.  
Problem stream 
The problem stream deals with the complex nature of getting policy makers to focus 
on one particular issue. There are always numerous problems vying for the 
attention of policy makers at any given time. Essentially, for a policy to change, 
people must first be convinced that there exists a problem and that something needs 
to be done about it (Brunner, 2008). This is actually quiet a complex process, as 
what constitutes a policy problem or failure is open to interpretation, and more 
precisely whose interpretation (Bovens and thard, 1996). According to Kingdon 
(1995) there are a number of various mechanisms that government officials adopt, 
which brings problems to their attention. These include the use of indicators by 
decision makers to determine whether a problem exists. Studies and reports are one 
type of indicator that often focuses on a particular problem at a specific point in 
time and are usually conducted by government agencies or nongovernmental 
researchers or academics. This would include the regular monitoring of statistics 
such as employment figures, heath and crime statistics, along with the results of 
public surveys such as the Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey (NILT, 2010). 
They use the indicators to assess both the magnitude of and the change in a problem 
and they then may suggest that a problematic issue requires government attention 
(Laraway and Jennings, 2002).  
Focusing events, including disasters, crises, personal experiences and symbols are 
also extremely important in the development of a problem and its potential ascent 
onto the government agenda (Birkland, 1998). According to this model, these events 
and/or symbols need accompaniment in the form of pre-existing preconceptions 
and knowledge about the specific incident. An example of a focusing event and a 
subsequent change in UK government policy was the death of twenty-three cockle-
pickers in Morecombe Bay in 2003. This highlighted problems of cheap labour, 
illegal migrant workers and human trafficking. The government reaction was the 
development and implementation of The Gangmasters Licensing Act 2004 to 
address these problems (Kennedy, 2009). Feedback is a further mechanism applied 
by the government to inform them about potential problems and issues (Kingdon, 
1995). Those tasked with implementing policies and those recipients of government 
actions and have opportunities to provide their views and opinions (feedback) 
through public consultations, evaluations, council meetings and engagement with 
local political representatives.  
As previously noted, the importance of problem recognition is a central element of 
Kingdons approach. For Kingdon (1995) the key to the identification of problems 
lay in values, comparisons and categories. It was also noted that identifying a 
problem on its own is not enough to place it on the government agenda. However, 
there is a great deal of skill required and it is a significant political and conceptual 
achievement in getting people to see new problem, or to see old problems in one 
way rather than another (Kingdon, 1995: 115). The subject of policy entrepreneurs 
will be discussed in more detail further in the chapter, but it is those individuals 
who have the skill and capacity to facilitate the process of fixing attention on one 
problem rather than another which is a central element of agenda setting.  
Policy stream 
According to Kingdon (1995: 121) this stream should be viewed through the 
analogy of a policy primeval soup. This comprises initiatives and strategies that 
have been advanced by stakeholders inside and outside of government. Within this 
soup, policy alternatives are formed, mutate, and recombine into new and diverse 
forms. Essentially, the mutation and recombination of older policies as opposed to 
the generation of new policies are the main methods by which new policy 
alternatives develop (Lipson, 2007). Within this soup some ideas float to the top of 
the agenda and others fall to the bottom. This aspect of the model highlights a clear 
rejection of the rationalist vision of policy making, which would assume that policy 
ideas develop in response to specific problems (Beland, 2005). Instead, Kingdon 
(1995) is of the view that experts and interest groups can promote policy ideas and 
alternatives without any known problems. The promotion of these ideas usually 
comes from policy communities, some of which are closed while others are 
extremely fragmented. Alongside the policy communities are what Kingdon refers to 
as policy entrepreneurs. These individuals are not assigned to any particular policy 
community and Kingdon (1995: 122) has noted that they could be in or out of 
government, in elected or appointed positions, in interest groups or research 
organisations.  
The defining characteristic of a policy entrepreneur is their willingness to invest 
their resources, that include time, energy, reputation and on occasions money in 
anticipation of a positive outcome (Mintrom and Norman, 2009). Keeping with the 
analogy of the soup, the model contends that these individuals are moving around 
the soup postulating and promoting ideas. The entrepreneurs are crucial for the 
survival of an idea and the opening up of policy communities to gain acceptability 
for a specific policy (Brunner, 2008). Throughout this process the entrepreneurs are 
involved in softening up those within the policy communities, drawing out 
elements of their policies and introducing new and often very different ideas to the 
individuals (Zahariadis and Allen, 1995). Kingdon (1995) attributes policy 
entrepreneurs with several vital resources, including a position of credibility so that 
they can speak and represent others and make decisions that have a direct impact 
on other groups. Secondly, these individuals have a degree of political shrewdness, 
negotiating skills and technical expertise. Thirdly, and most importantly is that the 
policy entrepreneurs require sheer persistence and dedication.  
It is important to note that within this stream the policies must meet certain criteria 
to survive (Exworthy et al, 2002). They must be technically feasible, in that they 
have previously been tested and are capable of being implemented. Secondly, the 
policies must be congruent with the dominant values that are held within the policy 
community. These include ideas on the role of government along with concepts of 
equity and efficiency (Kingdon, 1995). Thirdly, the policies must be considered 
within the context of budget constraints, the perceptions of the general public and 
their flexibility under political influence. In relation to the financial costs, the model 
acknowledges that any proposal that is going to require the state to spend more 
money is less likely to find a place on the policy agenda. The policies that meet the 
different levels of criteria are not viewed from the position of having a collective 
consensus where everyone advocates their support and appeals for their promotion 
onto the policy agenda. Instead, there is recognition that there are a number of 
prominent policies that are alternative options and could be used if circumstances 
emerge. According to Kingdon (1995) the outcome of this is that the subject is 
placed on the governmental agenda, and dramatically increases the chances for 
placement onto the decision making agenda.  
Politics stream 
Independent of the problem and policy streams is what Kingdon (1995) referred to 
as the politics stream, which keeping with the streams metaphor, flows along 
according to its own dynamics and rules. It is composed of a number of elements, 
which include the national mood and/or public opinion; interest group pressure 
campaigns; changes in administration; and elections (Bruner, 2008). According to 
this model, those in elected positions are able to detect changes and swings in the 
publics views and positions on certain subjects. This is achieved through their day 
to day dealings with constituents, media coverage and conversations with 
associates. Interestingly, non-elected officials often take their stance on the actions 
and behaviours of the politicians. Essentially, the pubic mood can dictate whether 
issues advance up the government agenda or alternatively remain off it (Kingdon, 
1995).  
Administrative change either through the removal of a sitting government or 
individual ministers can also have a significant effect on the agenda. If the political 
actors change, then new priorities emerge which push agendas in different 
directions. As Kingdon (1995:155) concludes new faces mean that new issues will 
be raised. A secondary impact of the organisational or individual change in the 
administration is that other potential items for the agenda are simply removed or 
restricted a position within the agenda-setting process. The interesting difference 
between the political arena and policy communities is that bargaining instead of 
persuasion is a central component in promoting issues onto the decision making 
agenda (Kingdon, 1995). As momentum is built around an issue, people often 
respond with support in an attempt to promote their own interests, and to be seen 
to be part of a successful process. Kingdon (1995) identified the political stream as a 
significant facilitator or inhibiter of high agenda status. It contains the important 
actors that have the opportunity to assess whether specific items and issues carried 
within the stream will succeed in finding a place on the agenda. In democratic 
societies the mass public have opportunities to influence this stream through 
protests and elections which ultimately indicate their support or criticism for 
government policies i.e. the introduction of the Poll Tax in Scotland in 1989 resulted 
in widespread rioting and disorder which resulted in a policy u-turn; and the failure 
of the Spanish government to win re-election in 2004 because of their decision to 
support the war in Iraq.  
Windows of opportunity  
When the three streams of problems, policies, and politics combine, coupling occurs 
and a window of opportunity or a policy window (both terms are used 
interchangeably) opens for advocates to bring their issue to the fore (Kingdon, 
1997). Solutions that have been floating in the soup of the policy stream become 
attached to problems, and then both together are joined with supporting political 
forces. Kingdon (1984) maintained that the greatest influences on the agenda were 
the problems and politics streams, and that the policy stream was mostly affected by 
alternatives. The coming together of streams and subsequent policy windows is 
both predictable (general elections) and unpredictable (natural disaster). Again, 
there is no schedule and time for how long the window will remain open.  
One key coupling is that of policy alternatives to something else that is unexpected 
(Kingdon, 1995). This is where policy entrepreneurs play a significant role in 
advocating and driving forward ideas, ready to assign preconceived policies onto 
willing participants. There are two scenarios favourable for the policy entrepreneur 
that include chance, were a problem appears and there is a readymade solution, or 
there is a change in the political stream in the form of government personnel or 
administration. Interestingly, Crenson and Ginsberg (2002) drew distinctions 
between policy experts and policy entrepreneurs and indicated that the latter often 
manipulate the three streams in pursuit of their own aims and objectives through 
the media and courts. An interesting dimension to the policy windows is what 
Kingdon (1995) referred to as spillovers. Essentially, if there is success in one 
policy area, then there is the potential for success in adjacent policy areas. The 
rationale for this is that policy makers and politicians enjoy the rewards from 
participating in a positive process and see the merits in continuing that relationship. 
They begin to look for other opportunities to push forward and support policy 
change.  
It is important to realise that Kingdons model is not an exact science, and the model 
acknowledges that this process can be extremely chaotic and unpredictable. 
Furthermore, there are occasions were one would expect issues to begin to emerge 
on an agenda in response to the amalgamation of the streams. However as Kingdon 
(1995: 207) notes dynamics internal to each stream, limits on coupling 
possibilities, and more general constraints, help us to understand why some items 
never rise on policy agendas.  
Limitations  
It is important to also acknowledge the apparent limitations to the Multiple Streams 
Approach. From the outset there is one very specific criticism of the approach which 
refers to its applicability outside of the USA. Baumgartner et al (2006) concluded 
that although Kingdons approach emerged as an influential perspective on the 
public policy process in the United States, a similar level of enthusiasm has yet to be 
observed for this model in other countries. There is evidence to suggest that as a 
tool it has been successfully adopted by academics to examine issues in public 
policy. Rushefiky and Patel (1998) used it while analysing health care reform in the 
United States during the 1990s, and OSullivan and Lussier-Duynstee (2006) applied 
the model to focus on adolescent homelessness in America. However, there have 
been counter arguments put forward by authors such as Zahariadis (1995) who 
maintain that this approach can be adapted outside of the US with limited revisions. 
This has been evident through the work of Mannheimer et al (2007) and their 
examination of Health Impact Assessments in Slovakia. Further empirical studies 
using this approach have been conducted in Canada (Howlett, 1998); Great Britain 
and France (Zahariadis, 1995); Great Britain and Germany (Zahariadis and Allen, 
1995) and by Nill (2002) in Germany.  
There have been a number of other criticisms of Kingdons approach to the agenda-
setting stage of the policy process. Dodge and Hood (2002) suggested that the main 
difficulty with the approach was Kingdons view of the policy process as 
disorganised, chaotic and extremely unpredictable, and the over reliance of the 
unknown. Other theorists have noted that it fails to illustrate the full process of how 
an idea becomes a policy (Blackman, 2005), as extensive research of the policy 
process has revealed that even after an issue appears on the policy agenda there are 
many more obstacles before a proposal can become a policy. Furthermore, there are 
numerous barriers and potential restrictions in the implementation of that policy 
before it can be assessed to have been successful (Sabatier, 1991). It has also been 
suggested that the model is unable to predict coming events, and subsequently 
policy advocates have been unable to employ this approach in attempts to increase 
their chances of promoting specific policy solutions (Zahariadis, 1999). It has also 
been criticised for having too narrow a focus as it only considered agenda setting in 
the context of the United States federal government. However, although 
acknowledging that more research is needed, Pralle (2006) through a case study of 
pesticide politics in Canada demonstrated that agenda setting models developed in 
the US context were applicable in other political settings. Further critiques of 
Kingdons approach (Bennett and Howlett, 1992) maintain that its emphasis on 
ideas and their role in agenda setting has resulted in an underestimation of the 
importance of interests and networks. They point to the impact of policy-orientated 
learning and the role of epistemic communities in agenda setting and policy change, 
which they contend is not accredited with enough importance in Kingdons theory. 
Prior to adopting the Multiple Streams Approach as the conceptual framework to 
underpin this research all of the limitations were considered. However, the fact that 
Kingdons approach can introduce a degree of order and structure to an extremely 
complicated and politically sensitive topic, and can allow for the separation of 
individuals and institutions meant that it was the most appropriate framework to 
To recap, this research applies John Kingdons theory of agenda setting, and 
demonstrates its use through the subject of Belfasts peace walls. The three streams 
set out by Kingdon will allow for the structure, isolation and management of the 
research findings into clear and distinct sections. Firstly, the Problem Stream will 
establish a framework to analyse the various interpretations and meanings 
interviewees attach to the peace walls. Secondly, the Policy Stream will hold all 
information pertaining to the types of social and public policies that relate to the 
peace walls. It was also provide an opportunity to consider the factors that underpin 
a potential policy on peace walls. Thirdly, the Politics Stream will create a structure 
in which the importance of public opinion and political support for policy can be 
examined.  
Following the presentation of the initial findings, the analysis through the windows 
of opportunity concept will ascertain the necessary conditions and factors required 
to position the issue of peace walls onto the decision-making agenda of the NI 
Executive. In essence, the Kingdon Model is a tool to allow for a deeper 
understanding of the complexities that surround the issue of peace walls, and reflect 
upon the social and political conditions that are required to elevate the issue onto 
the political agenda.  
4.5 Applying the Multiple Streams Approach   
There are a number of different agenda setting approaches and models one could 
apply as an analysis tool on the subject of peace walls. One of the central reasons for 
adopting Kingdons Multiple Streams approach is that it offers a systematic account 
of the concepts one needs to answer the key questions: 
How do subjects come to an officials attention? 
How are the alternatives from which they choose generated? 
How is the governmental agenda set? 
Why does an ideas time come when it comes? (Kingdon, 1995: xi) 
Furthermore, Laraway and Jennings (2002) concluded that this model was a useful 
tool for analysing the complex nature of why certain policies can only be enacted or 
implemented at very specific times within a specific political policy context. A 
further justification for the application of this model is that Kingdon essentially 
focuses on the policy as opposed to the public agenda. As Soroka (2002) has noted, 
the public agenda generally refers to the interaction between public opinion and 
issue salience in the media, while the policy agenda is primarily focused on the 
problems policy-makers themselves perceive as significant at a specific moment in 
time. Given the issue of peace walls has only recently emerged as a policy 
responsibility within the Northern Ireland Executive under the devolution of 
Policing and Justice in April 2010, it was felt that this model would provide a 
suitable lens to examine peace walls.  
In essence, this model is one of the only frameworks which analyses policy and 
takes seriously the agenda-setting phase of the policy process (Kendall, 2000), and 
essentially this is the area of the policy process that is under review in this case 
study. Furthermore, Kingdons model can also assist in the identification of relevant 
categories of stakeholders and to suggest useful organising concepts. Therefore, 
with this case study it should provide a lens in which political representatives along 
with policy communities can be isolated and analysed in relation to their roles and 
contributions to agenda setting. Finally, the model provides an opportunity to 
identify committed individuals, who are promoting policy innovation under the 
auspices of being labelled policy entrepreneurs. Considering the communal nature 
of politics and policy in Northern Ireland, Kingdons (1995) approach provides a 
lens in which one can distinguish between individuals and structures and allows a 
means to identify both the characteristics and qualities required to facilitate a 
process that could prove sensitive, divisive and controversial to communities in 
Northern Ireland.  
On a theoretical level, the application of Kingdon ensures that other approaches and 
models are involved in the analysis. Each of the streams in the model possesses a 
unique dynamic. The problem stream is all about processes of mobilization and 
issue definition, which can be viewed in pluralist terms. The policy stream is based 
on the rules of natural selection of policies were pressure of elites within narrow 
policy communities can be evident. The politics stream is often controlled or 
restricted by ideological and institutional characteristics of the policy system. 
Finally, the window of opportunity can be viewed as an entirely unpredictable and 
random event (Robinson and Eller, 2010).  
4.6 The Mulitiple Streams Approach and Peace Walls 
The conceptual framework adopted for this thesis is John Kingdons (1995) theory 
of policy change that operated via three streams: problems, policy and politics. Since 
this study aims to analyse data from the perspective of politicians and government 
representatives (politics stream), civil servants, academics and community 
representatives (policy stream) and to better understand why (problem stream) 
peace walls are either on or off the political agenda in Northern Ireland, the Kingdon 
framework was considered the most appropriate approach to offer a public policy 
theory and practice analysis. However, a note of caution is required at this stage, for 
this approach has been modified slightly in relation to the context of the windows of 
opportunity. As previously noted, the Multiple Streams model does not present 
opportunities for predicting when issues will become problems and positioned onto 
a government agenda. However, as the administration in Northern Ireland has only 
recently been in government, and it is has been shown that the subject of peace 
walls is not on the political agenda, it is anticipated that Kingdons framework will 
allow for a consideration of the views of the central stakeholders and political and 
community actors who are participating in an emerging peace walls narrative. 
Following an analysis of these views, while recognising that it is a deviation away 
from Kingdons approach, attempts will be made to postulate a number of 
hypotheses around what the necessary conditions would have to be in place, for 
peace walls to be positioned onto the decision making agenda of the NI Executive.  
In support of this interpretation and application of the Multiple Streams Model, one 
should consider the conclusions of Mucciaroni (1992:482). Recognising that the 
weakness of Kingdons model was its inability to provide satisfactory explanations 
as to why some rather than other issues received government attentions. He 
suggested that these weaknesses could be overcome by using it as a general 
framework to develop more middle-level propositions that allow us to predict the 
kinds of political and institutional conditions that need to exist or emerge for getting 
particular kinds of problems and solutions on the agenda. Considering this position, 
Blackman (2005) applied the Multiple Streams approach to the issue of tobacco 
control in the state of California, suggesting policy solutions and strategies to 
achieve their placement on the decision-making agenda. So, it is not unprecedented 
behaviour to adapt Kingdons model in such a way that it allows for hypothesising 
conditions necessary for issues to rise onto the government agenda.  
4.7 Conclusion   
The remainder of this thesis will be structured along the lines of Kingdons Multiple 
Streams Model. The three streams will be used to present and analyse the 
respondents views on the subject of peace walls. It is anticipated that the problem 
stream discussed in Chapter Five will explain how and why the issue of peace walls 
remains a condition or a problem for local elected representatives and the Northern 
Ireland Executive. This stream will identify the key actors in any future policy 
process and look to document the motivational factors that influence the different 
interpretations that exist towards peace walls. The policy stream is the focus of 
Chapter Six and will take into account the potential means to address peace walls 
through contributions from community representatives, civil servants, NGOs and 
academics. Using the analogy of the primeval soup the various impacts of past 
policies will be discussed alongside the factors from a policy perspective that must 
be considered if peace walls as a policy issue are to make their way onto the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. The chapter will also consider the 
relevance of policy entrepreneurs, and determine what characteristics and position 
within society such an individual and/or organisation would require. The politics 
stream discussed in Chapter Seven will include the views, actions and impacts of 
government and community representatives, NGOs and academics on raising peace 
walls onto the decision-making agenda. The chapter will also consider the influence 
of public opinion on the agenda-setting process, along with an analysis on the 
suitability and practicality of the structures of government to actually discuss and 
consider a peace walls policy. Continuing with Kingdons approach, Chapter Nine the 
window of opportunity, which is essentially the discussion, will draw together the 
various issues that emerged within the three streams. By adopting Kingdons (1995) 
approach one can then isolate the factors that may contribute or restrict the 
possibility of creating a window of opportunity that would result in peace walls 
finding their way onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive.  
            5. Multiple Streams  The Problems 
Are peace walls considered a problem that requires government intervention, or are 
they simply a condition that people can live with? To answer this question one must 
first establish what the different triggers and motivations are that shape and 
influence interpretations and positions towards peace walls. This chapter, through 
an analysis of the discussions with politicians, members of government 
organisations, NGOs, along with Loyalist and Republican representatives, will 
examine their views and opinions of peace walls against the methods in which 
policymakers are made aware of problems that may require government 
intervention. In this case, the focus is on the different ways that the subject of peace 
walls has been presented and articulated as either an issue or a problem, and the 
motivation behind these assumptions.  According to Kingdon (1995) there are four 
main themes that structure the analysis within the problem stream (figure 2).  
Figure 7: Analysis of the problem stream 
Problem 
Indicators 
Focused 
Events 
Recognition 
Feedback 
The application of indicators, focused events, feedback from existing policies, and 
recognition will allow for a comprehensive analysis on the issue of peace walls in 
the context of agenda setting. It is anticipated that through documenting the 
underlying events and factors that contribute to the contemporary interpretations 
on peace walls, that one may be in a position to consider whether they are simply a 
condition or alternatively a problem.  
5.1 Problem indicators  
Kingdons (1995) approach focused attention on the importance of systematic 
indicators in the context of raising awareness around potential problems. The 
discussions with respondents revealed a number of different indicators that drew 
attention directly and indirectly onto the subject of peace walls.   
Impact of the conflict 
According to all of the respondents, since the advent of the peace and political 
processes there have been greater opportunities to raise issues that have emerged 
because of the research surrounding victims and survivors of the conflict. One only 
has to consider the range of published material in this area, such Fay et al (1999); 
Bloomfield (1998); Hamilton and Byrne (2003); Hamber and Kelly (2004) to 
illustrate the large amount of interest generated in the legacy of the past and the 
impact of the conflict. The statistics that have emerged from some of these reports 
substantiated many of the claims made by respondents that areas close to the peace 
walls experienced the worst of the violence and disorder:    
More people were killed in North Belfast than anywhere else (largest number 
of peace walls are in North Belfast). I think it was about 21% and those 
wounds are deep and will take time to heal (Unionist MLA). 
This view has also been articulated in previous academic reports (Murtagh and 
Shirlow, 2006) and reinforced by statistics produced by the Special European Union 
Programme Body, which is a respected international funding organisation (table 
12). The statistics clearly show that over 10% of all deaths in the Belfast urban area 
took place less than 100 metres from a interface between Republican and Loyalist 
communities.  
Table 12: Relationship between deaths and location to interfaces 
Distance from interface % share of all deaths within Belfast Urban Area  
Less than 100 metres 13.47 
Less than 200 metres 28.89 
Less than 300 metres 44.25 
Less than 400 metres 57.28 
Less than 500 metres 66.53 
Less than 600 metres 71.88 
Less then 700 metres 75.91 
Source: Special European Union Programme Body (2003:49) 
There was a sense from respondents that any conversation that wished to include 
the subject of peace walls had to consider the legacy of the conflict, the impacts of 
which transcended all of the communities and continue to exist today: 
They (peace walls) physically demonstrate the fact that people of different 
identities here dont have the ability to live together or to tolerate each 
others differences. So they are manifestations of all those fears and 
weaknesses (Government 6 representative). 
There was a consensus from all of the participants that the peace walls could not be 
seen in isolation, and that any attempt to develop a policy process would have to 
consider the wider impacts of the conflict.  
Violence and disorder 
Further quantifiable indicators alluded to by respondents were statistics from the 
PSNI and government departments that referred to the levels of violence and 
disorder within and between Loyalist and Republican communities located close to 
the peace walls. However, there were diverging views on the actual levels of 
violence and disorder. It was recognised across all of the participants that generally, 
citywide incidents of communal violence had significantly decreased over the last 
decade, although specific areas still experienced rioting as a result of parading 
disputes and local community tensions. Respondents recalled incidents such as the 
Drumcree protests in the late 1990s (Jarman and Bryan, 1996); the Holy Cross 
dispute in 2001 (Cadwallader, 2004); the Short Strand/Inner East violence in 
2001/02 (Byrne, 2005); and the Whiterock riots in 2005 (Chrisalis, 2005) as 
examples where continual violence occurred across the majority of interfaces in the 
city. There was a strong sense that these types of events and subsequent riots had 
for the most part been removed from the city calendar. However, when 
conversations became more focused, it became evident that there were competing 
accounts of local peoples experiences of violence and disorder at the micro level. 
Several respondents recounted examples where families and individuals living close 
to peace walls and interfaces were continuing to report incidents of sectarian 
violence on a regular basis: 
There is a huge fear out there I have been to public meetings where the 
community have articulated that they are in constant fear of attack; houses 
are being stoned and hit with petrol bombs, which are the reality for some 
communities (Unionist MLA).  
The recent publication of PSNI statistics for North Belfast would concur with these 
views. Although there was an 8% decrease in interface violence from April to 
December 2009 there were still 516 recorded incidents within North Belfast (DPP, 
2010). When pressed on whether respondents viewed this violence as primarily 
sectarian in nature and possibly orchestrated by paramilitary groups there was a 
sense that it was limited to a minority of young people, under the auspices of anti-
social behaviour: 
In the last five years the pattern of conflict has changed. It is unregulated, 
sporadic and anti-social with young people the main instigators. Thats not to 
say there isnt a sectarian element, but for the most part it aint Troubles 
related (Republican 1 representative). 
According to several respondents there were a number of instances were local 
community groups were producing their own statistics and accounts of peoples 
experiences of living beside the peace walls. For instance, research by the North 
Belfast Interface Network (2008) through their Draw down the walls programme, 
and Forthspring (2010) through their Shared neighbourhood programme were 
examples of community-based organisations collating local peoples views on issues 
pertaining to peace walls and interfaces. According to interviewees these concerns 
were then being articulated to elected representatives through the production of 
community surveys and published reports: 
There was some work done recently that said Nationalists wanted the wall 
removed. Immediately after that story emerged we had elderly constituents 
phoning this office expressing their concerns, saying that if the walls came 
down then they would have to leave (Unionist MLA).  
One elected representative also indicated that their constituents experiences of 
sectarian violence alongside an increased fear of being attacked, was impacting on 
their views and perceptions of peace walls. They recalled an incident where they 
attended a public meeting at which local people lobbied them for the extension of a 
peace wall, the retention of another peace wall, and the construction a new peace 
wall: 
People were saying to me that they didnt want peace walls but that they had 
to live in their home with their six week old child, and they recalled an 
incident where they (rioters) threw petrol bombs and a brick through their 
window (Republican MLA). 
Discussions also noted that the perceptions of being a victim of a sectarian incident 
were very much the realities for people living either side of peace walls. Even 
though there may be no reporting of incidents, the experiences of neighbouring 
communities along with memories of the past appeared enough to shape 
contemporary views on the continued need for peace walls. 
Peace walls 
Several respondents acknowledged that when there were calls for the strengthening 
or construction of a peace wall under the auspices of community safety that it could 
be considered an indicator on the status of relationships between Catholics and 
Protestants: 
When you see new ones going up like the one on Hillview off the Crumlin 
Road (North Belfast)I suppose on one hand it is an indicator of how far 
there is still to go if we want to get this place to something that we can 
consider normal (NGO  3 representative). 
The construction of new peace walls and the strengthening of others were 
considered by several respondents as an indication of a lack of imagination 
surrounding the NI governments ability to address the communities concerns and 
fears of further episodes of sectarian violence: 
I just think for some people it is an easier way of doing things. I mean 
policing by walls is probably simpler than community policing (NGO 1 
representative). 
The irony of the peace walls themselves being considered an indicator or 
assessment on the peace and political progress that Northern Ireland had made in 
the last fifteen years was not lost on one respondent, who noted that: 
People are ambivalent about them. At one level people recognise that they 
are indicators (the peace walls) that they are not safe, on the other hand they 
realise that if they are taken down they may be less safe (NGO 5 
representative). 
However, the interviewees also recognised that opinions locally, nationally and 
internationally on what peace walls represented in the context of a peace process 
would differ significantly.  
Health and social wellbeing 
Respondents then shifted the focus of indicators onto the area of government 
statistics, with a specific emphasis on employment, income, and health. There was a 
general consensus from interviewees that residing in communities close to and 
beside the peace walls had a negative impact on the quality of ones life:  
People are living in poverty, social deprivation, and low levels of educational 
attainment and have very low levels of opportunity (NGO 1 representative). 
Indicators used to assess levels of health and social wellbeing such as the NISRA 
(2010) multiple deprivation index have consistently recorded electoral wards that 
have peace walls within them as the most deprived in Northern Ireland. Recent 
statistics based on income; employment; health deprivation and disability; 
education; skills and training; proximity to services; and crime and disorder show 
that the four most deprived electoral wards in Northern Ireland are located in 
Belfast close to and beside peace walls (1) Whiterock (2) Falls (3) Shankill (4) New 
Lodge (NISRA, 2010). Several respondents had experience of working extensively 
within these areas and felt that these communities had not progressed structurally 
or economically the way other communities in Belfast had over the last decade:  
These are very deprived communities, places where people are scraping to 
make a living every day of their lives. Very few of them see any so called 
peace dividend (Unionist MLA). 
This view that the benefits of the peace and political process had been experienced 
disproportionately throughout the city was a recurring theme, and one that is 
explored in more detail in Chapter Seven. However, the general position from 
respondents was that there was a direct relationship between the communities 
where peace walls are located, the health and social wellbeing of the residents, and a 
failure to witness tangible benefits of the peace process. 
Cost of division 
Following on from this a broader discussion took place on the implications of 
division and segregation across Northern Ireland and more specifically Belfast. 
Although it was acknowledged that communal segregation was not unique to 
Belfast, the fact that the division was often illustrated by the peace walls meant that 
people associated segregation with working class Loyalist and Republican 
communities in Belfast. So when statements are made about the cost of division, 
even though it is a Northern Ireland wide issue, they are often accompanied with 
pictures of the peace wall at Cupar Way in West Belfast:  
We need to get people to care about the economy and get people to think 
about the cost of division, cause if its 1.5 billion a year thats crazy money 
(Independent  Unionist MLA). 
According to respondents there was a growing awareness among the voluntary, 
community and statutory sector of the economic impact of division as a 
consequence of the conflict. This has also been raised by Graham and Nash (2006) 
through their analysis of the development of public policy in Northern Ireland after 
the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. They maintained that the financial burden of 
segregation was an indication of the difficulties facing local government through the 
devolved administration.  
It was interesting to note that although respondents felt that segregation and 
division was more acute in specific parts of Belfast, overall it had a significant 
impact on connectivity throughout the city and the provision and access to services: 
I think there is a move by central government to do something about the 
walls. Sectarianism really is very costly, now if you divide a city up into 
ghettos it costs more to resource communities. So I think the walls really 
represent bad value for the ratepayerif you want to look at the city and see 
how it operates then walls are very costly (Republican MLA). 
Recently Jones et al (2009) conducted a number of roundtable discussions with key 
stakeholders within Belfast on the potential for connectivity and mobility to be 
considered as contributing to conflict transformation initiatives. The participants 
considered the view that historically, government services were delivered within 
the city under a shared but equal approach. There was agreement that this had been 
the case, but also an acknowledgement that current economic difficulties alongside 
resource and budget cuts would have a direct influence on service delivery in the 
future.  
Tourism  
Interestingly, several respondents were keen to stress that not all of the statistics 
and indicators associated with the peace walls were negative. More specifically, 
these participants were talking about the economic benefits of the peace walls that 
had been generated through tourism. According to respondents, the last five years 
had seen a significant increase in visitors that was brought about by a curiosity and 
interest in the conflict. According to one respondent there had been a significant 
increase in cultural tourism in Belfast and this was reflected in the growing number 
of visitors to Loyalist and Republican parts of the city: 
I am chairman of Shankill Tourism and the reality is that cultural tourism is a 
hugely significant factor in the local economy...we have somewhere in the 
region of 350,000 people visiting the Cupar Street peace wall each year 
(Unionist MLA). 
This interest in conflict sites from international visitors is not unique to Northern 
Ireland, with several commentators (Seaton, 1996; Lennon and Foley, 2000; Lisle, 
2006; Murphy, 2010) documenting the growing trend of dark tourism in conflict 
related areas such as Belfast, Mostar and Nicosia.  
Summary  
Discussions revealed that there are several types of indicators that emerged in the 
last decade which together capture directly and indirectly the issue of peace walls. 
The social and economic indicators immediately focus attention on the health and 
social wellbeing of those that reside closest to the peace walls. However, to digress 
slightly, one of the respondents felt that these issues facing these communities have 
always been there, its just they hidden or deliberately kept off the political agenda 
because of the conflict: 
You had all these things emerging (key statistics), but they were all 
happening under the war radar, and that prevented a clear analysis of what 
was happening at any given time (NGO 2 representative). 
Aside from the negative impacts of the walls, they have also become recognised by 
some commentators as an indicator of the continued segregation between Loyalist 
and Republican working class communities, and therefore by default an illustration 
of the failure of the peace process. However, it is important to insert a note of 
caution at this stage, which relates specifically to the interpretation of indicators. 
For the power lies not in the assessment of the indicator but more importantly how 
it is interpreted and who is responsible for the interpretation. The chapter now 
shifts away from indicators and considers the impacts of focused events to 
determine if they have an influence whether peace walls constitute a condition or a 
problem.  
5.2 Focusing events  
Aside from indicators, there are occasions that potential problems require further 
support and emphasis to receive the desired attention and provision of policy and 
decision makers in and around government. That momentum is usually provided by 
either a focusing event, or a powerful symbol that garners support, or the personal 
experience of a policy-maker. Academics have written extensively on the power of 
focused events. For example Bang (2010) reviewed several climate change incidents 
in the context of focused events and examined whether they had the potential to 
significantly impact and ultimately change the US governments energy policy. So, in 
relation to peace walls, this section considers several incidents that may or may not 
be viewed as focused events and determines if they have raised awareness on the 
issue of peace walls. 
Mayor of New York 
In May 2008 Mayor Bloomberg speaking at the US-Northern Ireland Investment 
Conference in Belfast gave a speech that essentially focused on the relationship 
between the peace walls and external economic investment opportunities in Belfast. 
The following extract illustrates the tone and content of the speech: 
The best and the brightest dont want to live in a city defined by division. 
They dont want to live behind walls. And they dont want to live in a place 
where they are judged by their faith or their family names. The historical 
cultural barriers are slowly coming down, and the sooner they do  and the 
sooner the physical barriers come down too  the sooner the floodgates of 
private investment will open (Mayor Bloomberg, 2008). 
According to a number of respondents the speech proved extremely divisive and by 
drawing attention to the peace walls and more specifically the rationale for their 
continued existence, the Mayor was internationalising the profile of the peace walls: 
If the Mayor of New York lands in and makes a speech about walls then we 
have a problem. It is a perception problem abroad and is a factor if we are 
trying to sell this place as an investment locationhe is coming here and 
telling us this is a problem, its up to us whether we listen or not (Nationalist, 
MLA). 
There were other more dissenting comments surrounding the speech from 
respondents from the Loyalist community, who felt that it was inappropriate for the 
Mayor as an outsider to comment on an issue that he had no experience of:  
He comes over here and says them things, what does he know? He has no 
idea what it is like to live in these areas and have the threat of your home 
being attacked (Loyalist 3 representative).  
Although Mayor Bloombergs words divided opinion, there was agreement from 
respondents that they stimulated debate and re-energised discussions on the 
subject of division and segregation brought about through the physical barriers. A 
number of interviewees from both the community and government sectors felt that 
this new focus presented communities, politicians and statutory agencies with an 
opportunity to consider whether the general public had actually normalised the 
existence of the peace walls. As one respondent noted: 
Their existence along with the continued rationale for building new peace 
walls had never been challenged (Republican 4 representative). 
Essentially, there had been a normalisation process, where the peace walls had 
simply become an accepted reality within working class urban communities.  
Hazelwood peace wall 
In 2007 the Northern Ireland Security Minister, Paul Goggins took the decision to 
build a peace wall in the grounds of an integrated primary school in North Belfast, 
although it was not completed until late 2008. This decision received a large amount 
of media publicity due to the construction of a peace wall within the grounds of a 
school that was used by pupils and their families from all types of community, 
religious and ethnic backgrounds (Sharrock, 2007). The rationale for its 
construction was based upon the need to protect the families and homes of 
Nationalists and Unionist communities. This was considered a focusing event by 
several respondents for two specific reasons. Firstly, it generated a new focus on the 
rationale for the continued construction of peace walls in a city that had undergone 
a successful peace and political process. And secondly, it highlighted the fact that a 
physical barrier was still the governments only response to communal violence and 
disorder. Respondents noted that at the time it created a news sensation because of 
the timing and the perception that Northern Ireland was becoming more politically 
stable: 
Barriers were still going up ten years after the Good Friday Agreementthis 
was the flashpoint and raised awareness that there were no discussions 
about the signals this sent out (NGO 5 representative). 
One respondent went further and indicated that the construction of a new peace 
wall essentially undermined the previous fifteen years of peace building and cross 
community work:  
CRC went to the NIO Minister; it was the last straw, because if that is the 
signal of a peace process then we (society) are lost. Concerns were raised 
about the new barrier and about no long-term policy for the existing ones 
(NGO 5 representative). 
Following the construction of the peace wall the CRC established a working group to 
examine in more detail the impact of the peace walls across Belfast along with a 
review of government policies that related to the peace walls. Several of the 
respondents had been part of the working group, and there were mixed views from 
respondents as to why individuals and organisations participated in the process:   
The fact that the conversation was started by the statutory sector was a very 
interesting one. It wasnt the community saying that they wanted the walls 
downit was the statutory sector and CRC challenging the NIO putting the 
wall up, and seeing if there had been an exit strategy thought about, the 
emphasis never came from the community (Government 5 representative). 
However, according to a community representative, the focus of the conversation 
and rationale for participation in any process on the subject of peace walls was 
primarily motivated by the needs of individuals and families residing along 
interfaces: 
The reason I got into this process was because people initially felt that the 
wall in Hazelwood was a slap to civil society and I felt that was wrong. Within 
some quarters there is absolutely no understanding of peoples need for 
security (Republican 1 representative). 
It became apparent that there were different opinions and reasons for participating 
in any process that aimed to examine in detail the complexities the surround peace 
walls. However, for the first time, the decision to build a peace wall opened up the 
conversation and process to a much wider audience.  
Peace walls survey 
In 2008, the Queens University in Belfast organised a conference to reflect on the 
impact of The Good Friday Agreement (1998) and acknowledge the successful 
political developments that had taken place in the decade following the Agreement. 
The Mitchel Conference (May, 2008) brought together politicians and community 
representatives that had been integral in the peace and political processes that 
culminated in the Good Friday Agreement. In the run up to the conference a 
representative from the US/Ireland Alliance was in Belfast conducting research into 
the possibility of developing a process that would culminate in the removal of a 
peace wall. The findings from the research study have previously been documented 
in Chapter Two (2.7). However, in the context of focused events, it became apparent 
through several respondents that the research had a significant impact on 
conversations about the peace walls:  
That work of Trina Vargo (US/Ireland Alliance); really it was very 
patronising in not understanding the reality of the conflict, and how the walls 
got there (NGO 3 representative). 
Loyalist and Republican respondents were especially critical of the research, 
indicating that it was motivated out of self-interest, with the hope of producing a 
photograph of a politician standing beside a partially removed peace wall. This 
perception was reinforced by a story in a local newspaper, which reported Trina 
Vargo (responsible for the survey) saying Northern Ireland needs a Berlin Wall 
moment to show the international community that the Troubles are really over 
(News Letter, 2007). As one interviewee indicated:  
There was clearly an agenda with the Trina Vargo work, with the support of 
the American administration and supported by the Department of Foreign 
Affairs who all wanted to see the wall coming downbut there was an 
attitude within communities of you cannot walk in here and take a sledge 
hammer to the walls (Republican 5 representative).  
Other respondents reinforced this position, stating that the publicity surrounding 
the research and the conference failed to consider the reasons why the walls 
continued to exist, or the ongoing work of local community groups in addressing the 
impacts of the walls: 
Things are done for showits like the Trina Vargo stuff; lets take a wall 
down for George Mitchell coming back, yeah right (NGO 4 representative). 
It is important to note that there were respondents that recognised the positive 
aspects of the research. Specific attention was drawn to the uniqueness of 
conducting a survey on specific policy issue that was under researched, and also the 
fact that the study attempted to ascertain the views of the people directly affected 
by the peace walls: 
Trina Vargos approach was very clearly about not working through 
gatekeepers. In other words it was about getting the views of people who live 
in the houses and streets along the peace walls, rather than the views of 
community representatives (NGO 1 representative).  
There was a consensus from respondents that the research regardless of its 
perceived faults had created a momentum on the subject of peace walls, and led 
people to begin to consider their relevance within the city. Respondents considered 
it symbolic, as the findings from the survey created a platform and baseline from 
which practitioners and policy makers could measure views and attitudes to the 
peace walls for the first time.  
Return to power sharing 
According to the majority of interviewees, recent political developments have had a 
significant impact on generating interest and a renewed discourse on the subject of 
peace walls. In 2007 administrative powers were devolved to the assembly after 
political agreement was reached between the two largest parties, the Democratic 
Unionist Party (DUP) and Sinn Fin (SF). The Sunday Times reflected on the 
importance of the occasion with the headline No time for handshakes, but this was 
history in the making (Sharrock, 2007). For a number of respondents, the images of 
both political parties sitting together generated a new sense of confidence and 
stability, which transferred down to the electorate: 
For me personally May 2007 changed everything. The idea of Paisley and 
Adams sitting down together altered everything that had went before (NGO 2 
representative). 
It was evident from the participants that the closer co-operation between politicians 
was viewed as a catalyst for local communities to engage on cross-community 
issues. This is not to say that it hadnt been going on for a number of years, its just 
that the political stability created a momentum that precipitated down to the 
communities. For example, Byrne (2009) documented the development of the 
North Belfast Interface Monitoring Group which was a coming together of Loyalist 
and Republican activists to respond to violence and disorder along their interfaces 
in North Belfast. There was a degree of symbolism attached to the collaboration at 
the macro, political level and in a sense validated much of the work community 
representatives had been participating in since the onset of the peace and political 
process. 
The discussions then shifted onto the impact of the devolution of policing and justice 
powers in 2010 and the fact that David Ford and the Department for Justice had 
policy responsibility for the peace walls. This was viewed as a positive development 
from respondents:  
I think it brings the ownership of the whole issue into sharp focus; people 
cannot avoid their responsibilities like they may have done before (PSNI 
representative).  
There were mixed views from interviewees as to the practical benefits of having 
local policy responsibility for the peace walls. Several respondents indicated that 
this would make it easier to raise awareness of the issues and develop opportunities 
to bring about change: 
I think the army influenced the NIO and security took primacy but now under 
devolution with David Ford there is an opportunity to make a difference 
(NGO 2 representative). 
However, others were more dismissive and held the impression that given the 
nature of the political system, and the difficulty in achieving cross-departmental 
support for policies, that the Minister would have limited opportunities to exercise 
meaningful actions on the subject of peace walls: 
It is an interesting time for David Ford, although I dont think it is going to be 
for very long. So it is obviously not his top priority (NGO 4 representative). 
Furthermore, one respondent was clearly frustrated at the apparent lack of power 
the Alliance Minister would have, indicating that the two dominant political parties 
would ultimately remain in control of key policy decisions:  
I had high hopesbut I am a bit disheartened now that it is apparent that all 
the key decisions go back to OFMDFM such as parading. So the ultimate 
power remains with SF and the DUP (NGO 1 representative). 
The devolution of policing and justice powers to Stormont was seen as a positive 
development in the context of generating a discussion on the peace walls. All of the 
respondents were of agreement that policy for the peace walls should be the 
responsibility of local elected representatives. However, there were cynical views 
put forward from several respondents as to the actual impact this would have in 
raising the issue onto the political agenda because of its association with the past.  
Recession  
The global recession and its subsequent impact on the economy in Northern Ireland 
was viewed by a number of respondents as a catalyst which raised the profile of 
peace walls within government departments and institutions. In a similar way that 
the Mayor of New York drew upon the economic impact of division and segregation, 
there was a sense from respondents that issues around employment and investment 
opportunities have influenced government thinking towards the issue of peace 
walls: 
The strongest political argument for walls being removed is the economic 
argument because they feel that this is restricting development along with 
employment and holding back the economy here (NGO 6 representative). 
The increased pressure on the financial and government institutions has resulted in 
a renewed focus by the devolved government on areas of the city that historically 
have seen minimal or no inwards investment. This recognition that segregation was 
having a financial impact was noted by Anna Lo the Alliance MLA for South Belfast, 
when she stated that continued segregation was ruining the economy and negatively 
affecting the standard of living for the majority of society (Lo, 2007). The 
respondents also noted that Government and community organisations were 
developing collective approaches to addressing issues on regeneration. It was 
evident from participants that any radical government rethink on peace walls would 
be financially motivated:  
This isnt going to be because of any social or moral obligationyou know I 
am not an economist, but you have all that space that is not producing any 
economic activity, and large areas with no access and mobility issues (NGO 5 
representative). 
Among the interviewees from the government it was felt that more recently policy 
makers and those tasked with implanting policy had become more aware of 
difficulties of operating in a divided society:  
I think that the economic climate is driving this notion that you either have 
one leisure centre that you share or you have none. You have one community 
centre or you have none (Government 1 representative). 
A further point centred on the need for the city to be in a positive position to attract 
and encourage inward investment. However it was felt that these communities 
suffered because they looked less appealing and there was less risk attached than 
other more affluent part of the city: 
You cannot get jobs into these areas for two reasons. On the capital side, no 
one is going to invest in areas where there is a lot of risk, when there are 
other options. And on the labour side, the best and most qualified labour is 
more mobile so is likely to have left (NGO 1 representative). 
All in all, the recession was considered a focusing event as it was alerting people to 
the fact that the peace walls and the subsequent communal segregation and division 
were reducing opportunities for investment.  
Summary  
It was interesting to note that a number of the focusing events such as the speech 
from Mayor Bloomberg and the research from Trina Vargo were instigated by 
outsiders, but still provided the catalyst for several local communities to begin a 
conversation on themes pertaining to the peace walls. Recent conferences and 
publications such as the Challenge of Change Conference (2009) and the Towards 
Sustainable Security report (Jarman, 2008) have also acknowledged the role that 
these events had in raising awareness of the subject of peace walls across different 
audiences. The other identified focused events, including the return of power-
sharing and the construction of the forty-second peace wall provided further 
impetus to the emerging peace walls discourse. However, although these events 
were critical in raising public and to some extent political awareness on the issue of 
peace walls, it was also evident that these events alone were not enough to 
encourage some form of government intervention.  
5.3 Personal experiences of those in power 
Aside from the importance of focusing events, the Multiple Streams Approach 
(1995) included the idea that on specific occasions the personal experiences of 
policy makers and administrators bring certain issues to their attention. In this 
context, the majority of respondents indicated that there was one elected 
representative within the NI Executive who had a significant understanding of the 
walls:  
Gerry Kelly (Junior Minister) would be one of the few Ministers with a direct 
interest because they are in his constituency. So once you start to go beyond 
that level it has less relevance to other Ministers (NGO 3 representative). 
The Junior Minister was asked whether the fact that he resided in an area that had a 
large number of peace walls within it (North Belfast) meant that he had a stronger 
understanding of the issue of peace walls compared to his ministerial colleagues. It 
was apparent from the response that personal experiences and contact with the 
issues on a daily basis contributed significantly to his views on interface violence 
and the peace walls: 
I was out on the street for a number of years with members of Sinn Fin and 
community representatives dealing with the issue (violence) first hand. So I 
do think that gives you a fair amount of respect because you are prepared to 
get your hands dirty, you are not sitting in an office (Junior Minister). 
Among the respondents there was a slight concern about the level of support and 
interest that the Ministers colleagues would have on the specific issue of peace 
walls. However, there was a view from a small number of respondents in the 
community sector that in the future, the Ministers position within the NI Executive 
would become stronger, and subsequently the issue of peace walls may rise up the 
NI government agenda: 
The political system will mean that Sinn Fin either has the Finance or Justice 
Ministries. The DUP wont give up Finance so Kelly will become Justice 
Minister. Then you are going to have a North Belfast elected representative 
who has given a commitment to deal with interface issues in power. That will 
make a difference (Republican 6 representative). 
Interestingly, several interviewees adopted a different position and felt that in the 
future discussions on the peace walls involving communities and elected 
representatives should primarily be conducted with local councillors and 
department representatives from local government. The point being that a 
substantial number of the local councillors reside in and around communities that 
have peace walls so they would be best suited to discuss the local issues that arise 
from the peace walls:  
If they are not in your constituency then they are not your problemthats 
why I think that the issue with the walls should be based more within the 
council constituency than maybe MLA business (Republican 2 
representative). 
It should be noted that Kingdon (1995) reported that personal experiences of policy 
makers were occasionally important, but that they were not among the major 
influences on agenda status. Furthermore, their experiences acted more as 
reinforcements for something else, or as factors that might heighten a problem at 
the margins, rather than as prime movers. This idea that personal experiences and 
knowledge of peace walls may contribute to their positioning on the political agenda 
will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Seven which looks at the political issues 
and peace walls.  
5.4 Symbols and symbolism 
The use of symbols in the context of defining a problem is a further digression on 
the focusing event and is primarily concerned with the emergence and diffusion of a 
powerful symbol (Kingdon, 1995). In Northern Ireland, symbols and emblems have 
played a significant role during the conflict and for the most part continue to 
illustrate the characteristics of the different competing identities within Northern 
Ireland (Buckley, 1998). Furthermore, the use of symbols is still common practice 
among specific groups and communities to promote their political and religious 
affiliations and reinforce their sense of culture and identity (Bryan and Gillespie, 
2005; and Law, 1998). Symbols in one sense operate in a similar fashion to personal 
experiences. They are reinforcement for something that is already taking place and 
have the ability to fully focus attention, rather than act as the primary catalyst in 
promoting an issue onto the political agenda. Incidentally, there are also occasions 
where symbols gain momentum and have crucial focusing effects, in that they can 
embody the reality of a situation that people often have difficulty in explaining. 
Through the discussions with respondents it was apparent that there had been 
several developments and incidents in the last decade that were symbolic, and were 
adapted by individuals and organisations to emphasise the existence of peace walls 
in Belfast and the absence of a government strategy or policy on them.  
Anniversary of the collapse of the Berlin Wall 
In October 2009 the world celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the removal of 
the Berlin Wall (McElroy and Waterfield, 2009). In Belfast there were a small 
number of local events organised by youth and community groups to draw attention 
to the peace walls in Belfast.  Organisations such as Youthlink were central in raising 
the symbolism of the fall of the Berlin Wall against the backdrop of the peace walls 
in Belfast through events such as Up Against The Wall Project (Youthlink, 2009). 
According to interviewees with knowledge of these events, young people were at 
the centre of these initiatives, with many young people articulating the view to 
adults that they were not responsible for the construction of the walls, yet they had 
to live with them: 
When I was Lord Mayor we had the 20th Anniversary of the fall of the Berlin 
Wallwe did a number of events with young people. We highlighted the 
contrast with Germany, where people wanted the wall to be removed. Here 
they are quite content or at least afraid of making the changes that would 
require them to take them down (Alliance MP). 
Aside from the Lord Mayors contribution to these events there was limited 
evidence of further political involvement by elected representatives. There was no 
evidence to suggest that any of them used the anniversary as a symbol to emphasise 
the continued segregation and division that existed across working class 
communities in the city. In fact, there were interviewees from a political background 
who failed to recognise the symbolic association people had made between Belfast 
and Berlin and the removal of the wall: 
They are not comparable. The Berlin wall divided a country and was a 
national issue. These walls are local and primarily about a city (Republican 
However, respondents from the community sector indicated that any emphasis on 
the significance of the fall of the Berlin wall was driven from the grass roots, and 
was symbolic in their attempts to draw attention on the continued existence of 
peace walls in Belfast. This view was also evident from the local media when they 
reported on the anniversary of the removal of the Berlin Wall. The Belfast Telegraph 
stated that Berlin celebrates but Northern Ireland has more barriers than ever 
(McNeilly, 2009). Although, it must also be noted that there was no real momentum 
generated from the media attention, as once the anniversary had passed there was 
no evidence of continued press coverage on the issue.  
Partnerships 
This theme centred primarily on the increasing personal and professional 
partnerships between community representatives and organisations from Loyalist 
and Republican backgrounds over the last decade. Historically, in those areas that 
had experienced high levels of communal violence and disorder relationships were 
often strained or non-existent across the different communities and between 
opposing interface workers. Furthermore, if negative events occurred in one specific 
part of Belfast, it had the potential to have an impact on relationships across the city. 
For example, if sectarian rioting occurred in Short Strand and Inner East Belfast, it 
had the potential to escalate and result in violence in Ardoyne and Woodvale in 
North Belfast. However, interviewees from both Loyalist and Republican 
backgrounds acknowledged that trust had improved significantly between the key 
individuals responsible for working across the interfaces. This had a positive impact 
on overall levels of co-operation and engagement across the city: 
The relationships are now good, like I would be in the Falls Road or Ardoyne 
or New Lodge a couple of times a week and there is no fear anymore 
(Loyalist 4 representative). 
It was interesting to note that a number of respondents also felt that even though 
partnerships had been established across the city, they often consisted of small 
groups of individuals, and not broad sections of the community. This is a topic that 
will be explored in more detail within Chapter Seven under the theme of 
gatekeepers and their role in community development. There was concern that 
partnerships and engagement was taking place with a small number of people, and 
that the wider public were largely absent from any decision-making. Aside from the 
concerns about the numbers involved, it was clear from all of the respondents that 
relationships had dramatically improved, to the point where cross community 
partnerships were viewed as normal:  
We have good links now with people from the Loyalist community. 
Relationships are a lot stronger, to the point that if something goes wrong 
somewhere, it doesnt have a lasting impact on the working relationships 
(Republican 6 representative). 
The symbolism associated with community and interface workers and ex-
combatants building partnerships together in a meaningful and constructive 
manner cannot be underestimated. All of the respondents indicated that this was an 
important building block in the context of developing a dialogue on the issue of 
peace walls. Furthermore, it was noted that conversations on this sensitive topic 
could not take place without an establishment of trust between the main community 
representatives.  
Torrens 
Torrens was a predominantly Unionist housing estate in North Belfast that was 
separated from the neighbouring Nationalist areas by a series of peace walls and 
closed gates. By late 2004 all of the residents in the housing estate had left the area 
after an alleged campaign from Republicans to force the residents out through 
intimidation and violence. The narrative being pushed by Unionist politicians at the 
time was that nearby Republican communities required more space and housing 
which could be accessed from Torrens if the Protestant community left. The media 
reported of Accusations of ethnic cleansing as Belfast destroys houses along 
sectarian battle line (McKittrick, 2004). For this reason Torrens is an extremely 
powerful symbol within the Unionist and Loyalist communities that reside beside 
the peace walls in Belfast (Southern, 2008). It represents the expansion of one 
community over another and the failure of the state to intervene and protect the 
interests of the Protestant community. Several interviewees from the Loyalist 
community reaffirmed this belief and considered the events at Torrens as 
representative of a Republican agenda to reduce and eradicate the Unionist and 
Loyalist communities from Belfast:  
That was all about the removal of Protestant families from their homes so 
Catholics could move in. The state just let that happen, they were given no 
support or protection, it was easier for them all if the Prods just moved out 
(Loyalist 5 representative).  
It is important not to underestimate the influence the symbolism that Torrens has 
had on the attitudes and perceptions of the Loyalist community. Interviewees 
continuously stated that Torrens influenced how the community interpreted and 
understood the rationale for the peace walls. Torrens was a symbol of the decline 
and removal of a Protestant community in North Belfast, therefore Loyalist 
communities had seen a decrease in their population were now fearful that their 
community could follow a similar path. According to one respondent, the events in 
Torrens were a contradiction of the NI Executives and local governments policies 
and practices towards the recognition of a shared future. There argument was that 
the NI and British administrations would ignore the plight of Unionist and Loyalist 
communities to appease the needs of Republicans:  
When you are trying for a shared futurewas that an example of a shared 
future? A shared future is a Nationalist future (Loyalist 4 representative). 
The importance of Torrens within the Loyalist community as a symbol in 
determining whether the subject of peace walls should be considered a problem will 
become apparent in the latter stages of this chapter. It should be noted that 
Republican respondents had a very different perspective on what occurred at 
Torrens. Several interviewees contend that Loyalist families moved out, not through 
intimidation but because they were offered better housing and the opportunity of 
employment. The respondents apportion a large part of the blame onto the Unionist 
politicians and government departments for not examining ways that both 
communities in that part of North Belfast could live together: 
It must have been soul destroying for those families left at the end. There was 
nothing in the area; there were no facilities, just bricked up homes. It was a 
total failure on the part of the statutory bodies and the planners to sit down 
and look at ways of regeneration (Republican 5 representative). 
Like so many events that have occurred during the conflict, community perceptions 
and not the reality often dictate the narrative within the respective communities. 
The symbolism associated with Torrens within the Unionist and Loyalist working 
class communities of Belfast is one of intimidation, an abuse of rights, and the 
expansion of one community over another. However, Republicans view it differently 
and see it as an event which was exploited by Unionist politicians to score political 
points against their elected colleagues.  
Interface Working Group (IWG) 
The rationale and workings of the IWG have been comprehensively reviewed in 
Chapter Two. In relation to its symbolic merit, a number of respondents indicated 
that it illustrated a shift in the process of discussing peace walls in a more open and 
transparent way and created an environment where community and statutory 
agencies could come together to explore the issues pertaining to the peace walls. 
This was the first occasion that all those with a vested interest in the subject of 
peace walls had a mechanism and forum in which to articulate their views and 
opinions. According to one respondent the IWG was an important development in 
the pursuit of gaining political interest and momentum on the issue of peace walls:  
The working group was the place that policies could be discussed alongside 
the experiences of people that would be impacted by any developments. All 
the right organisations were there, it was important that the right people 
were in the right room talking these issues through (NGO 3 representative).  
There were several critiques of the IWG, mainly from community representatives, 
who pointed to the lack of policy and decision makers from the statutory sector 
participating in the IWG: 
They are not the right people with the power at the table. You need to bring 
the decision makers into the conversation so they can act on issues that arise 
(Republican 4 representative). 
There were also concerns that the IWG would become nothing more than a talking 
shop for community and local government representatives. A number of 
respondents mentioned previous working groups that had been established to 
address community based issues, which had failed to deliver any positive and 
constructive outcomes: 
I think there are confusions and I have concerns, it cant simple become a box 
ticking exercise. It needs to make a practical difference, and I havent seen 
evidence of that yet (Loyalist 6 representative). 
This is not the place for an evaluation on the outputs of the IWG or a critique of its 
membership (Appendix 7 includes the Terms of Reference and membership). 
However, respondents did acknowledge that the development of the IWG provided 
new impetus on the subject of peace walls and from a symbolic perspective it 
legitimised the narrative that surrounded the policy area and encouraged greater 
participation.  
Relics of the conflict 
A number of discussion points emerged in regards to the peace walls being the last 
physical vestiges of the conflict. Several respondents indicated that the walls were a 
symbol of the past: 
 For a long time there was probably a reassurance around the walls. But the 
 nature of the violence is changing, and certain people recognise that the war 
 is over and there is a general acceptance that people do not want to live in 
 the way they did in the past (Republican 4 representative). 
Others referred to the peace walls as defensible architecture that had its 
recognised place in society until the onset of the peace and political processes. 
Those respondents felt the existence of barriers and fences would continue to raise 
questions as the city tried to move away from the past and present itself as a shared 
city. Interestingly, Gaffikin et al (2008) through their examination of public and 
shared space in Belfast made similar assumptions, and noted that the physical lines 
of demarcation would continue to be a source of frustration for those tasked with 
planning the city. One respondent noted that the walls were a constant reminder of 
the past, and considering the political developments that had been made, did not fit 
with the international narrative that people in Northern Ireland were good at 
making peace:  
Is it our own expectations of the transition from war to peace that we are so 
far down the road that we think they shouldnt be there? (NGO 4 
representative). 
The conversations then shifted onto how the symbolism of the walls as a visible 
representation of the conflict could be used and manipulated by both the 
community and statutory sectors. Several respondents held cynical views on the 
rationale for the apparent upsurge in attention on the peace walls that was evident 
by the emergence of the IWG. They were of the impression that opportunities for 
funding and resources were the main driver encouraging local engagement on the 
issue: 
Maybe someone wrote a bid to SEUPB and thought what should we put in it 
to work on, and I suppose they (peace walls) sounded good in fitting in with 
the funders agenda of peace building (NGO 6 representative). 
Furthermore, it was also noted that financial support and resources funded under 
the criteria of peace building was quickly coming to an end. Therefore, it was argued 
that addressing a key visible symbol of the conflict such as peace walls would appeal 
to new and existing funding agencies: 
There certainly arent resources, with the end of European funding, the 
International Fund Ireland closing down, Atlantic Philanthropies in its exit 
strategy, it doesnt look good (NGO 7 representative). 
According to other interviewees the emphasis and attention on the peace walls was 
being driven by entrepreneurs and individuals trying to establish reputations and 
develop a new and innovative peace building model that could be exported to other 
conflict regions: 
I think it is symbolic. I think someone wants to take the credit, the glory, 
whatever, for the removal of a wall (Loyalist 4 representative). 
Finally, it was also apparent from both Loyalist and Republican interviewees that in 
the context of peace programmes and dealing with issues of the conflict, that the 
walls were viewed by many as one of the last difficult and symbolic issues to 
discuss: 
In its simplest form I think walls have become sexy. We have gone through all 
the dialoguewe have brought opposing groups together, done the 
residentialsso all we have left are the peace walls (Loyalist 2 
representative). 
There was a degree of scepticism from the interviewees as to the motivations that 
were driving momentum in this area. For some it was simply about fixing attention 
on a conflict related topic so that they could be seen to be adapting to new issues.   
Summary  
It was evident that respondents considered several events and incidents as symbolic 
in the context of developing interest on the issue of peace walls. However, they 
differed on how much emphasis should be placed on each of them. It was obvious 
that the symbols such as Torrens could be interpreted very differently and used by 
specific communities as a tool to promote one agenda and discredit another. There 
was also a consensus from respondents that the actual peace walls were a symbol of 
the conflict and the segregation and division within large parts of the city. They 
were also symbolic of the security services inability to develop alternatives to the 
barriers and fences when responding to the violence and disorder. What is evident 
from the findings is that symbols themselves are not enough to raise public and 
political awareness on the issue peace walls. Therefore one must also consider the 
different methods that elected representatives and government officials hear about 
and our educated about the impacts of the implementation of their policies.  
5.5 Policy feedback 
Essentially policy feedback refers to the methods that government representatives 
receive information about existing and policies and strategies that they are 
responsible for. The feedback is a way of raising issues with those tasked with 
developing policy, and highlighting problems or successes, which may influence the 
direction of future policies. According to Kingdon (1995) there are three main 
methods available to democratic governments with regards to receiving feedback, 
which are formal, informal and bureaucratic mechanisms. The formal and informal 
are primarily concerned with government officials meeting with constituents and 
hearing first hand the impact of specific policies. In the context of this thesis there 
were only two comments that could be construed as relating to these feedback 
mechanisms. According to one interviewee who was also a Junior Minister in the NI 
Executive, his constituents were not raising the issue of peace walls with me, which 
is the difficulty (Junior Minister). The second comment was in reference to an 
apparent confusion among government representatives on the ownership of the 
peace walls. One NGO respondent indicated that they had attempted to raise the 
issue of a particular peace wall with local officials, but there was confusion as to the 
ownership of the peace wall: 
There are somewhere in the region of 82 barriers or defensible structures 
within the city, and that includes the 42 peace walls that the department of 
Justice owns. But who can tell the difference, and whose (statutory 
departments) responsibility are the others, is it the NIHE or BCC? (NGO 8 
representative). 
The vagueness towards the subject area meant that it was difficult for organisations 
to approach the correct government department and raise issues that related to a 
specific barrier or peace wall. The remainder of this section is concerned with the 
third area of feedback, which refers to the bureaucratic mechanisms. According to 
Kingdon (1995) those tasked with delivering programmes and operating within a 
specific policy field are in a unique position to analyse and report on the impacts 
and effects of policies on the ground. They also have an opportunity, when 
appropriate to make recommendations on ways to address policy issues. In this case 
several respondents indicated that the peace walls had negative implications for the 
delivery of services across the city. According to a government official there was a 
culture of acceptance were people simply got on with their responsibilities: 
Once they were put up there was no strategy for taking them down. So over 
the years people, communities, government departments and agencies and 
even businesses tended to do planning on the basis that the walls were just 
there (Government 7 representative). 
A recent study by Deloitte (2008) commissioned by Belfast City Council examined 
the implications of a divided city on service delivery. The study reported similar 
views, and noted that there had been an acceptance of the division, with agencies 
simply continuing to deliver services. Conversations then shifted onto to the area of 
housing, regeneration and planning in a divided city. According to interviewees the 
peace walls had a significant impact on the local housing authoritys ability to 
regenerate existing housing estates and develop new housing stock: 
In pure planning terms, and in pure landlord addressing housing need terms, 
it hugely gets in the way of delivering good housing solutions to a pure 
housing need problem (Government 5 representative). 
Further conversations on the delivery of services revealed that some interviewees 
viewed the peace walls as exacerbating the problem of division.  They were adamant 
that a new policy for the peace walls would not address the issues around housing: 
So in planning terms and delivering housing solutions, the peace walls are a 
massive hindrance to us as a housing provider, a massive hindrance. But the 
reality is, it is not within our gift as a single agency to be able to take those 
walls down, because the reality is that those walls are in the mind 
(Government 5 representative).  
A further argument put forward from elected representatives and service providers, 
was that the current practice of a separate but equal approach to the 
implementation of certain policies was in the long-term, unsustainable. The current 
economic climate has meant that government agencies are constantly re-evaluating 
policies and strategies, and the cost of segregation is having a real impact:  
It is unsustainable for us to live in a two-track society. We cannot continue to 
duplicate services and we cannot continue to duplicate provision. We are 
denying our community good quality service because we are providing 
double of everything (Alliance MP). 
The financial implications of division have also been articulated in the research 
findings from Boujenko et al (2008) and their analysis of mobility and connectivity 
issues facing service providers in Belfast. They acknowledged the negative economic 
impacts of accessing services, delivering public transport and encouraging mobility 
within a city where large parts were divided along sectarian boundaries. One final 
point in relation to the feedback mechanisms concerns the implications that Direct 
Rule may have had on the ability of local civil servants to report policy feedback to 
the elected representatives. Kingdon (1995) felt that one of their most telling 
contributions to the political agenda was the awareness of civil servants to 
document and report problems that have emerged from their experiences of 
administering a programme. However, the fact that the British government through 
the NIO controlled the development and implementation of public policy in 
Northern Ireland may have restricted opportunities for local administrators to 
provide critical feedback on policies that originated in Westminster.  
Summary  
As peace walls have only recently become a policy matter for the devolved 
government there were minimal comments from respondents on current attempts 
to raise the issue directly with government officials. Interestingly, the one comment 
that did emerge focused on the issue of ownership and the confusion within 
government departments and statutory agencies as to who had policy responsibility 
for the peace walls. The feedback from those tasked with implementing and 
delivering government policy revealed that the peace walls had a negative impact 
across policy areas, especially in the delivery of statutory services within the city. 
The respondents clearly drew attention to the difficulties they encounter, and 
identified the point of origin as the peace walls and the resulting segregation and 
division.  
5.6 From a condition to a problem 
As Kingdon (1995) noted, there are significant differences between a condition and 
a problem. Conditions can be things that people put up with on a regular basis such 
as bad weather, poverty, taxes etc. However, conditions only become defined as 
problems when one comes to believe that something should be done about them. In 
this case, the question is whether peace walls are a condition or a problem? To 
better understand the significance of this question the subject of peace walls has 
been examined through three themes that Kingdom (1995) felt determined whether 
an issue was a condition or a problem. The following section is structured around 
the three themes of relevant comparisons, values and classification.  
Relevant comparisons 
Essentially, drawing comparisons with peoples expectations has the potential to 
raise an issue or condition into the area of being defined as a problem. In this 
context, the question one is asking, is whether the outcomes to date from the peace 
and political process have met with peoples expectations? As one respondent 
concluded: 
Someone said recently that Northern Ireland was being held up as this 
beacon of hope in terms of conflict resolution. But really all we have done is 
manage the conflict over the last fifteen years by keeping people apart, not by 
getting people together (Alliance MP). 
There were mixed views from respondents with several indicating that the peace 
walls were not a positive reflection of how far society had developed. However, 
there were others who felt that the walls were a necessary evil and something that 
society would have to contend with for many years to come. It was interesting to 
note the comments of one respondent who was part of a delegation that linked in 
with NGOs from other conflict regions to share models of good practice: 
I remember attending a meeting in North Belfast with the President of 
Burundi. The officials and himself had earlier been up in Stormont hearing 
about our wonderful peace process. They then wanted to see some 
community projects so they took him up to Forthspring. On the way, they 
passed by the peace walls and you should have seen their faces, they were 
almost offended that that these people up in Stormont had suggested that 
they could teach Burundi about peace, they were saying you live like this? 
(NGO 8 representative). 
Several respondents from both a Loyalist and Republican background indicated that 
the peace walls were a constant reference point when they met with international 
organisations and political delegations. The same interviewees also distinguished 
between the political process at the macro level and the peace process at the micro 
level: 
The agreements and politics mean that they sit together in the executive 
under so-called power sharing. The reality for us is that these walls are 
supporting the peace on the ground (Republican 3 representative). 
According to all of the respondents any understanding of the relationship between 
the peace walls and the peace process was entirely down to a personal 
interpretation. It was also stated that it was unhelpful and problematic to compare 
Northern Ireland with other regions, cities and countries that experienced a conflict 
and undergone their own peace and political processes. The fact that Belfast had 
peace walls did not mean that it had not successfully addressed a number of conflict 
related issues. Furthermore, it was felt that government officials and political 
commentators had to realise that not all peace walls or the issues relating to them 
were similar. Each peace wall in Belfast had to be seen in an individual context, 
which made comparisons with other peace walls in extremely Belfast difficult. 
Values  
According to Kingdon (1995) the value that one brings to an observation is 
important in any subsequent attempt at problem definition. Under this theme the 
values placed on the subject of peace walls will be examined through three very 
different perspectives, namely the government and Loyalist and Republican 
representatives. This allows for a clear understanding of their views along with the 
rationale and motivating factors that influence their judgement and subsequent 
position on peace walls.  
Government  
Those interviewees presenting a governments perspective indicated that the 
subject of peace walls was very much a community-based issue. There was a sense 
that any decision-making was to be restricted within the confines of a community 
forum. The government would not act or support any policy changes to the peace 
walls without the wishes and support from the communities in which the walls were 
located: 
Local solutions to local problems, and of course it has to be agreed by the 
people living either side of those walls, because they are the people who are 
directly affected by them. And this is not something that government can 
come and try and impose a solution (Unionist MLA). 
The momentum and willingness to address the issue of peace walls had to be seen to 
be coming from the community. Essentially, the responsibility was on the 
community to raise awareness on the subject of the peace walls and bring it to the 
attention of the government:  
I would be up for taking the peace walls down but only with the agreement 
from the people in the area (Republican MLA). 
These comments provide an indication on how the devolved government and 
statutory agencies value the issue of peace walls. There is a strong sense that they 
consider this to be absent from their political mandate, and any change to that 
approach will be determined by community action and not a change to government 
thinking.   
Loyalist 
It was evident from the outset that respondents from a Loyalist perspective 
considered this to be more than a conversation about peace walls. To understand 
their perspectives on the subject of peace walls it is important to consider the 
experiences of their community within a wider political framework. Earlier in the 
chapter the issue of Torrens and its symbolic meaning was discussed. According to 
respondents there were a growing number of Unionist and Loyalist communities 
which maintained that any conversation on the subject of peace walls was actually 
about a threat to their culture, history and community identity in Belfast:  
There are many areas that were once Protestant that are no longer 
Protestant but are instead Catholic. But I dont think there are any that I can 
think of that were once Catholic and are now Protestant (Loyalist 4 
representative). 
There is a growing fear within these communities that there is a Republican agenda 
to remove Protestants from Belfast. They point to the changing landscape of the city 
and the significant increase in Catholics, Nationalists and Republicans that now 
reside within the city. Several respondents consider peace walls as not only a 
structure to protect their homes from violent attacks, but also a mechanism to 
protect their cultural identity: 
Rightly or wrongly there still would be reference made about what happened 
in Torrens, so the people would see the walls as being if you like a buttress 
against Nationalist territory increasing to the detriment of the small Unionist 
community (Loyalist 3 representative).  
The dominant view is one of fear around the removal of peace walls, because 
for so long the walls guaranteed stability and territory (Loyalist 7 
representative). 
According to the interviewees the events of Torrens are as real today as they were 
six years ago. Those incidents are often discussed within Loyalist communities with 
the argument being projected that it was all about addressing the housing needs of 
Catholics. Several respondents even pointed out that the peace wall that had once 
protected Protestant families in Torrens had recently been knocked down to 
improve access for Nationalist families now living in the area: 
You saw what happened in Torrens. Within two years of all the Protestants 
moving out, driven out over 24 hours, the area is now redeveloped for 
Nationalist families and the peace wall has been knocked down to give them 
access onto the Old Park road (Loyalist 3 representative).  
Concerns around territory, culture and identity dominated the discussions, and 
interviewees indicated that these were the recurring themes they encountered 
when participating in community forums and meetings. As one respondent stated, 
perception is the reality within these communities, so one can conclude that there 
doesnt have to be a Republican agenda, people within the Loyalist community 
already believe that there is one. Considering all these issues and factors, the 
Loyalist respondents maintained that conversations on peace walls had the 
potential to be detrimental to their own community.  
The falling numbers within the Protestant community in Belfast was discussed 
extensively, and it was acknowledged that one consequence for those that remained 
was a feeling of vulnerability. It was recognised that the change in demographics 
was not solely the result of intimidation and attacks, but that a large number had 
simply moved because of new employment opportunities and better housing. 
However, the common narrative within these areas was that they were a community 
under threat: 
There is no argument that Nationalists in North Belfast need housing, and 
people here have no problem with them getting houses. What they do have a 
problem with and a fear, is this territory, expansion and contraction and 
Nationalist areas will continue to expand at the expense of the Protestant 
areas and there is this fear that this ongoing process of continually chipping 
away that literally puts their very existence in jeopardy (Loyalist 2 
representative). 
The value that Loyalists place on the subject of peace walls appears to be heavily 
influenced by past experiences and political scaremongering from Unionist parties. 
However, there is no doubt that the feelings of insecurity and fear of losing an 
identity and culture shaped there current thinking, perspectives and attitudes 
towards peace walls.  
Republican  
Discussions with Republican respondents revealed a number of different values that 
they placed on the subject of peace walls. The two most frequently referred to were 
housing need and the regeneration of communities. There was a clear sense from 
respondents that the housing issue which related to the shortage of housing in 
Nationalist and Republican was of particular concern:  
We are at saturation point, there is nowhere else to buildthere are these 
areas of wasteland that are out there that could be used, that could be shared 
(Republican 6 representative). 
One respondent used the example of where they lived to illustrate the sense of anger 
and frustration that existed towards the peace walls. Many within the community 
viewed the walls as barriers that prevented them from expanding into neighbouring 
Brownfield sites that were located in Unionist communities on the other side of the 
peace wall: 
Take them away to fuck. We cant build anymore. Ardoyne is at the point of 
implosion. We have limited permeability into the city centre, we have to deal 
with them every day, get rid of them (Republican 7 representative). 
Further respondents noted that the expansion of their communities would allow for 
regeneration programmes and subsequently address health and social issues that 
were prevalent within their neighbourhoods: 
It is claustrophobic. We have overdeveloped Nationalist areas and 
overcrowding because of the walls. The areas are not allowed to breath. All 
the indices on poverty, neglect and deprivation all highlight the high density 
of house building within any nationalist communities as one of the factors 
that affects quality of life (Republican 4 representative). 
The NIHE statistics reinforce the argument that there is a significant need for 
housing within Nationalist areas in Belfast. Recent figures reveal that by 2012 in 
North Belfast, Catholics will make up 95% of people on the waiting lists. Of the 1362 
housing units required in the area, 1291 indicated that they were from the Catholic 
community (Hughes, 2011). All of the interviewees acknowledged the housing crisis 
in North Belfast and felt that the conversation had to move beyond the merits of 
taking down or keeping up a peace wall, and instead, had to look at ways in which 
housing need could be addressed without alienating the Unionist community.  
In drawing together the government, Loyalist and Republican perspectives it was 
clear that there were significant differences from respondents. Any value that the 
government places on the peace walls is influenced and shaped by the actions of the 
community. However, the values that Loyalists hold towards the peace walls are 
dictated by historical events and a diminishing population. On the other hand, 
Republicans are more concerned by the restrictive nature of the peace walls that 
appear to be affecting their ability to expand and address the needs of their own 
community.  
Classification  
How peace walls are interpreted has a significant impact on there ability to move 
onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. Several respondents when 
pressed on how one should frame discussions about peace walls had mixed views.   
There was a general consensus that any analysis or discussion had to move beyond 
a one-dimensional view of considering peace walls as simply bricks and mortar. 
There was a range of opinions expressed, with a large number contending that the 
overall context of the conflict had to be included within any analysis on the peace 
walls. As one elected representative noted, the events of the previous forty years 
took place throughout Northern Ireland, and that: 
The peace wall is just the symptom. I do not believe that the walls were put 
up because those communities were worse than anywhere else. They were 
put up because those communities are on the front line of whats going on in 
wider society. So the idea that you put all of the onus on the people who live 
right beside the peace walls to deliver the change is unfair and unjust cause 
society has created the situation that the walls are there (Alliance MP). 
All of the respondents felt that any classification of peace walls had to be viewed 
alongside the context of division and sectarianism that was dominant throughout 
working class communities in Belfast:  
This is what is significant about the deconstruction of walls. The easy bit is 
taking the wall down; the difficult bit is changing the mindsets of people 
(Unionist MLA). 
The meaning attached to the walls was further explored, with several interviewees 
indicating that the peace walls were a visible manifestation of the past and the 
conflict. Therefore any type of classification or labelling process could not ignore the 
sectarian, paramilitary and state violence that took place within and between 
communities that resided either side of the peace walls:  
Peace walls are about the past. If you start talking about peace walls then you 
have to start asking why did they go up. Peace walls are about guys in 
motorbikes driving through and killing a woman in a chemist. Peace walls are 
about guys driving across one community into another and planting a bomb 
and blowing people up in a chip shop. Peace walls are about why did 
Bombay Street get burnt down? There are an awful lot of hard questions 
around peace walls and people are not up front about them (NGO 2 
representative). 
In staying with the theme of classification, an interesting narrative emerged around 
respondents views on whether the subject of peace walls was something that was 
synonymous with Belfast, or instead located within a larger context such as 
Northern Ireland. The question was put to them whether they thought that this was 
an issue that people throughout the country were familiar with? There was a sense 
that as far as levels of information and knowledge were concerned, peace walls were 
something that generated minimal interest outside of Belfast: 
I dont think this is a national issue, not in the same way policing was. It is 
also more pertinent to those people living in those areas affected by them 
(peace walls) on a daily basis. It is not particularly pertinent to people living 
in South Belfast or Newcastle or Ballycastle (NGO 5 representative). 
Interestingly one respondent felt that the subject of peace walls was not necessarily 
even a Belfast wide issue. Their personal knowledge and experience of working in 
Loyalist interface communities had informed them of the various local perspectives 
that existed on peace walls: 
Just one street back from the interface, people are unconcerned, just as long 
as its not in their back gardenwhile someone across the road is sleeping 
with fire extinguishers beside their beds (Loyalist 4 representative).  
The respondents indicated that a limited awareness and understanding of the peace 
walls had the potential to influence the ability of local communities to raise it as a 
policy issue in a constructive and meaningful way at the political level. Interviewees 
indicated that as an issue it could be perceived as something that relates to a small 
number of communities in pockets of territory in Belfast, which has no direct impact 
on the lives of the majority of people in Northern Ireland: 
Most people who dont see those walls on a daily basis dont careso as a 
population as a whole this is not something that people are clamouring for as 
a major issue (NGO 6 representative). 
How one chooses to categorise peace walls is a sensitive issue and one very much 
open to interpretation. However, there was a sense from respondents that the walls 
themselves were very much a small part of the debate and that it was the issues 
surrounding the walls which had raised the most questions to date.  
Summary  
The discussions with interviewees revealed the difficulties in determining whether 
peace walls were a condition or a problem, as the very issue is open to a large 
degree of interpretation. The themes of comparisons, values and classifications 
revealed the complex nature of the subject and it became evident that a discussion 
on the peace walls can very quickly transcend into a debate on a number of diverse 
socio-political issues and topics often unrelated directly to the walls. 
5.7 What is the problem?  
This chapter concludes with a brief analysis as to whether peace walls should be 
considered a problem that requires a government response. Although, several 
respondents acknowledged that peace walls were a problem that needed addressed, 
they also dropped in caveats where they could envisage peace walls not being 
viewed as a problem by the government, and it is important to state these. Firstly, 
several interviewees indicated that interest in the peace walls was simply a fad that 
would quickly disappear and be replaced by something else associated with the 
conflict. This resonates strongly with the views of Kingdon (1995) who prior to 
developing his agenda setting approach was influenced by Downs (1972) and the 
issue-attention cycle. According to both theorists, it takes time, effort and the 
mobilization of many actors along with the expenditure of political resources to 
keep an item prominent on the political agenda. A lot of the time problems simply 
fade from public view because a short period of awareness and optimism gives way 
to a realisation of the financial and social costs of action. Therefore, the realisation of 
the potential financial and political costs in an intervention may dissuade 
government action on the issue of peace walls.  
Secondly, there was a sense from respondents that there was an acceptance of the 
peace walls, and inevitability about their existence. They had been up for over forty 
years and nothing had been done to begin the process of removing them: 
They have been up a generation and nothing has been achieved, what makes 
now any different. They will most likely be forgotten about in a few years and 
something else will occupy peoples minds (NGO 5 representative). 
The apparent normalisation of the peace walls by local communities, service 
providers and government departments was discussed in great detail by 
interviewees and was a key factor in several respondents maintaining that the peace 
walls would quickly disappear from news cycles and policy debates: 
This does not command the symbolic power of say the removal of the Berlin 
Wall, which was dividing a city. These walls do not divide a city; they create 
and make it more difficult to get around bits of it and they are visibly 
unattractive. They are not causing enough of a harm that would generate a 
city consensus (NGO 3 representative). 
Thirdly, respondents felt that the relative inexperience of the devolved 
administration, along with the restraints on the NI Executives budget would result 
in other public policy issues focusing the attention of policy makers and government 
officials: 
The peace walls arent a priority; why would a politician get involved in 
something that is going to take years to resolve, and by that time they 
wouldnt even be in power. They have much more pressing issues 
(Republican 6 representative). 
These comments are important in building a picture around how peace walls are 
interpreted across the different government, community and voluntary sectors. 
They differ from previous perspectives which articulate the problematic nature of 
the walls and instead offer an alternative view on the issue.  
5.8 Conclusion   
This chapter has examined the various methods that government officials and 
communities adopt to fix their attention onto a specific issue and communicate it. 
The analysis considered whether the interviewees thought peace walls were a 
problem or a condition. In the last decade there has been an increase in the use of 
statistics and published independent research which has provided government 
officials and the general public with a wealth of information on the legacy of the 
conflict. This data has often inadvertently drawn attention onto the peace walls, 
which has illustrated the negative impacts of the walls on the communities that live 
closest to them. At the local level the statistics highlight issues of marginalisation, 
unemployment, low educational attainment, anti-social behaviour, and drug and 
alcohol dependency. However, in the international arena the peace walls have come 
to represent a litmus test as to how far the political institutions have come since the 
beginning of the peace and political processes. 
Aside from the problem indicators there have been several focusing events that 
have increased attention on the peace walls and raised questions as to their 
continued existence fifteen years after the first paramilitary ceasefires. The power of 
symbolism cannot be underestimated, especially in Northern Ireland where 
meaning and interpretation has been synonymous with historical and contemporary 
political and social events. The symbols outlined in this chapter have contributed to 
the growing awareness and momentum on the subject of peace walls. They have 
elevated the discussions to a higher platform and allowed people to focus their 
views and opinions within a constructive and safe framework. For example, they can 
now draw comparisons between Belfast and Berlin, and question the impact of the 
devolution of powers back to the NI Assembly. Alongside the symbolism the 
bureaucratic feedback mechanism highlighted the complexities in delivering 
services in a divided city, and the difficulties with attempting to adhere to the vision 
of a shared city while physical walls continued to demarcate territory.  
Finally, focusing on whether peace walls were a condition or problem revealed the 
different dynamics and motivations that exist within the different protagonists that 
have been identified within the thesis has crucial to the conversation on the peace 
walls. The government representatives deem this a community issue and one that 
requires limited or no intervention on their behalf. For both Loyalists and 
Republicans the discussion is more than being about bricks and mortar and whether 
the walls should remain or be removed. The former is concerned with issues that 
relate to their identity and culture and their mere existence as a community. 
However, the latter contend that this is about housing need and being able to 
respond to the demands of an expanding population. The question remains as to 
whether these competing views and agendas can be reconciled. The next chapter 
explores the various approaches and positions available within a policy context that 
may address peace walls if they are considered a problem that requires some form 
of government intervention.  
6. Multiple Streams - The Policies  
What are the different ideas, proposals and strategies that exist on peace walls? 
More importantly, who are the individuals and organisations proposing these ideas? 
And what are the influencing and motivating factors that both captivate and 
encourage these individuals and organisations to get involved in such a politically 
sensitive and divisive topic? Through the application of Kingdons (1995) analogy of 
the policy primeval soup it is possible to consider these questions by identifying 
the key actors that are members of a policy community on peace walls. The chapter 
examines their roles in this policy community, and concludes with a review of a 
policy on peace walls measured against Kingdons five criteria that if met could 
elevate an issue high onto a governments decision-making agenda.  
6.1 Policy communities 
To understand the types of alternatives, strategies and policies that exist in relation 
to the issue of peace walls, one must first recognise the central actors associated 
with the issue. Kingdons (1995) model used the pretext of policy communities to 
illustrate the individuals and organisations involved in the agenda-setting process. 
These policy communities consist of individuals and organisations that are 
considered specialists in different policy areas. There is a degree of flexibility within 
the policy community, with members drawn from different institutions and state 
and non-state organisations. Although the backgrounds of members may be 
different, they are bound by their concern, interest and attention with one specific 
area of policy problems (Forren and Hahn, 2006).  
This thesis has identified a policy community for peace walls, which includes five 
types of specialists that are engaged on issues that directly or indirectly relate to the 
issue. There were those within government who consisted of civil servants, elected 
representatives and policy advisors; secondly, individuals drawn from the academic 
sector; thirdly, members from the community and voluntary sector; fourthly, 
representatives from the Republican community who consisted of community and 
interface workers along with ex-combatants; and fifthly, representatives from the 
Loyalist community who also consisted of community and interface workers and ex-
combatants (Figure 3).  
Figure 8: Specialists in the peace walls policy community 
According to Kingdon (1995) a key feature of any policy community was the high 
level of interaction between the various members within it. He illustrated this point 
by often referring to incidents that occurred when he was conducting his own 
research. At the time he was examining the membership of a policy community 
associated with the issue of transport within the US administration. While 
conducting interviews with members of the policy community, the interviewees 
were often interrupted through telephone calls or requests through the secretary. 
Kingdon noted that those interrupting the interviews were individuals that had 
previously participated in the research. It was interesting to note that similar events 
occurred during the fieldwork stage of this thesis. On two occasions interviews had 
Loyalist 
reps. 
Republican 
reps. 
Government 
reps. 
Academics 
to be temporarily halted because of information requests made by telephone calls, 
by individuals who had also participated in the research. One can concur with the 
Multiple Streams Approach in that more often than not, the circle of specialists in a 
policy area is extremely small and intimate.   
The following section looks more closely at the five types of specialists that have 
been identified as participating in the policy community on peace walls. This brief 
introduction to the policy community will enable the reader to identify the different 
rationale and agendas employed by the specialists that influence the alternatives, 
strategies and ideas on peace walls that are discussed throughout the latter stages of 
the chapter.  
NI Government representatives 
According to those that worked within the NI government aligned to the 
government, peace walls should only be removed at the pace of the communities 
that live either side of them. Furthermore, it was not considered the governments 
responsibility to publicly raise the subject of peace walls, or more importantly 
challenge communities as to why there was still a need for the construction of the 
walls. Essentially, interviewees were of the opinion that the NI government would 
not force a peace walls strategy or policy onto communities. Instead, the 
governments roles and responsibilities should be to listen to what local residents 
are articulating and provide guidance and leadership where and when appropriate:  
 I would be up for taking the peace walls down but only with the 
 agreement from the people in the area (Junior Minister). 
 Local solutions to local problems. This is not something that government 
 can come and impose a resolution (Unionist MLA).  
These views have recently been articulated within the devolved governments draft 
programme Cohesion, Sharing and Integration that was open for public 
consultation during the summer of 2010. A section of the document refers 
specifically to peace walls, and states that decisions can only be taken when the 
process has reached the point where people from the local community are ready 
(OFMDFM, 2010:32). There is no evidence to suggest that the NI Executive considers 
itself responsible for facilitating community dialogue on the continued rationale for 
peace walls or to encourage the community to challenge the polices that have 
resulted in extensive segregation and division across the city.   
The interesting aspect of the governments position towards peace walls was that if 
agreement was reached on the ground on the issue, then how the government 
would implement a policy to address the communitys needs. Several respondents 
were under the impression that the structures within government would hinder the 
development of a specific peace walls policy: 
 One of the barriers to policy development and to policy implementation is 
 the silo mentality. It can start at the Executive where you have ministerial 
 competition. I would see it as rivalries that then cascade down to 
 departmental thinking. So the risk is that a department can become 
 aligned with the decision of the minister and his/her party (Government 7  
representative).  
Furthermore, it was noted that the issue of peace walls had the potential to be 
classified as a single policy issue, as opposed to a collective issue that the entire NI 
Executive had an integral role in and a responsibility for: 
 A lot of departments would not see peace walls as being part of their 
 agenda. From my experience it was difficult for government agencies to 
 figure out what role they had to play in bringing down the peace walls 
 (Government 3 representative).  
Finally, several interviewees were critical of the governments position and 
contended that it was extremely tokenistic. Essentially, the government could 
publicly recognise that segregation and division existed, and participate in policy 
discussions on the issue, without having to commit resources or stake political 
capital on making actual decisions. According to respondents, the NI government 
were abdicating responsibility, and leaving the outcome of any future policy process 
with the community: 
 The government say the right things, and put it out for public 
 consultationbut there is no commitment to do anything, they just hand 
 it off to those people that live beside the walls, the same people with no 
 experience of  making policy (NGO 4 representative). 
This brief analysis of the governments position within the policy community 
reiterates the fact that they do not have a coherent strategy or policy for peace walls. 
It also confirms the view that the devolved administration is relatively 
inexperienced in participating in a policy process on peace walls. Therefore, one 
may assume that the government are engaged in a watching brief, focusing on the 
other actors within the policy community.   
Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) 
The respondents indicated that specialists from NGOs had been involved in 
responding to conflict related issues, including those pertaining directly and 
indirectly to peace walls for a number of years. Several interviewees referred to 
organisations such as the Community Relations Council, the Belfast Interface Trust 
and the Belfast Interface Project as examples of NGOs that have been at the forefront 
of raising issues and facilitating engagement between the government and 
communities. The general conclusion from respondents of NGOs was that they were 
advocates for the removal of peace walls, but were undecided on the exact processes 
required to instigate such a policy that did not affect the safety of communities:  
 This is going to take resources, who is going to pay for it? It needs 
 government and local support (NGO 5 representative).  
In the context of the NGOs involvement with the policy community, respondents 
were of the opinion that they enhanced the debate and articulated different 
positions to those being formed by the community and government representatives. 
Furthermore, interviewees felt that the NGOs could objectively contribute to any 
process from a position of neutrality, in that they had no vested interest in the 
outcome of any peace walls policy:  
They have been involved in these types of issues for yearsthey know 
 what works and doesnt work, and they have the added advantage of 
 having no baggage (NGO 6 representative).  
The respondents alluded to work NGOs had been doing with ex-combatants as an 
example of their positive contribution to politically sensitive issues, and their ability 
to work in areas that were deemed problematic for members of the public sector 
and government. For example, reports compiled by Interaction (2007) and research 
conducted by Shirlow (2008) provide evidence of the important relationships that 
have been established between NGOs and ex-combatants in response to conflict 
related issues. There was a general acceptance from respondents that NGO 
representation within the policy community was important in regards to improving 
the group dynamics, but ultimately they were limited in what they could contribute.  
Academics  
Several respondents alluded to academics as having a significant role within the 
policy community on peace walls. According to one interviewee, academics and 
researchers could articulate opinions and positions that were not clouded by 
emotion, or be perceived as being sympathetic to a particular political party or 
community:  
 Academics can sometimes offer a different perspective on politically 
 sensitive issuesthey look beyond the tribal divisions and see the 
 practical issues and the problem (Republican 4 representative). 
A number of interviewees had personal experiences of working with academics and 
researchers in relation to the development of action plans, and evaluations of 
previous initiatives and programmes that engaged on issues of sectarianism, 
paramilitarism, interface violence, and victims issues. The expertise and knowledge 
of the academics had assisted them in both addressing issues and raising awareness 
of them to funders and government agencies. A brief review of academias 
contribution to raising debate and awareness on public policy issues in Northern 
Ireland show their importance to the process. For example, academics such as Knox 
and Darby were central to the content development and publication of the A Shared 
Future document (2005), which was a policy and strategic framework for Good 
Relations in Northern Ireland. More recently, academics and researchers at Queens 
have published several articles and reports on issues that relate to segregation, 
division and the development of urban policy in a spatially divided city. One such 
report was published by Gaffikin et al (2008) Planning Shared Space for a Shared 
Future which provided a number of recommendations for planners and policy-
makers on methods of addressing division within Belfast. Furthermore, academics 
at the University of Ulster, namely McQueen et al (2008) published research titled 
Your Space or Mine? a co-influence approach to shared future urban environments 
in interface communities. This work considered the role of planners in the 
redevelopment of interface communities. Aside from recognising the positive role of 
academics and researchers, several interviewees from the community sector did 
indicate that there had been occasions that communities had felt let down by 
researchers. They had previous experiences were representatives from academic 
institutions had conducted interviews, focus groups and observed relationships 
within their community, then completed their work, and never reported back to the 
community. The community felt that they had received no benefits from the 
research, and this had now influenced their views and perspectives of academics 
and researchers.  
Loyalist and Republican representatives 
The fourth and fifth groups of specialists in the policy community were from the 
Loyalist and Republican communities that resided alongside the peace walls. For the 
most part they consisted of community representatives, interface workers, and ex-
combatants. Collectively, they acknowledged the significance of peace walls in a 
society that had undergone a successful peace and political process, but there was 
also a realisation that Loyalist and Republicans had very different views and 
opinions on the peace walls (this has previously been alluded to in Chapter Five). 
However, there was also a consensus that factors and themes such as community 
safety and security were core concerns within both Loyalist and Republican 
communities.  
Attention then turned to the levels of engagement between the different groups, and 
there was an acknowledgement from both Loyalist and Republican interviewees 
that although they represent very different constituents they have developed 
positive working relationships over the last decade: 
 There is a level of trust and a level of co-operation that keeps the peace 
 through communication and contacts that they have developed over time. 
 The power brokers, the gatekeepers have nurtured these relationships 
 (NGO 2 representative). 
This position reinforces the research conclusions from Byrne and Monaghan (2008) 
who documented the increased number of partnerships between Loyalist and 
Republicans at interface areas in Belfast in relation to issues associated with 
policing and justice. In relation to this thesis, discussions with respondents then 
focused on the apparent differences that existed within the Loyalist and Republican 
specialists towards the issue of peace walls. Issues pertaining to personal safety and 
the reduction in communal violence were prominent in the views of specialists from 
both the Loyalist and Republican communities. They were clear that the removal of 
peace walls was off the agenda unless community concerns on safety were 
incorporated into any strategy or policy process: 
We need to determine what conditions need to be put in place for the walls to 
become obsolete. How do we create sufficient confidence and the right 
conditions for this process to happen? (Republican 5 representative).  
The policy community which harbours the Loyalist and Republican specialists 
provides the environment and opportunity to determine whether the competing 
needs of both of these communities can be reconciled in some way: 
 Loyalists are protecting their sense of community and identity that exists 
 within their areaswhile Republicans have massive concerns around 
 housing need and regeneration (NGO 1 representative). 
Regeneration was a central theme that bounded both Loyalists and Republicans 
together. Both Loyalist and Republican interviewees noted the high levels of 
unemployment, the extreme levels of health and social deprivation along with the 
anti-social behaviour that was prevalent across all of their communities. This 
picture resonates with the research findings from Cownie (2008) and his review on 
the quality of life issues facing residents living at an interface in North Belfast. This 
report documented the lack of opportunities, access to services and the risks to the 
health and social well being of Loyalist and Republican residents living in an 
interface community. 
This brief section has provided a snapshot of the specialists identified in the policy 
community on peace walls. In recent years several of the specialists have 
participated in the Inter-Agency Working Group (5.4) and other forums which have 
led to the development of proposals and ideas as to the most practical methods of 
alleviating the negativity of the peace walls. These ideas, solutions and alternatives 
will be explained in more detail throughout the remainder of this chapter. However, 
before an exploration of the factors which motivate and shape these ideas it is 
important to recognise the wider contextual position of peace walls in Northern 
Ireland. One must situate peace walls alongside the larger framework of two cultural 
phenomena that emerged out of the conflict, namely, the so-called peace industry 
and gatekeepers. These two phenomena have a direct influence on any 
contemporary discussion on where peace walls are located on the NI government 
agenda. 
6.2 The peace industry 
According to respondents, the peace walls and the violence and disorder 
synonymous within the interface communities has created and sustained an 
industry that has been resourced by international and local donors since the first 
paramilitary cease-fires in 1995. These assumptions have been well documented 
with MacGinty (2008) noting that Northern Ireland had benefited from massive 
amounts of peace-support funding. This financial support up to 2007 was quantified 
by Deloitte (2007) who concluded that the EU had provided 640 million through 
Peace funding since 1995 for peace and reconciliation programmes across Northern 
Ireland and the border counties. Furthermore, the International Fund for Ireland 
(IFI) of which the US administration is the largest benefactor has also contributed 
up to $500 million since the early 1990s in the pursuit of peace and development of 
regeneration programmes. A significant part of this funding has resulted in local 
people within interface communities being employed as community workers, 
interface workers, youth workers, and development workers (Archick, 2011). In one 
sense this has meant that local people are aware of the geography within the area 
and the specific issues impacting on the community, so can begin the process of 
addressing them immediately. A further element of the funding has been the 
promotion of cross-community partnerships and collaboration to work and action 
plans, which has led to a degree of familiarity and consistency among the employed 
workers across the interfaces. However, interviewees also noted that individuals 
and organisations working in this sector had the potential to become complacent 
and stale as they had been responding to similar issues on a regular basis over many 
years: 
For me the whole peace process has stagnated, we are still having the  same 
conversations we had five, ten years ago, and we havent taken that big 
quantum leap (Loyalist 2 representative). 
There was some concern from respondents that if peace walls were assigned into a 
similar category as other day-to-day conflict related issues such as interface 
violence, sectarianism, and victims issues, that innovative dialogue would become 
absent, and any movement on pushing the issue onto the political agenda would be 
weighed down by the other legacy issues. Interviewees when pressed on the 
negative consequences of peace funding touched on the rising levels of competition 
among groups at both an intra and inter community level. There was a sense from 
respondents that the increased competition for resources often meant that groups 
were incapable of agreeing long-term strategic plans, and this had the potential to 
affect cross community consensus on issues such as peace walls. There were also 
several dissenting voices on the subject of the funding oversight mechanisms in 
place to manage the programmes and expected out-puts. Respondents felt that 
groups based their funding applications on the needs of the funders and those 
tasked with monitoring the programmes: 
  An industry has been developed around an expertise in making bids for 
 projects (PSNI representative). 
This is a not a new conclusion, for Hamber (2003) has consistently indicated that 
community and voluntary organisations have experience of the language and 
terminology that is used in a funding application process. Therefore they often base 
anticipated outputs and work plans to meet the agendas and needs of funders as 
opposed to addressing the real and practical issues in the community. Among the 
respondents there was also a sense of frustration surrounding the overall, 
quantifiable impacts of peace funding programmes since 1994. Several interviewees 
openly questioned the achievements of the peace money, noting that social 
deprivation, unemployment, violence, sectarianism and segregation continued to 
define Loyalist and Republican working class communities in the city. Buchanan 
(2008) reported similar views, indicating that it was difficult to provide general 
assessments on the impact of conflict transformation projects in Northern Ireland.  
For a number of respondents the peace walls were a visible reminder of the failure 
of the various European and US backed strategies, programmes and initiatives 
implemented to tackle communal differences that existed within the city: 
We have spent all this money, created all these jobs and what have we got to 
show for itpeople arent burying their dead, or visiting loved ones in prison 
but thats itwe have peace walls, poverty and worst of all, no  hope 
(Loyalist 1 representative). 
One further criticism of previous funding initiatives centred on the apparent lack of 
long-term strategic planning in relation to the overall impact of the programmes 
they were funding. It was suggested that funded organisations employed a tick-box 
approach when providing services and training opportunities in interface 
communities. Interviewees maintained that certain groups preferred to engage in 
short term processes which enabled large numbers to participate, but had no long-
term impacts for the community. One respondent used an example of a group that 
provided conflict and mediation training to illustrate their point of how unregulated 
the system was:  
 I am sick and tired of getting emails from people saying that they are 
 putting on training for mediationwho is doing all this training, and what 
 are they doing with it once it has been completed. They have been trained 
 to death, yet I dont see people falling over themselves coming into these 
 areas to sort out interface issues, parades or concerns about territorial 
 control (Republican 3 representative).  
Discussions on the peace industry concluded with observations on the potential 
impact that a decline in funding and resources might have on developing a process 
on peace walls. Several interviewees maintained that current organisations and 
individuals employed by the peace industry were the people with the necessary 
skills, experience and knowledge required to participate in a process on peace walls. 
However, it is widely acknowledged that international funding for peace and 
reconciliation programmes is coming to an end. For example, the EU Programme for 
Peace and Reconciliation is due to conclude in 2013 (SEUPB, 2009). There was a 
concern that the experience and knowledge gained from addressing and engaging 
on conflict-related issues would be lost, which would be to the detriment of any 
attempts to engineer a process on peace walls: 
 The ending of the violence and segregation would be a visible measure of 
 successbut if the funding stops who is going to employ the workers who 
 have the skills and capacity to start a conversation about what should 
 happen to the peace walls? (Republican 6 representative). 
Those tasked with working on issues associated with the peace walls are often 
labelled as maintaining the peace industry, and this brief overview has illustrated 
that there is a degree of cynicism from respondents as to how motivated they are to 
embrace a new process towards peace walls. However, it was also noted that one of 
the reasons for this jaded approach among workers is because of the growth of 
gatekeepers, who constitute a central position within the peace industry. The 
following section discusses in some detail the background to gatekeepers and their 
relevance in the context of a future process to address the peace walls.  
6.3 Gatekeepers 
Discussions on the subject of gatekeepers proved highly sensitive and divisive 
among respondents. There was agreement that gatekeepers could be defined for the 
purposes of this research as individuals within Loyalist and Republican 
communities who are usually community representatives, ex-combatants, or 
community workers. Previous research from Shirlow et al (2004), Gribbin et al 
(2005) and Topping (2008) has alluded to the role of gatekeepers within working 
class Loyalist and Republican communities and noted their importance in the 
successful and unsuccessful delivery and implementation of programmes and 
strategies within their areas. Throughout the duration of the conflict, gatekeepers 
have divided opinion as to their rationale and motivation for being involved in 
community based issues. There are differing opinions towards gatekeepers with 
some maintaining that they have exploited their communities in pursuit of power 
and their own self-interests, while others maintain that gatekeepers facilitated 
engagement and advocated positive interventions that benefited the community as a 
whole (Hall, 2001; McDonal, 2009; Mitchell, 2010). 
Throughout the conflict academics, service providers and government 
representatives often gained access to Loyalist and Republican communities by 
communicating through gatekeepers (Gribbin et al 2005). There was an acceptance 
that an approach to the gatekeepers was the normal channel to gain access to local 
residents in working class communities. However, many of the interviewees raised 
the question that since it was over fifteen years since the first paramilitary cease-
fires, was it still necessary to adopt these methods of engagement? According to one 
respondent, gatekeepers did not represent the views and opinions of the 
community, nor did they have a mandate to make decisions. However, the difficulty 
was how one looked beyond the gatekeepers: 
I am a great believer in the community being involved and becoming right to 
move on. But how do you get to the community and how do you get past the 
gatekeepers? (Government 1 representative). 
There were also comments from several respondents on the association between 
the gatekeepers, the peace industry and a potential policy process on peace walls. In 
a somewhat cynical sense, one interviewee noted that the removal of the peace 
walls could be to the detriment of the gatekeepers: 
 Now a lot of people are doing a lot of good work but it is also apparent that 
 peace walls have created jobs for people, and many of those gatekeepers 
 have become very used to developing actions and receiving funds on the 
 basis that the walls continue rather than come down (Government 
 2representative). 
There were a number of interviewees from both Loyalist and Republican 
backgrounds that were critical of the continued use and recognition that service 
providers, politicians and local residents gave to gatekeepers. They argued that this 
legitimised their position within Loyalist and Republican neighbourhoods, and 
restricted the opportunity for other members of the community to get involved in 
community based issues. Interestingly, this notion of a minority of people dictating 
views and opinions, controlling the narrative and representing the community is not 
unique to Northern Ireland. It was evident in Gaventas (2004) work on community 
representation and involvement in local government in England. This study 
revealed that local residents usually abdicated decision-making powers to a small 
number of people, and those in authority preferred to engage with only a small 
number of people. 
In the context of Belfast, several respondents that did not represent Loyalist or 
Republican communities felt that gatekeepers were continuing to exploit their own 
communities and were preventing local people from participating in any decision-
making processes. This led them to have concerns about who exactly would 
represent communities if and when decisions had to be made about peace walls. 
Interestingly, Mitchell (2008) has conducted extensive research on the legitimacy 
attached to ex-combatants in Loyalist communities and their position as facilitating 
or negating outside access to their communities. In this research, there were 
implications for any policy process as questions could be raised as to whose agenda 
was being promoted, the communities or the gatekeepers. Therefore, one could 
assume that there would be implications for any process in relation to peace walls:  
The gatekeepers are not accountable to the community, and they dont speak 
for the community, we need to knock doors and hear first hand what local 
people are saying (Government 4 representative).  
Whilst the respondents were debating the role of gatekeepers in any future policy 
process on peace walls, one interviewee shared an interesting anecdote that 
illustrated not only the role of gatekeepers but also the parochial nature of politics 
in the city: 
I have actually been in a situation where community representatives 
(gatekeepers) went  directly to the Junior Minister which then undermined 
the government department that had been working with the communityI 
had to come to the defence of the civil servant because the community 
representatives did not understand that a civil servant does not have direct 
access to a Minister and thats what was slowing the process (Government 7 
representative).  
This account draws attention to the difficulties that exist in both setting an agenda 
and implementing policy while individuals can continue to bypass the formal 
government channels and procedures. According to respondents any potential 
process on the development of a peace walls policy would need to be transparent 
and accountable to people that reside alongside the peace walls. The above 
quotation illustrates the difficulties in moving beyond the historical practice of 
engaging with certain individuals in the community and moving towards one that is 
about developing a consensual approach on a sensitive and divisive issue. It should 
be noted that the conversations pertaining to gatekeepers were not entirely 
dominated by a negative narrative. Several respondents from the community and 
voluntary sector were also quick to praise the work ethic and contribution of 
gatekeepers to the peace process: 
 Gatekeepers can be used as a bad term but often when I think of 
 gatekeepers I think of people who are working away and have fantastic 
 knowledge and capacity and boundless energy and are really enthusiastic 
 (NGO 5 representative). 
Furthermore, there were interviewees that indicated that gatekeepers were an 
integral element of any policy process that intended to engage directly with 
communities. In the context of peace walls, respondents felt that gatekeepers were 
in a strong position to act as conduits between the government, service providers 
and communities: 
 They have done some fantastic work, and dealt with really hard issues. 
 The community trust and respect them, we can work together to go in and 
 talk to people about their needs, hopes and fears (NGO 4 representative).  
A further indication of the importance respondents from the community sector 
placed on gatekeepers centred on the lack of political representation within their 
communities. According to interviewees from a Loyalist background, very often so 
called gatekeepers were the only people in a position to articulate the views and 
concerns of the wider community because of a political vacuum. It was difficult to 
pin-point specific neighbourhoods, but respondents noted that Protestant 
communities off the Shankill Road and parts of West Belfast felt that they had 
minimal or no political representation at a local or national level. Blomkvist and 
Hackett (2008) have also documented this concern and noted that several working 
class Loyalist communities in the city felt isolated and ignored from the political 
process.  
The thesis findings suggest that it is within these neighbourhoods that respondents 
feel gatekeepers are crucial if local discussions with residents are to take place on 
peace walls. They can facilitate dialogue, encourage participation, and address the 
fears of the community about embracing a process on a sensitive and emotional 
issue. Several interviewees also touched on the risks gatekeepers take through 
engaging with statutory organisations and representatives from neighbouring 
communities. According to one interviewee who considered himself a gate keeper 
under the earlier definition:  
We are putting ourselves at risk. There are people in our area who just dont 
want to move on. We participate in a process, but the others dont live here, 
its me and my family who get the shit and the abuse from people in the 
community (Loyalist 7 representative). 
Those respondents who recognised the need for gatekeepers in any process that 
attempts to examine peace walls also noted the risks that they would have to take. 
The reality is that for the majority of these communities the status quo has been one 
of separation and single-identity, and any discussions on the peace walls would have 
to mean the communities shifting their position to one accommodation, integration 
and sharing. Initially, gatekeepers and supporters of such a process would have to 
take new positions that digress from the community consensus. This would take 
confidence and leadership and is fraught with difficulties in relation to how far one 
can move a communitys position. One could apply the thoughts of Gormley-
Heenan (2006) who discussed the role of leadership during the peace process in 
Northern Ireland to this discussion on the role of gatekeepers. Gormley-Heenan 
used the analogy of an elastic band to illustrate the delicate process of a political 
leader moving their constituents through a political process. Essentially, the 
politician needs to be aware of how far they can encourage participation and that 
there comes a point where their own electoral base would refuse to accompany 
them. The same analogy can be applied to this context if gatekeepers are going to be 
part of any process that aims to examine the future of the peace walls. The 
gatekeepers have to be extremely mindful of how far they can encourage their 
community to participate in a process that is largely alien to them, and which 
ultimately may mean the removal of a wall that historically protected their homes 
and families.  
To conclude this discussion on gatekeepers, it is important to acknowledge the 
concerns from Loyalist and Republican interviewees about the lack of individuals 
emerging from their communities who wanted to be actively involved in community 
based issues. This was problematic in that several respondents felt that any process 
on peace walls would last several of years, and this raised concerns about suitable 
community representatives with the capacity and skills to oversee this long and 
arduous process: 
 There is a wealth of experience here, along with good solid partnerships 
 between the key people from across the divide. But they arent going be 
 here forever and what is going to happen to all that knowledge  (Republican 5
 representative). 
This had not gone unnoticed and several respondents indicated that attempts were 
being made within these neighbourhoods to encourage greater levels of community 
participation so that it was not being left to a small minority. There was recognition 
that addressing issues such as interface violence, peace walls, anti-social behaviour 
and service provision would require long-term, strategic thinking, and more 
commitment and support from all sections of the community:  
 It is a thing that we are concerned about here, succession and trying to 
 encourage young people and to train them up and give them a bit of 
 experience so they can take up the baton (Loyalist representative).  
This is not a recent phenomenon, as Cairns et al (2003) documented the low levels 
of participation in community work and volunteering in Northern Ireland and 
indicated that time, resources and lack of personal gains were potential blocks to 
increased participation.  
This section has provided the reader with an introduction to the concept of 
gatekeepers and the role they had and continue to have in the context of the conflict. 
In relation to peace walls, it has been demonstrated that the gatekeepers have a role, 
whether as facilitators or spoilers in the development of a policy process. Moving on 
from the discussions around a peace industry and gatekeepers, it is now necessary 
to explore a recent mechanism that has been instigated at the behest of the former 
NI Secretary of State to consider the issues that surround a peace walls policy 
process.  
6.4 The Interagency Working Group  
The Interagency Working Group consists of all the communities of specialists that 
have been documented in figure 3 (p156). This was a mechanism for bringing 
together the key individuals and organisations that had experiences of, and 
responded to, interface and peace wall issues. The terms of reference of the IWG and 
a list of its members can be accessed in Appendix Seven. At this stage, in relation to 
the policy stream it is important to gain an insight into respondents views and 
opinions of this first inclusive attempt at bringing people together to share ideas and 
proposals on the policy area of peace walls. There was recognition from 
respondents that the overall concept was positive as it was an opportunity for 
community, voluntary, and statutory organisations to collectively work together and 
focus on the subject of peace walls from a citywide perspective and not just look at 
individual and separate geographical areas within Belfast. This was a crucial 
element of the IWG, in that it moved away from the silo mentality approach and 
instead provided the environment where knowledge and expertise could be shared: 
 It is useful, it has been a way of looking at a common approach from all of 
 the agencies in responding to the issue of peace walls (Government 
 3representative). 
However, there were a number of dissenting voices from respondents who were 
also members of the IWG who felt that it was not delivering measurable outcomes: 
 It has lost some of its momentum; there are people there who dont really 
 know what they are doing which means it turns into a talking shop (NGO 
 1 representative). 
One explanation for this was that community representatives felt that statutory 
organisations and government departments were sending people to the meetings 
who were in the words of one respondent just note takers:  
 There are not the right people with the power at the table. You need to 
 bring the decision makers into the conversation and they can act on issues 
 that arise (Republican 2 representative).   
Several Loyalist and Republican interviewees questioned the motivation and 
rationale individuals had for attending and participating in the IWG. There was a 
view that curiosity and personal gain were some of reasons people were 
participating, as opposed to participating in a process that may benefit all the 
communities:  
 People will be there for different reasons. I think people will be there out 
 of suspicion just to see who else is there, and what are they saying, and 
 who is getting whatthere is also a certain power and credibility being on 
 the group, and it is good for a funding application, showing that you are 
 on the group (Loyalist 7 representative).  
In the last three years the IWG has met on at least fifteen occasions and produced 
and commissioned two significant research reports (Challenge for Change, 2010: 
Towards Sustainable Security, 2008), and held a conference on the subject of peace 
walls. It has generated interest in the subject area, and provided a mechanism that 
has bridged the gap between the community and government in relation to 
understanding the different approaches to the peace walls. The meetings have 
created an environment where people can articulate diverse proposals on what they 
envisage a process should encapsulate in relation to the peace walls. Furthermore, 
the process has identified who the key people and specialists are in this growing 
policy area.  
Summary 
The policy community that has been outlined consists of five groups of specialists 
who each share an interest and commitment towards the issue of peace walls. They 
have different reasons and motivations for participating in the policy community, 
but agree that the safety and security of communities is paramount within any 
process. From this initial analysis, there appear to be significant differences between 
government and community representatives with regards to how any peace walls 
policy should develop and ultimately be implemented. Both Loyalist and Republican 
specialists contend that any process needs to emerge from the central government, 
while the NI Executive recognises the need for the removal of peace walls, yet 
abdicates responsibility for the walls onto the very communities that live either side 
of them. In the centre NGOs and academics continue to promote the virtues of 
sharing against the cost of division. Furthermore, all of these conversations are 
taking place at a time when international recognition of Northern Ireland is fading 
along with the funding of peace and reconciliation programmes.  
This snapshot of the key actors in the policy area illustrates the complexities that 
surround the development of a coherent policy that may lead to the issue of peace 
walls coming onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. To understand 
more comprehensively the dynamics and relationships within the policy community 
it is important to explore the impacts that past policies have had on the 
communities that would be integral to any policy process.  
6.5 Past policies 
The purpose of this section is to explore the impact of previous policies on those 
individuals and organisations participating in this policy community on peace walls. 
Sticking with the analogy of the policy primeval soup used by Kingdon, the soup 
does not resemble a rational-decision making system, with a number of well-defined 
alternatives available to decision and policymakers (Greathouse et al, 2005). 
Instead, there are a large number of ideas and proposals, which are often combined 
or adapted with similar type ideas that have been used in the past. In fact, it is 
usually uncommon for new and innovative ideas, instead old proposals are 
reframed and repackaged with slight alterations and resubmitted to the decision-
makers (Mucciaroni, 1992). The soup in this case consists of all the previous 
policies, strategies and ideas that had been implemented in Northern Ireland which 
had a relevance to interfaces and peace walls. 
From the outset, the majority of respondents commented on the British 
governments historical use of division and segregation as a response to communal 
violence and disorder. They were critical, that in over forty years of responding to 
the issue of community tensions, a physical line of demarcation was still regarded as 
a suitable response: 
 I think we always react to violence and community tension with a security 
 solution and I am not convinced that it is always the answer. If you have a 
 serious community issue in an area, Im not sure the first port of call should   
 be the builder in the form of peace walls (Alliance MP).  
This then led to discussions surrounding the role of both the British government 
and the devolved government in addressing the needs of communities separated by 
the peace walls in Loyalist and Republican working class areas. The respondents 
recounted numerous policies and strategies that had aimed to focus on 
regeneration, social deprivation, and unemployment in their areas, such as the 
Dunlop Report (2002). This report, published after numerous incidents of sectarian 
violence and disorder in North Belfast noted the need to develop regeneration 
programmes in the most deprived communities that often experienced the worst of 
the violence.  North Belfast was an example of an area that had experienced several 
plans and strategies aimed at improving the quality of life of residents that lived 
beside peace walls (Mackenzie, 2006). Although not completely criticising the 
governments attempts to improve the health and social wellbeing of residents 
within these interface communities, there were reservations about how the various 
strategies had been formulated and implemented: 
 I do think that government has reinforced the segregation to some 
 degree. They have not looked at the city as a whole, but rather in 
 segments. Whether it was BAT Teams (Belfast Action Teams) or Making 
 Belfast Work Teams, they were all separated geographically North, South, 
 East and West (Government 4 representative). 
It was also apparent from respondents that the separation of Belfast into quarters 
by service providers only served to institutionalise the sense of division and 
separation that interface communities already experienced. Several interviewees 
were also extremely critical of more recent attempts by the devolved administration 
to implement and deliver policy on the area of good relations: 
 Look at the Shared Future documentevery government department was 
 supposed to adhere to the notion of how do you do things that develop 
 the principles of a Shared Future? How do you develop policies and 
 strategies that take account of the need to move our communities to being 
 more cohesive? It just did not happen (Government 2 representative).  
It was also felt that the current NI Executive had failed to provide leadership and 
direct resources to those communities and service providers that had wanted to 
implement practices that would aim to address sectarianism: 
 I think this government has singularly failed to direct resources at a shared 
 and better future and if they do not turn that around then the fault lines 
 of the conflict will always be there (Unionist MLA). 
Several respondents indicated that a key criticism of previous government policies 
was an apparent lack of joined up thinking between the delivery agencies. This was 
illustrated by the views of one respondent who recalled their experience of working 
with those responsible for the redevelopment of the Westlink in 2008: 
 You remember the new footbridge at the Westlink, it was put in by the 
 roads to improve access to the hospital. Well, it brought back to life a dead 
 interface. The builders had taken away the shrubbery, reduced the size of 
 the walls and inadvertently created an environment that was exploited by 
 the young people (Government 6 representative). 
According to interviewees from the community sector, local community workers 
both Loyalist and Republican from West Belfast had made representations to the 
various agencies about the positioning of the bridge but these concerns were not 
acted upon. This, according to respondents from the community sector was not 
unusual: 
 The stats come out and consult. They draw up plans and tell you that you 
 have an opportunity to contribute to the plan; that the community have 
 ownership. But you know what, they have already made their mind up; 
 our comments just sit on a shelf somewhere. What we think doesnt really 
 matter (Loyalist 6 representative).   
Discussions with Loyalist and Republican interviewees then revealed two 
assumptions that relate to previous British government responses to interface 
issues within the city. Firstly, several respondents from a Republican background 
indicated that there was a perception within their community that previous 
government regeneration policies had been unbalanced and favoured the Protestant 
community. Although these perceptions were not substantiated by facts, they 
resonated within communities and raised suspicions about government 
interventions: 
Before the unwritten policy was you try and maintain the Protestant areas 
even where there are voids and no waiting liststo the detriment of the 
Nationalist community. Ardoyne and the New Lodge are prime examples 
(Republican 3 representative).  
Secondly, it was suggested that historically politicians had adopted a policy of non-
decision making, and preferred to socially engineer demographics by not addressing 
the needs of one particular community: 
 It suits the stats and service providers to just let them estates fall away. If 
 you have one community that needs housing and another community   
 thats  numbers are falling then why would you invest in it? Just let the 
 conditions get that bad, so they all move out, then the Nationalists can    move    
 in. It is a natural process (Loyalist 7 representative).  
The publication of a recent research report has added to this perception that the 
government had failed through inept policies to address the needs of Loyalist 
communities affected by the conflict. The document Beneath the Mask: an imperfect 
peace contends that Loyalist ex-prisoners have been ignored and given no support 
from the state (Kelly, 2010). This further compounds the suspicion and feelings of 
mistrust within Loyalist communities towards government strategies and policies.   
Conversations were also focused on the levels of funding and resources that had 
been provided to working class Loyalist and Republican communities in the last 
fifteen years to address conflict related issues. Several respondents highlighted the 
amount of European funding through the Peace Programme, and stated: 
There has been a heck of a lot of money from Europe put into these 
communities. Where has it gone? What has it actually done? Where are the 
measurable outcomes? The policy of pushing loads of money into this  place 
hasnt really worked (NGO 5 representative).   
There were also criticisms placed on those tasked with implementing the funding 
programmes and strategies. One respondent noted that financial packages were 
often directed at the issues funders felt were important as opposed to what local 
activists and workers had identified as areas of need: 
 I think that a lot of funding has come into North Belfast, and nobody can 
 deny it. A lot of it has been badly managed and badly spent. Funders have 
 a role in that (Republican 6 representative).  
One further criticism centred on the service providers responsible for allocating 
individuals and families to housing alongside peace walls and interfaces. Several 
respondents from the community sector indicated that the statutory services had a 
policy of allocating housing regardless of the impacts it would have on the wider 
community: 
 The people who moved them in hadnt thought it out. They moved people 
 in who had serious problems, health problems and mental health 
 problems, and they were the last people you needed living at interfaces 
 (Republican 3 representative).  
According to respondents the impact of this policy was that individuals and families 
with preconditions of poor physical and mental health found themselves under 
further stress and pressure as a consequence of the violence associated with living 
next to the peace walls: 
 You need to remove the poor housing and you need to stop putting 
 vulnerable people into the houses at interfaces, because thats the only 
 fucking people that live there (Republican 4 representative).  
This was not the first time these claims had been made, as Jarman (2006) in his 
review of work at the interface noted that community workers had liaised with the 
NIHE to make sure that interface areas were not dumping grounds for problem 
families. Furthermore, the Dunlop report (2002), which provided an analysis of life 
in North Belfast, concluded that interface areas had become a dumping ground for 
undesirable, anti-social, problem families.  
It was interesting to note that several respondents were of the opinion that in 
relation to the development of a new process to examine peace walls, that those 
residing closest to the walls did not have the capacity or willingness to contribute to 
the debate. As one Republican community representative concluded if you leave it 
up to them, the walls will never come down. Their argument was that people living 
closest to the walls had normalised the impact and inconvenience of the physical 
barriers, and that the walls provided them with a sense of safety and security.  
Not all of the discussions were negative surrounding the development and 
implementation of previous policies for interface communities. Several interviewees 
acknowledged the progress surrounding the NIHE attempts to promote the virtues 
of shared housing: 
In the last five years there is evidence of communities participating in  these      
shared housing schemes. People want to be part of them, and it is the housing 
executive who are promoting this (NGO 1 representative). 
Interestingly, one respondent commented on the initial difficulties in pushing 
forward with this policy, which was considered very different to previous statutory 
interventions on housing issues: 
 I mean there used to be huge resistance to shared housing when we 
 embarked on this journey five years ago. I mean massive resistance, 
 political resistance, community resistance, and community fear (Government 
4 representative). 
There is growing independent support for developments that aim to address the 
segregation and division that exists in the social housing stock. Recently the 
Independent Commission for the future of housing has supported the development 
of a ten year strategy to end segregated housing in Northern Ireland and welcomed 
the work of the NIHE in promoting the ideas of shared living (Madden, 2010). An 
interesting observation that will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Eight 
surrounded the top-down nature of past policy interventions and strategies. Those 
tasked with setting the agenda, along with policy design and formulation were 
aware of the difficulties residents experienced in these communities, but appeared 
to suffer from a lack of resources to fully support the introduction of targeted 
policies to address their needs. It was apparent that the specialists that participate 
in the policy community which relates to peace walls were aware of the numerous 
policies that had failed in relation to improving the health and social wellbeing of 
residents in interface communities. One Loyalist representative summed it up best 
by concluding, Im not sure what works, but Im an expert in what doesnt.  
Summary 
The policy primeval soup provides an opportunity to reflect on past and present 
policies that have aimed to address issues within interface communities. Through 
the application of this framework, it has become obvious that previous strategies 
and policies have suffered from an apparent lack of political leadership along with 
an absence of adequate resources. There also remains a degree of suspicion from 
many within the community sector towards the policy making process. There is a 
perception that previous policies have been motivated by the governments 
reluctance to address issues that have emanated from the conflict, such as 
segregation and division. This has led many, particularly within the Loyalist 
community, to maintain that the state on occasions has adopted a position of non-
decision making, instead of implementing policies that could be conceived as 
discriminatory by one community over another. Although Kingdons model (1995) 
recognised the importance of the primeval soup, it also drew attention to the fact 
that certain ideas and proposals within the soup, require an individual to encourage 
their successful development onto the decision-making agenda. The Multiple 
Streams Model referred to these individuals as policy entrepreneurs and considered 
them an integral element of the agenda-setting process.  
6.6 Policy Entrepreneurs 
Advocates of a particular proposal or idea are often referred to as policy 
entrepreneurs (Mintrom, 1997; 2000). As previously noted in Chapter Four, they 
are defined by a set of characteristics that include their willingness to invest their 
resources which include time, energy, reputation, and money in the hope of some 
return in the future. All of the interviewees were asked if they were aware of a 
particular individual or organisation that had the potential to elevate the issue of 
peace walls onto the decision making agenda of the NI Executive. The findings 
suggest three categories that may provide the conditions that a policy entrepreneur 
may emerge from and promote the issue of peace walls. Firstly, several respondents 
were adamant that any individual or organisation would have to emerge from a 
position within the NI Executive: 
 There have been officials from OFMDFM round the table, and unless you 
 have real political drive it tends to drift along and be a bit vague 
 (Government 1 representative).   
The reasoning was that the NI Executive had the financial resources and the 
credibility to push forward proposals that would affect all communities close to the 
peace walls. One respondent went further and identified the current Minister for 
Justice, David Ford as a likely policy entrepreneur: 
 I think this could be Fords legacy if he did take the lead. They are under 
 the Ministry for Policing and Justice after all (NGO 8 representative).  
The fact that the Minister was a member of the Alliance Party and did not have an 
electoral base that was drawn from the Loyalist and Republican communities most 
affected by the peace walls, was considered crucial in the development of sensitive 
and potentially controversial proposals. Instead, the Alliance Party is considered a 
party that appeals to middle class voters from the Greater Belfast area (McGimpsey, 
2010) although this could be argued considering Naomi Long is now the MP for East 
Belfast where a large number of the electorate come from Loyalist working class 
communities.  
There were respondents who critiqued the view that a potential policy entrepreneur 
would emerge from within government circles. This opinion was based on the 
premise that any benefits of a peace walls policy would only be experienced in 
twenty or thirty years, by which time the likely policy entrepreneur would no longer 
be in a position to benefit. Several respondents felt that any likely elected 
representative would be reluctant to stake their reputation or political capital on a 
policy that someone else would most likely benefit from: 
 People have got used to the walls, they have been up a hell of a long time. 
 Similarly, it will take a long time to remove them.    The problem with this
 being led by government is that I am not sure if government is capable of 
 leading. Whats in it for them, apart from nothing but stress and aggravation?
 (PSNI  representative).  
Secondly, a number of respondents pointed to the community sector as the ideal 
environment for the emergence of a policy entrepreneur. There was a strong view 
that without grass roots connections and the approval of local residents that it 
would be pointless to pursue an agenda on the peace walls. The argument was 
based on the premise that only someone close to the issue could understand and 
articulate the views and opinions of those most affected: 
 You cant have a champion who doesnt live in these communities. These 
 champions have to be local people, championing for a better life for their 
 children and their grandchildren (NGO 3 representative).  
The counter position was also noted from respondents where critiques included the 
lack of resources or political support a member of the community would have in a 
policy arena dominated by bureaucracy and politics: 
 With all the will in the world, nothing much can be achieved without 
 political pressure; and you need to know people, and know what to say to 
 actually get things done (Republican 6 representative).  
Thirdly, there were a number of respondents who suggested that any future policy 
entrepreneur would most likely emerge from a position unattached to the 
government or community sectors. They were referring to outsiders who had a 
vested interest in Northern Ireland. Respondents noted the impact of the US/Ireland 
Alliance research that has been discussed in Chapter Two along with their 
associations with the US State Department as an example of an organisation not 
aligned to any political party but still in a position to push attention onto the issue of 
peace walls. Upon publication of their research findings on peace walls, local 
newspapers led with stories Majority want peace walls torn down (News letter, 
2008) and Is the writing on the wall for the peace lines (Belfast Telegraph, 2008). 
For a short period this generated wide interest in the subject among the general 
public, and highlighted the impact an outsider could have in raising the profile of 
peace walls. Atlantic Philanthropies (AP) was also mentioned as a potential catalyst 
in raising the issue of peace walls onto the policy agenda on the NI Executive. They 
had been involved in a number of conflict related programmes since 1994 and 
vested their time, energy and reputation into a number of complex and sensitive 
issues that historically government departments had reservations committing to. 
One example was the funding and resourcing of local community restorative justice 
programmes that were developed in response to paramilitary assaults and 
shootings (Mika, 2006). According to several respondents AP had shown an initial 
interest in the subject of peace walls and they felt there was the potential for AP to 
become more integrally involved in a future process: 
 There was talk of the department working up a bid with AP to get the 
 funding in place to really look at the issue and put a number of  programmes 
 together (NGO 2 representative). 
Those respondents that pressed for an outsiders contribution to a future policy 
process on peace walls held the view that financial commitments and bureaucracy 
were less of an issue in comparison to individuals associated with government 
institutions or the community sector. However, several respondents did question 
the rationale outsiders placed on participating in conflict related issues in Northern 
Ireland. They felt that these individuals and organisations placed their needs above 
the needs of the communities residing beside the peace walls: 
 You remember the 10th anniversary of the Agreementwell some 
 Americans wanted to take a sledge hammer to a peace wall, all for a photo 
 opportunity, so they could show the people back home that they did it 
 (Republican 4 representative).  
Several respondents from the community sector recalled their previous limited 
experiences of international representatives wanting to become involved in 
assisting them with often sensitive and complicated issues. For the most part, they 
felt that the outsiders were motivated by self-gain and were essentially exploiting 
the situation to raise their own profiles.  
Summary 
The analysis from the respondents views has revealed no definitive position on the 
existence of a policy entrepreneur in the emerging policy area of peace walls. 
Although vague on the exact characteristics an individual or organisation would 
have, the interviewees were of the opinion that they would emerge from either the 
government sector, community sector or from a position outside of Northern 
Ireland. This idea of a policy entrepreneur having a role and responsibility in 
facilitating a process that may result in peace walls having a place on the decision-
making agenda of the NI Executive will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Eight 
(8.4). For now, the findings suggest that any such person or organisation must be 
competent in relation to understanding the emotional attachments that surround 
the subject of peace walls. Attention now turns to a discussion on what types of 
policy may find favour with a potential policy entrepreneur and more importantly 
policy and decision makers. To examine this, one must consider the characteristics 
that influence the structure and content of a policy by adopting Kingdons (1995) 
criteria for advancement framework.  
6.7 Criteria for policy advancement 
This chapter has illustrated the mechanics of the policy primeval soup drawing on 
the specialists that contribute the proposals, ideas and strategies that are debated 
and subsequently discarded or accepted for serious consideration. Kingdon (1995) 
went further in the Multiple Streams Approach and identified characteristics that he 
felt enhanced the chances of an idea surviving within this environment. In relation 
to the policy community, Kingdon (1995) referred to technical feasibility and value 
acceptability as integral elements to the increased support and validation of a 
proposal. Furthermore, if the proposal increased in popularity then it advanced into 
a larger political arena and required three more considerations. These included the 
financial cost of the proposal, the anticipated public acquiescence, and finally a 
positive hearing among elected decision-makers. Essentially, for an idea or proposal 
to successfully emerge on the government agenda it must pass these five tests. If this 
is not achieved then the idea is reworked and redrafted and combined with 
alternative proposals until it is suitable to attempt the process again.  
As there is no policy or fixed government position on peace walls, which essentially 
means there is a policy vacuum, it is not possible to use these criteria. So for the 
purposes of this thesis the researcher inquired as to what respondents envisaged a 
potential policy on peace walls would contain. From the outset there was agreement 
that in the long-term there were more positives than negatives to be gained if peace 
walls were removed: 
 If this is our end goal, which is we no longer have peace walls, then how 
 do we get there? (Government 1 representative). 
Furthermore, there was acknowledgement that previous policies had failed to 
address the needs of the communities that reside either side of the peace walls: 
 Public policy here is something that is very elusive, it has not got to grips 
 with ghettoisation in our communities (NGO 2 representative).  
Therefore, in the absence of a strategy or policy the respondents discussed the 
dynamics that would surround a policy that advocated the removal of peace walls in 
Belfast. Their views and opinions around the practicalities and implications of such 
a policy have been outlined below, based upon the five criteria that Kingdon set for 
the successful raising of an issue onto the policy agenda. Although purely 
speculative it provides one with an insight into how such a policy would fair if 
attempts were made to push the idea onto the NI Executives decision-making 
agenda.  
Technical feasibility 
In a policy process this is where the advocates of a proposal examine the nuts and 
bolts and determine whether it could actually succeed. According to Kingdon 
(1995) feasibility is all to do with implementation and deciding if a proposal will 
actually deliver. Extensive discussions took place with respondents as to the 
mechanics surrounding the implementation of a policy that aimed to remove the 
peace walls in Belfast. Five significant themes emerged which together illustrate the 
complexities that surround the execution of such a policy. Firstly, interviewees were 
concerned about the implementation of a policy that would affect people differently 
depending upon their place of residence. There was a sense that those living beside 
peace walls had yet to be properly consulted on what a policy would entail:  
 The people who live right up against the interfaces are mystified. There is 
 a feeling that they are constantly being talked about but not being talked 
 toand they are being plagued by academics, community workers, 
 politicians, and they are sort of lost in this massive movement that seems 
 to be gaining momentum about how to deal with the walls (Loyalist 5
 representative).   
Interviewees also indicated that there was a distinct lack of awareness on a peace 
walls process from those who would be most affected. Aside from community 
representatives and gatekeepers only a minimal number of residents in Loyalist and 
Republican communities would be aware of an interest in developing a peace wall 
policy. Respondents felt that the lack of interest and understanding would have an 
impact on developing any community consensus for a new policy.  
Secondly, respondents debated the merits of implementing a policy from both a top-
down and bottom-up perspective (Parsons, 1995). There was no clear consensus 
from respondents as to the most appropriate method of implementing such a policy. 
Several interviewees indicated that the devolved government had to take 
responsibility for the administration and management of any policy by providing 
leadership and authority, which would instil confidence within Loyalist and 
Republican communities. They advocated a top-down style (Richards and Smith, 
2006) of implementation: 
 It needs political efficacy because what goes on at the macro political level 
,impacts at the micro politics. So if you dont have political leaders making 
progress and decisions, then it makes it much tougher for those at the grass 
roots to do it (Unionist MLA).  
However, there were other respondents who contradicted this position and were of 
the view that any policy had to be nurtured and implemented from the bottom-up 
(Sabatier, 1986), with the onus of responsibility on the communities to take 
ownership of the process:  
 The only policy development that works is when it comes from bottom 
 upso I think statutory groups doing this to the community will never 
 work (Government 4 representative). 
There was an alternative to the top-down, bottom-up positions and this involved a 
combination of both views (Matland, 1995).  Several respondents felt that the onus 
of responsibility needed to be shared among all of the key protagonists. There was a 
sense that any policy on peace walls could only succeed through a combination of 
political and community support:  
 I think a bit of both. The initiatives are going to have to be driven from the 
 grass roots, with those at the top of the pile, the politicians delivering 
 resources and leadership (Loyalist 8 representative).  
The various approaches to the implementation process illustrate the differing views 
and opinions of the respondents. However, it was interesting to note that the one 
common theme evident throughout the discussions was the importance of political 
leadership. At the grass roots consent and desire for change can exist, but without 
vision and direction at the governmental level, respondents noted that there would 
be limited opportunity for communities to radically alter their physical 
environment. 
Thirdly, interviewees considered the practicalities around the delivery of a policy 
that centred on the removal of peace walls in Belfast. Interestingly, none of the 
respondents envisaged a Berlin type moment where local residents would emerge 
onto the streets with hammers and shovels and begin to tear down the walls brick 
by brick. Instead, there was a consensus that any tangible outcomes of a policy 
would be experienced incrementally and in a manner that was welcomed by those 
residing either side of a peace wall:  
 I think there will be cautiona cautious rolling back over time of levels of 
 security rather than one day where all the walls come down together  (NGO
 2 representative).  
Furthermore, respondents frequently referred to the word momentum indicating 
that it was a crucial element for the successful implementation of a peace walls 
policy. There was an acknowledgement that there was a large degree of fear and 
suspicion that surrounded the subject of peace walls from local residents. Therefore, 
it was felt that any immediate developments should focus on those peace walls and 
barriers that required minimal effort. This would reduce the figure of forty-two 
peace walls, and possibly provide a feel good factor and build support for the 
policy: 
 The reality ishow many incidents are there now (minimal interface 
 violence), so its all in the mindset. There are half a dozen walls could be 
 taken down tomorrow (Government 4 representative). 
The respondents drew distinctions between the various peace walls in Belfast, 
acknowledging that those which formed part of the tourist trails (Springfield Road 
and the divide between the Shankill and the Falls Road), were very different to those 
in other parts of the city. They compared these with the barrier in Henry Street and 
similar gate type structures, and considered them less intimidating and more 
susceptible to structural change than the one in Cupar Way: 
 You pick your easy targets first to get momentum around itpeople then 
 see what it is all about. You dont need to start at the Cupar Way peace 
 wall (NGO 1 representative).  
These tactical considerations on changes to the peace walls were also evident from 
those tasked with providing policing and security. There was a concern around the 
community safety implications if peace walls were removed too quickly and without 
prior consultation. A stagist approach was advocated where subtle alterations to the 
local environment improved access and connectivity without reducing the 
perception that residents personal safety and property were at risk: 
 Stage one is putting a new opening in the wall, until you get to the point 
 where people are used to crossing through the wall. Then you put a few 
 more openings in it to the point where the rest of the wall becomes 
 redundant (PSNI representative).  
Fourthly, respondents noted that any policy or strategy would be required to focus 
beyond the physical structures of the peace walls. Several interviewees concluded 
that implementing the conditions which would allow for the removal of the peace 
walls was the key tenet for a successful peace walls policy:  
 I dont think that people should be looking at the walls and saying our 
 goal is to bring these walls down. I think people should be looking at the 
 communities and say how can we improve the lifetime opportunities of 
 these communities to the point where they want to live together? 
 (Independent Unionist, MLA).  
Considerable time was spent among respondents examining what these conditions 
would look like and more importantly, who was responsible for facilitating the 
process that would result in the conditions being established?  
 What creates the confidence so that we dont want the wall there to 
 protect us? What does the community require which alters their 
 environment for the better  and nearly makes the wall irrelevant? 
 (Republican 5 representative). 
Chapter Seven deals with these questions in more detail, but at this stage it is suffice 
to say that in the context of feasibility, it illustrates the difficulty in developing a 
policy on the removal of peace walls. Fifthly, the conversations also included a 
reference to the use of targets in any future policy on peace walls. This created a 
mixed response, with several interviewees advocating the need for specific targets, 
while others were more dismissive and felt this was too sensitive a policy area to 
structure around figures and dates. Those supportive of targets felt this would 
create goals and more importantly, an impetus for the process: 
 There should be a short-term target and a few should be removed 
immediatelypeople will immediately think of the big ones (Lanark Way), 
but I mean small easy ones, where people can see the benefits. You sell this to 
the community as a concept and then set more targets (Government 4 
representative). 
Others were more definitive and indicated that actual dates needed to be 
incorporated into any policy to provide direction and a means to measure and 
evaluate the success of the policy:  
 50% of walls down by 2025 would be under ambitious, I think more like 
 75% of walls removed by thenotherwise it will just drift (NGO 5 
representative). 
Targets were not only considered in the context of big headlines and future dates 
when x number of peace walls have to be removed.  It was suggested that a more 
individual and unique use of targets could be applied to the reduction in size and 
structure of each individual peace wall. Essentially, this would allow for each 
community to work to its own schedule and respond to its own unique issues 
associated with the process. Communities would have ownership of any process and 
control the changes to their community:  
 I think putting a set date on it would be doomed for failure. I think it has 
 to be more sophisticated than thatsay more like gradually reducing the 
 height of a wall over time, taking a couple of feet off it every year, until it 
 serves no purpose (PSNI representative).  
It should also be noted that there were respondents reluctant to consider the use of 
targets, as they felt they would be detrimental to the long-term success of any policy 
on the removal of peace walls: 
 I like targets because they give you something to work towards, but   I    think 
once you publish a target you can become a hostage to fortune, and people 
can use it against you (Government 6 representative). 
Several interviewees referred to a culture of people wanting you to fail in Northern 
Ireland, and targets were viewed as an opportunity for people to criticise the policy. 
This analysis based on the attribute of technical feasibility revealed a number of 
complex issues and considerations that impact on the management and delivery of a 
policy for the removal of peace walls. The findings have indicated that such a policy 
could succeed, but to do so would require the development of several conditions 
and also willingness across society for the successful implementation of the policy.  
Value Acceptability 
According to Kingdon (1995) proposals that survive in the policy community are 
comparable with the dominant values of each of the specialists that participate in 
the community. So, in this case it would mean that each of the five specialists agrees 
at some level on the need to address the issue of peace walls. Although there is a 
degree of fragmentation within the policy community, the findings have revealed 
that each of the specialists have common characteristics. The respondents indicated 
that the specialists recognised the multitude and complexity of issues aligned with 
the peace walls and noted that understanding, along with the need for trust, 
confidence and safety had to be incorporated into any approach that was to consider 
the removal of peace walls. These four values that respondents indicated were 
necessary for a policy process on peace walls have been explored in more detail 
below.  
Understanding 
There was recognition from all of the interviewees that peace walls were a sensitive 
and complex subject area and one that required a broad lens that allowed for 
multiple issues to be included within the discussions: 
 Peace walls cannot be talked about in isolation from social and economic 
 regeneration, because they go hand in hand (NGO 8 representative).  
Interviewees felt that if people were serious about developing a policy for the 
removal of peace walls then they had to consider the wider implications of 
segregation and division:  
 If you look at the interface areas they didnt really see the peace 
 dividendthese are not the people that are going to get the economy up 
 and running. For some they are a hindrance to the economy because they 
 have no skills and are on benefits (Loyalist 5 representative).  
And there was a realisation and understanding that the discourse on any policy for 
the removal of peace walls had to include pre and post conflict related issues, as this 
was imperative to comprehending the mechanics around implementing such a 
policy.  
Trust  
This was an evolving component and one that had only recently emerged as 
important in the context of a potential peace walls policy. According to respondents, 
regardless of the practicalities of a policy, without a sense of trust between 
advocates of the approach it would be doomed to failure. It was acknowledged that 
trust was both developing and improving on a number of different levels. At the 
grass roots, among Loyalist and Republican communities there were genuine 
partnerships between key individuals and youth and community groups: 
 There is trust now between the community workers. It has taken a while, 
 but now we know what to expect from each other, we are comfortable in 
 each others communities (Republican 6 representative).  
At the political level, it was also noted that representatives from different parties 
were working more closely together on a number of social and economic issues that 
were impacting on inner city Loyalist and Republican communities:   
 You see it at Belfast City Council, they are trying to work together to 
 address issues around unemployment, health and education. They know 
 if they dont work together, nothing will get done (NGO 3 representative). 
Recent statistics reinforced this notion that through working together and meeting 
with people from a different community, relationships could improve. The OFMDFM 
Good Relations Indicators in 2010 noted that 88% of respondents felt that better 
relations between Protestants and Catholics would be achieved through more 
mixing of the two communities rather than separation (OFMDFM, 2010b). The 
respondents in this research felt that the increase in trust within a small number of 
people would eventually resonate to the wider community, and prove crucial in the 
development of any process that incorporated peace walls. An example of this trust 
building was reported recently in the Donegal Democrat (2010) where after two 
years of extensive meetings and workshops a large number of Loyalists and 
Republicans attended a joint visit to Dublin.  
Confidence 
According to respondents a further element of any approach to peace walls was the 
need for confidence building measures. There was a consensus that confidence 
whether at a political or community level was important in relation to the delivery 
of any new policy. Individuals alongside Republican and Loyalist communities 
needed to feel confident in developing new relationships with those who historically 
may have been responsible for acts of violence against their community and/or 
themselves: 
 What would create the conditions for someone from the Lower Shankill to 
feel safe about going into the New Lodge for work? Thats the  conversation 
that is happening. It is not just about peace walls, it is about people being 
able to interact with each other (Republican 1 representative).   
Confidence building measures are something that will be discussed more 
comprehensively in Chapter Eight. However, it is obvious that members of the policy 
community recognise the importance of instilling confidence in those most affected 
by the legacy of the peace walls. This is a stark reminder that the removal of the 
physical structures is the last action of a process that would begin with the 
nurturing of confidence within those communities most affected by the conflict. 
Security 
The respondents were in agreement that the safety and security of the communities 
either side of the peace walls was of paramount importance and central to any 
proposal to remove them. Aligned with the notion of confidence building measures 
it was clear that security was valued as a crucial component which was a necessary 
consideration in any process on the peace walls:  
 If your aspiration is to take away those walls and peace lines then you  have 
to manage how that happens so that it is done in a way where people are able 
to live safely (Government 4 representative).  
It was interesting to observe the importance placed on security by respondents. 
There was recognition that community safety both perceived and real was a crucial 
element in the discourse on peace walls. The role of the police was seen as crucial in 
both alleviating community fears and creating an environment that would allow for 
positive engagement between communities: 
 With the PSNI becoming more acceptable in many of the areas and with 
 community policing initiatives people will begin to feel safer and secure 
 in their own areas and this could lead to the conversation about removing 
 the peace walls (Government 2 representative).  
The four values referred to by respondents underpin any potential policy on the 
removal of peace walls. A community representative captured it best when he 
concluded that:   
 People have to get away from this obsession with bricks and mortar and 
 see that this has to do with regeneration, with relationship building and 
 with removing the fear and distrust (Loyalist 6 representative). 
The value acceptability framework employed in this analysis has revealed the 
common characteristics that respondents maintain exist within the policy 
community on peace walls. Representatives from the government, NGOs, along with 
the Loyalist and Republican communities have acknowledged that values based on 
confidence, trust, security and understanding are central to any discussion on the 
removal of peace walls. There may be difficulties in recognising roles and 
responsibilities within the context of implementing a policy, but the specialists are 
in agreement that the values placed on such a policy can attract support across all of 
the key constituents.   
Budget Constraints 
The anticipated costs that may be incurred through the implementation of a policy 
on peace walls have the potential to influence whether it finds a position on the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. The financial impacts of a policy that 
promotes the removal of peace walls can be considered from two very different but 
highly significant positions. The first is the impact of the economy on policy 
development pertaining to peace walls, while the second is the views of the general 
public on a potential policy that for many has limited or no tangible benefits for the 
majority of the population.  
In respect of the economy, a number of respondents highlighted the current 
economic climate as one that was not conducive for the development and 
implementation of a new policy that advocated the removal of the peace walls. 
Instead, there was a suggestion that government policy would be preoccupied with 
bread and butter issues with the long-term goal of improving the countrys 
financial situation:  
 You have the whole economic downturn, the squeeze on department 
 budgets; it probably isnt uppermost on peoples minds. They are 
 probably interested more in education, health and adequate housingand 
 it probably isnt high on their agenda (Government 1 representative). 
Furthermore, interviewees acknowledged the inevitable budget cuts and 
redundancies that would result from the governments attempts to address the 
economic downturn and budget deficit. There was a clear view that this would 
impact on the allocation of future government resources: 
 I dont think that there is going to be the money there to really sustain the 
 work that is only beginningthere is the recession and the cull of local 
 government, the cull of salaries; the cull of community workers; the 
 professionalization of community work; the end of European funding. I 
 just dont think that they are going to have the resources (Loyalist 4 
 representative).  
During an economic downturn, respondents felt that both politicians and the 
general public would prioritise the issues that required government intervention. 
This was recently evident when the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors drew 
attention to the cost of division, and indicated that the 1 billion spent on our 
divided society could be used to upgrade the water infrastructure (BBC, 2011). One 
could argue that in a limited budget, an improvement to the countrys water supply 
that has an impact on the entire population would supersede the need to address 
segregation in a small number of working class communities. However, there were 
also several interviewees who indicated that the current economic climate actually 
facilitated the need to develop a peace walls policy. They contended that if 
government and the general public failed to act then the financial costs to society 
would significantly increase in the future: 
 With the division and the walls you are losing more money because of the    
replication of services in both communities. With no wall you could have a 
single regeneration plan and cut costs (Government 2 representative).  
The second point of interest on budget constraints related to the wider publics 
perception on the importance of instigating a policy on the removal of peace walls. 
From a purely economic position, several respondents felt that individuals and 
families may prioritise peace walls considerably less than issues concerning health, 
education and employment: 
 It is still just a hypothetical exercise, but if someone said right here is the 
 money to take the walls down or alternatively we can stop water charges 
 or fund ten new schools or two new hospitals, then you know what the 
 public  would choose (NGO 6 representative).  
Although, it should also be noted that it is extremely difficult to quantify this 
position through statistics and surveys. The general public have never been 
consulted as to what their views and opinions are on the peace walls. Overall the 
respondents recognised the financial implications of a peace walls policy in the 
current economic climate. However, several were of the view that resources would 
have to be committed to addressing the problems emanating from the peace walls 
or the financial ramifications for future administrations would be extremely costly. 
This would have a negative impact on the financial position of the general public: 
 We need to spend now. We cannot afford not to do this. The communities 
 will only get worse and become dead zones and it will reflect negatively 
 on the entire country (NGO 5 representative).  
The economic argument has proved to be influential in shaping respondents views 
on the viability of developing and successfully implementing a policy for the 
removal of the peace walls. It was recognised that for peace walls to get to the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive they would have to be framed alongside 
a sound business case which justified the commitment of government resources. 
The difficulties at that stage, which are explored in more detail in Chapter Seven, are 
determining who benefits from such a policy and the impact that has on gaining the 
necessary political support required to raise the issue onto the decision-making 
agenda.    
Mass Public Support 
Assessing whether the general public would be supportive or critical of a proposal is 
a crucial test in determining whether it has the ability to make it onto the decision-
making agenda. Several discussions with respondents were dominated by views on 
what constituted the notion of public support and how that would affect the 
development of a peace walls policy. For some, it was enough to garner the support 
of local residents either side of a peace wall:  
 The families on both sides have to be supportive, but they need to know what 
it is all about. The people three or four streets away, never mind those in a 
different postcode, have no feelings on this (Loyalist 6 representative). 
While acknowledging those that reside directly adjacent to the peace walls are 
crucial in the context of achieving public support for a policy, it was noted that for 
some members of these communities there was a degree of suspicion about any 
form of government intervention, which could influence their support for a policy. 
These respondents recalled local residents experiences of previous government 
attempts at community regeneration initiatives. One respondent in particular 
referred to a predominantly Unionist housing estate in North Belfast called Tigers 
Bay that had witnessed a significant shift in demographics as a result of government 
intervention. Bradley and Murtagh (2007) noted that the scheme resulted in the 
clearance of 300 properties and the construction of 140 new homes along with a 
business park. According to the interviewee the outcome had been the de-
stabilisation of the community, and a constant fear that there was an agenda to 
remove the Unionist community from the area: 
 You know there were 600 Protestant homes knocked down for a business 
 park. Promises were made that the community would benefit in terms of 
 employment, unemployment is still about 52% in the area. The jobs never 
 came. That is still very much in peoples headsthey didnt get a better 
 quality of life. They were fed empty promises (Loyalist 2 representative). 
Bradley and Murtaghs research also made reference to the regeneration initiatives 
that had occurred in and around the Tigers Bay, noting that one section of the 
community felt that it was essentially an interface under the auspices of a 
community regeneration plan. These past interventions had a direct impact on the 
governments ability to seek support and approval for further polices that would 
impact the local environment.  
In the context of this thesis, there were other respondents who noted that 
segregation and division was an issue that had to reach beyond the residents 
adjacent to the peace walls. The peace walls were considered an issue for all of 
society; something that required buy in at all levels: 
 This is something that everyone has to buy into in some way. The peace 
 walls just dont affect the people beside them; they are a reflection of our 
 society and the past, and everyone needs to be part of the solution (NGO 
 4 representative).  
The difficulties in managing to get the general public to embrace the notion that the 
peace walls should be removed were highlighted by one respondent. He felt that 
there was a large amount of ignorance from the public towards the realities facing 
Loyalist and Republican communities either side of the peace walls, and that any 
debate on the implications of a policy that would see the removal of the peace walls 
would be dominated by the financial burden placed on society: 
 Another risk at the minute is the impact of budget cuts. Money could get 
 whacked off departments and the majority of the community will 
 probably think that it is more important to have hospitals open than walls 
 knocked down (Government 7 representative).  
It was also noted that by introducing a policy on peace walls there was the danger of 
creating a hierarchy of types of segregation and division. One runs the risk of other 
communities in Northern Ireland that are highly segregated and experience high 
levels of social and economic deprivation complaining that they are being ignored 
simply because they do not have physical lines of demarcation keeping them a part: 
 But there are regeneration projects needed in other areas, which have no 
 interface problem, and the people there think their needs are just as 
 important (Junior Minister).  
The recent publication from Bell and Jarman (2010) has illustrated this very point 
by concluding that contested space and segregation was a significant factor 
throughout Northern Ireland and was not simply limited to the urban areas. The 
relationship between raising issues onto the decision-making agenda and the need 
for public support will be explored in more detail in Chapter Seven (7.1). However, 
this initial analysis has revealed the complexities around balancing the need for 
public commitment towards a policy, which in reality only benefits at a practical 
level a relatively small section of the population.  
Political Support 
The fifth and final criterion refers to the levels of support among elected 
representatives towards a specific proposal. Without political backing, Kingdon 
(1995) contends that advocates of proposals are less willing to raise the profile of 
their idea into the larger political arena. In this case there were mixed opinions as to 
the wider political support for a policy on the removal of peace walls. There were 
respondents who commented that all elected representatives, regardless of the 
location of their constituency or their political background, had a responsibility to 
commit to a policy on the removal of the peace walls: 
 This is not going to happen without a robust policy framework. OFMDFM 
 really have the lead, although the peace walls are a security solution but 
 the fundamental problem is one of community relations. The peace walls 
 belong to the DOJ, but the problem doesnt belong to the DOJDSD have a 
 role in terms of regeneration (Alliance MP). 
There was awareness from interviewees that this was a subject area that required 
joined up thinking across all of the political parties, along with the statutory and 
voluntary organisations: 
 We all need to sit down and see this as a shared problem that requires a 
 shared solution, where there is shared responsibility (NGO 5 representative). 
Throughout all of the discussions there were no respondents who indicated that 
there would be any political criticism for a policy that advocated the removal of the 
peace walls as long as it had the support of the communities residing at them.  
However, interviewees drew a distinction between politicians acknowledging 
support for such a policy and actually contributing time, resources and commitment 
to its implementation. The respondents noted that this was more often than not 
political tacit approval, as it didnt require a significant amount of political capital: 
 They all say, yes in the long term we would like to see the removal of  peace 
wallsbut that is it. They then go on to indicate that nothing can or will 
happen without the say of the community (Republican 6 representative). 
The interviewees recognised the need for political support in the development of a 
proposal on the removal of peace walls. However, there were differing opinions as 
to whether elected representatives would actually pursue the agenda vigorously 
and facilitate a process. However, it was also noted, that political silence can also be 
interpreted as positive, and not being critical or voicing disapproval of a specific 
approach can also assist in the promotion of a proposal onto the decision-making 
agenda.  
The five criteria provided an opportunity to explore in detail the practicalities 
associated with the pursuit of a policy that aimed to remove the peace walls in 
Belfast. This built upon the findings that emerged from the primeval soup 
framework, which identified the actors in the policy community along with the 
impact that previous policies had on the evolution of new ideas and strategies for 
the peace walls. In the context of a potential policy that promoted the removal of 
peace walls, it became apparent that even though each of the criteria was important, 
there were certain criteria more influential than others. Although, financial costs 
and mass public support were considered desirable criteria, more weight was 
placed on the relevance of technical feasibility, value acceptability and political 
support. A central concern for interviewees was whether or not any new idea, which 
advocated a radical shift in policy, was achievable and not doomed to failure. 
Alongside these concerns, interviewees also noted that the main stakeholders 
within any process had to place similar values on the reasoning for embarking on a 
process that had the potential to remove peace walls in Belfast. It was noted that 
local communities and their representatives had to recognise collectively that values 
based on confidence; trust, security and understanding had to underpin any idea or 
strategy which advocated for the removal of peace walls.  
The majority of interviewees considered the fifth and final criteria known as 
political support, as the most influential and critical for the advancement of policy. 
There was a general consensus that political support would provide those engaged 
with this issue with a sense of legitimacy and confidence and encourage further 
development. It was also noted that even though positive political support might 
lack any form of commitment or financial resourcing, it was more productive and 
less debilitating than negative political scaremongering.  
Overall, it was evident that for any idea promoting the removal of peace walls to be 
considered as a serious and viable proposal, it had to contain the five characteristics 
of policy advancement enshrined within the Multiple Streams Model (1995). 
However, upon reflection it was clear that political support was deemed extremely 
significant when interviewees considered the merits of a policy that aimed to 
remove the peace walls.   
6.8 Conclusion 
The policy stream developed by Kingdon (1995) has allowed for an examination of 
the motivations and factors that influence the different agendas that the specialists 
hold within the policy community on peace walls. This loosely constructed group of 
specialists that include government representatives, NGOs, academics, and members 
of the Loyalist and Republican communities share an understanding that peace 
walls have a detrimental effect on the health and social well being of communities 
living either side of them. The members of the group have significant ideological and 
political differences, but there is an ad hoc consensus that in the future some form of 
policy process on the peace walls would be a positive development. They were clear 
that any process had to be based on the premise that confidence-building measures 
would be established, and that the communities themselves had ownership of the 
process with political support and leadership. It was also apparent that two 
phenomena associated with the Troubles, the peace industry and gatekeepers had 
a significant impact on how people not only interpreted the peace walls, but also on 
the implementation of a peace walls policy.   
The analogy of the policy primeval soup provided the framework to explore the 
impact of previous initiatives and strategies that have aimed to address the 
segregation along with the social and economic needs of interface communities. 
Furthermore, it allows one to consider the failures of past policies, and to also learn 
from these policies when considering new approaches to a peace wall strategy. One 
of the difficulties with this subject is the different interpretations people place on 
the peace walls, along with the numerous agendas that exist within the policy 
community. However, the sets of criteria set down by Kingdon (1995) allow for a 
comprehensive analysis of what characteristics are necessary for a successful 
proposal to make its way onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. Not 
only do these five criteria provide a framework to manage the numerous issues and 
dynamics, but they also allow for the various positions to be attributed to the 
specific actors in a policy process.   
This chapter has complemented the discussion in Chapter Five by providing an 
analysis of the proposals, options and solutions that may be applicable to the 
problems pertaining to peace walls. It has become evident that any potential policy 
will be influenced by how the peace walls are interpreted. However, what is missing 
is a focus on the political implications of responding to the issue of peace walls, 
along with a comprehensive examination of the public support for raising the 
subject of peace walls onto the decision-making agenda. These themes, along with 
their relationship to the problem and policy streams will be explored in Chapter 
Seven.  
7. Multiple Streams - The Politics  
How important are the public in raising an issue onto the governments decision-
making agenda? Furthermore, what or who constitutes the public? And who defines 
what public voices are important, and what are irrelevant in the context of setting 
the agenda? Once the public audience has been identified how do politicians go 
about assessing public opinion? And finally, how do the institutions within 
government respond to public opinion and how does it impact on the developing 
agenda? These are the questions discussed within this chapter, and will allow for an 
understanding of the relationship between peace walls, politics and the decision-
making agenda of the NI Executive. There are four distinct elements to the chapter 
which include a comprehensive analysis of the role of the public mood in shaping 
the agenda-setting process; the importance of political leadership in influencing the 
public mood; the role of pressure group campaigns; and the mechanisms within 
government that allow issues to rise onto the decision-making agenda.  
7.1 Public mood 
In Kingdons (1995) study it was apparent that a small and limited number of 
people, usually close to the US government, constantly observed the public mood. 
This enabled them to assess events and issues and to both judge and recognise when 
the political environment was susceptible to change as a result. Therefore, the 
public mood was crucial in the context of agenda change and policy outcomes as 
decision-makers and policy entrepreneurs often pre-determined any policy process 
on a measurement of the public mood. Through the examination of health and 
transport issues in the USA in the 1970s, Kingdon observed how the governments 
sense of the national mood served to promote some items onto their policy agendas 
and to restrain others from rising to prominence. For example, a general societal 
position of hostility to government regulation meant that committee hearings on 
deregulation proposals on transportation were welcomed throughout the 1970s. It 
was clear from the research that if there was an appetite for change then it could 
create an enabling-environment that would result with the inclusion of an issue 
onto the government agenda. In a similar vein, how decision-makers interpret the 
public mood, may also result in issues being withdrawn from the policy agenda and 
forced into obscurity.  
The following analysis on peace walls has been guided by Kingdons (1995) position 
that the public mood has the potential to have a significant impact on whether 
issues are promoted onto the decision-making agenda. The discussions with 
interviewees initially considered whether they felt that the general public had an 
interest, both passing and/or concerted in the forty-two peace walls in Belfast. All of 
the respondents concluded that it was difficult to quantify the publics views on the 
peace walls, as they were unaware of any occasion that they had been directly 
consulted on them. Instead, the public in recent years have been surveyed on issues 
pertaining to community and good relations through questionnaires on the subjects 
of housing, education and social activities. For example the Northern Ireland Life 
and Times Survey (NILTS) has been recording annually the attitudes, values and 
beliefs of people throughout Northern Ireland since 1998. Although this survey has 
never consulted on peace walls, an exploration of the survey results in the last 
decade provide an insight into the public attitudes to housing integration and 
shared living (Byrne et al, 2006). These statistics have consistently revealed that 
approximately 80% of people throughout Northern Ireland would be supportive of 
mixed religious neighbourhoods (NISRA, 2005; and OFMDFM, 2011). Although 
unrelated to peace walls, these findings provided evidence that there is an appetite 
within the general public for less segregation and more integration in relation to 
housing. The statistics were mentioned by several respondents and were used to 
substantiate their claims that the general public if given the opportunity would 
prefer sharing over separation:  
 Have you looked at the Life and Times Survey? They dont ask about peace 
walls, but they do ask about people living in a mixed neighbourhood and it is 
about 86%, so there is an aspiration for sharing  (NGO 1 representative).  
Further analysis revealed that the discussions with interviewees on the subject of 
public mood fell into three distinct categories that can be summarised as: 
 Conversations on what constituted the public; 
 Conversations on the relationship between Loyalist communities and their 
elected representatives; 
 Conversations on the relationship between Republican communities and 
their elected representatives.  
These three categories on the topic of the public mood will be discussed below.  
7.2 Who are the Public? 
To better understand the respondents views on how peace walls were construed in 
the wider public, discussions with interviewees focused on whether peace walls 
could be considered a national issue or a city issue? Framing the conversation in this 
manner allowed for differentiations to be drawn in relation to what constituted the 
general public, and to determine what audiences the respondents felt were crucial 
for the devolved government to have to consider raising peace walls onto the 
decision-making agenda. Several respondents concluded that opinions and views on 
peace walls could only be elicited from those who had direct knowledge and 
understanding of their impact. Therefore, they were considered to be an issue that 
was very specific to Belfast:  
 Who does this really affect? And more importantly, how does it affect  them? 
You talk about public interest, but really is this not something to do with just 
the people in the city, Im sure those in Bangor couldnt give a fuck 
(Republican 3 representative).  
Recent documentation from the Northern Ireland Office (NIO, 2010) reaffirmed the 
claim from respondents that peace walls were primarily a Belfast phenomenon. The 
report indicated that aside from the forty-two peace walls in Belfast there were a 
further five in Derry/Londonderry, five in Portadown and one in Lurgan. From the 
perspective of assessing the public mood towards peace walls, respondents were 
clear that the majority of people in the country had no experience or knowledge of 
the peace walls because they were only located in a minority of urban areas:  
 The walls are an almost exclusively Belfast phenomenonthis defensive 
 architecture has become the norm. We dont build streets to take people 
 from A to B, we build streets to confuse people so they cannot get from A 
 to B (Alliance MP).  
This view was further compounded by the comments of one respondent who talked 
about their surprise at how little their work colleague knew about the peace walls 
even though they resided in Belfast. This lack of awareness and knowledge of the 
conflict architecture put into perspective the level of interest generated in the issue: 
 I did a radio programme on the peace walls last year and the sound 
 recordist was from East Belfast. He was thirty years old lived there all his 
 life and he hadnt seen a peace wall. So if a thirty year old from Belfast has 
 no sense of what it is like in North and West Belfast, its not surprising that 
 most people have very little idea (NGO 8 representative).  
It may seem surprising to an outsider that someone has lived within ten miles from 
peace walls for thirty years and never seen one. However, due to conditions created 
by the conflict, issues pertaining to personal and communal safety meant that 
people were unable to travel through different neighbourhoods or access services 
that were not located in their own communities (Shirlow, 2003). Respondents from 
Belfast recounted their experiences of living in the city during the height of the 
conflict and described how people lived in pockets, rarely venturing into 
neighbouring areas. This led several respondents to conclude that for the most part, 
individuals and families that resided in working class communities in Belfast were 
the only people really aware of the peace walls. The majority of the people who 
lived, worked and shopped in Belfast did not come into contact with the peace walls, 
so therefore did not consider them as something that concerned them:  
These walls are only in North, West and East Belfast, and thats the working 
class partsall the roads into the city have been sanitised, the walls are 
behind the arterial routes, you just dont see them (Loyalist 7 
representative).  
The publication of Jarmans (2008) review of defensible architecture in Belfast 
reinforces this opinion. The report concluded that of the 88 security structures, of 
which 42 were NIO peace walls, the overwhelming majority were clustered in North 
and West Belfast, and none were positioned in middle-class neighbourhoods or the 
city centre. The location of the peace walls led a large number of interviewees to 
conclude that measuring public opinion on the topic only required contributions 
from local people as they constituted the most important group as they were 
directly affected by any change to the peace walls. The respondents felt that if it was 
left to the rest of society then there would be minimal or no interest shown towards 
peace walls. A National Attitudinal Survey (NISRA, 2007) conducted at the start of 
the devolved governments first term lends support to this assumption. When asked 
what the most important policy issues were facing the Northern Ireland 
government, 44% of participants indicated that it was the health service, followed 
by 34% who indicated the economy.  
However, there were a minority of interviewees who held an alternative view and 
thought that peace walls were a national issue and not simply one that should be 
confined to Belfast. They contended that the peace walls were a visual 
representation of the division, segregation and sectarianism that existed across 
Northern Ireland: 
 I do not believe that the peace walls were put up because those communities 
are any worse than anywhere else. They were put up because those 
communities are on the front line of whats going on in  the wider society. 
Society has created the situation that the walls are there, so everybody has to 
participate and get them removed (Alliance MLA).  
These respondents indicated that segregation and sectarianism was an issue 
throughout society, and the only difference was that the peace walls were an honest 
and visible portrayal of the differences that existed between Republicans and 
Loyalists. Several respondents went further and felt that parts of society preferred 
to have this Troubles architecture in Belfast as it allowed them to draw comparisons 
between their own lives and the lives of others: 
 It is very easy to live in your own neighbourhood where you are not being 
 challenged about your religion and you dont have rocks and bottles 
 coming over your fence. It suits them to say thats where the conflict is, it 
 is in Belfast (Unionist MLA). 
 There is another thing you find outside of Belfast, which is an attitude I 
 came across and that is that the Troubles and segregation is not about 
 me it is about them on the Falls and the Shankill, and we dont live like 
 that here (NGO 5 representative). 
These views which suggest sectarianism, segregation and division is widespread 
throughout Northern Ireland have also been articulated in research conducted by 
Hamilton et al (2008) which illustrated peoples experiences of segregation in rural 
and urban parts of Northern Ireland through housing, work, schooling, shopping, 
leisure and social activities. In the context of this thesis several respondents felt that 
peace walls were an issue for everyone in Northern Ireland as they simply reflected 
the prejudices, hatred and sectarianism that existed in places outside of Republican 
and Loyalist working class communities:  
I might live in a part of the country with no walls but it doesnt mean that I 
dont have the attitudes in me that the walls represent (Government 7 
representative).  
A small of number of respondents went further and indicated that peace walls were 
as significant an issue as the paramilitary cease-fires (Mansergh, 2006), political 
agreements (Aughey, 2006) and the decommissioning of armed groups (McCaffrey, 
2010), which had dominated the political and social landscapes of Northern Ireland 
over the last twenty years:  
 Society has changedthe structure of the police, the makeup of the labour 
force, the paramilitaries, the murals on the walls, they were all  symptomatic 
of the structure of societyand the peace walls are part of this menu that has 
to change (Government 6 representative).  
By placing the peace walls in the same category as other historical events the 
respondents were stating that they were not an issue that could be confined to 
Belfast. Therefore, any assessment of who and what constitutes the public opinion 
on peace walls would involve an approach that incorporates everyone from across 
Northern Ireland.  
This brief analysis of the public mood in relation to peace walls has illustrated the 
difficulties in defining who or what is important when articulating a position on the 
peace walls. Respondents were undecided whether those closest to the peace walls, 
those who resided within Belfast, or all of society were representative of the public 
mood that had to be included within any process. One of the reasons for the 
diversity in views was that respondents had very different interpretations towards 
what the peace walls represented. This has previously been articulated in Chapter 
Five and reinforces the importance that problem recognition has in the context of 
gauging the public mood in the agenda-setting stage of the policy process. The 
findings suggested that there was no consensus from the respondents as to what 
constituted the public mood. However, a more detailed examination revealed that 
there was agreement that both Loyalist and Republican communities that reside 
either side of the peace walls are a key element of the public mood. Building on this 
revelation, it is appropriate to adopt Kingdons (1995) framework that considers the 
engagement between elected and non-elected political representatives and their 
constituents as a method of assessing the public mood. In this case it means a 
closer examination of the relationships between Loyalist and Republican 
communities and their elected representatives to determine whether this impacts 
on how government officials determine public interest towards the issue of peace 
walls.  
7.3 Loyalist communities 
An analysis of interviewees comments revealed five themes that best illustrate the 
complexities that relate to Loyalist working class communities and the relationship 
with their political representatives. It is anticipated that this analysis will provide an 
insight into how Unionist elected politicians assess the public mood within their 
constituencies where peace walls are situated.  Firstly, respondents indicated that 
there was a perceived absence of any relationship in some areas between the 
Loyalist working class community and the mainstream Unionist parties i.e. the 
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP). According to 
interviewees there had never really been positive, meaningful partnerships between 
the electorate and the Unionist politicians:  
 They have always taken our vote for granted, and they were probably  right. 
People in the past just voted for the Protestant person. Nobody really 
questioned what they were going to do, it was all about the Union and 
keeping the others out (Loyalist 4 representative).  
A number of respondents from a Loyalist background recalled the mid 1990s as a 
time when it became apparent that their political leaders were particularly 
uninterested in the bread and butter issues that were facing the Loyalist working 
class people. Holloway (1995) confirms this position, drawing attention to an 
emerging crisis within Protestant working class communities at the time of the first 
paramilitary cease-fires. Much of this crisis stemmed from an apparent lack of 
interest shown by the Unionist politicians in any issues apart from those that 
pertained to the constitutional question. Furthermore, research conducted by Hall 
(2006) documented Loyalist views of the mainstream Unionist parties and noted 
dissenting views and criticisms of their policies and failure to respond to the needs 
of the Loyalist people. Although difficult to substantiate there have been claims in 
the media, namely the News Letter (2011) that a number of people from a Loyalist 
background, residing in the Shankill Road have been voting for Sinn Fin because of 
a breakdown in relationships with Unionist political parties. This claim resonates 
with the views held by Hackett and Blomkvist (2008) that there is a pervading sense 
of political apathy and frustration within Loyalist communities in relation to their 
elected representatives. 
Aside from failing to proactively address problems and issues within these 
communities, respondents noted that mainstream Unionism adopted tactics based 
on fear to garner political support. Since the paramilitary cease-fires, several 
interviewees from the Loyalist community maintained that Unionist politics was 
based on scaremongering and about controlling their communities through a 
politics of fear: 
 It has all been about the green tide of Nationalism sweeping over the  border 
attacking our culture and identity by taking our territory and removing our 
symbols and flags (Loyalist 7 representative).  
According to one respondent, these negative politics had prompted Loyalist 
communities to become ultra defensive, which made them look extremely negative 
and lacking in confidence (Loyalist 6 representative).  
A second theme related to the number of elected representatives from Unionist 
political parties that were based in the communities where interviewees from a 
Loyalist background had identified the greatest need. Respondents were referring to 
areas such as the Shankill, Old Park, the Crumlin Road and Tigers Bay, all in North 
and West Belfast, all have peace walls, and all have been synonymous with a strong 
Protestant and Loyalist culture and sense of identity (McAuley, 2005). However, it 
emerged that there was a lack of Unionist/Loyalist representation at both local and 
national levels for these communities when compared with the levels of political 
representation for the neighbouring Nationalist/Republican communities: 
There just isnt the same number of politicians around. There are not any 
MLAs in the West of the city, and considering the growing Catholic 
population, it doesnt look good for the rest of the city (Loyalist 4 
representative).  
Interestingly, the results from the Stormont elections on May 5 2011 reaffirmed the 
views of respondents from the Loyalist community. According to the Electoral Office 
for Northern Ireland (2011) in North Belfast there were two Republican and one 
Nationalist Memberships of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and three Unionist 
MLAs (Table 13). In West Belfast there were five Republican MLAs and one 
Nationalist MLA (Table 14). There were no representatives from the Unionist 
parties. In the two Assembly constituencies where the majority of peace walls are 
situated, there are nine Republican and Nationalist elected representatives and 
three elected Unionist politicians. These statistics lend support to respondents 
perceptions that the Unionist community in these inner-city working class electoral 
wards are not being adequately represented at Stormont.  
Table 13: North Belfast MLAs elected in 2011 
Political Party Number of Seats % of first preference votes 
Democratic Unionist Party 3 37% 
Sinn Fin 2 28.9% 
Social Democratic Labour 
Party 
Total votes cast 6 33,470 
This sense of political isolation and abandonment within the Unionist community is 
further illustrated by the voting figures for West Belfast (Table 14). These clearly 
show that 11.7% of first preference votes were cast for the DUP and the UUP. 
However, neither party were successful in gaining a seat in the constituency. This 
amounts to approximately 3,900 people who may feel disenfranchised from the 
political system.  
Table 14: West Belfast MLAs Elected in 2011 
Political Party Number of Seats % of first preference votes 
Sinn Fin 5 67.1% 
Social Democratic Labour 
Party 
1 10.9% 
Democratic Unionist Party 0 7.5% 
Ulster Unionist Pary 0 4.2% 
Total votes cast 6 34,647 
Interviewees from a Loyalist background maintained the position that Unionist and 
Loyalist communities in the most socially and economically deprived electoral 
wards in Northern Ireland were not being suitably represented within the 
government institutions. It was also noted from interviewees that without political 
leadership, these neighbourhoods were missing opportunities to attract social and 
regeneration programmes. This view has also been documented in research from 
Blomkvist and Hackett (2008) who identified minimal or no political representation 
as a significant barrier to creating social and economic change, as this meant no 
strong advocate for Unionist and Loyalist communities at the policy making level 
within government.  
The third theme to emerge centred on the frustration Loyalists had the policies and 
election promises made by the mainstream Unionist parties, specifically the DUP. A 
number of respondents used the previous European election in 2009 as an example 
to illustrate the frustration they had with the DUP who they felt disregarded the 
views, opinions and concerns of the Loyalist working class electorate. During the 
European election the DUP although in government with Sinn Fin were 
encouraging Loyalist communities to vote for them to restrict Sinn Fin from 
topping the Northern Ireland electoral poll:  
 Diane Dodds stood in the European election in 2009 under the ticket  smash 
Sinn Fin, why did she do that? Because they appeal to the lowest common 
denominator, which is fear, distrust and suspicion. Yet although this was a 
campaign about beating Sinn Fin, they were sharing power with them up in 
Stormont (Loyalist 5 representative).  
During this electoral campaign Clarke (2009) documented extensively the bitter 
contest between Sinn Fin and the DUP. The focus of the analysis was on the twin 
track approach to politics that was being shown by both parties. While criticising 
each other in the campaign arena, they continued to work together within the NI 
Executive to govern Northern Ireland. However, these mixed messages simply 
confused and frustrated many of the electorate from the Loyalist community and left 
them thinking that the politicians (DUP) were unconcerned about the social and 
economic issues that were impacting upon them.  
Fourthly, there was a view from interviewees that Unionist politicians in the past 
had withheld resources or put up barriers to community-based initiatives because 
members of the community were considered a threat to the political establishment: 
 For years there have been many cases and incidents of where resources 
 have actually been denied by politicians (Unionist) into these 
 communitiesI know one example were 500,000 was returned because 
 they claimed they could not spend it. They simply did not want to 
 empower people to be able to do things for themselves (Loyalist 7 
 representative).  
Although these claims are difficult to substantiate, there have been previous 
accusations that mainstream Unionist political parties have been reluctant to 
facilitate programmes that would address issues on the ground. Hall (2002) 
reported that local Unionist and Loyalist communities were frustrated with their 
politicians because of a perceived failure to address local issues and were only 
visible during times of crisis management. More recently, Fearon (2010) has 
reported that the leader of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), Jackie McDonald 
has called on Unionist politicians to become more active in supporting working class 
communities in addressing social issues. The UDA contend that the elected 
representatives have been slow to develop working partnerships with the 
community, where the power is equally distributed among the community and grass 
roots initiatives have an opportunity to develop.  
The fifth and final theme refers to Loyalists perceptions of the level of engagement 
between the Republican community and their own politicians compared to what 
Loyalists experience themselves. The respondents held the view that Republicans 
had a much stronger relationship with their elected representatives:  
There has been more community development done in terms of the 
Catholic/Nationalist/Republican community, probably because of the access 
they have to their politicians and the connectivity that existsas opposed to 
the Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist community (Loyalist 6 representative).  
Respondents considered the Republican community to be at an advantage because 
of the close ties between constituents and politicians, which allowed for increased 
funding opportunities, better delivery of services along with strong representation 
within the institutions of devolved government. However, it should also be noted 
that there were several dissenting voices in relation to this position. They 
maintained that in recent years, Republicanism has become just as fragmented as 
Loyalism and many of the residents had the same apathy for politics that existed in 
Loyalist neighbourhoods:  
 If you stick your head over the wall, it isnt all rosy in  the  Republican   areas. 
They are splittingSinn Fin are in trouble, the dissidents arent helping the 
situationthe people want to know what they bought into (Loyalist 2 
representative).  
This analysis with Loyalist representatives has revealed the complex layers that 
exist in relation to the relationship between Loyalist communities and their elected 
representatives. It is clear that Loyalism is not a homogenous group, and within 
Loyalism there are different levels of engagement with the mainstream Unionist 
parties. The analysis has noted five distinct themes that influence the extent of this 
engagement and this in turn has an impact on how elected representatives 
determine the public mood within their communities. If politicians have a poor 
relationship with their electorate then they are going to find it difficult to assess 
their views and opinions on potential new public policies and strategies. Overall, 
this brief examination has illustrated the difficulties politicians have in defining the 
mood within Loyalism, which has a direct impact on whether peace walls can be 
positioned onto the decision-making agenda of the Northern Ireland Executive.   
7.4 Republican communities  
Similar discussions took place with interviewees from a Republican background to 
determine the level of engagement along with the nature of the relationships 
between political representatives and the Republican community. Interestingly, 
there was not the same level of discussion and debate as there was with the Loyalist 
respondents.   According to the interviewees there was a history of positive 
engagement between working class Republican communities and Sinn Fin. There 
was an acknowledgement that the SDLP had also been pro-active in responding to 
issues within these communities, but that it was very much the minority in 
comparison to Sinn Fin. The interviewees discussed the significant rise in support 
for Sinn Fin within interface communities over the last decade, often at the expense 
of support for the SDLP. A similar view was articulated by Murray and Tonge (2005) 
after they extensively reviewed both political parties and reported on the political 
rise of Sinn Fin alongside the demise of the SDLP.  
According to the respondents there was a sense of familiarity between the residents 
in Republican neighbourhoods and members of Sinn Fin that extended from 
council representatives to Ministers in the Northern Ireland Executive. This enabled 
the party to both comprehend and be in a position to address the needs of the 
community in which they resided. Several interviewees recounted incidents were 
Sinn Fin advocated and promoted the social and economic needs of Republican 
working class communities through policy initiatives and strategies. According to 
respondents this was one of the reasons that Sinn Fin managed to build a strong 
support base within Nationalist and Republican working class communities. Bean 
(2007) has examined closely the areas where Sinn Fin has had electoral success 
and noted a correlation between indices of social and economic deprivation and 
high levels of Sinn Fin community engagement. The thesis findings suggest that 
elected representatives have developed a sense of the public mood within 
Republican communities through community events, workshops and discussion 
events that were frequently attended by Sinn Fin representatives: 
 We would put flyers out advertising an event and hold it in the     community 
centreusually they are about local issues like policing, drugs  or the health 
services, and you would see Gerry or Caral or someone from the  party there 
(Republican 4 representative).  
There also appeared to be a strong community infrastructure within certain 
Republican neighbourhoods that appeared to work alongside and complement the 
actions of the political representatives. According to Republican respondents there 
was an emphasis placed on the views of local people, with numerous opportunities 
for local residents to articulate their concerns and opinions:  
 We have went about developing programmes to hear what people with no 
 previous involvement in community activitiesschool teachers, window 
 cleaners, home owners, taxi drivers etc. and asked them to talk about  issues 
 they face within their community (Republican 6 representative).  
It was interesting to note from one elected representative, that the community often 
used other mechanisms to garner public opinion and address issues. There were 
areas that other community and voluntary organisations shared the responsibility 
and worked alongside the politicians to address specific issues. This engagement 
and co-operation meant that elected representatives were not only aware of the 
public mood within their constituencies, but they could also assess public 
satisfaction or disapproval for particular policies:  
 There are all sorts of people involved. You have faith groups, community 
 activists, and ex-prisoners who are all mixed up in this work and that can 
 only be good (Republican MLA).  
According to one interviewee the support for elected representatives was based 
very much upon the party delivering real change in the community and responding 
to the needs of the community. In the case of Republican working class areas, 
housing was considered as one of the key issues prevalent within the area:  
 If you look from 1969 to today the Catholic community in the Bone, 
 Ardoyne and the New Lodge has been expanding. Walls have been used as 
 a way of trying to contain thatSinn Fin are there to promote the needs 
 of its constituents, of which housing is of primary concern (Republican 
 MLA).  
According to respondents the fact that elected representatives historically had a 
record of delivering for communities, especially around housing concerns, went 
some way to consolidating the relationships between residents and politicians. For 
example, one of the explanations for Sinn Fins meteoric rise in Belfast City Council 
was their ability to work across communities and deliver substantial policies that 
made real differences to the electorate (Tonge, 2006). The stronger the relationship 
between the community and the politicians the easier it was for the politicians to 
determine their mood towards specific policies.  
It was also interesting to note that interviewees thought that local newspapers could 
be used by politicians as mechanisms of assessing the public mood within 
Republican communities. Several respondents pointed to the Andersonstown News 
and the North Belfast News as methods of gauging the publics reaction to particular 
public policy issues. According to the editor of the former, the paper has been 
described as an ultra-reliable barometer of Nationalist opinion, if West Belfast really 
is the cockpit of the North, the Andytown News has become its instrument panel 
(Livingstone, 2007). Historically, the Andersonstown News has been a staunch and 
loyal supporter of Republicanism and particularly the policies of Sinn Fin. They 
have articulated the party position and highlighted issues and problems within West 
Belfast that the party has addressed. However, it should also be noted that the paper 
has on occasion criticised the party. An article by a pro-Sinn Fin columnist 
Squinter heavily criticised the MP for West Belfast Gerry Adams, for not addressing 
issues of violence, anti-social behaviour and the fear of crime (Andersonstown 
News, 2008a). Interestingly, the paper apologised for the article in a front-page 
headline in the next edition, noting that the tone and timing of the article were 
wrong in the current climate (Andersonstown News, 2008b).  
The majority of respondents from a Republican background concluded that the 
relationships between elected representatives and working class Republican 
communities were relatively strong. However, there was a realisation that there 
were those from within the community that disagreed with Sinn Fins politics and 
their role in the Stormont government. The recent upsurge in dissident Republican 
paramilitary activities lends support to the idea that there is a growing constituency 
of people from within working class Republican communities that are prepared to 
disagree with the mainstream Republican position advocated by Sinn Fin. Research 
by Frampton (2009) has documented the nature and extent of the threat of 
dissident Republican paramilitary groups and concluded that this threat is at its 
highest level in over a decade. Furthermore, the research noted that dissidents were 
developing increased control in republican areas throughout Northern Ireland. A 
report by Tonge (2010) reaffirms the findings from Frampton in which a survey 
revealed that 14% of Nationalists sympathised with dissident Republican terrorists, 
with young Nationalist working-class males the dominant grouping that showed 
support. One further point is that in the 2011 local Northern Ireland council 
elections, Eirigi a small political grouping based on revolutionary socialist principles 
took the decision to stand a small number of candidates in the council elections. The 
party who oppose the policies of Sinn Fin stood two candidates in the Lower and 
Upper Falls electoral wards. Interestingly, the candidate in the Lower Falls was an 
ex-republican prisoner and blanket man Padraic Mac Coitir who had become 
disillusioned with the strategies and tactics adopted by Sinn Fin (Ryan, 2011). 
Although the two candidates failed to get elected, together they polled 2,062 first 
preference votes (BCC, 2011b), which is a substantial number considering this is an 
area where the electorate are widely supportive of Sinn Fin. These recent academic 
studies and the emergence of a new Republican political party provide evidence that 
there are those from within Republican communities that are not supportive of the 
policies and strategies endorsed and promoted by Sinn Fin. This illustrates the 
difficulties that political representatives in certain Republican communities may 
have in assessing the public mood towards policies, strategies and initiatives the 
political party is attempting to place onto the decision-making agenda of the NI 
Executive. 
Discussions with interviewees on the relationship between Republican working 
class communities and their political representatives present a mixed assessment. 
There is no doubting the success that Sinn Fin as a Republican political party has 
had in working class Republican communities. This support has provided them with 
a political mandate to make decisions that affect these communities. Furthermore, 
the close working relationships that exist between members of the party and its 
constituents means that it is in a strong position to measure public opinion on 
issues and policy decisions. However, there is a counter-argument based upon a 
growing body of evidence that indicates dissent within Republican communities 
towards the mainstream Republican political party is growing, which makes it more 
difficult for those elected representatives to accurately judge the public mood.  
Summary  
This analysis of the public mood has revealed several distinct features that 
contribute to our understanding of its relevance in the context of the agenda-setting 
stage of the policy process. From the outset, defining what constitutes the public 
mood in relation to an understanding on peace walls proved both complex and 
fraught with difficulties. The debate ensued as to whether peace walls were a Belfast 
city issue or instead a national issue? Depending on how one viewed the relevance 
of the peace walls, very much impacted on their interpretation of what constituted 
the public mood and therefore the influence they have on the agenda-setting stage 
of the policy process. Although the respondents were divided on who to incorporate 
into a group that represented the public mood, there was consensus that Loyalist 
and Republican communities either side of the peace walls were a central 
constituent.  
The assessment of the public mood towards peace walls was framed in a similar 
way to Kingdons (1995) approach, with politicians considered the central actors 
who were in a position to assess what the public were thinking. The findings 
revealed that within Loyalist and Republican communities, a range of different 
audiences may have very different relationships with their politicians, which would 
significantly impact on how politicians interpret the public mood on peace walls. In 
the case of Loyalist working class areas there was clearly a sense of apathy and 
frustration within communities towards the mainstream Unionist political parties. 
This gap in support raises the possibility that the politicians are not in a position to 
gauge the mood within the community towards specific issues such as the 
development of a process on peace walls. In Republican communities there 
appeared to be a large amount of support for the mainstream Republican Party, Sinn 
Fin. This should enable the elected representatives to continually assess the 
communitys views and opinions on government strategies and policies. However, 
recent evidence has illustrated increased community support for paramilitary and 
political groups that are opposed to Sinn Fin, which allows the introduction of 
some doubt as to whether mainstream Republican politicians are best placed to 
report on the public mood in Republican working class communities.  This analysis 
has touched on the idiosyncrasies that surround an analysis of the public mood and 
its influence on promoting an issue onto the decision-making agenda. Those that 
reside closest to the peace walls make up a core group of those that constitute the 
public mood. However, this alone may not be enough to raise the profile of the 
issue onto the decision-making agenda. For that reason one must also consider the 
impact of political leadership on how the public perceive the issue.  
7.5 Political leadership 
The interviewees were divided as to the amount of political leadership that has been 
shown by the NI Executive in its first term, and its impact on the public mood 
towards the institutions. Firstly, there was a consensus from several interviewees 
that the public mood was influenced by societys interpretation of relationships 
between the individual elected representatives and the political parties in 
government. Respondents identified good, positive leadership as the reason that 
there were significant improvements to the relationships between elected members 
of the different political parties. According to respondents, this had influenced 
relationships on the ground: 
 For years the politicians didnt engage, so why should the 
 communitiesbut now there is a sense that it is all changing. Up in the hill 
 (Stormont) they are talking and working together. That makes it easier 
 for communities to work together (NGO 3 representative).  
A further development that had a direct impact on the public mood towards the 
politicians and more importantly the NI Executive, were the actions and responses 
of the First and Deputy First Ministers during times of crisis: 
 They stood together after that sectarian murder in Coleraine, and then 
 you had the dissident attacks and rioting in Belfast. That showed stability 
 and convinced people this was something worth investing in (Republican 
 8 representative).    
The media provided striking images and sound bites of First Minister Robinson and 
Deputy First Minister McGuiness with the Chief Constable Matt Baggott condemning 
the actions of those involved in the killing of the two British soldiers and policeman 
over a 48 hour period, and the dissident inspired rioting in Ardoyne on the 12 of July 
(McDonald, 2010). However, others were more critical and felt that the government 
should have been doing more to address the legacy of the conflict which might have 
prevented these types of incidents: 
 It is easy for them to fire fight on issues and to be seen to be addressing 
 issues of racism, homophobia, or outbreaks of sectarian violence. So in 
 many ways they are good at dealing with the symptoms rather than 
 addressing the core problems (Government 7 representative). 
The second theme identified from several respondents opposed this view and 
indicated that decision-makers had been reluctant to provide leadership on the 
issue of peace walls, which had inadvertently had an impact on public opinion 
towards the topic. Essentially, interviewees contended that if politicians fail to 
acknowledge the importance and relevance of placing the issue of peace walls onto 
the policy agenda, then in the long-term the general public would remain 
ambivalent to the issue.  
Several respondents also talked about the lack of political direction that surrounds 
the peace walls. They compare this with the normalisation strategies employed by 
the British government and military after the paramilitary ceasefires and how there 
was a plan and direction to follow:  
They didnt say to the shopkeepers in Belfast city centre, ah you decide 
yourself when the security barriers are coming down. And in   Armagh    they 
didnt leave it up to the communities about when it was right to remove the 
army installations. There was a clear government strategy for  the removal 
of those pieces of the Troubles architecture, so there needs to  be the same 
for the peace walls (NGO 1 representative). 
Discussions concerning the relationship between peace walls, political leadership 
and public opinion can also be defined by the wider issues of courage and risk-
taking. Respondents acknowledged the sensitivities surrounding the subject, and 
that the negative ramifications of focusing on peace walls could out-weigh any 
positives:  
 One of the reasons that political leadership is so weak is that there is a 
 genuine fear amongst politicians that if they step out and take a lead that 
 they will be shot down by other peopleif it goes badly wrong and a wall 
 gets taken down and someone gets hurt, then they as political leaders will 
 get the blame (Alliance MP).  
According to respondents there has historically been an absence of collective 
leadership from political parties and their leaders on the issue of peace walls. There 
was recognition among respondents that politicians during elections design their 
manifestos to appeal specifically to their own constituents and often ignore others 
that are not from a specific ethnic or religious group. Research by Evans and Duffy 
(1997) on the sectarian divide within Unionist and Nationalist political parties 
reinforces this position. However, in this context, several interviewees indicated 
that because of the symbolism attached to the peace walls, that the NI Executive 
should administer strong political leadership and maturity in a collective capacity to 
influence public opinion on any future policy process: 
 There needs to be leadership from the Executive, which would see them 
 acknowledging that we are projecting a normal society where intolerance 
 in all of its manifestations is tackled head on, where physical barriers 
 separating communities are no longer present and every effort will be 
 taken with the agreement of communities to remove themso I think a 
 very strong policy statement of intent needs to come from the politicians 
 (Government 6 representative).  
These thoughts may be more aspirational than practical considering previous 
incidents where the political leaders have failed to present a collective front on 
specific policies. The A Shared Future Document (2005) discussed in (2.5) was an 
opportunity for local politicians to embrace a road map to address segregation, 
division and sectarianism across society, but they failed to either endorse or 
implement the policy. Furthermore, the CSI consultation document which was a 
renewed attempt to develop a government response to segregation and hate crime 
caused division within the Executive, with the leader of the SDLP Margaret Ritchie 
stating that it was taking a step back from A Shared Future (SDLP, 2010), and the 
UUP leader noting that the document failed to provide any sense of direction or 
vision for a shared future (McAdam, 2010). However, the Sinn Fin and DUP 
leadership were more supportive of the document, noting that it provided an 
opportunity to provide a framework to address sectarianism and all forms of hate 
crime (BBC, 2010).  
In conclusion the political institutions have recently responded through positive 
leadership to growing incidents of dissident paramilitary violence and episodes of 
sectarianism. However, as respondents noted, there has been an absence of 
leadership from elected representatives on the complex issues such as the legacy of 
the conflict, segregation and sectarianism. This perceived gap in political leadership 
has not gone unnoticed, with renewed attempts to influence political 
representatives and decision-makers on issues pertaining to the conflict through the 
use of community and interest group campaigns. These are discussed in more detail 
below.  2 
7.6 Pressure group campaigns  
When referring to interest group pressure, Kingdon (1995) uses the notion of 
political mobilization (Birkland, 1998), along with the behaviour of political elites 
(Beckett, 1994) and interest groups (Bratton and Haynie, 1999) to illustrate the 
complexities that surround the subject. According to Kingdon, if the decision makers 
sense that individuals and organisations are thinking and moving in a similar 
direction with regards to an idea or proposal, then there is a high probability that it 
would receive political support. In a similar vein, if there is a lack of harmony within 
various individuals and groups towards a specific issue, then politicians may 
consider ignoring it.  
In the context of peace walls as a potential policy issue, respondents were quick to 
allude to several examples where local groups had recently organised campaigns 
aimed at placing pressure on elected representatives to support their call for new 
barriers. One elected representative recalled the concerted attempts 
representatives from both Nationalist and Unionist communities had made in 
support of the construction of a peace wall:  
 I argued along with a number of people for the last peace fence that went up 
in the integrated primary school in 2008. Now I argued for it, and so  did the 
DUP, and we dont often agree with thingsbut people were telling us their 
lives were in danger (Junior Minister).  
As previously noted, the 25-foot peace wall was finally erected in the grounds of the 
school in May 2008 (McGready, 2008). Interviewees indicated that residents that 
lived in interface neighbourhoods had a long history of responding to issues 
pertaining to the peace walls: 
 Word would get around that they are thinking of taking it down (peace 
 wall); or maybe there were calls for one to be built. Either way, people 
 quickly got the message and started putting pressure on the authorities 
 (Loyalist 8 representative).  
This notion that local people could place pressure on elected representatives in 
relation to the construction of peace walls was previously discussed in Chapter Two, 
(2.5) where the literature highlighted the increased lobbying from both Loyalist and 
Republican communities for peace walls after the paramilitary cease-fires. A 
historical review of local newspapers has revealed a number of examples where 
local residents had instigated pressure groups in an attempt to influence the 
government and security force policies relating to peace walls. The Belfast 
Telegraph (1994) documented a campaign for a new peace wall from a large 
number of Nationalist residents from the Springfield Road in West Belfast. They 
lobbied Sinn Fin to support their calls for an extension to the existing peace wall to 
protect residents from Loyalist attacks. Similarly, the Belfast Telegraph (1998) 
reported that Unionist residents from the Donegal Pass area of South Belfast had 
formed a group that was prepared to picket the train line at rush hour if the security 
forces did not address the violence that had been perpetrated by members of the 
neighbouring Nationalist community. Community-based advocacy groups were not 
always about lobbying for the construction of new peace walls. In fact the Irish News 
(2002) reported on a Nationalist residents group that were putting pressure on 
elected representatives not to remove the security barrier in Newington street 
within North Belfast. The residents carried posters with the slogan save the barrier, 
save our lives. This brief analysis illustrates the emotive nature of peace walls, and 
captures the influences that community based interest groups had on elected 
representatives.  
When pressed on the importance of interest and pressure groups in the context of 
setting and implementing policy, respondents were quick to allude to the parochial 
nature of governance in Northern Ireland. Discussions have already revealed that 
many Republican political representatives reside within the communities adjacent 
to the peace walls (section 7.2). This localised approach to politics was seen as both 
a hindrance and facilitator to achieving outcomes on specific issues: 
 The personal approach to issues means that people know people. Those 
 in power cannot go far without meeting someone attached to the issue. 
 There is also a chance that they know the impact of the policy, or the 
 dangers of not responding to the pressure from a group (Republican
 1representative).  
Furthermore, interviewees suggested that the current political make-up of the 
Executive (6 positions for the DUP; 5 positions for Sinn Fin; 2 positions for the 
Alliance; 1 position for UUP; and 1 for SDLP) means that political power is largely 
divided between Sinn Fin and the DUP. Therefore, interest-groups that reflect 
either Republican or Loyalist interests have only to lobby one political party:  
 First of all the table is divided up in a way that tends to suit groups who 
 are lobbying from one particular community perspectiveyou have the 
 DUP and Sinn Fin which makes it a carve up (NGO  4 representative).  
More recently the nature and representation of interest groups associated with 
peace walls has changed. The Interagency Working Group (IWG) previously 
discussed in section 5.3 could be construed in some ways as an interest group. 
Although consisting of members who work and reside in interface communities, and 
others who deliver services across the peace walls it considers the issue more 
broadly in the context of regeneration and investment and is not fixated with local 
issues. Furthermore, it is important to note that members of pressure and/or 
interest groups are not simply residents within Loyalist and Republican working 
class communities that live close to peace walls. Platform for Change is an example 
of a new organisation established in 2009 to promote a renewal and realignment of 
politics in Northern Ireland. The group is made up of citizens from across the 
region, and does not use religious or communal terms to define the demographics of 
its membership. The goal of the organisation is to generate debate and discussion on 
the role of government and promote the need for a genuine power sharing coalition 
in Northern Ireland. Platform for Change has recognised the social and economic 
negativities associated with the peace walls, reaffirmed a commitment to the need 
for shared neighbourhoods, and advocated the need for the necessary security 
conditions to remove the peace walls (Platform for Change Agenda, 2009).  
Historically, the interest and pressure group campaigns pertaining to peace walls 
have been localised, practically on a street-by-street basis. The protection of 
property and life was the key message that emanated from the groups, and was 
often the deciding factor in the construction of a new, or extension of an existing 
peace wall. However, the emergence of the Interagency Working Group and 
organisations such as Platform for Change have transformed the conversation, and 
provided a more holistic approach to the subject of peace walls.  
7.7 Government Structures and institutions  
Aside from the relationship between the public and elected representatives, 
Kingdon (1995) contended that the structures within government had a direct 
influence on the agenda setting process. The institutions and departments 
responsible for the delivery of policies were considered a major component of the 
political stream. The following section considers the relevance of the devolved 
administration and the various institutions to promoting peace walls onto the 
decision-making agenda. It will also consider the dynamics of local politics and 
consider the impact these may have on the ability of key actors to promote a peace 
walls process.  
From the outset a number of interviewees were concerned about the capabilities of 
the NI Executive to deliver significant policy change due to the polarised political 
agendas that existed between the parties that were represented in the Executive. 
Respondents pointed to the nature of forced coalition that has resulted in five very 
different parties attempting to share power in the NI Executive. The consociational 
framework that underpinned the NI Assembly was identified as the reason for the 
lack of co-ordination and joined up governance within the Executive (McGarry and 
OLeary, 2009). For the purposes of this thesis it is important to recognise the 
consociational nature of government and power sharing in Northern Ireland 
(Lijphart, 2001; Guelke, 2009; Wolff , 2009), however, it is not an area under 
investigation or one that forms part of the research analysis.  
Several respondents were of the opinion that individual political party agendas 
were impacting on the NI governments ability to develop and implement policies in 
a cohesive and structured manner. Within the political arena of Stormont, the ability 
to bring issues and proposals to the attention of the NI Executive by elected 
members was considered difficult, as the politicians were often reluctant to discuss 
issues that may destabilise the political institutions:  
 The way it works is that the First Minster and Deputy First Minister have 
 to agree the agenda (prior to an executive meeting) and if they decide that 
 an item should not be on the agenda, then it isnt. So if one doesnt want to 
 talk about health or education reform, then it is simply kept off the 
 agenda (Government 7 representative).  
The DUP and Sinn Fin hold both primary positions in the OFMDFM. Therefore as 
the two dominant parties they have significant control over the political agenda in 
the NI Executive. This was illustrated in 2008 when Sinn Fin had a public fall out 
with the DUP over the devolution of Policing and Justice. This resulted in Sinn Fin 
failing to agree an agenda for an Executive meeting with their DUP colleagues, with 
the outcome being no Executive meeting for four consecutive months (McAdam, 
2008). Respondents provided further examples of incidents where the political 
actions of members of the Executive did little to promote a sense of unity and 
collectiveness. Several interviewees remarked on the different statements from 
Ministers relating to the impact of the economic climate on government services and 
the subsequent budget cuts. The local media has also reported on the fragmented 
nature of the Executive with Curran (2011) noting a sense of dismay with the 
political responses to the budget plans, drawing attention to the inter-party rivalry 
around the Executive, and a failure of the Executive to exercise collective 
responsibility. One respondent maintained that:  
 You had a health Minister donning a cloth cap at a trade union rally at city 
 hall, lending his support to those campaigning against cutshaving just 
 come out of an Executive meeting where a public expenditure settlement 
 had just occurredwhat kind of message does that send out? (Government 6 
representative).  
Clarke (2011) has reinforced these views, commenting that the draft budget plans 
exposed the weakness of the NI Executive, and highlighted the differences compared 
to the Irish or British cabinets where coalition governments had been negotiated. 
This was illustrated by the very public criticism of the budget by the Health Minister 
Mr McGimpsey. At the time the Belfast Telegraph (Curran, 2011a) concluded that it 
was political suicide for Ministers to publicly criticise their ministerial colleagues. 
During the heated debates between the Health Minister and the First Minister Peter 
Robinson, the First Minister stated that anybody who looks at how government 
operates will recognise that in any other form of administration the Health Minister 
would have been sacked (Robinson, 2011). These very public exchanges illustrate 
the difficulties the NI Executive has in portraying a collective approach to 
formulating public policies and governing Northern Ireland.  
A number of respondents commented on the apparent division that existed within 
the NI Executive, and the apparent lack of Ministerial accountability. There was a 
sense from interviewees that personal and political agendas had the potential to 
take precedence over a collective agenda advocated by the NI Executive:  
 The current system allows Ministers their own fiefdoms to make decisions 
within their own budgetary scope. And often in a coalition arrangement like 
this they tend to make populist decisions, and then blame their own 
Executive Ministers for not giving them the money (Government 7 
representative). 
This view has been reinforced by Birrell and Gray (2010) who documented several 
examples of individualised decision-making by Ministers from 2007. On a number of 
occasions these decisions had brought the Executive into disagreement, and caused 
Ministers to publicly criticise their colleagues in government. The decision by the 
Education Minister to abolish the 11+ examination (McDonald, 2009) is one 
example of this ministerial individualism, which is considered an outcome of the 
absence of collective responsibility in the NI Executive. According to Birrell and Gray 
(2010) this has encouraged the operation of government departments as silos or 
Ministerial fiefdoms with limited cross-departmental co-operation and working.  
Respondents concluded that the special system of governance where 
accommodation took primacy has resulted in policy stagnation. This view has also 
been put forward by Knox and Carmichael (2010) who have suggested that the 
structure of government has led to grid-lock in the decision-making process, 
especially with regard to contentious issues. For all five main political parties in 
government a culture of political blame has become prominent, and the OFMDFM 
has found it more and more difficult to exercise leadership and project a sense of 
unity: 
 The idea was you work with OFMDFM. But I think the dysfunctional  nature 
of the Executive where everything is siloed and there is little capacity for 
cross-departmental working and support makes this very difficult (NGO 5 
representative). 
Respondents were asked whether they thought that the general public were critical 
of the governments lack of cohesion and direction on certain strategies and policies. 
There was a consensus from interviewees that there was a sense of frustration from 
the public around the lack of decisions being made, or the ability of the Executive to 
respond to perceived controversial issues. Recent statistical data from the Northern 
Ireland Life and Times Surveys (2007-2009) substantiated these claims (table 15). 
Results highlighted the fact that in 2007, only 26% of people were fairly or very 
dissatisfied with MLAs. However by 2009 this figure had increased to 53%.  
Table 15: Are you satisfied with the way Northern Ireland MLAs are doing 
their job?  
Response 2009 2008 2007 
Very satisfied 1 1 2 
Fairly satisfied 21 13 43 
Neither / or 25 18 26 
Fairly dissatisfied 28 30 17 
Very dissatisfied 25 37 9 
Dont know 1 3 3 
Source: NI Life and Times Survey2007-2009 
Further statistical data from a study commissioned by the NI Executive (Lawther 
and Evans, 2010) on the public views on the devolved government also revealed 
mixed results. Three quarters of respondents (75%) agreed that the NI Executive 
had helped bring peace and stability to Northern Ireland. However, only 54% agreed 
that the Executive was making a real difference to life in Northern Ireland. 
Furthermore, 43% of people felt well informed about what the Executive was doing. 
These statistics alongside the views from the interviewees reveal a growing sense of 
public frustration with the NI Executive in relation to tackling and delivering on the 
difficult issues through collaboration and political partnerships. Interviewees were 
then asked specifically about peace walls as a policy issue, and whether they felt that 
the NI Executive had the ability to collectively incorporate peace walls onto their 
agenda. According to one interviewee, the peace walls were considered a divisive 
issue that had the potential to split opinion within the NI Executive: 
 In terms of the Ministers and the Executive it is a mixed bag, some of them 
 see it and some of them dont. Some are passionate, but only a 
 minoritythere isnt that kind of drive (Alliance MP). 
Interestingly, the Justice Minister David Ford has repeatedly acknowledged the 
negative impacts of the peace walls. He has also made it clear that the long term 
solution does not rest solely with the Department of Justice, and that partnerships 
need to be made at both political and community levels (Ford, 2011). Respondents 
were asked whether they thought that the Ministries in the NI Executive were 
capable of working together on strategies and policies associated with the peace 
walls. Several respondents recalled personal experiences of working with the 
different departments on issues associated with peace walls. These were described 
as being largely negative, dominated by poor communication, a lack of 
accountability and a failure from specific departments to acknowledge 
responsibility for peace wall related issues: 
 This issue straddles a number of departments. But a lot of departments 
would not see peace walls as being part of their agenda. Its almost like, the 
NIO put them up, and then they can take them down. When I worked on the 
development of the North Belfast strategy it was difficult for other agencies 
to figure out what their role was in relation to the removal of  peace walls 
(Government 1 representative). 
Overall the respondents felt that the forced coalition was an impediment to raising 
the issue of peace walls into the policy agenda because the political sensitivities 
attached to the issue, meant that achieving a collective consensus on action would 
prove difficult. Furthermore, developing cross-departmental responsibility and 
ownership for something as challenging as peace walls may be difficult to achieve. 
To better understand how the political parties operate within these governmental 
institutions, one must consider the membership of the political parties, their 
electorate and how these influence their policy positions.   
7.8 Party politics  
Aside from the government institutions the respondents considered the political 
parties themselves and their electorate as important in how decisions were taken in 
relation to the formulation of public policies. Historically, party politics in Northern 
Ireland has been characterised by polarisation. This was further evidenced by the 
views expressed by respondents, who suggested that the political system invariably 
takes us down a sectarian headcount (government 6 representative). The 
discussions with interviewees focused on the relationship between the electorate 
and the political parties, noting that the largest two parties had very identifiable 
constituents:  
 You have to remember even with this whole concept of shared power and 
devolution, voting it still factionalised. So the DUP have their vote and      Sinn 
Fin have their vote, and that isnt going to change (Republican 5 
representative).  
Essentially, respondents acknowledged that across Northern Ireland, and 
particularly within interface communities, those from the Catholic community voted 
in a Republican/Nationalist block, and those from the Protestant community voted 
in Loyalist/Unionist block. Graham and Nash (2006) have reflected on the division 
that exists within the electorate and concluded that the electoral primacy of Sinn 
Fin and the DUP could be interpreted as the democratic endorsement of a form of 
apartheid. According to respondents the maintenance of a divided electorate was 
considered to be positive and beneficial for the two dominant political parties. 
Interviewees felt that from a policy perspective, both Sinn Fin and the DUP would 
not promote controversial and sensitive ideas and issues that would dilute their 
own power base. Inevitably this led several respondents to question the willingness 
of the dominant parties to enter into a policy process that may result in the removal 
of the peace walls:  
 The two biggest parties in control have historically been single identity. 
 Their  voters are single identity. They are going through a period of 
 uncertainty and so to hang onto their electorate it suits their interests  to 
 keep single identity communities (NGO 4 representative).  
Interestingly, McLaughlins (2005) research suggested that as a result of the design 
of the coalition government, the NI Executive would find it difficult to reach 
agreement on core social policies. Instead consensus would only be reached on the 
lowest common denominator of issues, and this would lead to a conservative 
approach to the development of social policy. This has been highlighted by the 
decisions made on populist issues such as the non-implementation of water charges; 
the abolition of prescription charges and a rates freeze (Knox, 2010). However, the 
NI Executive has been unable to reach agreement on several areas that may or may 
not have a direct impact on the constituents of the DUP and Sinn Fin. These include 
a proposed Irish Language act, the reform of district councils, and the regeneration 
of the Girdwood Army Barracks site (Knox, 2010).   
Several interviewees made observations about the implications for political parties 
if peace walls were removed. The respondents indicated that the removal of walls 
had the potential to reconfigure the demographics within electoral wards. It was 
suggested that this had the potential to threaten the political power bases of elected 
representatives with small majorities:  
 If you draw your support from a single section of the community, and  largely 
what motivates people to vote for you is fear of the other and the fear of what 
would happen if they didnt...if that is your selling point, then of course the 
removal of the walls is a risk (Alliance MP).  
The discussions went further, with the more cynical respondents contending that it 
was not in the interests of some politicians to advocate for any policy that 
encouraged the transformation of peace walls: 
 (Q) From an electoral viewpoint it maybe suits some MLAs not to have 
 walls removed? 
 (R) Yeah, yeah, and there is logic to that. If you have this contained 
 electorate why would you blur that, why would you undermine your 
 position (NGO 5 representative).  
Several interviewees from a Republican background used North Belfast and the 
competition between Nigel Dodds (DUP) and Gerry Kelly (Sinn Fin) for the 
Parliamentary seat (Smyth, 2005) to illustrate the potential impact of the removal of 
peace walls: 
 You take down a few walls, and you are left with massive areas for 
 housing. The largest numbers of people on the housing waiting lists are 
 from the Nationalist community. That can only be good for Kelly 
 (Republican 7 representative).   
In recent years the political dominance of the DUP in the North Belfast area has 
considerably decreased. In the recent Westminster Election in 2010, the DUP held 
the seat with a lead of 2,224 votes from Sinn Fin. However, the margin had 
significantly decreased from a majority of 5,188 in the 2005 General Election. 
Although purely speculative, Republican respondents assumed that the removal of 
peace walls in this area would politically be more beneficial to Sinn Fin as opposed 
to the DUP.  
One further topic of discussion centred on the issue of individual political party 
agendas. Although related to the previous debate on the relevance of structures 
within government, this theme focused on the notion that there were competing 
party versus NI Executive agendas. Respondents felt that on occasion political self-
interest and the needs of ones political party came into direct conflict with the 
overarching principles of collective governing. The difficulty for some Ministers was 
that they were appealing to a number of audiences, which was a relatively new 
concept in Northern Ireland politics. They had their own constituents who voted for 
their party, but the Ministers also had to attach themselves to the collective sense of 
identity associated with the NI Executive:  
You had individual Ministers making statements instead of the 
Executivethe classic one was the free bus passes for old people. You had 
Peter Robinson (Minster for Regional Development) wanting to announce it 
in terms of his department and ultimately party, and OFMDFM wanting to 
announce it as an Executive decision (Government 6 representative).  
It was also noted that politicians were also accountable to their electorate even for 
decisions that they had no control over. Very often, collective decisions were made 
in the Executive that they were associated with, but the impacts of the policy could 
have negative implications for their electorate: 
 Your local MLA could be the Minister for Social Developmentyou could have 
voted for him because of the party he was from. But once he is in power, the 
government agenda overtakes everything, and he might have to cut housing 
schemes (Republican 7 representative).  
Recently, the Chair of the Northern Ireland Institute of Directors further 
reconfirmed these observations when she noted that elected representatives had 
been competing with their colleagues on issues of policy and governance. The Chair 
criticised the current approach Stormont had taken to the economic downturn, 
along with the public spats over the draft budget plans, and advocated a more 
collegiate approach to the planning and development of policy: 
It does not helpthat some Ministers are chipping away at each other at 
every-public opportunity. Government must be decisive, act cohesively and 
deliver the action it is responsible for. It must not be one in which individuals 
or groups seek advantage (Stuart, 2011).  
This individualism versus collectivism and party interests approach versus the need 
to prioritise government interests was a recurring theme throughout discussions. It 
added another layer to the complexities that surrounded the ability to raise the 
issue of peace walls onto the political agenda. Many respondents were of the opinion 
that segregation and division of Republican and Loyalist working class territories 
(Shirlow and Murtagh, 2006) had been replicated at the Ministerial round table, 
where the elected representatives garner much of their support from being 
advocates for these single-identity communities. Therefore there are significant 
political risks attached to the idea of supporting a policy on peace walls which 
impacts directly on their electorate and power base. As one respondent from the 
community sector concluded politicians pushing a policy for the removal of peace 
walls, would be like turkeys voting for Christmas.  
7.9 Conclusion  
This chapter has highlighted the importance of the political stream as either a 
promoter or inhibiter of high agenda status (Kingdon, 1995). The findings of this 
research have produced a number of interesting conclusions that enhance 
understanding of where peace walls may be positioned within the agenda setting 
process of public policy. The importance of identifying who and what constitutes the 
public mood is crucial when considering policy development pertaining to a policy 
on peace walls. An analysis resulting from this research has clearly illustrated, as it 
also did in Chapter Five, that there are a number of actors, both community and 
political who are important in the agenda-setting stage and who have varying 
opinions on the peace walls. According to Kingdon (1995) the actors associated with 
the politics stream, namely the politicians and decision-makers, continuously make 
assessments as to the balance of support or criticism for specific issues. In this 
context, the fractured relationship between Loyalist working class communities and 
their political representatives may impact on how decision-makers view approval 
for a policy on peace walls.  
The government structures and institutions were considered important elements to 
understanding the political relationship with the agenda setting stage of the policy 
process.  Although the political institutions have been operating since May 8 2007, 
there has been a growing sense of public frustration and cynicism around the 
governments ability to lead and govern the country. Respondents consistently 
alluded to the forced nature of the coalition, and the subsequent difficulties with 
pushing ideas and proposals onto the government agenda. In fact, the term agenda 
was used frequently in relation to individual political party agendas along with 
collective Executive agendas. By applying this analysis to peace walls, there was a 
sense that an absence of collective leadership and a failure to acknowledge 
governmental responsibility had the potential to restrict the ability of the issue of 
peace walls to find its way onto the policy agenda. The Politics Stream along with 
the Problem and Policy Streams have framed the discussions on peace walls within 
the agenda setting stage of the policy process. By bringing them together they 
provide a comprehensive overview of the issues and dynamics associated with 
peace walls, along with the roles and responsibilities of the key actors. The thesis 
now turns to an exploration of what Kingdon (1995) referred to as the windows of 
opportunity. Essentially, this draws together the main findings and provides an 
opportunity to consider the conditions and then hypothesis on how peace walls 
could be promoted onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive.  
8. Multiple Streams - Window of opportunity 
This thesis sought to interrogate Belfasts peace walls through a public policy lens 
and to suggest, where appropriate, how to place the issue of peace walls back into 
the narrative of the Northern Ireland conflict and the subsequent peace and political 
processes. The promotion of peace walls onto the decision-making agenda of the NI 
Executive in some sense would be recognition that the issue has risen in political 
prominence and gained public awareness. Although, it is clear from previous 
research that securing a position on the decision-making agenda does not 
necessarily mean the development of a policy and government response (Kingdon, 
1995). However, it is still recognised as having a more active status than simply 
being positioned on the governmental agenda.  
If one acknowledges that policymaking is a complicated process because there are 
many actors involved with different propositions and influences on what constitutes 
the policy agenda (Bauman and White (2010), then Kingdons (1995) three streams 
model of Policies, Problems and Politics allows for a clear differentiation and 
categorisation of the emerging themes and issues that surround peace walls into 
clear analytical structures. Chapter Five, Six and Seven illustrate the empirical 
findings that emerged from the informal interviews with community, statutory, 
government and political representatives. This chapter intends to build on those 
findings through Kingdons (1995:1) policy windows framework. This framework 
dealt with the conundrum of how does an ideas time come? Essentially, the policy 
window is concerned with the processes that account for the three individual 
streams coming together.  
According to Kingdon (1995:165) a problem is recognised, a solution is developed 
and available in the policy community, a political change makes it the right time for 
policy change, and potential constraints are not severe (figure 4). The opening of a 
policy window is both predictable and unpredictable, and is an opportunity for 
policy entrepreneurs to push through their ideas, or raise awareness on specific 
problems (Smrekar, 2011). The most likely streams to influence the opening of a 
window are the Politics and Problem streams. In the case of the former the most 
obvious factor is a change in the government after an election and in the latter it is 
often after a focused event, such as a terrorist incident. Kay and Ackrill (2010) 
indicate that Kingdon drew distinctions between political windows and problem 
windows and indicated that the alternatives to the governmental agenda were 
generated in the policy stream. A key dynamic within this process is the coupling of 
streams, such as when advocates hook ideas and solutions that have been floating in 
the primeval soup to emerging problems (Exworthy et al, 2003). While the 
governmental agenda is set primarily by events in the politics and problem streams, 
the setting of a decision-making agenda requires suitable options in the policy 
stream. Essentially, for the successful promotion of an item into the decision-making 
arena it requires all three elements  the problem, solution, and political support  
to be bundled together into a single unit.  
Figure 9: The three streams combine to create a window of opportunity 
Source: Kingdon (1995) 
Window of Opportunity 
Policy 
Stream 
Politics 
Stream 
Problem 
Stream 
There are two key stages to the remainder of this chapter. Firstly, there is an 
examination of the major themes to emerge from the Problem, Policy and Politics 
streams. The second stage builds on these findings and explores the necessary 
conditions that are required for the opening of a policy window that may result in 
the peace walls becoming part of the NI Executives decision-making agenda.   
8.1 Problems and opportunities  
A central tenet of the research was to establish if from the outset if the peace walls 
in Belfast were viewed as a problem that deserved a place on the decision-making 
agenda of the NI Executive, or whether they were considered a condition that did 
not require a government response in light of more pressing concerns. The 
empirical findings outlined in Chapter Five revealed that the key to understanding 
these questions centre on how peace walls are interpreted, and more importantly, 
who is the person or persons making that interpretation. Within Chapter Five 
several themes were developed to both structure and analyse the research findings. 
These included problem indicators at both the micro and macro level (5.1) such as 
the statistics highlighting the levels of social and economic deprivation within 
communities that resided either side of peace walls; focusing events (5.2) namely, 
the New York Mayors speech in 2008 that made an association between economic 
investment and the removal of peace walls; personal experiences (5.3) such as the 
NI Executive Junior Ministers close knowledge, experience and understanding of 
peace walls due to place of residence and constituents; symbols (5.4) which referred 
to the twentieth anniversary of fall of the Berlin Wall; feedback (5.5) related to 
government agencies such as the NIHE reporting on housing waiting lists; and 
finally values, comparisons and classifications (5.6) which involved comparing 
Belfast to other  post conflict cities, along with the interpretations the government, 
along with Loyalist and Community representatives place on the peace walls.  All of 
these themes were used to frame respondents views and provide an understanding 
of the relevant factors employed in determining how peace walls were recognised 
and interpreted by individuals and organisations. The remainder of this section 
builds upon these findings and looks to examine in more detail the relationship 
between the key actors, their proximity to the peace walls and the impact on their 
interpretation of the peace walls. It is based upon an exploration of six key actors 
(figure 5) that emerged in the Problem stream who each contribute to our 
understanding of how peace walls are interpreted.  
Figure 10:  Key actors in the interpretation of peace walls as a problem or 
condition 
Peace Walls 
General Public 
NI Executive 
Belfast City Council 
Service Providers 
Gatekeepers 
Residents 
These actors are crucial in determining whether peace walls are deemed a problem 
that warrants a position on the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. Figure 5 
identifies the key actors and their position in relation to the evolving peace walls 
narrative. Local residents within Loyalist and Republican communities have been 
identified as those geographically closest to the peace walls, while the general 
public is considered the most geographically distant from the peace walls. The 
onion analogy assists with illustrating the position of the remaining actors, and how 
numerous layers of differing interpretations exist when considering whether peace 
walls are a condition or a problem. Each of these actors will be discussed in more 
detail below.  
General public 
At the periphery are the general public, who for the most part, are unaffected by the 
peace walls and have a minimal understanding of the issues that surround them. 
However, for those that do have limited knowledge of the peace walls, they are 
considered a legacy of the conflict, and a subject associated with Loyalist and 
Republican sectarian violence. It is not unreasonable to maintain a view that the 
vast majority of the general public has limited or no knowledge about the peace 
walls. Although there are fifty-three NIO constructed peace walls in Northern 
Ireland, they are located in only four towns and cities including, one in Lurgan; five 
in Derry/Londonderry; five in Portadown; and forty-two in Belfast (Lynagh, 2011). 
Furthermore, the legacy of the conflict is unequally distributed throughout Northern 
Ireland. From 1975 onwards, more than 90% of the deaths and direct injuries 
associated with the conflict were borne by people in three broad groups: the urban 
poor, primarily in North and West Belfast; the rural population in the border 
counties; and the security forces. Research conducted by Fay et al (1997) and 
McKittrick et al (1999) reaffirms this view that certain sections of society were 
disproportionally affected by the conflict. Essentially, there were large sections of 
the country that were spared the worst of the violence and disruption (Morrow, 
2005).  
There have been attempts to elevate the issue of segregation that has been 
reinforced by physical division from something that impacts on the micro level 
(Loyalist and Republican communities) to the macro level (general public) through 
a financial analysis of the cost of division (McDevitt, 2010; McCarthy, 2010). Yet 
when political commentators highlight the annual 1.5 billion cost of living in a 
divided society, the conversations are often followed by images of the peace walls. 
However, the interviewees were of the opinion that the general public did not 
associate the peace walls with having a financial impact on their own lives. In fact, 
there is a strong argument that the last fifteen years have been particularly positive 
in terms of economic investment opportunities for large sections of the population. 
A report by Oxford Economics (2009) concluded that there had been an 
unprecedented golden era in terms of rising output and falling unemployment, 
increased wealth and job creation in Northern Ireland.  
According to the respondents there was a sense from their own experiences that the 
general public appear apathetic to the issue of peace walls. There are occasions that 
the issue becomes topical and associated with other conflict related issues, usually 
during disputes over parades (Siddique, 2010) or large-scale interface violence 
(McDonald, 2010a). However, these incidents usually only remain newsworthy for 
one or two days. As Downs (1972) issue attention cycle maintains, the intense 
desire to affect change or to focus ones attention on an issue, often evaporates as the 
issue looses momentum. This is often due to the issue being resolved, or more often 
than not, a realisation of the political, financial and social costs of getting involved.  
Northern Ireland Executive 
As one moves towards the centre of figure 4, we come to the NI Ireland Executive, 
where policy responsibility and control over peace walls is located. The devolved 
governments position in regards to peace walls has fluctuated between viewing 
them as problematic, while on other occasions considering them as a condition. 
This can be illustrated through three different examples which include the 
government responses to focused events, the past policies endorsed by politicians, 
and the personal experiences of elected representatives. 
Firstly, it was evident that focused events (Birkland, 1997) such as the Mayor 
Bloombergs speech in 2008 where he indicated that walls should be removed in the 
interests of peace and security, and the construction of the forty-second peace wall 
in the integrated primary school in 2007 raised public awareness about the issue. 
However, these were identified as isolated events that were quickly replaced in the 
media by other news stories. This reaffirms Kingdons (1995) position that focused 
events alone are not enough to promote issues up the government agenda. In this 
case the NI Executive acknowledged the existence of the peace walls, but essentially 
abdicated responsibility by stating that the communities adjacent to them had to 
provide the catalyst for any policy change. According to the First Minister Paisley 
(2008), in response to Mayor Bloombergs comments local communities would 
ultimately be responsible for making the decision. By responding in this way, the 
government has indicated that the peace walls are a problem that related to a very 
small subsection of the population. It could be argued that this created the 
opportunity for the remainder of society to endorse the notion that the peace walls 
are a condition that requires no redress from the government. It also reaffirms the 
position of Birell and Gray (2010) that the NI Executive are reluctant to engage in 
issues that are deemed sensitive, political and damaging to the structures of 
government.  
Secondly, for a number of elected representatives there is a difficulty in 
acknowledging that the peace walls are a problem as they may have campaigned in 
the past for their construction. In Chapter Two, whilst outlining the historical 
development of peace walls, it was noted that from the first paramilitary ceasefires 
in 1994 there have been a number of cases where local politicians lobbied the NIO 
for new peace walls to be built and other walls strengthened. In one case the Sinn 
Fin Councillor Tom Hartley publicly campaigned for the extension of a peace wall 
in West Belfast (Andersonstown News, 2000; Irish News, 2000) and Jarman (2004) 
has also highlighted the political support for new peace walls in response to 
communal violence.  Therefore, there is the potential for a future scenario involving 
elected representatives, who previously advocated for the construction of walls as a 
solution to violence and disorder, having to recognise that they are now a problem 
in their own right and therefore merit a government response.  
Thirdly, a further influence on the governments attitude to peace walls is based on 
Kingdons (1995) notion of personal experiences and associations around an issue. 
Essentially, the more information and personal capital someone has surrounding an 
issue, then the more likelihood it has of gaining political acknowledgement as a 
problem. In this case, there is a question around how much experience and 
knowledge elected representatives have on the subject of peace walls. Of the 108 
MLAs in the Stormont Assembly, twenty-four (22%) are from Belfast, and only 
twelve (11%) of those are from constituencies in North and West Belfast where the 
majority of peace walls are located. Furthermore, in the NI Executive out of the 
fifteen ministers, only one, Junior Minister Kelly has a constituency with a large 
number of peace walls within it. On the other hand, Jeffrey Donaldson when he was 
a Junior Minister (2009:15) stated at a conference on interface issues that he came 
from an area that does not have any peace walls, and that it has been an eye opener 
to see at first hand the impact that the barriers have on community life. 
These examples illustrate the flip-flop nature of the governments response to 
peace walls. As there is no policy on peace walls it means that the governments 
position can constantly change depending on circumstances influenced by focused 
events and the public mood. More importantly the absence of a policy framework 
means that there is no mechanism in place to hold the government to account. 
Belfast City Council 
The third layer of actors in the problem recognition process was Belfast City Council 
(BCC). The rationale behind placing them closer to the peace walls than the NI 
Executive was borne out of the findings from the discussions with political and 
community representatives. The evidence suggested that the peace walls and issues 
of segregation and division experienced by Loyalist and Republican working class 
communities resonated more directly with BCC than the NI Executive. The findings 
revealed that for BCC policy-makers, councillors and civil servants the peace walls 
had a direct impact on the delivery of services on a day-to-day basis, unlike their 
counterparts in the NI Executive who were responding to similar issues but in a 
broader, regional context.  
A report by Deloitte (2008) for BCC reaffirms this view, where it concluded that 
community usage of council facilities was based primarily on the location of the 
facilities. The community and religious background of service users dictated where 
they would visit and access the council services. Furthermore, community 
perceptions of territory centred on the types of housing the facilities were close to. 
As Byrne et al (2006) noted, approximately 98% of social housing in Belfast was 
segregated along communal and religious lines, so this would have a direct impact 
on local peoples ability to access council services and facilities. The council 
recognised the problematic nature of the peace walls, and recently viewed their own 
position as crucial in alleviating some of the negativities associated with the walls. 
An example of this commitment to addressing the negatives of the peace walls was 
through the Re-imagining Communities project. The council along with community 
groups selected peace walls and developed renewal and regeneration programmes 
to transform the surroundings (BCC, 2009). 
The council has also acknowledged the detrimental impact that the peace walls have 
had on the economic and social development of working class communities and has 
been at the forefront of a number of programmes and initiatives that have aimed to 
tackle these problems. At the heart of the Belfast City Council Peace Plan (2009) is 
the aim to develop shared space accompanied by the integrated regeneration of 
those communities at the interfaces. Recently, through a European Fund for Peace 
and Reconciliation Programmes known as Peace III, the council provided over 
285,000 to an intercommunity forum that included dialogue on the removal of 
interface barriers and the development of community networks (BCC, 2010). This 
initiative was about creating the conditions so that local communities were 
empowered to make decisions about issues that related to the peace walls. 
Furthermore, this programme aimed to develop collaboration across interface 
communities and promote the sharing of good practice.  
At a more strategic level the promotion of Good Relations is a corporate objective of 
the council, and is a central aspect of their policy-making process (BCC, 2009). The 
council considers Good Relations as underpinning all of their work, and therefore 
any strategies that directly and indirectly relate to peace walls have strands of Good 
Relations encompassing them. The findings from this thesis revealed that BCC was 
best placed to push forward with ideas and polices that might look to address issues 
that surround peace walls. This has been validated by the report from Deloitte 
(2010) which suggested that Belfast City Council had a political legitimacy that 
would enable it to lead an urban agenda and was best placed to provide a strong, 
leadership role. Interestingly, the conclusions made by Deloitte are very different to 
the findings that emerged from Bollens (2001) earlier study on divided cities. That 
study in relation to Belfast indicated that the Belfast City Council had no 
comprehensive or strategic approach to dealing with sectarian division. However, 
the thesis findings alongside Deloittes research suggests that in the last decade 
significant progress has been made within the institutions of local government, and 
they seem best placed to address issues surrounding the peace walls.  
There is one further aspect of the peace walls that has a direct impact on the council, 
and is not necessarily considered in a negative context, although acknowledging its 
importance requires a political balancing act. Essentially, one could argue that the 
peace walls are the last remaining physical manifestations of the conflict, and this is 
highly significant, from both an educational and historical perspective. The analysis 
of the findings revealed that for most people the peace walls were a Belfast 
phenomenon, associated with the conflict, and not something associated with wider 
parts of Northern Ireland. In fact the majority of the conflict related architecture has 
disappeared from view and all that is left are the peace walls and a small number of 
paramilitary murals. The British Military removed the ring of steel that surrounded 
the city after the cease-fires (Jarman, 2008), the bollards within the city centre have 
been taken away, and the majority of paramilitary murals have been replaced with 
community paintings (BCC, 2008). In Belfast the physical legacies of the conflict are 
a significant draw for visitors and tourists. According to BCC (2009) 9.3 million 
tourists visited Belfast, generating 450 million to the local economy, and among the 
popular attractions were the bus tours of the city. The terror tours as Morrow 
(2009) dubbed them include attractions such as the paramilitary murals, the 
flashpoints for riots and murders during the conflict, the city cemetery along with 
the peace walls. In fact, tourists are encouraged to write their name and messages 
on the largest peace wall between the predominantly Republican Falls and Loyalist 
Shankill communities (Murphy, 2010). The Troubles architecture provides Belfast 
with another layer to its identity as a post-conflict city. This thesis is in no way 
suggesting that the economic benefits from the tourist industry would influence the 
councils interpretation of the peace walls. However, it is another factor in the 
myriad of issues that the local government must consider when they recognise 
peace walls as a problem and develop a response.   
Service providers 
Service providers from both the statutory and voluntary sector were positioned 
closer to the peace walls than either BCC or the NI Executive, because they were 
often responsible for the delivery and implementation of policies and strategies in 
areas where the walls are located. The rationale for categorising service providers 
together was due to the analysis revealing that the majority of service providers 
considered peace walls problematic. They were either considered a problem in 
practical terms through the delivery of services, or they were a problem because of 
the economic, social, and political issues that manifested from the peace walls and 
which they had to address. These views were common themes in research produced 
by Deloitte (2007) that explored the financial burden of segregation; research again 
by Deloitte (2008) that examined the delivery of services in a divided city; and 
research by Komarova (2008) on the difficulties towards shared space in Belfast. 
They all highlighted the difficulties that public sector bodies, government 
institutions and the community and voluntary sector had in delivering services in a 
segregated and divided city. Through Kingdons (1995) framework in the Problem 
stream, it became clear that the analysis which framed the interpretations of service 
providers most eloquently were problem indicators and feedback. The thesis 
findings suggested that statistics based on health, employment, anti-social 
behaviour, and education alerted service providers to the negative consequences of 
residing in areas adjacent to the peace walls. As Hall (2010) concluded, if you live at 
an interface you are liable to die ten years earlier, be more dependent on alcohol 
and prescribed medication, suffer depression and mental illness, be unemployed, 
experience a breakdown in the family unit, and have a lower level of educational 
attainment, than someone who does not live at an interface. 
In relation to the feedback mechanisms (Kingdon, 1995) it was apparent that since 
devolution in May 2007, local service providers indicated that structured feedback 
on strategies, policies and initiatives from themselves was being listened to more 
comprehensively by local departments, Ministers and the decision-makers in 
government. Historically, service providers within the city executed their roles and 
responsibilities under the political mantra of separate but equal. This was best 
illustrated by Bollens (2001) who maintained that the principles for Belfasts urban 
policymakers historically was to position the governments role and image as a 
neutral participant, not biased towards Catholics or Protestants. Furthermore, those 
tasked with delivering policy were required to ensure that the implementation 
process did not exacerbate sectarian tensions by managing space in such away as to 
alienate members of both communities. Historically, this was the environment in 
which services and policies were often delivered and implemented, so one could 
argue that the peace walls were interpreted as a condition because regardless of 
circumstances, services had to be provided. However, in the new political 
dispensation that service providers have now found themselves operating within, 
there is a willingness to recognise problems such as the peace walls and look 
towards decision-makers for solutions.  
Gatekeepers  
The penultimate set of actors in the process of problem recognition is gatekeepers. 
Although they figure in more detail in the Policy stream as a group that can have a 
direct influence on the policy process, they require a mention in context of problem 
recognition, as they are crucial in understanding the overall interpretation of peace 
walls. The role of gatekeepers in the context of the conflict has been extensively 
documented in Chapter Six (6.3). However, how they choose to label the peace walls 
has implications rightly or wrongly on whether they are pushed onto the decision-
making agenda of the NI Executive. In the analysis of the research findings it was 
evident that gatekeepers divided opinion. There were those that considered 
gatekeepers as important in relation to building community capacity and 
partnerships within and across community boundaries. However, there were other 
dissenting voices, which indicated that gatekeepers were spoilers and it would not 
be in their own self-interests to participate in a peace walls process. A recent study 
by Goldie and Ruddy (2010) reinforced the criticisms of gatekeepers that several 
respondents expressed for this research. There study highlighted the lack of 
accountability gatekeepers had to the community and they also found evidence that 
the gatekeepers views were not often representative of the communities in which 
they resided. It was also noted that in some instances it was in the gatekeepers 
interests to refrain from engaging on issues pertaining to the removal of the peace 
walls. All of which had the potential to impact on their power relationships within 
their own community.  
In relation to this thesis the findings suggested that the community and political 
respondents were generally acceptant of the positive role that gatekeepers had 
played during the conflict. However, the analysis suggested that there were 
distinctive differences between Loyalist and Republican gatekeeper opinions on 
whether the walls were a problem or a condition. Whilst both recognised the role 
that peace walls had played in providing a sense of security for their communities, 
Republicans were more inclined to stress the problematic nature of the walls than 
their Loyalist counterparts. There was a degree of caution from the Loyalists 
surrounding the subject of peace walls with a strongly held view that any 
conversation pertaining to the walls was already pre-empted by the view that they 
should be removed. Although both Loyalist and Republican gatekeepers freely 
acknowledged that the peace walls were a problem, Republicans were more likely to 
promote this position and look to engineer a solution.  
Residents 
The final set of actors that have been identified from the findings and those deemed 
geographically closest to the peace walls were the residents from Loyalist and 
Republican communities. To understand more comprehensively the motivational 
factors that shape these communities interpretation of the peace walls, it is 
necessary to discuss both communities separately. Underpinning this analysis is 
Kingdons (1995) use of values, which is a crucial framework in which to consider 
both communities positions. This provided the opportunity for a comprehensive 
exploration of the events, experiences and perceptions that have all contributed to 
Loyalist and Republican agendas towards peace walls.   
Loyalist perspective 
The Loyalist representatives interpretation of the peace walls revealed a number of 
interesting observations. From the outset the subject was considered both a 
politically sensitive and an emotional issue, and there appeared to be several 
motivational factors that influenced their views on whether the walls were a 
problem or a condition. It quickly became apparent that underpinning the Loyalist 
communitys position on towards peace walls was a sense of vulnerability around 
the changing demographics in working class communities in Belfast. Essentially, the 
Loyalist community maintained that the Protestant and Unionist areas were being 
erased from the map of the city. A prime example to illustrate the changing 
demographics is the Shankill area in West Belfast, which has witnessed a population 
migration of approximately 50,000 people since the 1970s (Redpath, 1995). There 
was also a perception that a growing Catholic and Nationalist community was now 
replacing areas that historically had been associated with the Protestant 
community. This assessment has been reaffirmed by Interaction (2007) who noted 
that there was a fear within Protestant communities in the city about the greening 
of areas, where neighbourhoods that where historically Protestant had become 
Catholic. Furthermore, the public consultation into the Belfast Masterplan noted that 
the Protestant community felt they were being squeezed out of North Belfast (DSD 
consultation report, 2010). So this underlying fear of Catholic and Nationalist 
expansion at the expense of Protestant and Unionist communities has a significant 
influence on how they interpret the peace walls. Figure 6 has illustrated the key 
factors that appear to determine how the Loyalist communities perceive the peace 
walls.  
Figure 11: Influences on agenda setting within the Loyalist community  
Problem Condition 
The analysis was separated into two categories to determine the motivational 
factors that shaped whether they were a condition or a problem. Essentially, it 
came down to a risk analysis, with the Loyalist community adopting the position of 
what were the risks to their community if they acknowledged that the peace walls 
were a problem and therefore required some form of government intervention. 
Issues related to regeneration, economic investment and a general need for an 
improvement in the health and social wellbeing of residents would suggest the need 
to identify the walls as a problem. However, by acknowledging that there is a 
problem, one is opening the door to finding a solution. One possible solution would 
be the removal of the peace walls. However, the Loyalist communities feel 
threatened by the growing Nationalist and Republican community, and consider the 
removal of the peace walls as an opportunity for that community to expand further 
into Loyalist territories. There is a legacy that exists from when Unionist and 
Loyalist families left the Torrens estate in North Belfast in 2004 (discussed in 
section 5.4). The common narrative is one of ethnic cleansing and the 
discrimination of Loyalist families by the state. According to the interviewees this 
view dominates the opinions and beliefs of many Unionist and Loyalist working 
class families in Belfast and impacts on how they feel about the removal of peace 
walls. 
Therefore, if the peace walls are instead recognised as a condition, then they do not 
require a position on the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive and possible 
government intervention. Issues such as community identity, history and culture 
that are protected by the peace walls are not then threatened by the expansion of 
Nationalists relocating into Unionist neighbourhoods. This resonates with the 
findings from Kingdon (1995) who concluded that if there is a delay in acting on an 
issue when it has become labelled a problem, the pressure for change can soon 
subside. The longer people live with a problem, the less pressing it seems. The 
problem may not change, but the longer people live with it, the less urgent it 
becomes. The Loyalist communities recognise that there are significant economic 
and social problems within their neighbourhoods, but the peace walls for the most 
part are not responsible for these failings. This risk analysis positions community 
identity against community rehabilitation, and currently the fear and mistrust that 
exists within the Loyalist community means condition dominates the 
interpretation. It was interesting to reflect that Darby (1986) argued that working 
class Loyalist communities were committed to defending their territory against the 
perceived threat of encroachment from over-crowded Catholic enclaves. These 
thoughts that were articulated twenty-five years ago continue to ring true today 
within Loyalist interface communities.  
Republican perspective 
The views and opinions surrounding the interpretation of the peace walls were 
slightly different from the perspective of Republicans, compared to those from 
within the Loyalist community, although there were strong similarities on issues 
pertaining to security, protection and community safety. The motivating factors that 
appeared to influence Republican communities centred on housing need, the 
regeneration of neighbourhoods and improved access to services (figure 7).  
Figure 12: Influences on agenda setting within the Republican community 
Condition Problem 
These concerns are consistent with Deloittes (2008) research into accessing 
services in a divided city; and the recent NIHE (2011) report that projected in 2012, 
that Catholics would make up almost 95% of the total number on the waiting list for 
social housing in North Belfast. If one applies a similar cost-benefit analysis to the 
interpretation of peace walls that the thesis has applied to Loyalist communities, the 
outcome is significantly different. Identifying the peace walls as a problem has the 
potential to address the fundamental issue facing Republican communities in 
Belfast, and that is a lack of space and territory. Put bluntly, by recognising the peace 
walls as a problem and not a condition, the community is creating the situation 
where a solution that involves the removal of the walls, inadvertently addresses 
several other issues prevalent within their community. These motivational factors 
driving the recognition of the peace walls as a problem are further exacerbated by 
the apparent solution being on the other side of the wall. There is no denying that 
the most significant communities to experience population decline have been 
Unionist and Loyalist (Ploger, 2007; Heatley, 2004). Furthermore within these 
neighbourhoods there are a large number of Brownfield sites when compared with 
Republican neighbourhoods (Shirlow and Murtagh, 2006). The findings from the 
thesis projected a strong sense that stagnation had settled into Republican areas, 
which was affecting community aspirations and instilling an attitude of frustration 
and anger towards their Loyalist neighbours.  
The interpretation of peace walls from both a Loyalist and Republican perspective is 
crucial when discussing the window of opportunity in relation to promoting the 
issues onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. It was interesting to 
note that indicators and focused events (Kingdon, 1995) had a minimal impact on 
how both communities interpreted the peace walls. Instead factors influenced by 
values and symbols had a lasting impression within these communities. What is 
clear is that both Loyalist and Republican communities have very different 
motivating factors that influence their positioning and interpretation of the peace 
walls. Figure 8 draws together the key influencing factors that shape the 
communities views and interpretations of the peace walls.  
Figure 13: Influencing factors on the interpretation of peace walls 
Considering the opposing views, the question then, is how can these different 
agendas be reconciled, so that any solution to a problem is not perceived as a zero-
sum outcome, where one community is seen to gain more than the other (Maney et 
al, 2006). 
Summary 
This exploration of the Problem stream in relation to how the key actors interpret 
and define the peace walls has gone some way to deepening our understanding of 
whether the issue is considered a condition or a problem. It has become apparent 
Loyalist 
community  
No political 
support 
Reduction in 
bonfires/parades 
and flags 
The greening of 
Belfast - Torrens 
Diminishing 
popultation 
Peace walls 
Republican 
community 
Connectivity 
Housing shortage 
Housing 
discrimination 
Exploding 
popultation 
that there are a multitude of factors that both contribute and influence the 
interpretations that surround the peace walls. Figure 5 illustrated the six key actors 
and the diverse opinions and views they hold towards the peace walls. Although, 
those closest to the peace walls recognise that they are a problem, it is based very 
much on personal experiences and quality of life issues. However, this is an 
extremely small section of the population, and as one transcends outwards from the 
core, the audience expands and the issue becomes less problematic. Ironically, the 
groups that are more likely to label peace walls as a problem have less influence and 
power in the policy making process than those willing to consider the walls as 
nothing more than a condition.  
There appears to be a hierarchy of problems, and although elements within the 
groups of key actors will acknowledge peace walls as a problem, they appear 
unwilling to push forward a process that might engineer a government response. As 
was previously noted, resourcing the health and education systems, which have 
large user audiences, were prioritised as considerably more problematic than peace 
walls. Therefore, in the context of problem recognition, there are a number of 
conciliatory factors impacting on the ability of the issue of peace walls being 
elevated onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. These include the 
small number of people that actually recognise peace walls as a problem; aligned 
with the poor condition of the economy; the political sensitivities of the issue; and 
the reluctance of the NI Executive to show leadership in addressing legacy issues 
derived from the conflict.  
8.2 Policies and opportunities 
In the majority of cases the opening of a window of opportunity is predisposed by 
either the Problem or the Politics streams (Kingdon, 1995). However, for maximum 
effect, having a suitable idea, solution or alternative that has been tested can often 
result in the issue being positioned onto the decision-making agenda quickly 
(Zahariadis, 2008). Chapter Six provided a comprehensive analysis of the Policy 
Stream where the ideas exist in what Kingdon (1995) referred to as the primeval 
soup. The chapter, guided by several themes, identified the different specialists that 
participated in the policy community associated with the peace walls along with the 
factors that shaped and influenced their views. A review of existing and past polices 
was documented, along with the role of policy entrepreneurs in raising the issue of 
peace walls onto the political agenda. The chapter concluded with a constructive 
analysis of the key sets of criteria Kingdon (1995) proposed that would enhance the 
chances of an idea being adopted as a policy solution. The criteria were set against a 
proposal that envisaged the removal of all the peace walls in Belfast which provided 
an opportunity to explore in detail the practicalities of successfully attempting to 
achieve cross-community and political support for such a policy. The remainder of 
this section aims to build on the learning that emerged from Chapter Six.  
The policy community consisted of members of government agencies, elected 
representatives; academics, NGOs and representatives from Loyalist and Republican 
communities. By structuring the analysis around Kingdons (1995) themes, it was 
possible to extrapolate the different approaches, strategies and ideas that these 
groups advocated and put forward as potential responses to the policy inertia that 
existed on peace walls. The key to understanding the different approaches is to 
recognise the significance of the range of questions being asked and how a response 
could impact on each of the actors. The research findings suggest that the central 
question is whether the focus of any policy process is on the removal of peace walls 
or instead is it about the regeneration and rehabilitation of Loyalist and Republican 
communities that reside either side of the peace walls? In a similar vein to the 
Problem stream there are very diverse solutions, alternatives and ideas depending 
on the classification of the problem. To illustrate this point, the following section 
focuses on the relationship between government and community representatives 
within the policy community, and considers were they think responsibility should 
be for the implementation of any proposal. The NGOs and academics are themselves 
integral within the policy community, but the evidence contends that they are on the 
periphery of the process, considered more as facilitators and brokers, whose 
approval is not viewed as necessary to the process.   
Historically, those individuals and departments that represented the government 
responded to interface issues by developing strategies and policies that managed 
the situation (Calame and Charlesworth, 2009). A similar approach was also 
adopted within the community and voluntary sector where programmes and 
initiatives to address communal violence and disorder managed the issues, as 
opposed to focusing on a long-term approach to examining the manifestations of the 
problems (Jarman, 2008; Goldie and Ruddy, 2010). The research findings suggested 
that both the government and community representatives were now refocusing 
their approaches, and concentrating efforts to develop ideas to transform rather 
than manage interface issues. There was a realisation from the key actors that a 
more holistic approach with a long-term focus was required to both address the 
problems experienced by communities living alongside the peace walls.  
Representatives from both Loyalist and Republican groups were clear and 
unequivocal that the NI Executive and other elected representatives should be 
tasked with providing a strategy and policy framework to address the economic and 
social issues that faced interface communities. The investment of political and 
economic resources was seen as key factors in both successfully implementing a 
policy solution, but also gaining support from the community for government 
intervention. This top-down approach to the policy process (Sabatier and 
Mazmanian, 1980) sees the responsibility being removed from those that the policy 
would have the greatest impact upon. This reflects the sensitivities of the policy 
area, and assumes that local communities do not have the capacity to resolve the 
problem (figure 9). However, those that represent the interests of government 
advocated a bottom-up approach (Barrett and Fudge, 1981) indicating that any 
solutions must be developed within those communities that reside closest to the 
peace walls.  
Figure 14: Perspectives on the development of a peace walls strategy 
This has been the NI Executives position since Mayor Bloombergs speech, which 
according to this analysis may be considered as a focused event. The government 
contends that they cannot force the issue, or socially engineer a solution to the 
problem of peace walls (Donaldson, 2009). It is obvious from the findings that this is 
an item that the NI government does not want to force onto their decision-making 
agenda. This is consistent with their interpretation of the peace walls as a condition, 
rather than a problem. From a public policy perspective one could lend support to 
this bottom-up approach of policy development advocated by the government 
towards the issue of peace walls. Critiques of the top-down model (John, 1998) 
maintain that the approach is difficult to apply when there is no dominant policy or 
a multitude of governmental actors. In this context, the Problem stream has 
previously identified complexities associated with the issue, and the impact that 
peace walls has across several departments within the NI Executive. Therefore, a 
top-down approach without a clear sense of leadership and ownership of the issue 
would potentially complicate the ability of peace walls to rise onto the decision-
making agenda of the NI Executive.  
Community 
Top-down 
approach  
Government 
Bottom-up 
approach  
The two central groups of policy specialists (figure 9) consider the roles and 
responsibilities of both government and community very differently. However, one 
method of potentially converging these two approaches is through the Inter Agency 
Working Group (IWG) outlined in Chapter Two, and discussed by interviewees in 
the Policy stream (6.4). This was the mechanism in which members of the policy 
community could communicate, interact and develop an understanding of the 
different views and positions on any future peace walls strategy. The catalyst for the 
IWG was the construction of the forty-second peace wall in the grounds of the 
integrated primary school, and was established at the bequest of the Secretary of 
State for Northern Ireland in 2008.  One could liken the IWG to the primeval soup 
that Kingdon (1995) referred to as holding all the different ideas and strategies in 
place. In this case, it is a forum that for the first time brings together the five 
different groups within the policy community to examine policy options, strategies 
and alternatives to the issues that surround peace walls. Further analysis of the IWG 
provided support at the conceptual level for Kingdons (1995) primeval soup 
analogy, and also illustrated the practical benefits of bringing the top-down and 
bottom-up approaches together.  
Firstly, the IWG allows for the policy specialists to present their different agendas in 
an open and transparent manner. The Problem stream has already alluded to the 
fact that groups define the problematic nature of peace walls very differently. So the 
IWG is an opportunity for these groups to put forward their views on where the 
focus of attention should be. Secondly, the forum is a mechanism that informs its 
members about the limitations the government has with regards to economic 
resources, political capital, and community support. The research findings revealed 
that these were the main elements that had to encompass any idea or strategy 
pertaining to the peace walls. Thirdly, the fact that the IWG exists is recognition that 
the NI government is concerned that there is not enough thinking and strategising 
about methods of response towards the peace walls. The members of the IWG had 
experience and knowledge of a number of unsuccessful policies, and subsequent 
reports and evaluations that had documented the circumstances that led to the non-
delivery of these programmes. Fourthly, and an area that has a direct link back to 
the Multiple Streams approach is the recalibration of old ideas, strategies and 
policies, which Kingdon (1995) refers to this as the process of origins, mutations 
and recombinations. There was strong evidence of this in the IWG, where it 
emerged that perceived new ideas around calling on the government to begin a 
process of removing peace walls had in fact been suggested by some IWG members 
several years ago (NBIN submission to the Programme for Government, 2007). 
Further ideas discussed in the forum around community safety, young people and 
policing had been outlined in previous policy reports and recommendations 
(Jarman, 1998; 2006; Dunlop, 2002; Belfast Interface Project, 2004). It may have 
been that the ideas and suggestions from these reports were developed in a vacuum 
with no genuine political or community support. However, now after several 
focused events (5.3), and devolved policy responsibility for the peace walls there 
may be a renewed interest within government to examine more closely similar ideas 
and strategies.   
Further analysis on the IWG revealed that the main ideas and initiatives floated 
within the IWG centred on the need for a strategy that delivered the conditions that 
would enable residents to feel confident and secure without the need for peace 
walls. Essentially, what were the practical measures that had to be implemented 
within Loyalist and Republican communities that would ensure that the peace walls 
became obsolete? The IWG has been established since 2008, and there have been 
critics that contend that it is a talking shop, where the decision makers are absent, 
and the community is not properly represented. Their views were documented in 
Chapter Six (6.4) and were based primarily on the lack of measurable outcomes and 
achievements since the group was formulated. A recent report from the CRC (2011) 
reaffirmed these observations, but also noted the slow, sporadic nature of this 
process was to be expected considering the multitude of actors and issues 
associated with the peace walls.  
Whilst acknowledging the importance of the policy community, the Policy stream 
also provided a framework to examine whether there was evidence of policy 
entrepreneurs. Although the analysis was unable to definitively label someone or an 
organisation as a policy entrepreneur, assumptions may be made as to the likely 
location from which they may emerge, along with the characteristics necessary to 
navigate through the issues. Considering the political sensitivities that surround the 
subject of peace walls, it seems clear that any potential policy entrepreneur would 
have limited or no communal or political affiliations. This would address the fears 
that exist within communities about the perceived different hidden agendas that 
surround strategies pertaining to peace walls. These include perceptions that any 
solution is about political gain through an increased electorate; increased housing 
for an over populated community; or the reaffirmation of a community previously in 
decline. A policy entrepreneur must be considered impartial on these issues, but 
also have the resources to negotiate, facilitate and promote the virtues of their ideas 
to the multitude of audiences previously identified within the Problem stream.  
Summary 
The framework within the Policy stream allowed for the analysis of the key actors 
that make-up the policy community attached to the issue of peace walls. In a similar 
vein to the Problem stream, there are different approaches advocated by Loyalist 
and Republican policy specialists to the issue of peace walls. However, there is 
agreement that any strategy regardless of content and practicalities around 
implementation must originate at the government level and be encouraged within a 
top-down process. This is in stark contrast with the policy specialists from a 
government position that advocate a bottom-up approach where communities are 
seen to engineer the process. The remaining policy specialists consisting of 
academics and NGOs are crucial within the context of the policy community as they 
can facilitate debate and dialogue on the different approaches, contribute to the 
recalibration of ideas, and use their independence and expertise to test the merits of 
the different approaches.  
8.3 Politics and opportunities  
The Politics stream was responsible for framing the themes that surrounded the 
public mood, the relationship between communities and their elected 
representatives, and the structures along with the institutions of governance in 
Northern Ireland. A considerable amount of the analysis focused on whether the 
general public would both expect and support a government approach to addressing 
the issue of peace walls. The first key point was that for the majority of people in 
Northern Ireland, the topic of peace walls was not something they were familiar 
with, and not something they were lobbying their elected representatives to 
address. The key constituents who politicians felt were most important in any 
conversation about the peace walls were those that resided alongside them. 
Although, the thesis has also revealed that there were significant differences and 
similarities between how those communities engaged with their elected 
representatives. Those from within the Loyalist community were deeply frustrated 
with their politicians and felt that they were totally disengaged and disenfranchised 
from them. In the Republican community it was slightly different, were there was a 
stronger sense of political engagement between the community and the politicians. 
Interestingly, both communities indicated a sense of frustration with how the 
benefits from the political process had appeared to pass over their communities and 
instead impacted in the middle classes and business districts of the city. As Leonard 
and McKnight (2011) have also noted, the ongoing recession, rising unemployment 
and a lack of affordable housing has impacted negatively on the anticipated gains 
from the peace process. There are large numbers of people from interface 
communities that remain disillusioned about the promised economic dividend that 
was initially associated with Northern Irelands transformation to a post-conflict 
society. A former Loyalist combatant recently articulated this perspective through 
his response to the painting of two new paramilitary murals in East Belfast which 
showed hooded gunmen, when he stated that  the lack of a peace dividend in 
working class East Belfast was making the total removal of paramilitarism 
extremely difficult (Wilson, 2011).  
The second point of interest related to political leadership and the difficulties 
government had in appealing to their different constituencies considering the 
demographic make-up of their electorate. Historically, there has been criticism of 
the neutrality of policy-making in Northern Ireland, where Neill (1993) indicated 
that it had been selective and lacked a critical commitment capable of addressing 
the injustices of segregation and socio-spatial exclusion. A similar view emerged 
from this thesis where it was felt that political leaders within the devolved 
government, in an attempt to appeal to their own voters were inclined to operate in 
a policy vacuum or deal with sanitised issues rather than make decisions that one 
side of the electorate could deem unsatisfactory. There has possibly been one 
exception to this and that has been the Education Ministers position on the 11+ 
exam, but this is largely the exception to the rule. The vast majority of the 69 
government bills passed from 2007-2011 did not result in much publicity or court 
public controversy. A number of mundane social policy issues were dealt with in the 
Energy Bill; the Water and Sewage Bill; the Sun beds Bill; the Caravan Bill; and the 
Forestry Bill (Hay, 2011). Overall, the analysis of the thesis findings revealed 
minimal confidence from the community sector with regards to the NI Executive 
making decisions that would address the communal segregation that is so acute in 
working class areas of the city. These views have recent been substantiated by the 
Community Relations Council (2011) when it highlighted the lack of political 
direction in the NI Executives draft budget and maintained that it provided limited 
evidence of any serious planning to tackle the costs of division in society.  
If one maintains that the NI government is reluctant to engage in politically sensitive 
issues, then the fact that peace walls could be labelled as Troubles architecture 
means that that peace walls may receive a similar response from government as 
issues such as the Maze/Long Kesh site and Girdwood Barracks received. This 
amounted to a non-decision making approach from a number of political parties and 
resulted in political stalemate and an absence of actions and outcomes. This view of 
government failing to consider perceived controversial items and instead focus on 
neutral, non political areas of policy-making has been replicated in other research 
that has focused primarily on policy-making under devolution (Birrell, 2009; Knox, 
2010; Birell and Gray, 2010).  
The third major area of analysis within the Politics stream related to the structures 
of governance. Essentially, the finding suggested that the devolved government 
departments and institutions were established in such away that no specific area 
took policy responsibility for issues pertaining to the peace walls, and that there was 
a lack of joined-up thinking and cross-departmental working on the issue. 
Furthermore, there was no Ministerial accountability for departmental decisions, or 
a consideration of the impacts that the implementation of policies not directly 
associated with peace walls had on communities that resided adjacent to the walls. 
From a theoretical perspective, policy may be developed in one area without taking 
into account the unintended impact that such a policy may have in other parts of the 
policy-making arena (Richards and Smith, 2002). One example, which illustrates this 
point relates to a decision taken by the former Education Minister, Ms Ruane. The 
decision was taken to close a maintained primary school in the Suffolk area of West 
Belfast amidst strong objections from the local Unionist community. According to 
the Minister the decision was based on demographic changes and subsequent 
declining enrolments (Andersonstown News, 2009). The primary school was 
located in a small Unionist and Loyalist community that was surrounded by a 
number of peace walls. The implications of this decision were that several 
Protestant families decided to relocate, a number of houses became vacant, and 
residents felt that the government did not want to invest in their community 
(NiChorra, 2009). Not only did this decision have ramifications for the Unionist and 
Loyalist community in Suffolk, it also contributed to the growing narrative that is 
perceived throughout Protestant communities in Belfast. The substance of the 
narrative is that the NI Executive ignores diminishing Protestant areas, in the hope 
that residents will relocate, freeing up space for the growing Catholic population.  
A further point of interest to emerge from the findings surrounded the level of 
political support for a consideration of peace walls to be on the decision-making 
agenda of the NI Executive. The analysis revealed an absence of commitment to any 
process, which affirmed the conclusions from Gaffikin et al (2008:33) that unless 
there is a targeted ambition to start removing or scaling down these 
barriersBelfast would remain a fortress city. The political institutions were 
criticised by respondents for not facilitating or encouraging the transformation of 
communities adjacent to the peace walls. This was also reflected in the work of 
Murtagh and Keaveney (2006) where they concluded that decision-makers 
associated with urban regeneration and government planning were devoid of any 
real imagination, especially when addressing the effects of residential segregation. It 
was interesting to note that the government at the local and Executive level was not 
devoid of contributing resources to other types of regeneration projects. In 2009, 
BCC took the decision to provide 10 million for the Titanic Signature Project, with 
the Lord Mayor indicating that this was to illustrate their commitment to the new 
generation (Long, 2009). Furthermore, in 2008, the NI Executive offered 43.5 
million towards the project, noting that it was a tremendous opportunity to develop 
an iconic, world-class visitor destination (Foster, 2008). Ironically, approximately 
500 feet away is a peace wall between the Nationalist community in Short Strand 
and the Unionist community in Inner East Belfast. Initially, the barrier was a fence 
that could be opened and closed depending on incidents of violence (Byrne, 2005). 
However, as Jarman (2006) has documented, this has since been replaced by a wall, 
which has been decorated on either side with young peoples impressions of people 
and buildings playing in the now closed off streets.  
Summary  
The Political stream was dominated by the relationship between elected 
representatives and their constituents, along with the structures and institutions 
within the devolved government. In a broad political context peace walls are not an 
issue because the majority of people in Northern Ireland have yet to raise their 
concerns about their absence from the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. 
As Kingdon (1995) indicated, politicians and decision-makers assess the public 
mood from their interaction and level of communications with their constituents. 
However, Loyalist working class communities are disengaged from their elected 
representatives, which is in direct contrast with those from the Republican 
community. Simply put, politicians need to be informed that a problem exists, and 
peace walls are not considered a large enough problem, because not enough people 
have registered their concerns about them.  
The second significant factor to emerge from the Politics stream related to the 
institutions and structures of government. There appeared to be a lack of joined up 
thinking or partnerships between the Ministerial departments. The issues 
pertaining to peace walls were being responded to in isolation, and there was a silo 
mentality in relation to any strategic thinking on the subject. The NI government 
appeared to be shaped significantly by events in the Problem stream, in that peace 
walls were deemed a local issue; therefore for the most part the NI Executive 
appeared content to abdicate policy responsibility and decision-making to local 
government and communities.  
8.4 Where is our window of opportunity  
The entire premise of Kingdons model is based on responding to the question how 
does an ideas time come? The approach uses the analogy of a window of 
opportunity to illustrate the moment when all the factors are in place and an item 
can be positioned onto the decision-making agenda. It is common turn of phrase 
with a universal meaning i.e. recently Declan Kelly the US economic envoy in a 
speech to business leaders in Belfast stated that the window of opportunity where 
Northern Ireland could call upon special US attention would close within two years 
(Fitzpatrick, 2011). Up to now the thesis has guided the reader through a historical 
review on the development of peace walls, followed by an analysis of the 
contemporary issues that surround peace walls through a framework composed of 
the Problems, Policies, and Politics. Now attention shifts to examining the conditions 
and factors necessary for a window of opportunity that may result in putting peace 
walls onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive.  
The problem stream identified several key actors along with the various labels and 
meanings they attach to the peace walls. The issue of problem recognition was a key 
element of this stream, and had a direct influence on whether peace walls could be 
positioned onto the decision-making agenda. The analysis revealed that those 
communities that reside adjacent to the peace walls were central in defining 
whether peace walls were a problem that required government intervention or a 
condition that could largely be ignored. The thesis recognises that the two 
communities are key to determining how government views the issue of peace 
walls. However, by drawing this conclusion one is posing a more significant 
question. How do you reconcile the two opposing agendas that are so evident in this 
thesis? On one side there is a Nationalist and Republican community who require 
more housing and would envisage the removal of the peace walls so they can build 
and expand their neighbourhoods. On the other hand you have a Unionist and 
Loyalist community that has a diminishing population and considers its expressions 
of culture through parades, bonfires and flags under threat because of the greening 
of Belfast so do not see the benefits to entering into a process that could result in 
the removing of the peace walls.  
One possible method of bringing together the opposing positions is to first move 
away from the zero-sum game that has dominated community perceptions of 
previous policies in Northern Ireland. This requires a collective approach to the 
problem definition process that surrounds peace walls, with both communities 
acknowledging the multitude of problems that emanate from the peace walls. 
Historically, communities have been taught to think along the lines of single identity, 
firstly through the need for safety in response to the sectarian violence (Boal, 1982) 
and more recently through funding applications. Research by Komarova (2008) has 
noted that in the past funders felt that there was a need for single identity personal 
development and capacity building work before communities could begin the 
process of building partnerships. This was then reflected in the distribution of 
grants and funding which placed an emphasis on single identity capacity building. 
However, if peace walls are going to be profiled as a problem, then there requires 
willingness from both Loyalist and Republican communities through interest groups 
and pressure group campaigns to promote the problems of the peace walls at the 
micro, meso and macro levels (table 16).  
Table 16: Problematic nature of peace walls 
Micro Residents Detrimental impacts on health and social 
wellbeing; aspirations and opportunities; 
unemployment; educational attainment 
Meso Belfast City Council Issues of connectivity; delivery of services; 
negativity for tourism; investment 
Macro NI Executive Exporting peace; investment; tourism; economic 
costs; time and resources responding;  
Firstly, the negative impacts of the peace walls at the micro level have been well 
documented (Shirlow 2002; Murtagh; 2006; Byrne 2005). However, there also 
needs to be a concerted effort within these areas to develop the conversations 
across the communities so that a critical mass evolves where entire 
neighbourhoods, and not just those immediately beside the peace walls, recognise 
that they are the problem. Secondly, representatives from both Loyalist and 
Republican communities need to challenge local government as a collective 
constituency, highlighting the cost to local services of operating under the mantra of 
separate but equal. Thirdly, the critical mass that has now recognised the 
problematic nature of peace walls must bring it to the attention of the Assembly and 
NI Executive through their elected representatives and the use of pressure group 
campaigns. Highlighting the negativity associated with peace walls as a collective, 
along with the correlation between the walls and violence and disorder can have a 
significant affect on the government. Take for instance the international headlines 
after the violence and disorder in North Belfast in July 2010 when the Australian 
government informed its citizens to avoid all protests and demonstrations in 
Northern Ireland, as there was potential for violence (Melkme, 2010). Furthermore, 
the US Consulate and the New Zealand government also issued warnings for their 
citizens that were visiting Northern Ireland (Newenham, 2010). The classification of 
peace walls as a problem must transcend the micro, meso and macro levels. 
However, the catalyst needs to evolve from within those that reside closest to the 
peace walls. This critical mass generates the legitimacy for the recognition of peace 
walls as a problem, and allows local and national government to participate in the 
process without pre-emptive agendas, that would otherwise dominate the partisan 
nature of local politics.  
In illustrating the policy stream Kingdon (1995) used the analogy of a primeval 
soup to highlight the environment in which various ideas, strategies and solutions 
were floating around. In a similar context, this research has drawn comparisons 
with that analogy and the Interagency Working group (IWG) that was established in 
2008 to examine policy options and strategies that would inform government and 
policy makers about the issues on peace walls. The research findings confirmed that 
this forum was dominated by two very different positions on how peace walls 
should be addressed. The government maintained that any process had to be driven 
from the bottom-up, while community representatives consistently held the 
government responsible for directing a process. However, the most appropriate 
option may be to develop further the views of Scodanibbio (2011) who indicated 
that action in the policy process must happen from the bottom up as much as from 
top-down, with external pressure from outside in the form of an advocate.  It is this 
role of the advocate or for want of a better word policy entrepreneur that will be 
explained in more detail below. 
The policy entrepreneurs that Kingdon (1995) refers to are people willing to invest 
their resources in return for a potential suitable outcome. They can be motivated by 
concern for the issue; the promotion of their values and beliefs; self-acclaim for 
resolving a perceived problem; or by simply wanting to participate. In this context, 
any potential policy entrepreneur needs to be aware of the sensitivities and 
difficulties that surround the subject of peace walls. These range from the problems 
about how they are interpreted and defined, to hidden political agendas that 
influence potential solutions. Furthermore, a policy entrepreneur has to contend 
with the legacy of the conflict and a government that has consistently been reluctant 
to address issues from the past. Therefore, considering these difficulties, it is 
suggested that a policy entrepreneur in the form of a third party intervention, not 
aligned with any community or political party may be the most appropriate. 
Historically, when an impasse has existed on difficult issues, local politicians have 
turned to third party intervention for support i.e. the British, Irish and US 
governments during the Good Friday Agreement (1998); the St Andrews Agreement 
(2006), and more recently during the negotiations for the devolution of policing and 
justice (2009). Furthermore, when it was recognised that policing had to be 
reformed, the Patten Commission (1999) was formulated, and during the immediate 
years after the paramilitary cease fires, the South African Cyril Ramaphosa observed 
the PIRA arms dumps (McGarry and OLeary, 2006). Finally, when the PIRA 
decommissioning process was close to breaking down in 2005, two churchmen 
(Alex Reid and Harold Good) were asked to observe and verify the process. So there 
is precedence of third party intervention brokering agreement on difficult and 
extremely sensitive issues which has not been seen to weaken the authority or 
political mandate of our elected representatives. For as soon as the problem has 
been addressed the outside support has left the political arena and the local 
government institutions have returned to governing. Therefore, one option is that 
the private sector with a degree of support from Belfast City Council become the 
third party intervention or policy entrepreneurs that break the deadlock between 
Loyalist and Republican communities that exists towards the issue of peace walls. 
The following illustration (figure 10) captures the role of the key constituents in any 
future policy process for peace walls.  
Figure 15: The Policy Entrepreneurs policy framework     
-------------Intractable community conflict evidenced by the peace walls---------- 
The thesis findings suggest that BCC are clearly aware of the impact of the peace 
walls on their ability to deliver on their corporate plan of fostering a shared city. 
Therefore, combining the local knowledge and experience of the council with the 
resources of private investors at the micro level creates an opportunity for new 
conversations on developing the space and land either side of the peace walls. More 
importantly, these discussions and the sharing of regeneration ideas and plans can 
only take place if they receive the support from both Loyalist and Republican 
communities.  
However, these processes can only take place if the NI Executive provides the 
strategic over-sight by formulating legislation on the peace walls and stating 
unequivocally that the construction of peace walls is no longer a policy option in 
NI Executive 
Loyalist 
community 
Private Sector 
Repubican 
community 
Belfast City 
Council 
response to communal violence and disorder. A moratorium on the building of 
peace walls sends a signal that separation and division as a policy response is no 
longer legitimised at a political level. This sense of leadership would then prove the 
catalyst for the private sector to work alongside Belfast City Council to begin the 
process of addressing the intractable conflict that exists between Loyalist and 
Republican communities on peace walls. Essentially, local organisations, with local 
solutions to local problems are the most appropriate methods of reconciling the 
agendas that exist within both Loyalist and Republican communities. However, 
without the legislative framework and NI Executives support for approaches that 
seek to address the peace walls, then local initiatives instigated by the private sector 
will struggle for legitimacy and recognition.  
There are several international examples of cities that have applied a similar 
approach, were external support unattached to local political organisations has been 
used to address ethnic division through regeneration programmes. The following 
strategies and initiatives outlined below offer potential policy learning and transfer 
(Dolowitz and Marsh, 1996) that may be applicable to Belfast. In Chapter One, there 
was a discussion on the international context of walls and barriers in cities and 
borders. One of the cities mentioned was Beirut where much of the city centre was 
destroyed and ethnically segregated during the civil war. However, since the end of 
the armed conflict there has been significant economic and social development 
along with urban regeneration as a result of private investment. After the civil war, 
the government unsure how to respond to the ethnically segregated communities 
within the city, decided to put large plots of land and territory up for sale (Milky and 
Metar, 2009). The government offered tax incentives and appealed for international 
architects, designers and investors to become involved. The project was hailed a 
complete success and resulted in the complete transformation of the city centre, 
where previously contested land became neutral. However, it should be noted that 
there have been criticisms of this project. The most frequently citied critique is that 
ethnic boundaries have simply been replaced with class boundaries (Calame and 
Charlesworth, 2008).  
Nicosia is another divided city that has benefited from private investment and the 
expertise of urban planners. The Nicosia Masterplan is a multi-dimensional process 
that incorporates planning, architecture, social and economic objectives 
(Demetriades, 1998). It provides a platform for local investors and planners to 
develop plans that incorporate and look to benefit all the people of the city. Those 
most deprived areas in the city centre are being revitalised through private 
investment and new commercial activities (Hadjichristos, 2006). The 
aforementioned cases illustrate how individuals and institutions un-associated with 
the nature of a conflict can often engage with all participants on practical urban 
policy based issues. They have the ability to remove emotions from the conversation 
and base their assumptions and positions on practical reasoning.  
These two examples illustrate how after conflict, land and territory can become 
depoliticised and regeneration can lead to an altering of the environmental 
landscape. In the case of Belfast, there is the potential for the private sector to 
become involved in providing solutions to the problems associated with the peace 
walls under the auspices of regeneration, transformation and new opportunities for 
social and economic investment. In recent years there have been examples of urban 
planners with the support from architects, academics and the business community 
working on projects that have considered issues of contested space in Northern 
Ireland i.e. McQueen et al (2008) from the University of Ulster looked at a co-
influence approach to shared future urban environments in interface communities; 
Gaffikin et al (2008) from Queens University Belfast was part of the Contested Cities 
Urban Universities (CU2) project that aimed to investigate the interface between 
regeneration and reconciliation in a contested city; Sterrett et al (2009) established 
the Forum for Alternative Belfast (FAB) which explores alternative ways that the 
city might be developed. These three examples illustrate the growing contribution of 
organisations and institutions with no political affiliation or perceived agendas 
driven by the legacy of the conflict. The academics and architects can harness the 
resources of the private sector and provide the imagination and expertise that 
would generate ideas, strategies and solutions to the physical segregation and 
division experienced by both Loyalist and Republican communities.  
Three developments are required to take place within the politics stream that would 
make it more susceptible to cross with the problem and policy streams which would 
create the conditions for a window of opportunity. Firstly, the NI Executive and the 
Assembly need to place a moratorium on the construction of future peace walls and 
security barriers. While the option continues to exist, it is difficult to encourage 
independent and non-governmental organisations to contribute their time and 
resources to invest in areas that could potentially become separated and divided by 
the construction of future peace walls. Only this year, Derry City Council took the 
decision to seek planning permission for the construction of a 170m interface peace 
fence in response to sectarian violence involving young people (McDaid, 2011). 
Although this was a decision taken by the local council, the NI Executive failed to 
intervene or provide a collective government perspective on the decision.  
The second development surrounds the need for the governing institutions at the 
macro level (Ministerial Departments) to sanction operational authority for peace 
wall related issues to institutions within the meso level (Belfast City Council). There 
are signs that as the Stormont institutions gain stability that more powers will be 
devolved to local councils. This is an interesting development as Knox (2008) 
indicated that MLAs would be reluctant to see a much strengthened local 
government sector as their own popularity is not increased by abdicating functional 
responsibilities to other personnel and institutions. However, only recently the NI 
Environment Minister indicated that a new planning bill would return control of 
planning to councils, which would eventually mean that councillors would make the 
majority of planning decisions (Poots, 2010). The analysis from the Problem stream 
concluded that the majority of people considered peace walls to be a local issue that 
required local solutions. However, this thesis argues that although local solutions 
are the answer, they need to be situated within an overall policy framework 
overseen by the NI Executive. The NI Executive can provide leadership and 
legitimacy for any practical process, but local councillors that reside within these 
communities, along with council departments, are the most appropriate means of 
facilitating the political process that would facilitate the opening of a policy window.  
Thirdly, the political representatives from both the macro and meso institutions 
must recognise the importance of third party intervention. It is not a sign of political 
weakness to expand out the issue and include new partners, especially considering 
the intractable nature of the conflict that exists between Republican and Loyalist 
communities, and the reluctance of political parties to engage on legacy based 
issues. In one capacity, the NI Executive could be seen to be strengthening local 
government by increasing their presence in the process, and converging the top-
down and bottom-up approaches appears most likely to consolidate the competing 
approaches within the policy community on peace walls.  
According to Kingdon the three streams come together at certain critical times. 
Solutions become aligned to problems, and both of them are joined to favorable 
political forces. This coupling is most likely when a policy window is open which 
creates the necessary conditions and momentum to position an issue onto the 
decision-making agenda. This analysis has revealed that there are two core 
dynamics to any policy window that could impact on the potential of peace walls 
rising onto the policy agenda of the NI Executive.  
Firstly, Loyalist and Republican communities that reside adjacent to the peace walls 
are required to present a collective position on the problematic nature of the peace 
walls. This must over-ride any sense of injustice in relation to housing and notions 
of the protection of territory and community identity. Secondly, there is a 
requirement for the institutions within government alongside the political 
representatives to acknowledge the importance of an agreed government position 
and policy on the peace walls. As previously noted in the criteria for policy 
advancement, interviewees identified political support as crucial within any process, 
which aimed to position peace walls onto the policy agenda. Therefore, a window of 
opportunity may be preempted by a political consensus that peace walls are a 
problem that need addressed, and that there is a willingness to consider various 
policy options.  
8.5 Conclusion 
This scenario assumes that a great deal will occur within each of the streams so that 
a window of opportunity would open and push the item of peace walls onto the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. Essentially, within the Problem stream, 
peace walls becomes such a pressing issue because those communities residing 
beside them have campaigned to local councillors, lobbied their MLAs and raised 
awareness within the media that they become a problem. Alongside this in the 
Policy stream, policy entrepreneurs in the form of private investors have developed 
regeneration plans for a small number of interface communities that aim to 
transform the local neighbourhoods. In the Politics stream the NI Executive 
recommends the devolution of planning powers to councils with the aim of 
strengthening local government. Furthermore, with the introduction of private 
investors and a stronger role for the council the NI Executive does not have to 
commit large amounts of political capital or economic resources to the issue of 
peace walls. These events create the policy window, where peace walls are put on 
the decision-making agenda, which opens up the possibility of action.   
One final point, predicting the process of how an item might make the decision-
making agenda is fraught with difficulties (Blackman, 2005). In fact Kingdon (1995) 
acknowledged that there was a degree of opportunism in proposals being attached 
to problems and garnering political support at the precise time. It is also important 
to recognise that if a window of opportunity occurs it does not necessarily mean 
that the issue will find a place on the decision-making agenda. As Kingdon 
(1995:134) stated, participants may conclude that the subject is too complex, that 
the problems too numerous, and the array of alternatives too overwhelming, that 
their attention would drift away to something more manageable. Considering the 
level of detail that has emerged within the problem, policies and politics streams on 
peace walls, it is not incomprehensible to think that the NI Executive might do 
likewise.  
9. Thesis conclusion 
The Northern Ireland Executive has a multitude of issues to consider after their 
eight week summer recess in 2011. At the top of the agenda are issues surrounding 
corporation tax, rising unemployment, student fees, marginalised Loyalist 
communities, and dissident Republican terrorism. The issue of peace walls, 
according to the findings from this research will not feature on the decision-making 
agenda at this moment in time. This creates a problem for Northern Ireland in the 
longer term as it is further evidence that the elected representatives are either 
unwilling and/or unable to begin the process of addressing the legacies of the past. 
Furthermore, the peace walls continue to demarcate the territory where Loyalists 
and Republicans engage in sectarian violence and disorder. These are the images 
that continue to capture the attention of the international media, and have a direct 
impact on tourism, investment and Northern Irelands international reputation as a 
model for peace building and conflict transformation.  
However, although peace walls are currently absent from the NI Executives agenda, 
this thesis has considered the circumstances and conditions that are necessary for 
the issue to gain momentum and emerge onto the decision-making agenda. The 
research has examined the underlying factors and issues which motivate, influence 
and shape individuals and organisations views and positions on Belfasts peace 
walls. This is crucial for an understanding of the various drivers and inhibitors to 
the development of a locally developed policy on peace walls. The application of 
John Kingdons (1995) Multiple Streams Model provided the necessary theoretical 
framework with which to interpret the empirical data generated within the thesis. 
This brought together the various themes associated with the problems, policies and 
politics around peace walls and allowed for an examination of the elements crucial 
for the opening of a policy window that would see peace walls thrust onto the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. To understand this process more, it is 
necessary to reflect once again on the research questions that guided the line of 
inquiry:   
9.1 Research questions  
1. Are peace walls considered simply a condition that people can live with or 
something more of a problem that requires some form of government 
intervention? 
The findings suggest that the issue of peace walls are best considered through a 
micro (community), meso (BCC and service providers) and macro lens (NI 
Executive). Firstly, at the micro level there are two key constituents that are 
relevant to the narrative on peace walls; the minority of people that reside close to 
and beside the peace walls and the majority of the general public who are 
geographically distanced from the peace walls. The thesis was not designed to 
consider the views of the general public. However, the interviewees were adamant 
that they believed the wider public would not have the same degree of interest in 
what happens to Belfasts peace walls compared to those who resided closest to 
them. They believed that in terms of the hierarchy of public policy problems and 
issues to be addressed in the new Northern Ireland including the significant funding 
cuts to education, training and employment and health that the general public 
would be more content with supporting policies which addressed these core bread 
and butter issues rather than those which are more overtly political in nature and 
tone. In other words, while they assume that the general public believe that there is 
no need for peace walls in the new Northern Ireland they also believe that dealing 
with the issue of peace walls should not come at the expense of addressing other 
public policy issues that are prevalent within their own respective communities. For  
those residents that live under the shadow of the peace walls, the research indicates 
that their interpretation has been guided by the values and beliefs that exist within 
their own communities which have been heavily shaped and influenced by the 
conflict. Therefore working class Republican communities identify the peace walls 
as a problem based upon their experiences of political discrimination by the state, 
an expanding population, a need for quality housing, and a need for more territory 
in which to build on. On the other hand, Loyalist working class communities have 
witnessed a significant decline in population numbers, and experienced the 
curtailing of their cultural events, namely 11th July Bonfires and Parades, and 
criticisms of their symbols, that include murals, flags and the painting of kerbstones.  
The peace walls have not only protected their homes and property from damage, 
they have also enabled the practices and behaviours of Protestant, Unionist and 
Loyalist culture and identity to flourish and avoid becoming diluted by an 
association with other ethnic and religious groups. Therefore, Loyalist communities 
are more inclined to label the peace walls as a condition, for fear that any 
government intervention would result in their removal, which would be to the 
detriment of the their own culture and identity.  
Secondly, at the meso level the thesis findings suggested that Belfast City Council 
along with other public sector agencies may view the peace walls as a problem. At a 
practical level, the division and segregation had an impact on their ability to deliver 
services within the most socially and economically deprived areas of the city. 
Furthermore, the central tenet of the councils Peace and Reconciliation Plan (2009-
13) and underlying principle within their corporate identity is the promotion of a 
shared city. However, the thesis revealed that without the legislative framework 
and political leadership at the NI Executive level then the council were restricted in 
the amount of resources and commitment they could provide engaging directly on 
the issue of peace walls.  
Thirdly, at the macro level there was a sense from interviewees that the devolved 
government and NI Executive were content to continue with the status quo which 
essentially was policy inertia towards the issue of peace walls. That meant it was for 
communities themselves to determine whether peace walls were a problem that 
required government intervention. There was no evidence to suggest that the locally 
elected politicians that participated in this research were being asked about the 
impact of peace walls by their political colleagues who for the most part, were 
ambivalent to the issue. A general lack of political ownership of the issue alongside 
existing public policy issues on education, employment and the economy has meant 
that peace walls at the macro level are viewed more as a condition than a problem 
and something that government should directly intervene in.  
This overview of the micro, meso and macro levels illustrates the complexity of 
trying to frame a general interpretation of the peace walls. There are a number of 
issues and a multitude of factors that exist within the discourse on peace walls and 
together they influence whether the walls are viewed as a problem or condition. 
Although the thesis has articulated the rationale employed by Republican working 
class communities, service providers and Belfast City Council in considering them a 
problem that requires some form of intervention, the reality is that for many others, 
which include Loyalist communities and the general public they are simply not a big 
enough problem to require government intervention. Especially if that intervention 
means the removal of the peace walls, and the resources to achieve this are taken 
from budgets across the different Ministries in the NI Executive.  
2. What are the key underlying factors that influence and shape the policy 
process on peace walls?   
The findings from the thesis have revealed that the influences are never generic, but 
rather they affect specific constituency groups at certain times which combine 
together to provide a series of factors that effect the development of a public policy 
process on peace walls. The thesis identified five specific groups of specialists which 
constituted the overall policy community interested in the issue of Belfasts peace 
walls, which included; academics, NGOs, government representatives, and Loyalist 
and Republican representatives. These groups of specialists each make different 
contributions to the policy process on peace walls, and they have very different 
motivations for participating. Firstly, specialists from academia bring knowledge 
and expertise to the process and have historically contributed to public policy 
debates in Northern Ireland. They also have no political or community agenda in 
regards to the outcome of any policy on peace walls. The findings suggested that 
academics had a crucial role in facilitating dialogue between other specialist and 
developing ideas, alternatives and strategies for the other specialists to debate. 
Secondly, specialists from NGOs have been involved in responding to issues 
associated with the conflict for the last forty years. They have played an integral role 
in addressing policy vacuums created firstly by the NIO and then the devolved 
government. Within the policy community they played a significant role in 
brokering ideas and filtering opinions between the community and government 
representatives. Thirdly, the findings indicated that specialists representing the 
governments interests maintained that elected representatives and government 
departments were heavily influenced by public opinion on the issue, along with the 
impact of their decisions on government resources. Alongside this, the findings 
suggest that the NI Executive are reluctant to address legacy based issues associated 
with the conflict, which may also have a direct influence on their level of interest 
and commitment to the formulation and implementation of a policy process on 
peace walls or lack there of.    
Fourthly, the research has evidenced that specialists from the Loyalist community 
are influenced by the strong sense of fear and vulnerability which exists within their 
areas about the encroachment of the Republicans into land and territory which they 
perceived as belonging to the Protestant community. These beliefs have led to a 
suspicion and reluctance to enter into discussions directly about the development of 
a peace walls policy process, further feeding the policy inertia. The specialists 
maintain that over the last decade, many from the Loyalist community believe that 
the peace and political processes have been dominated by a Nationalist and 
Republican agenda, and fear that any policy process around peace walls would 
follow a similar path.  
Fifthly, the thesis has shown that specialists from the Republican community are 
heavily influenced by their expanding population, the poor and inadequate housing 
within their communities and a lack of available Brownfield sites in which to build 
and develop. They maintain that the peace walls are hindering their expansion and 
restricting them access to space, land and un-used territory on the other side of the 
wall. In this regard, it can be argued from the evidence that any peace walls process 
that Republicans enter into will be dominated by their demands to address the 
housing shortages that exist within their community.  
The findings also suggest that those specialists from the government, Loyalist and 
Republican communities were the most important to the process. The remaining 
specialists, namely academics and NGOs are considered more as facilitators to the 
process, as they do not advocate specific agendas. It is clear from the data that 
numerous agendas exist within the discourse on the peace walls. However, it is also 
important to acknowledge that across all of the specialists within the policy 
community, there is recognition that community safety is paramount within any 
policy process. They noted that aside from division and segregation there had been 
no alternatives or strategies that had addressed the key concerns of the community 
and the security services. Therefore, a key consideration for any peace walls process 
in the future is the development of community safety mechanisms that may replace 
the sense of safety and security that barriers provide for residents.  
3. What are the political factors that must also be considered in the context of 
this policy process?  
This thesis has concluded that a range of political factors are influential in the 
development of a peace walls policy process. It has already been established that 
politicians are cautious not to ignore the needs of their electorate, and there is 
minimal evidence to suggest that the wider general public have raised the issue of 
peace walls to their elected representatives. In this regard, specialists in the policy 
community did not think that there was enough national recognition on the 
problematic nature of the peace walls. Instead the consensus is that they are 
considered very much a local issue, clustered in working class Loyalist and 
Republican parts of the city. Therefore, this makes it extremely difficult for peace 
walls to be positioned onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive as there 
is not the political support or energy to invest time, energy and resources into an 
issue that impacts on a minority of the electorate. 
A further political consideration surrounds the government institutions and 
departments and whether they were conducive to working collectively on complex 
and sensitive issues. The evidence from the thesis indicates that any strategy or 
policy on peace walls would require cross-departmental support and joined up 
working across the political parties. However, the historical nature of governance in 
Northern Ireland along with the single identity electorate where the parties draw 
their support may result in difficulties with the implementation of a policy that may 
be seen to benefit one section of the community more than another. Furthermore, 
considering the current economic climate that is dominated by budget cuts and 
downsizing, actually achieving Ministerial commitment across the NI Executive on 
an issue in which the thesis revealed many did not consider their responsibility, may 
prove extremely difficult.  
The previous three questions assisted in the interpretation and analysis of the 
empirical findings which have been discussed in Chapters Five, Six and Seven. 
Collectively, these findings provide the opportunity to develop a comprehensive 
answer to the over-arching question:  
What are the necessary conditions to create a window of opportunity to 
position peace walls onto the decision-making agenda of the Northern Ireland 
Executive?  
Kingdons Multiple Streams Approach of the agenda setting stage of the policy 
process clearly provides an ideal lens to frame the analysis of peace walls within this 
thesis. The model provides the structure to both manage and interpret the complex 
issues that emerged from the empirical findings. More significantly, the approach 
creates the opportunity for an exploration of the necessary conditions required to 
raise the awareness of peace walls and allow for them to be positioned onto the 
decision-making agenda of the NI Executive. The findings suggest that significant 
changes need to occur at the micro, meso and macro at a similar time for the correct 
conditions to emerge that potentially could create the opening of a policy window.   
Firstly, at the micro level both Loyalist and Republican working class communities 
need to move away from the position of separate but equal, where both 
communities receive services and investments parallel to each other. This requires a 
new and collective approach to the social and economic issues that are prevalent 
within both communities, and an acknowledgement that a new policy around peace 
walls policy could be beneficial to all parties. From the outset this will not be an easy 
task, but the platforms exist and the thesis has highlighted the significant levels of 
trust and co-operation that currently take place between community 
representatives across the interfaces. In essence, both Loyalist and Republicans 
need to identify the problematic nature of the peace walls and recognise that 
collaboration is not particularly detrimental to a specific communitys culture and 
identity.  
Secondly, at the meso level the Belfast City Council along with policy entrepreneurs 
in the form of private investors are central to the opening of a policy window. The 
council has the local knowledge and expertise through the councillors and 
department employees to build relationships with local communities and establish 
confidence-building measures that can remove the fear and sensitivities that 
surrounds discussions on the peace walls. The private investors have the innovative 
skills and the financial resources to develop the plans and inform communities as to 
the economic and social benefits of transforming the peace walls and regenerating 
their neighbourhoods. Communities can only imagine what regeneration and the 
transformation of peace walls actually represents. However, private investors with 
architects and environmental landscapers can put their ideas down into drawings, 
posters and plans which allow the community to see the physical transformation of 
their areas, and removes some of the fears and suspicions that come with change.  
Thirdly, at the macro level, elected members and political parties within the NI 
Executive and Stormont Assembly need to acknowledge the economic, social and 
political benefits of government intervention on this issue. An increase in pressure 
from the electorate where peace walls exist, alongside pressure group campaigns 
and submissions of support from local councillors can force those at the macro level 
to take a position on the issue. A legislative framework needs to be established that 
provides direction for those communities that aspire to transform the peace walls 
within their neighbourhoods. Although this thesis suggests that peace walls are 
considered local problems that require local solutions any process requires a policy 
framework that is supported and advocated by the devolved government. In its 
absence, Loyalist and Republican communities, Belfast City Council and private 
investors will continue to struggle to generate the political legitimacy that any 
process that involves the transformation of peace walls would require. The 
underlying and decisive factor within the macro level is that decision-makers and 
policy advisors are keenly aware that by advocating the promotion of peace walls 
onto the decision-making agenda, they are not risking political capital on a 
contaminated issue.  
Essentially, for a policy window to emerge there needs to be collective agreement at 
the micro level between Loyalists and Republicans that peace walls are a problem 
that require a government response; there needs to be willingness to take 
ownership of the operational delivery of a peace walls process at the meso level 
involving the local government and private investors; and there needs to be a 
consensus at the macro level that a policy framework is all that is required to project 
political legitimacy. If significant changes take place across the three elements of the 
peace walls discourse then peace walls may become part of the decision-making 
agenda of the NI Executive.  
9.2 Contribution to knowledge 
The contribution to knowledge from this thesis can be divided into three distinct 
categories that include empirical, theoretical, and public policy and practice. 
Empirical  
The first key empirical contribution of this thesis has been to address the current 
gap in knowledge on the subject area of peace walls in Northern Ireland. Although 
there has been a large amount of research and literature published on social policy 
issues associated with the conflict, very little has focused primarily on the peace 
walls themselves. The subject of peace walls has been discussed and commented 
upon, but usually in a secondary context, and has not been the primary focus of 
investigation. The following academics have examined several of the key social, 
political and economic issues synonymous with the conflict, and within their 
analysis have incorporated issues pertaining to the peace walls in Northern Ireland. 
Fay et al (1999) documented the demographics of victims and referred to the 
correlation between deaths and the location of peace walls; Hall (2003) considered 
the impact of the Troubles on children and young people and documented childrens 
views on the peace walls; Jarman (2005) and Byrne (2005) whilst investigating 
communal violence and disorder noted the emotive attachment communities placed 
on the peace walls; Bollens (1998), Boal (1982), Murtagh (1999), and Doherty and 
Poole (1995) have been prominent in highlighting the levels of deprivation and 
segregation within communities that have peace walls; Darby (1983), Keane (1985), 
and Murtagh (2002) through their research into housing alluded directly to the 
impact of the peace walls; and finally, Bollens (2000) and Murtagh (1995) critiqued 
urban planning in Belfast and referenced the difficulties in developing policy in a 
physically and spatially divided city. In this purview of work that academics and 
researchers have produced in relation to the conflict, it is obvious that a narrow 
focus on peace walls from a policy perspective is absent. This thesis has attempted 
to not only fill this vacuum, but also to complement the existing literature and 
research into social policy issues associated with the conflict.  
The second empirical contribution relates to the relevance of the thesis findings to 
recent academic studies that have assessed the productivity of the Northern Ireland 
Assembly. Birrell (2009), Knox (2010), along with Birrell and Gray (2010) have 
analysed the policy decisions the NI Executive has made from 2008, and alluded to 
the reluctance of elected politicians to address social policy issues that could be 
perceived as politically sensitive, and instead have argued that policy formulation 
and implementation has been dominated by populist decisions. For example, 
Ministers have found it extremely difficult to develop and implement policies on the 
politically sensitive issues such as the 11 plus and the regeneration of the Girdwood 
barracks site because they cannot achieve the required cross-party support within 
the NI Executive. However, policy action on less emotive and politically sensitive 
social policy issues such as prescription and water charges have all generated cross-
party support within the Executive. The findings from the thesis reinforce this 
assumption, where it has identified that elected representatives appear reluctant to 
attach a political priority or engineer policy solutions to the peace walls. The peace 
walls were deemed to be a complicated issue that had both political and communal 
ramifications. In the context of agenda setting, elected politicians considered this an 
issue that had to be addressed within the community as opposed to within the 
government institutions.  
Theoretical  
From a theoretical perspective the thesis reconfirms the views of Mucciaroni (1992) 
and Blackman (2005). They maintained that Kingdons Multiple Streams Model 
could be used in certain situations to predict the kinds of political and institutional 
conditions that need to exist or emerge for getting particular types of problems and 
solutions onto the political agenda. Chapter Eight has illustrated the dominant 
factors that are required within the problem, policy and politics streams to prompt 
peace walls onto the decisionmaking agenda of the NI Executive. Kingdons model 
(1995) provided the framework in which complicated and divisive issues could be 
managed, categorised and labelled. This enabled the research analysis to project the 
characteristics and factors that would be conducive for the coupling of streams and 
the opening of a policy window. This provides an insight into the various dynamics 
that include the institutions and people that might be central to the promotion of 
peace walls onto the decision-making agenda of the NI Executive.  
The thesis also confirms a number of assumptions that Kingdon (1995) postulated 
upon his review of agenda setting and policy formulation by the US federal 
government. According to Kingdon (1995) the policy process is disorganised and 
extremely haphazard. A similar observation could be drawn from the findings that 
emerged from this thesis.  The analysis of the three streams in chapters Five, Six and 
Seven revealed the different interpretations, solutions and political responses that 
exist on peace walls. Furthermore, any policy process on this subject will be 
complicated and will require the involvement of numerous participants from very 
different socio-cultural and political backgrounds, and be located within a political 
system that has only recently completed its first full four-year term.  
A further similarity between Kingdons (1995) approach and this thesis relates to 
the position of elected representatives within a policy process. Kingdon (1995) in a 
similar vein to Weaver (1986) concluded that politicians are primarily motivated by 
the desire to avoid blame for unpopular actions, rather than seek credit and 
applause for popular ones. This notion of blame avoidance was evident within the 
research findings from the policy stream where politicians advocated a bottom-up 
approach to the agenda-setting process. There was a sense that they did not want to 
be associated with any plan or strategy pertaining to the peace walls that evolved 
within government. Any responsibility for raising the issue was placed firmly in the 
hands of the community and non-governmental representatives.  
Finally, the research reaffirms Kingdons (1995) view that the media has a relatively 
minor role in the agenda-setting aspect of the policy process. He contends that the 
media report what is going on in governmentrather than having an independent 
effect on governmental agendas (1995:59). However, academics such as Hill (2005) 
would critique this position and maintain that the media have a significant role in 
defining the problems, reporting the potential solutions, and influencing the political 
positions on issues. Within the thesis the findings recorded minimal recognition of 
the media having a direct influence on peace walls and the agenda-setting process. 
On occasions when the media reported on the peace walls, the stories were quickly 
replaced by other conflict related issues.   
The final conceptual contribution to knowledge relates to the applicability of John 
Kingdons approach outside the confines of the US political system. The Multiple 
Streams model, like many other theories on agenda setting have been based on the 
American political system (Birkland, 2005). A number of scholars (Baumgartner and 
Jones, 2005) have indicated that because of the different institutions of governance 
between the USA and the UK, it is difficult to generalise findings and transfer 
learning. However, Zahariadis (1995) was of the opinion that in the context of 
studying agenda setting that the Multiple Streams Model could be used in 
jurisdictions outside of the USA. This thesis has reaffirmed this position, and has 
illustrated that Kingdons (1995) model can be used to identify policy actors and 
manage the various issues that surround the agenda setting aspect of the policy 
process in a UK setting.  
Public policy and practice 
Within the public policy context, this thesis has practical implications in relation to 
the growing debate within both government and civil society on how to tackle 
sectarianism, intolerance and division in Northern Ireland. The findings provide a 
unique opportunity to inform, advise and contribute on peace walls within a public 
policy framework. The findings clearly illustrate how these physical lines of 
demarcation have divided opinion at both a communal and political level. This thesis 
sets out the arguments in a clear and concise manner under the themes of problems, 
policies and politics. This provides an opportunity to distinguish between 
structures, institutions and individuals, and therefore align the roles and 
responsibilities for those wishing to raise peace walls onto the decision-making 
agenda of the NI Executive.  
The findings from this thesis come at a time when the NI Executive has published 
the draft Cohesion, Sharing and Integration (CSI) document for public consultation. 
This document sets out the governments attempt to address good relations and 
community cohesion issues prevalent in Northern Ireland. Within the document, 
there is a direct reference to peace walls: 
 What is required is a number of interventions to tackle the issues which 
 sustain the maintenance of peace wallsto end this, OFMDFM will lead in 
 the development of aprogramme with departments, agencies and the 
 community on how best to work actively towards the removal of peace 
 walls (CSI, 2010:23). 
The document provides no information on how this is to be achieved, resourced or 
implemented. However, the findings from this thesis go some way to identifying the 
central actors and their interpretations of the peace walls. The three streams 
articulated not only their interpretations of the peace walls and potential solutions, 
but also the values and judgements used to construct their positions. In the context 
of promoting peace walls onto the decision-making agenda as a result of being 
presented with a viable solution, this information could assist policy-makers with 
the factors that influence, facilitate and potentially hinder consensus on a future 
peace walls policy.  
9.3 The way forward 
The findings generated from this thesis provide a comprehensive account of peace 
walls from a public policy perspective. This is a relatively new lens in which 
academics and policymakers can observe a topic in its own right, which was 
previously tacked onto other social policy issues. It is anticipated that, just as Darby 
(1983) and Boal (1982) provided the platform and catalyst for research into 
segregation and division in Northern Ireland for the next three decades, the findings 
of this research will encourage academic debate and new theoretical approaches 
that frame peace walls within a public policy process. Three areas of potential work 
have been identified that may build on the findings from the thesis.  
Firstly, it may be appropriate to consider assessing the views and opinions of the 
general public on peace walls. The Politics stream in Chapter Seven illustrated the 
difficulties in measuring the general publics interest and their interpretation of 
peace walls, and whether they perceived this as an issue that the government should 
respond to. One method of determining the views of the mass public is through a 
large-scale questionnaire. The Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey first 
launched in 1998, and held annually since, measures the attitudes, values and beliefs 
of people in Northern Ireland on a wide range of social policy issues. The survey has 
previously included questions on themes relating to community relations and the 
role of government. This may be the mechanism to develop a series of questions to 
ascertain the publics interpretation, interest and views on government 
interventions on the peace walls. Any new statistics aligned with the existing 
findings from the Politics stream in Chapter Seven would provide a more robust and 
comprehensive picture of the public mood in regards to the peace walls. 
A second area of consideration would be to once again reflect on the findings from 
the only survey to date that has questioned residents who live beside peace walls 
(US/Ireland Alliance, 2008). The quantitative research that was commissioned by 
Trina Vargo (see 2.8 for more information) collated residents views on the removal 
of peace walls. This thesis has shown the different values those from Loyalist and 
Republican communities place on the peace walls, and the role this has on their 
interpretation of the peace walls. It may be appropriate to revisit those communities 
and conduct a secondary qualitative piece of research involving focus groups and 
interviews and assess whether there is a correlation between views on the removal 
of the peace walls and the values they place on them. This would assist policy and 
decision makers in understanding the local nuances that communities adopt and 
which influence their positioning on the peace walls and reduce the potential for any 
government strategy or policy framework to be viewed by communities in a zero-
sum context.  
Thirdly, it may be appropriate to develop further analysis on the theoretical learning 
that emerged in relation to the top-down bottom up application of policy making. 
The thesis found that elected representatives advocated a bottom-up approach to 
the formulation and design of policy pertaining to peace walls. They supported the 
idea that Loyalist and Republican communities should be part of the local decision-
making process with an emphasis on community participation and grass-roots 
mobilization. However, the community perspective was slightly different, where 
there was a sense that a top-down approach was required, with decision-makers 
within government providing leadership and direction through a new peace walls 
policy. In most cases, decision-makers and politicians advocate a top-down 
approach, but in this case, there has been an inverse and the opposite has been 
supported. This may be attributed to the fact that peace walls have become 
associated with the conflict, and politicians are reluctant to engage in this policy 
arena. Therefore, it may be interesting to examine whether this is an isolated 
incident, or whether decision-makers pursue a bottom-up approach to other legacy 
based issues. This could also be expanded to include other post-conflict experiences 
on an international scale to determine whether this type of policy making is 
frequent in other conflict related environments. 
9.4 Conclusion  
This thesis has applied John Kingdons (1995) Multiple Streams Model as a toolkit 
to analyse and better understand a complicated, emotional and politically sensitive 
subject in the form of peace walls. From a theoretical perspective a toolkit best fits 
the description of how the Multiple Streams Model was applied to analyse and make 
sense of the research findings.  This model allowed for the key actors in the agenda-
setting process to be identified and more importantly provided a system that 
collated the factors and dynamics that influenced their positions and interpretations 
on the peace walls. This then created the space for the various policy alternatives 
and ideas to be discussed along with the roles and responsibilities of those tasked 
with promoting the subject of peace walls onto the decision-making agenda. Finally, 
the model provided an opportunity to consider the process that would result in a 
window of opportunity, which would catapult peace walls onto the decision-
making agenda of the NI Executive.  
Kingdon (1995) maintained that the purpose of his model was to make progress in 
understanding vague and imprecise phenomena. This thesis, through the 
application of the Multiple Streams Approach, has brought a sense of clarity and 
order to the complicated and chaotic issues that affect and impact upon the diverse 
interpretations of peace walls. This thesis has lifted some of the ambiguity and 
suspicion that encompasses the discourse on peace walls, and has revealed the 
difficulties in raising peace walls onto the decision-making agenda of the NI 
Executive without political and community agreement on a viable solution or 
alternative.  
The undeniable truth is that there is no locally based policy or framework on peace 
walls. The danger with this is that if a local community reached an agreement on the 
removal of their peace wall, there is no policy or strategy in place that would 
provide them with the tools to do it. Ironically, Under the Justice and Security Act 
(NI) 2007 section 29 the Secretary of State can still take possession of land and build 
defensible structures for the preservation of peace and the maintenance of order.  
The absence of a policy leads to government departments shunning responsibility 
and the inability for communities to hold the devolved government to account. 
Finally, the failure to have in place a peace walls policy that has been formulated and 
designed by locally elected representatives does little to encourage those that reside 
beside the peace walls that their needs are contained within the new political 
agenda. Instead, it lends support to the argument that prevails within Loyalist and 
Republican communities that they have been absent from the economic gains made 
from the peace and political processes, and considered by the rest of the society as 
stuck in a time-warp and not their problem.  
Appendix 1 
Full list of NIO constructed peace walls in Belfast 1969-2008 
Year Location Material by 2008 
1969 Cupar Way/Clonard High concrete wall topped with metal 
sheeting topped with weldmesh fence 
1969 Alliance Avenue / Glenbryn Metal sheeting fence 
1969 Cupar Street Upper High brick wall topped with metal 
sheeting 
1970s Bryson Street / Thistle Court Brick wall topped with open mesh 
fencing 
1970s Cluan Place / Clandeboye Gardens Brick wall topped with open mesh 
fencing 
1970s Mountpottinger Road / Woodstock Link Open mesh fence 
1970s Henry Street / West Link Brick wall topped with double steel 
palisade fence 
1970s Manor Street / Rosevale Street Brick wall topped with steel fence 
1970s Rosappenna Street / Oldpark Street Brick wall topped with metal fence 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / Halidays Road  / 
Newington 
Welded mesh fence on top of existing 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / South Side Brick wall / metal fence / pedestrian 
gates 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / North Side Brick wall / metal pedestrian and 
vehicle gate 
1970s North Queen Street / Duncairn Gardens High mesh penal fencing and brick wall 
1970s Duncairn Gardens / North Side Brick wall and metal sheeting 
1970s Malinmore Park / Oranmore Drive Double steel palisdale fence and steel 
sheeting 
1970s Ardmoulin Avenue / Beverley Street High gates at Percy Street and block 
wall with steel sheeting on top and 
weldmesh fencing 
1970s North Howard Street Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1970s Northumberland Street Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1980s Newtownards Road / Strand Walk Brick wall and steel slatted panel fence 
1980s Woodvale / Holy Cross Weld mesh fence 
1980s Torrens / Wyndham Street Steel fence with brick wall reinforcing 
another steel fence on top 
1985 Roden Street / Westlink Stone wall with steel fencing on top / 
metal sheeting and welded mesh in 
further places 
1988 Springfield Park / Springmartin Road Brick wall topped with metal sheeting 
1988 Lanark Way Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1989 Springfield Avenue / Springfield Road Brick wall with steel posts and railings 
1990s Torrens / Oldpark Road  and Avenue Brick wall 
1990s Springfield Pde / West Circular Road Brick and block wall topped with chain 
link fencing , palisade fence and metal 
sheeting 
1990s Ballygomartin Road Steel fence with sections of palisade 
fencing 
1990 Workman Avenue Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1990 Springmartin Road Steel double gates and palisade fence 
1991 Moyard Pde 
Steel palisade fence 
1992 Townsend Street 
Metal pedestrian and vehicle gates 
1993 Squires Hill / Hazel Brook Drive Metal fence topped with weldmesh 
fencing and brick wall 
1993 Serpentine Gardens / Gunnell Hill Metal sheeting fence topped with open 
mesh sheeting 
1994 Ainsworth Avenue / Springfield Road Brick wall topped with mesh panel 
fencing 
1994 Flax Street 
Two metal barriers 
1994 Parkside Gardens / Mountcollyer Street High wall of  weldmesh and steel 
fencing 
1997 Mountainview Pde / Mountainview Park Steel mesh fence 
1998 Longlands Road / Arthur Bridge Palisade fence with metal sheeting 
attached 
2002 Madrid Street  East Belfast Steel gates topped with sheeting and 
weld mesh fencing 
2008 Graymount Metal pedestrian gate topped with 
palisade fencing 
2008 Hazelwood Integrated Primary School Weld mesh fence on top of existing 
school perimeter fence 
Appendix 2 
Elected representatives Interview guide 
1) General introductory comments  setting the scene? Building a 
relationship with the participants? Understanding their motivations to 
becoming involved? Knowledge and understanding of the issue? 
 Peace walls in the community 
 Roles and responsibility  
 History  
 Origin 
 Rationale for construction 
 Key issues 
2) Politics and peace walls  the impact of the walls on the political party and 
individual? Is it an issue? 
 Impact on your role 
 Party position on walls 
 Differences 
 Local government vs Executive 
 How is it raised 
3) Community issues  how do they relate to you? Do the community see your 
role as an opportunity to raise the issue? Is it ignored in the community?  
 Impact on the community 
 Issues raised by the community 
 How are the raised 
 Community led  
 Politically led 
 Benefits to the community 
4) Outcomes  what is the way forward? Is there anything that cn be achieved? 
What would that look like? In whose interests? Is there a political agenda? 
 Local and governmental level  differences 
 Coherent strategy 
 Willingness to address the issues 
 Influence policy 
 Peace walls absent from discussions 
Appendix 3 
Government / statutory representatives interview guide 
1) General introductory questions  Setting the scene? Developing a 
relationship around the subject area? Understanding individuals 
interest/experience in the area of peace walls? 
 Role in government 
 Relevance to peace walls 
 Historical involvement 
 Experience in responding to issues 
2) Organisations position  determining the role of the organisation in the 
context of peace walls? Has it always been involved? Is it relatively new to 
the topic? What has it contributed? 
 Existing policies that respond to peace walls 
 Issues pertaining to peace walls 
 Resources 
 Impact of the peace process 
 Legacy of the conflict 
 Political support  local/Executive 
 Key issues 
3) Cross departmental impact  what is the level of engagement between 
different statutory agencies? Has this always existed? Joined up thinking?  
 Co-operation 
 Individual approach 
 Budgets/resources 
 Coherent policy 
 Leadership 
 Issue led 
4) Outside involvement  are the external pressures at a local and 
international level on the organisation? Can these influence policy 
decisions? Can they contribute to setting the agenda? 
 Economic issues 
 Investment 
 International recognition 
 International pressure 
5) Policy on peace walls  is there a distinct policy? Who is involved in 
setting and implementing the policy? 
 Roles and responsibilities  
 Setting the agenda 
 Changed over the years 
 Opportunities to develop new policies 
6) Community involvement  is there any involvement or working 
partnerships with local communities on this subject? Who represents the 
community? How do you engage with the community? Are the 
community supportive? 
 Participation 
 Types of issues involved with 
 Consultation 
 Opportunities to influence policies 
 Inhibitors or drivers for change 
7) Exit strategies  what is the way forward? Remaining with the status 
quo? Altering the geographical landscape? Who is going to fund the policy 
changes if there are any? Is there a cohesive policy agenda 
 Vision of local neighbourhoods 
 Vision of the city 
 Relationship to a shared city 
 Role of OFMDFM 
 Issues around security 
 Measuring policy decisions  
 Who has responsibility 
Appendix 4 
NGO interview guide 
1) General introductory questions  Setting the scene? Developing a 
relationship around the subject area? Understanding individuals 
interest/experience in the area of peace walls? 
 Role in the sector 
 Relevance to peace walls 
 Historical involvement 
 Experience in responding to issues 
2) Organisations position  determining the role of the organisation in the 
context of peace walls? Has it always been involved? Is it relatively new to 
the topic? What has it contributed? 
 Existing policies that respond to peace walls 
 Issues pertaining to peace walls 
 Resources 
 Impact of the peace process 
 Legacy of the conflict 
 Political support  local/Executive 
 Key issues 
3) Outside involvement  are the external pressures at a local and 
international level on the organisation? Can these influence policy decisions? 
Can they contribute to setting the agenda? 
 Economic issues 
 Investment 
 International recognition 
 International pressure 
4) Policy on peace walls  is there a distinct policy? Who is involved in setting 
and implementing the policy? 
 Roles and responsibilities  
 Setting the agenda 
 Changed over the years 
 Opportunities to develop new policies 
5) Community/government involvement  is there any involvement or 
working partnerships with local communities/government representatives 
on this subject? Who represents the community? How do you engage with 
the community? Are the community supportive? 
 Participation 
 Types of issues involved with 
 Consultation 
 Opportunities to influence policies 
 Inhibitors or drivers for change 
Appendix 5 
Community Representatives interview guide 
1) General introductory questions  Setting the scene? Developing a 
relationship; general comments around peace walls throughout the city; 
begin a more focused look at walls within their respective communities? 
 Position in the community 
 Background 
 Geographical location 
 Issues in the area 
2) Development of peace walls  Overview of the types and number of 
walls within their community? The context in which they were 
constructed? Was their a community campaign for their construction/ a 
perceived need? 
 Origins within the area 
 Rationale for their construction 
 Incidents of violence 
 Main protagonists  
 Types of walls 
 Altered, adapted over time 
3) Interpretation of the walls  How does the community view the walls? 
Has this changed over time? Are their generational differences in relation 
to the rationale for the walls? Do they address community concerns? 
What are the community concerns? 
 Community support 
 Who is the community 
 Perceptions of the walls 
 Immediate impact i.e. reduction in violence 
 Address community concerns 
 Wider societal impacts of division 
 Differences pre/post political settlement 
4) 2010  The context of the walls today in your community? What purpose 
do they serve? Are they necessary? Are they an issue? Are there different 
perspectives within the community on the topic? Is there a relationship 
between violence and the walls? 
 Role of the walls 
 Levels of violence 
 Key protagonists in the violence 
 Community support  
 Issues around community safety 
 Legacy of the walls 
 Young people 
 Benefits to the walls 
5) Community consultation on walls  how would any discussions take 
place? Who would be facilitating them? What aspects of the peace walls 
would be included in these discussions? What support would be 
necessary? 
 level of interest 
 future of the walls 
 role of gate keepers 
 representation of the entire community 
 methods of consultation 
6) Relationships outside of the community  how they impact on the 
agendas being set within the community? Are the community reliant on 
the views of outsiders? Are there issues out of the control of the 
community which contribute to their agenda being set?  
 Cross community 
 Role of community representatives 
 Levels of engagement with neighbouring communities 
 Support from statutory services 
 Relationship with elected representatives 
7) Future  determine the position of peace walls within local 
neighbourhoods and the city in the coming years? Essentially what does 
this mean for a community agenda on any future policy on the peace 
walls?  
 Vision for your community 
 Vision for the city 
 The role of the community 
 The legacy of the walls 
 Potential to contribute to policy 
 Developing a cohesive position on the walls 
 Ability to transform policy / what methods employ 
Appendix 6 
Title of Project:  
The Belfast Peace Walls: The Problems, Policies and Politics of the Troubles 
Architecture 
Name of chief investigator (researcher) Mr Jonny Byrne 
Purpose of the research  
The purpose of this research is to develop an understanding of the different views 
and opinions that communities, government organisations and statutory agencies 
have on the subject of peace walls in Belfast. By understanding these different views 
and opinions on peace walls it may be possible to define the different agendas and 
provide information which may be useful to any future organisation responsible for 
developing a policy on peace walls.  
Role of the participant  
You have been asked to participate in an interview that will focus on issues relating 
to peace walls in Belfast. The interviewer has a number of questions around the 
subject of peace walls that they would like to ask you. The interview should last 
approximately 45 minutes. With your permission the interviewer would like to 
record the interview. If however you do not wish for the interview to be recorded, 
no such device will be used.  
Confidentiality and Anonymity 
All views, opinions and references are ENTIRELY CONFIDENTIAL AND 
ANONYMOUS. All interview transcripts are screened and purged of any and all 
material which has the potential to identify respondents in any way.  All information 
is held in compliance with the Data Protection Act 1998. 
Thank you for your participation in this study  
Jonny Byrne 
PhD Researcher  
University of Ulster 
School of Social Policy 
07739677662 
byrne-j1@email.ulster.ac.uk 
Consent form for participants 
Research Title: The Belfast Peace Walls: The Problems, Policies and Politics of 
the Troubles Architecture 
Name of Chief Investigator: Mr Jonny Byrne 
Please read and initial the following statements:  
 I confirm that I have been given and have read and understood the 
information sheet for the above study and have asked and received answers 
to any questions raised     ______________ 
 I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to 
withdraw at any time without giving a reason and without my rights affected 
in any way      _______________ 
 I understand that the researchers will hold all information and data collected 
securely and in confidence and that all efforts will be made to ensure that I 
cannot be identified as a participant in the study (except as might be required 
as law) and I give permission for the researchers to hold relevant personal 
_______________ 
 I agree for this interview to be recorded 
_______________ 
 I agree to take part in the above study 
_______________ 
 I understand that if at any future stage I would like to withdraw from this 
study that any data attributed to myself is either destroyed and/or returned 
Should you have any special needs or requirements please indicate what they 
________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Name of Participant (please print, sign and date) 
_________________________________________________________ 
Name of Researcher taking consent (please print, sign and date) 
Appendix 7 
Interagency Working Group Terms of Reference and Membership 
Principles:  
In all responses to the legacy of physical segregation the safety and security of the 
people living near to interfaces and interface barriers must be the priority. 
1. With this in mind, we should create the conditions for the removal of all 
interface barriers across the city of Belfast; 
2. The process of removing barriers should be part of an inclusive, community 
approach towards building a shared city; 
3. No more segregation barriers should be built; rather priority must be given 
to other forms of investment in communities, to ensure their safety and 
security without the need for physical structures. 
The IWG is based on three key elements 
 It must be inclusive and prioritise the needs of residents 
 Strategies must be developed to meet the specific local context 
 It will build upon existing good practice and address any gaps in provision 
Membership 
- 4 community representatives that come from the community partners group (2-  
from the Nationalist/Republican community and 2 from the Unionist/Loyalist 
community) 
- 1 member of the Community Relations Council 
- 2 members of Belfast City Council 
- 1 member from OFMDFM 
- 1 member from DSD 
- 1 member from Department of Justice 
- 1 member from PSNI 
- 1 member from Youth Services 
- 1 member from DRD 
References 
A Shared Future (2005) A Shared Future: Policy and Strategic Framework for Good 
Relations in Northern Ireland, London: Whitehall 
Adams, C. (2000) Suspect Data: Arresting Research, in King, R.D. and Wincup, E. 
(eds) Doing Research on Crime and Justice, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Ahearne, J. (2006) Public Intellectuals Within A Multiple Streams Model of the 
Cultural Policy Process: Notes from a French perspective. International 
Journal of Cultural Policy 12 (1), pp. 1-15 
Alliance Press Statement (2007) The cost of segregation on society Anna Lo South 
Belfast MLA, http://www.annalo.org/news/view/155 Date accessed: 
23.01.10 
Andersen, S. (2003) On a clear day you can see the EU, case study methodology in 
EU research. Norwegian School of Management, ARENA Working Paper 
16/03 
Anderson, J. (2008) From Empires to Ethno-National Conflicts: A framework for 
studying divided cities in contested states Part 1, Divided Cities/Contested 
States, Working Paper No.1  
Andersonstown News (2008a) Squinter column in Andersonstown News, 20.03.08, 
 Belfast: Andersonstown News 
Andersonstown News (2008b) Apology to Gerry Adams, Andersonstown News 
 27.03.08, Belfast: Andersonstown News 
Andersonstown News (2009) Suffolk residents say living conditions are all but 
 intolerable for local people, Andersonstown News 14.04.09 Belfast: 
 Andersonstown News 
Armesto, F,F. (2004) This Story Doth A Wall Present, Index on Censorship 33 (3) 
Issue 212  
Adams, C. (2000) Suspect Data: Arresting Research, in King, R.D. and Wincup, E. 
(eds) Doing Research on Crime and Justice, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Archick, K. (2011) Northern Ireland: The Peace Process, CRS Report for Congress, 
Washington: Congressional Research Service  
Ashe, F. (2007) Gendering ethno-nationalist conflict in Northern Ireland. A 
comparative analysis of nationalist womens political protests Ethnic and 
Racial Studies, 30 (5), pp. 766-786  
Aughey, A. (2005) The Politics of Northern Ireland: Beyond the Belfast Agreement, 
London: Routledge  
Aughey, A. (2006) The 1998 Agreement: three Unionist anxieties in Cox, M., 
 Guelke, A., and  Stephen, F. (2006) A Farewell to Arms? Beyond The Good 
 Friday Agreement, second edition. Manchester: Manchester University Press 
August, O, and Haynes, D. (2009) Nouri al-Maliki gambles on peace as Baghdads 
blast walls come down, The Times, 07.08.09  
Bachrach, P.S. and Baratz, M.S. (1962) Two Faces of Power, American Political 
Science Review, 56, pp. 1947-52 
http://www.annalo.org/news/view/155
Bachrach, P.S. and Baratz, M.S. (1970) Power and poverty. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Baggott, M. (2011) East Belfast riots a wake-up call, says Baggott, Mcadam (2011) 
Belfast Telegraph, 24.06.11  
Bailey, D. (2005) EU outposts turn into fortresses, BBC UK News, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4294426.stm Date accessed 
09.04.09 
Bang, G. (2010) Energy Security and Climate Change Concerns: Triggers for energy 
policy change in the United States, Energy Policy, 38 (4), pp. 1645-1653 
Barrett, SM,. and Fudge, C.  (eds) (1981) Policy and Action: Essays on the 
 implementation of public policy. London: Methuen.  
Barzilay, D. (1973) The British Army in Ulster Volume 1.  Belfast: Century Services 
Limited. 
Barzilay, D. (1975) The British Army in Ulster Volume 2.  Belfast: Century Services 
Limited. 
Baumgartner, F.R., and Jones, B.D. (1991) Agenda Dynamics and Policy Subsystems, 
Journal of Politics, 53 (4), pp. 1044-74 
Baumgartner, F.R, and Jones, B.D. (2005) Agendas and Instability in American 
Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
Baumgartner, F.R., Green-Pedersen, C., Jones, B.D. (2006) Comparative studies of 
policy agendas, Journal of European Public Policy, 13 (7), pp. 959-974 
Bauman, C., and White, S. (2010) Enhanced dialogue in the transport planning and 
 decision-making process: enabling change through citizen/stakeholder 
 deliberation, paper presented to the 12th World Conference on Transport 
 Research, Lisbon, Portugal.  
Bazeley, P. (2007) Qualitative Data Analysis with NVIVO. London: Sage Publications 
BBC (2009) Forty Years of Peace Lines, BBC Northern Ireland, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8121362.stm Date accessed: 
06.06.10 
BBC (2010) Northern Ireland Parties comment on CSI, BBC Northern Ireland, 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-11652370Date accessed: 
06.03.11 
BBC (2011) Northern Ireland Council Elections, BBC Northern Ireland, 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/special/election2011/council/html/95z.stm 
Date accessed: 06.06.11 
BBC (2011b) 1 Billion spend on NIs divided society should go on water, BBC 
Northern Ireland http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-
12214466 Date Accessed: 13.05.11 
Bean, K. (2007) The New Politics of Sinn Fin. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
Beaumont, P. (2009) Argentina call halt to a wall separating rich from poor, The 
Guardian, 12.04.09 
Beckett, K. (1994) Setting the Public Agenda: street crime and drug use in 
 America politics. Social Problems, 41 (3), pp. 425-447  
Beland, D. (2005) Ideas and Social Policy: An Institutionalist Perspective. Social 
Policy and Administration, 39 (1), pp. 1-18 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4294426.stm
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8121362.stm
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-12214466
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-12214466
Belfast City Council (2003) Belfast City Council Corporate Plan 2003-2006. Belfast: 
Belfast City Council.  
Belfast City Council (2007) Good Relations Plan 2007, Belfast: Belfast City Council 
Belfast City Council (2008) Belfast City Council Re-imaging murals in the city plan 
http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/re-image/ Date accessed: 14.08.10 
Belfast City Council (2009) PEACE III in Belfast: Building Positive Relations at the 
local level, Belfast: Good Relations Department, Belfast City Council  
Belfast City Council (2010) PEACE III in Belfast: A review of the first phase of the 
 Belfast Peace and Reconciliation Action Plan under Priority 1.1 of the Peace 
 III Programme, Belfast: Belfast City Council. 
Belfast Interface Project (1998) Interface Communities and the Peace Process. 
Belfast: Belfast Interface Project.  
Belfast Interface Project (2004) A Policy Agenda for the Interface, Belfast: Belfast 
 Interface Project 
Belfast Interface Project (2008) A Map of the total Interface barriers in Belfast  
  http://www.belfastinterfaceproject.org/interface%20map.html 12.11.09 
Bell, J.B (1993) The Irish Troubles: A Generation of Violence 1967-1992, Dublin: Gill 
 and MacMillan 
Bell, J. and Jarman, N. (2010) Beyond Belfast: contested spaces in urban, rural  and 
 cross-border settings. Belfast: Community Relations Council  
Belfast Telegraph (1994) brick wall demanded to stop killer gangs Belfast 
 Telegraph, 10.05.94  
Belfast Telegraph (1998) residents demanding protection Belfast Telegraph, 
 31.05.98 
Bennett, C. and Howlett, M. (1992) The lessons of learning: reconciling theories of 
policy learning and policy change, Policy Sciences, 25, pp. 275-294  
Benvenisti, M. S. (1976) Jerusalem: The torn city. Mineapolis: University of 
Minnesota 
Benvenisti, M. S. (1986) Conflicts and Contradictions. New York: Villard Books  
Bew, P. and Gibbon, P., and Pattersib, H. (1996) Northern Ireland 1921-1996: 
Political Forces and Social Classes. London: Serif 
Birkland, T.A. (1997) After disaster: Agenda setting, Public Policy, and Focused 
 Events, Washington DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Birkland, T.A. (1998) Focusing Events, Mobilization, and Agenda Setting, Journal of 
Public Policy, 18 (3), pp. 53-74 
Birrell, W.D., and Murie, A.S. (1975) Ideology, Conflict and Social Policy, Journal of 
Social Policy, 4 (3), pp. 243-258 
Birrell, W.D., and Murie, A.S. (1980) Politics and Government in Northern Ireland: 
Lessons of Devolution, London: Gill and MacMillan Ltd 
Birrell, D. (2007) The Reform Agenda in the Northern Ireland Civil Service: The 
Influences of Parity, Integration, Devolution and Direct Rule. Public Policy 
and Administration, 22 (3), pp. 275-288 
Birrell, D. (2009) Direct rule and the governance of Northern Ireland. Manchester: 
 Manchester Univerity Press. 
http://www.belfastinterfaceproject.org/interface%20map.html
Birrell, D. and Gray, A.M. (2010) Governance and social policy in Northern Ireland 
 2007-2010: Consensus and Eithne Mcloughlins Lowest Common Denominator 
 Thesis. Unpublished  
Blackman, T. (1991) Planning Belfast. Aldershot: Avebury Academic Publishing 
Group  
Blackman, V.S. (2005) Putting Policy Theory To Work: Tobacco Control in California. 
Policy, Practice and Nursing Practice, 6 (2), pp. 148-155 
Blomkvist, J. and Hackett, C. (2008) Issues and Strategies for Conflict Transformation 
 at Belfasts Interfaces: results from the Belfast-Area workshops 5th -28th 
 February 2008. Belfast: Belfast Conflict Resolution Consortium.  
Bloomberg, M. (2008) Take down peace walls, NY Mayor 10.04.10 
 http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7390938.stm  
Bloomfield, K. (1998) We Will Remember Them: Report of the Northern Ireland 
Victims Commissioner, Northern Ireland: Northern Ireland Office. 
Boal, F.W. (1972) The Urban Residential Sub-community: A conflict interpretation, 
Area, 4, pp. 41-79  
Boal, F.W. (1976) Ethnic Residential Segregation, in Herbert, D.T., and Johnston, R.J., 
(eds), Social Areas in Cities, 1. Spatial Processes and Form, pp.41-79, 
Chichester: Jon Wiley  
Boal, F. (1982) Segregation and mixing: space and residence in Belfast. Integration 
 and division. Geographical perspectives on the Northern Ireland problem. F. 
 Boal and D, Neville. London, Academic Press, pp. 249-280  
Boal, B.W. (1987) Segregation. Beckenham: Croom-Helm.  
Boal, F.W. (2002) Belfast: walls within, Political Geography, 21, pp. 687-694 
Boal, F.W and Royle, S. (2006) Enduring City: Belfast in the Twentieth Century. 
Belfast: Belfast City Council. 
Bochel, C. (2006) New Labour, Participation and the Policy Process, Public Policy and 
Administration, 21 (4), pp. 10-22  
Bollens, S.A. (1998) Urban Peace-Building in Divided Societies: Belfast and 
 Johannesburg, Oxford: Westview Press 
Bollens, S.A. (1999) Urban Peace-Building in Divided Societies. Colorado: Westview 
Press  
Bollens, S.A. (2000) On narrow ground: urban policy and ethnic conflict in Jerusalem 
and Belfast, Albany: State University of New York Press 
Borger, J. (2007) Security fences or barriers to peace? The Guardian, 24.04.07  
Boujenko, N., Buchanan, C., Jones, P. (2008) Discussion Paper VI Improving 
Connectivity and Mobility in Belfast, Discussion Paper VI, Belfast City Council, 
June 2008. 
Bratton, KA, and Haynie, KL (1999) Agenda Setting and Legislative Success in 
 State  Legislatures: the effects of gender and race. The Journal of Politics, 61 
 pp. 658-679  
Breen, S (2010) Peace Process failed Loyalist prisoners, claims new report Sunday 
 Tribune, 09.01.10  
Bovens, M. and tHart, P. (1996) Understanding Policy Fiascos, New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers.  
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7390938.stm
Bradley, C. and Murtagh, B. (2007) Good Practice in Local Area Planning in the 
Context of Promoting Good Relations, Belfast: Belfast City Council.  
Brand, R. (2009) Written and Unwritten Building Conventions in a Contested City: 
The Case of Belfast. Urban Studies, 46, (12) pp. 2669-2689  
Brien, L. (1991) Ulster enjoys all-time high tourist figures Belfast Telegraph 10.09.91  
British Soldier (1) (2009) Operation Banner Forum. www.operationbanner.com 
private email correspondence 
British Soldier (2) (2009) Operation Banner Forum. www.operationbanner.com 
private email correspondence 
Brown, S. (1985) Central Belfasts Shopping Centre. Estates Gazette 19th October 
(1985) P256-258 
Brunner, S. (2008) Understanding policy change: Multiple streams and emissions 
trading in Germany. Global Environmental Change, 18, (3), pp. 501-507 
Bryan, D and Gillespie, G. (2005) Transforming Conflict: Flags and Emblems. Belfast: 
Institute of Irish Studies, Queens University Belfast. 
Bryman, A., and Burgess, R.G. (1994) Analysing Qualitative Data, London: Routledge 
Bryman, A (2001) Social Research Methods, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Bryman, A. (2004) Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Research: How is it done? 
Oxford: Oxford University Press  
Bryman, A. (2008) Social Research Methods Third Edition, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press 
Buchanan, S. (2008) Transforming Conflict Through Civil Society: Assessing the  
 impact of the International Fund for Ireland in Northern Ireland and the 
 Border Counties of Ireland. 2nd ECPR Graduate Conference, Barcelona. Section 
 7, Panel 313, Conflict Resolution and Civil Society, Paper NI. 508.  
Buckland, P. (1981) A history of Northern Ireland, Dublin: Gill and Macmillan.  
Buckley, A (ed.) (1998) Symbols in Northern Ireland, Belfast: The Institute of Irish 
Studies, Queens University Belfast.  
Byrne, J., Hansson, U., and Jarman, N. (2005) Teenage Kicks, Arvac Bulletin, NO. 98  
Byrne, J. (2005) Interface violence in East Belfast during 2002, Belfast: Institute for 
Conflict Research 
Byrne, J, (2005) Out of Site: Paramilitary exiling of young people in Northern Ireland, 
Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research 
Byrne, J., Hansson, U., and Bell, J. (2006) Shared Living: Mixed residential 
communities in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research.  
Byrne, J. (2006) Interface Violence in East Belfast during 2002: The mechanisms and 
programmes employed to limit the impact on local residents, Shared Space 
Journal, Issue 2, Belfast: Community Relations Council 
Byrne, J. (2007) Review of Interface Issues in Derry: A review of key issues to inform 
local partners in developing more strategic responses to violence in interface 
areas, Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research 
Byrne, J., and Jarman, N. (2007) New Migrant Communities and Belfast: An overview 
of demographics trends and social factors relating to new patterns of 
migration to the city, Belfast: Belfast City Council 
http://www.operationbanner.com/
http://www.operationbanner.com/
Byrne, J. (2008) Belfast City Council Bonfire Management Programme Evaluation, 
Belfast: Belfast City Council 
Byrne, J. and Monaghan, L. (2008) Policing Loyalist and Republican Communities: 
Understanding key issues for local communities and the PSNI, Belfast: Institute 
for Conflict Research 
Byrne, J. (2009) The role of the North Belfast Interface Monitoring Group, Belfast: 
North Belfast Interface Network 
CAB/4/1634/1 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
CAB/1634/1 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
CAB/1634/2 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
CAB/1634/3 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
Cadwallader, A. (2004) Holy Cross: The Untold Story, Belfast: The Brehon Press ltd 
Cairns, E., Van Til, J., Williamson, A. (2003) Social Capital, Collectivism- Individualism 
 and Community background in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Office First 
 Minister Deputy First Minister 
Calme, J. (2005) Divided cities and ethnic conflict in the urban domain, Paper from 
ICCROM FORUM October 4th 2005  
Calame, J and Charlesworth, E. (2008) Divided Cities: Belfast, Beirut, Jerusalem, 
Mostar, and Nicosia, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press  
Cameron, D. (2011) David Cameron tells Northern Irelands politicians: move past 
the peace process, in, Rudford, A. (2011) Belfast Telegraph, 10.06.11  
Challenge of Change Conference (2009) Challenge of Change Conference; Interface 
Working Group, Belfast: Community Relations Council.  
Chrisalis, A. (2005) Riots rain on Belfasts parade, The Guardian 12.10.05 
Chulov, M. (2009) Security walls return to Baghdad after series of bombings, The 
Guardian, 04.09.09.  
Clarke, L. (2009) Uphill Task for Sinn Fin in EU elections, Sunday Times, 09.05.09 
Clarke, L. (2010) Too Many Snouts in Stormont Trough, Sunday Times. 13.12.10 
Clarke, L. (2011) Debate over budget preferable to sectarian squabbling, Sunday 
 Times, 22.02.11 
Cobb, R.W., and Elder, C.D. (1972) Participation in American Politics: The Dynamics of 
Agenda-Building, Boston: Allyn and Bacon  
Cobb, R.W., Ross., J.K., and Ross, M.H. (1976) Agenda Building as a Comparative 
Political Process, American Political Science Review 70 (1), pp. 126-38 
Cohen, M., March, J., and Olsen, J. (1972) A Garbage can model of organisational 
choice, Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, pp. 1-25  
Cohesion, Sharing and Integration (2010) Programme for Cohesion, Sharing and 
Integration: Consultation Document, Belfast: OFMDFM 
Coffey, A. and Atkinson, P. (1996) Making Sense of Qualitative Data, London: Sage 
Community Relations Council (2009) Towards Sustainable Security: Interface 
barriers and the legacy of segregation in Belfast, Belfast: Community Relations 
Council 
Community Relations Council (2010) Response to the consultation on the Programme 
for Cohesion, Sharing and Integration Consultation, Belfast: Community 
Relations Council 
Community Relations Council (2011) Submission to the Northern Ireland Draft 
Budget, Belfast: Community Relations Council 
Community Relations Council (2011a) Community Partners Interface Working Group 
Residential Report. Belfast: Community Relations Council 
Conflict Transformation Project (2007) Belfast City Councils Conflict Transformation 
Project. Belfast: Belfast City Council 
Connolly, M. (1990) Politics and Policy-making in Northern Ireland, London: Philip 
Allan  
Connolly, K. (1999) Gypsies trapped behind European wall of shame, The Guardian, 
24.10.99 
Conroy, J. (1988) War as away of life: A Belfast diary, London: Heinemann 
Cowan, C. (1982) Belfasts hidden planners, Town and Country Planning, 51, (6) pp. 
163-67 
Cownie, E. (2008) The Whitewell Youth Mediation Project, Belfast: Belfast 
 Interface Project.  
Crenson, M.A. (1971) Unpolitics of Air Pollution: Study of non-decision making in 
 the cities, Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press 
Crenson, M.A. and Ginsberg, B. (2002) Downsizing Democracy: How America 
Sidelined its Citizens and Privatized its Public. Baltimore: John Hopkins 
University Press. 
Curran, E. (2011a) Health Ministers options are issues of life and death, Belfast 
 Telegraph, 01.3.11 
Curran, E. (2011) Trench warfare has erupted, Belfast Telegraph, 22.02.11 
Dahl, R. (1958) Who Governs? Democracy and Power in an American City, New 
Haven/London: Yale University Press  
Dahya, B. (1974) The Nature of Pakistani Ethnicity in Industrial Cities in Britain, in, 
A. Cohen (eds), Urban Ethnicity, pp. 77-118, London:  Tavistock 
Darby, J. (1976) Conflict in Northern Ireland: The development of a polarised 
community, Dublin: Gill and Macmillan 
Darby, J. (1983) Northern Ireland: The Background to the Conflict (Eds). Belfast: 
Appletree Press Ltd 
Darby, J. (1986) Intimidation and the Control of Conflict in Northern Ireland, 
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press 
Darby, J. (2003) Northern Ireland: The background to the peace process, 
Derry/Londonderry: CAIN, University of Ulster  
Dawson, G. (1984) Defensive planning in Belfast, Irish Geography, 17 (1), pp. 22-41 
Davies, H.T.O., Nutkey, S.M., and Smith, P.C. (2000) What Works? Evidence-based 
policy and practice in public services, Bristol: University of Bristol 
Deloitte (2007) Research into the financial cost of the Northern Ireland Divide, 
Belfast: Deloitte 
Deloitte (2008) The Implication of Providing Shared Services in a Divided City, Belfast: 
Belfast City Council.  
Deloitte (2010) Regeneration and Good Relations at the Interface, Belfast: Belfast 
 City Council. 
Demetriades, L. (1998) The Nicosia Masterplan, Journal of Mediterranean Studies, 
 8 (2), pp. 169-176 
Denzin, N.K. (1989) Interpretive Interactionism, London: Sage  
Denzin, N. and Lincoln, Y. (eds) (1994) Handbook of Qualitative Research, California: 
Department of Justice (2011) Building Safer, Shared and Confident Communities: 
Consultation Strategy on a Community Safety Strategy, Northern Ireland: 
Department of Justice 
Department for Social Development (2010) Physical Regeneration Concept 
Masterplans consultation report, Belfast: Department for Social Development 
Dewar, M. (1985) The British Army in Northern Ireland, London: Arms and Armour 
Press  
District Policing Partnership North Belfast (2009) Tackling crime North Belfast Area 
District Policing Partnerships 9 month Report, Belfast: District Policing 
Partnerships  
Dittman, S.A. (2010) The Development of All-Day Schooling in Germany: How 
 was it  possible in this Conservative Welfare State? Germany Policy Studies, 
 6 (3), pp. 49-81  
Dixon, P. (2001) Northern Ireland: The Politics of War and Peace, New York: Palgrave  
Dodds, N. (2008) No easy fix on walls, North Belfast News, 17.05.08  
Dodge, M., and Hood, C. (2002) Pavlovian Policy Responses to Media Feeding 
Frenzies? Dangerous Drugs Regulation in Comparative Perspective, Journal 
of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 10 (1), pp. 1-13  
Doherty, P., and Poole, M. (1995) Ethnic Residential Segregation in Belfast, 
 Coleraine: Centre for the study of conflict 
Dolowitz, D.P., and Marsh, D. (1996) Who learns what from who: a review of the 
 policy transfer literature, Political Studies, XLIV, pp. 343-57 
Donaldson, J. (2009) Opening address at the Challenge for Change Conference, 
 Belfast: Community relations Council 
Donegal Democrat (2010) Months of meetings led to shared weekend for 
 Loyalists and  Republicans. Donegal Democrat, 01.04.10  
Douglas, J.N. (1982) Northern Ireland: Spatial Frameworks and Community 
Relations (pp. 105-135) in Boal, F.W and Neville, D (eds), Integration and 
Division: Geographical Perspectives on the Northern Ireland Problem. London. 
Academic Press.  
Downing, D. (2005) Apartheid in South Africa: Witness to history, United Kingdom: 
Heinemann Library.  
Downs, A. (1972) Up and down with ecology: the issue attention cycle Public 
Interest, 28(1), pp. 38-50  
Draw Down the Walls (2008) Conversations on the walls, 
http://nbmovingon.blogspot.com/ Date accessed: 12.12.10 
Dror, Y. (1968) Public Policy Making Re-examined, San Francisco: Chandler.  
Dumper, M. (2008) The Multiple Borders of Jerusalem: Policy implications for the 
future of the city, Divided Cities/Contested States, Working paper No.4.  
Dunlop Report (2002) North Belfast Community Action Project: Report of the 
Project Team, May 2002, http://www.dsdni.gov.uk/nbcau_dunlop_report.pdf 
Dunn, S. (1994) Managing Divided Cities, Keele: Ryburn Publishing.   
Dunstan, S. (1984) Uniforms Illustrated 4: The British Army in Northern Ireland, 
London: Arms and Armour Press.  
Dyer, G. (2007) Why Walls Are Going Up All Over the World? Arab News, 07.02.07 
Electoral Office for Northern Ireland (2011) Electoral Statistics, 
http://www.eoni.org.uk/index/elections/elections-2011-results-and-
statistics/ni-assembly-election-2011-results.htm Date accessed: 13.06.11 
Everett, S. (2003) The Policy Cycle: Democratic Process or Rational Paradigm 
revisited?, Australian Journal of Public Administration,  62 (2), pp. 65-70 
Exworthy, M., Beney, L., Powell, M. (2002) How great expectations in Westminster 
may be dashed locally: the local implementation of national policy on 
health inequalities, The Policy Press, 30 (1), pp. 79-96  
Exworthy, M., Blane, D., and Marmost, (2003) Tackling Health Inequalities in the UK: 
the progress and pitfalls of policy, Health Services Research 36 (6), pp.         
1905-21. 
Evans, G. and Duffy, M. (1997) Beyond the Sectarian Divide: The Social Bases and 
 Political Consequences of Nationalist and Unionist Party Competition in 
 Northern Ireland, British Journal of Political Science, 27, pp. 47-81  
Evelegh, R (1978) Peace Keeping in a Democratic Society: The Lessons of Northern 
Ireland, London: C. Hurst and CO  
Farley, J., Baker, D., Baker, D., Koliba, C., Matteson, R., Mills, R., Pittman, J. (2006) 
Opening the policy window for ecological economics: Katrina as a focusing 
event. Ecological Economics, 63 (2-3), pp. 344-354  
Farrell, M. (1980) Northern Ireland: The Orange State (2nd Edition), London: Pluto 
Press Limited 
Fawcett, L. (2002) Whos Setting the Postdevolution Agenda in Northern Ireland? 
Press/Politics, 7 (4), pp. 14-33  
Fay, M.T., Morrissey, M., Smyth, M., Wong, T. (1999) The Cost of the Troubles Study: 
Report on the Northern Ireland Survey: the experience and impact of the 
Troubles, Derry/Londonderry: INCORE. 
Fearon, A. (2010) UDAs Chief Challenge to Unionist Politicians, South Belfast News 
 14.04.10 
Feldman, A. (1991) Formations of violence: The narrative of the body and political 
terror in Northern Ireland, Chicago: University of Chicago Press  
Fielding, N. (1993) Qualitative Interviewing, in Gilbert, N (ed) Researching Social 
Life, London: Sage Publications  
Fisk, R (1975) The point of no return: The strike which broke the British in Ulster, 
London: Times Books  
Fitzduff, M., and OHagan, L. (2009) The Northern Ireland Troubles: INCORE 
background paper, University of Ulster: CAIN  
Fitzpatrick, J (2011) Pragmatism or Populism, BBC Northern Ireland, 
http://www.xydo.com/toolbar/15936762-pragmatism_or_populism, Date 
accessed: 12.06.11 
http://www.eoni.org.uk/index/elections/elections-2011-results-and-statistics/ni-assembly-election-2011-results.htm
http://www.eoni.org.uk/index/elections/elections-2011-results-and-statistics/ni-assembly-election-2011-results.htm
http://www.xydo.com/toolbar/15936762-pragmatism_or_populism
Flathman, R.E. (1966) The Public Interest.: An Essay Concerning the Normative 
Discourse of Politics, New York: John Wiley and Sons.   
Forren-Odom, J and Hahn, E. (2006) Mandatory Reporting of Health Care-
 Associated Infections: Kingdons Multiple Streams Approach. Policy, 
 Politics and Nursing Practice 7, pp. 64-72 
Forthspring (2010) Towards a Shared Neighbourhood, Belfast: Forthspring Inter 
 Community Group, Belfast: Forthspring 
Foster, A. (2008) Executive Moves Titanic Signature Project Forward,       
http://www.northernireland.gov.uk/news/news-deti/news-deti-
novermber-2008/news-deti-271108-executive-moves-titanic.htm 
Frampton, M. (2009) The Return of the Militants: Violent Dissident Republicanism, 
 UK: The International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and Political 
 Violence   
Ford, D. (2011) Peacelines remain obstacle to shared future, Department of Justice 
Press Release, 16.02.11   
Gallagher, F (2008) Belfast Conflict Resolution Consortium, From Confrontation to 
Co-operation: Grassroots Conflict Resolution Conference Report 23.04.08, 
Belfast: Belfast Conflict Resolution Consortium  
Gaffikin, F., McEldowney, M., Rafferty, G. and Sterrett, K. (2008) Public Space for a 
Shared City:  A research report for Belfast City Council, Belfast: Belfast City 
Council 
Gaffikin, F., and Rafferty, G. (2008) Belfast: A City of Partners, experiences and lessons 
 from the last decade, Belfast: Contested Cities-Urban Universities   
Gardiner Committee (1975) Report of a Committee to Consider, in the Context of Civil 
Liberties and Human Rights, Measures to deal with Terrorism in Northern 
Ireland. London: HMSO 
Gaventa, J. (2004) Representation, Community Leadership and Participation: Citizen 
 Involvement in Neighbourhood Renewal and Local Governance. London: 
 Neighbourhood Renewal Unit Office of Deputy Prime Minister.  
Gay, O. (2011) The Northern Ireland Decommissioning (Amendment) Bill, Research 
Paper 01/114, London: House of Commons Library  
Gibb, G. (2002) Qualitative Data Analysis: Explorations with Nvivo, Buckingham: 
Open University Press 
Gilchrist, A. (2006) Partnership and Participation: Power in Process. Public Policy 
and Administration, 21(3), pp. 70-85  
Gillespie, G. (2008) Historical Dictionary of the Northern Ireland Conflict, Plymouth: 
Scarecrow Press Inc 
Glaister, D. (2008) US City plans moat to keep out migrants, The Guardian, 03.14.08 
Goodin, R.E. (1982) Political Theory and Public Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press 
Goggins, P. (2008) The Wall, Radio Ulster, 05.09.08  
Goldie, R., and Ruddy, B. (2010) Crossing the line: Key features of effective 
 practice of shared space close to an interface, Belfast: Belfast Interface 
 Project. 
http://www.northernireland.gov.uk/news/news-deti/news-deti-novermber-2008/news-deti-271108-executive-moves-titanic.htm
http://www.northernireland.gov.uk/news/news-deti/news-deti-novermber-2008/news-deti-271108-executive-moves-titanic.htm
Goldsmith, W.W., and Blakely, E.J. (1992) Separate Societies: Poverty and inequality 
in U.S. cities, Philadelphia: Temple University Press  
Gold, R.L. (1958) Roles in Sociological Field Observations, Social Forces, 36, pp. 217-
Gormley-Heenan, C. (2006) Political Leadership and the Northern Ireland Peace 
 Process: Role, Capacity and Effect, Oxford: St Anthonys Series 
Graham, I. (2008) Pull down peace walls New York Mayor urges, Belfast: Belfast 
News Issue 465 
Graham, B and Nash, C. (2006) A Shared Future: Territoriality, Pluralism and Public 
Policy in Northern Ireland, Political Geography, 25(3), pp. 253-278 
Greathouse, L.W., Hahn, E.J., Chizimuzo, T.C., Okoli, T.A., Warick and Carol A, R. 
 (2005) Policy Politics Nursing Practice, 6, pp. 211-220  
Gribbin, V. Kelly, R. Mitchell, C. (2005) Loyalist Conflict Transformation Initiatives, 
 Belfast: Office First Minister Deputy First Minister  
Groves, R.M., Fowler, F.J., Couper, M.P., Lepkowski, J.M., Singer, E., and Tourangeau, 
R. (2004) Survey Methodology, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley 
Guelke, A. (2009) Consociationalism and the wider peace process, in, McGarry, 
 M. and OLeary, B. (2009) Consociational Theory, London: Routledge 
Guest, G., Bunce, A., and Johnson, L. (2006) How Many Interviews are Enough? An 
Experiment with Data Saturation and Variability, Field Methods, 18 (1), 
pp.59-82  
Hadfield, B. (1992) Northern Ireland: Politics and the Constitution, Philadelphia: 
Open University Press 
Hadjichristos, C. (2006) Cyprus: Nicosia and its d-visions, Architectural Design, 76, 
(3), pp. 12-19 
Hall, D., and Hall, L. (1996) Practical and Social Research, London: MacMillan Press 
Hall, M. (1993) Life on the Interface, Newtownabbey: Island Publications  
Hall, M. (2001) Community Relations An Elusive Concept: an exploration by 
 community activists for North Belfast, Newtownabbey: Island Publications 
Hall, M. (ed) (2002) An uncertain future: an exploration by Protestant community 
 activists, Newtownabbey: Island Publications 
Hall, M. (ed) (2003) The East Belfast Interface (1): Lower Newtownards Youth Speak 
 Out, Newtownabbey: Island Publications 
Hall, M. (ed) (2006) Conflict Transformative Initiative: A new Reality, Loyalism in 
 Transition 1, Newtownabbey: Island Pamphlets  
Hall, M. (ed) (2007) Building bridges at the grassroots: The experience of Suffolk-
Lenadoon Interface Group,  Newtownabbey: Island Publications  
Hall, M. (ed) (2010) Death by Postcode: Report on a Health Inequalities Conference, 
 Newtownabbey: Island Publications 
Hamber, B., and Kelly, G. (2004) Community Reconciliation in Northern Ireland: 
Realising opportunities, meeting challenges and ensuring new innovation into 
the future, Belfast: Democratic Dialogue.  
Hamber, B. (2003) Peace building Post 2006: the need for a more expansive view of 
peace building in Ireland, Keynote address to the Peace building post 2006 
workshop, Fairways Hotel, Dundalk, Co. Louth, 4.02.03 
Hamill, D. (1985) Pig in the middle: The army in Northern Ireland 1969-1984, 
London: Methuen. 
Hamilton, J and Byrne, J. (2003) A review of the Health and Social care Needs of 
Victims/Survivors of the Northern Ireland Conflict, Northern Ireland: EHSSB 
Hamilton, J., Hansson, U., Bell, J., and Toucas, S. (2008) Segregated Lives: Social 
division, sectarianism and everyday life in Northern Ireland, Institute for 
Conflict Research: Belfast.  
Hammersley, M and Atkinson, P. (1983) Ethnography: Principles in Practice. London: 
Tavistock 
Hancock, D. (1983) Comparative Public Policy: An Assessment in Ada Finifter, (ed). 
Political Science: The state of the discipline. Washington: APSA, pp. 283-308  
Hay, W. (2011) The Speaker of the NI Assembly end of mandate address, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/hi/northern_ireland/newsid_94310
00/9431971.stm Date accessed: 04.06.11 
Hayes, M.T. (1992) Incrementalism and public policy, Longman: New York.  
Heatley, C. (2004) Interface flashpoints in Northern Ireland, Belfast: Lagan Books.  
Hennessey, T. (2005) Northern Ireland: The Origins of the Troubles, Dublin: Gill and 
Macmillan 
Hennessey, T. (2007) The Evolution of The Troubles 1970-72, Dublin: Irish Academic 
Press 
Hepburn, A.C.H. (1994) Long division and ethnic conflict: the experience of Belfast, 
in, Dunn, S (eds) (1994) Managing Divided Cities, Staffordshire: Ryburn 
Publishing  
Hewstone, M., Cairns, E., Voci, A., Paolini, S., McLernon, F., Crisp, R., Niens, U., and 
 Craig, J. (2005). 'Intergroup Contact in a Divided Society: Challenging 
 Segregation in Northern Ireland', in Abrams, D., Marques, J.M., and Hogg, M.A. 
 (Eds.), The Social Psychology of Inclusion and Exclusion, pp 265-292, 
 Philadelphia: Psychology Press 
Hill, M. (2005) The Public Policy Process, fourth edition, London: Pearson Education 
Limited 
Hillyard, P. (1983) Law and Order, in Darby, J. (1983) Northern Ireland: The 
Background to the Conflict, Belfast: The Appletree Press Ltd  
Hiro, D. (1973) Black British, White British, London: Penguin Books 
Holland, J. (1999) Hope Against History: The Ulster Conflict, London: Coronet Lir 
Books  
Holloway, D. (1995) Irish Studies Department: Queens University Belfast Fourth 
 Public  Discussions: Loyalism in Northern Ireland. April 4th 1995 Central 
 Library Belfast 
Holloway, D. (2005) Understanding The Northern Ireland Conflict: A summary and 
overview of the conflict and its origins, Belfast: Community Dialogue   
http://news.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/hi/northern_ireland/newsid_9431000/9431971.stm
http://news.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/hi/northern_ireland/newsid_9431000/9431971.stm
Howlett, M. (1998) Predictable and unpredictable policy windows: institutional and 
exogenous correlates of Canadian Federal agenda-setting, Canadian Journal 
of Political Science, 31 (3), pp. 495-524     
Howlett, M., Ramesh, M., and Perl, A. (2009) Studying Public Policy: Policy Cycles and 
Policy Subsystems, Third Edition, Ontario: Oxford University Press   
Hughes, K. (2010) Catholics will makeup 95% of waiting lists by 2012, North Belfast 
News, 22.11.10  
IBN/1/4/34 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
INF/3/1/5 Public Records Office Northern Ireland 
Interaction (2007) The State of Play, Belfast: Interaction. 
International Court of Justice (2004) Legal Consequences of the Construction of a 
Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion. I.C.J. Reports 
2004, 195, Para. 142 
Irish News (1996) Residents call for Peace Wall, Irish News 10.04.96 
Irish News (2002) Frustration at attempts to remove barrier, Irish News 29.06.02 
Irish Times (1996) Both sides want new wall after riot, Irish Times 04.09.96 
Jarman, N and Bryan, D. (1996) Parade and Protest: A Discussion of Parading 
Disputes in Northern Ireland, Coleraine: University of Ulster 
Jarman, N. (1996) On the Edge: Community perspectives on the civil disturbances in 
North Belfast, June-September 1996, Belfast: Community Development Centre.  
Jarman, N. (1999) Drawing back from the edge: community based response to 
 violence in North Belfast, Belfast: Community Development Centre North 
 Belfast 
Jarman, N. (2004) Demography, Development and Disorder, Belfast: Institute for 
 Conflict Research 
Jarman, N. (2005) No Longer A Problem? Sectarian violence in Northern Ireland. 
Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research. 
Jarman, N. (2006) Policing Policy and Practice: responding to disorder in North 
 Belfast, Anthropology in Action, 13 (1-2) January 2006 
Jarman, N. (2007) Building a peaceline: Security and segregation in Belfast, in Belfast 
Ordinary, Belfast: A Factotum Publication 
Jarman, N. (2008) Towards Sustainable Security: Interface Barriers and the Legacy of 
Segregation in Belfast. Belfast. Community Relations Council  
Jarman, N. (2008) Security and Segregation: Interface barriers in Belfast, Shared 
 Space  Journal, (6) June 2008 
John, P. (1998) Analysing Public Policy, London: Continuum 
John, P. (2003) Is There Life After Policy Streams, Advocacy Coalitions, and 
Punctuations: Using Evolutionary Theory to Explain Policy Change? The 
Policy Studies Journal, 31 (4), pp. 481-498 
John, P. (2006) Explaining Policy Change, in Budd, L., and Charlesworth, J. and 
Patton, R. (2006) Making Policy Happen, New York: Rutledge 
Joint Working Party on Processions etc (1971) Future Policy on Areas of 
Confrontation, Northern Ireland: Government of Northern Ireland  
Jones, E. (1960) A Social Geography of Belfast, London: Oxford University Press 
Jones, P., Boujenko, N., Wilson, C. (2009) Discussion Paper: Improving Connectivity 
and Mobility in Belfast, Belfast: Belfast City Council Good Relations Unit 
Kay, A., and Ackrill, R. (2010) The Sweet EU Politics of WTO Rule Compliance: Duty 
 Bound Reform, Paper presented to the Political Studies Association Annual 
 Conference, Edinburgh 30th March 2010 
Keane, M.C. (1985) Ethnic Residential Change in Belfast 1969-1977: The impact of 
 public housing policy in a plural society. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Queens 
 University, Belfast 
Keane, M. (1990) Segregation processes in public sector housing, in Doherty, P 
(1990) Geographical Perspectives on the Belfast Region, Dublin: Geographical 
Society of Ireland   
Kelly, J. (2010) Beneath the Mask an Imperfect Peace, Northern Ireland: North Down 
and Ards Community Forum 
Kendall, J. (2000) The mainstreaming of the third sector into public policy in 
England in the late 1990s: whys and wherefores. The Policy Press, 28. (4) pp. 
541-62 
Kennedy, M. (2009) Gangmasters still free to exploit workers in Uk, says Oxfam 
report, The Guardian, 31.07.09 
Kent, G. (1996) Informed Consent in The Principled Researcher, unpublished 
manuscript, Social Science Division, University of Sheffield: The Graduate 
School 
Kingdon, J.W. (1984) Agendas, alternatives and public policies, New York: 
HarperCollins. 
Kingdon, J.W. (1995) Agendas, alternatives and public policies (2rd ed.), New York: 
HarperCollin. 
Kitson, F. (1971) Low Intensity Operations, London: Faber and Faber  
Klein. M. (2005) Old and New Walls in Jerusalem, Political Geography, 24, pp. 53-76 
Knox, C. (2008) Policy Making in Northern Ireland: Ignoring the Evidence, Policy and 
Politics, 36 (3), pp. 343-359 
Knox, C. (2009) The Politics of Local Government Reform in Northern Ireland, Local 
Government Studies, 35 (4), pp. 435-455 
Knox, C. (2010) Devolution and the Governance of Northern Ireland, Manchester: 
 Manchester University Press. 
Knox, C and Carmichael, P. (2010) Debate: Devolution in Northern Ireland, Public 
Money and Management, 30 (2), pp. 82-83 
Komarova, M. (2008) Shared Space in Belfast and the limits of a Shared Future, 
 Divided Cities/Contested States, Working Paper No.3.  
Laraway, A.S, and Jennings, C.P. (2002) Health Insurance Flexibility and 
Accountability Demonstration Initiative (HIFA): A Policy Analysis Using 
Kingdons Policy Streams Model, Policy Politics Nursing Practice, 3 (2), pp. 
358-366 
Laswell, H.D. (1971) Teaching the policy sciences: Reflections on a graduate 
seminar, Policy Sciences, 30 (4), pp. 217-231  
Law, G. (1998) The Cultural Traditions Dictionary, Belfast: The Blackstaff Press 
Lawther, S., and Evans, K. (2010) Public Perceptions of the Executive, Belfast: 
 OFMDFM 
Lennon, J, and Foley, M. (2000) Dark Tourism: the attraction of Death and Disaster. 
London: Cassell  
Leonard, M., and McKnight, M. (2011) Young peoples perspectives of peace lines 
 In Belfast, International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, forthcoming.  
Lindblom, C.E. (1959) The Science of Muddling Through, Public Administration 
Review, 19, pp. 79-88  
Lindblom, C.E. and Woodhouse, J. (1993) The policy-making process, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall 
Lijphardt, A. (2001) Constructivism and consociational theory, Newsletter of 
 the  American Political Science Association Organized Section in 
 Comparative  Politics, 12(1), pp. 11-13 
Lisle, D. (2006) Local Symbols, Global Networks: Re-reading the Murals in Belfast 
special issue on Art and Politics, Alternatives: Global, Local, Political, 31 (1), 
pp. 27-52  
Lipson, M. (2007) A Garbage Can Model of UN Peacekeeping, Global Governance, 
(13), pp. 79-97  
Livingstone, R. (2007) in, Bean, K. (2007) The New Politics of Sinn Fin, Liverpool: 
 Liverpool University  Press 
Lofty, T. (2009) Challenge of Change Conference: Interface Working Group Report. 
Belfast: Community Relations Council  
Logan, J.R., Alba, R.D., and McNulty, T.L. (1994) The racially divided city: housing and 
labour markets in Los Angeles, In Dunn, S. (Eds.) (1994) Managing Divided 
Cities, Keele: Ryburn Publishing 
Long, N (2009) Long challenges OFMDFM on peacelines on 40th anniversary of 
troubles,http://allianceparty.org/news/004650/long_challenges_ofmdfm_o
n_peacelines_on_40th_anniversary_of_troubles.html, Date accessed: 12.01.11  
Loughlin, J. (1992) Administering Policy in Northern Ireland in Hadfield, B (eds). 
Northern Ireland: Politics and Constitution, Buckingham: Open University 
Press  
Lynagh, C. (2011) The markers of our divided past, Belfast Telegraph 04.03.11 
MacBride, D. (2008) Good Practice in Conflict Transformation, Belfast: Belfast City 
Council.    
MacGinty, R and Darby, J. (2002) Guns and Government: The Management of the 
Northern Ireland Peace Process, London: Palgrave  
MacGinty. R., and Darby, J. (eds) (2002) Progressing Towards Peace, Houndsmill:  
 Palgrave/MacMillan      
MacGinty. R. (2008) Six observations on the Northern Ireland Peace Process,   
 Presented at the School of Politics, Queens University Belfast, June 2008 
MacGregor, S. (1994) Reconstructing the divided city: problems of pluralism and 
governance. In Dunn, S. (Eds.) (1994) Managing Divided Cities, Keele: Ryburn  
McAdam, N. (2008) Executive Plunges Deeper into Crisis, Belfast Telegraph, 
 29.08.09 
McAdam, N. (2010) UUP leader adds to the criticism of anti-hate strategy, Belfast 
 Telegraph, 02.11.10 
McAuley, J.W. (2005) Whither New Loyalism? Changing Loyalist Politics after the 
 Belfast Agreement, Irish Political Studies, 20 (3), pp. 323-340 
McCaffrey, S (2010) Paramilitary Groups Decommission Weapons, The 
 Independent,  09.02.10  
McCann, E. (1980) War and an Irish Town, 2nd Edition. London: Pluto Press.  
McCann, E. (1993) War and an Irish Town: New Edition, London: Pluto Press 
McCarthy, K. (2010) Tackle costs of division to prevent cuts in vital services,    
http://allianceparty.org/article/2010/005055/tackle-cost-of-division-to-          
prevent-cuts-in-vital-services  
McDaid, B. (2011) Councillors defend Peace Fence, Belfast Telegraph, 11.03.11  
McDevitt, C. (2010) The Cost of Division, 
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/newsarticle/mcdevitt_cost_of_div
ision_in_the_north_1.5bn/ 
McDonald, H. (2008) Adams has failed his constituency says pro-Sinn Fin 
 Columnist, The Guardian, 20/03/08  
McDonald, H. (2009) 11-plus returns in Northern Ireland, The Guardian, 
 06.02.09 
McDonald, H. (2010) Belfast violence leads to seven arrests, The Guardian, 15.07.10 
McDonald, H. (2010) Police Officer seriously injured after Loyalist march ends in 
 sectarian riot, The Guardian, 13.07.10 
McDonall, R. (2009) Has Northern Ireland left the Past Behind.
 http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8381652.stm Date 29.11.06  
McElroy, D., and Warerfield, B. (2009) Germany celebrates twentieth anniversary of 
the collapse of the Berlin Wall, The Telegraph, 09.11.09  
McGarry, J and OLeary, B. (1993) The Politics of Antagonism: Understanding 
Northern Ireland, London: The Athlone Press  
McGarry, J and OLeary, B. (1999) Policing Northern Ireland: Proposals for a new 
start, Belfast: Blackstaff Press 
McGarry, J and Oleary, B. (2006) Consociational Theory, Northern Irelands Conflict, 
and its Agreement. Part 1: what consociationalists can learn from Northern 
Ireland, Government and Opposition, 41 (1), pp. 43-63 
McGarry, J. and OLeary, B. (2009) Consociational Theory, London: Routledge.  
McGimpsey, C. (2010) Peter Robinson: the end of Mr untouchable, The Guardian, 
 07.05.10    
McGready, M. (2008) Group very concerned at schools peace wall, Belfast 
 Telegraph, 21.05.08 
McGreal, C. (2004) Work Court tells Israel to tear down illegal wall, The Guardian, 
10.07.04  
McKittrick, D., Thornton, C., Kelters, S., Feeney, B. (1999) Lost Lives: The Stories of the 
Men, Women and Children who died as a result of the Northern Ireland 
Troubles, Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing Company Ltd   
http://allianceparty.org/article/2010/005055/tackle-cost-of-division-to-%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20prevent-cuts-in-vital-services
http://allianceparty.org/article/2010/005055/tackle-cost-of-division-to-%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20prevent-cuts-in-vital-services
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/newsarticle/mcdevitt_cost_of_division_in_the_north_1.5bn/
http://www.sdlp.ie/index.php/newsroom_media/newsarticle/mcdevitt_cost_of_division_in_the_north_1.5bn/
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8381652.stm
McLaughlin, E. (1991) Introduction: A problem solved, in Davies C, and McLaughlin, 
E (Eds) Women, Employment and Social Policy in Northern Ireland: A problem 
postponed? Belfast: Policy Research Institute 
McLaughlin, E. (2005) Governance and Social Policy in Northern Ireland (1999-
 2002): the devolution years and postscript, in, Powell, M., Bauld, L., and 
 Clarke, J. (eds) Social Policy Review, 17 analysis and debate in Social Policy, 
 Bristol: Policy Press 
McNeill, P. and Chapma, S. (2005) Research Methods (3rd ed.), Oxon: Routledge  
McNeilly, C. (2009) Berlin celebrates but Northern Ireland has more barriers than 
ever, Belfast Telegraph 10.11.09  
McKittrick, D (2004) Protestant exodus creates new source of tension, The 
Independent 24/08/04  
McQueen, M., Hisham, E., Millar, J., and Geoghegan, P. (2008) Your Space or Mine? 
 A co-influence approach to shared future environments in interface 
 communities, Belfast: Community Relations Council 
Macauley, T. (2008) A process for Removing Interface Barriers: A discussion papers 
proposing a five stage process for the removal of peace walls in Northern 
Ireland. Belfast: Macauley Associates 
Mackenzie, D. (2006) North Belfast Community Action Unit: Evaluation Report. 
 Belfast: OFMDFM  
Madden, A. (2010) Call to tackle Northern Ireland segregation with mixed housing 
 estates, Belfast Telegraph, 20.05.10  
Maney, G.M., Ibrahim, I., Higgins, G.I., Herzog, H. (2006) The Pasts Promise: lessons 
 from Peace Processes in Northern Ireland and the Middle East, Journal of 
 Peace  Research, 43, pp. 181-200  
Mannheimer, L.N., and Gulis, G., Ostlin, P. (2007) Introducing Health Impact 
Assessment: an analysis of political and administrative intersectoral 
working methods, European Journal of Public Health, 17 (5), pp. 526-531 
Mansergh, M. (2006) The background to the Irish Peace Process, in Cox, M., 
 Guelke, A., and  Stephen, F. (2006) A Farewell to Arms? Beyond The Good 
 Friday Agreement, second edition, Manchester: Manchester University Press 
Marcuse, P. (1997) The Ghetto of Exclusion and the Fortified Enclave: New patterns 
in the United States, American Behavioural Scientist, 21 (3), pp. 311-326  
Marcuse, P (2002) The Partitioned City in History, in Marcuse, P. & Van Kempem, R 
(Eds.), Of States and Cities: The Partitioning of Urban Space, pp. 11-34. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press  
Mason, J. (1996) Qualitative Researching, London: Sage 
Matland, R. (1995) Synthesizing the Implementation Literature: the ambiguity-
 conflict model of policy implementation, Journal of Public Administration 
 Research and Theory, 5(2), pp. 145-174 
Melkme, J. (2010) Australians travelling to Northern Ireland warned of increased 
 violence, The Guardian, 27.08.10 
Mesev, V., Shirlow, P,. Murtagh, B., McMullan, A. (2002) Measuring and Visualising 
Labour Market and Community Segregatio: A Pilot Study, Belfast: University of 
Ulster 
Mika, H. (2006) Community based Restorative Justice in Northern Ireland, Belfast: 
 Queens University Belfast 
Milky, E., and Metar, H. (2009) Beirut/Lebanon Against all odds, Dubai: HVS Dubai 
 Office. 
Millard Brown Ulster (2008) Peace walls survey,  
http://www.millwardbrownulster.com/ Date accessed: 13.11.09 
Mills, C.W. (1956) The Power Elite, London: Oxford University Press 
Mintrom, M. (1997) Policy Entrepreneurs and the diffusion of innovation, 
 American Journal of Political Science, 41 (3), pp. 738-770 
Mintrom, M. (2000) Policy Entrepreneurs and the school choice, Washington,  DC: 
 Georgetown University Press 
Mintrom, M. and Norman, P. (2009) Policy Entrepreneurship and Policy Change, The 
Policy Studies Journal, 37 (4), pp. 649-667 
Mitchell, C. (2008) The Limits of Legitimacy. Former Loyalist Combatants and Peace-
 building in Northern Ireland, Irish Political Studies, 23(1), pp. 1-19 
Mitchell, A., and Kelly, L. (2010) Walking with de Certeau in North Belfast: Agency 
and Resistance in a Conflicted City, Divided Cities/Contested States, Working 
Paper No.17 
Mitchell, A. (2010) Transformation and ongoing conflict in Belfast: a workshop on 
 the 20th January 2010. Belfast: Queens University Belfast 
Morrow, D. (2005) Shared Space: A Journal for learning, dialogue and change in a 
 divided society? Shared Space, Issue 1, Belfast: Community Relations Council  
Morrow, D. (2009) in, McDonald, H. (2009) Bridge over troubled waters, The 
Guardian, 29.07.09 
Mucciaroni, D.P. (1992) The Garbage Can Model and the Study of Policy Making: A 
Critique, Polity, 24 (3), pp. 460-82 
Mulcahy, A. (2006) Policing Northern Ireland: Conflict. Legitimacy and reform, 
England: Willan Publishing  
Murphy, D. (1978) A Place Apart, London: John Murray Publishers 
Murphy, W. (2010) Touring the Troubles in West Belfast: Building Peace or 
Reproducing Conflict? Peace and Change, 35 (4), pp. 537-560 
Murray, R. (1983) Police Officer Deaths in Northern Ireland  1969-1982, Police 
Chief, 50 (4), pp. 41-47  
Murray G., Tonge, J. (2005) Sinn Fin and the SDLP: From Alienation to  participation, 
 London: C.Hurst & Co. Publishers Ltd 
Murtagh, B. (1995) Image making versus reality: Ethnic division and the planning 
challenge of Belfasts Peace Lines, in, Neill, J,V; Fitzsimons, D,S; Murtagh, B. 
(1995) Reimaging the Pariah City: Urban Development in Belfast and Detroit. 
England: Avebury Ashgate Publishing  
Murtagh, B. (1999) Community and Conflict in Rural Ulster, Coleraine: Centre for 
 the study of conflict 
Murtagh, B. (2002) The Politics of Territory: Policy and Segregation in Northern 
Ireland, Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Murtagh, B., and Keaveney, K. (2006) Policy and the future of the ethnocratic city, 
 Space and Polity, 10 (2), pp. 187-202 
Murtagh, B. & Shirlow, P. (2006) Belfast: Segregation, Violence and the City, London: 
Pluto Press 
Murtagh, B. (2009) New Spaces and Old in Post-Conflict Belfast, Divided 
Cities/Contested States, Working Paper No.5 
Musiani, F. (2007) The Padua Wall: Immigration, Conflict, and Integration, University 
for Peace: Peace and Conflict Monitor.  
Nakamura, R. (1987) The textbook policy process and implementation research, 
Policy Studies Review, 7, pp. 142-54 
Nasr, J.L. (1996) Beirut/Berlin: Choices in Planning for the Suture of Two Divided 
Cities, Journal of Planning Education and Research, 16, pp. 27-40  
Newenham, P. (2010) Tourists warned about travel to Northern Ireland, The Irish 
 Times, 26.08.10. 
News letter (2002) Security Measures Extend Peace Lines, News Letter, 07.02.02 
News letter (2007) A Berlin Wall Moment News Letter, 20.10.07 
News letter (2008) Majority want peace walls torn down, Newsletter 05.02.08 
News letter (2011) Loyalists voting for Sinn Fin, News Letter 14.01.11 
Neill, W. (1993) Lipstick on the gorilla? Conflict management, urban development 
and image making in Belfast, in, Neill, J,V; Fitzsimons, D,S; Murtagh, B. (1995) 
Reimaging the Pariah City: Urban Development in Belfast and Detroit. England: 
Avebury Ashgate Publishing 
Ni Chorra, A. (2009) Suffolk residents say living conditions are all but intolerable for 
local people, Andersonstown News, 14.04.09 
Nill, J. (2002) Applications of Kingdons Policy Window concepts, Discussion Paper NO. 
54/02, Berlin: Institute for Ecological Economy 
Northern Ireland Office (1981) Schemes to develop business developments (6/01/81). 
Belfast: Northern Ireland Information Service  
Northern Ireland Office (2007) Northern Ireland Peacelines: Condition Report 2007, 
Belfast: Northern Ireland Office 
Northern Ireland Office (2009) Northern Ireland Office: Freedom of Information 
Request, Belfast: Northern Ireland Office 
Northern Ireland Office (2010) Northern Ireland Office: Freedom of Information 
Request, Belfast: Northern Ireland Office 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2005) Northern Ireland Multiple  
Deprivation Measure, Belfast: NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2005) Life and Times Survey, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2007) Life and Times Survey, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2008) Life and Times Survey, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2009) Life and Times Survey, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2010) Life and Times Survey, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Northern Ireland Statistics Research Agency (2010) Northern Ireland Multiple 
Deprivation Measure 2010, Belfast: NISRA 
North Belfast Community Action Project (2002) Report of the Project Team May 
 2002, Belfast: Office First Minister Deputy First Minister 
North Belfast Interface Network (2007) Submission to the Programme for 
 Government 2007-2011, Belfast: North Belfast Interface Network 
North Belfast Interface Network (2008) Do good walls make good neighbours, 
Belfast: North Belfast Interface Network 
North Belfast Interface Network (2009) Moving on living with interface walls, 
http://nbmovingon.blogspot.com/2009/04/living-in-interface-
community.html Date accessed: 01.08.10 
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (1988) Coping With Conflict: Violence and 
Urban Renewal in Belfast, Belfast: Northern Ireland Housing Executive 
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (1991) Building a Better Belfast, Belfast: 
Northern Ireland Housing Executive  
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (2000) Tackling housing need in North Belfast, 
Belfast: Northern Ireland Housing Executive  
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (2006) Mapping Segregation in Northern 
Ireland: Northern Ireland Housing Executive Estates outside Belfast, Belfast: 
Northern Ireland Housing Executive  
Northern Ireland Housing Executive (2011) Northern Ireland Housing Market: 
Review and Perspectives 2011-2014, Belfast: Northern Ireland Housing 
Executive 
O Dochartaigh, N. (1997) From Civil Rights to Armalites: Derry and the Birth of the 
Irish Troubles, Cork: Cork University Press 
ODowd, L and Komarova, M. (2009) Regeneration in a contested city: A Belfast Case 
Study, Belfast: Conflict in Cities and the Contested State 
ODowd, L., Rolston, B, and Tomlinson, B. (1980) Northern Ireland between Civil 
Rights and Civil War, London: CSE Books  
OKane, E. (2010) Learning from Ireland? The uses and abuses of the Irish model, 
British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 12 (2) pp. 239-256 
ONeill, T. (1969) Ulster at the Crossroads, London: Faber 
OSullivan, J., and Lussier-Duynstee, P. (2006) Adolescent Homelessness, Nursing 
and Public Health Policy, Policy Politics and Nursing Practice, 7 (1). Pp. 73-
Oberschall, A. (2007) Conflict and Peace Building in Divided Societies: Response to 
Ethnic Violence, London: Routledge 
Office First Minister Deputy First Minister (2008) Building a better future: Budget 
2008-2011, Belfast: OFMDFM  
Office First Minister Deputy First Minister (2010) Cohesion, Sharing and Integration 
 draft consultation document, Belfast: Office First Minister Deputy First 
 Minister 
Office First Minister Deputy First Minister (2010b) Good Relations Indicators, 
Belfast: NISRSA 
http://nbmovingon.blogspot.com/2009/04/living-in-interface-community.html
http://nbmovingon.blogspot.com/2009/04/living-in-interface-community.html
Office First Minister Deputy First Minister (2011) Good Relations Indicators, Belfast: 
 NISRA 
Operation Banner (2006) An analysis of military operations in Northern Ireland, 
London: Ministry of Defence   
Operation Banner Forum (2009) The British Armed Forces in Northern Ireland,  
http://www.operationbanner.com/forum/default.asp Date: 12.08.10 
Oxford Economics (2009) Forecasting future skill needs in Northern Ireland, 
 Belfast: Department for Employment and Learning  
Paisley, I. (2008) Pull down Northern Ireland peace walls, BBC Northern Ireland, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7396762.stm  
Parsons, W. (1995) Public Policy: An Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Policy 
Analysis, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar  
Papadakis, Y. (1998) Walking in the Hora: Place and Non-Place in Divided 
Nicosia, Journal of Mediterranean Studies, 8 (2), pp. 302-327 
Phillips, T. (2009) Rio slum barrier plans spark outcry, The Guardian, 06.01.09  
Platform for Change Agenda (2009) Platform for Change Agenda: new politics for 
 a new Northern Ireland, http://www.platformforchange.net/aboutus.htm 
Ploger, J. (2007) Belfast City Report CASE report 44, London: LSE 
Polsby, N. (1963) Community Power and Political Theory, New Haven: Yale 
University Press  
Poots, E. (2010) Ulster councils to be given new planning power, Belfast 
 Telegraph, 30.11.10 
Porter, R.W., and Hicks, I. (1995) Knowledge Utilisation and the Process of Policy 
 Formulation: Towards a framework for Africa, Washington, DC: USAID  
Powney, J. and Watts, M. (1987) Interviewing in Educational Research, London: 
Routledge & kegan Paul 
Pralle, S. (2006) The Mouse That Roared: Agenda Setting in Canadian Pesticides 
Politics, The Policy Studies Journal, 34 (2), pp. 171-194 
Pullan, W. (2004) A one-sided wall: Jerusalem, Eurozine: Index on Censorship 
Redpath, J. (1995) The Shankill and the Falls: The minority experiences of two 
 communities in West Belfast, Discussion group at Central Library, 01.06.95 
Richards, D., and Smith, M. (2002) Governance and Public Policy in the UK, 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Richards, D. and Smith, M (2006) Central Control and Policy Implementation, 
 Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis, 8(4), pp. 325-45 
Robson, C. (1993) Real World Research: A resource for social scientists and 
practitioner-researchers, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers 
Robson, C. (2002) Real World Research: A resource for social scientists and 
practitioner-researchers (2nd edn), Oxford: Blackwell 
Robinson, S.E. and Eller, W.S. (2010) Participation in Policy Streams: Testing the 
Separation of Problems and Solutions in Subnational Policy Subsytems, The 
Policy Studies Journal, 38 (2), pp. 199-215 
Robinson, P. (2011) Minister sacking comments rejected, News Letter, 17.02.11 
Roche, R. (2008) Sectarianism and Segregation in Urban Northern Ireland: Northern 
Irish Youth Post-Agreement. Belfast: Queens University  
http://www.operationbanner.com/forum/default.asp
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7396762.stm
Rushefsky, ME., and Patel, K (1998) Politics, power and policy-making. The case of 
health care reform in the 1990s, New York: ME Sharpe  
Ryan, F. (2011) Eirigi enter the council election fray, Andersonstown News, 
 7.02.11 
Ryder, C. (2000) The RUC (1922-2000) A force under fire, London: Arrow Books 
Sabatier, P.A, and Mazmanian, D.A. (1981) Effective Policy Implementation, USA: 
 Lexington Books  
Sabatier, P. (1986) Top-Down and Bottom-Up approaches to implementation 
 research: a critical analysis and suggested synthesis, Journal of Public Policy, 
 6 (1), pp. 21-48  
Sabatier, P.A. (1991) Toward better theories of the policy process, America Political 
Science and Politics, 24 (2), pp. 147-56 
Sabatier, P.A. and Jenkins-Smith, H. (eds) (1993) Policy Change and Learning: An 
Advocay Coalitions Approach, Boulder, CA: Westview Press  
Saint-Germain, M.A. and Calamia, R.A. (1996) Three Strikes and Youre In: A Streams 
and Windows Model of Incremental Policy Change, Journal of Criminal 
Justice, 24 (1), pp. 57-70 
Sarantakos, S. (2005) Social Research (3rd ed,) Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan  
Sassen, S. (1994) Ethnicity and space in the global city: a new frontier. In Dunn, S. 
(1994) Managing Divided Cities. Keele: Ryburn Publishing   
Schattschneider, E.E. (1960) The Semi Sovereign People: A Realists View of 
Democracy in America, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, INC 
Scodanibbio, L. (2011) Opening a policy window for organisational change and 
 full-cost accounting: The creation of BC Hydros water use planning 
 programme, Ecological Economics, 70 (5), pp. 1006-1015 
Scope (1982) Who designs the city? Belfast: Scope 
Seaton, A.V. (1996) Guided by the dark: from thanatopsis to thanatourism 
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 2 (4), pp. 234-244 
Seeliger, R (1996) Conceptualising and Researching Policy Convergence, Policy 
Studies Journal, 24 (2), pp. 287-306  
Sharrock, D. (2006) Army removes last watchtowers, The Times, 04.04.06  
Sharrock, D. (2007) No time for handshakes, but this was history in the making, 
The Sunday Times, 27.03.07  
Sharrock, D (2007) New Peace Wall for Ulster, The Sunday Times, 25.05.07 
Sherwood, H. (2010) Palestinians face being walled by Israeli security barrier, The 
Guardian, 08.07.10   
Shirlow, P. (2002) Fear, Mobility and Living in the Ardoyne and Upper Ardoyne 
 Communities, University of Ulster: Mapping the Spaces of Fear Research 
Shirlow, P. (2003) Who Fears to Speak: Fear, Mobility, and Ethno-sectarianism in 
the Two Ardoynes, The Global Review of Ethnopolitics, 3 (1) 76-91 
Shirlow, P. and Murtagh, B. (2004) Capacity Building, Representation and Intra-
 Community Conflict, Urban Studies, 41 (1), pp. 57-70 
Shirlow, P., McEvoy, K., McElrath, K. (2004) Resistance, Tranistion and Exclusion: 
 Politically Motivated Ex-Prisoners and Conflict Transformation in Northern 
 Ireland, Terrorism and Political Violence, 6(3), pp. 646-670 
Shirlow, P and Murtagh, B. (2006) Belfast, Segregation Violence and the City, Belfast: 
 Pluto Press 
Shirlow, P., Tonge, J., and McAuley, J. (2010) Abandoning Historical Conflict? Former 
Political Prisoners and Reconciliation in Northern Ireland, Manchester: 
Manchester University Press 
Siddique, H. (2010) Belfast riots continue for third night, The Guardian, 14.07.10 
Silverman, D. (2000) Doing Qualitative Research: A practical handbook, London: Sage 
Publications     
Sluka, J. (1989) Hearts and Minds, Water and Fish: Support for the IRA and INLA in a 
Northern Irish Ghetto, London: JAI Press INC 
Smrekar, C. (2011) Taking Charge of Choice: How Charter School Policy Contexts 
 Matter, Research Brief, Nashville: National Centre on School Choice 
Smyth, D. (1990) Sailortown: the story of a dockside community, Belfast: North 
Belfast History Workshop  
Smyth, M. (1996) Two Policy Papers: Urban Regeneration and Sectarian Division. 
Derry: Templegrove Action Research Limited  
Smyth, S. (2005) Tribal voting patterns continue to set sectarianism in stone, Irish 
 Independent, 09.05.05 
Soroka, S.N. (2002) Agenda-setting Dynamics in Canada, Vancouver: University of 
British Colombia Press  
Southern, N. (2008) Territorality, Alienation, and Loyalist Decommissioning: the 
case of the Shankill in Protestant West Belfast, Terrorism and Political 
Violence, 20 (1), pp. 66-86  
Special European Union Programmes Body (2003) Building Peace and Reconciliation 
Post 2006, Belfast: EU Cross-border Management Committee 
Special European Union Programmes Body (2009) EU Programme for Peace and 
Reconciliation 2007-2013 Northern Ireland and the border regions Operational 
Programme, Belfast: Special European Union Programmes Body 
Spector, M., and Kitsuse, J.I. (1987) Constructing Social Problems, Hawthorne: Aldine 
de Gruyter 
Sterrett, K., Flynn, L., Mackel, C., Barrett, M., Lappin, S., Hill, D., and Hackett, M. 
 (2009) The Forum for Alternative Belfast,  http://www.forumbelfast.org/  
Stone, D.A. (1989) Casual stories and the formation of policy agendas. Political 
Science Quarterly, 104, pp. 281-300  
Stout, K.E and Stevens, B. (2000) The Case of the Failed Diversity Rule: A Multiple 
Streams Analysis, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 22 (4). pp. 
341-355  
Strain, A. (2009) Walls remain in divided Belfast, BBC Northern Ireland,  
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8351569.stm Accessed on 
18.12.10 
Stuart, J. (2011) Speech at the Northern Ireland Institute of Directors Annual Dinner 
on 14.02.11, Belfast: Northern Ireland Institute of Directors  
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/8351569.stm
Sutton, M. (2001) An index of deaths from the conflict in Northern Ireland, 
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/sutton/book/ Accessed on 13.09.10 
Switzer, S., and McDowell, C. (2009) Redrawing cognitive maps of conflict: lost 
spaces and forgetting in the centre of Belfast, Memory Studies, 2 (3), pp. 337-
Taylor, P. (2001) Brits: The war against the IRA, London: Bloomsburg 
The Agreement (1998) The Agreement: its your decision, Belfast: Northern Ireland 
Office  
The cost of the Troubles Study (1999) Final Report: The Cost of the Troubles Study. 
Belfast: The Cost of the Troubles Study 
Throgmorton, J.A. (2003) Planning as persuasive storytelling in a global-scale web of 
relationships, Planning Theory, 2 (2), pp. 125-151 
Throgmorton, J.A. (2004) Where Was the Wall Then? Where Is It Now? Planning 
Theory and Practice, 5 (3), pp. 349-365  
Todd, J., and Ruane, J. (2010) From A Shared Future to Cohesion, Sharing and 
Integration An Analysis of Northern Irelands Policy Framework Documents, 
UK: Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust  
Tonge, J. (2006) Sinn Fin and New Republicanism in Belfast, Space and Polity, 
 10 (1), pp. 135-147 
Tonge, J. (2010) The ESRC Northern Ireland 2010 Westminster Election Survey, 
 Liverpool: University of Liverpool 
Topping, J. (2008) Community Policing in Northern Ireland: A Resistance Narrative, 
 Policing and Society, 18 (4), pp. 778-797 
Torney, K. (2007) Peaceline plan for integrated primary, Belfast Telegraph 23.05.07 
Trademark (2008) Shared Residential Space. Belfast: Belfast City Council.  
UTV (2009) Peace walls: 40 years on, http://www.u.tv/News/Peace-walls-40-years-
on-/37c27eaa-b413-40da-a921-e478844ee971 Accessed on 12.14.11 
Van Hoven, B. (2003) Using CAQDAS in Qualitative Research, in, Clifford, N.J and 
Valentine, G. (2006) Key Methods in Geography, London: Sage Publications 
Vargo, T (2008) Belfast residents asked if peace walls should come down, US-
Ireland Alliance, www.us-irelandalliance.org 
Waldman, A. (2004) India and Pakistan: Good Fences Make Good Neighbours, New 
York Times, 04.07.04  
Walliman, N. (2006) Social Research Methods. London: Sage Publications  
Wharton, K. (2008) A Long Long War: Voices from the British Army in Northern 
Ireland 1969-1998, West Midlands: Helion & Company.  
Weitzer, R. (1995) Policing under fire: Ethnic Conflict and Police Community Relations 
in Northern Ireland, Albany: Suny Press  
White, B. (1983) From Conflict to Violence: The Re-emergence of the IRA and the 
Loyalist Response, in Darby, J (eds) (1983) Northern Ireland: The Background 
to the Conflict. Belfast: The Appletree Press Ltd  
Wilensky, H.L. (1975) The Welfare State and Equality: Structural and Ideological 
Roots of Public Expenditures, Berkeley: University of California Press   
Willis, J.W. (2007) Foundations of Qualitative Research: Interpretive and critical 
approaches, London: Sage Publications  
http://www.u.tv/News/Peace-walls-40-years-on-/37c27eaa-b413-40da-a921-e478844ee971
http://www.u.tv/News/Peace-walls-40-years-on-/37c27eaa-b413-40da-a921-e478844ee971
Wilson, J. (2011) Anger over doubles standards on murals, News Letter, 12.05.11 
Wolff, S. (2005) Between Stability and Collapse: Internal and External Dynamics of 
Post-Agreement Institution Building in Northern Ireland In (eds) Noel, S. 
(2005) From Power Sharing to Democracy: Post Conflict Institutions in 
Ethnically Divided Societies, Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press 
Wolff, S. (2009) Peace by Design? Towards complex power sharing, in, 
 McGarry, M. and OLeary, B. (2009) Consociational Theory, London: 
 Routledge. 
Working Group on Peace Lines (1994) Northern Ireland Office: Working Group on 
 Peace lines Report: Belfast: Northern Ireland Office 
Youthlink (2009) Belfast Young People To Mark Fall Of Berlin Wall At Belfast Peace 
Wall. Belfast: Youthlink Press Release 04.11.09 
Youthlink (2009) Berlin 1969-1989, Belfast 1969-???? Belfast young people mark fall 
of Berlin Wall at Belfast Peace Wall. Youthlink press release 09.11.09.  
Zahariadis, N. (1995) Comparing Lenses in Comparative Public Policy. Policy Studies 
Journal, 23, pp. 378-382  
Zahariadis, N. and Allen, C.S. (1995) Ideas, networks and policy Streams: 
privatization in Britain and Germany. Policy Studies Review, 14, 
(Spring/Summer), pp. 71-98 
Zahariadis, N. (1999) Ambiguity, Time, and Multiple Streams, In Theories of the 
Policy Process, ed Paul Sabatier. Boulder, CO: Westview Press 
Zahariadis, N. (2003) Complexity, Coupling, and the Future of European 
 Integration,  Review of Policy Research, 20 (2) pp. 285-310 
Zahariadis, N. (2008) State Subsidies in the Global Economy, New York: Palgrave 
