Perceptions of Justice, Identity, and Political Processes of
Forgiveness and Revenge in Early Post-Conflict
Transitions.
Case Studies: Northern Ireland, Serbia, South Africa
Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree
of Doctor of Philosophy
Marcia Byrom Hartwell
8IS1H1 
 CIllSOd3a
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CENTRE 
QUEEN ELIZABETH HOUSE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY 
81,000 WORDS
WOLFSON COLLEGE 
APRIL / 2005
THESIS ABSTRACT
This thesis offers an alternative way to reframe issues and questions that have plagued 
peace processes during post conflict transitions throughout the 1990s and beyond. This 
framework, derived from a survey of relevant literature, observation, and fleldwork 
interviews in Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South Africa, examines perceptions of justice, 
formation of identity, and political processes of forgiveness and revenge in post conflict 
transitions. This thesis is organised into three sections; Issues and Concepts: Chapters 
One to Three, Country Background: Chapters Four to Six, and the Conclusion: Chapters 
Seven and Eight. In the first section, Chapter One depicts perceptions of justice as 
fairness as a strong and underlying motivation for formation of identity and processes of 
forgiveness and revenge. Chapter Two focuses on issues of post-conflict identity and the 
claim to victimisation by all groups formerly in conflict. Chapter Three demonstrates 
how these concepts interact with and motivate evolutionary, parallel, and entwined 
political processes of forgiveness and revenge in post conflict transitions. The concluding 
section explores the problems of violence during peace processes, in Chapter Seven; and 
proposes some alternative ways for the international community to approach 
peacekeeping and aid conditionality. A key finding of this thesis is that a willingness for 
all individuals and groups to practice forbearance from revenge, rather than unconditional 
forgiveness, is the strongest factor directly impacting political, social, and economic 
relationships between former enemies. Seen as a mid phase between processes of 
forgiveness and revenge, this "passive resentment", where a decision to forbear from 
enactment of revenge has been consciously taken, has emerged as a key factor for 
moving political cooperation and reforms forward.
Authorship Declaration
I hereby certify that this thesis is the result of my own work except where 
otherwise indicated and due acknowledgement is
given.
The author's signature has been removed from the online version of this thesis.
Thesis Table of Contents
Introduction 3 
SECTION I; Issues and Concepts
Chapter 1: Perceptions of Justice in Early Post-Conflict
Transitions 37
Chapter 2: Formation of Post-Conflict Identity 59
SECTION II; Country Backgrounds
Chapter 3: Northern Ireland 79 
Chapter 4: Serbia 105 
Chapter 5: South Africa 137
SECTION III; Conclusion
Chapter 6: Violence in Peace 168 
Chapter 7: Political Processes of Forgiveness and Revenge 198
Chapter 8: Conclusions and Reflections on Peace Processes 239
Bibliography 267 
APPENDIX: Fieldwork Interviews/ Questionnaires 282
Introduction
One of the great challenges in the post-Cold War era has been how best to 
cope with the emergence of intense conflicts and their aftermath. Rather than 
ushering in an optimistically anticipated peaceful coexistence, the 1990s appeared to 
unleash cataclysmic forces that erupted into numerous violent civil conflicts around 
the globe. This has resulted in a decade where much of the developed world has 
been in the process of adjusting to repercussions from what in many cases have been 
new variations on old conflicts, while simultaneously searching for more effective 
ways to settle them. The international community's quest to find solutions has 
resulted in much discussion regarding the use of political, economic, and social aid, 
and military force, in order to bring stability to a country or region. However, 
despite many well-intentioned efforts, numerous core problems remain.
Key problems in recovering from conflict have focused on the process of 
political cooperation between former enemies. This cooperation is necessary to 
strike a peace agreement, to rebuild and create institutions, and to lay a foundation 
for sustainable peace. Many problems experienced in contemporary post-conflict 
transitions have resulted from a lack of understanding by international interveners of 
the underlying dynamics within post-conflict societies. The importance of 
identifying and addressing these dynamics and their effect on internal and external 
motivations to pursue peace has become increasingly apparent. As international 
relations scholar Fred Halliday has observed, peace processes in the late twentieth 
century have had a mixed record of success. With more conventional methods of 
dealing with post-conflict transitions running into increasing difficulty, the
international community has begun searching for new ways to address more 
effectively these complex problems. (Halliday, 2000, 277-8)
Halliday has described four types of peace processes dominating post-Cold 
War conflicts throughout the 1990s that have been plagued by these underlying 
problems. One type is a process, which despite experiencing difficulties, makes 
progress that results in a stabilised, successful peace within a time frame of five to 
ten years. A second has been one where political negotiations continue but where 
unanticipated problems and delays have occurred. A third is where hostilities have 
formally ceased but where a political stalemate exists between all parties and the 
process becomes stalled; and a fourth is where peace breaks down completely and 
conflict is renewed at the previous or an escalated level of violence. (Halliday, 2000, 
This thesis proposes a basic framework that identifies and explains many of 
the key problems inherent to the peace processes described by Halliday. It offers an 
alternative view of examining old problems and reorganising priorities to more 
effectively address sensitive issues related to political cooperation. This work 
defines perceptions of justice as fairness; formation of post-conflict identity, 
especially victimisation; and political processes of forgiveness and revenge, as key 
issues during the early post-conflict transitional period. It describes their 
relationship to each other and impact on the will of populations to cooperate in the 
earliest phases of peace. The role of violence during peace processes and the ways 
in which it relates to the theoretical framework, is also explored. These issues have 
been examined in the context of three cases, Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South 
Africa.
These conflicts were of particular interest as they appeared to have been 
written off by national and international political circles as 'intractable' or 'no hope' 
scenarios (see Chapter Three, Seven). Prevailing national and international attitudes 
assumed these populations were doomed to an inevitable and perpetual cycle of 
conflict. In many ways this attitude allowed both the national and international 
community to abandon any attempt to identify and address root causes of these 
conflicts, and to continue implementing a policy of military containment, rather than 
making a serious effort to seek resolutions.
A short time before the 1998 Northern Ireland Peace Agreement was struck, a 
meeting held with a distinguished mostly British audience at Chatham House, 
London, evoked strong negative reaction when it was suggested by attendees from 
Northern Ireland that the world had moved on and was redefining the Northern 
conflict in its wake. (Cox et al, 2000, 2-3) There had been previous periodic 
attempts to reach a solution, but core problems had been viewed by many in the 
British government as essentially insolvable or irrelevant, rather than as symptoms 
of a conflict based on historic and current political, economic, and social factors.
During the late 1990s South Africa, another allegedly no-hope scenario, came 
to a peaceful resolution as the new government conducted a Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, better known as the TRC (see Chapter Five). Serbia, 
located in the midst of the historically turbulent Balkans, and troubled not only by 
the uncertain status of Kosovo but by a difficult post-Communist, post-conflict 
transition, has continued to struggle toward achieving the political and economic 
standards of Western Europe (Chapter Four).
During this time, inspired by the South African TRC, intangible issues such as 
forgiveness, previously treated as irrelevant political concepts by most non-
theologian scholars and policy makers, began to be widely discussed in political and 
legal forums. Inclusion of forgiveness began to emerge in international 
peacemaking discussions as a new way forward in the process of promoting social 
reconciliation. However, examining the political dimensions of forgiveness and 
revenge was not new and had been previously discussed by post-World War Two 
philosopher Hannah Arendt, who had explored the motivations of Nazi Germany, 
and later in the 1980s by Susan Jacoby, who examined the relationship between 
justice and revenge. (Arendt, 1958, The Human Condition: Jacoby, 1985, Wild 
Justice: The Evolution Of Revenge) However, it wasn't until the mid 1990s when 
studies such as Donald Shriver's An Ethic For Enemies. Forgiveness in Politics 
appeared, that a serious discussion, outside of Christian theological paradigms, 
began to take place. (Shriver, 1995)
Shriver, a pastor in North Carolina and participant in the 1960s civil rights 
marches in the American South concluded that the concept of forgiveness which had 
been "customarily relegated to the realms of religion and personal ethics" belonged 
"at the heart of reflection" in pondering ways that groups of humans could repair 
damage from past conflicts with each other. Because forgiveness embraced "moral 
truth, history, and the human benefits" that flowed from conquering enmity, Shriver 
defined "forgiveness" as a "word for a multidimensional process that is eminently 
political". (Shriver, 1995, x)
From the beginning, research and fieldwork clearly underscored Shriver's 
interpretation and reinforced the work of Arendt and Jacoby. Both forgiveness and 
revenge emerged as deeply intertwined parallel processes that directly impacted 
political cooperation while encompassing all aspects of justice. This has been 
reflected injustice studies. While still in the early stages, considerable evidence has
begun to mount that when confronted with serious emotional issues of justice and 
injustice in "high impact situations", individuals will give precedent to 
reestablishing justice over a sense of personal financial gain. (Lerner, 2003, 396)
"If the justice motivation and emotional arousal are sufficiently strong, the 
imperative to act may narrow the focus of attention and thought" resulting in a 
diminished response to self-interest. Individuals may be willing to give up 
"considerable economic incentives to punish a harm-doer", working instead to help 
those they perceive to be innocent victims rather than working to increase their own 
profit. In some cases they may go so far as to "derogate their own self-worth" 
determined to withstand potentially severe political, economic, and social costs as a 
consequence for their support. In this context justice assumes a counter-intuitive 
position as an independent and important source of motivation, overriding and 
separate from "self-interested desires to maintain self-esteem and maximize profits." 
(Lerner, 2003, 396) The reactive hypersensitivity characteristic to most post- 
conflict environments combined with the deep connection and interaction between 
justice, forgiveness, and revenge, make this interpretation of the justice motive 
especially relevant to understanding the evolution of peace processes.
A clear distinction between peace and reconciliation processes has also 
evolved from work on this thesis. Peace processes, which often result from 
pragmatic deals struck with short-term objectives, can lack solid guarantees for 
long-term peace. They are commonly characterised by escalating violence and are 
not to be confused with the longer process of reconciliation. As Halliday has 
observed, conditions for peace are "neither wholly internal or external" but both are 
necessary. Internal conditions usually depend on the will of the principal military 
and political players. Peace does not necessarily occur "through replacement of the
nasty people by nice people" but rather through a decision taken by the "nasty 
people" that at a particular moment, it is more advantageous to pursue peace rather 
than war." (Halliday, 2000, 284-5) This pragmatism has been echoed by Stephen 
Stedman who maintains that the greatest risk to sustained peace comes from 
"spoilers" or "leaders and parties who believe that peace emerging from 
negotiations threatens their power, worldview, and interests, and use violence to 
undermine attempts to achieve it." (Stedman, 1997, 5)
Genuine reconciliation, though formed in the earliest stages of peace, is a 
longer process and likely to encompass multiple generations and diasporas. It can be 
seen as having its real beginning at the point when deeply contentious issues which 
have been initially set aside to move a peace process forward begin to hinder a 
countibliographyry's political progress. These moments of face-off between 
pragmatic peace agreements and aspirations, expectations, and reality of 
implementation have been described in Chapters Three to Five which describe the 
background of the conflict in each case study.
In striving for sustained peace in a society where violent conflict has created 
deep distrust there is a need for all sides to develop a style of personal and political 
toleration that a majority can accommodate and a minority can aspire to. This 
toleration of groups with different histories, cultures, and identities is pursued not 
for its own sake, but because many aspire to its value as justification for a "peaceful 
coexistence and of the life and liberty that it serves." This toleration of difference 
shifts the burden of social accountability onto those who would reject these values 
through acts of indiscriminate abuse such as forced removals, ethnic cleansing and 
other destructive deeds, to justify their actions. (Walzer, 1997, 2)
A key characteristic of any successful regime of toleration is that "it does not 
depend on a particular form of virtue" nor does it require that "all its participants 
stand at one point on the continuum." Some societies may work better with an 
atmosphere of resignation, indifference or stoicism while others have a need to 
encourage curiosity and enthusiasm. (Walzer, 1997, 12) Viewed as an attitudinal 
state of mind, toleration embodies a range of possible approaches to accommodating 
a wide range of different groups within the same society.
Walzer has described five types of civil toleration depicted as evolutionary 
stages. The first is a basic religious toleration with origins in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, a resigned acceptance of the other for the sake of peace that is 
derived from an exhaustion accumulated from years of killing. A second stage 
embodies a passive indifference to and benign acceptance of others. A third stage is 
described as a kind of "moral stoicism" where it becomes the moral duty and 
obligation to accept that others have rights to practise their beliefs even when it is 
unattractive to some. A fourth stage expresses openness, curiosity and respect, and 
is accompanied by a willingness to listen and learn from difference. A final and 
perhaps ultimate form embraces and endorses difference as "a necessary condition 
of human flourishing" where individuals are offered choices that "make their 
autonomy meaningful." (Walzer, 1997, 10-11)
Most importantly, Walzer depicts toleration as an ongoing negotiated 
arrangement whose goal is to strike a balance that provides a version of peaceful 
coexistence that is in itself "an important and substantive moral principle." While 
not necessarily a formula for harmony, it nevertheless legitimises previously 
repressed or "invisible" groups, and allows them fair access to competition for 
available resources. The presence of these formerly excluded groups will in turn
benefit all by expanding the "amount of political space" through the increase in 
number and range of political institutions along with opportunities for individual 
participation. It has been found that politically engaged citizens who have a 
"growing sense of their own effectiveness" in civil society are its best insurance 
against racist or extremist political ideologies and commitments. (Walzer, 1997, 6, 
Seeking a form of toleration that facilitates political cooperation and a will to 
sustain peace is a challenging but necessary achievement for societies emerging 
from conflict. A key finding of this thesis is that a willingness for all individuals and 
groups to practise forbearance from revenge, rather than unconditional forgiveness, 
is the strongest factor directly impacting political, social, and economic 
relationships between former enemies. Seen as a mid phase between processes of 
forgiveness and revenge, this "passive resentment", where a decision to forbear 
from enactment of revenge has been consciously taken, has emerged as a key factor 
for moving political cooperation and reforms forward (see Chapter Seven).
The extent of courage and determination required by all sides to achieve this 
phase has been widely underestimated and misunderstood by the international 
community. A key objective of this thesis is to provide a framework that can be 
used by the international community to understand better the views of internal post- 
conflict populations, who will in turn be able to express their needs more directly.
To provide coherence, this thesis has been grouped into three sections 
focusing on theory, country backgrounds, and conclusion. A diagram of the 
analytical framework inserted before Section I depicts both the linear structure and 
interactive flow of what I have identified as three areas; perceptions of justice, 
formation of post-conflict identity, and political processes of forgiveness and
revenge, that are key to understanding post-conflict transitions. Justice and identity 
are described in Section I, Issues and Concepts, which lays out a theoretical 
framework that analyses two of the underlying dynamics in early post-conflict 
transitions. Section II, Country Backgrounds, describes a history of the conflict in 
each country where fieldwork was conducted in a way that is relevant to issues 
discussed in Section I and III. Section III, the Conclusion, draws together elements 
discussed in previous chapters through exploration of reasons for escalating 
violence during early phases of peace processes in Chapter Six, the core Chapter 
Seven on political processes of forgiveness and revenge, and conclusions and 
reflections on peace processes in Chapter Eight.
Section I-Issues and concepts
This section lays out the theoretical framework for analysing two key 
components of the underlying dynamics in early post-conflict transitions: 
perceptions of justice and formation of post-conflict identity. Each concept has 
been observed to have a direct effect on the political motivations of early post- 
conflict populations to pursue sustained peace or return to violent conflict. It is 
evident from the timeline of interviews and observations of others that internal 
reactions to these issues evolve over time. Initial elation over implementation of 
peace agreements almost invariably gave way to disillusionment as progress was 
perceived to have occurred less rapidly or not in the way originally anticipated. The 
underlying dynamics observed in each country, though shaped by the specific 
conflict, were found to be universal in concept. These are laid out in Chapter One 
as perceptions of justice as fairness, and in Chapter Two as formation of post- 
conflict identities.
Chapter One examines perceptions of justice as fairness, known as 'justice 
judgments' in the context of each case study. While not replacing formal legal trials 
and other procedures, these perceptions are formed early by all groups in order to 
rapidly assess their individual and group status in an unstable post-conflict transition 
and directly influence decisions and opinions affecting cooperation with former 
enemies.
During work on this thesis, the link between perceptions of justice and 
formation of post-conflict identities assumed greater significance than had been 
previously understood. Individuals and groups were observed to re-negotiate their 
identities utilising their perceptions of justice as fair treatment which in turn shaped 
political processes of forgiveness and revenge.
Chapter Two analyses an assumption of a victim identity common among all 
groups in each of the three countries. While still focused on conflict-defined 
groupings, they were less concerned with inter-group grievance than with all 
groups' perceptions of themselves as victims of violence. In each case the formerly 
dominant group was especially vulnerable to assuming this identity and an 
articulation of victimhood was often found to have been a motivating factor for this 
group in initiating or prolonging the original conflict.
In recent work on the relationship between justice, identity and behaviour, 
Tom Tyler and Steven Blader observed that development and maintenance of a 
positive individual and group identity most strongly influences cooperation and 
leads "people to be internally motivated to engage in and cooperate" with groups. 
Attitudes and values are an important part of this process as "to the degree that 
people are internally motivated, they engage in cooperative behaviors for personal 
reasons, and they do not need to receive incentives (rewards) or to face the risk of
sanctions (punishments) to encourage their group-related behaviors." (Tyler and 
Blader, 2003, 353-4) They found that social identity is formed from three 
interconnected areas; identification, pride and respect.
Identification reflects the degree to which people cognitively merge their 
sense of self and their evaluations of self-worth with their judgments 
of the characteristics and status of their groups. Pride reflects the person's 
evaluation of the status of their group. Respect reflects their evaluation of 
their status within the group. (Tyler and Blader, 2003, 354)
Section II- Country Backgrounds
The case studies, Northern Ireland (Chapter Three), Serbia (Chapter Four), 
and South Africa (Chapter Five) have each demonstrated these theoretical issues in 
a myriad of ways. Chosen for their relative similarities and as well as differences, 
they demonstrate internal and external lessons relevant to other countries emerging 
from violent conflict. For example, the story of Northern Ireland was well known 
worldwide to those who are or have been involved in violent civil conflict. Referred 
to with frequency and familiarity by many individuals interviewed in Serbia and 
South Africa, it was one of the world's longest standing, unresolved civil conflicts 
until the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.
The most recent Northern Ireland "Troubles" as they have been 
euphemistically known, began in the late 1960s during an era with very different 
views and definitions of accountability of human rights and causes of conflict. 
Fought within the territorial boundaries of the United Kingdom, a highly developed 
country, this conflict embodied the range of problems characteristic of civil wars 
fought in the recent decade. While the actors within Northern Ireland were the 
focus of this chapter, the role of Great Britain was of particular interest.
The most recent results of the two year quest to reinstate the Northern Ireland 
Assembly, have been increased support of and face-off between the province's two
most extreme political parties; lan Paisley's ultra conservative DUP Party 
(Democratic Unionist Party), and Gerry Adams's Sinn Fein Party with IRA 
connections. Although refusing to meet face to face, they were in negotiations 
brokered by the UK and Irish government but had not succeeded in reaching a final 
agreement by late 2004. While there has been huge pressure by the Irish and UK 
governments on both Sinn Fein and the hard right Democratic Unionist Party 
(DUP) led by the Rev. lan Paisley to reach a political accommodation, it has been 
pointed out that Northern Ireland is more segregated in 2005, especially in 
communities surrounding peace walls, than it was before the cease-fires, and this is 
a trend that is not showing any signs of abating. (Shirlow, 2003, 2002)
In early 2005, this difficult political relationship was exacerbated by public 
accusations made by both Irish and UK governments citing IRA involvement in an 
historic 26.5 million Northern Bank heist in Belfast, December 2004. Especially 
damaging was the accusation that some senior members of Sinn Fein had had prior 
knowledge, as there is some overlap between the IRA Army Council and Sinn 
Fein, thus linking them directly to the robbery. At the time of this writing, April 
2005, there was still no hard evidence offered to substantiate this or directly 
implicate either Gerry Adams or Martin McGuinness. Further complicating 
matters, the murder of Robert McCartney, a young father from an area known for 
its support for Sinn Fein, outside a Belfast bar in late January 2005, was directly 
linked to members of the IRA and by association to Sinn Fein. (This killing was 
particularly controversial as locally known IRA members appeared to behave as if 
they were entirely above the law and after the murder had taken place oversaw the 
forensic cleanup of the scene and 'encouraged' potential witnesses to refrain from 
talking to police.)
McCartney's sisters made their 'anti-terrorist' case in the international media 
and were embraced by powerful, high profile leaders. Gerry Adams was 
subsequently shunned by many American politicians who had previously welcomed 
him to March 17th Saint Patrick Day's celebrations while the sisters of the slain men 
were given an international forum by the White House and President George Bush 
to state their quest for justice. As a result, the threat to the peace process by both 
these events has been politically significant, and public accusations and support 
articulated by national and international governments in both cases has eroded all 
appearances of neutrality. On 6 April 2005, Gerry Adams made a public statement 
appealing to the IRA to embrace peace and to help rebuild the Northern Ireland 
political process. A brief positive response was made by IRA leadership, and it is 
anticipated that a more detailed and positive move will be forthcoming.
Nevertheless, many members of the opposing parties, for all their extreme 
differences, share a deep pragmatism toward the political process. This was evident 
in a joint public appearance at a Visiting Parliamentary Seminar on Conflict 
Resolution at Oxford University just prior to the murder of Robert McCartney, 
where both Martin McGuinness, Northern Ireland MP and former Education 
Minister and public spokesperson for Sinn Fein, and Peter Robinson, MP for the 
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), alluded to the improbability of the overall bank 
heist accusation holding for all Sinn Fein members. The convenor, Labour MP 
Martin O'Neill, concluded the session by citing the Nixon lesson in China - that 
Nixon was able to negotiate a deal with communist China in the late 1960s because 
he was known to be a staunch anti-Communist and thus had rock solid credibility 
and trust in making an advantageous agreement. He alluded to the May 2005 
national UK elections with indications that both Sinn Fein and the DUP would
dramatically increase their numbers. The audience was left with the distinct 
impression that, similar to the Nixon scenario, the key participants believed that 
eventually a deal would be made between both parties in order to allow the Northern 
Ireland Assembly to be reconvened. (St Antony's College, 2005, Oxford) However, 
by all accounts it has been acknowledged that formal power sharing between the 
two parties is still some time away.
Serbia, located at the edge of Western Europe, has been a prime example of 
violent political transitions often seen in less developed countries on other 
continents. The choice of Serbia evolved as an opportunity to study a developed 
European population newly emerging from a conflict situation that had many 
characteristics of African and Asian ethno-nationalist conflicts - genocide, torture, 
rape, massive ethnic cleansing, pervasive government corruption, organised crime, 
and paramilitary organisations. It provided an opportunity to observe the reactions 
of Serbs, often perceived by the international community to be responsible for the 
break up of the former Yugoslavia (as Slovenia and Croatia were the areas that first 
opted for independence this perception is questionable: see Chapter Four) during 
their transition from a communist to democratic system as well as to the United 
Nations administration of Kosovo.
Previous to the 1990s war which led to the break up of the former Yugoslavia, 
the collapse of Communism in the former Soviet block in the 1980s led to the loss 
of jobs, guarantees of access to education, health care, and retirement pensions and 
the predictable doctrines and familiar faces of the previous ruling party. The 
resulting increased poverty and uncertainty about the future made the population 
vulnerable to the economic and political security offered by the concept of ethnic 
nationalism, making them easy to exploit by leaders seeking to increase personal
power. One young man interviewed in the early post Milosevic days spoke of 
Serbs as being previously motivated by a victim ideology and a "self absorbed 
.. .strong.. .tough" image and Serb journalist, Bratislav Grubacic, maintained that in 
order not to repeat a similar war, Serbs needed to understand that "Serb nationalism 
needs to be examined and politics adjusted to the modern world". (Serbia 
Interviews, January 2001: see Appendix)
South Africa was chosen as a comparative case for two reasons. First, it was a 
natural extension of analysis from the Northern Ireland conflict as there had been a 
long historic relationship between and perceived similarity by all groups in both 
countries. This interchange with the island of Ireland had begun in the early 20* 
century when "Irish republicans identified with Boers, who, like them, were 
engaged in a militant campaign against the British." This empathy ended with the 
apartheid regime in 1948, when the conflict shifted from Afrikaners versus Britain, 
to white Afrikaners against blacks. (McGarry ed., 2001, 5) It was revived in the 
1980s and 90s when Northern Ireland nationalists and republicans identified with 
the ANC and the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa. During the same time 
Northern Ireland unionists and loyalists sympathised with the Afrikaners who they 
perceived, like them, to be a beleaguered minority defending their culture and 
territory.
Secondly, the format of South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
(TRC) had begun to be adopted and promoted by the international community. 
While not replacing formal tribunals or trials it was increasingly proposed as a form 
of peace conditionality and along with forgiveness began to be publicly promoted as 
a necessary prerequisite to social reconciliation. However, as internal reaction to
and assessment of the TRC's outcome continued to elicit a wide range of verdicts, it 
became clear that this form of transitional justice needed closer examination. 
Section III- Conclusion
The final section frames Section I and II in the context of Chapter Six, 
"Violence in Peace", which discusses the relevance of transitional violence to the 
success or failure of peace agreements and processes; Chapter Seven, "Political 
Processes of Forgiveness and Revenge"; and Chapter Eight, "Conclusions and 
Reflections on Peace Processes".
In the earliest days of a declared peace, many populations are especially 
vulnerable to the violence of settling scores, and language on all sides resonates 
with hypersensitivity. Conflict-induced displacement and the seemingly 
uncompromising demands surrounding fundamental issues such as land, 
discrimination, and violence, move to secondary but no less important issues such 
as prisoners and investigating commissions. "Nomenclature and symbolism" that 
signals the onset of "what the French call revolution des esprits, a broad change of 
mind, is much slower to come than initial enthusiasm might suggest." (Halliday, 
2000, 286) As Halliday notes,
there is a special problem about bringing peace in societies that are 
ethnically fragmented.. .as distinct from riven by predominantly social 
divisions.. .or where the conflict appears at least to be one between locals 
and outsiders... .In fragmented societies, the war creates or reinforces.. .a 
deep suspicion and cleavage in the society which no rush of optimism or 
agreement, let alone international involvement, can overcome.
(Halliday, 2000, 286)
For the much of the population who are supportive of peace and who have 
begun reaping rewards from the newly acquired stability (such as being able to shop 
without worrying about bombs or attacks), it is a time of great concern for a broad 
range of social, economic, and political issues. Depending on the level of 
devastation, these concerns can range from acquiring basics such as food, clothing,
shelter, clean water; and issues of equal access to quality health care for physical 
disability, HIV, and emotional disorders; to generating sufficient income to cover 
living costs without being forced to engage in illegal gray or black economies (this 
was a paramount problem in Serbia and Eastern Europe).
The early post-conflict period is a time of great internal group pressure. 
Intimidation that has been commonly utilised during conflict by armed militias to 
coerce group members to conform to decreed standards of behaviour, such as not 
showing sympathy or support to declared enemies living nearby, or forcing others to 
arm themselves and fight, does not suddenly evaporate when a peace agreement is 
signed. Much of the violence inherent to ethno-national conflicts is a "complex 
phenomenon" that varies
in scale, complexity, intensity, longevity, number of actors, 
degree of external involvement, and military sophistication of the 
combatants... .Often the interpretations of violence are contested. 
A violent act may have multiple motivations and interpretations; 
the perpetrator and victim may variously interpret an action as 
criminal, political, or random or as motivated by religion, ethnicity, 
race, or identity. (McGinty, 2001, 640)
Much research in Northern Ireland and other countries had previously assumed 
violence to be a consequence of political problems that would immediately 
disappear following a settlement. This chapter explores and suggests reasons why 
political violence has often drifted into criminal violence. As Keen has observed, 
the '"transition from war to peace' is unlikely to see a clean break from violence to 
consent, from theft to production, from repression to democracy, or from impunity 
to accountability." Instead a negotiated peace is very "likely to institutionalize 
violence in some form" and "may not be possible without institutionalizing violence 
in some way." (Keen, 2001, 10)
In this climate of fear, construction of a post-conflict identity that reinforces a 
sense of security, assumes paramount importance. It is during this hypersensitive 
time when the international community can play a crucial role.
The crucial difference between the success and failure of spoilers 
is the role played by international actors as custodians of peace. 
Where international custodians have created and implemented 
coherent, effective strategies for protecting peace and managing 
spoilers, damage has been limited and peace has triumphed. 
Where international custodians have failed to develop and 
implement such strategies, spoilers have succeeded at the cost 
of hundreds of thousands of lives. (Stedman, 1997, 6)
For internal security forces - both police and military - this is a time of 
increased defensiveness and hostility, as they too face dramatic internal 
organisational and image changes. In their view, they sacrificed their lives as the 
last line of defence between complete anarchy and civilized society, trying to 
protect civilians, only to be accused and blamed in post-conflict transitions for 
actions they felt were not always in their control. This situation was particularly 
prevalent in Northern Ireland where, in a controversial move, demanded by 
republicans and generally resisted by unionists, the recommendations of the 1998 
Patten Report for a complete overhaul of the RUC (Royal Ulster Constabulary) was 
implemented by changing among other things their name - to PSNI, the Police 
Service of Northern Ireland - as well as uniforms, and recruitment procedures. (The 
redundancies in the transition to peacetime policing resulted in recruitment of many 
former RUC to assist in organising independent police forces in Kosovo, and other 
post-conflict countries).
Chapter Seven is the core chapter of the thesis. It describes the ways in which 
perceptions of justice and formation of a victimisation identity are linked to a 
complex parallel, evolutionary, and inevitably political process of forgiveness and 
revenge in a post-conflict transition. Although still in its infancy, the analysis of
forgiveness and revenge and its relationship to political processes present in all 
national and international political systems raises important questions for the 
international community as well as the internal victims, perpetrators, and 
bystanders.
When considering how forgiveness unfolds for victims, the 
motivations underlying forgiveness decisions become important. 
Do people forgive to release themselves from discomfort, or do 
their decisions reflect more principled motives? Are such 
distinctions about motives important, in terms of predicting 
outcomes for forgivers or offenders? (Exline et al, 2003, 345)
Recent analysis has also shed light on the pragmatic advantages of adopting a 
stance of passive resentment. While potentially destructive feelings of bitterness or 
hatred can be eliminated through unconditional forgiveness, a mid-phase of passive 
resentment or forbearance from revenge may have elements of self-preservation 
deemed necessary for surviving a violent post-conflict transition.
.. .Some have argued that principled feelings of resentment can be 
beneficial; in fact, it might actually be dangerous or morally 
remiss to set them aside. Expressions of forgiveness, although 
often facilitating reconciliation, might also create risks for 
offended parties. (Exline et al, 2003, 345)
As indicated in this chapter, genuine and unconditional forgiveness is ultimately an 
individual spontaneous act that is not necessary to create an initial short term 
climate of tolerance or political cooperation. However, the implication is equally 
strong that if the issue of forgiveness remains unaddressed by subsequent 
generations or diasporas, they may re-emerge with an unfettered vengeance to erupt 
into another cycle of violent conflict in the future.
Chapter Eight, "Conclusions and Reflections on Peace Processes", summarises 
key findings and ways in which the underlying dynamics described in Chapters 
One, Two, and Seven relate to the process of political cooperation. This final 
chapter lists practical suggestions for monitoring internal dynamics of post-conflict
transitions and for improving the relationship with the international community. 
The role of social memory in constructing histories that perpetuate and fuel future 
conflicts are discussed. The way stories of conflicts are passed to subsequent 
generations and to diasporas are a critical factor in transmitting either bitterness or 
hope. As Jan-Werner Muller observed in the context of World War II, "with the 
waning of Holocaust survivors (as well as slave labourers and soldiers who served 
in the Second World War), 'communicative memory', that is, living oral memory 
based on personal recollection, is passing into 'cultural memory'" which is 
understood as a cultural representation that lacks the "immediacy of first-hand 
recollection." (Muller, 2002, 13-4)
It also covers aspects of transitional justice that relate directly to these issues. 
The conclusion emphasises that directly or indirectly, it is followers, not leaders, 
who have the final word on the direction and long term outcome of peace processes.
Summary ofFieldwork Conducted for the Purpose of This Thesis
Fieldwork was conducted in Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South Africa, 
during a three year period, 1999 to 2002 with the intent of identifying the 
relationship between perceptions of justice as fairness; formation of post-conflict 
identity; and political processes of forgiveness and revenge during the early post 
conflict transitional period. Within these three countries, the following hypotheses 
have been examined:
  that perceptions of justice as fairness, known as "justice judgments", while 
not replacing formal legal justice, are formed early by all groups in order to 
begin a pragmatic form of reconciliation that directly influences all decisions 
and opinions shaped early in a post-conflict environment;
  that post-conflict individual and group identities are re-negotiated through
these perceptions of fair treatment and relied upon in shaping political processes 
of forgiveness or revenge;
  that political forgiveness and revenge are parallel complex evolutionary
processes present in all national and international political systems, are directly 
related to perceptions of justice, and can be used as indicators of the will of 
populations to seek a permanent peace, or a return to sustained violent conflict; and 
if not addressed, these key issues identified as present in early post conflict 
transitions, will eventually be motivation for renewed conflict.
Examined in the context of each country, each issue's priority was defined by 
the culture and circumstances of the conflict, but found to be present in each post 
conflict society and as having significant impact on the will of populations to work 
together during the earliest phases of peace. The case studies were also chosen for 
potential lessons they could share with other conflicts. At some point, each of these 
conflicts had been viewed as hopelessly intractable by external observers. Upon 
initial observation each area appeared to be imprisoned by its history however closer 
examination through interviews and research made it clear that many citizens did 
understand their fundamental problems but needed more external understanding and 
support in seeking long term solutions.
Northern Ireland was chosen as a base case, as stated earlier, it remained one 
of the world's longest standing and unresolved civil conflicts. By the mid 1990s it 
had become clear that the Northern Ireland conflict had not been unique to the 
country or situation, but embodied many of the dynamics and issues shared by the 
new 'ethnic conflicts' which had began surfacing around the globe. For the 
purposes of this thesis, Northern Ireland was chosen as a geographically and 
linguistically accessible area in which to conduct the first phases of fieldwork and to 
compare observations made there with the two other case studies.
South Africa, was chosen as a second comparative case firstly for its 
longstanding history of identification and interchange with first, the entire island of 
Ireland and later, with Northern Ireland specifically. The second reason is, as has 
been previously mentioned, international adoption of South Africa's Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (TRC) as a tool for social reconciliation needed 
assessment.
As noted earlier, the choice of Serbia evolved as an opportunity to study a 
European population who had recently emerged from a conflict that shared many 
characteristics with developing world ethno-nationalist conflicts, as well as an 
opportunity to observe the earliest stages of transition to democracy, enforced 
partition of Kosovo, and formation of post conflict identity. The difference in 
language and circumstance in Serbia also provided an additional opportunity to test 
the relevance of observations made in Northern Ireland and South Africa.
Northern Ireland did prove to be a model of the type of ethno-nationalist 
conflict that became commonplace throughout the 1990s. Northern Ireland 
interviews took place in March 1999, the entire month of April 2000, and from mid 
to late November 2000. There were additional visits for the purpose of presenting 
findings at a Queens University Belfast conference (2001) and research in the 
Political Collection in the Linen Hall Library, Belfast, where the most 
comprehensive collection of published and artifact memorabilia on the Northern 
Ireland conflict was housed. Interviews, research, and observation conducted in 
Northern Ireland sharpened interview skills and research strategies for later work in 
the other countries. By using Northern Ireland as a base case, I was well-prepared 
to understand the processes taking place in Serbia when I visited in January and 
March 2001, and June 2002. Experience in both countries aided in interpreting 
results from final fieldwork in South Africa for six weeks in November and 
December 2002.
Subsequent fieldwork in Serbia did provide valuable insights into the earliest 
phases of a post-conflict transition. Unexpectedly it also provided a basis for
understanding the ethnic diversity of Serbia's population and shed light on why the 
significant population of Croats in Vjovidina Province did not break with Milosevic 
during the earliest phase of the Yugoslav war. It also reinforced the fact that the 
Kosovo war was primarily a conflict between competing nationalities, Serbs and 
Albanians, rather than between Christians and Muslims, and highlighted issues 
surrounding the internal displacement of Serb refugees from other areas of the 
former Yugoslavia.
South Africa was especially interesting as a case study for this thesis as having 
previously, along with Northern Ireland, been considered to be one of the world's 
most intractable situations, it had subsequently launched an international 
reconciliation prototype by establishing a high profile truth and reconciliation 
commission as a way to deal with divisive post-conflict issues. The South African 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), is now seen by many South Africans 
as a positive part of the process of building a new country and as a way to recollect 
history (if not always accurate) but not as a guarantee to a long term reconciliation. 
Many South Africans interviewed in November/December 2002, agreed that despite 
the TRC, the hard work of building a new country had "just begun". (South Africa, 
Cape Town, 2002) This fieldwork was particularly important for the purpose of this 
thesis as South Africa was the final country visited and viewed as an indicator of 
what might lie ahead for Serbia and Northern Ireland and other conflicts. It also had 
some of the most comprehensive survey data on the evolution of the reconciliation 
process of any of the three countries. 
Methodology
Background for this work was developed through an early pilot study 
undertaken in Northern Ireland (1995); a thorough literature review of political,
economic, sociological conflict-related processes; and macro-economic analysis of 
the impact of tourism on economies in transition and crisis (Northern Ireland, 1996; 
Slovenia, 1996; Czech Republic, 1996; papers written while completing a first 
degree in economics and government). "The Role of Forgiveness in Reconstructing 
Society After Conflict", my MSc thesis at the LSE, and one of the bases upon which 
my current work has been built, was published in 1998 in The Journal for 
Humanitarian Assistance', University of Cambridge, UK.
The main purpose of this fieldwork was to interview individuals and/or groups 
who represented various ethnic and socio-economic areas of the country. 
Informational interviews were also conducted with individuals within the country 
who were doing research and analysis in that environment. A base set of questions 
regarding the key concepts of this research; justice, identity, forgiveness, revenge, 
were developed in a political context (Sample Questionnaire: see Appendix).
The questions were refined under the guidance of my external supervisor, 
Professor Adrian Guelke, Director of the Centre for the Study of Ethnic Conflict, 
School of Politics, Queen's University, Belfast, who has written widely on related 
issues in Northern Ireland and South Africa. Additional assistance was given by 
researcher, practitioner, and now lecturer, Dr. Kathleen Cavanaugh, (who had 
researched political structures in Northern Ireland as a doctoral candidate at the 
London School of Economics under the supervision of Professor Brendan O'Leary). 
Advice was also sought from other researchers and practitioners in the field. The 
result sought from this approach was to identify and prioritise key issues as 
articulated by members of the societies of the three countries where fieldwork was 
conducted. 
Interviews
Following initial interviews in Northern Ireland, I began to refine interviewing 
and data collection techniques. While the formal questionnaire was useful as a 
reference it quickly became clear that too many questions could be distracting for an 
interviewee, and I found I could gather a greater amount of relevant information if I 
asked about a few key areas while allowing the interviewee(s) to lead the discussion 
with discreet input from myself. It immediately became obvious that some wished 
to speak more about some subjects than others, and that better quality information 
was acquired if one followed their lead. It also resulted in my being approached for 
a number of spontaneous informal interviews given by individuals who decided they 
wanted to speak to me. A journalistic interviewing style underscored by academic 
rigour was developed, and proved to be invaluable in identifying issues important to 
individuals and groups in post-conflict environments.
In interpreting data, a key understanding that evolved during fieldwork was 
learning to pay attention to what people were not saying as much as to what they 
actually verbalised. Another was that these conversations were part of an 
evolutionary process that stood as only one measure of a point along the continuum 
of post-conflict adjustment during which time the same individual could have 
widely varying views. This was reinforced by observations of others in the field 
such as clinical psychologist and policy analyst Brandon Hamber, a South African 
involved in the early centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation in 
Johannesburg, South Africa, and who later held a Tip O'Neill Fellowship at 
INCORE, Northern Ireland.
Populations surveyed in each country included a cross section of professions, 
generations, and socio-economic backgrounds of groups previously in conflict. In 
each country I networked with internal academic, practitioner, and social contacts in
order to speak to as many community members, including ex-prisoners, as possible, 
and interviewed academic and public figures only when relevant. As opinions of 
well-known individuals were more accessible through published work and the 
media, my preference, whenever possible, was to speak to those who were less often 
heard in a public forum. Where language was an issue, such as in Serbia, many of 
those interviewed either spoke English, or reliable interpreters translated.
Due to limitations in time and funding, interviews were conducted in specific 
areas in each country, while acknowledging the differing experiences of the 
previous conflict and transition due to location and socio-economic background. 
Overall, observation and documentation of the evolutionary process of post-conflict 
transition was accomplished by cross referencing field interviews with relevant 
political, economic, and social surveys; current and past media; oral histories, and 
observational journals kept during each trip.
During interviews in Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South Africa, justice was 
expressed as a remedy of previous inequality of access to economic, political, social 
resources; equal opportunity to participate in future political arrangements; equal 
application of the rule of law; equal access to funding for economic development 
and to quality education, housing, jobs; and elimination of identity coding to 
prevent or limit access to resources.
Social concerns included acknowledgement of diverse geographical (urban, 
rural) and socio-economic (working class, middle class, wealthy) experiences of the 
population during conflict; internal corruption; reintegration of ex-combatants - 
paramilitary members, child soldiers - and refugees (where applicable); and reform 
of the security sector including military and police (a situation faced by Northern 
Ireland, Serbia/Kosovo, South Africa). The future role of ethnic minorities who
were not members of conflicting groups or collaborators (Northern Ireland has a 
sizeable Chinese community in Belfast; Serbia has over twenty ethnic minorities 
who were not directly involved in the conflict) was also of increasing concern.
Protection of interviewees was of paramount concern throughout this 
undertaking. The most dangerous places were and still are Northern Ireland and 
Serbia. In Northern Ireland most people either wanted taped interviews so that their 
words could not be misinterpreted, or ones that were entirely off the record. In 
Serbia, notebooks were acceptable to most, but again, many did not want to be 
identified. The situation in South Africa was more stable and flexible, but there was 
a great deal of caution among whites, especially Afrikaners. In all these countries I 
have avoided using individual names if I felt there might be any sort of threat 
associated with using them. Many deliberately did not give their names, but could 
be safely associated with the public location of the interview. The citations for 
fieldwork interviews reflect this consideration. 
Chronology of interviews
Fieldwork was conducted in three countries; Northern Ireland, Serbia, and 
South Africa, during a three year period from 1999 to 2002. Anonymity of those 
interviewed was respected upon their request, however I also exercised caution in 
using names in the text if there was any concern on my part for the individuals and 
groups interviewed. Many who were formally interviewed in Northern Ireland 
wanted their answers tape-recorded, otherwise notes were taken there and in the 
other countries. Certain individuals interviewed, particularly professionals, are 
included in the bibliographic listing and clearly identified. 
Northern Ireland Interviews:
Fieldwork in Northern Ireland was conducted in three principal blocks; in late 
March 1999; for the month of April 2000 (1-24); and November 2000 (16-30). It
was also visited several other times for the purpose of presenting at a conference 
(Belfast July 2001) and library research.
The key strategy in this interview series, repeated later in Serbia and South Africa, 
was to find a set of "gatekeepers", leaders of organisations or informal networks, 
who could pass me on to others if they felt so inclined. I also used informal social 
situations to gather information without the intimidation of a formal interview, and 
recorded many of these conversations and observations in a journal.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
Serbia Interviews:
Fieldwork in Serbia took place in three blocks of approximately 1-2 weeks each. 
The first visit was to Belgrade in late January 2001, just a few months after 
Milosevic had been deposed. A series of interviews were conducted in March/April 
2001, in and around the Subotica, located on the Hungary/Serbia border northern 
province of Vjovidina, and Belgrade. The interviews in June 2002 were conducted 
in Novi Sad and Belgrade. The first two visits in 2001, (January, 18-30; April 1-9) 
required an official 'letter of invitation' from a Serbian resident, while the June 
2002 (17-29) trip fell under a newly initiated open tourism visa during the summer 
months.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
South Africa Interviews;
Fieldwork in South Africa was left for the final phase, (30 October - 15 December 
2002) as both an observational and progress cross reference comparison with the 
two other countries. It was done in the Western Cape region including, Cape Town 
and Stellenbosch.
Conclusion
The gap between idealised aspirations and reality of action that philosopher 
Immanuel Kant observed; "We do not live in an enlightened age but we do live in 
an age of enlightenment", is as true now as it was in the late 18th century. (Kant
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
quoted in Halliday, 1999, 27) In an environment of increasing globalisation, 
inequality inside and between states is growing, and insurgence is increasing as the 
world struggles to find a new way to address old challenges. Clearly, new questions 
need to be asked and more attention paid to the complexity of motivations 
underlying the surface actions and reactions of all groups. The analytical 
framework proposed in this thesis is intended to help provide insights into the 
relationship between internal groups and external interveners that will aid in 
constructing an alternative way to frame these problems and in perpetuating a 
legacy of hope and peace for subsequent generations.
Both research and interviews have shown that internal and external 
acknowledgement of what has taken place as both a way to honour the dead and to 
construct a future free of violence is a key issue for all groups formerly in conflict. 
As this research demonstrates, the form this acknowledgement takes will change as 
a peace process evolves. More than ever, the international community needs to be 
aware of its implications for, and importance to, facilitating internal stability. The 
international community needs to ask itself if what it is doing is helping or 
hindering when asking post-conflict societies to take certain steps to facilitate 
political and economic reform and social reconciliation. Learning to listen to what 
all sides are saying, or in some cases, not saying, while allowing them time to seek 
their middle ground may be one of the best means of support that external 
interveners can give.
SECTION I: ISSUES AND CONCEPTS
Chapter One: Perceptions of Justice in Early Post-Conflict 
Transitions
In the earliest days of a peace process, a cry for justice is the rallying point 
for traumatised survivors. Rebuilding a country where peace is dimly remembered 
or unknown to a younger generation is a daunting task. While slow moving formal 
trials can serve a ritualistic purpose in much the same way as formal truth 
commissions, the limitations of a criminal trial where punishing perpetrators may 
not automatically benefit victims, must be confronted in a rapidly changing often 
violent post-conflict environment. Instead, building a long term social 
reconciliation that encompasses all members of society ~ victims, perpetrators, their 
beneficiaries, and bystanders - may require other forms of justice in order to 
understand and develop their place in the new political, social, and economic order. 
(Mamdani, 1997,22)
Social psychologists have put forward two theories as to why people care 
about justice: The first is the social-exchange-based resource model arguing "that 
people want to maximize the resources they obtain from social interactions, a goal 
that they believe is facilitated by following rules of distributive and procedural 
justice". The other is an identity-based relational model suggesting "that people 
attempt to maintain high status within groups and use the justice of their experiences 
to evaluate their group status". (Tyler, 1994, 850) However, it has been 
consistently confirmed that "concerns about equity and other normative aspects of 
distribution are clearly most related to perceptions of justice" that place relational 
over instrumental concerns. (Wendorf and Alexander, 2001)
The earliest days of a peace process are often a time of great fear, escalating 
violence and increased concern for physical security (see Chapter Six). Many 
groups and individuals from all sides are under death threat both from punishment 
vendettas within their own community and from former enemies, fearing attacks 
while inside their homes or while travelling to work through former enemy 
neighbourhoods. There is also fear of abuse by security forces, both military and 
police, who are perceived to have been biased toward one community over another. 
Security forces are equally fearful of retaliation.
Adding to the uncertainty is heightened hypersensitivity in language (i.e. 
graffiti, public statements, personal conversations), symbols displayed (flags, 
colours worn), and action (meeting with or boycotting discussions, marching or 
gathering in areas of heavy significance to recent enemies) that can quickly inflame 
smouldering resentments. Each conflict has its coded language which can give 
serious resonance to the simplest word or action by both internal and/or external 
players, resulting in almost instantaneous appearance of murderous gangs, or 
conversely, a reassurance and sudden willingness among former enemies to 
negotiate contentious issues. (Northern Ireland Interviews, Belfast, April 2000: see 
Appendix)
This chapter proposes that expectations of fair treatment by all those affected 
by the previous conflict are a key issue in early hypersensitive post-conflict 
environments. These expectations are most often expressed as perceptions of justice 
as fairness. As Allan Lind noted in his inaugural lecture for the Leiden University 
Fund Chair in Social Conflict, the terms "justice" and "fairness" can have different 
implications in the English language. The term justice can evoke a more formal or
legal concept of "what is right or due", while fairness evokes a more general or 
intuitive perception of the same. (Lind, 1995, 25)
There is ample evidence in both interviews and literature cited throughout 
this thesis that these perceptions are treated as reality and acted upon accordingly 
(see especially Chapter Seven, Six). These perceptions strongly impact the 
formation of post conflict identities, both on an individual and interactive group 
level and are especially influential in the formation of a sense of victimisation 
(Chapter Two). They are also an integral part of the phases of political processes of 
forgiveness and revenge in early post conflict environments (Chapter Seven). These 
internal perceptions of justice as fairness are especially important to external aid 
donors and military peacekeepers as they directly shape ways in which external 
actions are interpreted as fair or unfair by internal populations. 
Justice as fairness
An important and relevant finding of social psychologists who have done 
much empirical work on the relationship between justice and fairness is the 
demonstration that people in groups and organizations "react to third-party 
allocations and dispute resolution decisions by evaluating their fairness, not simply 
their absolute or relative favorability." (Tyler, 1994, 850) The ways in which justice 
is perceived to be fair are extremely important as "people's views about what is just 
and fair are a social facilitator through which the interaction among people and 
groups is enabled." (Tyler, 2000, 117-8)
All indications point to the fact that justice judgements are formed early with a 
tendency to be inflexible. There is much evidence to suggest that justice is a 
"socially created concept" that "has no physical reality" existing "only in the minds 
of the members of an ongoing interaction, a group, an organization, or a society."
For justice to be effective, studies of procedural justice judgements have revealed 
that individuals and groups must feel that the process of decision making has been 
fair. (Tyler, 2000, 117-8)
The social significance of justice as fairness was extensively explored by 
political philosopher John Rawls, one of the twentieth century's outstanding 
contributors to the ongoing debate. This debate, for Rawls and others, centred on 
development of social justice with a primary focus on the ways in which major 
social institutions, especially ones that define fundamental human rights and duties 
determine the division of political, social, and economic advantages through social 
cooperation and a shared concept of what is "good" or best for the society as a 
whole. (Rawls, 1999, 6)
In his original (1971) and later revision (1999) of A Theory of Justice, 
Rawls presented his interpretation of justice as fairness as an important part of the 
theory of rational choice and as an example of what he called a "contract theory" 
which conveys the idea that principles of justice could be conceived as the choice of 
rational persons, whether applying to relationships between several persons or 
groups, and in this way could be both explained and justified. To Rawls the use of 
the word contract embraced a plurality and condition that "the appropriate division 
of advantages must be in accordance with principles acceptable to all parties". 
(Rawls, 1999, 14-5)
While Rawls accepted the notion of deep inequalities within a society, the 
context in which he examined ways in which to approach and implement his 
theories was within the limitations of a "well-ordered society" where "everyone is 
presumed to act justly and to do his part in upholding just institutions". He assumed 
that a deeper understanding could be gained in no other way and that the "nature
and aims of a perfectly just society is the fundamental part of the theory of justice". 
(Rawls, 1999, 8)
In his work Political Liberalism (1993) that followed his first edition of A 
Theory of Justice in 1971, Rawls expanded his concept beyond sole dependence on 
rational behaviour to include a notion of reasonableness. He portrayed individuals 
as partially motivated by a "sense of justice" depicted as a form of reasonableness 
that encompassed a "moral sensibility" lacking in "mere rationality", further 
expanding this to include the idea of reciprocity which he linked to a concept of 
altruistic impartiality. (Rawls, John as quoted in Knight, 1998, 430)
Stating that "reasonable persons .. .are not moved by the general good as 
such" but by a desire for a "social world in which they, as free and equal, can 
cooperate with others on terms all can accept", will insist on cooperation with each 
other as "cooperation involves the idea of fair terms of cooperation" and "fair terms 
of cooperation specify an idea of reciprocity" as all those who cooperate and who 
follow the rules and procedures required will in turn "benefit in an appropriate way 
as assessed by a suitable benchmark of comparison". (Rawls as quoted in Knight, 
1998, 430) Tyler has stated that this sense of fair treatment is usually derived from 
four key factors: opportunities for participation or "voice" in stating their case and 
making suggestions, neutrality of the authorities and forum, the degree to which the 
motives of authorities are trusted, and the degree to which all parties are treated with 
dignity and respect. (Tyler, 2000, 117,121)
While there are inherent strengths to Rawls' philosophy of justice as fairness, 
he clearly stated that his theories presumed "strict compliance" and an assumption 
of the presence of a well-ordered society and some form of working government, as 
distinct from "partial compliance theory" that comprised theories of punishment,
doctrines of just war, justification of ways to oppose unjust regimes, from civil 
disobedience to military resistance and revolution. (Rawls, 1999, 8) A problem in 
applying Rawls theory of justice as fairness to societies recovering from conflict is 
that neither of his conditions may be present. It has also been amply demonstrated 
that rather than waiting for justice to be formally enacted in a court of law, informal 
assessments of perceived fair or unfair treatment, dubbed as justice judgements, will 
be used by former enemies, both individuals and groups, when making decisions to 
cooperate in post-conflict environments. (Lind, 1995, 15-6)
According to Lind, it is clear "that the time to establish a favourable fairness 
impression is early in the resolution of a dispute". (Lind, 1995, 11-13)
What this means is that once people arrive at the conclusion that 
they are being fairly treated, they cease to look for, or even 
attend to, additional information that might cause them to revise 
that impression... .[However] if procedures and outcomes seem 
to be very unfair, the implication of rejection and exploitation can add 
an extra sting and make people ignore even their interest as they seek 
to harm those whom they believe have treated them unfairly.
(Lind, 1995,11-13)
For former enemies the advantage of using justice judgements to evaluate 
fairness when addressing contentious issues is that it allows people to get around the 
logical problems associated with co-operation. This frees them to "construct their 
social identities and contribute to the common good" with diminished apprehension 
of being exploited or rejected. (Lind, 1995, 15-16)
Gone is the need to calculate all of the potential consequences of 
co-operative actions and to attempt to guess the probability of others' 
favorable or unfavorable behaviors. It is enough to decide that the 
relationship is fair. (Lind, 1995, 15-16)
Transitional justice
A key concern in early post-conflict environments has been the possibility of 
using justice as a cover for revenge (see Chapter Three). In recent years various
transitional justice mechanisms have sought to address expectations linked to 
perceptions of justice during the early post-conflict phase by pursuing and 
developing alternative forms of institutionalised justice. These address perceptions 
of fairness, past abuses, the need for faster, more flexible forms of justice, and 
numerous related legal and political issues that have remained "up for grabs" either 
because they were too contentious and specifically omitted from earlier negotiations 
or because there was a "deliberate constructive ambiguity about their resolution". 
(Campbell and Aolain, 2003, 870, vii) In this context transitional justice 
mechanisms can be seen as a way to transcend early post-conflict instability, until 
the conditions that support the more viable justice mechanisms and institutions that 
Rawls envisaged are in place.
The most popular forms of transitional justice mechanisms have been truth 
commissions, international tribunals, and restorative justice paradigms. The Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) in South Africa, the International Tribunals 
for Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Truth Commission and Special Court in 
Sierra Leone, and the Commission for Historical Clarification in Guatemala, have 
all been established as a way to address the past.
Truth commissions have been present since 1974 in Uganda, but became high 
profile with the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) of South Africa from 
1995 to 2000. (Hayner, 2001, 291-7) In their original form, they were understood to 
be "investigative mechanisms with the primary aim of publishing an authoritative 
factual report on human rights violations committed in a country" while the 
"societal impact of gathering information was given little attention." (Hamber, 
2003,1074) In South Africa, there was a dual focus of truth-telling along with a 
"religious-redemptive vision of reconciliation" that stressed a forbearance from
revenge, public confession by victims, and created meaning for suffering by 
providing a "narrative of sacrifice for liberation". (Wilson, 2001, xix)
Much recent debate has focused on the role of retributive justice in high 
profile war criminal tribunals. Tribunals began after World War II in Nuremberg, 
Germany, and Tokyo, Japan, were a way to hold former Nazi and other leaders 
accountable, but many individuals put on trial were more often symbols of 
wrongdoing rather than the ones directly responsible for giving orders. In even "the 
best-intentioned attempts to deal with large-scale crimes fairly, pragmatic 
limitations of massive legal procedures mean that some of the less guilty are tried, 
and some of the more guilty go free." (Hoffman in Owen ed, 2003, 281)
In many cases, there are two distinct views - external and internal - of justice 
being served. The external group is composed of outsiders -the international 
community, including hostile countries, who are mediators, aid givers, military 
forces, and peacekeepers. The internal sphere is composed of groups formerly in 
direct conflict and state-led security forces (military, police). The trial of Slobodan 
Milosevic at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) 
in The Hague, the first head of State to be tried for war crimes, and has been an 
example of the ambiguity of the justice being served.
Restorative justice, an experimental approach to satisfying a need for 
interactive, participatory justice systems, has evolved dramatically in recent years. 
Provoking a range of debates among both advocates and practitioners, its basic 
principles are to provide restitution to victims and communities, promote 
reintegration of offenders, and repair relationships between victims, offenders and 
communities in order to build a consensus of understanding and acceptance. 
(McEvoy et al, 2002, 469-70)
While applicable in peaceful societies, it has a particular relevance to post- 
conflict transitions as community-led initiatives have been designed to address 
problems of perceived "state illegitimacy" as well as inadequate and ineffective 
delivery of justice services. In post-conflict transitions restorative justice projects 
can become "a bellwether for the societal transition to peace and a key practical and 
ideological site of contest between the state and informal structures which have 
emerged over the period of conflict". (McEvoy et al, 2002, 470-72) Such issues 
have been a main focus for Northern Ireland's Republicans, particularly the IRA 
(Irish Republican Army), where restorative justice theory and practice have 
provided an alternative to paramilitary punishment violence and coercion, and for 
South Africa's ANC (African National Congress), where the truth commission 
(TRC) provided a community based justice model that was used for subsequent 
legislation such as a Child Justice Bill introduced in 2002.
While tensions between institutional and restorative justice models regarding 
trust, various forms of popular and informal justice, and the "potential of the state to 
disable deliberative democracy" remain, there is also a range of possibilities for 
cooperation. John Braithwaite, who has a broad range of applied experience 
including experience in Northern Ireland, maintains that the value of restorative 
justice is that it gives "a type of empowerment to participants that.. .is largely 
impervious to exercises of state power". (McEvoy et al, 2002, 471-2) He argues 
that top-down and bottom-up accountability is necessary and compatible based both 
on consensual UN Human Rights agreements and citizen articulation of goals 
sought from restorative justice as " top-down lists motivated by UN instruments or 
the ruminations of intellectuals are only important for supplying a provisional, 
revisable agenda for bottom-up deliberation" in setting standards of restorative
justice that address "distinctively local anxieties about injustice". (Braithwaite, 
2002, 563)
Christine Bell has noted that attitudes and approaches to justice mechanisms 
change over time and become easier to establish once initial compromises give way 
to "dominant narratives of responsibility". As the dynamics of peace processes 
move beyond the initial goal of "stopping the war,.. .common understandings of the 
causes and costs of conflict may emerge". Instead of the more limiting "piecemeal 
approach" to recovering the truth and establishing accountability, a renewed focus 
on "how much principle is needed versus what is pragmatically possible" allows a 
different set of questions to emerge. (Bell, 2003,1146-7)
How should societies move towards common goals for transitions? 
What normative content should these goals have? How is the 
transition towards these goals managed over time? At what points 
might past-focused mechanisms be useful in this process? Which 
mechanisms are useful at which time? To what extent can and should 
future possibilities be left open by mechanisms established?
(Bell, 2003, 1146-7)
Referring to the process of recovering from genocide in Rwanda, Mahmood 
Mamdani has asked, "Is a form of justice possible that is not at the same time 
victor's justice? Is a form of reconciliation possible that is not at the same time an 
absence of justice, and thus an embrace of evil?" Seeking an alternative version he 
has proposed a "survivors' justice" which includes not only surviving victims but 
"all those who continue to be blessed with life in the aftermath of a civil war". 
(Mamdani, 2001, 272-3) Where beneficiaries of a dominant group's action are 
many, as was the case with South Africa's white population,
reconciliation has to be social to be durable, which is the same 
thing as saying there can be no durable reconciliation without 
some form of social justice... .But where beneficiaries are few 
and perpetrators many, the key to reconciliation is political... 
The prime requirement of political reconciliation is neither 
criminal justice nor social justice, but political justice. It requires 
not only shifting the primary focus of reform from individuals
to institutions, but also recognizing that the key to institutional 
reform is the reform of institutions of rule. (Mamdani, 2001, 272-3)
The art of "staging" or utilizing different transitional justice mechanisms at 
different phases of the peace and reconciliation process has potential for offering 
new insights for more specific and positive support of transitions from violent 
conflict as each country's culture and individual history of conflict will influence 
and shape the process necessary for creating sustained peace. (Bell, 2003,1146-7) 
The choice of transitional justice mechanisms and procedures will differ with each 
conflict but all offer a bridge between the uncertainty and insecurity characteristic of 
an early peace process and a subsequent phase where institutions are in place and 
functioning to a degree necessary to support formation of a stable society. 
Northern Ireland prisoner releases and restorative justice
One of the greatest post-conflict challenges to the concept of justice in 
Northern Ireland was the early release of paramilitary prisoners included in the 1998 
Good Friday Agreement, seen as one of the most controversial but arguably most 
important incentives for peace. Both the IRA (Irish Republican Army) and Loyalist 
paramilitaries worked separately and together to help broker peace deals inside the 
Maze prison. From the beginning their cooperation was based on the understanding 
that conditional amnesty for all political prisoners would be made part of the Good 
Friday Agreement.
The Good Friday Agreement, unlike the previously similar but failed 1973 
Sunningdale agreement, represented an "acceptance of the political motivation of 
paramilitaries, an implicit acknowledgement of the state as a protagonist in the 
conflict, and a preference for politics over 'security'". This acknowledgement of 
political motivation behind the campaigns of paramilitary violence did not indicate 
approval or appeasement by the international community or the Irish or British
governments, but rather a pragmatic recognition by the conflicting groups, 
especially Republicans, that no side had won a clear victory. Instead, political 
justice offered an alternate avenue for achieving goals previously sought through a 
campaign of violence. (McEvoy, 1999, 1574-1575)
While both Republican and Loyalist sides agreed to cease "military activities" 
against each other, internal "policing " continued in both communities, resulting in a 
higher profile of the destabilising effect of internal punishment beatings to 
sustaining a long term peace. Restorative justice, perceived as a way of eliminating 
brutal score-settling, offered a way to link informal bottom-up paramilitary justice 
traditions to more formal state systems. Designed to allow paramilitaries in their 
terms, to "disengage responsibly" from these acts, community-based restorative 
justice projects handed dispute resolution back to the local communities where the 
problems originated. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 434-6)
This bottom-up approach to justice was particularly significant for Northern 
Ireland in addressing the Republican challenge to legitimacy of the "state" -Great 
Britain and its annexation and control of Northern Ireland since 1921- by 
acknowledging that their fight had been for a political, not criminal cause. The 
Royal Ulster Constabulary or RUC (now renamed Police Service of Northern 
Ireland or PSNI) lacked credibility and legitimacy in working class areas and their 
constant recruitment of local criminals as informers meant that local IRA 
paramilitary group took it upon themselves to carry out policing activities. (McEvoy 
et al, 2002, 536)
While in some circumstances, this form of rough justice administered by the 
IRA, as well as Loyalist paramilitaries, may have been viewed as a necessary 
alternative to the established police force, the culture of violence and intimidation
fostered by all paramilitaries has become increasingly problematic in the post- 
conflict transition (see Chapter Six).
A demonstrated willingness by both Sinn Fein (Republican, directly 
connected to the IRA) and Loyalist political parties was a precondition imposed in 
order to participate in all party peace negotiations leading to the signing of the 1998 
Peace Agreement. An exploration of "crime prevention, restorative justice, human 
rights, and humanitarian law, mediation, and non-violence" was initiated by 
activists from Republican areas in 1996, resulting in publication of the "Blue Book" 
proposing a model based on principles of restorative justice. Four pilot projects, 
known as Community Restorative Justice Ireland were launched in Republican areas 
in coordination with the Northern Ireland Association for the Care and 
Rehabilitation of Offenders (NIACRO). The Loyalist community initiated a similar 
project, the Greater Shankill Alternatives, under the guidance of the Ulster 
Volunteer Force (UVF) who had stipulated that the justice model would only be 
applied to interventions on punishments not related to internal paramilitary 
discipline, inter-paramilitary group disputes, sexual offences or sales of drugs. 
(McEvoy et al, 2002, 536-7, 539)
The Blue Book encompassed a wide range of recommendations, but in 
application on the community level, project activities have focused on victims and 
offenders, mediation, family groups, and monitoring of agreements. The system is 
begun when a "case" is referred to the local community project office. Following 
assessment by staff as to whether the matter is within their jurisdiction or to be 
referred to other community or state agencies, the problem is assigned to two-person 
teams of well trained volunteers who then attempt to mediate informally in a type of
simplified "shuttle diplomacy". Failing that, arrangements are made to conduct a 
formal mediation hearing in a neutral location. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 538)
If an agreement is reached, the local project seeks to monitor compliance 
and to intervene if an agreement needs to be renegotiated. In general,
Preliminary evaluations of these activities suggests that large group 
conferences are not exceptional, that many local disputes are long standing 
and are therefore 'thick' or relatively complex, that conflicts involving 
'anti-social' behaviour have a very significant impact on participants' 
sense of quality of local life, and most cases are resolved very quickly, 
many within a 48-hour timeframe. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 538)
While still evolving, it has been clear that that restorative justice schemes in 
all communities have proven to be sophisticated vehicles with wide ranging 
implications for peace and reconciliation processes. Key characteristics have been 
the high level of community expectation that these informal justice mechanisms 
include Republican and Loyalist "culture of consultation and partnership within 
working-class communities" and be responsive to the needs and resources of the 
area they serve. Their high visibility and the level of community interest and 
ownership in these projects at both the local and regional level has increased 
community pressure for these pilot projects to take a leadership role in introducing 
these models into additional areas. With potential for extending operations beyond 
the original parameters of providing non-violent alternatives to punishment violence 
to broader mediation activities and conflict resolution work, the demand for these 
mechanisms is so great that their capacity has been severely stretched. (McEvoy et 
al, 2002, 540)
Although requiring more than solely restorative justice mechanisms to stop 
all punishment violence, criminal activity and anti-social behaviour, Northern 
Ireland has demonstrated that,
Informalism is .. .possible. It is possible when it is based upon a 
genuine commitment to the values and practices of restorative justice;
located in politically organized and dynamic communities; well 
managed and staffed by committed volunteers; and guided by 
locally developed standards of practice which are based upon 
accepted human rights principles. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 556)
As Gusty Spence, the Commanding Officer of the UVF (Ulster Volunteer 
Force-Loyalist/Protestant) understood and articulated when addressing his fellow 
paramilitaries in Northern Ireland's Long Kesh Prison (a.k.a. the Maze) while 
calling for a universal cease-fire a full twenty years (12 July 1977) before the 1998 
Good Friday Agreement:
The political prisoners and the paramilitaries cannot be made the 
scapegoats for our society's ills because ours was a sick society 
long before the fighting men came on the scene. .. ..Before we can 
reconstruct we must have a peace with a modicum of trust in order 
to bind the wounds created by.. .three hundred years of strife, hatred, 
mistrust and oppression with no one side having a monopoly on good 
and evil. (Spence, 1977)
The positive potential of restorative justice projects lies in the fact that they are 
perceived to be fair, participatory processes by divided communities, state 
authorities, and the police, and they are providing a way to move forward in the 
peace and reconciliation process while continuing to engage politically with the 
United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland governments. Their bottom-up, top-down 
support, offer a framework for other post-conflict societies to adapt to their specific 
needs. 
Serbia and the case of Milosevic
In the case of Serbia, an externally driven quest for justice has focused on 
the trial of Slobodan Milosevic for war crimes at the Hague in exchange for 
economic assistance, a condition that President George W. Bush made explicit to 
both Serbia and the international community as the price of US post-conflict 
economic assistance. This US- and European-shared attitude was a much-discussed
and controversial issue among a majority of Serbs, including many who had voted 
against Milosevic.
During my first and subsequent visits to Serbia, between 2001 and 2002,1 
was struck by the almost universal ambiguity regarding Serb cooperation and the 
conduct of the international community in the extradition and trial of Milosevic. 
Most felt that he should be tried in Serbia for war crimes. For the majority this was 
not an endorsement of Milosevic but rather a suspicion by many that the outside
_ fli"
world was using him to demonise all Serbs. For participants in "October 5 (2000), 
a code slogan for the "revolution", the day when a large cross-section of Serbs 
stormed Parliament and defied the security forces (who in the end refused to act 
against them), the case of Milosevic was finished as he had been thrown out of 
office to form a new government and his arrest was cynically viewed as a diversion 
from the real domestic issue - recent passage of a hefty tax law. Many felt internal 
and international efforts would be more effective by helping Serbs to address 'real' 
problems, such as creating jobs that would offer a subsistence wage, thus avoiding 
alternatives of having to work either two or three legitimate jobs, or immersing 
oneself in the black market.
During this time there was recognition that the new democratic Serbia 
should apply justice in a way that would best overcome large internal political, 
economic, and social divisions. There were groups composed of pensioners, state 
employees, and others who were dependent on the previous regime for protection 
and financial benefits. A significant group of Serbs had actively resisted Milosevic 
at great personal risk by protesting the draft and enduring professional expulsion. 
The police and military were another group equally vulnerable to and representative 
of the former State regime. There were also dozens of ethnic minorities -
Montenegrins, Albanians, Hungarians, Yugoslavs, Muslims, Roma, Croats, Slovaks, 
Macedonians, Romanians, Bulgarians, Russians, Vlachs, Turks, Slovenes, and 
others who had lived together in relative peace inside Serbia (excluding Kosovo) 
throughout the war.
Ironically, in 2002, one of the major internal Serbian post conflict issues 
centred on the status of refugees. Blamed for starting the war in Croatia and Bosnia 
in the early 1990s, and in Kosovo in 1999, Serbia had an estimated 900,000 Serb 
refugees who had been expelled from their homes (700,000 from Croatia/Bosnia; 
200,000 from Kosovo), in reverse ethnic cleansing, making it host to one of the 
largest refugee populations in Europe. By refusing Yugoslav citizenship to Serbs 
who were refugees from a war that had been instigated by Serb leadership, 
Milosevic effectively denied them jobs and property rights, forcing most to survive 
in the grey economy. Their kiosks selling CDs, clothing, etc. proliferated 
throughout central areas of Belgrade.
Justification for citizenship was generally perceived by resident Serbs as 
divided between skilled and non skilled refugees. In interviews conducted in 
Subotica, a Serb city on the Hungarian border, these refugees were seen as "a 
problem of social adaptation" - one where they "have to accept and adopt rules in 
this area". They were seen as "confused", and not knowing "how to behave .. .not 
used to hearing different language and different kinds of customs". A distinction 
was made between the rural and city refugees, with the urban ones cited as 
acclimating more easily, while the rural ones were still living in local refugee camps 
with no land to till and no other adaptable skills. (Serbia interviews, April 2001: see 
Appendix)
The issue of repatriation versus local integration has become increasingly 
more visible. The New Serbia Forum (a programme for the reconstruction of 
Yugoslavia, administered by the British Association for Central & Eastern Europe) 
held post-Milosevic in December 2000, stated that
If safe return is not possible for these groups in the foreseeable future, 
many experts agree that a new democratic government should promote 
their permanent settlement in Serbia. This would require additional 
resources to provide adequate accommodation, welfare assistance, 
and job creation schemes. A new government will clearly find it 
difficult to finance these measures implying the need for EU and 
international assistance to help promote durable solutions for refugees.
(The New Serbia Forum, 2000, 64-5)
Faced with their lack of democratic experience and a bleak short term 
economic future, the initial Serb reaction in 2001 was a mixture of cynical 
resentment tempered with resignation - if the world wanted Milosevic as the price 
for economic aid, then so be it. Increased political apathy "because people in Serbia 
are deeply disillusioned with politicians of every stripe" invalidated two subsequent 
Serbian presidential elections (September 29, October 13, 2002) where 50% voter 
turnout was required. (BBC news UK ed, 12 March 2003) The assassination of 
controversial pro-Democratic reformist Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic in March 
2003, continued corruption and expansion of international mafia crime 
organisations, and continuation of the uncertain status of Kosovo have continued to 
test the country's resolve to pursue a democratic peace. 
South Africa and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
The underlying implication for the internally created 1995 South African TRC 
was that somehow making truth public would enable the country to acknowledge a 
criminal past without holding its perpetrators accountable, thus setting South Africa 
free to head for a new future without a backward glance. It was a courageous step
for a new government to take, especially as they too, would be questioned for past 
misdeeds, but its significance as a tool for reconciliation and healing was 
overestimated and misunderstood by both internal participants and external 
observers.
A major weaknesses of the TRC was its attempt to stifle rage and 
acknowledgement of the power of retributive justice. Amnesty given in exchange 
for testimony was challenged by the families of murdered Black Consciousness 
Movement leader Steve Biko, and defense lawyer Griffiths Mxenge, as denying 
their right to bring the men's killers to trial. The emotionally charged Human 
Rights Violations hearings also promoted an exclusively religious Christian view 
that "invoked notions of confession, forgiveness, sacrifice, redemption and 
liberation". They
became national rituals of 'reconciliation', forgiveness and 
truth-telling .. .which generated collective moral values and 
sought to inculcate them in all who participated, including 
those watching hearings on television each night. Like all rituals, 
they were met with a complex mixture of compliance, acceptance, 
indignation and resistance. (Wilson, 2001, 6-7)
While articulating the truth may have had a cathartic effect on the teller, South 
Africans found that truth telling on its own did not guarantee social healing and 
reconciliation. "All truth is bitter" goes the Zulu saying and Derek Summerfield, 
psychiatrist for the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture has 
asked,
impact of a truth commission in comparison with, say economic 
factors.. .[and] what happens when a sizeable section of the public 
is instinctively against the trawling of the past, as in East Germany, 
where an astonishing number of ordinary citizens were drawn into 
the security service's informer networks at some point during the 
communist era? What emerges.. .might be inflammatory and divisive 
rather than reconciling. (Summerfield, 1997, 1393)
The real value of post conflict public truth telling, both formal and informal, 
is that it may function as a kind of public forum for acknowledging the almost 
inexpressibly deep anguish of loss, giving a common platform of dignity and respect 
for the experience of all. As Eva Hoffman has pointed out,
perhaps the symbolic justice of recognition is the best we can 
achieve. For the victim, such recognition is needed for the 
restoration of basic moral coherence. For the society as a whole, 
the public disclosure and acknowledgement of what happened is 
a way of placing a metaphoric marker between the past and present.
(Hoffman in Owen ed, 2003, 286)
It is clear from subsequent events in South Africa - the failure to more equitably 
distribute economic resources, a shift from racism to classism with the rise of a 
wealthy black African elite, a significant rise in crime, an increasingly devastating 
AIDS epidemic, and the political difficulties of a post Mandela era ~ that the TRC, 
though important as one way of addressing past injustice, has not been enough on 
its own to address perceptions of fair and unfair treatment for many South Africans. 
In late 2002, many South Africans of all backgrounds recalled the TRC as a good 
way to write history but with little direct relevance to the process of reconciliation 
(see Chapters Five, Seven).
Even more telling, the 2003 South African Reconciliation Barometer, showing 
results from the second of three comprehensive national surveys tracking socio- 
political trends, noted that almost one quarter of South Africans currently "disregard 
the rule of law under circumstances where it is legislated and executed by a political 
party not of their choice" while another third "disregard it on the grounds that it is 
ineffective", making a strong case for developing a more widely accepted judicial 
system that is considered to be fair. (SA Reconciliation Barometer, 2004,10) 
Conclusion
In the process of reforming institutions during the early post-conflict period 
the impact of perceptions of fair treatment and their influence on a peace process 
should not be underestimated as a driving force behind a will to create sustainable 
peace. Understanding the importance of ways in which justice is perceived during 
this time can assist all parties in discouraging formation of a cult of victimisation 
among formerly dominant groups, thus helping to limit and prevent future 
aggression. Serbs in the former Yugoslavia, Protestants in Northern Ireland, and 
Afrikaners in South Africa, have long held an image of themselves as 
misunderstood victims, forced to defend themselves against hundreds of years of 
constructed historic injustice and persecution. (Ramet and Adamovich, 1995,101- 
As philosopher Stuart Hampshire has observed, "All modern societies are, to 
a lesser or greater degree morally mixed, with rival conceptions of justice, 
conservative and radical, flaring into open conflict and needing arbitration" as there 
is no state where there is a perfectly fair representation of "conflicting moral 
outlooks within it." (Hampshire, 1999, 38-9)
While in peaceful societies this simply means a compromise that is preferably 
smart rather than shabby, the stakes are much higher for post conflict environments 
where the buffering middle layer of civil society has often been destroyed or 
severely limited. For them this can mean the choice between achieving a 
compromise that settles conflict with emotional rhetoric within an institutional 
setting, or reverting to an all-out bloodbath on the ground.
Hoffman has observed that "public justice can only be partial and imperfect- 
a kind of metonymy for the ideal of justice".
In thinking about ethical justice, we veer between the notions of 
Forgiveness and retribution. Neither seems viable on a large scale.
It seems to me that the limits of tolerance and forgiveness are also 
imposed by a kind of recognition - the recognition of the perpetrator's 
agency, and the awful but human reality of the deeds he committed. 
But large-scale retribution is untenable as well -if only because it leads 
to widespread bitterness and the next cycle of vengeance.
(Hoffman in Owen ed, 2003, 286)
It is institutions and their rituals that hold society together as long as "they 
are successful and well established in the resolution of moral and political conflicts 
according to particular local and national conventions". Justice and fairness in 
procedures
whether in duels, sports, games, law courts, parliaments, in all 
kinds of arguments and in adversary processes in which one side 
wins and another side loses, either fairly or unfairly .. ..is how 
politics and social life go forward, at best in controlled and 
recognised conflicts, sometimes enjoyably, sometimes painfully.
(Hampshire, 1999, 35)
In a war, all have suffered, but different groups and individuals have varying 
intensity of experiences. It is the way in which fairness is perceived to be utilised 
during the process of arriving at judgements that will most affect all groups' 
willingness to continue to persevere toward a greater level of tolerance and 
sustainable peace.
Chapter Two: Formation of Post-Conflict Identity
Individual and group identities constructed during the early post-conflict 
transition are a critical interactive link between perceptions of justice as fairness and 
political processes of forgiveness and revenge. Formation of identity is a fluid and 
evolutionary process, influenced by race, religion, ethnicity, nationalism, and 
territory, with the resulting social identities manipulated for the political, economic, 
and social gain of groups and their members. In post conflict environments, these 
identities are shaped by perceptions of fairness of treatment during the process of 
arriving at distributive and legal decisions. Formed in these environments identities 
are especially sensitive and reactive to perceptions of threat to personal and group 
security. The result is a judgment of perceived fairness of access to political power 
and privilege that can contribute to shaping both an individual and group identity of 
victimisation.
Once a conflict begins, the parameters of one's identity become frozen, rigidly 
drawn and defined by enemies. During conflict, defining who one is becomes 
brutally simple and critical to survival - you are simply not whoever or whatever 
your enemy is. In circumstances where racial difference is used as the defining 
criteria, such as in South Africa, enemies are easier to visually identify. However, 
as has been illustrated in Northern Ireland, the former Yugoslavia, and other similar 
conflicts such as Rwanda, regardless of similarities shared in physical appearance, 
language, food, and lifestyle, intricate social coding laden with symbolism is used to 
define the Other.
Religious differences have often been used to obscure relationships of unequal 
power between groups in conflict. Typical of this situation is Northern Ireland,
where the problem has appeared to be a conflict over religious identities. For 
insiders, the labels of Protestant and Catholic, have always been more descriptive of 
cultural inferences than about strict adherence to religious beliefs. As Protestant 
Archbishop of Armagh, Robin Eames noted,
I myself have lost count of the times I have been confronted by 
the question 'It's all about religion - isn't it?'... The truth is that 
Northern Ireland is a religious community.. ..[but] the flags of 
convenience of religious affiliation at a census bear little resemblance 
to identifiable church involvement.
For many
everyday involvement in church life is subordinate .. .to a desire
to be identified by one or other of the main religious labels which
are comforting, traditional and have a significance greater than
religious faith alone. For many the religious definition they wish
to adopt has as much to say of what they are not as it has to do
with what they claim to be. (Robin Eames as quoted in Murray, 2000, Ch 4)
Identifying victims
One of the most contentious post-conflict issues among all groups, 
independent of dynamics in the previous conflict, is identifying who is a victim and 
who is a perpetrator. In early post conflict transitions, individuals and groups form 
political interpretations of 'winning and losing' by observing the group they 
perceive to be receiving the greatest amount of aid, especially economic, from 
external sources. Well aware of the resonating power to the international 
community, the external designation of victim and perpetrator identities are often 
used by internal groups to manipulate nai've international aid and peacekeeping 
groups in order to gain more aid, sympathy, support, and protection.
"It is not uncommon for groups in conflict (that is sharing the same history) 
both to claim victimhood and to accuse the other of victimizer". (Cairns and Roe 
eds, 2003,175) Despite the perhaps dubious palatability of a formerly dominant 
groups' claim to victimisation in the post-conflict environment, implicit or outright
designation of victims and perpetrators, and winners and losers, by the international 
community, can impede the process of peace and reconciliation.
In an early post-conflict environment, there are at least three different 
identities interacting with each other; victim, perpetrator, and observer. The victim 
can be defined as the individual/group acted against by the perpetrator who is the 
initiator and/or enactor of the grievance or crime. The role of the observer is far 
more ambiguous, usually not neutral, and involves some level of passive complicity 
with or support for vengeful, violent actions carried out on behalf of their group by 
others. There may also be an external collaborative link to the perpetrator, or an 
independent fourth perspective, from an individual, group, or country that stands to 
profit directly or indirectly by the retaliatory action. (Mikula and Wenzel, 2000, 
128-9)
As these identities are not clearly defined and open to debate, it is important 
to understand their interaction and to identify the possibility of multiple roles in 
conflict situations. While it may appear to be a simple public act of horrible deeds 
done by one group to another, there is often less visible retaliation initiated directly 
by, or on behalf of, the victimised group. In many instances, the victim has become 
perpetrator and vice verse, with passive observers influencing both.
This process of forming an identity of victimisation reflects what 
anthropologist Richard Jenkins has described as two interdependent but separate 
social interactions, "internal definition" and "external definition" that operate 
separately but interactively on an individual, group, and institutional level. While 
linked notions of individuals and groups have long been prevalent in sociological 
literature on ethnicity and race, many analyses of ethnicity, especially within social 
anthropology have "emphasized internal definition and group identification at the
expense of external definition and social categorization". In some circles this has led 
"to a mistaken belief that the process of identity is somehow an isolated internal 
process related to authority and unaffected by relationships of power". (Jenkins, 
1997, 72, 166) During early post-conflict transitions, being "categorized" as a 
victim is often perceived to be the most favourable position for external support in 
the unstable political climate of a peace process.
Groups who form a post conflict victimisation identity based on perceptions 
of being unacknowledged or neglected by the international community can become 
a danger to sustaining peaceful coexistence. This sense of collective victimisation 
directly motivates a negatively focused socio-historic construction that goes beyond 
simple commemoration to emphasise "judgements of blame and responsibility" that 
are being constantly reconstructed in response to fluctuating circumstances. (Cairns 
and Roe eds, 2003, 16) By perceiving slights against their group as justification 
for revenge, and by ignoring subsequent retaliation enacted in their name, these 
groups set the stage for constructing a one-sided version of history that helps to 
create future perpetrators.
This is of special concern as in a number of cases, an assumption of 
victimisation by a politically and/or economically dominant group that has its roots 
in earlier post-conflict transitions, has been a key factor in initiating and renewing 
conflict. Citing social-psychological reasons for intergroup conflict, Hewstone and 
Greenland have observed that
many apparently pointless conflicts become more understandable 
when viewed as, at least in part, attempts to establish, maintain, or 
defend cherished social identities. .. .Groups in conflict often differ 
in status and that changing status relations and their perceived 
legitimacy are crucial determining characteristics of intergroup 
relations. (Hewstone and Greenland, 2000, 138-9)
Political leaders have fully understood and successfully manipulated this identity in 
mobilising groups to fight. The Serbs in the former Yugoslavia, the Protestants in 
Northern Ireland, and the Afrikaners in South Africa, all constructed a siege 
mentality and identity based on a view of themselves as victims of unfair treatment 
that justified aggressive action.
Milosevic, under whose leadership nationalist propaganda and actions led to 
the violent breakup of the former Yugoslavia, reinforced Serb victim imagery 
through reminders of Croat action against the Serbs in World War II, successfully 
triggering perceptions of threat that led to aggressive action. The same imagery of 
threat by Albanians to Serbs was used as justification for the invasion of Kosovo 
(see Chapter Four). In Northern Ireland, exclusion of Catholics by Protestants was 
portrayed as preserving a morally superior and upstanding English work ethic, 
under threat by the unmotivated Catholic minority within the province, and the 
larger Catholic population to the south in the Republic (see Chapter Three). In 
South Africa, a beleaguered Afrikaner victim/survivor identity, constructed after a 
humiliating defeat and internment by the English in the Anglo-Boer War of 1899- 
1902, was used as justification for apartheid in the twentieth century (see Chapter 
Five).
The assumption of universal victim-hood implying that blame and 
distribution of post-conflict resources should be equitable among all groups has 
been challenged. Marie Smyth, director of The Cost of the Troubles Study in 
Northern Ireland, has maintained that "we cannot say we are all victims, because to 
do so implies that we have all had equally difficult experiences. .. ..At a moral level, 
it is incorrect to lay claim to victim-hood on the basis of paltry experiences of the 
Troubles, in comparison to the immense suffering of others." She protested this
approach in that it masks "the way in which damage and loss has been concentrated 
in certain geographical areas, communities, occupational groups, age groups, 
genders". (Hamber, 1999, 34, 38, 49)
During a January 2001 Belgrade interview, shortly after Milosevic had been 
voted/forced out of power, a group of Serb students, of wide ranging backgrounds 
and ages, gave their opinions on changing what they alluded to as a victimised Serb 
self-image. "It's time for changes here... reality makes Serbs think about 
themselves differently". We are "strong and tough", but "too prone to being self 
absorbed". (Serbia Interviews, January 2001: see Appendix) Bratislav Grubacic, a 
journalist who started up his own English language news service, V.I.P. Daily News 
Service, after having been banned by Milosevic, maintained that an open process 
was needed. The "basic elements of Serb nationalism need to be examined and 
politics adjusted to the modern world". (Serbia Interviews, January 2001: see 
Appendix)
Acknowledging the suffering and loss of all sides in a conflict may be more 
important to internal reconciliation than assigning blame (see Chapter One, Three, 
Eight) as it is clear that a victimisation identity contributes to feelings of bitterness 
and pessimism, both of which are detrimental to long term political and social 
reconciliation. As Mahmood Mamdani has observed, "The question of political 
justice goes beyond holding the perpetrators .. .accountable. Ultimately, it is about 
the definition of political identities." (Mamdani, 2001, 274) 
Transitional identity of the formerly dominant group
As almost all formerly dominant groups have come to learn, defending the 
barricades requires vastly different mindsets and strategies than those needed to 
assault them. Preserving and defending a way of life requires increased rigidity and
inflexibility in an attempt to stave off change. In each case study, and in 
observation of other post conflict situations, the formerly dominant group has been 
the one most prone to fragmentation, lack of cohesion, and inter-group violence.
On the other hand, storming the political barricades requires focused 
creativity, flexibility, cunning, and an intimate knowledge of your opponent. As a 
result, when a peace agreement is reached the formerly subordinate group usually 
demonstrates a focused purpose and cohesion cemented through struggle, while it 
becomes equally apparent that the solidarity of the formerly dominant group was 
due less to common convictions than access to privilege. Perceived internationally 
as losers, nevertheless it is the formerly dominant group who is making one of the 
most difficult post-conflict transitions by being forced to relinquish and/or share 
political power. Whatever the actions of this group have been in the past, the newly 
dominant group, despite personal feelings, pragmatically understands that these 
concerns must be openly acknowledged as there can be no sustained peace without 
their cooperation.
Prior to the 1998 Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland, the Protestant 
identity was primarily linked to dominant cultural status and power. Development 
of a Protestant/Unionist siege mentality took place during "fifty years of.. .the 
unionist 'monolith' ", from 1921 until "the end of the Unionist government in 1972 
had removed the main institutional focus of political unity for Ulster Protestants. 
This both consolidated and encouraged unionism's organisational and political 
fragmentation". A semi-mythical identity known as " 'the unionist family' " began 
to emerge which implied that, despite possible "party competition, differences of 
personal ambition and tactical disagreements between them", unionists shared a
common goal that transcended these differences, resounding in a "call for unionist 
(family) unity" during a crisis. (Cox et al, 2000, 62)
This reaffirmed the existence of Northern Ireland, or Ulster, seen as the 
"historic homeland of Northern Protestants", existing as a "separate and distinctive 
society because the Protestant community willed it so and was willing to make the 
ultimate sacrifice to achieve and defend it". This view supported a Protestant 
identity that saw themselves as "hard workers, straight in their business dealings", 
respectful of the law and state institutions which had caused them to be treated well 
by security forces, honest, loyal, "deserving of trust and esteem" which had given 
them the "right to take offence at symbols and aspirations different from their own." 
(Ruane and Todd, 1998, 194, 200)
Prior to partition of Ireland and despite regional differences between North 
and South, Irish Catholics shared a cohesive community identity based on a form of 
Catholicism that integrated "cultural and political nationalism" and "virtually all 
Catholics into a single national community". After separation of the two regions in 
1922, the Catholics remaining in Northern Ireland were simply Catholic residents in 
a territory which Northern Protestants had staked out as their own. (Ruane and 
Todd, 1998, 51)
Disintegration of the Unionist side in Northern Ireland has dramatically 
increased since the 1998 Agreement with the emergence of "so-called fringe 
loyalist parties" such as the Progressive Unionist Party (close to the Ulster 
Volunteer Force) and the Ulster Democratic Party (close to the Ulster Defence 
Association) firmly establishing themselves. Other mainstream Unionist parties 
have constantly reformed themselves as "Robert McCartney's United Kingdom 
Unionist Party (UKUP) emerged explicitly" (Cox et al, 2000, 63) to challenge
David Trimble's policy and then split in 1999. Four previous party members who 
had sat in the Assembly founded the Northern Ireland Unionist Party. In 1998, four 
explicitly anti-Trimble Unionists were elected to the Assembly and the Ulster 
Unionist Party (UUP) has continued to divide.
Just prior to the 1994 ceasefires, many Protestants had complained of being 
"alienated, not from the British connection, but from the British administration", the 
feeling being that the Westminster government had never bothered to understand 
feelings of Protestants, listening only to the Catholics who "seemed to have a ready 
audience". (Dunn and Morgan, 1995, 178)
One Protestant Unionist in Northern Ireland expressed the beleaguered 
feelings of many others when he stated that
History has shown us as Protestants, that on this island there is no 
place here for us, unless we acquiesce and lie down.. .and say 
nothing about our culture and don't express it in any visible way 
that shames anyone or offends anyone. Yet there is much in the 
other culture [Catholic/ republican] that offends Protestantism.
(Cochrane and Dunn, 1999,22)
Protestant alienation has grown and in November 2003, elections that had been 
previously postponed three times resulted in the anti-Agreement right wing 
fundamentalist lan Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), squaring off with 
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, as the two leading parties. As of August 
2004, both parties in a process reminiscent of negotiating the 1998 Agreement, were 
indirectly talking to each other through the Dublin based Irish Times in preparation 
for formal talks to be held in September at Stormont, then Leeds Castle at Kent. 
While this situation has slowed down the devolution process, it is dealing with the 
hard realities of political reconciliation, and in the long term may clarify many of 
the problems that have prevented permanent reinstatement of the Northern Ireland
Assembly. (BBC News, Saturday 21 August 2004) This is an unfolding story and a 
number of related events have taken place since this time (see Introduction). Since 
1998, Northern Ireland has been vacillating between two types of stalled peace 
processes described by Halliday - one where unexpected delays and problems are 
encountered, and the other in an outright stalemate (see Introduction).
But as Mahmood Mamdani has maintained, negotiating cultural identity as 
"self-identification" such as is the case in Northern Ireland is distinct from 
legal/political identities classified by the state. While in many societies cultural 
identity is consensual, voluntary, and open to multiple variations, "all post- 
modernist talk of hybridity and multiple identities belongs to the domain of culture 
.. .when law imposes a cultural difference, the difference becomes reified. 
Prevented from changing, it becomes frozen". (Mamdani, 2001,274) Once an 
identity is legalized, there is no longer a choice of who and what you are, and 
"cultural identity is drawn into the domain of politics and becomes political". 
(Pantich and Leys, 2002,140)
There are few places in the world where individual and group identity have 
been so starkly defined as in apartheid South Africa. Individuals were given identity 
cards which legally and arbitrarily defined their racial group - the white minority 
and those closest to them being the most privileged and who in turn, determined 
access to jobs, income, and standard of living for all other groups. In the 1950 
Population Registration Act racial categories were defined as white, coloured, 
Native. Native was changed to Bantu in 1951 and again to Black in 1978. However, 
Indian was considered to be a racial category. They have now been officially 
included in what is referred to as population or ethnic groups - this last usually 
meaning African Xhosa or Zulu - and are referred to as the four main groups;
African, white, Coloured, and South Africans of Asian origin (Indian). (Gibson and 
Gouws, 2003, 36-7)
The African majority, known by Europeans as native, Bantu, or Black, are 
descended from the Iron Age farmers and were among the earliest immigrants to 
South Africa. The whites of South Africa, formerly called Europeans, are 
descendents of Dutch, German, French (Huguenots who fled France due to religious 
persecution), English, and other European and Jewish settlers. Colonisation by the 
British instilled English as the major spoken language. The Coloured category was a 
mixed race classification and referred to the children of mixed white, Khoi-Khoi 
(aka 'Hottentots'), the San (aka 'Bushmen'), slaves from Malagasy and Southeast 
Asia (Malaysia), and Africans.
The Asian/Indian population came to work as indentured labourers in the 
sugar plantations in Natal in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, 
originating from different regions on the Indian subcontinent with differing 
religious beliefs and languages, and were generally known as Indians. (Gibson and 
Gouws, 2003, 36-7)
Like the Protestants of Northern Ireland, the formerly dominant white 
minority, primarily Afrikaners, Euro-Afrikaans speakers, English speaking settlers 
and their descendants, have experienced the greatest sense of loss, confusion and 
lack of consolidation. English and Afrikaners had bitterly opposed each other in the 
Boer War, fought in 1899-1902, which the English won, only to later cede political 
power to the Afrikaners. An Afrikaner victim/survivor identity constructed on the 
ashes of defeat by the English in the Anglo-Boer of 1899-1902, and reinforced by 
life in their concentration camps, was later used as a defensive weapon to justify the 
construction of apartheid. (Goodwin and Schiff, 1995,187-89) While neither group
liked or got along with each other (one of the main sources of enmity was the deaths 
of 20,000 Boer women and children in British concentration camps) they both 
actively and passively cooperated in a policy of segregation that led to apartheid 
legislation.
On the morning of my arrival for fieldwork in late October 2002, Soweto, the 
Black African suburb of Johannesburg, was bombed by a previously unknown 
rightwing group calling themselves Warriors of the Boer Nation. It was an event 
that shocked the country and reawakened discussions about how far the country had 
actually distanced itself from the past. As one female Afrikaner observed "the right 
wing has not accommodated" to the new South Africa. They have the "lunatic idea 
they can rule the country again.. .but they have the power to cause racial 
polarization and are very good at it. .. .My father's generation just doesn't get it. 
.. .and younger white Afrikaner males are resentful about affirmative action... afraid 
they won't find jobs". (SA Interviews 2002, Gouws: see Appendix)
In post apartheid South Africa, many English speaking whites have tried to 
disassociate themselves from the privilege of the former regime. They have 
portrayed themselves as passive victim/beneficiaries of apartheid legislation, 
associating themselves with the 'neutrality' of England, rather than acknowledging 
their complicity in perpetuating apartheid. In a Cape Times editorial column (25 
November 2002), "Learning To Let Go of Privilege, Whites still battling to find 
their place in Africa" white researcher, Melissa Steyn, described the anger, 
bitterness, and confusion of the formerly dominant white group.
The continuities in our racialised identities are still very strong, 
we still fit the world onto a template of "us" and "them". For 
white South Africans, the ideological "other" (and this is of course 
a generalisation) is the African National Congress/ Congress of 
South African Trade Unions/South African Communist Party 
alliance, which represents a challenge to the ways in which the
old society was organised to privilege 'white' interests.
...A secondary 'not-us' consistfs] of members of the 'other' white 
group. I say this because there is still quite a strong tendency for 
English speakers to identify racism with Afrikaners, and for Afrikaners 
to see English whites as unsympathetic to their concerns.
For English-speaking South Africans the in group, 'us', has an 
ideological epicentre outside the country, wherever European 
whiteness is seen to be secure and politically and socially upheld. 
White Afrikaans-speaking South Africans seem to be in difficulty 
defining who exactly 'us' is -is it white Afrikaners, Afrikaans 
speakers (mainly white and coloured), or Afrikaans and English 
speakers who are anti-ANC? (Steyn, 2002)
Shortly after the Soweto bombing, the Group of 63, a lobbying organisation 
composed of Afrikaner intellectuals called on President Thabo Mbeki "to address 
the Afrikaner people and acknowledge their minority interest and protect the 
Afrikaans language". Claiming that Afrikaners were not satisfied with the present 
situation, and the ways in which the Afrikaans language was being eliminated from 
universities and the civil services, they warned that while until now Afrikaners had 
followed the path of least resistance by emigrating or "seeking the apparent 
protection afforded by their private world" they described the Soweto bombings as 
the "most serious manifestation of Afrikaner alienation yet". Declaring concerns 
"that increasing disaffection and alienation among Afrikaners may lead to further 
violence and instability" they stated that while the group didn't condone the 
bombings they could "understand why certain people will hit back". (Deane, 2002)
Suspended between the privilege of the whites and the subjugation of the 
black Africans, the classification of Coloured, which during apartheid included 
Asians, was the most ambiguous and subjective racial interpretation. Racial origin 
was determined by the father - and categorised as African, if the father was the 
same, but Coloured, if the father was white. However, this was also dependent on 
community acceptance of skin colour and physical features which often led to a
situation where "mixed race families were split up due to the hues of their skin, 
causing immense suffering". (Gibson and Gouws, 2003, 37)
The Coloured identity has continued to be one of the most hotly debated 
political identity issues in the "new" South Africa. Many have been called "Brown 
Afrikaners", because a significant number share language and cultural affinity with 
white Afrikaners. Following the bomb in Soweto, two Black Africans authored an 
editorial article published in Cape Town (November 2002), where the largest 
Coloured population in South Africa resides, titled "Caught Between Two Worlds, 
the twisted politics of colour".
When will the so-called coloured community of the Western Cape 
transcend their sense of marginality in their relationships between 
Africans and the whites? ..[Their] existential and political experience 
is one of being caught and sandwiched between two worlds, and 
being closer to the white oppressors in terms of cultural identification.
.. .We argue that the coloured community would be much better 
served politically - and would help us to alleviate the problems of 
discrimination that we as African people experience in the Western 
Cape- by an identity which emphasizes the truth and fact of their 
blackness and Africanness in spite of minor cultural and social 
distances they may feel from us Africans. (Mgobozi and Mavata, 2002)
Their words incited a passionate response that went on for days. "Coloureds 
don't need to be 'liberated' from their culture" ran the Opinion page headline.
The coloureds speak languages (English and Afrikaans) which 
are historically European, follow European or Eastern-based 
religions, and have a proud and long-standing culture which is 
fundamentally different in history and belief systems from the 
historically tribal-based culture of black Africans.
The mind of the coloured is a complex one. Some see themselves 
as black, others as coloured, while there are those who do not know 
and view themselves as 'so-called coloured'.. ..Coloureds, I think 
do not have a very strong group consciousness. This helps us to 
fit in anywhere. We are true internationalists. The coloureds 
currently feel left out of the new South Africa, like we did in 
the old. We are a critical people who are harsh on ourselves, 
and so we will be harsh on others. That is our nature.
(Cape Times, 2002, Opinion Letters)
One Coloured Cape Town resident told me, "White people were seduced by 
white privilege", but the "Coloureds were seduced by coloured privilege". They 
"spoke Afrikaans, Afrikaner identity freed them from the British imperialists, and 
Afrikaner identity gave them an African identity". (SA Interviews, 2002, Kolbe: see 
Appendix)
He described the "officially created coloured suburb" of Grassy Park, where 
in the 'new' South Africa, the current inhabitants have found more in common with 
Afrikaners than with the new African National Congress (ANC). These were the 
same people who had planted flowers in the Kirstenbosch gardens, a famous 
botanical area in Rondebosch, a leafy upper middle class university suburb of Cape 
Town, and had been forcibly removed from the adjacent village of Protea. Despite 
their history, they were strongly anti-ANC and had "voted for the new nationalist 
party which now includes coloured people. ...They are Dutch Reformed ... 'brown 
Afrikaner nationalism' - [and] hate black people, hate the British .. ..and like their 
white Afrikaner brethren they feel the threat of blacks". (SA Interviews, 2002, 
Kolbe: see Appendix)
In their work on identity and intolerance in South Africa, Gibson and Gouws 
found that "intolerance will be most commonplace among those more firmly 
attached to their own group" and that such intolerance "typically flows from 
perceptions that groups are threatening. (Gibson and Gouws, 2003, 87, 76) This 
perception of threat to human security -physical, political, economic, and social - by 
one group toward another, is an important link in understanding how victimisation 
identities are shaped, and the ways in which they influence the processes of 
forgiveness and revenge which in turn impact peace and reconciliation during early 
post-conflict transitions.
Conclusion
The process of post-conflict identity formation emerges in the earliest stages 
of a peace process and can be seen as an inevitable consequence of the post conflict 
survival experience. While in some cases, violent acts may have limited impact on 
certain segments of society, there is evidence that indirectly affected populations 
nurture the same strength of feelings as those who have been directly affected by the 
previous violence. This feeling extends to factual or perceived, direct or indirect 
political, economic, and cultural victimization of both individuals and groups, (see 
the section on country backgrounds on Northern Ireland, Serbia, South Africa: 
Chapters Three, Four, Five)
The heightened fear in early post conflict environments reinforces the 
importance of the link between perceptions of fair treatment, formation of identity, 
and actions shaped by political forgiveness and revenge. "How people reason about 
justice" and the links they forge between "identity salience and conceptions of 
fairness" relies on how they reason about fairness. "One needs to know whether 
they are taking the perspective of themselves as individuals or of morally inclusive 
entities" and "group-level concerns about fairness remain a very important area of 
inquiry". (Skitka, 2003, 294) The process of forming a reasoned sense of justice, 
informed by perceptions of fairness, does not appear to differ among leaders, 
mobilizers, or followers. The difference between these subgroups appears to relate 
more to the varying levels of acquiring political power and access to resources, 
rather than differing in the process of forming perceptions of justice or post-conflict 
identities. In other words, while as individuals and groups elites on differing sides 
of a conflict will identify more with each other in matters of class and power, they 
will not differ from the non-elite of their own group in the way that they process
perceptions of justice and formation of post-conflict identities (for a discussion on 
the ways this can affect post-conflict violence, see Chapter Six).
In the past too little consideration has been given by the international 
community to the potentially negative effect that formation of a victim-centred post- 
conflict identity will have on political issues during a peace and reconciliation 
process. This is especially true when distribution of aid money and allocation of 
security operations are at stake. In all case studies where fieldwork was conducted, 
there were consistent references made by both internal populations and aid workers 
regarding perceptions of biased and judgmental treatment by international 
interveners toward designated 'victims'.
In Northern Ireland it was the preponderance of aid money disbursed through 
formation of community NGOs given to former Republicans, while equally 
impoverished Protestants who were serious about pursuing a peace process were 
ignored. In Serbia, subcategories of "good" Serbs - those perceived by the 
international community to have been fighting Milosevic, either by leaving the 
country or from inside, were seen to be given good jobs and nice cars to drive. 
There was also strong resentment toward the international community's politics and 
finances of the Kosovo situation as many Serbs, as well as Albanians, had been 
forcibly removed. In South Africa, poor Afrikaners and Coloureds bore great 
enmity toward black Africans for the amount of assistance given by the international 
community. (This was observed during all time spent in Belfast, N.I., 2000 onward; 
in Belgrade, Serbia in 2001, 2002; and South Africa, end of 2002.)
This is not to imply that there are not genuine victims, but the international 
community needs to understand that the level and type of their suffering is not 
assigned to one ethnic group only but varies according to geographic location and
socio-economic class and is strongly influenced by these multiple experiences. In 
higher income, middle, and upper class areas relatively unaffected by the fighting, 
and among individuals who have not lived in the poorest battle-worn areas, there is 
relief often tinged by guilt at having been relatively unaffected by the conflict. 
These individuals and groups often want to put the past quickly behind and move on 
to the future. (This was observed during 2000 interviews in Belfast, N.I., and during 
interviews in Belgrade, Serbia in 2001 and 2002: See Appendix)
By beginning to distribute aid and protection more equitably through use of 
more sophisticated strategies (see Chapter Eight) rather than assigning roles of 
victim and perpetrator, post-conflict populations will perceive that all sides who 
share similar problems are being treated fairly and in turn will be more likely to 
cooperate with former enemies. It is through these perceptions of fair treatment that 
former predators can begin to construct an identity that accommodates and promotes 
peace and cooperation, allowing them to envisage themselves as equal participants 
in new institutions, rather than as victims. As Richard Jenkins has noted external 
interveners need to acquire a better understanding about the way individuals and 
groups interact to develop identity.
Unless we can construct an understanding of ethnicity which 
addresses all of ethnicity's facets and manifestations - from the 
celebratory communality of belonging to the final awful moment 
of genocide- we will have failed not only ourselves, but also the 
people about whom we write. .. .The collective cannot be 'real' 
without the individual. .. .Any social identity - and ethnicity and 
its allotropes are not exceptions- must mean something to 
individuals before it can be said to 'exist' in the social world.
(Jenkins, 1997, 73, 166)
Those who have lost the most and fought the hardest can often be slow to 
embrace change but when this group commits to peace they can be more 
determinedly resolute than other less conflict-affected groups in seeking a solution.
(These views were expressed in 2000 by interface community groups living on both 
sides of the peace lines in West Belfast, N.I.)
The process of re-negotiating identity from one of violent conflict into one of 
peaceful coexistence demands an acceptance of profound changes in individual and 
group relationships in the newly created nation. Transformation into a post conflict 
identity must supersede and make its peace with the previously established and 
conflictual political, economic, legal identities. In an early post conflict 
environment this construction of identity, and the ways in which it is influenced by 
the international community, can be a vital link to the difference between internal 
support for a sustained peace or renewed war.
SECTION II: COUNTRY BACKGROUNDS
Chapter Three: Northern Ireland
If there has been one thing the 1990s has shown us, it is that Northern 
Ireland's internal conflict, euphemistically known as "The Troubles", was not a 
unique event but instead the harbinger of the future as a wide range of countries 
disintegrated into civil war. Long been assumed to be an intractable situation, it 
inspired political writer, John Whyte to sardonically call it the "no-hope analysis". 
(Whyte, 1990, 234) Whyte also cited the pessimism of political analysts such as 
Richard Rose who in 1971 stated "no solution is immediately practicable" and again 
in 1976, "many talk about a solution to Ulster's political problem but few are 
prepared to say what the problem is.. ..the problem is there is not a solution". (Rose 
cited in Whyte, 1990, 234) From the late 1960s until the early 1990s, the situation 
in Northern Ireland was generally seen as "a place apart, its conflict the result of 
some unique pathology". (McGarry, 2001, 1)
This attitude began to be challenged in late 1980s and early 1990s. Whyte 
maintained that "to say that there is no solution is the most pessimistic of 
conclusions, not to be adopted till every other way forward has been conclusively 
blocked off. (Whyte, 1990, 235) In 1990, John McGarry and Brendan O'Leary 
took a stronger stance stating, "we want to counter one facile, thought-stopping, and 
pessimistic article of faith which has come to dominate academic, administrative 
and intelligent journalistic commentary on Northern Ireland ... the notion that there 
is no solution to the conflict". (McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 354)
In the early 21 st century, after over thirty years of civil war, Northern 
Ireland, arguably one of the most difficult and certainly among the most bitter peace 
processes in the world, has managed to hang onto its determination to work its way
permanently out of war. A geographically small province of the United Kingdom 
it is hard for all sides to avoid past and present enemies, but if there is one lesson to 
be learned from the agonizing, often violent Northern Ireland peace process, it is 
that achieving the type of cooperation that is necessary for permanent reconciliation 
depends fully on the courage and determination of all participants. 
Background
Northern Ireland was created by the British government in the Ireland Act of 
1920. It partitioned the island into the two regions, one in the south as the newly 
independent Irish Free State (becoming the Republic of Ireland in 1949) with a 
Catholic majority consisting of 26 counties, and the other, a northern United 
Kingdom province (Northern Ireland) that was made up of six counties in north-east 
Ireland with a Protestant majority. As with many contemporary "intractable" 
conflicts, history and its interpretation played a major role during the conflict and 
post-conflict narrative. According to historian A.T.Q. Stewart, the "Ulster 
Question" is widely believed to have begun in 1609 with the creation of the 
Plantation of Ulster. This happened shortly after the death of Queen Elizabeth I, 
when Hugh O'Neill surrendered to Mountjoy, her deputy, on 30 March 1603, thus 
allowing "Ulster, the heart of O'Neill's territory" to "at last lay open to English 
supremacy". (Stewart, 1997, 21-2)
In 1605 Lord Deputy Sir Arthur Chichester had proposed a plantation 
scheme by assigning English and Scots to settle in specific areas to strengthen royal 
influence, but it was to be done in a way "in which the new settlers were to obtain 
land without dispossessing the Irish" and they were instructed to allow the Irish to 
take as much land as they could develop before the influx of English and Scots. A 
small, unexpected, and quickly crushed rebellion led by Sir Cahir O'Doherty of
mishowen that resulted in the capture and sacking of Derry in 1608 ended official 
support for Chichester's proposal for fair treatment of Irish landowners. By 1609 
only small areas of each county were set aside for "deserving" natives, with the 
remainder, excepting the land granted to the Church, to be settled by the English and 
Scottish. (Stewart, 1997, 22-3)
This resulted in a three tiered system of land re-grants of whom the most 
important were the category of "undertakers" who were given large areas to be held 
for the Crown. They agreed to allow settlement of the Protestant English and 
'"inland Scottish farmers, husband-men, artificers and cottagers" and were to 
establish villages, build fortified farmhouses, and keep arms to defend the 
settlements. The second group of "servitors" had less favourable terms for 
landownership but, unlike the first group, were allowed to have Irish tenants. The 
Irish proprietors, who formed the least favoured group, were also allowed Irish 
tenants, but paid high rents on their estates while still bound to the same defence 
obligations as the undertakers. It was during this time that the town of Derry was 
renamed Londonderry, a point of contention throughout the 20th century, becoming 
known as Londonderry/Deny with the Catholic and republican population of 
Northern Ireland and the Republic generally refusing to call it other than its first 
name. (Stewart, 1997, 23)
Northern Ireland's modern political and economic problems can be traced to 
these sixteenth and seventeenth centuries when an "internally conflictual system of 
relationships" linking Britain and Ireland emerged (Ruane and Todd, 1998,16) 
during which "the relationship between Ireland and England over the centuries, 
fortunately or otherwise, failed to culminate in the successful integration of the Irish 
into the British political and social system." (de Breadun, 2001,1) It was during
this time that "Ireland's mode of integration into the English/British 
state.. .produced a system of relationships which ensured British control over 
Ireland, privileged Protestants, and subordinated and marginalised Catholics." 
(Ruane and Todd, 1998, 48)
By 1641 Protestants owned 41 % of the land and held a majority of the seats in 
both houses of Irish parliament. Anglicanism had become the established religion of 
the dominant group of newcomers, English the official language, the Catholicism of 
the Old-English and Gaelic-Irish population was in demise and, "the political and 
economic base of a self-confident Gaelic culture had been destroyed". The new 
order, established by coercion, "rested on a narrow and insecure base - on the 
control of a settler minority whose economic and political power depended on the 
legal and social exclusion of the majority and continued British support". (Ruane 
and Todd, 1998,20-23)
Subsequently, two Anglo-Irish religious minorities developed with widely 
different experiences. After 1690, the minority Anglican Protestant population was a 
privileged elite who enjoyed a monopoly of political power and who thought of 
themselves as an Irish Protestant nation. But this version of "Protestant 
Ascendancy" was challenged by nationalist Protestants in eastern Ulster who "in 
spite of being a colonial population .. .considered themselves distinctly Irish", and 
who "within the space of a century .. .enunciated and pressed on the home 
government a completely articulated Irish nationalism" which was taken over by the 
Catholic nationalism of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. (Stewart, 1997, 162)
Persistent demands for independence, originally initiated in 1791 by the 
Society of United Irishmen, the forerunner of the modern republican movement led
by its Protestant radical founder, Theobald Wolfe Tone, continued with "regular 
outbreaks of armed revolt" for the next two hundred years, (de Breadun, 2001, 1)
Protestant Unionism in its contemporary form did not take shape until the first 
half of the twentieth century when it became clear that Protestants were becoming a 
political minority.
In Ulster .. .this basic pattern was complicated .. ..by a 
number of cross-currents. If the Presbyterians ceased to 
be nationalists, they did not cease to be liberals, and they 
instinctively chose the opposite side politically from the 
Tories of the Established Church. Although conservative 
Presbyterians and Anglicans grew closer together, especially 
after Catholic emancipation, Liberalism (with a capital L) 
was still very strong in Ulster until 1886. (de Breadun, 2001, 163)
Gladstone's introduction of the first Home Rule Bill for Ireland to Parliament 
in 1886 set the stage for the modern Ulster question. The Ulster Catholic population 
embraced it while the Ulster Protestants unanimously resisted. From 1886 until 
1920 the Ulster Protestants considered themselves under threat and, as one historian 
asserted, it was "the simple determination of Protestants in north-east Ireland not to 
become a minority in a Catholic Ireland" that seemed to make partition an 
inevitability. (Stewart, 1997, 162)
Following "wider structural transformations", Catholic demands for change 
were resisted by the intimidated Protestants. This "balance of coercive power 
between the British state and Irish Protestants on one hand and Irish Catholics on 
the other" (Ruane et al, 1996, 48) led to "regular outbreaks of armed revolt" that 
contributed to the eventual partition of Ireland in 1921. (de Breadun, 2001,1)
The Easter Rising of April 1916, an insurrection of Irish rebels against the 
British in Dublin, lasted one week and was crushed by the British. "The execution 
of the leaders of the Rising and an ill-judged proposal to introduce conscription" 
served to sharply increase nationalist militancy between 1917 and 1918 resulting in
the reorganisation of the Volunteer movement, now known as the Irish Republican 
Army, and of Sinn Fein which became the mouthpiece of radical nationalist views. 
"In an effort to stem the activities of the IRA the government introduced a number 
of specially-recruited and ruthlessly aggressive units into Ireland, most notoriously 
the so-called 'Black and Tans'", but the actions of these units seemed to have had a 
catalytic effect on the opposition, eventually leading to a truce and partition in 1921. 
(Duffy, 2000, 114)
This set up an independent Irish Free State with twenty six counties of the 
original thirty two, and created the United Kingdom province of Northern Ireland 
with the remaining six counties; Antrim, Armagh, Derry, Down, Fermanagh, and 
Tyrone. This action mutually reinforced and interlocked in the North "a set of 
socio-cultural and ideological differences; a structure of dominance, dependence 
and inequality; and a tendency towards communal polarisation". (Ruane and Todd, 
1998,48) 
The Troubles
By the late 1960s there was little doubt that trouble between the Protestant 
majority and the Catholic minority that had long been seething beneath the 
province's post-partition surface was ready to explode into violence. Sparked by a 
1968 civil rights demonstration by Catholics in Derry/Londonderry, events passed 
the point of no return when on 12 August 1969 the Apprentice Boys of Derry "one 
of the Protestant "loyal orders" commemorating the '"no surrender'" action of 
thirteen Protestant apprentice boys who had slammed the gates of Derry on the 
Catholic army of King James II thus beginning a siege of the city from December 
1688, until August 1689, conducted an ill advised march in Derry. (Elliott and 
Flackes, 1999, 168) Having ignored the request by the government to cancel their
march in such a tense atmosphere, the Apprentice Boys and the Orange Order (the 
largest Protestant organisation in N.I., formed in 1795 in County Armagh to 
celebrate the victory of Protestant King William of Orange over the Catholic forces 
of King James at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690), paraded their bands and marchers 
through the city centre igniting the predicted Catholic riots.
At the same time Loyalists attacks on the Catholic working-class areas in 
West Belfast "quickly assumed the proportions of a pogrom", (de Breadun, 2001, 
2) "Residents left in anticipation of impending violence or were directly forced out 
after threats or actual violence. Overcrowding and housing shortages in one area 
due to incoming populations also precipitated the reactive expulsion of ethnic 
others." (Feldman, 1991, 23) Westminster had "not allowed for the eventuality, 
indeed inevitability, of ordinary Catholics being shot at and burnt out of their homes 
on a large scale. It was perhaps the first example of 'ethnic cleansing' in Western 
Europe since the Second World War." (de Breadun, 2001, 3)
The British government, responding to reaction from both Northern Ireland 
and the international community, and realising that events were spiraling beyond the 
control and capability of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), the province's 
police force, ordered in British troops. They were in the streets of 
Deny/Londonderry by 14 August 1969, and had completed construction of a Peace 
Line in West Belfast by 10 September.
At first hailed as saviours by the Catholic communities, this situation 
changed dramatically with the Falls Road curfew in July 1970. After soldiers 
discovered an IRA arms cache during a house search in the lower Falls Road, an 
angry crowd formed, and when soldiers called for reinforcements, a full riot 
developed. There was shooting between the army and IRA gunmen and locals who
"threw petrol bombs, nail bombs, and grenades". The army imposed a two day 
curfew while they conducted door-to-door searches and recovered more weapons. 
"While this may have been regarded as a success from a purely military perspective, 
politically it represented a turning point in the relationship between the army and the 
nationalists, convincing many in the Catholic population that the army had adopted 
an adversarial attitude towards them." (McKittrick et al, 1999, 53) By the time 
Bloody Sunday occurred, when thirteen unarmed Catholic civilian civil rights 
marchers were shot dead by British paratroopers on 30 January 1972, the conflict 
had begun in earnest. Bombs began exploding with numbers of deaths mounting 
among both the civilian population and security forces.
The devolved Northern Ireland parliament, established in 1921, came under 
intense scrutiny and pressure. As events escalated, the Protestant dominated 
parliament, seen as contributing to the problem by consistently demonstrating its 
inability and lack of desire to accommodate or integrate Catholics into an equitable 
system, was suspended by the British Government in March 1972. For the first time 
in its existence, Northern Ireland was under direct rule from London. With the 
exception of a brief power sharing interlude in the Northern Ireland Assembly under 
the terms of The Sunningdale Agreement (December 1973) between January to May 
1974, direct rule was reinstated by the Northern Ireland Act of 1974, "which made 
temporary provision for the government of N.I. by the Secretary of State and his 
ministerial team, subject to annual renewal". (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 607-9) It 
was not until 1999, that the Northern Ireland Assembly became independent once 
again, following the power-sharing agreement outlined in the Belfast Agreement, 
better known as the Good Friday Agreement of 10 April 1998.
Sources of conflict
To the uninitiated, Northern Ireland's source of conflict has appeared to 
focus on religious differences, but the complexity of experience precludes so simple 
an explanation. Some of the origins of the recent Troubles can be traced to the 
deteriorating economy and decline of traditional industries in the 1960s. Attempts 
at political reform encouraged Catholic demands for equal treatment in Northern 
Ireland that resulted in the formation of the civil rights movement. A Protestant 
backlash that "blamed reform for the ending of Catholic acquiescence in their 
subordination" included "hard-line Loyalists" whose fears were "aroused by the 
social and economic trends of the period, particularly the erosion of residential 
segregation between communities" and who "regarded the civil rights movement as 
a plot to bring about a united Ireland". (Guelke, 1995, 107)
McGarry and O'Leary have maintained that Northern Ireland has been the 
site of an "ethno-national conflict", a
systematic quarrel between political organizations of two 
communities who want their state .. .or who want what they 
perceive as their state to protect their nation. .. .Explosive 
national conflicts arise between politically mobilized ethnic 
communities. Territory, sovereignty and national esteem are 
their media. Land, power, and recognition are their bloody issues.
(McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 354-5)
John Whyte found that religion in N.I. mattered most as a "basis for 
segregating the population into two communities, largely ignorant of each other and 
susceptible .. .to prejudice and stereotyping". For most Catholics, religion mattered 
in more peripheral ways, as political and economic issues took precedence over 
differences in religious attitudes. Among the "Ulster British", a self-defined tolerant 
identity formed by "the cherishing of British ideals", the issues were political, and 
to "a much wider spectrum of Protestants", religion denoted a "badge of identity".
Only for the "extreme evangelical Protestants" was the conflict seriously religious 
as they saw "the struggle as one between Christ and Antichrist". (Whyte, 1990, 51, 
Whyte also found that there were significant differences in the "sharpness of 
the divide" and in "the mix of religious, economic, political, and psychological 
factors" from one place to another that "make the community divide much more 
complex than one might imagine from drawing on region-wide generalisations".
A point that emerged repeatedly in Whyte's research has been 
emphasis on the great local differences - in the influence of the 
Churches, in the degree of residential segregation, in economic 
conditions, in the impact of violence, in political attitudes... 
Northern Ireland has only one and a half million people, but it 
is astonishing how much variety it contains within it.
(Whyte, 1990, 111)
This point regarding multiplicity of experience of the conflict was reinforced in 
conversations with Northern Ireland psychologist and author Ed Cairns. (Cairns, 
1999)
Perceptions of unfair access to political and economic resources, 
opportunity, and power, have long been cited as an important reason for the conflict 
by both sides. Whyte found that economic issues, especially those concerning the 
income gap between Catholics and Protestants, were identified by both groups as 
the strongest "source of perceptions differentiating the two communities". (Whyte, 
1990, 65)
It is a thing of which Catholics are sharply aware, and with which 
they are much concerned. This is shown by the publicity given in 
nationalist news media to every report from the Fair Employment 
Agency which shows up some new instance of inequality of 
opportunity, and by the frequency with which the Irish side in the 
Anglo-Irish Conference established under the Hillsborough 
agreement of 1985 brings up issues of fair employment.
On the other side, many Protestants have difficulty in facing the 
possibility that they may be treating Catholics unfairly. .. .In a 
study of Protestant attitudes to discrimination, the self-image of 
many Protestants made it peculiarly difficult for them to
acknowledge that they might have behaved unfairly: they believed 
themselves to be a just people, who did not do things like that. 
(Whyte, 1990, 65-6)
Whyte observed that while Protestants as a whole tended to be better off than 
Catholics, there were, in reality, enough upper income Catholics and lower wage 
earning Protestants to equalise the socio-economic status of both groups. (Whyte, 
1990, 65) This however, did not change the perceptions of an unlevel playing field 
for Catholic job opportunities overall, as held by upper income Catholics who were 
earning significantly more than the others.
McGarry and O'Leary agreed that while the acknowledgement of "the 
existence of significant inequality between Catholics and Protestants" was widely 
accepted, Catholic opposition to this inequality was "not exclusively materialist but 
... rooted in norms about justice and fair play". (McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 283) 
This was why many Catholics securely employed in upper income brackets objected 
as strongly to job discrimination as those who were victims of discrimination.
At the opposite end of the socio-economic scale, certain working class 
Protestants felt victimised by the assumption that they were economically better-off 
than Catholics. "They felt that they were just as impoverished, just as often 
discriminated against, and they resented the favour which world opinion seemed to 
bestow on the Catholics." (Whyte, 1990, 92) Economic motivation appears to have 
been a strong incentive for the formation of paramilitaries by the dominant loyalist 
group who were from "objectively deprived backgrounds" but until recently had 
seen themselves as better off than the Catholics. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 291) 
A cult of victimisation built on political and economic grievance has also been used 
as a way to justify the socio-economic position of the dominant Protestant group. 
(Whyte, 1990,101-2; Guelke, 1995,107)
From 1972, marking the end of the Protestant-led Stormont administration and the 
beginning of direct rule,
having previously regarded themselves as socially and culturally 
(if not economically), superior to their Catholic neighbours, the 
Protestant working class has had to deal with a pervasive sense of 
failure. They suddenly had to come to terms with the outside world 
telling them, not that they had built Northern Ireland out of the sweat 
from their own brow, or as a result of their characteristic determination 
and fortitude, but rather had done so on the back of discrimination and 
domination of the Catholic community. (Cochrane and Dunn, 1999, 34)
The role of the British
Throughout the Troubles, the British, specifically the population living in 
Great Britain, had an ambivalent relationship with their troubled province. A 
significant problem with the British government's (Parliament at Westminster 
London) involvement with the Northern Ireland conflict had been its position of 
perceived neutrality and detachment, with disregard for the impact earlier British 
actions had on shaping Irish history and course of the recent conflict. For some, 
Great Britain offered "a progressive modern political arena" within which the 
conflict could be resolved, but for others, its' long term goal in Northern Ireland had 
always been unclear and viewed as a contributing factor to its longevity. (Ruane 
and Todd, 1998, 204) In 1983, academic Padraid O'Malley pointed out that, 
"None of the parties to the conflict trusts Britain, and with good cause. Because she 
will not declare herself, no one knows where she stands". (O'Malley as quoted in 
Whyte, 1990, 143)
The constitutional relationship between Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
embodied in "years of abortive legislative initiatives which had attempted to forge a 
new relationship between Ireland and Britain" was defined in the Government of 
Ireland Act 1920 as establishment of "bicameral parliamentary institutions for
Northern and Southern Ireland with provision for their eventual unification". Under 
the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, the Irish Free State was established as a dominion 
within the British Empire with authority over all of Ireland. The Protestant-led 
Northern Ireland government was given the right to remain part of the United 
Kingdom and quickly chose to do so. (Cunningham, 2001, 1)
This political arrangement was further cemented in the Ireland Act 1949 which 
clarified the British relationship with the new Republic of Ireland and the status of 
Northern Ireland by declaring that "it is hereby affirmed that in no event will 
Northern Ireland or any part thereof cease to be part of His Majesty's dominions and 
of the UK without the consent of the Parliament of Northern Ireland". Labour party 
back benchers were concerned that the government had adopted a partisan pro- 
Unionist position because if a nationalist majority were to develop in a particular 
county, "it would not have the option of joining the Irish Republic because of the 
'any part thereof formula" which reinforced the six county constituency of 
Northern Ireland. Another concern was that "consent was invested in the parliament 
of Northern Ireland rather than in the people" so if a majority favoured a united 
Ireland, "this would not be reflected in the composition of Stormont because of 
gerrymandered constituency boundaries". (Cunningham, 2001, 3-4)
Ruane and Todd put the Northern Ireland issue within the context of 
domestic state versus international British politics. They pointed out that the state 
structure developed as an "uneven assemblage of structures, institutions and ritual 
practices" without a formally written constitution. Instead "statute law, made by and 
revocable by parliament" and "established practice" have defined constitutional 
parameters without clear territorial definition. Practically speaking, two spheres of 
constitutional practice developed, one for the domestic arena and the other for the
empire that asserted imperial or colonial rule. It was a situation where the 
distinction was clearly understood, if not legally structured, but which left only one 
territory, Ireland, in a position that was "ambiguous between the two spheres" of 
domestic and colonial rule that became especially obvious during the Troubles. 
(Ruane and Todd, 1998, 204-5)
The Army was sent in while Stormont was still in power during the earliest 
days of the conflict, and while initially it was seen to be protecting Catholics, the 
tide soon turned and its policy was seen as controversial by all sides. In 1985, 
lawyers Kevin Boyle and Tom Hadden had argued that "British policies have 
'contributed to a deepening sense of alienation among many Catholics both from 
Britain and the majority community' ", by allowing "abuses in the security field", 
by failing "to secure an effective voice for Catholics in the government of Northern 
Ireland", and by allowing "the continuing difference in levels of unemployment and 
deprivation in the two communities". (Whyte, 1990, 142, 83) Whyte pointed out 
that "the violence of the paramilitaries, and the counter-violence of the State", were 
likely to have marked different people in different ways, depending on where they 
perceived the main source of threat. (Whyte, 1990, 142, 83) Keeping in mind that 
Northern Ireland was legally a province of the United Kingdom, the violence of the 
republican paramilitaries, and to a lesser extent that of similar loyalist groups, 
provoked national countermeasures that were highly questionable in a democratic 
society. These included
internment without trial (1971 to 1975), trials without jury, a vast 
expansion of the police force (Royal Ulster Constabulary, or RUC), 
the raising of a local regiment of the British Army (the Ulster 
Defence Regiment, or UDR), house searches, road-blocks, police 
interrogations, the use of supergrasses, the employment of plastic 
bullets. (Whyte, 1990, 83)
Of these, internment without trial was perhaps the most controversial. 
Initiated by the Northern Ireland Protestant controlled government, with approval of 
the British Home Secretary on 9 August 1971, it was seen as a way to stop the 
escalating violence. On the first day of enforcement 342 people thought to be 
members of the IRA were arrested and held (104 were released within forty-eight 
hours) in an effort to eradicate the IRA. This resulted in rioting, 23 deaths in Belfast 
in the following two days, and the launch of a massive civil disobedience campaign 
by the Catholic community. (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 662-3)
The internees were held in Long Kesh Prison, later known as the Maze 
Prison, the Magilligan army camp in County Derry, and the Maidstone ship in 
Belfast harbour. The methods of interrogation used - "hooding, exposure to 
continuous noise, standing against a wall leaning on fingertips, and deprivation of 
food and sleep"- were extremely controversial. They were first investigated by the 
Compton Inquiry whose neutrality was questioned in both Britain and Northern 
Ireland. In the subsequent Compton Report, November 1971, there were admissions 
that "physical ill-treatment of detainees" had occurred but not torture or brutality. 
Most of the detainees refused to give evidence and many of the cases eventually 
went to the European Court of Human Rights, brought there by the Republic of 
Ireland in 1978, where it was decided that the prisoners had been subjected to 
"inhuman and degrading treatment" and that these techniques were contrary to the 
Convention. (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 211, 246)
In 1971, a three-man advisory committee was set up to recommend release 
of individual internees, who upon release were required to take the following oath, 
"I swear that for the remainder of my life, I will not join or assist any illegal 
organisation or engage in any violence or counsel or encourage others to do so". In
the meantime the Republic of Ireland set up five refugee camps for dependents of 
internees. In November 1972 a new system of internment was introduced by the 
British government, called the Detention of Terrorists Order. The prisoners were 
now called "detainees" and there was a limit to initial custody of twenty-eight days 
at which time the prisoner was to either be released or referred to a commissioner 
for a decision on continued incarceration. (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 663-4)
In January 1975, the Gardiner Report, released after an investigation into 
Northern Ireland's terrorism focusing on the issue of civil and human rights, issued 
a statement that while "detention without trial was a short-term necessity", a 
"special category (or political) status for convicted prisoners should be ended.. .non- 
jury trials for terrorist offences should be continued for the present and that there 
should be a new offence of terrorism". (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 264-5) They 
concluded that "detention without trial could only be tolerated in a democratic 
society in the most extreme circumstances". Adding that they would like to 
recommend the abolition of detention, "the present level of violence, the risks of 
increased violence, and the difficulty of predicting events even a few months ahead, 
make it impossible for us to put forward a precise recommendation on timing. We 
think that this grave decision can only be made by the Government". (Elliott and 
Flackes, 1999, 664) Detention without trial was ended on August 1975 when the 
Secretary of State, under the Emergency provisions Amendment Act, rescinded the 
power to make detention orders, thus ending the commission and releasing the 
remaining seventy five detainees in December. (Elliott and Flackes, 1999, 664)
An ongoing problem over the past thirty years has been the perception by 
many British that the problems in Northern Ireland are not relevant to Great Britain.
There is some evidence that the British accept the view that Northern 
Ireland is a colony, despite occasional protestations by British
prime ministers.. .otherwise it would be difficult to explain British 
public opinion, the peculiar constitutional status of Northern Ireland, 
[and] the exclusion clauses in the Prevention of Terrorism Act. 
(McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 312)
There appears to be a general unwillingness or lackadaisical attitude of the Labour, 
Liberal Democratic, and Conservative parties to organise there. (McGarry and 
O'Leary, 1995,312)
This disassociation from their province was still being expressed in the early 
1990s by British leaders such as Douglas Kurd who advised the European Union 
foreign ministers that they should avoid military intervention in Bosnia or they 
would end up "having a protracted commitment like Northern Ireland on their 
hands" - the implication being that "external intervention in Bosnia was comparable 
with Britain's allegedly internal intervention in Northern Ireland". (McGarry and 
O'Leary, 1995, 313) Overall, despite efforts made through a slow process of 
acknowledgement on all sides, mostly via public inquiries, there has continued to be 
a lack of public accountability by both British government and public for the non- 
neutral role of the British government and for the impact their words and deeds have 
had on shaping the conflict.
The road to peace
Throughout the Troubles attempts had been made to resolve the conflict, with 
peace-orientated groups forming in Northern Ireland soon after the violence had 
begun. Women Together for Peace came into existence in 1970 to "encourage 
dialogue, communication, and mutual respect". In 1978 the Ulster People's College, 
a collaboration of academics, trade unionists and community organisations, formed 
to address "the low educational attainment and subsequent socio-economic 
difficulties of urban working class communities in the Greater Belfast area". They
sought "to contribute to the process of peace and reconciliation through the twin 
educational programs of community development and democracy and citizenship". 
(Cochrane and Dunn, 1999, 17-19)
The Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), founded in 1981, 
addressed "issues of justice and fairness" that "were inextricably linked to the 
conflict" and which required resolution in order for the conflict to end. The Quaker 
House, begun in 1982 by British and Irish Quakers, was concerned with promoting 
"confidential dialogue" and discreet meeting places for groups and individuals who 
might not be able to meet publicly. They and others struggled on with their work 
through the worst of the violence. (Cochrane and Dunn, 1999, 18)
In a sense, you could say that the continual demonstration, either 
in a very demonstrative way, like the Peace People's rallies, or 
other similar events throughout the three decades of violence, 
signalled that there was a considerable section of the community 
totally opposed to violence, and there was always a rein on terrorism 
and on those who went for the violent option. 
(Cochrane and Dunn, 1999,167)
Although appearing to be "relatively insignificant at the individualistic level" the 
peace groups had a major impact on Northern Ireland's civil society.
The unspectacular 'drip-in-the-bucket' work conducted by the sector, 
provided avenues of contact for political actors who were not able to 
interact at the public level. While this dialogue and debate had little 
tangible impact on the level of violence at the time, it assisted the 
process of political education and re-evaluation which ultimately 
contributed to the republican and loyalist cease-fires in the autumn 
of 1994. (Cochrane and Dunn, 1999, 197)
The early 1990s also saw the formation of two peace groups directed at the 
paramilitaries. One, the Families Against Intimidation and Terror (FAIT) focused 
on "highlighting and trying to stop paramilitary 'punishment' attacks and 
intimidation against the civilian population in Northern Ireland". The Springfield 
Inter-Community Development Project (SICDP) focused on equality of socio-
economic development in the nationalist and working class communities of North 
and West Belfast, bringing together former loyalist and republican paramilitary 
members as organisational leaders. Billy Hutchinson, one of the early staff leaders, 
was "a leading member of the loyalist Progressive Unionist Party (PUP) and a 
former Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) prisoner". (Cochrane and Dunn, 1999, 16, 20)
As McGarry and O'Leary observed "More than mere exhaustion is necessary 
to end a war and create a lasting and just peace. .. .To create a constructive peace 
.. .requires intelligent and informed statecraft from all parties in Northern Ireland, 
the Republic, and Great Britain." (McGarry and O'Leary, 1995, 4)
On 15 December 1993 a foundation for the 1995 Frameworks Documents 
and the 1998 Belfast Agreement was laid with "The Joint Declaration for Peace", 
made at Downing Street, London.
It acknowledged the efforts by the people of Ireland, North and South,
and the British and Irish Governments together, to remove the causes
of conflict, to overcome the legacy of history and to heal the divisions
which have resulted, recognising that the absence of a lasting and
satisfactory settlement of relationships between peoples of both islands
has contributed to continued tragedy and suffering...and that the development
of an agreed framework for peace.. .provides the starting point of a peace
process to culminate in a political settlement. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1999,408)
A brief IRA Christmas cease-fire declaration in 1993 was later made 
permanent on midnight 31 August 1994 as a unilateral implementation of a 
"complete cessation of its military operations". This was reciprocated in October 
1994 by the Combined Loyalist Military Command in a cease-fire statement that 
included an unexpected apology. "In all sincerity, we offer to the loved ones of all 
innocent victims over the past 25 years, abject and true remorse. No words of ours 
will compensate for the intolerable suffering they have undergone during this 
conflict." (Bew, 1996, 63-65, 72)
The Frameworks Documents ("Frameworks for the Future") appeared in 
February 1995 to dissatisfaction on all sides. Part I suggested "A Framework for 
Accountable Government in Northern Ireland" and proposed a single chamber 
assembly of around 90 elected members for a fixed four or five year term. All-party 
assembly committees would oversee Northern Ireland's department and an elected 
panel of three would do the same for the assembly. (Bew, 1996, 83-4)
Part II, "A New Framework for Agreement", laid out the description of future 
North-South Irish relations. North-South institutions were to be created to "cater 
adequately for present and future political, social and economic inter-connections on 
the island of Ireland, enabling representatives of the main traditions, North and 
South, to enter agreed dynamic, new, co-operative and constructive relationships". 
Departments would be composed of department heads from the assemblies of both 
north and south and "areas where harmonisation would take place" were designated 
as energy, trade, health, social welfare, education, economic policy, industrial 
development, consumer affairs, industrial development, agriculture and fisheries, 
and transport. (Bew, 1996, 83-4)
These areas of harmonisation in a North-South context were very sensitive 
for both middle and working class unionists. "The core belief of Ulster unionism 
was clear: it is better to be separated from the rest of Ireland than from Great 
Britain." The Mitchell Report issued in January 1996, concluded that "paramilitary 
organisations will not decommission any arms before all-party talks" and 
recommended that "the parties should consider an approach under which some 
decommissioning would take place during the process of all-party negotiations, 
rather than before or after as the parties now urge". (Bew, 1996, 151)
During this time political actions were accompanied by economic initiatives 
designed to increase investment and to create more jobs. Tourism began to be 
marketed in earnest in 1994, and by January 1996 a 68% increase had been recorded 
over the previous year. (Bew, 1996, 148) President Clinton had hosted a U.S. 
conference on trade and investment in Ireland in November 1994, pledging a US$10 
million increase by the U.S. to the existing International Fund for Ireland, and 
raising the amount to a total of US$30 million over the next two years. This came 
fast behind a proposal by the European Parliament a month earlier to increase the 
European Union's contribution from 28 million to total 40 million. (Bew, 1996, 
In May 1995 the US International Relations Committee ruled that the 
MacBride principles on fair employment must be applied when deciding how the 
International Fund for Ireland's money would be used. (Bew, 1996,101) In 
December of that year Sir Patrick Mayhew, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, 
announced that if the cease-fires continued that another 100,000 would be added to 
the 180,000 already cut from the security budget and would be redirected to the 
other areas of Northern Ireland's budget over the next three years. In February 1996, 
Mitchell McLaughlin of Sinn Fein and David Trimble of the Ulster Unionist Party 
shared a debating platform at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. 
(Bew, 1996, 140, 157)
A group of extremely turbulent years began in 1996 when it appeared that all 
chances of peace had irretrievably broken down and that resumption of all-out 
conflict was imminent. The IRA had broken their cease-fire on 9 February by 
detonating a bomb at 7 PM in an office car park in London's Canary Wharf, killing 
two men and injuring 100 others. Gerry Adams who had been distancing Sinn Fein
from the IRA, had stated earlier in the day during a BBC Radio Ulster interview, 
that "political progress can be made through all-party talks.. ...with his Protestants 
brothers and sisters". That same day "Mitchell McLaughlin had taken part in a 
ground-breaking television debate with Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist MP who 
had carried the coffins of so many of his constituents killed by the IRA". The lack 
of retaliation by the loyalist paramilitaries to the Canary Wharf bombing signalled 
that this time the quest for peace was serious. In a distinct break from previous 
British response, Conservative MP Peter Temple-Morris stated that Gerry Adams 
should not be forced to condemn the bombing as it would "basically negate the 
whole peace process, and in neutering Adams and co. you invite something far more 
extreme to take their places". (Bew, 1996,158, 160,163-6)
The Good Friday Agreement (aka Belfast Agreement) of 10 April 1998 was 
the result of what eyewitness Irish Times journalist Deaglan de Breadun described 
as the
Ten Days That Shook Northern Ireland. Not since the Treaty 
negotiations of 1921 had such a determined effort been made 
to resolve the Anglo-Irish conundrum. These were days when 
participants scaled the heights of optimism only to be plunged 
into the depths of despair -and then lifted up again just as quickly.
Whatever might have been said about it being a turning point "it was certainly a
point of no return." (de Breadun, 2001, 111, 141)
The Agreement was "erected on the foundations of earlier, ill-fated, attempts 
to restore devolved government to Northern Ireland following the imposition of 
direct rule in 1972" and like the failed 1973-74 arrangements, represented "an 
exercise in consociational democracy" designed to "accommodate the interests, 
needs and, more negatively, mutual suspicion harboured by political rivals". 
(Wilson, 2001, 59-60)
In this power-sharing arrangement newly devolved democratic institutions 
were set, with a proposed North-South Ministerial Council to be established under 
a new British-Irish agreement, and a British-Irish Council that included the new 
assemblies for Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Isle of Man, Channel Islands and 
the Irish and British parliaments. It included provisions for the protection of human 
rights and arrangements for weapons decommissioning, reduced security, a 
commission to review policing, and for a rapid release of prisoners. The release of 
prisoners from all sides of the conflict was widely credited for helping to bring the 
agreement about. (McEvoy, 1998, 40-1))
Testing the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, violence continued to peak during 
the Loyalist summer marching season of 1998, when three Ballymoney Catholic 
brothers aged 8, 9, 10 burned to death in a house fire started by a loyalist petrol 
bomb. This was followed three days later by one of the most costly bombings of 
the war. Claimed by the dissident republican group, the Real IRA, the bomb 
exploded in Omagh's City Centre on 15 August 1998, killing a total of twenty nine 
people "in what has come to be regarded as possible the worst single incident of 
the troubles". In both cases the outrage was universal both inside and out of 
Northern Ireland, and on every front it seemed to harden the determination for 
peace. (McKittrick et al, 1999, 1437)
Physical security, and its fair and equitable enforcement was and has 
continued to be a key issue and in the earliest post-conflict phase workers and 
employers especially feared for their safety. In 1997, the Standing Advisory 
Commission on Human Rights (SACHR) identified these fears by employers and 
employees in Northern Ireland as the "chill factor", and one of the most important 
employment issues facing the region. This was defined as a situation where workers
from one community were reluctant to take jobs located in or forcing them to travel 
through communities dominated by the other group. Employers expressed equal 
reluctance to "take on workers from areas known to be associated with paramilitary 
activity." (Whyte, 1990, 63-4) These fears have been reinforced by the highly 
conflictual perceptions between Catholics and Protestants of the attitude 
demonstrated by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), which as of 2001 was 
renamed the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI), in protecting each 
community.
The Northern Irish nationalist political parties, Sinn Fein and the Social 
Democratic and Labour party (SDLP), have long maintained that the RUC was " a 
unionist as well as a sectarian police force, an instrument of unionist domination 
[and] a participant in the conflict rather than a neutral law enforcement agency". 
Sinn Fein claimed that the "RUC's members have been linked to the repression, 
torture, and killing of nationalists" as well as collusion with loyalist paramilitaries. 
(McGarry and O'Leary, 1999, 7)
On the other hand, "partisan unionists" have long regarded the RUC as "their 
police, protectors of the Union", while more moderate "unionists of goodwill - 
committed to treating Catholics as equal citizens of the Union" have regarded the 
police as a force that equally protects everyone. "In their eyes the police are already 
professional; effective and efficient; fair and impartial; free from partisan political 
control; tough but fair; tough on terrorists, be they republicans or loyalists; and 
tough on criminals." (McGarry and O'Leary, 1999, 6) The Patten Commission, 
issuing its report on the RUC on 9 September 1999, made one hundred seventy-five 
recommendations for reform, including a new name, reorganisation, and new 
uniforms. (Patten, 1999)
Conclusion
Northern Ireland is still a sporadically violent place but the nature of these 
outbreaks seem to be more about grabbing political turf, settling paramilitary scores, 
and criminal activities rather than a threat to plunge the region back into civil war. 
Despite difficulties in multiple suspensions and reinstatements of the Northern 
Ireland Assembly, and traumatic elections, there is a real commitment to peace by 
all parties. The world has moved on and the European Union has provided the 
protection and arbitration that comes with membership. There are now institutional 
structures and mechanisms in place that may help to permanently transform 
Northern Ireland from a symbol of insoluble strife to one of a rarely precedented 
peaceful success.
In The Far Side of Revenge de Breadun feels that "looking ahead it is 
possible to discern a resolution in some form to the age-old national conflict. The 
United Kingdom is becoming a de facto federation" and Scottish independence is a 
possibility.
The European Union is .. ..breaking down economic, social and 
legal barriers. The unionist elite is discovering the discreet charms 
of the Irish national bourgeoisie. Sinn Fein ministers are winning 
at least benign neutrality from sections of the North's majority 
community. I expect to live to see a united Ireland eventually but 
not perhaps the one the poets dreamed about, and with a very close 
relationship to a modernised, post-imperial Britain.
(de Breadun, 2001, 364)
Perhaps the words of Gusty Spence, the once feared but prophetic Loyalist leader of 
the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), delivered in 1977 as his 11 November 
Remembrance Day Speech from the Long Kesh (Maze) prison will at last be 
realized.
Let the rattle of oratory and the volley of words be heard instead 
of bombs and bullets - we need the strategy of political policies in 
place of battle plans and let us face one another across the negotiating
table as opposed to no man's land. Let us reconcile and permit the 
grass and flowers to grow over the battlefields just as they have at 
the Somme and Passchendaele.
And lastly let us forget past dissensions and resolve to pass on 
to our children the fruitful lessons which cost us so high a price 
in life and human misery, so that they may never know the hell 
and barbarity through which we had to pass.
(Spence quoted in Garland, 2001, 220)
Chapter Four: Serbia
The violent disintegration of the former republic of Yugoslavia which, until 
1991, consisted of Serbia (including the provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo), 
Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia & Hercegovina, Macedonia, and Montenegro, was 
integrally linked to the dissolution of the former Soviet bloc in the late 1980s. A 
unified state of Yugoslavia had been attempted twice previously in the 20th century 
- once by royal proclamation in 1918, and again by Tito in 1944.
While there may have been some expectation of a successful Yugoslav 
transition to democracy following the collapse of the communist system in the late 
1980s and early 1990s, it was equally apparent to others who had a greater 
knowledge of the region and politics that dissolution was inevitable. In retrospect, 
organisation and development of a post communist democratic Yugoslavia was 
always going to be difficult as the country had never been organised with a 
dominant overarching concept or identity of statehood upon which to build 
legitimacy for its' political institutions.
Yugoslavia (born 1918, died 1991) is significant because no one 
single ethnic group was in a position to act as the Staatsvolk .. .a 
single dominant ethnic group. .. .It also experienced no durable 
and convincing construction of a state based on ethnic consensus, 
through authentic federation or consociation, admittedly a difficult 
undertaking. The principal national communities never sought 
genuinely to understand the other's perspectives, interests or 
aspirations. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993,172)
Reversing the more commonly familiar secessionist strategy of peripheral 
states attempting to withdraw from the centre, Serbia, as the main political, 
economic, and cultural centre of the former Yugoslavia, positioned its regime 
publicly as "adamantly Unitarian, anti-secessionist, even anti-nationalist", 
emphasising the preservation of territorial integrity at all costs, while
simultaneously pursuing an agenda of ethnically separating Serbs from non-Serbs. 
(Conversi, 2000, 333) The unravelling of the former Yugoslavia from 1991 to 1999 
was not only a story of competing nationalisms and ethnic identities, but of groups 
of people, most especially Serbs, who simultaneously undervalued the benefits of 
staying together and underestimated the costs of breaking apart. 
Background
The first Yugoslavia, created from the crumbling Austrian-Hungarian empire 
at the end of World War I by Prince Aleksandar Karadordevic, ruler of the Kingdom 
of Serbia, was a nation made up of members belonging to Eastern Orthodox, Roman 
Catholic, and Islamic faiths, who called themselves Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. The 
Delegation of the National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs from Zagreb 
described an "idea" of national unity rather than a single nation. Prince 
Karadordevic envisaged a concept of Yugoslavia that sought to "dissolve all 
national differences into one unified nation" in order to create a "unitary state", 
while the Delegation was thinking in terms of preserving national differences 
among Southern Slavs within the structure of a federal state. (Pavkovic, 1997, 4)
Many in the Serbian elite had never understood the need for accommodating 
other groups as the "nineteenth-century Serbian tradition of conquest and 
expansion" had become the dominant tradition of the new state. (McGarry and 
O'Leary, 1993, 173)
The suspension of the fragile semi-democratic institutions established 
in 1918, the creation of a royal dictatorship in 1929, and the slide 
into full hegemonic control proved an easy step for much of the Serbian 
elite. This outcome, however, was to have fatal long-run consequences, 
because it ethnicised the state in the eyes of non-Serbs and eroded whatever 
loyalty they had to Yugoslavia. The monarchy, far from legitimizing the 
state, came to be perceived as alien and oppressive by non-Serbs, separate 
ethnic discourses came to the centre of politics and talked past each other 
in the forums of South Slavs. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 173)
While unitarism had been a key Serb experience, Croatia, as a separate co- 
existing region within a "partially decentralised empire", had experienced exactly 
the opposite as their previous political experience had included volatile negotiations 
between Vienna and Budapest. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 176) With 
cooperation based on short term pragmatic political interests, the Croats were 
"primarily motivated by the need to defend Croatia from foreign domination". 
Once the decision had been made that Croatia could be defended "outside the union 
with Serbia and without Serbian cooperation, they were ready to abandon or 
renegotiate the union and the terms of cooperation." (Pavkovic, 1997, 13)
The country's name was changed to Yugoslavia in 1921, and by then a new 
ruling elite dominated by Serbs and "Yugoslav-inclined Croats" (including 
Slovenes) decided Serbs and Croats were one nation who spoke Serbo-Croat. Serbs 
had decided that Croats were in essence Serbs and rationalised occasional non Serb- 
like behaviour as deviant from the norm. This attitude was reinforced by the Serb 
attitude that the new state must be "strong, unitary, centred on Belgrade and run by 
Serbs" and there was no "suggestion of ethnic proportionality, power-sharing or any 
redefinition of the state ideology in a way that would satisfy the Croats". 
(Pavkovic, 1997, 176-7)
When Nazi Germany invaded the country on 6 April 1941, the government 
collapsed, and Croatians created their own state (Independent State of Croatia). The 
four years that followed were "extraordinarily cruel" for both Serbs and Croats who 
each experienced genocide in 1941 and 1945 respectively. (McGarry and O'Leary, 
1993, 178) The Germans regarded Serbs as their primary enemies and proceeded 
to dismantle Serbian territory. Most of Macedonia and parts of southern Serbia was 
controlled by Bulgaria, Kosovo was annexed to Albania, and sections of Vojvodina
were administered by Hungary, along with areas of northern Serbia known as the 
Banat, overseen by German inhabitants. The remainder of Serbia was under direct 
control of the German military. (Thomas, 1999, 20)
The Germans were resisted by paramilitary groups who fought each other as 
well as a common enemy. Major groups were the Cetniks, also known as the 
Yugoslav Home Army, and the Communist Partisans led by Josip Broz, a half 
Slovene, half Croat, who was better known as Tito. The Cetniks, led by Draza 
Mihailovic, were described as pro-Allied, anti-Communist '"local defence units" 
composed of "marauding bands of Serb villagers, anti-partisan auxiliaries, forcibly 
mobilised peasants, and armed refugees which a small group of uncaptured 
Yugoslav officers were attempting, without success, to mold into an organised 
fighting force." (Thomas, 1999, 21) The Communists drew most of their recruits 
from the impoverished Bosnian and Croatian highland peasants who under Tito 
were known for their ability to "deploy a degree of battlefield mobility" as well as 
being motivated by a "disciplined and ruthless ideology". (Thomas, 21) In this war 
environment, Tito counted Germans, Italians, and Croat Ustase as enemies.
Tito and his men took political control after marching into Belgrade in 
October 1944. After expelling the Germans in 1945, they formed the second 
Yugoslavia, and quickly suppressed all opposition (the Cetnik leader, Mihailovic 
was captured, tried and executed in 1946). Although Tito split with Moscow in 
1948, he remained Communist while maintaining a balance between the east and 
west, using the country's "unique position" during the Cold War years "to secure 
financial backing, and a prosperity that was beyond its means". (Silber, 1995, xxvi)
Ruling with an iron hand, and named President for life, Tito controlled 
Yugoslavia for the next forty-five years, seeking to reframe the WWII history as a
"struggle of the whole people unified under the Partisan banner against the alien 
occupier". Public partisan monuments were erected and public holidays celebrated 
Partisan anniversaries, while anti-communists were branded reactionaries and 
collaborators. (Thomas, 1999, 22)
By the 1960s the communist rulers under Tito were victims of their own 
success. Having successfully industrialised the northern republics of Croatia and 
Slovenia, stabilised the country, and created a system that was perceived to be 
legitimate and internationally recognised, it became clear that "a threshold had been 
reached in politics, economics and in society". This would require a redistribution 
of power, but "how much, in what way, and by what criteria then became a matter 
for debate". (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 183-4)
However, the World War II legacy of total distrust remained strongly 
ingrained in the national psyche of both Croats and Serbs. The fact that the 1941 
massacre of Serbs had been committed by a Nazi regime long defeated and the 1945 
killings of Croats had been the work of the Partisans remained irrelevant in the face 
of the perception that all Croats were "tainted in the eyes of the Serbs as legatees of 
the Ustasa state" and all Serbs seen by Croats as favoured beneficiaries of Titoism. 
(McGarry and O'Leary, 1993,178-9)
Throughout the Tito years, a type of "Serbiam'sm" ran beneath the political 
and social fabric "more a river than a rivulet", nourishing the search for an 
"ethnically homogeneous" Greater Serbia that had been spearheaded by Serbian 
elites since the mid nineteenth century. (Conversi, 2000, 339) During this time 
Slovene and Croat ethno-nationalist secessionist movements also grew and cannot 
be underestimated in shaping subsequent Serb behaviour.
When Tito died at the age of eighty-eight, in 1980, there was genuine and 
universal grief, but the Yugoslav state he had managed to keep together was poised 
to unravel.
The Yugoslav state was perceived as only semi-legitimate at best 
by the different ethno-national groups. For the Serbs, Yugoslavia 
was meant to be a compensation for the loss of the Greater Serbian 
dream, but many Serbs regarded Yugoslavia as a dubious construct, 
superimposed on the Serbian nation, while for non-Serbs, the Yugoslav 
state was increasingly an ethnicised entity serving Serbian interest: 
the symbolic 'proof being the federal capital in Belgrade. Once the 
Serbs recommenced defining their identity in territorial terms, there 
was virtually nowhere else for them to go but to define their aims as 
Greater Serbian. (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 195)
Communism had collapsed too suddenly, at varying rates of speed in each 
republic, for pro-federal Yugoslav elites to find common ground. The democratic 
traditions in each varied widely with "the western aspirations of the Slovenes being 
in stark contrast to the volatility and political inexperience of the Serbs". It was also 
bad luck and bad timing for political leaders with Milosevic in Serbia and Tudjman 
in Croatia, neither of who had the interest or capability to keep a complex state 
together during a time of deep tension and contradiction. (McGarry and O'Leary, 
1993, 203)
Still, many Serbs did not envisage the rapid break-up of Yugoslavia or the 
war. In June 2002, a Croat English teacher, raised with and married to a Serb in 
Novi Sad, wanted to talk about what had occurred.
After ten or twelve years, it's still very present in our minds. 
.. .We were utterly unprepared for what happened. .. .No one 
expected what happened would happen.. .on TV we saw the 
enmity getting greater and it became very serious .. .but we 
thought it might finish in some quarrel. When Tito died, our 
relatives in Vienna asked what would happen but we thought 
'nothing'. (Serbia Interviews, June 2002: see Appendix)
As Mahmut Bakalli, an "ethnic Albanian communist", recalled, "We all 
cried, but we did not know we were burying Yugoslavia." (Silber, 1995, xxvii) 
The War
The "federative Serbian republic" which did not have a majority at the 
Yugoslav level, did have its own strong political and cultural institutions that 
supported the "inward turn from Yugoslavism toward Serbianism" in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s. (Conversi, 2000, 340) The stage had been set when on 23 
September 1987, Slobodan Milosevic took control of the Serbian Communist Party 
during its 'Eighth Session', forcing resignation of Belgrade party chief, Dragisa 
Pavlovic. By October 1988, leaders in the province of Vojvodina and in 
Montenegro's party resigned after mass demonstrations and protests were led by 
pro-Milosevic activists. (Thomas, 1999, ix) By March 1989 Serbia had ended 
autonomy of the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina, and increased power at the 
expense of other Yugoslav republics.
During the 1990s there were two major phases of the war launched by the 
Serbs. From 1991 to 1995 the initial war with Slovenia, then Croatia, then Bosnia- 
Hercegovinia took place after which The Dayton Agreement of 1995 was struck. 
The second phase, fought in Kosovo from 1998 to 1999, prompted NATO 
intervention, and bombing of Belgrade. (The Economist, 1998, 5) 
Pre Dayton Phase
The first phase, following a 1990 plebiscite showing 86% Slovenes voting in 
favour of a sovereign and independent Slovenia, began with a 1991 challenge to the 
Yugoslav federal army by Slovenia. On 25 June 1991, Slovenia's Parliament 
declared itself independent of the Yugoslav federation, while the Croatian Diet 
simultaneously declared the same for Croatia. By that time, both had massed 
military forces to withstand a challenge by the Yugoslav federal army. (Pavkovic, 
1997, 124-7)
Slovenia portrayed itself to the foreign media, especially in Austria and 
Germany, as a small "westward-leaning democracy". Using international 
spokesmen fluent in English and German it projected a defiant sophistication 
perceived to be absent in the advancing Yugoslav army tanks. Ten days of fighting 
between Slovenian military forces and approximately 3000 Yugoslav army 
personnel (10% of the Yugoslav fighting force) resulted in a final ceasefire on 7 
July 1991 mediated by "the EC Troika" (European Commission) and a European 
Union mission consisting of foreign ministers from Italy, Luxembourg, and the 
Netherlands. On 18 July, the Yugoslav state presidency decided to withdraw all 
troops from Slovenia within three months, signalling a deceptively easy victory for 
Slovenian independence. (Pavkovic, 1997, 135-7)
In November 1991, Macedonia seceded, calling itself the Republic of 
Macedonia and immediately sought recognition from the European Union. This 
move, virtually unchallenged by Serbia, elicited protest from Greece for whom the 
newly created republic directly challenged a popular concept of Greek identity that 
saw itself as part of a homogeneous, indigenous Macedonian group, with a northern 
Greek province bearing the same name. (Danforth, 1995, 28-42)
Bosnian Serbs in Croatia's Krajina region declared independence from 
Croatia in March 1991. In June and July 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared 
independence from Yugoslavia, and in August Croatia declared war on Yugoslavia 
"in response to ethnic cleansing in Serb-held Croatia". (Pavkovic, 1997, 124-7) 
October 1991 saw the Bosnian war begin. In assuming that the EU might intervene 
and allow them to achieve independence with minor bloodshed, the "Croatian and 
Bosnian Muslim political leaders not only overestimated the ability of the European 
Community and, later, the United Nations, to halt the Yugoslav federal army's
advance but also ignored the possibility that, in the process, the army itself would 
change its personnel and its objectives". (Pavkovic, 1997, 137)
The war with Croatia resulted in victory for that country, for "unlike Mr 
Milosevic, Mr Tudjman", then leader of Croatia, "won his war, driving out the 
Serbs and giving Croatia the first real independence it has known since the 12l 
century." (The Economist. 1998, 12) Secret talks had been held between Milosevic 
and Tudjman in Serbia, as early as March 1991, but by early May of the same year 
there had been clashes between Serb militia and Croatian police in an area of 
western Slavonia where the Serbs were the majority. (Judah, 1997, 177) The war 
continued in Croatia until the 2 January 1992 ceasefire was signed in Sarajevo. "It 
was a dirty war .. ...using their overwhelming firepower, the Serbs managed to carve 
out between a quarter and one-third of Croatia's landmass and hold it until, 
abandoned by Serbia, it was reconquered by Croats in 1995." (Judah, 1997, 181)
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the most ethnically mixed Yugoslav republic, where 
"every minority was big enough to start a war" was next on the Croat and Serb 
agenda. (The Economist, 1998, 9) In December 1991, Bosnian Serbs held an 
unofficial referendum opposing separation from Yugoslavia, proclaiming a new, 
independent, Serb republic. By March, 1992, Bosnia's Muslims and Croats had 
voted for independence in a referendum boycotted by Serbs. The following month, 
the EU recognised Bosnian independence but war broke out between the Bosnian 
government and local Serbs who had laid siege to Sarajevo. By January 1993, 
efforts to strike a peace agreement failed and war broke out between former allies, 
Muslims and Croats. (CNN World, 2000)
During late 1994, fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina ended in a negotiated 
truce. "The year had ended well for the Bosnian Serbs with their forces, fighting in
alliance with Muslim forces loyal to the regional power-broker Fikret Abdic." 
(Thomas, 1999, 236) But Bosnian government forces launched a March offensive 
against Serb positions in Mount Vlasic and the Majevica hills, and by the beginning 
of May, the Croatian army had moved against the western border of the Bosnian 
Serb enclave, the Republika Srpska (RSK). The Serb army was ordered to 
withdraw by Milosevic, but within Bosnia itself, a stalemate continued as Serb 
forces continued to surround Sarajevo, repelling the efforts of the Bosnian army to 
break through their lines. (Thomas, 1999, 237)
At the end of July and into August, Croatia launched offensives into western 
Bosnia, taking towns and ending Serb control of Krajina. As the Serb army 
retreated under orders of Milosevic, they were followed by about 165,000 Serb 
refugees who had been expelled by the Croat army and civilian vigilantes. The 
refugees fled to Serbia, but they found themselves sent to areas outside Belgrade, as 
their presence in the city was an unwelcome reminder of Milosevic's military 
failure. (Thomas, 1999, 240) In August a Serb mortar shell exploded in a Sarajevo 
marketplace, killing 37 and wounding 85. In retaliation NATO launched airstrikes 
against Bosnia Serb military targets. Rapid advancement by Muslim-Croat 
federation forces along with the Croat army, retook more Serb held towns in 
western Bosnia. (Thomas, 1999, 241)
War raged in Bosnia until the turning point of July 1995, when Serbs turned 
against Muslims in the Bosnian mining town of Srebenica. American Serb war 
journalist and political analyst, Chuck Sudetic, who had Muslim family members 
trapped in Srebrenica, described how in spring 1993 the Bosnian Serb army "goaded 
tens of thousands of displaced Muslims into Srebrenica, battered them with artillery, 
demanded their surrender, and threatened to massacre the town's menfolk once the
place fell". Sudetic, and a relative who had recently emigrated to Canada, 
understood how events would unfold. "We predicted what would happen; anyone 
who knew page one about Bosnia could have predicted what would happen. We 
waited to see who would make it out alive." (Sudetic, 1998, xxxv, xxv) The mass 
execution of approximately 7,000 Muslim men, women, and children in what had 
been declared by the UN Security Council to be a 'safe area' protected by NATO 
jets, became known as a catastrophic symbol for the failure of the United Nations, 
European Union, and United States to protect civilians.
August 1995 saw Croatia retake Krajina in 'Operation Storm', and NATO 
begin a large-scale bombing of Serb targets in Bosnia. (The Economist, 1998, 5) 
Pushed by the international community, and the US in particular, Milosevic, along 
with the presidents of Bosnia and Croatia travelled to Dayton, Ohio, to sign the 
Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995. The agreement hammered out was 
"uncompromising on only one point: that Bosnia remain a single country" an 
insistence that required all parties to adopt a somewhat schizophrenic view of recent 
history. As The Economist observed: "Think of Dayton as having two buttons: fast- 
forward to speed Bosnia's two entities towards the norms of democracy, and rewind 
to restore Bosnia to something like its pre-war ethnic mix. The first task is 
daunting, the second next to impossible." (The Economist, 1998, 6) 
Kosovo
While war raged elsewhere, Kosovo adopted a strategy of quiet passive 
resistance well away from centres of attention. As long as Kosovo could be ignored, 
Serbs were not forced into facing a key contradiction in Serbian policy.
This was that the carving out of Serbian enclaves, in Croatia and 
Bosnia, was justified on the basis of an ethnic principle, which also 
declared that the republican boundaries of Yugoslavia had no 
international status because they were simply 'administrative
boundaries' within a state. .. .Kosovars [ethnic Albanians] were 
not entitled to this same.. .self-determination because Kosovo was 
Serbian thanks to 'historical right'" which superseded the first. 
(Judah, 2002, 59-60)
As it turned out Kosovo was only temporarily peaceful. For some time there 
had been unverified rumours of a Milosevic plan to implement 'Operation 
Horseshoe' designed to push out the Albanian population from the province. In 
truth, the reality may have been closer to Belgrade journalist Braca (Bratislav) 
Grubacic's assessment.
I doubt that there was a real Horseshoe plan. I think that when 
the bombing started they just did it. The worst were paramilitaries 
and locals. Before the bombing it was common knowledge that 
they would expel Albanians. .. .There were differences between the 
police and the army. The police were in favour of expulsions because 
they could steal money from people. The intelligence guys were 
against it though because they said it was bad for us. (Judah, 2002, 241-2)
Despite its lack of overt conflict, Kosovo had increasingly become a threat due 
to the growing presence of the KLA (Kosovo Liberation Army), an ethnic Albanian 
paramilitary group who suddenly burst into the limelight in 1998. When many 
Kosovars began abandoning non-violence following the Dayton Agreement's failure 
to address the question of independent status, Serbs became increasingly concerned 
with this new threat in their southern province.
The KLA's roots were in the 1978 movement for the national Liberation of 
Kosovo (MNLK) when the goal of Kosovo independence was a concept thought to 
be gradually achievable for their grandchildren. As one early member recalled, 
"back then, no one really believed that anything more than republican status could 
be achieved". (Judah, 2002,105)
Prior to 1989, there had been limited international sympathy for their cause 
as the "idea of an armed uprising, however notional, against a strong, confident and 
world respected Yugoslavia seemed patently ridiculous" and Yugoslavia had
appeared to be indestructible. (Judah, 2002, 105,108) In 1989, The Democratic 
League of Kosovo (LDK) was founded and strongly influenced political life until 
1998, when the KLA, for whom they had raised funds in the late 1990s, became the 
dominant organisation. An unexpected 1997 collapse of the government in 
neighbouring Albania due to fraudulent financial pyramid schemes resulted in the 
government losing control. The subsequent dissolution of the army and police made 
suddenly available an abundant supply of guns and ammunition for very little 
money. As these weapons began finding their way into Kosovo, many were 
reluctant to use them, repeating the common refrain "Look what happened in 
Bosnia" in reference to Srebrenica and the failure of the international community to 
support the Muslim population when they had tried to fight for themselves. (Judah, 
2002, 129)
The KLA began making political inroads in Kosovo when members of the 
political opposition in Serbia marched against Milosevic, protesting the 1996 
elections that they had won but had been subsequently rigged in Milosevic's favour. 
Opposition parties in Montenegro had also won, and had begun making threats to 
secede. The timing appeared to have arrived for declaring Kosovo independence. 
KLA activities began going public in 1997 and incidents with Serb police in Kosovo 
escalated the following year.
On a visit to Pristina, 23 February 1998, Richard Gebhard, the US special 
envoy, expressed increasing concern in diplomatic circles by warning that "the 
violence we have seen growing is incredibly dangerous." He criticised the actions of 
the police and condemned "very strongly terrorist actions in Kosovo. The UCK 
[KLA] is, without any questions, a terrorist group." To Serbs, this was the 
equivalent of waving a red flag in front of a bull. "If the KLA were a terrorist group
and the representative of the most powerful nation on earth said so, then there could 
be no objection to the Serbian police moving in to finish it off." (Judah, 2002, 138) 
In late July 1998, the Serb police and army began sweeping through Drenica 
and other KLA areas, burning and looting houses, crops, livestock, and forcibly 
removing thousands of citizens. By early August an estimated 200,000 Kosovo 
Albanians had been expelled. Warnings were given by NATO to Serbian security 
forces to withdraw from Kosovo by October, or face air strikes. By mid March 
1999, it became clear that Milosevic was not going to accept a peace deal despite 
the willingness of Kosovo Albanians meeting in France to sign the Rambouillet 
Agreement.
The 'intervention' as it became known in Serbia, began on the night of 24 
March 1999, when NATO bombed Belgrade, and other Serb targets such as Novi 
Sad. By June 10th, Serb forces began withdrawing from Kosovo, and NATO air 
strikes stopped. The dream of a "Greater Serbia" had begun and ended in Kosovo, 
leaving the country's economy devastated, Kosovo as a UN protectorate, and 
Montenegro threatening secession. 
Role of Serb Paramilitaries
Throughout the series of 1990s wars, ethnic Serbian paramilitaries had been 
organised and used in place of, or in conjunction with, the Yugoslav army. 
Individuals had been recruited by the secret police and members of the Socialist 
party of Serbia (SPS) for Serb militia groups and paramilitaries by the end of 1990. 
The criterion for membership was willingness to "unofficially ...support the state 
and Milosevic's agenda, through the use of extra-political methods and physical 
force" and to act as an informal auxiliary force to the regular military. (Thomas, 
1999, 93) Responsible for some of the worst war atrocities in both Croatia and
Bosnia from 1991 to 1995, these groups, usually organised around a known leader 
or political party, were a critical part of Milosevic's military strategy, and were 
supplied arms, supervision, and organisational support by a group within the Serb 
secret police. (Sell, 2002, 325-7) In the early months of the 1992 Bosnian civil war, 
these irregular fighting groups played a crucial role in displacing Bosnian Muslims 
and Croats from their homes by using "classic death squad methods such as killing, 
torture, theft, and rape". (Campbell et al, 2000, 287)
Contrary to the Western media image suggesting that excessively brutal 
paramilitaries are inherent in "Balkan or Serbian culture", James Ron has 
maintained that the dominant use of paramilitaries were caused by limitations 
imposed by "local and international norms prohibiting Serbian military action 
beyond Serbia's official borders". These in turn motivated Serb officials to "enter 
into a subcontracting relationship with semiprivate groups in both Bosnia and Serbia 
.. .which were able to use violence without directly incriminating the Belgrade 
regime". (Campbell et al, 2000, 287)
Several scenarios of the ways in which the Belgrade-Bosnia paramilitary 
connection functioned have been proposed. In one view, Milosevic has been 
depicted as micromanager of the entire Bosnian ethnic cleansing process through a 
"smoothly functioning death machine spreading its tentacles from Belgrade down to 
the most remote Bosnian detention camps and massacre sites". A second view 
insists that Serbia was completely uninvolved in Bosnian events. A third 
interpretation, seen by Ron to be the most likely, suggests that while Milosevic 
"facilitated, encouraged, and supported the Bosnian war effort", he only provided 
guidance and weapons. (Campbell et al, 2000, 301)
In the "Military Line" hypothesis, described as a "parallel chain of command 
that allowed Milosevic to privately control Serbia-based paramilitaries and Bosnian 
Serb forces" key government officials from security services were used to train and 
arm irregular troops as well as travelling with them to Croatia and Bosnia, where 
"this network of state security agents.. .coordinated the process of ethnic cleansing". 
(Julian Borger as quoted in Campbell et al, 2000, 302)
Using the Interior Ministry's uniformed and plainclothes police, 
officials close to the top ranks of the Serbian state had generated a 
series of covert relationships with individuals and groups in an effort 
to quietly transfer influence, weapons, and guidance from Serbia to 
ethnic Serb fighters in the diaspora. Secrecy was important because 
of restrictions on official Serbian cross-border military action. The 
state-paramilitary connection thus provided the Serbian leadership 
with plausible deniability, facilitating an ethnic cleansing policy for 
which the Serbian government hoped to avoid responsibility.
(Campbell et al, 2000, 307)
Two of the best known and most notorious "paramilitary warlords" were 
Vojslav Seselj, "a onetime dissident turned nationalist demagogue" who led the 
White Eagles, and Zeljko Raznatovic, or "Arkan" whose group was known as the 
Tigers . (Sell, 2002, 325) Seselj, better known in political circles, was often in 
and out of favour with Milosevic depending on the internal or domestic image 
portrayed at a given moment, while, Arkan, the son of a high ranking officer in the 
Yugoslav air force, remained a favourite. (Sell, 325-6) Having become a well 
known bank robber in western Europe during the 1970s and 80s, Arkan returned to 
Belgrade in 1986, when he took up a new career as a patisserie owner. After 1990 
he established himself as a fan and patron of the Red Star Belgrade football 
association and its fan club, the Delije (Warriors), the same group who had violently 
clashed with their Croatian counterparts at a 1990 game in Zagreb. His role was to 
channel the group's nationalism in ways more easily controlled by the government,
and when later that same year he founded his Serbian Volunteer Guard (SDG), 
known as the Tiger, its core fighters came from Delije. (Thomas, 1999, 94)
By the time of NATO bombing and during the 1999 Kosovo war, 
paramilitaries were being recruited from Serbian jails, where they were given 
amnesty in exchange for fighting. In a pattern familiar since the early 1990s, the 
police or army would go into an area, intimidate or secure it, and leave for the 
paramilitaries to follow. (Judah, 2002, 245-6) Members of the paramilitaries 
separated themselves into professionals who considered themselves "Serbian 
patriots", fighting for the "Serbian cause" and former criminals who "for 
freedom.. .would do just about anything". (Judah, 2002, 246-7) The "patriots", 
made up of former members of Croatian state security, Bosnian war veterans and 
other experienced combatants, were sent into Kosovo to "fight the KLA and to 
cleanse away their support" but "money was the main thing". (Judah, 2002, 246)
One Bosnian Serb, recruited by the Serbian Radical Party members recalled
We heard that members of the Serbian secret police were 
transporting Albanian civilians in the trunk of their cars for 
$2,700. There were some members of my unit who would 
take the money and just kill the guy. I didn't do such things. 
I took them to the border. When the NATO bombing 
intensified, I started doing the same thing - taking the money 
and killing them. (Judah, 2002, 246)
A former criminal recruited by Arkan's organisation just before the final 
phase in Kosovo, maintained, "We didn't arrest just anyone... we arrested important 
people, political types, functionaries. We didn't arrest people we weren't supposed 
to, but you know you have crazy people everywhere. People who would rape 
everyone from Serbia to Albania." (Judah, 2002, 247) 
Sources of conflict
The Serbian sense of victimisation in post-communist Yugoslavia had been 
reinforced by changes introduced in the 1974 Constitution under Tito. Responding 
to pressure, the two Serb provinces, Vojvodina, which bordered Hungary to the 
north, and Kosovo, in the south, were granted semi-autonomous status and powers 
separate from Serbia. In an official publication of the "Blue Book" in 1977, the 
1974 Constitution was blamed for having, in essence, "curtailed the sovereignty of 
Serbia by ending it at the borders of the two provinces", concluding that the 
"regionalisation of Serbia" was leading to an emerging "problem of the status of the 
Serbian 'nation' within Yugoslavia". It was the first step taken toward expression of 
the basic tenets underlying the "new Serbianism" which was to resurface in a 
stronger form two decades later. (Conversi, 2000, 341)
In 1986, a group of "loyal nationalists" who were allowed to publicly 
articulate their positions on social issues "in the form of scholarly or aesthetic 
elaboration of the Serbian national question" under the auspices of the Serbian 
Academy of Arts and Science (SANU) and the Serbian Writers Association, 
published a Memorandum stating that the "'Serb people' throughout Yugoslavia" 
were "a kind of primary entity, possessing a unitary set of claims and rights which 
transcended any mere political or geographical division". (Conversi, 2000, 342)
The Memorandum can be defined as the quintessential document of 
the Yugoslav intellectual nomenklatura made up of pseudo-dissidents 
who ... benefited enormously from the regime's covert support. By 
referring simultaneously to Yugoslavia and Serbia, to socialism and 
liberalism, to dissidence and conformism, to nationalism and anti- 
nationalism, to unity and separation, these intellectuals were masters 
in double-speak.
.. .However, the baseline in the document was a stress on Serbian 
victimhood .. .the Serbs were portrayed as victims of 'genocidal 
terror' by the Albanians, of 'economic exploitation' by the Slovenes, 
of cultural assimilation by the Croats, of religion conversion 
by the Muslims, of systematic historical impairment by the Titoist regime.
(Conversi, 2000, 342)
For the international audience, the inward refocus of Serbia was projected as a 
crusade to defend the values of the "liberal West" against "nationalism, communism, 
and religious intolerance". (Conversi, 2000, 342) However, as Ted Gurr noted in his 
1993 work on minorities at risk, " the very concepts ethnic and minority take on 
special meaning" in an Eastern European context. (Gurr, 1993, 173)
Every ethnic identity group is potentially a minority in some 
relational sense. Even a dominant majority can become a minority 
in the face of a concerted opposition (a coalition of disaffected 
minorities), thereby putting the majority state itself at risk.
(Gurr, 1993, 173)
While this set the stage, the actual dissolution and subsequent war of the Yugoslav 
state could not have taken place without the catalytic effect of a charismatic leader 
with powerful state and party "machinery" at his disposal.
In 1987, at about the same time Milosevic took control of the media, a kind of 
"ethno-kitsch" became popular. This apparent grass roots movement was expressed 
in "spontaneous yet officially orchestrated mass rallies", in the new "turbo-folk" 
rock music, football slogans chanted by the fan club Crvena Zvezda, and statements 
made by many creative artists, members of the military, writers, journalists, and 
academics. Driven by imagery of Serbs as a wronged party, a victim of other ethnic 
groups in the former Yugoslavia who had never appreciated earlier efforts and 
sacrifices made on their behalf, an attitude of patriotic victimization began to spread 
throughout the media with statements such as "We do not hate them - they hate us" 
and that Serbs were being treated as "Jews of the Balkans" through "no fault of their 
own". (Udovicki et al, 1997,1)
From 28 March 1989 onwards, when adoption of the new Serbian Constitution 
made Serbia in effect a unitary state, Milosevic facilitated what Daniele Conversi 
describes as the road of "secessionism by the centre" by "re-taking" Vojvovdina and
Kosovo through abolishment of provincial autonomy, and forcing the subsequent 
exit of Slovenia. (Conversi, 2000, 343)
By the beginning of 1992, both Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union ceased to 
exist. Three of the nine countries of Eastern Europe that had existed prior to this 
time had been classified as multinational states or "states that govern more than one 
culturally, linguistically, territorially, and politically distinct ethnic identity group or 
nation". All but three out of thirty minority groups considered to be at risk in 
Eastern Europe prior to 1990 were located within the boundaries of the former 
USSR, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia. (Gurr, 1993,177)
In transition from an authoritarian Stalinist type of state system utilising 
sweeping reform programs restructuring government institutions, and redefining 
intergroup relations, "formal and informal rules" and "norms of social group 
interaction" in the process, personal and group insecurities increased. (Gurr, 1993, 
174-5, 177) Exacerbated by previous official sanction of "unique linguistic, 
religious, and cultural forms" that directly and indirectly "promoted social or 
political stratification or both on the basis of ethnic identity" it was assumed that 
everyone would feel "increased personal risk in an increasingly unfamiliar social 
landscape". Social and political cleavages were more likely to be highlighted as 
individuals and groups "jockey for position and influence. In the confusion, it is 
possible that the proverbial "baby" of civil society may be thrown out with the 
"bath" of the coercive state, making every social group in the region individually 
and communally at risk. (Gurr, 1993, 174-5,177)
Prior to the outbreak of war, Kosovo had experienced a long history of 
reoccurring cycles of political and ethnic violence with power changing several 
times between Albanians, Serbs and Montenegrins. In the early 1960s, Kosovo had
experienced the highest annual population increase in Europe, with 29% recorded 
solely by the Albanian population who had doubled in size between 1948 to 1981. 
After 1967, Serbs and Montenegrins emigrated in increasing numbers, leaving a 
77% Albanian majority in the province by 1981. In the same year, Kosovo 
Albanians began agitating for independence with the rallying cry "Kosovo- 
republic" (Pavkovic, 1997, 80-1) The Yugoslav federal government responded by 
sending in the military and police to suppress uprisings, but Kosovo political 
leadership, dominated by Albanians, did little to slow the exodus of Serbs and 
Montenegrins. In 1985 Kosovo Serbs protested their treatment by Albanians and by 
the late 1980s had attracted a powerful ally in Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian 
Party's president.
In April 1987, Milosevic visited a town near the capital Pristina, to meet 
with the Kosovo Party leadership. Upon his arrival, Serb and Montenegrin crowds 
gathered in a demonstration organised by Milosevic and Kosovo Serb activists. 
When clashes between demonstrators and Albanian Kosovo police began, Milosevic 
appeared to be "taken aback by the violence of the protest and the anger of the 
demonstrators." (Thomas, 1999, 44) The crowd is said to have begun shouting to 
Milosevic who appeared in their midst, "They are beating us", to which Milosevic 
responded with words that became a rallying point for Serbs throughout 
Yugoslavia... "No one should dare to beat you." (Pavkovic, 1997, 84: Thomas, 
1999,44)
Milosevic's assurance implied he was protector of Serbs in Kosovo, a role 
that superseded provincial authority. Warning bells were heard in other parts of 
Yugoslavia, for if Milosevic took that position in Kosovo, there was little to stop 
him from doing the same in Croatia, or Bosnia-Hercegovina. Testifying during the
May 2003 trial in the Hague, Milan Kucan, former President of Slovenia and leader 
of the Slovenian delegation's exit from the Communist Party congress in the 1990s, 
recalled, "Mr Milosevic's intentions were clear from his speeches as early as 1989. 
.. .the message was that should Yugoslavia fall apart... Serbia would never agree to a 
situation where parts of the Serb people living outside the borders of Serbia would 
be left beyond the Serb republic." (BBC News, 2003) 
As one Novi Sad, Vojvodina, resident recalled
I admit the great majority of people adored him... especially 
[after] theS* session of the Communist Party when he took 
power. Then hostility and enmity began at that time. 
... .Milosevic and his people created the police and hatred 
toward other nationalists was not hidden. The result was 
that when we talked with friends, we had to be careful about 
what we were saying ... .you couldn't tell them what you think. 
(Serbia Interviews, June 2002: see Appendix)
An irony of Serbs choosing Bosnians, like Croatians before them, as 
enemies, were in the number of similarities they shared. They were both 
multiethnic, multicultural Slavs who spoke Serbo-Croat with religious differences 
deriving from political reactions to history rather than from a separate development 
of theology. "The Bosniacs became Muslim because they collaborated with their 
Ottoman occupiers; the Serbs rejected Ottoman rule and remained Orthodox; the 
Croats' Roman Catholic faith, and their sense of belonging to Central Europe rather 
than to the Balkans, was preserved by Hapsburg rule." (The Economist, 1998, 9) 
Recognized by Tito to be historically unique, Bosnia was constitutionally 
determined to be "a separate and multinational republic" consisting of Muslims, 
Serbs, Croats, Hungarians, Jews, who had lived together for generations in relative 
harmony. (Ali, 1994, 367) The intermarriage rate among Bosnians was estimated 
to be as high as 30%, with paternity defining ethnic identity. (The Economist. 1998,
Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital, had been one of the most sophisticated cities in 
Eastern Europe, part of an "ancient land, the new republic of a modern state" which 
had been the "centre of a distinctly cosmopolitan way of life. .. .The intermingling 
of peoples and cultures had continued apace in the twentieth century.. ..Ethnicity 
had ceased to be the defining criterion of identity for Bosnia's new generation of 
'Yugoslavs'." (Ali, 1994, 367) But by 1991, only 6% still identified themselves as 
Yugoslavs in a federal census, identifying instead as a member of an ethnic group, 
and in the final stages of war "fighting was fiercest where the inter-marriage rate 
was highest". (The Economist, 1998, 9)
Despite collaboration with both sides during the Bosnian war, the tragedy 
for Muslims was that their presence provided a means to an end for both Serbs and 
Croats. Useful to the Croats when they needed help in fighting the Serbs and vice 
versa, it became clear that visions of a 'Greater Serbia' and 'Greater Croatia' did not 
include accommodation for a separate Muslim territory or tolerance for 'mixed' 
marriages. "The objective was to 'cleanse' Bosnia not only of Muslims but also of 
the unique and dangerous cosmopolitanism of its cities which clearly had no place 
in the new 'pure' nation-states emerging from the ruins of Yugoslavia". (Ali, 1994, 
One characteristic of Milosevic-style ethno-nationalism was its selectivity, 
and outside of Bosnia, Muslims were not automatically targeted. Contrary to 
general international understanding, throughout the 1990s and later, Serbia 
continued to be composed of at least twenty different ethnic groups. A large group 
of Muslims living in the Sanjac region of Serbia, along the Montenegro border, 
although subject to tensions resulting from the Bosnian war, lived peacefully 
without encountering Serb ethnic cleansing. In 1992, the results of a federal census
for Serbia and Montenegro, published the self-described "national [ethnic] 
composition of population". After Serbs, the largest group in Serbia were 
Albanians. There were also over 100,000 Hungarians, Muslims, Croats, Gypsies, 
followed by Slovaks, Macedonians, Romanians, Bulgarians, Russians, 
Montenegrins, Vlachins, Turks, and Slovenes. At that point there were just over 
300,000 people who called themselves "Yugoslavs"; 44,000 "Others"; 16,000 
"Undecided"; and 60,000 "Unknown". (Janjic, 1994, 117-176)
Many of these minorities continued to live in Serbia throughout the 1990s, 
and while wars were being fought with Croatia and Bosnia, there were Croats and 
ethnic Hungarians living in the northern province of Vojvodina. For Milosevic, the 
wars were not about applying "ethnic purity in a racial sense" .. .but about 
preserving the political predominance of the Serbs". The majority of ethnic 
minorities within Serbia did not constitute this type of threat, with the exception of 
the Kosovar Albanians, "especially once they fought back". (The Guardian 
Weekend. 1999, 13)
Interviews in Vojvodina and Belgrade during April 2001 and June 2002, 
reinforced this ethnic conditionality. Vojvodina was repeatedly described as a "very 
special" province with a "different culture and tradition", where "for centuries 
mixtures of cultures and nationalities" made it special (Serbia Interviews, April 
2001, Demek: see Appendix). Subotica, its' northernmost city on the Hungarian 
border was described as having a "huge number of mixed marriages" (Serbia 
Interviews, April 2001, Subotica: see Appendix) Though tensions had been 
especially high among the Serb Muslim population during the Bosnian war, it was 
clear both in interviews and observation during fieldwork in Serbia, that Muslims
were considered to be a different group from Kosovo Albanians and that it was 
specifically Albanians with whom Serbs did not get along.
In the 1990s, with the exception of Serbia - and for a brief time Slovakia, 
when anti-Hungarian feelings were exploited- most Eastern Bloc politicians had 
envisaged association with or entry into the European Union as a goal. This thinking 
was mirrored in the similarities and differences between Serbia and Croatia. In the 
early 1990s both had been led by leaders, Slobodan Milosevic and Franjo Tudjman, 
who had much in common. Although both had acquired and reinforced their power 
through systematic corruption thinly disguised by a veneer of democracy, their 
attitude towards the West varied greatly.
In 1998 it was noted that while differences appeared to be superficial, Serbia 
was in truth looking back toward the past while Croatia was preparing for what lay 
ahead. In Zagreb, capital of Croatia, there were ordinances against hanging laundry 
to dry in public, and western music was commonly played in cafes and restaurants. 
At the same time, in the Serb capital of Belgrade, the ambient music was "Serbian 
city folk" and a chaotic proliferation of gray and black market kiosks dotted the 
streets. "Croatia desperately wants to belong to the West, and can.. .be pushed 
towards greater openness and pluralism. Serbia is ambivalent at best. The West can 
bully and cajole Serbia, as it is doing, but it cannot seduce it. Change, when it 
comes, may be sudden and violent." (The Economist, 1998, 12)
Despite its peaceful reputation, violence erupted between Serbs and 
Hungarians, who make up approximately 15% of the population, in the northern 
province of Vojvodina during late summer 2004. Serbian government 
representatives agreed that these events need not "overshadow the traditionally solid 
inter-ethnic relationships" and that there was no need to involve the international
community. (B92, 8 September 2004, Kostunica) When the European Union's 
Council of Ministers arrived for a visit to the province on 13 September 2004 they 
declined to discuss the matter and the Hungarian Foreign Minister Laszlo Kovacs 
stated that "the incidents were a law and order issue which the Serbian government 
should resolve in order to meet the standards required for EU membership". (B92, 
13 September 2004, EU ministers)
The Federal Foreign Minister Vuj Draskovic stated that those who had 
"committed individual excesses" in particular those responsible for writing graffiti 
"urging Hungarians to leave Serbia" must be identified. "I'm afraid of the self- 
proclaimed patriots getting carried away with words, because over the past fourteen 
years their battle cries have only pushed Serbia into disaster." (B92, 8 September 
2004, Kostunica) 
The road to peace
In the post-Kosovo era, it became clear that there had been three Serbias. One 
had been in full support of Milosevic, the other, clearly resisting, and the third, and 
perhaps the largest, an uncertain group, not totally convinced, but ending up going 
along with a trend they felt helpless to prevent. It has been claimed that "for the war 
to become thinkable, trust that had steadily grown since World War II despite some 
tensions between the ethnic groups had to be rooted out first, and confusion, doubt, 
and fear implanted in its stead". (Udovicki et al, 1997, x, 109)
A male Croat raised with Serbs in Novi Sad, the Vjovodina river city north 
of Belgrade whose bridges were bombed by NATO, recalled those years:
I changed.. .1 was very realistic from the beginning. I rejected 
Milosevic from the beginning but when I saw he [was in power].. 
I became insincere towards myself. I needed to convince myself 
that he was good. .. .1 ask all the time about those people in the 
media for their responsibility. ..The media are responsible for the 
things.. .They accepted regime ideas and mercilessly spread them 
through the media.. ..Milosevic expelled people from the media and
took the media into his hands. He knew how to rule.
(Serbia Interviews, June 2002: see Appendix)
Throughout the late 1980s and 90s, there had been internal opposition to the 
draft and to Milosevic and his policies inside Serbia. When the Croatian war began, 
there had been an exodus of Croats and Hungarians from the Vojvodina province to 
Budapest, Hungary. Others stayed behind in Serbia, becoming draft resistors on 
the run. Also, a number of academics and journalists were expelled from their 
positions. (The issue of draft evasion, and expulsion were mentioned repeatedly in 
interviews conducted in Serbia during both the January 2001 and April 2001 visits.) 
In 1999, when the final phase of the Yugoslav war began, a final wave of draft 
resistors (encouraged to resist by NATO and the international community) again 
fled to Hungary, or hid inside the former Yugoslavia. At the time of the Kosovo 
War, Amnesty International estimated that up to 23,000 draft evaders faced military 
trial and imprisonment in Serbia. (Amnesty International FRY, 1999)
The end of Milosevic was unanticipated by most of the international media, 
but clearly understood by Serb voters who had begun to reflect a growing majority 
of 'undecided' voters in political surveys just prior to the 2000 election. (Serbia 
Interview, April 2001, Open University Subotica: see Appendix) Political 
opposition to Milosevic and his SPS Party (Socialist Party of Serbia) had surfaced 
earlier during the November 1996 protests when hundreds of thousands of Serb 
opposition supporters, unified under the Zajedno coalition, accused the government 
of cancelling local elections results where the opposition had won office. A series 
of street protests continued until February 1997, when after interference by the 
OSCE, Milosevic issued a letter urging Prime Minister, Mirko Marjanovic, to 
propose a law to parliament (Lex Specialis) recognising the legitimacy of the 
Zajedno victories. Enacted on 11 February, this step, though technically
unnecessary, was seen as a way for Milosevic to reinforce his power to control 
events. (Thomas, 1999, 277-316)
Political opposition continued after conflict erupted in Kosovo. Milosevic was 
widely held personally accountable for letting NATO bomb Belgrade, and following 
the subsequent loss of Kosovo, he was doomed in domestic politics. On election 
day 24 September 2000, the DOS (Democratic Opposition of Serbia) announced 
that it was winning at all levels, with Milosevic losing to their candidate Vojslav 
Kostunica. Milosevic and his supporters resisted ceding the election, until 5 
October, when huge crowds from around the country gathered in Belgrade, clashed 
with police and set the parliament building on fire. The police withdrew and the 
army did not intervene. The next day Milsoevic stepped down from office. By the 
end of March 2001, he was arrested in Belgrade for war crimes, and at the end of 
June was sent to the International War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague. (SMMRI 
Media Monitoring, Elections 2000)
Ironically, it may have been Milosevic's relative tolerance for internal political 
opposition that laid the groundwork for his downfall.
Though Slobodan Milosevic pursued thuggish policies outside 
Serbia's borders, within the narrower confines of Serbian 
domestic politics he was not an out-and-out dictator. He was 
a semi-authoritarian leader who permitted some real political 
space for opposition parties, independent NGOs, and media. 
He pressured, harassed, and disadvantaged those groups to 
varying degrees, but they operated openly and actively. As a 
result, credible local partners existed for Western groups to support.
Related to this, elections were already well established as a 
genuine mechanism of political competition in Yugoslavia well 
before the 1999-2000 campaign. Milosevic had certainly cheated 
and bullied his way through past elections, but some of them, such 
as the 1992 contest between Milan Panic and Milosevic as well as 
the 1996 local elections, were serious affairs in which opposition 
groups competed hard and, in the latter case, successfully fought to 
uphold its victories. Thus... .a critical part of the important 
groundwork on elections was already in place. (Carothers, 2001, 6-7)
The arrest of Milosevic and subsequent trial in the Hague was difficult for 
Serbs of all political persuasions. "For Serbs, Milosevic was over when he was 
thrown out in October 2000", and the necessity for a public trial was suspected to be 
a way for the international community to humiliate all Serbs (see Chapter One). 
(Serbia Interviews, April 2001 Open University Subotica: see Appendix) 
Conclusion
The heady days of 5 October 2000 have since been counterbalanced by the 
difficult and painful process of recovering from partially self-inflicted economic and 
political problems. One unanticipated effect of the break up of the former 
Yugoslavia was the number of Serb refugees who fled to a country unprepared for 
ethnic cleansing in reverse. "On the eve of war the Serbian rallying cry was 'All 
Serbs in One State'" In trying to create an imagined reunified Serb state, with the 
exception of the 200,000 or so Serbs in the newly formed Republika Srpska, the 
Serb half of Bosnia created during the war, Milosevic's actions accelerated reverse 
ethnic cleansing of Serbs, creating "800,000 Serb refugees from Croatia, Bosnia and 
Kosovo". (Judah, 2002, 60) 111 equipped to deal with this mass influx, Serbs have 
been learning to cope with the various economic, social, and political issues 
common to all countries under pressure from large numbers of post-conflict 
refugees.
This difficult transition is still in its early stages. Accountability for acts 
committed in the name of all Serbs by the government and satellites is still difficult 
for many to accept. "Serbs need to know what was done in their name." concluded 
Belgrade journalist Bratislav Grubacic when speaking of the massacre at Srebrencia. 
(Serbia Interview, 2001, Grubacic: see Appendix) "Responsibility? Individual 
versus collective responsibility? It's useful- can't say they're all responsible but in
fact I believe we are all in some measure responsible." (Serbia Interviews, June 
2002) "Serb nationalism needs to be examined and politics adjusted to the modern 
world". (Serbia Interviews, January 2001: see Appendix)
In January 2003 Serbia and Montenegro split in a "divorce", when the 
parliament of Montenegro voted to dissolve the Yugoslav federation, to be replaced 
with a loose association sharing a common foreign and defence policy. Supported 
by the Serb parliament, there were provisions for a three-year waiting period before 
a referendum for independence could be held by either country. So far, Serbia has 
been willing to give Kosovo autonomy but not independence. ("Montenegro is a 
divorce.. .but Kosovo... will go on for ten years...it will last a long time." (Serbia 
Interviews, January 2001, Belgrade students: see Appendix)
A few months later, in March 2003, Prime Minister of Serbia, Zoran 
Djindjic, "a reformer who courted controversy in his own country with his pro- 
western stance" was assassinated, throwing the country into turmoil. (BBC News, 
Djindjic, 2003, Obituary) Corruption, a direct legacy of the Milosevic years, dogs 
the country with organised crime still a prevalent and in some areas, growing 
problem. Kosovo remains a very troubled place with an uncertain future as attacks 
and killings against Serbs living there have continued.
A symbol for dramatic political reform, it has been clear that Djindjic's death 
has functioned as a catalyst for Serbs to begin realistically facing their political and 
economic future. The challenge for the Serb population is to construct a viable 
democracy that supports legitimate economic growth and pragmatically deals with 
the proposed sovereignty of Kosovo. The re-emergence of nationalism, 
accompanied by lack of experience with the democratic process, and the eruption of
violence in Kosovo, spilling over into Southern Serbia, has tested the Serb and 
Albanian commitment to peace.
When the independent Belgrade-based news agency, B92, interviewed Kosovo 
Albanian artist Enver Petrovci about the violence in late March 2004, he envisaged 
a wider view beyond the problems between Serbs and Albanians. "When I think 
about my life I certainly don't think solely about myself and Kosovo. I think about 
the whole Balkans." For him, "victors have ruled without understanding of the 
vanquished" as acquisition of power in the Balkans has never "been ruled by 
reason" and "people do not come to power here ... to make things better for the 
people, or the city or their state" but "to spite one another. .. .somebody is 
constantly taking his revenge". (B92, 25 March 2004, Independent Intellectuals)
However, both Serbs and Albanians have shown that when they are 
determined to do so, they are capable of making great and positive changes. This 
was evident when Serbs deposed Milosevic, and when Serbs and Albanians worked 
together to settle earlier violence in the border region of Southern Serbia. As 
Kosovo Albanian, Jetmir Balaj observed,
This is a wakeup call for all of us, for honest people, for all the 
good people who will fight for themselves and a better future, who 
are sick of Serbs and Albanians. People who want better things 
for themselves, for their children, who want a better future, who 
would never have thought of this.
But there are dark forces, too. And we have to get rid of those 
forces for ourselves. It can't be done by anyone from the outside, 
it can't be done by UNMIK or KFOR. We have to do it ourselves. 
It has to be our message, five years after the bombing began.
(B92,25 March 2004, Independent Intellectuals)
The possibility of taking the first steps toward EU membership has been the 
carrot for both Serbia and Montenegro to continue their democratic path. At the 
beginning of 2004, Croatian President Stjepan Mesic declared that "Europe's future
lies in association, in open borders. This is the Europe in which Serbia should take 
its place". (B92, 26 January 2004, Croatian President Stjepan Mesic,)
In January 2001 a student declared that for the "first time in Serbian history 
we changed our authorities peacefully." (Serbia Interviews, January 2001, Belgrade 
Students: see Appendix) Serbia has been facing the double jeopardy of post- 
conflict recovery and complete political and economic transition from one system to 
another. After years of heading in a doggedly different direction, Serbia knows it is 
sailing into unchartered territory, with many lessons to be learned by both Serbs and 
the international community.
Chapter Five: South Africa
The peaceful transition of power in South Africa, from apartheid to an ANC- 
led government, was not widely expected prior to the 1994 election. "In the 1980s 
few people either inside or outside South Africa anticipated the irreversible 
liberalisation of the South African polity", or the sudden "passage from white 
minority .. .to African majority rule", that began with President de Klerk's reversal 
of the ban on the ANC, 2 February 1990, and culminated in the Presidential 
inauguration of ex-prisoner and ANC member Nelson Mandela, on 10 May 1994. 
(Guelke, 1999, 1-2)
Instead, many, like Afrikaner journalist/author Rian Malan, feared an 
impending apocalypse.
All across the country, the white right is on the rise. Shadowy 
vigilante groups are cruising the streets of small towns, shooting 
blacks at random from the back of pick-up trucks. In the cities, 
they're blowing up black taxi-ranks, stirring up mayhem in the 
townships, plotting to assassinate the traitor De Klerk. The 
whites-only [areas are]... under siege by muggers and burglars, 
slowly turning into an armed camp. I wish I could say this 
will end well, but I find it hard to have faith. (Malan, 1990,421)
South Africa's political struggle, well known as one of the starkest examples 
of legalised racial oppression in the world, is also a story of how two ethnically 
distinct groups of white colonizers, the Afrikaners and the British, "superimposed" 
their competition on the "white-black conflict". The society that took shape in 
South Africa by the mid 1850s was somewhat unique when compared to that in 
other countries colonised by Europeans. Neither self-sufficient nor dominantly 
white as in Australia, nor bearing any similarity to India where Europeans had more 
limited roles as traders, missionaries, and rulers, South Africa remained somewhere 
in between. Where whites did settle in large numbers, they assumed a position of a
superior group but were highly dependent upon the labour of black Africans. It was 
one of the "very few European colonial settlements where the dominant racial 
minority was ethnically divided" but also where they equally supported a policy of 
racial segregation that led to apartheid. (Giliomee, 2003, 285, 283)
Some of the answers to the ways in which South Africa prevented a civil 
war lie in the country's historic enmity between these two white colonising groups, 
development of legislated apartheid from a jointly advocated policy of segregation, 
the way in which civil unrest transpired, the white government and white citizens' 
response, interaction with the international community, and the willingness of the 
black African community to move on to the future. 
Background
European colonisation of South Africa can be traced back to Cape Town 
when the first Dutch settlement by the Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagie (VOC), 
better known as the Dutch East India Company was established in 1652. The first 
recorded encounter between Europeans and the natives had taken place in 1488, 
when Portuguese sailors, led by Bartolomeu Dias, set anchor in Mossel Bay and 
continued 300 miles up the coast. Noting huge herds of cattle belonging to the 
Khoikhoi natives (latter called Hottentots by Europeans), they established the 
existence of an alternate route to the Indies, giving the Cape of Good Hope its' first 
of several names, "Cabos de Todos los Tormentos", the Cape of all Storms. (Welsh, 
2000, 1-2)
While Western and Eastern coastal regions farther north such as in Ghana, 
were developing wealthy empires by trading gold and slaves with Europe and Asia, 
South Africa remained isolated. With exception of the area in proximity to the Cape 
of Good Hope, there were few safe harbours, rivers had limited navigation, and
access by land was discouraged by a desert stretching from the Atlantic to the Vaal, 
and swamps in Mozambique. The result was slower exposure to modernisation, 
than in other areas of the continent. (Welsh, 2000, xxiv-xxv)
This isolation ended when Simon van der Stel, "one of the founding fathers 
of Afrikanderdom, the first famous 'Afrikaner'" (a word that came into use during 
his lifetime) arrived with his six children, minus his estranged wife, to become the 
Dutch East India Company's Governor in 1679. Eventually severing all ties with 
Holland he began a "South African dynasty", becoming an Afrikaner icon despite 
the fact he was not native Dutch, had been born in Mauritius of Dutch and Indian 
descent, and under apartheid would have been classified as "Coloured". During this 
time, South Africa became an established colony expanding by hundreds of miles, 
increasing agricultural production, and firmly establishing Dutch language and 
manners. French Protestants, who fled persecution in France after 1688 were also 
rapidly assimilated into the prevalent Dutch culture. (Welsh, 2000, 50-52)
By 1780, the Cape Colony began to feel the effects of revolutionary changes 
taking place in Europe and America. In Holland, pro-French and anti-English 
groups, inspired by the success of the American Revolution, attempted to join in a 
coalition of "seafaring powers" banded against Britain. First French, then American 
ships began appearing in the Cape. Finally the British, supporters of the House of 
Orange, under William V, who was the enemy of the Patriots' Free Corps in the 
Netherlands, helped along by Prussian intervention, brought the war to a close in 
1787. On 11 June 1795 the British, arriving with a letter from the Prince of Orange, 
took over government of the colony. This first British occupation was short-lived 
and ceded to the newly formed Dutch Batavian Republic (allies to the French) in the 
Treaty of Amiens 1802, as settlement for the end of the Napoleonic war. Following
the first abdication of Napoleon and reinstallation of the Prince of Orange in the 
Netherlands, the British returned to the Cape Colony, now more highly valued as a 
strategic outpost against the French, for good in 1806. (Welsh, 2000, 84, 88-9, 97) 
They inherited a region of over 80,000 people which consisted of a mix of 
"colonists, Khoikhoi, slaves, and the increasingly numerous 'Bastaards' of mixed 
descent", as well as Xhosa and Bushmen, who had survived disease and persecution 
while living on the periphery of settlements. In the Cape itself were 30,000 slaves 
and about 25,000 prosperous burghers of Dutch, French and German descent who 
spoke Dutch or the related "taal" that came to be known as the Afrikaans language. 
English speaking farmers and Hollanders, exposed to recent world events in Europe, 
and newly arrived inside the relatively isolated Dutch farming communities, tended 
to divide the rural farmers from the newcomers. English law, using a system of 
magistrates, began to initiate a political transition by replacing the previous Dutch 
code and curbing the Governor's powers. (Welsh, 2000, 105, 127, 132-3)
In 1834, the English-led emancipation of Cape slaves most of whom had been 
born there "of mixed descent... speaking a patois that became Afrikaans", 
essentially acknowledged that a "Coloured community" had already been formed. 
This act not only ended all statutory discrimination and slavery but also abolished 
institutions that had been familiar to Afrikaners. This, coupled with 
mismanagement of Dutch farmers' land claims by an English land tenure 
administration influenced by a strong anti-Boer prejudice, sparked an Afrikaner 
exodus to the frontier out of British control. This mass movement of around 15,000 
people between 1835-55, became known as The Great Trek, one of the most 
enduring of Afrikaner symbols. (Welsh, 2000, 148-9,146, 150, 152)
The Trek was represented as a "bold defiance of the British Empire, a 
courageous endeavour to find freedom from persecution in the great spaces of 
Africa". It was later symbolized by a voortrekker monument in Pretoria, celebrated 
by national holidays, and firmly implanted at the "centre of Afrikaner national 
consciousness". (Welsh, 2000, 146-7) The Trek resulted in scattering Afrikaners 
across what is now modern South Africa, except for the southeast seacoast, and to 
destroy any chance for establishing a solely Afrikaner republic where they were 
"self-sufficient in their labour needs". (Giliomee, 2003, xv)
The new Boer Republic of Natalia, on the East side of the Cape, was taken 
over by the British in 1843. The Orange Free State and the Transvaal became Boer 
republics. (Welsh, 2000, 146-7) While these republics were established by fighting 
natives for their land, it was not the trekkers or their descendants but rather the 
British army who defeated indigenous African resistance in the eastern half of South 
Africa in the 1870s and 80s. (Giliomee, 2003, xv)
Historian Hermann Giliomee maintains that the Afrikaners "were both a 
colonized people and colonizers themselves, both victims and proponents of 
European imperialism". When under the control of the Dutch East India Company 
they had been treated as a form of indentured servant with possible punishment for 
misbehaving resulting in the Company taking them back into service as sailors or 
soldiers, with the effect of breaking up their families. While this situation was 
precarious, they were also slave-owners and a part of colonial domination. When the 
British conquered the Cape for the final time in 1806, the Afrikaners, a name that 
had come into common use, while enjoying privileges accorded British subjects, 
were now under a foreign ruler who "displayed the contempt British imperialists so 
often showed for what they regarded as lesser cultures and breeds of men", and
Afrikaners were often portrayed as rough, backward people who were "lacking in 
industry and cruel and unjust in their dealings with indigenous people". (Giliomee, 
2003, xiv)
Growing hostilities between the Afrikaners and the British, exacerbated by the 
discovery of diamonds in 1867, resulting in the Diamond Trade Act of 1882 which 
supported the De Beers diamond mines, and the 1886 discovery of what would 
become one of world's most extensive gold deposits in the Transvaal, erupted into 
civil war. The Boer War of 1899-1902, came at the end of a century of "conquest, 
expansion and compromise" that resulted in two opposing white interpretations of 
South African history. A British historian saw their victory as "the colonial British 
ideal of progress towards a multiracial democracy, slowing but still powerful", 
facing off the "Dutch republicans unflinching assertion of white dominance and 
denial of political rights to all others". (Welsh, 2000, 301, xxvi) Unsurprisingly, an 
Afrikaner's historic interpretation was that in fighting the "twentieth century's first 
anti-colonial war" the Afrikaners were among the first groups "to experience the 
horror of total war and concentration camps for civilians" between which one-tenth 
of the Boers died and almost all farms were destroyed. (Giliomee, 2003, xv)
The war between whites utilising artillery on both sides made South Africa
qualitatively different from all other African colonial states. 
.. .Nothing less than the huge cost in both sides' blood and 
treasure in the second African war, together with a joint 
determination to quash any hopes that blacks may have 
harboured from thinking that the war had also been their 
own, could have made politically possible the centralization 
of four white polities into a Union. (Greenstein, 1998, 291)
English speakers tended to represent Afrikaners as villains and fanatics who 
created or "at least perfected institutionalized racial discrimination", while 
Afrikaners unwittingly contributed by emphasising their status as the only whites 
who were "truly indigenous" and who would "fight to the end for white
supremacy". Giliomee maintains that the "Afrikaner-British rivalry should be 
understood as a typical fight over relative group status and symbols similar to other 
such struggles around the world". (Giliomee, 2003, vi)
Political economist Sampie Terreblanche has described the Anglo-Boer War 
as "undoubtedly the greatest tragedy in South Africa's history". While it was fought 
to protect British interests in southern Africa, "its high cost and the way in which it 
was conducted" accelerated British "economic and moral decline as an industrial 
and imperial superpower". From an Afrikaner and black African view it was an 
economic disaster and "impoverished many people in both groups". (Terreblanche, 
2002, 244-5)
From about 1890 to 1924, there was an "economic and political 'revolution'" 
where
.. .various political units- controlled by the British, Afrikaners, 
and independent African tribes- were united into the Union of 
South Africa under the effective political control of whites. 
During the same period a mining and agricultural revolution took 
place in the northern provinces that not only extended in the Cape 
to the North, but also institutionalised a fully fledged system of 
racial capitalism in all sectors of the South African economy.
(Terreblanche, 2002, 239)
As Terreblanche has emphasised,
this period was not only one of state-building, during which white 
political domination was consolidated, but also one in which the 
state- on behalf of foreign-owned mining corporations-built the 
institutional and physical infrastructure of white supremacy. At 
the same time, it created a racially based socio-economic and 
labour structure aimed at supplying foreign corporations and white 
farmers with a cheap and docile labour force. Consequently, a 
symbiotic relationship developed between white political domination 
and racial capitalism that endured until the 1990s.
(Terreblanche, 2002, 239)
The Union of South Africa was officially established in 1910, combining the 
two British colonies of Natal and the Cape Colony, with the two Afrikaner
Republics, the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. In the years prior to the 
Afrikaner Nationalist party coming into power, a series of key legislation jointly 
supported by English and Afrikaners set the stage for apartheid. Disagreement 
between English and Afrikaners over colour policies did not lie in the policy of 
racial segregation itself, but in the way it was implemented under apartheid.
Alfred Hoernle, an English-speaking liberal intellectual in the 1930s and early 
1940s, "would have found it astonishing that people in the final decades of the 
[twentieth] century could think that race relations were relatively benign before the 
1948 election". He and others opposed interracial activities "not on biological but 
on social and political grounds" and observed that there existed two kinds of 
segregationists; the "single-minded type" who looked upon all black Africans as a 
threat to all whites, and the "double-minded segregationist" who "aimed at the 
parallel development of white and black interests under white control". (Giliomee, 
2003, 448) 
Segregation to apartheid
Between the 1870s and 1913, a perception, despite the obvious minority 
status of whites (340,000 whites to 2.2 million non-whites in the late 1870s, and 
1.25 million whites to 6.4 million non-whites in 1915) took hold among both British 
and Afrikaners that South Africa, with the exception of areas with heavy African 
settlement, was a "white man's land". The issue not only focused on white 
supremacy, but more importantly on "which whites would dominate". Although 
bitter enemies in many respects, the "Dutch and English 'races'", as they were 
referred to in the mid 1800s were prepared to set aside their political differences 
only "at the point where it jeopardized white supremacy itself. This was
particularly the case in the Cape Colony where Afrikaners had a three to one 
majority over the English. (Giliomee, 2003, 283, 487)
The legal foundation for the formal system of apartheid enacted in 1949 can be 
found in the Natives Land Act of 1913, the Industrial Conciliation Act of 1924, and 
the Immorality Act of 1927. It has been pointed out that the strongest ideological 
influences on apartheid were not "Nazi racial dogmas" but widespread white 
community support of segregated schools, theological teachings of the Dutch 
Reformed Church; "a people's church or volkskerk with a mission strategy of 
working towards self-governing indigenous churches", the policy of racial 
discrimination and segregation in the southern United States, "imperialist ideas 
about indirect rule and trusteeship", and "emerging theories of social conflict in 
plural societies". (Giliomee, 2003, xvii-iii)
"Development and dissemination" of apartheid as a formal operating ideology 
produced by Afrikaner nationalism was "a project that originated in the church in 
the Orange Free State and in the political and academic circles of the Western Cape 
rather than in the Transvaal-based Afrikaner Broederbond [brotherhood]". While 
there have been references to a link between German and Afrikaner nationalism in 
the 1940s, there has been little evidence to suggest that it was ever more than 
"tenuous at best". Introduction of apartheid legislation was clearly stated by the 
Nationalist Party to have been inspired by the legal segregation then existing in the 
American southern states. (Giliomee, 2003, The Making of, 376-7) Citing an 1890 
American post-Civil War book by Henry Grady called The New South, advocating 
"separate but equal" policies as "a form of segregation with genuinely equal 
opportunities for both whites and blacks" South African politician Jacob Wilhelm 
Sauer introduced the 1913 Natives Land Act designating areas "outside of which
blacks could neither purchase nor rent land, and within which no one but blacks 
could buy or lease land". (Giliomee, 2003, 303-4, 309)
Immediately following the Anglo-Boer War, poverty among Afrikaners had 
increased dramatically. It was a time when "gold mines were unwilling to employ 
landless Afrikaners despite the fact that the mines were.. .suffering from an acute 
shortage of unskilled labour" due to discrimination against them by mining 
companies and British mine workers. During and after a miners' strike in 1907, 
Afrikaners were employed for the first time in skilled and semi-skilled jobs 
previously held by British mineworkers.
Coming into power in 1910, the Botha/Smuts government sought to 
accommodate demand for lower labour costs by the mining and agricultural 
industries while keeping the job supply steady for white labour, especially 
mineworkers and poor Afrikaners. This was accomplished in 1911 via passage of 
two segregationist laws designed to control black African labour. The first was the 
Native Labour Regulation Act, which was a "repressive measure aimed at making 
African labour cheaper and more docile" and the Mines and Works Act which was a 
"discriminatory measure aimed at protecting white miners against competition from 
Africans". (Terreblanche, 2002, 268-9)
These laid the groundwork for protection of whites at the expense of black 
workers in the Industrial Conciliation Act of 1924.
This act was supported by a broad spectrum of political interests, 
the white bureaucracy, and a united front of mining, industrial, 
and agricultural employers and white trade unions. Its most 
important stipulation was that 'pass-carrying' black men could 
not become members of trade unions, and were thus excluded 
from the official labour relations system. This was a repressive 
measure with far-reaching implications for the bargaining power 
of Africans, and also a discriminatory measure, because Africans 
could no longer participate in wage negotiations alongside white 
workers. (Terreblanche, 2002, 271)
South Africa remained a poor country until the mid 1930s with Afrikaner 
poverty continuing as a dominant problem. Generally perceived as an urban issue, 
the lack of income meant that impoverished whites and other races tended to live 
together in the same mixed low income areas. Fear of racial miscegenation and 
dilution of the white race became a concern for elite whites. (Giliomee, 2003, 340, 
344) The Immorality Act of 1927 (originally passed 30 September 1926) was 
enacted to ban "extra-marital intercourse" between whites and blacks. (South 
African History, 2004)
When the Afrikaner National Party won power by a slim margin in May 
1948, it was treated as a great victory by Afrikaners. At this point in time Afrikaners 
constituted 57% of the white population had a 29% share of total personal income, 
English speakers had a 46% share, and black Africans who totalled 68% of the 
population had a 20% share. About one third of the Afrikaners worked on farms, a 
figure that would drop to half that number by the early 1960s. Over a million 
Afrikaners lived in urban areas and were primarily considered to be in working class 
occupations, with 27% in upper income jobs. There were "now very few Afrikaners 
considered to be poor whites or .. .unskilled" and "it was this profile of the 
Afrikaners that the NP [Nationalist Party] had in mind when it introduced the 
apartheid system". (Giliomee, 2003, 489)
Apartheid, "a system of minority domination of statutorily defined colour 
groups on a territorial, residential, political, social and economic basis" that lasted 
for almost fifty years (Boraine, 1999, 6) formally began in 1949 with enactment of 
the Mixed Marriage Act banning marriages between whites and non-Europeans. 
This was followed by the 1950 Immorality Act which amended the 1927 law to 
extend prohibition of any form of sexual relations between whites and all "others",
to include Coloureds and Indians and the 1950 Population Registration Act, 
considered to be "the basic weapon of apartheid, under which every person had to 
be classified as 'White', 'Asian, and Indian' or 'Coloured'" and made to carry an 
identification card listing their racial category. (Welsh, 2000, 430)
Forced removals of blacks from urban areas to townships was set up through 
the Group Areas Act (1950) which allowed designation of an area to be used solely 
by one race; the Illegal Squatters Act (1951) which provided the framework for 
removing "surplus natives" from cities and towns; and the Abolition of Passes Act 
(1951) which mandated that black men carry passes at all times. This caused strong 
resentment in the black population. (Welsh, 2000,430) As Mahmood Mamdani has 
noted "Without underlining these institutional modifications it is not possible to 
understand the incredibly enhanced capacity of the apartheid state to effect the 
expanded program of influx controls and expulsion procedures - a program summed 
up in two fearful words, forced removals" (Mamdani, 1996,102)
Despite legislated enforcement, in reality, apartheid had never worked as 
well as had been projected. It sustained itself by perpetuating fear of the native 
black majority among the white minority, and creating a false economic dependency 
based on underpaid labour and exclusion of the country's majority workforce. 
Enforcement had also never been comfortable with the categories of Asians and 
Coloureds, whose mixed race numbers had increased throughout apartheid. Each 
year, as the international community increased its scorn, eventually imposing 
economic sanctions, and the native African population felt there was less to lose 
through open protest, the fragile networks that had held the apartheid system 
together began to unravel, and inter-racial violence began to increase.
The conflict
South Africa came close to an all-out civil war in the late 1980s, with a great 
deal of torture, bloodshed, and collusion on all sides, but similarly to the 'Troubles' 
in Northern Ireland, it was never a publicly declared conflict. Almost all accounts 
agree that the crisis and subsequent settlement were the collective outcome of an 
ANC-led revolt, internal social movements, external international pressure in the 
form of sanctions and that the eventual peace was a result of a policy shift from one 
of confrontation to negotiation by the liberation movement under Nelson Mandela 
and the National Party (NP) under F.W. De Klerk. (Hysop, 1999, 2)
The groundwork for the eventual demise of apartheid and political 
transformation of South Africa was laid in the late 1950s when a number of groups 
such as the ANC (African National Congress), the PAC (Pan-Africanist Congress, 
the SAIC (South African Indian Congress), Black Sash (women's organisation), and 
others (many African women in the townships took leadership in leading protests) 
began to band in an united front under the Congress of Democrats. Attempting to 
launch a non-violent Defiance Campaign in 1952, they held massive 
demonstrations, burned pass cards, and held boycotts. The government's response, 
at first hesitant, became uncompromising and led to the Sharpeville Massacre of 
1960. (Alden, 1996, 17-8) The catalyst for the changes in the early 1990s that 
culminated in Nelson Mandela's election, has often been traced to Sharpeville as a 
key event and can be broken into three phases; the years 1960 to 1984; 1984 to 
1986; and 1986-1990. 
The beginning 1960-1984
The Sharpeville Massacre of March 1960 took place in a township located 
outside Veereniging, where the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) orchestrated an anti-
pass demonstration. Several weeks earlier nine policemen had been killed in a 
similar demonstration in Cato Manor, and the poorly trained police force panicked 
and began firing on the crowd, killing 69, most of whom were shot in the back. 
While similar incidents had previously taken place and would happen again, 
Sharpeville turned into a domestic and international watershed for the apartheid 
government.
By April 1960, the government banned the ANC and PAC, "detention 
without trial was introduced" and "torture of prisoners became standard practice". 
Stiff sentences and a number of death verdicts were given to organisers of the 
opposition. (Davies et al, 1985, 142) Decreeing that the African majority of South 
Africa were citizens often "ethnic homelands" and part of the Bantustan 
programme, the government began forcibly removing them to these areas. This 
action sparked immediate international protest and official condemnation of South 
African policies by the UN General Assembly, (van Kessel, 2000, 2) In September 
1966, Prime Minister Dr. H.F. Verwoerd was assassinated by a white parliamentary 
messenger and Balthazar Johannes Vorster took power. (Welsh, 2000, 464)
The Soweto Uprising of 1976, touched off by schoolchildren protesting an 
attempt to introduce Afrikaans instead of English as the main language for school 
instruction, included Indian, Coloured, and black African youths and spread to 
townships in the Rand, Pretoria, Natal, and the Cape. An unofficial death toll from 
the rioting was estimated to be 500 (the official figure was 360), and although the 
government became more repressive, they also became increasingly aware of the 
consequences of their actions. The proposal to use Afrikaans as the dominant 
educational language was dropped, electricity was installed in the townships, and
large numbers of young people emigrated to countries just north of the South 
African border to join the ANC. (Arnold, 1999, 257-8)
After P.W. Botha came to power in 1978, he countered re-emergence of 
resistance in the 1980s with a "total strategy", a policy of keeping the black African 
community under complete subjugation so that "every facet of their life- residence, 
employment, education, public amenities, and politics-was regulated to keep them 
in a strictly subordinate role". (Meredith, 1999, 16) The years 1983 to August 1984, 
saw formation of the United Democratic Front (UDF) which reacted to government 
actions, by launching high-profile campaigns against the 1984 constitution which 
had formed a tricameral parliament that opened political power to Indians and 
Coloureds, but totally excluded black Africans. Many "colored and Indian 
organizations within the UDF were in the forefront of activity." (van Kessel, 2000,
The 1984 to 1986 revolt
Called "the most turbulent period in South African history since the Anglo- 
Boer War", the period of 1984 to 1986, can be seen in hindsight as a turning point 
of change for South Africa's government. September 1984 to July 1985 saw grass 
roots uprisings in the African townships of the Vaal Triangle, "where initially 
localized protests around schools and rents gradually evolved into a challenge of the 
authority of the local and central state", (van Kessel, 2000, 2, xvii)
By the mid 1980s, groups of black youths, known as "comrades", were 
fighting heavily armed police and soldiers inside the townships with "stones, 
catapults, and petrol bombs", (van Kessel, 2000, 5 ) The exiled ANC, supported 
them from afar and in person by infiltrating townships where "many comrades saw
themselves as the shock troops of revolution and believed [victory] was within their 
reach". (Meredith, 1999,15)
The grassroots action in the black townships was supported by whites and 
others, recalled Vincent Kolbe, one of the 1980s founders of Cape Town's 
countercultural Bush radio 89.5.
We fought for the airwaves and were raided and summoned until 
the government issued the license.. .[we] were the only radio station 
with a gay hour.. .Noam Chomsky, Angela Davis.. .The 80s are when 
whites joined en masse.. .The United Democratic Front was potent in 
the 1980s.. .because white students took to the streets.
(SA interviews, 2002, Kolbe: see Appendix)
Botha's government, claiming that this was a communist-inspired 
insurgency, reacted with mass arrests, while imposing a series of states of 
emergency which gave the security forces "unlimited powers" to deal with the black 
African population. They arrested and interned without trial community leaders, 
student activists, church workers, and union officials, while lending support to 
"right-wing vigilante groups". To slow down ANC infiltrations, they "launched 
cross-border raids into neighboring countries and trained and supplied rebel groups 
to disrupt governments there". (Meredith, 1999, 15-6) The heavy handed violence 
of the state security forces escalated reaction in the townships, which the 
government perceived to be from UDF agitation, but which was in most cases 
"spontaneous rather than orchestrated", (van Kessel, 2000, xvii)
During July 1985 to June 1986, the government proclaimed a partial State of 
Emergency, using increasingly repressive tactics that prompted new forms of 
opposition such as consumer boycotts and street committees. This "period of 
'people's power'" was marked by a "peak in violence and messianic expectations of 
impending liberation." (van Kessel, 2000, xvii) 
1986 to 1990
June 1986 to 1988 provoked a second State of Emergency which sparked 
greater rebellion and repression, resulting in townships under "virtual military rule", 
(van Kessel, 2000, xvii) The movement seemed to lose some of its momentum 
when the expectation of liberation didn't materialise and "by early 1987, black 
resistance appeared to be at an end, with the UDF in danger of losing authority over 
their constituencies, most notably in the case of youth." (van Kessel, 2000, xvii- 
xviii)
The beginning of 1989 saw a revival of resistance with political detainees 
staging a hunger strike, which built momentum as more detainees were released. 
The UDF built a new umbrella alliance of trades unions with COSATU (Congress 
of South Africa Trade Unions), and the Mass Democratic Movement (MDM) which 
revived popular protest. When the African National Congress was unbanned, and 
the ANC leadership were released from prison, the UDF, a key actor during the 
crucial years of reform and rebellion in the 1980s, and "an umbrella for a great 
variety of organizations that shared a total rejection of apartheid and a willingness to 
take to the streets in a public demonstration" withdrew from the political scene, 
disbanding in 1991. (van Kessel, 2000, xviii)
The UDF had cobbled together a haphazard alliance to fight the 
government's constitutional reforms of 1982 but "with the wisdom of hindsight, the 
UDF can be depicted as a transitional front" that prepared the ground for "leaders of 
the "authentic" liberation movement to come home from exile and from prison to 
take over power." (van Kessel, 2000, 2) Preparing the way for the ANC had not 
been on the agenda for many of organisers and participants. As one of the central 
activists, Azhar Cachialia, recalled; "Look, when we founded the UDF, we had 
never in our wildest dreams expected that events would take off in the way they did.
What happened was beyond everybody's expectations." (van Kessel, 2000,2) On 2 
February 1990, F.W. de Klerk, President of South Africa, unbanned the ANC and 
all other liberation movements, and on 11 February, freed Nelson Mandela after 
twenty-seven years in prison. 
Sources of conflict
In sub-Saharan Africa, South Africa had always been considered to be a 
"blessed" country, with a highly developed infrastructure producing half the 
electricity generated in Africa, modern agriculture, advanced manufacturing, and a 
world-class stock exchange. But it couldn't counteract the difficulties that arose 
from attempts to maintain an unsustainable policy of apartheid. (Welsh, 2000, xx) 
It failed "because the plan was imposed, because whites lacked the numbers to make 
it work and because the world had changed". Well known English speaking 
Afrikaner intellectual, N.P. van Wyk Louw, had foreseen the system's vulnerability 
in 1952 when he urged Afrikaners "not to choose 'mere survival' over 'survival in 
justice'." (Giliomee, 2003, xviii) In trying to sustain long term minority rule over 
an overwhelming majority, white South Africa developed a support system so 
extreme, that it eventually produced the opposite effect.
Apartheid in effect left no room to compromise on basic human needs such as 
a positive self and group identity. There was no provision made to satisfy the black 
African "need to belong", to counteract fear for their personal safety, or to 
"participate and share in decisions and processes that directly affect their 
lives... .Apartheid not only denied black people in South Africa their freedom, it 
also humiliated them and frustrated their basic need for respect and recognition" 
setting up the type of social and political structures that "are the deepest roots of 
conflict". (Amoo et al, 2002, 13-14)
As Mahmood Mamdani has observed, "neither institutional segregation nor 
apartheid was a South African invention" but the South African version required "a 
degree of force and brutality" that seemed to place it in a class of its own. "The 
context in which apartheid came to be implemented made for its particularly harsh 
features" for to separate the races and create native institutions in an urbanised and 
semi-industrial South Africa, meant "the forced removal of those marked 
unproductive" in order to push them out of the white areas and back into native 
homelands, while at the same time forcing the ones "deemed productive" to embark 
on an "ongoing cycle of annual migrations" between the workplace and homeland. 
(Mamdani, 1996, 6-7)
Under apartheid South Africa was a country that was "artificially 
deurbanised". Beginning in the Western Cape area during the late 1950s and 
spreading nationwide, it is estimated that between 1960 to 1985, forced removals to 
the townships "uprooted more than 3.5 million people", and accounted for "more 
than 10 percent of the South African population-labour tenants, farm squatters, and 
city residents". Given these facts, "there could be no mistaking apartheid in the 
urban areas as anything but a frontal assault on the residual rights of the African 
population". (Mamdani, 1996, 102)
Race was used as the sole criteria for access to jobs, income, and standard of 
living. The official racial categories were originally defined as "'white, coloured, 
Native' " in the 1950 Population Registration Act, then changed from "Native to 
Bantu" in 1951, and again to "Black" in 1978. In the post-apartheid era, racial 
categories have been referred to as population or ethnic groups (this last usually 
meaning African Xhosa or Zulu) and referred to as four main groups; "African,
white, Coloured, and South Africans of Asian origin (Indian)". (Gibson and Gouws, 
2003, 36-7: also Chapter Two)
It can be argued that perhaps more than other Europeans composing South 
Africa's white groups, Afrikaaners have always seen themselves as having a bigger 
stake in Africa, rather than Europe. Constantly fearing annihilation by the vast 
majority of natives and non-whites, and not trusting the British and other members 
of their own racial group, Afrikaners became increasingly hard-line about apartheid 
as a way to defend the barricades. As one Cape Town academic observed,
Afrikaners have always known we are a minority and when the chips 
are really down we don't count for much... .My view is that Afrikaners 
as a group have historically been a decided minority... .Until the end of 
the 19th century, even in the republic where they were politically 
sovereign, everyone knew they were the backwater of the English 
empire. (SA Interviews, 2002, du Toit: see Appendix)
Prior to the 1994 election, it has been observed that there were three major 
irreconcilable political positions on the conflict. The first was an extreme right wing 
position of seceding and creating a white-only homeland; the second an 
"Africanist/socialist position of no negotiation until the regime is defeated and ready 
to transfer power", and the third, an emerging National Party-ANC alliance that was 
increasingly finding common ground in a "social-democratic economic 
compromise". (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 229)
During the 1980s, "few people either inside or outside South Africa 
anticipated the irreversible liberalisation" of the South African political scene. 
Acknowledging that the situation was at an "impasse", and that a "fundamental 
breakdown of the existing system had taken place" with the admission of the 
"existence of a South African conflict" (Guelke, 1999, 2-3) white South Africans 
"poured endlessly into the shops and malls in an apparent frenzy of consumption... 
as barricades burned in the townships, and armoured vehicles rolled through their
streets". (Hyslop, 1999,1) In 2002 interviews it was recalled that white people 
have "never not been fearful". (SA Interviews, 2002, Kolbe: see Appendix) Many 
had difficulty identifying with an African continent whose image was seen as 
"mostly negative - famine, disease, lack of infrastructure.. .to think of yourself as 
part of that.. .white people [couldn't] fathom that". (SA Interviews, 2002, Gouws: 
see Appendix)
For those involved in the late 1980s resistance, there was a growing feeling 
that this time things would finally change. By the end of 1984 the Confederation of 
South Africa Trade Unions (COSATU) had become a mouthpiece for reform 
demanding "the release of Nelson Mandela, the abolition of the pass laws, and an 
end to foreign investment". In 1985, the 25th anniversary of the Sharpeville 
Massacre, rent strikes, boycotts, and demonstrations pushed things still farther and 
federal troops began to back up the police in townships.
Alongside the overarching conflict, much internal intimidation took the form 
of black-on-black crime where township victims accused of collusion or informing 
the government, were murdered by "necklacing" or "putting an old tire filled with 
kerosene around the neck .. .and setting it on fire". (Arnold, 1999, 258-9) The rise 
of black African vigilantes who fought anti-apartheid groups on behalf of local 
governing bodies supported by the government, began to emerge in the mid 1980s. 
In urban townships they were seen as "right-wing, community council-backed 
vigilantes whose primary targets [were] groups that threatened] the status and 
function of the community councils". The rural, homeland vigilantes appeared to be 
"little more than paramilitary auxiliaries whose sole function [was] to prevent the 
appearance of...organized resistance to.. .homeland authorities" who saw their 
authority under threat in a post apartheid era. (Haysom, 1986, 7,9)
Despite the danger, in 1987 "650,000 households took part in rent boycotts" 
and for two days in May (5-6), "a general strike brought three million workers and 
students out". Young whites began to protest the draft on the grounds of 
conscientious objections. (Arnold, 1999, 258-9) By the late 1980s, South Africa 
was out of step with the rest of the world, "by then Martin Luther King was 
assassinated, the Beatles, long hair .. .the rest of the world was thinking of apartheid 
as an anachronism. .. .When the US passed anti apartheid investment laws, de Klerk 
said we need to do something." (SA interviews, 2002, Kolbe: see Appendix)
When F.W. de Klerk, the final apartheid-era President, took office after 
Botha resigned, the country had been under increased international pressure in the 
form of economic sanctions; trade sanctions, an arms boycott; and in cultural, sport, 
and political isolation. World events such as the end of the Cold War in the late 
1980s and the subsequent disintegration of the Soviet Union which had been a 
"major benefactor and source of military and financial support" for the ANC 
"allowed Western nations, previously lukewarm to the ANC" to view them more 
favourably. (Haysom, 2002,11) The stage was set for change and by February 
1990, de Klerk saw the necessity for South Africa to redefine its system of 
governance. He ended a thirty year exclusion of the ANC (African National 
Congress) and PAC (Pan-Africanist Congress) and freed Nelson Mandela.
Once again, black on black violence escalated as a power struggle began 
first in KwaZulu, Natal, and eventually parts of Witwatersrand, between Mandela's 
ANC party and the Zulu nationalist Inkatha Party headed by Chief Buthelezi (see 
chapter seven). Security forces "still wedded to the ideal of a 'total strategy'" 
colluded with the Inkatha to keep the ANC from power (Meredith, 1999,17), and to 
"boost Buthelezi's chances for personal political advancement" (Arnold, 1999, 259)
Massacres by both sides took place with death squads "known to be at work". 
(Meredith, 1999,17) By March 1990, after Mandela was released, approximately 
3000 Africans had been killed in these clashes while the white police either refused 
to intervene or arrived late on the scene. (Arnold, 259) The black Azanian People's 
Liberation Army, opposed to negotiation, singled out white civilian targets, while 
white right-wing paramilitaries equalled the score. The ensuing turmoil threatened 
to wreck the negotiation process. (Meredith, year, 17)
According to one Robben Island ANC ex-prisoner interviewed just prior to 
the 1994 elections, the violence had not been unexpected.
You know when ANC was unbanned I think some of us were very 
cautious. We knew .. .the government was unbanning us.. .not 
because of change of heart.. .They are unbanning us so as to clobber 
us. We knew that... thing[s] are not going to be that easy and of 
be allowed to work openly you know but it's going to be through our 
efforts that we force this government to stop this violence. .. .We are
going to win the elections [1994] .. ..There's still going to be violence,
even after elections.
.. .I'm not saying that violence is what I believe in and so on. I wish I 
can stop but I'm a trained person, I've studied situations outside, in 
other countries.. .1 know that the right wing will not leave the ANC 
to run this country, to govern undisturbed. They'll want to destroy it. 
Destabilise [the] ANC government.
.. .Former SADF forces or generals are .. .setting up private armies under 
the guise of security companies.. .Some of them are not just resigning to 
go and do fishing or farming you know. I think we need to prepare people 
for that but I think also work for peace you know. ...I'm an optimist. I 
think the situation will improve and of course the ANC must be creative. 
ANC must always be with the people you know and learn from the 
experiences of other countries.
(Mayibuye Centre, 1993, Binda, Cassette 3, side A)
The years between the liberalisation of the political system in 1990 and its 
democratisation in 1994 were seen by most as a key period in determining the 
uncertain outcome of elections in 1994. The fall of Communism in Eastern Europe 
has generally been assumed to have been a major catalyst for President de Klerk's 
apparently abrupt changes, but whatever realistic options may have been available
in the early 1990s, it can be said that the prevailing perception was that negotiating 
and forging political alliances among genuine representatives of the population was 
critically important to future economic growth and to achieving a fully inclusive 
democratic government. This "high road" approach was seen as the necessary 
option for an inclusive political system that ensured peace as opposed to a "low 
road" pursuit of authoritarian government with carefully chosen political 
representatives and stagnant or low economic growth that would "ultimately turn 
the country into a waste land." (Guelke, 1999, 2,12-13) 
As Guelke has pointed out,
The issues of what options were available in the late 1980s is an 
important one... .the common assumption was that a variety of 
options was available through negotiations with genuine representatives 
of public opinion. This perception was important in sustaining a 
political climate favourable to calls for negotiations, [between the 
Nationalist Party and the ANC] In this context, a distinction was 
often drawn between substantive negotiations on a new dispensation 
and the efforts being made by the government to co-opt leaders from 
the subordinate communities. (Guelke, 1999,12-3)
Guelke emphasises that it was the perception of the consequences of either choice 
that influenced public opinion, especially among the white community, and made 
them receptive to the changes de Klerk made in February 1990. (Guelke, 1999, 12-
When the barricades finally crashed in 1992, due to a "surprising 68.7 per 
cent of South Africa's 15 per cent whites" voting to support a "negotiated abolition 
of their minority rule" in a 17 March 1992 referendum, it "passed almost as a non- 
event" due to the fact that "many apartheid laws had already been largely ignored 
and remained unenforced". (McGarry and O'Leary, 1993, 226-7)
The road to peace
South Africa's choice to create a Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
(TRC) transformed it into a global role model for constructing positive strategies
promoting post-conflict reconciliation. The idea for the TRC was proposed as early 
as 1992, but not seriously discussed until after Nelson Mandela was elected 
President in 1994. Controversy during negotiations to shape the legislation in late 
1993, focused on the issue of amnesty in exchange for testimony, a point insisted 
upon by both the government and military. In the end, everyone agreed to a " 
'postamble' to the constitution stating that 'amnesty shall be granted in respect of 
acts, omissions and offenses associated with political objectives and committed in 
the course of the conflicts of the past', and only later linked directly to the "truth- 
seeking process". (Hayner, 2001, 41)
After seeking citizen input and holding two international conferences 
exploring post-conflict transitional justice procedures implemented in other 
countries, Parliament passed the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation 
Act in 1995. Following open public nominations and selection, Archbishop 
Desmond Tutu was appointed as chair along with seventeen commissioners. The 
TRC was composed of three interconnected committees; the Human Rights 
Violations Committee (HRV), responsible for collecting statements from victims 
and witnesses and charting the extent of the "gross human rights violations" 
between 1960 and 1994; the Amnesty Committee (AC) which rendered decisions on 
individual applications; and the Reparations and Rehabilitation Committee (R&R), 
which designed and recommended a reparations program. (Hayner, 2001, 41-2)
The Human Rights Committee identified and referred victims to the 
Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee which was empowered to "provide victim 
support" envisaging the overall function of the recommendations as ensuring "non 
repetition, healing and healthy co-existence". A President's Fund, composed of 
funds designated by Parliament and private contributors was established to "pay
urgent interim reparation to victims in terms of the regulations prescribed by the 
President". The Amnesty Committee to whom anyone could apply for amnesty 
from "any act, omission, offence associated with a political objective committed 
between 1 March 1960 to 6 December 1993" was later extended to 11 May 1999. 
(TRC website, 2003, The Committees)
Beginning work on April 1996, they released a five-volume report in 
October 1998. (Hayner, 2001, 44-5) The Amnesty Committee, which finished 
taking applications in September 1997, did not finish making decisions until 2001. 
(TRC website, 2003, The Committee) The last two and most contentious reports, 
one by the amnesty committee and the other a comprehensive victims list, were 
handed over in March 2003, officially ending the commission and initiating the 
state's legal obligation to pay reparations (Mail & Guardian Online, 2003, 
Controversy, Saint)
While there is little doubt the TRC played an important cathartic role in 
publicly acknowledging victims' suffering, and a positive step in creating a 'new' 
South Africa, it was equally clear that for many it had limitations. One problem was 
a strong Christian view described as a "religious-redemptive vision" that "stressed 
public confession by victims and .. .created meaning for suffering through a 
narrative of sacrifice for liberation". (Wilson, 2001, xix)
In an emotive, evangelical style, Archbishop Tutu epitomised this position 
by pushing victims to 'forgive' their perpetrators, while describing the act of 
forgiveness as "realpolitik" beyond the realm of religion or the spiritual, and as 
"beyond justice". For him it expressed "a faith of grace", and an African 
communalism called Ubuntu, which said that "I am human only because you are 
human. If I undermine your humanity, I dehumanise myself. You must do what you
can to maintain this great harmony, which is perpetually undermined by resentment, 
anger, desire for vengeance." (Mail & Guardian, 2003, Ultimate)
While it has been noted that religion and local belief systems were an 
important source of "inspiration and legitimation" for the 1980 protests and that 
"many - probably most" of the protesters "were not acting within a purely secular 
framework" ...but "also fighting a spiritual battle against the forces of darkness, 
cleansing society of evil in the search for harmonious moral order"(van Kessel, 
2000,11), combining religion with the formal legal components of a truth 
commission became problematic. (Mail & Guardian, 2003, Ultimate)
In a 1996 newspaper article, an 'anonymous' TRC commission member 
commented that while Tutu's faith was his greatest asset it was "also his greatest 
blind spot". Allowing him to be a "visionary leader, a symbol of reconciliation, 
beloved to all".. .it also imbued him with a "theological fatalism" that made him feel 
that things were out of his control and "that, at the end of the day, a force higher 
than us will make things happen". As leader of a spiritual body, the Anglican 
Church, Tutu was used to a beneficent role in which he stated policy and expected 
others to unquestioningly follow, but as leader of the TRC, he headed up a group of 
seventeen members who were politicians and lawyers and "tough as nails". Many of 
them, while feeling a deep affection for him, viewed his "clerical paternalism as 
offensively patronising" and told him so. "It would take ages to reach decisions 
because he wasn't able to move them forward and he didn't want to let go of 
something if he disagreed with it." (Mail & Guardian, 2003, Ultimate)
According to some, the biggest problem with the TRC was that it sought an 
overarching legitimacy in a legal context, by elevating "truth out of the realm of 
political struggle and negotiation" (Wilson, 2001,225) while simultaneously
ignoring the fact that the process of forgiveness, whether political or religious, often 
has an element of revenge in its earliest stages, and must be given voluntarily by 
victims (see Chapter Seven). In the end, the religious emphasis "restricted both the 
narrative form and the content" especially excluding revenge "in a process of legal 
colonization ... of personal experience. The real question was 'how to strike the 
right balance between legal-forensic investigations and historical approaches to 
truth". (Wilson, 2001,225)
The positive effect of a human rights commission was that ideals and talk 
focusing on human rights could help to "create a space which did not exist before" 
and "where narratives of suffering could.. .become incorporated into the official 
version on the past." The benefit of the TRC was that it helped different groups 
within a highly segregated society to understand their common ground and to 
irrevocably invalidate any "claim that apartheid was a well-intended policy of good 
neighborliness that somehow went wrong." Because of the TRC the "range of 
permissible lies is now much narrower." (Wilson, 2001, 224-5)
In post-2000 assessments and later observations made in Cape Town 2002, it 
became clear that the TRC, while well-intended with its discourse on human rights 
and efforts to promote reconciliation, had excluded those for whom the truth did not 
set free, such as Steve Biko's family and others who wanted other means of seeking 
closure to their past. 
Conclusion
In many ways the South African story is a familiar one of native populations 
conquered by outsiders who then claimed the land as their own, and proceeded to 
exclude the original inhabitants from mainstream participation. Apartheid was an 
extreme and brutal version of this pattern. However, for the rest of the world, it is
the way in which all South Africans handled the sudden change in political power 
that is of greatest interest. Nevertheless, as post-Mandela and TRC South Africa is 
discovering, there are no quick fixes or easy answers as the country addresses the 
difficult gap between expectations of change and reality of implementation.
There are still extremist groups and many, from all backgrounds, ranging 
from conservative Afrikaners, former '80s activists, township residents, have had 
difficulty accepting the ways in which these changes have occurred. The ANC has 
discovered that holding political power is complex and that there are no quick fixes 
to the enormous economic, social, political problems it inherited. There are still 
enormous disparities in income split along racial lines, widening disparities of 
income with the emergence of a wealthy black African upper-middle class, a huge 
HIV/AIDS problem, and a constant search for ways to get poor disaffected youth 
better educations and jobs. Problems related to the inward flow of war refugees 
from other African war-torn areas have also emerged.
Still, there is hope. As one twenty-five year old Gugaleteu township resident 
expressed "My age group were of the first allowed to integrate the schools. I went 
to Sea Point High which used to be all white" and "with that came a freer interaction 
with white, and Jewish kids". Then "I went to UCT", the University of Cape Town, 
"after that."
What do I think of South Africa? .. .One can only go up -I don't see 
us going into such a deep trench we can't get out of it. South Africa 
is the one country that can get the continent right by showing the rest. 
..[by].. .eradicating corruption, alleviating poverty, creating a model. 
We should advise not dictate ... lead by example.
(SA Interviews, 2002, Melane: see Appendix)
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission was a bold and courageous effort to 
address the problems of the past, however, as in many post-conflict areas, there are 
still huge problems and strong and potentially violent feelings beneath the surface.
However, no one knows better than South Africans themselves that their hard work of 
reconciliation has just begun.
SECTION III: CONCLUSION
Chapter Six: Violence in Peace
Continuation and escalation of violence during peace processes has become 
increasingly problematic for civilians in countries recovering from violent conflict. 
Most, along with the international community, expect a negotiated peace to bring 
violence to an abrupt halt, however, as has been clearly shown in Northern Ireland, 
Serbia, and South Africa, this is seldom the case. Instead, the continuation, and 
often escalation, of violence in the early days of peace is a major stumbling block 
for internal populations trying to rebuild and create social institutions after civil war, 
and a dangerous source of misunderstanding and frustration for the international aid 
and peacekeeping community who are trying to help them.
The expectation that violence developed over the duration of a conflict, will 
"become irrelevant and swiftly disappear" once a peace agreement has been reached 
has proven to be unrealistic. (Hays and McAllister, 2001, 901-2) A '"transition 
from war to peace' is unlikely to see a clean break from violence to consent, from 
theft to production, from repression to democracy, or from impunity to 
accountability". Instead it is more "likely to institutionalize violence in some form" 
as "peace may not be possible without institutionalizing violence in some way." 
(Keen, 2001,10) 
Transition to Peace
Early post conflict violence is strongly influenced and motivated by the way in 
which a peace agreement has been brokered. The biggest threat during this period is 
from "spoilers.. .leaders and parties who believe that peace emerging from 
negotiations threatens their power, worldview, and interests, and use violence to 
undermine attempts to achieve it." (Stedman, 1997, 5) Peace agreements are often
divisive and representation in the process may be skewed so that "after a negotiated 
ending to a civil war, most countries lie in the intermediate terrain" between 
domestic forces who backed peace accord implementation, and "hardliners on one 
or more sides who would prefer a return to armed conflict over implementation of 
the accords". (Boyce, 2002, 32)
As has been illustrated in post-agreement paramilitary punishment beatings 
and intimidation in Northern Ireland; transitional violence between African political 
parties in South Africa; political assassinations and organised crime in post war 
Serbia; violence may shift rapidly from inter to intra group targets. This may result 
in an increased number of assassinations, punishment beatings, vigilantism, 
coercion, forced exile, and other forms of intimidation used to settle scores and 
jockey for political power among one's own group.
Stephen Stedman has made the assertion that "peace processes create 
spoilers." During a conflict "there are combatants, who can be identified in myriad 
ways-for example, rebels, bandits, pariahs, rogues, or terrorists" but "spoilers exist 
only when there is a peace process to undermine". Peace creates spoilers "because it 
is rare in civil wars for all leaders and factions to see peace as beneficial. Even if all 
parties come to value peace, they rarely do so simultaneously, and they often 
strongly disagree over the terms of an acceptable peace." (Stedman, 1997, 7)
As Keen has noted "the art of facilitating a transition from war to peace may 
lie, to a considerable extent, in ensuring that some of those benefiting from war are 
in a position to benefit to a greater extent from peace." (Keen, 2001, 12, 18-9) For 
international interveners this means correctly identifying the types of spoilers who 
are slowing down an agreement or peace process and taking the most effective
strategy to thwart them. Stedman has classified three types of spoilers; total, 
limited, and greedy.
Total spoilers can be most difficult long term, as they often have fixed, 
inflexible goals and ideologies, and are led by individuals "who see the world in all- 
or-nothing terms" and/or who exhibit "pathological tendencies that prevent the 
pragmatism necessary for compromise settlements of conflict". Limited spoilers 
usually have several inflexible, specified goals such as "recognition and redress of 
grievance" or "a share of power or the exercise of power constrained by a 
constitution and opposition" as well as demands for meeting the "basic security" 
needs of their followers. Greedy spoilers are somewhere between the first two, only 
with more flexibility. "The greedy spoiler holds goals that expand or contract based 
on calculations of cost and risk", at one point having "limited goals that expand 
when faced with low costs and risks" and alternatively having "total goals that 
contract when faced with high costs and risks." (Stedman, 1997,10-11)
Since the beginning of the 1990s when the international community began 
acting as "custodians of peace processes" three major strategies to address spoiler- 
caused problems have been pursued: inducement, socialization, and coercion. 
Inducement takes a positive approach to addressing spoiler grievances that include 
fear, security, fairness, demand for greater benefits, justice, and legitimisation or 
acknowledgement of their position. Socialization relies on establishing a 
combination of material and intellectual norms while "carefully calibrating the 
supply of carrots and sticks to reward and punish the spoiler". Normative standards 
can include
commitment to the rules of democratic competition and adherence 
to the protection of human rights. The intellectual component 
can be aimed at both elites (the attempt to inculcate appropriate
values) and at citizens (the attempt to educate the mass of citizens 
into norms of good governance, democratic competition, and 
accountability, as a means of pressuring elites).
(Stedman, 1997, 12-13)
Coercion has ranged from the use or threat of punishment, coercive diplomacy 
incorporating threats and demands, the use of force, and the two most common 
strategies - the "departing train" and/or "withdrawal" strategies. The departing 
train strategy combines the premise that the "spoiler's demands and behaviour are 
illegitimate with the assertion that the peace process will go irrevocably forward, 
regardless of whether the spoiler joins in or not." Withdrawal assumes "the spoiler 
wants an international presence during the peace process" and "aims to punish the 
spoiler by threatening to withdraw the international support and peacekeepers from 
the peace process." The problem with this strategy is that it operates like a " blunt 
instrument" in that it "promises to hurt parties who have fulfilled their obligations 
and rewards any spoiler who opposes international engagement." (Stedman, 1997, 
13-14)
The most effective use of strategies is considered to be the application of 
either force or the "departing train" scenario on total spoilers who "cannot be 
accommodated in a peace settlement; they must be defeated or so marginalized that 
they can do little damage"; or implementation of some form of inducement that can 
include in some cases, a policy of socialization and/or coercion on limited spoilers 
who "can be accommodated by meeting .. .nonnegotiable demands." (Stedman, 
1997,14-15)
Greedy spoilers require a long-term socialization strategy but in the short term 
can be a serious problem. "As inducements alone will serve only to whet the 
appetite of the greedy spoiler, the legitimacy and illegitimacy of its demands must 
be clearly distinguished" and depending on the "cost insensitivity and risk-taking of
the spoiler, the use of coercive sticks may be necessary to impose costs and create a 
strong sense of limits to the spoiler's demands." (Stedman, 1997, 15)
A controversial but somewhat common strategy has been to grant amnesty for 
prisoners, incurring an almost universally negative reaction among groups of all 
sides in countries where it has been implemented, such as Northern Ireland and 
South Africa. However, it has been equally clear that without prisoner cooperation 
in supporting peace agreements, using amnesty as a condition of their release, peace 
would not have occurred (see Chapter One).
Less controversial has been the ease with which the upper echelon of 
paramilitary and rebel groups have appeared to gain political legitimacy while the 
bottom half or dissident members of the organisations have failed to find dramatic 
improvements in their living conditions during peace. One outstanding example of 
transition from outlaw to legitimate politician has been the success of Gerry Adams 
of the Sinn Fein Party, long linked to the highest levels of the IRA in Northern 
Ireland.
For six years, beginning in 1988 (ending in 1994), a ban by the British 
government prohibited the broadcast of Northern Ireland's IRA and loyalist 
paramilitary spokesmen's voices. Gerry Adams could be seen but not heard on 
British television, a situation which was circumvented by the BBC and British 
media using an actor's voice-over. The turning point came in 1994 when Adams, 
having been previously considered an "international pariah" and prohibited from 
entering the United States, was granted a special visa by President Clinton. The 
Republic of Ireland subsequently lifted its ban on radio and television interviews by 
Adams and Sinn Fein, and along with political prisoners from all sides of the
conflict, Adams became extremely useful in advancing the peace process. (O'Toole, 
2003,14)
It was "the very ambiguity of his position" that became one of the great 
assets of the peace process. "If Adams were not accepted as a democratic politician, 
he could not be brought into negotiations. If, on the other hand, he did have at least 
a significant degree of control over the terrorists, he could deliver what the 
governments and most of the Irish people wanted: an end to the IRA's sordid 
campaign." In the mid 1990s, Adams was viewed as the key person to help 
persuade the IRA to exchange political violence for political strategy. By bringing 
him so prominently into the peace process, the international interveners helped to 
advance negotiations by combining inducements such as a high profile role and a 
visit to the United States, with an opportunity to be elected as a legitimate politician 
in the new government. His perceived success was such that by 2003, Gerry Adams, 
"the godfather of terrorism", had been reborn as a "tree-loving, wine-drinking 
celebrity politician." (O'Toole, 2003,14)
Another well known ex-IRA man and key Sinn Fein politician, Martin 
McGuinness, became the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland in 1999. In 
May 2001, after stating that he had been second in command for the IRA in Derry 
(Londonderry) on Bloody Sunday, January 30,1972, he subsequently survived a 
motion for a vote of 'no confidence' proposed by lan Paisley's right wing DUP 
(Democratic Unionist Party) in the Assembly. Despite having left formal education 
at age fifteen, in a Belfast Telegraph poll of ministers taken 24 May 2001, "he came 
in third with a 44% approval rating" and "won the Mid-Ulster seat in the General 
Election in 2001 with a significantly increased personal majority of almost 10,000 
votes over lan McCrea .. .of the DUP." (McGuinness, 2003)
Loyalist paramilitary leaders who had supported the Unionist cause made a 
similar transition. David Ervine and Billy Hutchinson, both prominent politicians in 
the Progressive Unionist Party (PUP), in the Northern Ireland Assembly, had been 
equally visible members of the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), and had continued, 
like Sinn Fein to act as spokespersons for paramilitary members. (PUP, 2003)
In South Africa, as of 2003, much of the government, including the 
president, and most members of the African National Congress (ANC), had 
previously been outlawed and/or imprisoned as part of a rebel group dedicated to 
the overthrow of apartheid government. (ANC, 2003) Nelson Mandela, elected 
president of South Africa in 1994, hailed by all sides as a hero in preventing open 
warfare, had been a prisoner, ANC member, and former publicly declared enemy of 
the state.
These well-publicised leaps from status of condemned outlaw to powerful 
politician, have reinforced the use of violence as a political tool in that
groups that have been able to use violence to secure control of 
production, trade and emergency aid in wartime may be able to 
carve out for themselves a degree of control over production, trade 
and development or reconstruction aid after a peace settlement. 
(Indeed part of the point of wartime violence may be precisely to 
secure a commanding and lucrative position within the peacetime 
economy). (Keen, 2001,12)
It has become equally clear that legitimate political power and its benefits 
gained through a peace agreement are usually most advantageous to the elite, or 
roughly top half of the organisation of rebel groups, irregular troops, and 
paramilitaries, as the prospect of peace has offered few advantages to lower ranks. 
For this less influential and visible group, there is often a shift from predominately 
political to solely criminal violence. For them, the prospect of peace can mean 
trading power gained by intimidation and comfortable outlaw lifestyles, supported 
by racketeering, illegal arms trading, drug dealing, and human trafficking, for one of
low income jobs, bad housing, and substandard quality of life with little prospect for 
change. This perception by the rank and file, of little advantage in pursuing a 
legitimate nonviolent lifestyle during peace, has continued to motivate violence in 
Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South Africa.
Punishment in Northern Ireland
Throughout the thirty years of conflict, Northern Ireland always had an 
imperfect safety net in the form of Great Britain. As John Newsinger observed in his 
work on British counter-insurgency,
The war in Northern Ireland was, of course, complicated by its 
being formally part of the United Kingdom. Indeed... the initial 
attempt to employ the same counterinsurgency methods that were 
perceived to have been successful in Malaya, Aden and elsewhere 
were to prove a disaster in Northern Ireland, enabling the Provisional 
IRA to establish and consolidate a strong base of support for itself 
within the Catholic working class. (Newsinger, 2002,2)
Characteristic of conflicts of this type, in Northern Ireland, most paramilitary 
violence with the exception of bombings, took the more common "form of 
intermittent street assaults, rioting, vandalism, and assassinations", with much of 
this activity coming under the category of 'punishment', a form of internal 
community policing carried out by paramilitaries on both sides. (McGinty, 2001, 
In 1994 when the Loyalist and Republican ceasefires were called, and again in 
1997 in the case of the IRA, both sides were adamant that only "military activities" 
would cease and that "policing activities" would continue "albeit fluctuating in the 
light of political events and events in local communities". (McEvoy et al, 2002, 
536-7)
One of the preconditions for signing up to take part in all party peace 
negotiations leading to the final 1998 agreement was "the willingness of Sinn Fein
and the Loyalist parties connected to the Loyalist paramilitaries to 'urge that 
punishment killings and beatings stop and to take effective steps to prevent such 
actions'." Despite notable exceptions, such as the 1998 Omagh bombing (which 
was by most accounts a bungled Real IRA bomb threat) and assassination of lawyer 
Rosemary Nelson by Loyalist paramilitaries, "the absence of major bombings and 
'military' attacks in the wake of the ceasefires considerably raised the political 
significance of punishment violence." (McEvoy et al, 2002, 536-7)
According to police statistics, (reported) paramilitary-style assaults in 1995, 
the year of the first ceasefire that led to the 1998 peace agreement, had more than 
doubled among Loyalists and nearly tripled among Republicans over the previous 
year. In 1997/98, the year the peace agreement was signed, there had been a 
dramatic dip in beatings, going from 125 to 70 among Loyalists, and from 166 to 55 
among Republicans. However, the following year, this rose to almost double 
among Loyalists, while rising only slightly among Republicans. As of 2002/03, with 
the exception of a Republican decrease in 1999/00 and 2001/02, beatings have 
continued among both groups, and since 1999/00 have steadily increased among 
Loyalists. (Chief Constable's Annual Report 1988-2003; 98/99:128, 99/00:150, 
02/03:21)
Young males under thirty have consistently been the main targets in recent 
years. "In 1995, the first full year of paramilitary ceasefires, there were no shootings 
of young people at all. Since then the trend has been clearly upwards, with an 
acceleration in 'punishment' shootings." According to statistics on assaults of 
children and juveniles, the greatest perpetrators have been Loyalist paramilitaries 
and a significant number of victims have been 17 or younger. While women were 
less often the direct victims of paramilitary assaults, they were nonetheless often
unwilling witnesses to the attacks and left to care for permanent injuries caused by 
the beatings. (Kennedy, 2001, 4, 6-7)
A simple view of paramilitary punishment violence is that it has been and 
still is a strategy "designed to maintain a position of hegemony within local 
communities." (McEvoy et al, 2002, 536) On the Republican side, however, it is 
the legacy of the RUC's (Royal Ulster Constabulary now renamed the Police 
Service of Northern Ireland or PSNI) "lack of acceptability or legitimacy in 
working-class communities and their usage of local criminals as informers" thus 
leaving a couple of generations with little experience of a credible, local or national 
state police force. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 536) This attitude was compounded by 
allegations of collusion between the police and Loyalist paramilitaries in order to 
assassinate IRA members or anyone accused of sympathy toward them. (Newsinger, 
2002, 2)
This paramilitary style
produced a brutal system of informal justice wherein both Republican 
and Loyalist paramilitaries assumed responsibility for the 'policing' 
of their areas through punishment beatings, shootings and banishments. 
Thousands of individuals were shot in the knees, thighs, elbows or 
ankles, beaten with iron bars, baseball bats or hurling sticks, or 
forcibly excluded from their communities. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 536)
In Republican communities, most of the activity was carried out by the IRA, 
through an organisational unit called "the civil administration" which heard 
complaints of criminal activities or anti-social behaviour from the communities they 
served. They carried out investigations and administered "designated punishment". 
The Loyalist side, less organised and more narrowly focused, dealt primarily with 
internal disciplinary actions against fellow paramilitary members, or members of 
rival splinter groups, rather than members of their own communities, but with 
equally harsh punishment. (McEvoy et al, 2002, 536)
Despite the possibility of being targets themselves, for a variety of reasons still 
related to both communities' lack of confidence in police protection, some degree 
of local support for paramilitary policing has remained. Increasingly, however, the 
paramilitaries are looking less like community police forces and more like ordinary 
organised crime syndicates consolidating a "patchwork of Mafia-style mini-states, 
of orange or green complexion, operating vendetta-style justice and sustained 
economically by extortion and other forms of racketeering". (Kennedy, 2001, 7)
In spite of, or in a more cynical view because of, the transition from political to 
criminal violence, overall peace is holding.
Despite strains in republican and loyalist ceasefires, and even 
despite the British government's judgement in October 2001 that 
the Ulster Defence Association's (UDA's) is no longer intact, the 
main point is that only a small minority still think the problems in 
the North can be sorted out through armed struggle. (Porter, 2003, 2)
What we are witnessing at the moment in Northern Ireland are
the protracted negotiations necessary to put in place an alternative 
to both the Orange state and direct rule. Whether the outcome is 
power-sharing or shared sovereignty remains to be seen, but, 
despite the efforts of the Real IRA and of the Protestant Supremacists, 
it does seem as if the conflict in Northern Ireland is over.
(Newsinger, 2002, 2)
Or perhaps, as the evolving political landscape has shown, it may end up being the 
negotiated efforts of the most extreme political parties which ensure lasting political 
institutions and an enduring peace. 
Post apartheid violence in South Africa
The period of transition between the end of apartheid and creating inclusive 
democratic government proved to be "bloodiest in South Africa's existence as a 
political entity". (Guelke, 2000, 240-1) The negotiation process "aimed at drafting 
a constitution safeguarding individual rights while providing for institutions to 
regulate an integrated society" evolved against this "backdrop of serious and ever-
escalating violence." (Gibson and Gouws, 2003,18) This dramatic rise began in the 
early 1990s, with the result that from 1990 to 1994, the death rate ranged between 
2476 and 3794 per year. (Guelke, 2000, 240-1)
Between 1993 and 1994, The South African Institute of Race Relations 
(SAIRR) Yearbook recorded that 3,706 people were killed; "2,434 between 1994 
and 1995; and 1,004 between 1995 and 1996." (Gibson and Gouws, 2003, 18) 
Only one other year, 1976-77, which followed the Soweto uprising of June 1976, 
when 575 people died, was comparable. During the transition most of the deaths 
were concentrated in two areas - Natal, renamed KwaZulu-Natal, and Pretoria- 
Witwatersrand-Vereeniging (PWV), renamed Gauteng, and, with few exceptions, 
the overwhelming numbers of perpetrators and victims were black Africans. 
(Guelke, 2000, 240-1)
Tracking the death toll has turned out to be easier than defining and agreeing 
on causes. It was unclear if the conflict had been "between contending racial groups, 
between different ethnic groups focusing on certain primordial ethnic sentiments, or 
between warring political ideologies". (Gibson and Gouws, 2003, 18) The sheer 
volume of violence raised a multitude of questions. Who was principally 
responsible for the escalation, or were all parties responsible? Were the ones blamed 
really responsible? Who benefited from the violence and did it have any role in the 
strategy of the major political parties? (Guelke, 2000, 242)
It has been argued that ethnic membership and ideology have often overlapped 
in South Africa, and a "large percentage of the violence" could "be attributed to 
political rivalry between the ANC" and, before its unbanning, the United 
Democratic Front (UDF) "and the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP)" rather than 
ethnicity being a major cause. (Gibson and Gouws, 2003,18) Collusion, later
verified by evidence given to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, between 
the KwaZulu government, Inkatha Freedom Party, and the South African Police 
Security Branch and the South African Defence Force Military Intelligence, to work 
against the ANC and the UDF, was seen as the primary reason for the clash. 
(Guelke, 2000, 242)
The increase in violence as peace negotiations were taking place reinforced 
the premise that "elite-concluded accords do not work unless elites are able to 
demobilise their own constituencies." Despite all three leaders having made public 
statements which supported promotion of peace and peaceful initiatives, this 
"inablility of Mandela, de Klerk and Buthelezi to demobilise their constituencies" 
directly contributed to the failure of the National Peace Accord of September of 
1991, which indicated that "the underlying forces behind the violence were mostly 
beyond their control." (Sisk quoted in Guelke, 2000, 242-3, 244).
Three overarching theories have been put forward as explanations for the 
high levels of violence during this time. One has been the "third force" concept that 
acted from within the apartheid government to destabilise and weaken the ANC 
before elections. (Guelke, 2000, 244) This explains violence between the two 
factions as "the involvement of state-sponsored clandestine forces such as units of 
the Security Force agitating in communities on a local level" in order to "derail the 
negotiation process and to destabilize the country". (Gibson and Gouws, 2003,18- 
20) While, there is some basis for suspecting the existence of a "third force" as 
viewed by the TRC, and "it is credible that such a strategy existed at the start of the 
transition, by mid-1992 at the latest it was evident on all sides that continuing 
political violence was damaging, not helping, the cause of the National Party 
government." (Guelke, 2000,252)
A second theory is that the transitional violence was the "product of the 
strength of racial and ethnic antagonisms within the country", while a third depicted 
the violence as "a legacy of the structures of inequality set in place by the policy of 
apartheid." Two other theories proposed as alternatives to the first three views were 
that violence "was primarily generated by local factors.. ..unrelated to the dynamics 
of the negotiations", and that it was "a product of political competition among the 
parties contending for power in a post-apartheid South Africa." (Guelke, 2000, 244)
Guelke has maintained that while "sometimes these conditions may be a 
source of violence that is independent of the rivalry between the parties" it has been 
the political rivalry aspect that has provided the most convincing explanation for the 
acceleration of violence. Agreeing that while "it can reasonably be argued that a 
battle for scarce resources played a part in some arenas of political violence", the 
regional patterns of violent activities gave credence to "the role of political 
competition as the dominant factor", as deprivation was nationwide and
not a feature that set the areas affected by political violence apart. 
.. .The advantage of the interpretation of the violence of the transition 
as an aspect of political competition among those contending for 
power over other explanations is that it is much better able to explain 
both where violence occurred and when it occurred. (Guelke, 2000,249-50)
As the main focus during negotiations had been on the ANC leaders and 
followers, there is a case to be made for analysing this transition from the 
perspective of spoilers. In many ways the IFF took on the role of an "outside 
spoiler", defined as "parties who are excluded from a peace process or who exclude 
themselves, and use violence to attack the peace process" as they utilised tactics that 
included "assassination of moderates who stand for a negotiated peace, massacres 
that coincide with any progress in reaching a negotiated settlement, and the creation 
of alliances with conservative members in the armed forces and police to sabotage 
any agreement." (Stedman, 1997, 8-9)
If one sees the violence in the light of attempts to acquire political power by 
both the ANC and IFF, the "decline in violence in KwaZulu-Natal after the 1996 
local elections which established a balance of power between the IFF and the ANC" 
fits this interpretation. (Guelke, 2000, 244)
There has been post-apartheid resistance to this explanation as it implies that 
"violence played a part in the strategy of the very parties that negotiated a 
constitutional settlement that enabled South Africa to become a democracy without 
the racial bloodbath that had been widely feared and predicted." (Guelke, 2000, 
251) Guelke suggests that one way to view this is to recognise that "the parties had 
very different conceptions of what constituted legitimate political activity in the 
country during the transition and thus tended to see the actions of the security forces 
and/or their supporters in an aggressive or defensive light, based on their 
interpretation of the other side's intentions." It has since become clear that while the 
causes have continued to be contentious, "the impact of the conflict generated by 
ANC-IFP rivalry became a potent factor in forcing the government to make 
concessions to the ANC." (Guelke, 2000, 251)
The escalation of violence also threatened post-apartheid acceptance by the 
international community, feeding perceptions that the country was ungovernable 
and "creating the sphere of social breakdown and political fragmentation." In the 
end "all of these factors helped to make agreement with the ANC a palatable 
alternative for the government." The dire implications if the apartheid government 
did not strike a deal with the ANC were sufficient "to generate during the course of 
the transition a massive shift in white attitudes towards the prospect of an ANC-led 
government. Ironically, by challenging the ANC so forcefully, Buthelezi and the 
IFF actually contributed to its triumph." (Guelke, 2000,251-2)
The violence during this period has appeared to settle the national power 
struggle between the ANC and IFF, and "since the 1996 local elections in KwaZulu- 
Natal, the ANC has largely succeeded in co-opting the IFF as a junior partner". The 
reduction of antagonism between the two parties has found them both focused on an 
urge to move on, "with the consequence that the ANC has little interest in pressing 
the IFP's culpability for the violence of the transition." (Guelke, 2000, 253)
As the level of predominantly black-on-black political violence began to 
decrease, criminal violence moved in take its place. Domestic crime and criminal 
violence were cited by many as a huge 'new' negative factor in the post-conflict 
environment, more pervasive, and "more difficult to root out because of its social 
and economic origins" unless successful long term strategies in "economic growth, 
job creation, and skills training" were initiated by the new government.
Its randomness and the anxiety it generates among all South 
Africans, especially those living in urban areas, is the most 
significant source of pessimism about the country's future. An 
unemployment rate of about 46 percent, an influx of automatic 
weapons into many black townships with the winding down of 
the war in Mozambique, and grass-roots hostility in the townships 
toward the government police have combined to create a local 
culture of arbitrary street justice that sustains the lethal activities 
of criminal gangs, local warlords, and self-defense units. 
(Kitchen etal, 1994,176-7)
In the early 1990s South African political youth organisations which had been 
the mobilising force behind political change, witnessed a severe decline. Asking the 
question, have "yesterday's comrades.. .become today's bandits?", Young Warriors 
(2001), described the transformation of a politically significant youth movement 
which had taken root during the 1980s in the black South African townships of 
Diepkloof. From origins of "democratic centralism and collective leadership" 
where they had to "work hard to produce true leadership" while risking 
assassination, the author charted a shift to a link between membership and
"careerism and individual fame" accompanied by a disproportionate "preoccupation 
with resources." (Marks, 2001,133, xi, 136)
Many who joined during this time "were inexperienced, unaccountable, and 
were not schooled in the discipline and ideology of the youth organisations of the 
'80s" with the result that "the collective activities (both violent and peaceful) 
...became less directed and exemplary." (Marks, 2001,133, xi, 136) The failure of 
government to distribute material benefits in the face of "unrealistic expectations of 
delivery.. .led many youth in the direction of the underworld as a means of 
acquiring wealth." Gangs became the "alternate providers of social cohesion" and 
contributors to a rising crime rate. (Marks, 2001,133)
This shift from politically active 1980s youth organisations to criminal gangs 
affected the countryside in equally disturbing ways. Investigating the escalation of 
events that had culminated in the murder of the son of a white farmer who had 
purchased a farm in KwaZulu-Natal, Jonny Steinberg soon realised that the previous 
owner, Lourie Steyn, had in fact been run out by his tenants, which eventually set 
the stage for the murder. In unravelling the story he began to understand that he 
"had stepped in on the 30-year relationship between Steyn and his tenants at its 
most interesting time. Both sides were behaving in ways that their forebears would 
have found unnerving and peculiar. Talking in shorthand, they were acting oddly 
because of South Africa's transition to democracy." (Steinberg, 2002, 39-40)
In the early 1990s, farmer Lourie Steyn, an "old paternalist who understood 
his tenants as natural and eternal serfs, greeted the prospect of universal suffrage 
with horror." His flirtation with Eugene Terre'Blanche's neo-fascist movement was 
"an index of the turmoil he was suffering", and "a desperate and panic-stricken way 
for a farmer in the Natal hinterland to spend his Sundays." The tenants, the Cubes
and Mashabana families were also "acting in ways that would have sent cold shivers 
down their fathers' spines." While their predecessors would have "done their fair 
share of tugging and prodding in their relationships with the white men who 
controlled the countryside", their strategies would have been "passive and subtle" 
and their goal always "to carve out just a little more room to breathe." (Steinberg, 
2002, 39-40) 
But as Steinberg notes,
the young men who came of age in the 1980s were a different 
breed altogether. The Cube and Mashabana men of this generation 
had all found themselves behind makeshift barricades in South Africa's 
urban insurrections. And they had witnessed something of the new 
interface between politics and crime, where young men chose whether 
to join a youth organisation or a car theft racket. They took these 
experiences back with them to the countryside, to their relationship 
with their white landlords. (Steinberg, 2002, 39-40)
The tenant families, Cubes and Mashabanas played each family off against the 
other, by telling stories to the gullible white farmer. There was "something funny 
and insouciant about using the white man's fists to make grief for a black 
neighbour." It was as if
white supremacy had become something light, something one 
played with and manipulated to one's own ends. It spoke of a 
confidence and an arrogance that was new to the peasants of the 
KwaZulu-Natal countryside . .. .The truth is that by the time I met 
Steyn, his family had been routed by their black neighbours. The 
arson, the burning fields, the unprecedented cattle theft, the gunshots 
in the night, these were vicious and brutal tactics, and Steyn, for all 
his right-wing posturing, never stood a chance. (Steinberg, 2002, 39-40)
As South Africa continues to settle into what promises to be a success story, it 
is clear that the violence which was always present beneath the placid exterior of 
apartheid government, but segregated and targeted away from white areas, has 
surfaced in a very democratic way. The white reaction to crime levels has in part 
been a reaction to this change in status. The question that remains for all South 
African citizens is how much violence they can tolerate and still move forward, and
for the ANC government, how to best construct an accountable police force that will 
effectively protect all members of their nation. 
Assassination in Serbia
With the exception of the border region of Southern Serbia and Kosovo, the 
violence in post-Milosevic Serbia has primarily taken the form of political 
assassination. By the end of the Kosovo war in 1999, Serbia had inherited a legacy 
of paramilitary death squads who had colluded with organised crime and established 
strong links to Milosevic's government through the Special Operations Units (JSO) 
of the Serbian State Security Service (see Chapter Five). Clandestine and "often 
paramilitary in nature" they made murder "their primary and even sole activity" and 
used to "carry out extra judicial executions and other violent acts (torture, rape, 
arson, bombing, etc.) against clearly defined individuals and groups." (Campbell et 
al, 2000, 1-2)
Serbia's death squads, used early on during the Yugoslav war, encompassed 
elements common to many ethnic conflicts where "the individual may hold a 
quasi-civilian and quasi-military position." The "combatants or semicombatants 
operating in largely civilian rather than military environments" were more likely to 
"find it easier to conceptualize violence against them as personal rather than 
impersonal." (McGinty, 2001, 641-2)
They emerged out of a "peculiar symbiosis between the state and nonstate 
interests" where the "need to maintain plausible deniability of state involvement 
often forces the creators of death squads to seek aid from private groups and 
individuals." One way to do this was "to establish deniability" by having "the 
killing organized and done by people who are not formally or officially associated 
with the state" but who operate "with the overt support, complicity, or acquiescence
of government, or at least some parts of it" and aided by government security forces 
who often participated in the killing. (Campbell et al, 2000,1-2,6)
Slobodan Milosevic and "his cabal" successfully operated a system of 
mutually beneficial corruption, and avoided democracy by inciting a series of 
conflicts that reinforced "a Serb 'siege mentality" which deepened "politically - and 
economically- profitable sanctions." He legitimised undemocratic rule and 
stigmatised political opposition as "Western collaborators", thus allowing "various 
kinds of asset transfer from ordinary people to this cabal (not least from ordinary 
Serbs through a variety of pyramid schemes, taxation, and monopolistic pricing)." 
(Keen, 2001, 17)
From 1999 to 2000, the year prior to Milosevic being ousted, the secret police 
and organised criminal gangs, along with suspected army involvement, had been 
accused of joining forces to execute members of the political opposition. Journalist 
Slavko Curuvija, who had opposed Milosevic, was assassinated in April 1999 
during the NATO bombing in a "classic mafia-style 'hit' despite being under 
security service surveillance at the time." (Oxford Analytica Daily Brief. 12 March 
2003) In October of the same year, a "staged road crash on the Ibar highway south 
of Belgrade" killed four members of the opposition Serbian Renewal Movement 
(SPO), for which Milosevic's secret police chief, Radomir Markovic, and two 
agents were convicted in January 2003. And just before the 2000 elections, the 
"estranged former mentor" of and potential threat to Milosevic, Ivan Stambolic, was 
abducted and disappeared. By the time Milosevic had been voted/forced out of 
office in September and October 2000, it has been said that "this connection was so 
strong that it was difficult to separate the two" and that many dangerous criminals
had become members of his elite and special forces. (Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief, 
12 March 2003)
The Milosevic alliance "between organised crime, the security services, the 
legal system and politicians" set up an intricate web of spoilers, including both 
insiders, those who signed the peace agreement, signaling compliance but failing to 
fulfill key obligations, and outsiders, all those, but especially leaders of mafia-like 
organisations, who had been formally excluded from negotiations. (Oxford 
Analvtica Daily Brief. 25 March 2003) This partnership set up a system of sabotage 
that has continually challenged the will of Serbs to move forward toward permanent 
peace. The situation has been further exacerbated by the collapse of the Serbian 
economy, widespread dependence on black markets and other illegal activities, the 
deepening collapse of the former Soviet Union, and the unsettled question of 
Kosovo, accompanied by a difficult transition from centre-led style socialism to 
democracy.
The election success of the Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS), a 
coalition of many smaller parties including the DSS (Democratic Party of Serbia), in 
October 2000, and the political transition to a democratic government in January 
2001 proved to be a shaky and turbulent coalition between Yugoslav President 
Vojislav Kostunica (DSS) and Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic (DOS). 
Kostunica, the official commander-in-chief of the army, a former academic seen as 
'clean' of corruption and association with the former regime, was a nationalist who 
opposed the 2001 deportation of Milosevic to the Hague as unconstitutional. 
Djindjic, who oversaw the police, was an outspoken and controversial proponent of 
democratic reform and perceived to be more open to the international community's 
demands that Milosevic be handed over for trial. He also launched a campaign
against organised crime, threatening to arrest and transfer war crimes suspects such 
as Milorad "Legija" Lukovic, leader of the Zemun gang, and former commander of 
the Special Operations Units to the Hague for war crimes. Ironically, it had been 
"Legija" who had sided with Djindjic against Milosevic in 2000, before resigning 
his post the next year. (Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief. 25 March 2003: 14 March 
2003)
A subsequent political feud between Kostunica and Djundjic resulted in key 
Milosevic wartime army and secret police staying on in government far longer than 
might have been prudent. "Distracted by their in-fighting, the DOS's leaders failed 
not only to carry out necessary change in security structures, but also to wage a 
serious war on organised crime, especially the big gangs." (Oxford Analvtica Daily 
Brief, 12 March 2003) The situation reached a crisis point on 12 March 2003 when 
Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic was shot dead outside a government building 
in Belgrade.
In the immediately-declared state of emergency, a round-up of suspects began 
with the primary goal of finding "Legija" Lukovic, who was reported to have faced 
imminent deportation by Djindjic to the Hague. Within a few days of the 
assassination, a serious dismantling of the old Milosevic alliance was underway. 
The former Deputy Public Prosecutor Milan Sarajlic admitted taking bribes from 
organised crime and thirty-five judges were forced to retire. The Supreme Court 
President Leposava Karamarkovic resigned, the Public Prosecutor Sinisa Simic was 
suspended, and the questioning of 3,682 people resulted in 1,075 being detained. 
(Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief. 25 March 2003)
The most significant development was the forced resignation of the head of 
Military Counter-intelligence (KOS), Major-General Aleksandar Tomic, a key
figure in the old Milosevic linkage. (Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief, 25 March 2003) 
Until he was dismissed, Tomic had acted with impunity much as in the old 
Milosevic era as "even within the army, which in former Yugoslavia resembled a 
state within a state outside civilian control", the KOS had "acted independently", 
and it was likely that "both Legija's gang and the KOS" had "played an important 
part in the protection of such war crimes suspects as Ratko Mladic and Veselin 
Sljivancanin" who had been among the most wanted war criminals by the Tribunal 
at the Hague. (Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief. 25 March 2003)
By mid-April 2004, thirteen suspects had been charged with direct 
involvement in Djindjic's assassination, including "Legija" Lukovic. Five, 
excluding Lukovic, were in custody. (Legija turned himself into Belgrade 
authorities in late April.) Immediately following Djindjic's death, both Zemun Clan 
leader Dusan Spasojevic and Mile Lukovic were "shot dead in what police say was 
an exchange of fire during an operation launched following Djindjic's murder on 
March 12." Ex-police chief and former deputy interior minister, Nenad Milic had 
confirmed a statement made by the previous interior minister Dusan Mihajlovic, 
that an eyewitness had come forward to identify the killers of opposition journalist 
Slawko Curuvija. (B92,13 April 2004, Underworld bosses/Djindjic trial)
Following Djindjic's death, Serbs demonstrated prolonged apathy at the polls 
by failing to muster 50% of the electorate to validate elections late in 2003. The 
Serbian parliament approved the government led by the new Prime Minister 
Vojislav Kostunica in early March 2004 "after two months of coalition negotiations 
following inconclusive elections", leaving Kostunica relying heavily on the support 
of the newly revived Socialist Party of Slododan Milosevic. (BBC News, 2004, 
Country profile)
In March 2004, the most serious violence since 1999 erupted in Kosovo 
leaving a total of nineteen people, both Albanians and Serbs, dead, 900 Serbs 
injured, and 700 Serb homes and 30 Orthodox churches burned to the ground after 
two days of Albanian riots. An estimated 3600 Serbs and other non-Albanians fled 
their homes after the attacks. (B92,13/16 April 2004, Security Council, EU says too 
early) Much of the Albanian violence was blamed on extremists who tapped into 
the frustration among Albanian Kosovars for a political settlement to Kosovo and a 
solution to the 70% unemployment rate. (B92, 29 March 2004, Independent 
Intellectuals from Kosovo)
In August 2004, Vojvodina, the Serb province that had resolutely remained a 
model of ethnic harmony throughout the wars of the 1990s saw a rise in violence by 
Serbs against the 300,000 Hungarians living there. Prime Minister Kostunica, as 
well as Serb government officials, sought to downplay these incidents by 
maintaining that they did not "overshadow the traditionally solid inter-ethnic 
relationships" and that the problem had no need to be "internationalised". Kostunica 
insisted that the word "atrocity" was being "tossed around too lightly. Whoever is 
using that word is not being truthful. And with this untruthfulness, they are 
increasing the tension between different ethnic groups and spreading nationalistic 
hate and intolerance." (B92, 8 September 2004, "Kostunica")
Subsequent Hungarian and European Union reaction has mirrored Kostunica's 
reaction but emergence of this type of violence in Vojvodina, where everyone I 
interviewed in 2001 reaffirmed the province's good inter-ethnic relationships and 
common defiant attitude toward Milosevic in the early days of the Yugoslav war, is 
worrying.
Culture of violence
One way to view violence in a post-conflict environment is to judge its long- 
term continuation as inevitable and self perpetuating. This line of argument supports 
the premise that the longer a violent conflict has continued, the greater the chance 
for installing an irreversible culture of using violence as a medium for expressing 
and achieving political goals. An alternate view challenges this perception of 
intractability with the implication that a conflict is fundamentally insolvable. A 
third view sees violence as useful for its time and place in the early stages of a peace 
process as a way for individuals and groups who would not otherwise have 
legitimate access to acquire power, but not necessarily a guarantee that its use will 
continue in the long term.
There is evidence to suggest that prolonged public exposure to violence can 
help "mould popular attitudes toward the use of violence as a political tool" that 
encourage its' continuation in a perpetual cycle, and that a significant minority of 
the population is "prepared both to condone political violence and to participate in 
it" through "apparent widespread support for- or at the very least, ambiguity 
towards - paramilitary organisations." (Hays and McAllister, 2001, 901-2) 
Lengthy, violent conflicts also help to create a framework that supports a culture of 
violence. While "individuals perform violent acts, the violence is initiated and 
carried out within a social system" that "provides the rationales and justifications 
for the violence." The "systems organisations train the individuals to carry out 
violent acts, and social mechanisms and institutions glorify the violent 
confrontations." (Cairns and Roe, 2003, 79)
The weakness in the self-perpetuating approach is that it does not take into 
account the number of long term conflicts once written off as intractable or
insolvable - certainly all three case studies here have been classified as such - but 
which in the right combination of circumstances have proven to be capable of 
maintaining peace. The use of lethal violence within a conflict does not in itself 
guarantee lifelong use of violence as a means to an end as the reasons and 
motivations for violent action may change over time. "When a party is outside of a 
peace process and uses violence to attack the parties within" interveners must judge 
the intent motivating the violence. "Is it an attempt by the spoiler to force its way 
into negotiations - to alter a process so that its demands are included in a 
settlement? Or is it an attempt to weaken the commitment of the internal parties as 
a means to destroy a negotiated settlement?" (Stedman, 1997, 18)
A party that has signed an agreement, and then refuses to abide by the tenets 
set, might see the agreement as desirable but may be fearful of "putting its security 
into the hands of its adversary." Likewise, a party may cheat after signing "because 
it is greedy and desires a better deal" and "to increase its chances of maximizing its 
return in the settlement." It may also be a way of seeking an upper hand during 
critical elections that could determine key "division of spoils and power of the 
settlement" or be a way to strengthen its bargaining position if it loses. A party may 
subsequently cheat after signing because of pragmatic or tactical reasons. If it looks 
as though the agreement will bring the party into power, then there is motivation to 
comply, but if that changes "it will cheat to overturn the agreement. In such a case, 
the spoiler is motivated by total goals and defines the stakes as all or nothing." 
(Stedman, 1997,17)
Not everyone who has participated in political violence will be subsequently 
attracted to criminal violence. "The fact that the comrade youth may have 
collectively killed a gangster, an informer, or an attacking Inkatha supporter",
(Inkatha Party against an ANC member in South Africa) "does not mean that they 
will easily hijack a random vehicle and murder the driver." If the "collective 
political violence carried out by the comrade youth of the past was driven by a set of 
clear moral justifications with stated political objectives" then this is a very different 
"from the use of violence in self-interested and by most accounts, indefensible acts 
of crime." (Marks, 2001,134)
As has been noted earlier in this chapter, motivations for violence can change 
dramatically for individuals and groups and elites and non-elites in the post-conflict 
transition. 
Conclusion
In assessing the impact of violence on any post-conflict society, a key question 
to ask is the following: how much violence can a peaceful society tolerate and in 
what form? In other words, what is the point at which a society fragments into civil 
war, and why is it this point not universal? Though expectations are greatest that 
violence will cease at the beginning of a peace process, all country studies have 
repeatedly demonstrated that this is not the case. Conversely, it is also 
likely to be a time when populations will have been most accustomed to it and if 
there is serious civilian intent, will not allow random acts of violence to dissuade a 
peace process.
As a country maintains peace and stabilizes over a longer period of time, the 
population will tend to become less tolerant of certain types of violence. Much of 
this evolutionary process is influenced by cultural norms and the type of violence 
that dominated the recent conflict. It is worth noting that many of the world's 
wealthy, highly developed and politically stable countries have evolved from 
situations as violent, if not more so, than many contemporary societies emerging
from civil war, and a number of them, the United States in particular, are known for 
tolerating high levels of violence.
Interpreting the intent behind violent behaviour requires skill and 
experience. Deciphering spoilers' goals, motivation behind "acts of noncooperation 
or aggression", depth of commitment, assessing the "degree of leadership command 
and control of followers", internal group unity, and "likely effects of... action on 
the spoiler's willingness to continue aggression, on the other parties to the peace 
process, and on interested external actors" is a vital element to keeping post-conflict 
violence to a minimum. (Stedman, 1997, 17)
One way to better understand the threat of violence to a peace process is to 
compare it to levels of criminal and domestic violence present in society before it 
escalated into full scale conflict. As Keen has observed,
Much of the violence in peacetime consists of crime. Peace may 
be riddled with violent crime; it may not feel particularly peaceful. 
Much of this crime may be organised crime, and since war can also 
take the form of organized crime, the distinction between peace and 
war is further eroded. (Keen, 2001, 9)
Preventing the lower echelons of the former rebel/paramilitary groups who 
have been marginalized by peace from shifting into organised crime requires a 
different kind of assurance and assistance than the paramilitary elite. Their 
perception of equal access to economic, political, and social opportunities are 
especially relevant to their willingness to cooperate in the early post-conflict phase. 
This bottom half and those who have fallen out of favour with rebel or paramilitary 
leaders, or belong to the many urban and rural poor who have survived in areas of 
constant battles, face the low-paying employment available to those with their lack 
of qualifications -skills, training, education- guaranteeing a future of grinding
poverty. For them, disruptions to peace and alliances with organised crime 
networks are a guarantee of substantial income and social status.
International interveners who become active in negotiating peace 
agreements "must anticipate violent challenges to peace processes." They "must 
constantly probe the intentions of warring parties" looking for evidence of sincere 
commitment to peace and "must seek and make good use of intelligence about the 
warring parties' goals, strategies, and tactics." They must "judge what is right or 
wrong, just or unjust, and fair or unfair in peace processes." Instead of thinking 
generally about the possible threats to peace, they must ask, "Who are the threats to 
peace?" (Stedman, 1997, 52-3)
Stephen Stedman's research reinforces the importance of coordinating 
international aid and peacekeeping as there are strong implications that 
"international consensus about norms, coordination behind a strategy of aggressive 
management of spoilers, and unambiguous signals to peace supporters and spoilers 
provide the difference between successful and failed implementation of peace 
agreements." (Stedman, 1997, 52-3)
It also has become increasingly clear that for many post-conflict societies, 
peace processes and reconciliation are separate issues (see Chapter Eight). Northern 
Ireland, despite having been given aid and resources for the purpose, is, as Norman 
Porter has pointed out, "not a model of reconciliation. Part of the answer.. .lies in 
understanding .. .that it is peace and not reconciliation that many of us in the North 
are keen on." (Porter, 2003, 6)
Given this distinction, many types of violence can be viewed as parallel 
expressions of the phases of revenge described in Chapter Seven. Throughout the 
interwoven evolutionary phases of forgiveness and revenge, the enactment of justice
as revenge can be seen as a potentially intimidating and eventually violently 
destructive act. Equally clear is that the presence of violence, like revenge, does not 
necessarily eliminate the potential for forgiveness.
It is clear that if peace is to mature into some form of reconciliation, learning 
to accept that some degree of violence, like revenge, will be present is part of the 
process. Over time, society will adjust to the level of violence that can be tolerated 
while developing institutional structures. It is the individual and collective will of 
all groups in post-conflict societies, determined to move on from open warfare, who 
will decide how much violence is allowable to ensure permanent peace.
Chapter Seven: Political Processes of Forgiveness and Revenge
In recent years there has been increased discussion regarding the role of 
forgiveness in post-conflict reconciliation. The most common debate has focused on 
whether there can be "reconciliation without forgiveness and/or forgiveness without 
reconciliation". (Cairns and Roe eds, 2003, 132) Revenge, if mentioned within this 
discussion, has often been treated as a separate issue and as the antithesis of 
forgiveness and reconciliation. Though work on deconstructing the relationship 
between forgiveness and revenge in post-conflict transitions is still in the earliest 
stages, it has become increasingly clear from fieldwork interviews, observations, 
and relevant research included in previous chapters, that they share similar phases or 
stages within an evolutionary process that results in vastly different goals.
This chapter incorporates earlier material on perceptions of justice and 
formation of post-conflict identity discussed in Section I, as well as a review of the 
conflict in each country included in Section II. In this analysis, reconciliation is 
viewed as both a short and long term process. In the short term, it is seen as a 
pragmatic cooperation between former enemies in rebuilding political, economic, 
and social institutions; in the long term, it is a process which encompasses multiple 
generations. During both, but most dramatically during the earliest phases, political 
actions and reactions are strongly influenced by an interaction between perceptions 
of fair or unfair treatment; formation of a victim/perpetrator identity; and personal 
and political processes of forgiveness and revenge. It suggests that while 
unconditional forgiveness may not be necessary, or possible, in order for enemies to 
cooperate in the short term, the processes of both forgiveness and revenge have 
increasingly important implications for long term sustainability of peace.
Forgiveness and revenge in post-conflict transitions
Forgiveness and revenge are treated in this thesis as evolutionary parallel 
processes that are very useful in assessing the intent of populations to pursue long 
term peace or return to war. Understanding how these processes evolve and how 
they are influenced can help to reveal underlying motives behind public rhetoric. 
The question of their relevance to post-conflict transitions was answered in the 
earliest phases of fieldwork. Venturing into Northern Ireland during a tense April 
2000,1 found that while somewhat reticent to discuss revenge, few had reservations 
in expressing their views on forgiveness. This experience was consistently repeated 
in Serbia and South Africa.
Furthermore, research and fieldwork has made clear that both forgiveness and 
revenge are perceived by internal populations to be inherently political. Viewed in 
this context, use and abuse of political power is the strongest catalytic issue for all 
groups and directly affects actions taken on the ground. On the individual level 
there are additional influences such as differences in personal experience of the 
conflict, extent of personal loss related to the conflict, religious interpretations of 
forgiveness and revenge, and influence of family and/or community.
This analysis, incorporating perceptions of justice and formation of post- 
conflict identity, offers a clearer understanding of how these processes work in a 
political context. Most importantly this work stresses that there is a great deal of 
ambiguity in the early formations of forgiveness and revenge. The quality of local, 
national, and international leadership, prevailing cultural norms, and the type of 
conflict that has just taken place, influence the ways in which these processes are 
expressed in the political and social sphere.
Forgiveness, interwoven with the social and political processes of justice, 
apology, truth, and reconciliation, has often been depicted as a solely religious act, 
promoted on one hand by religious leaders as a necessary prelude for reconciliation, 
while scorned on the other as capitulation by those who seek retaliation for wrongs. 
Political forgiveness, however, is a multidimensional and subjective process that 
transcends the past by embracing moral truth, history and the human benefits reaped 
by conquering enmity. Its enactment belongs entirely to the offended and is a 
powerful expression of unconditional acceptance.
Revenge, on the other hand, has often been seen as a strongly intimidating and 
uncontrollable political force - the antithesis of forgiveness, and a remedy by men 
of action to settle scores with vigilante-style justice. Revenge, in the context of 
ethnic conflict, can be seen as group activities involving rioting, looting, forced 
removals; and as individual acts involving harassment, vandalizing, and physical 
intimidation. Punishment beatings and targeted murders by paramilitaries in the 
post-conflict transition are also part of a process of revenge, (see Chapter Six) As 
discussed previously (see Chapter One) and later in this chapter, revenge is closely 
related to and influences perceptions of justice while forming an underlying 
motivation for the formation of judicial institutions.
One of the major differences between political versus individual acts of 
forgiveness and revenge is the necessity for public declaration in the political arena. 
While personal forgiveness may positively impact public acceptance of a political 
process it has the option of remaining private. Acts of political forgiveness in a 
post-conflict environment can be a public declaration of forgiveness for an offence 
by one individual toward another, or toward a group. It can also be one group 
officially forgiving another for its actions. Political acts of revenge can be seen as
group activities involving rioting, looting, forced removals; and individual acts 
involving harassment, vandalizing, and physical intimidation. Punishment beatings 
and targeted murders by paramilitaries in the early phases of a post-conflict period 
can be included.
A key point to remember is that while forgiveness and revenge acted out in the 
political arena are often presented in terms of rational and dispassionate discourse, 
in reality they are rarely disconnected from their emotional source. Forbearance 
from acting out revenge, while simultaneously moving forward to take steps to 
cooperate with former enemies, appears to be one of the keys to successfully 
rebuilding a country in the short term. Acknowledgement of the complexity of these 
interactions on both an individual and group level, their connection to an emotional 
source, and influence on the political situation, was present in all three countries 
where interviews took place. 
Models of forgiveness and revenge
While it is clear that assessment of the impact of the political processes of 
forgiveness and revenge on post-conflict transitions is still in its earliest stages, it is 
possible to accurately describe the way in which these processes work by utilising a 
variety of academic disciplines, such as comparative political literature and theory, 
social psychology, socio-legal studies, anthropology, philosophy, as well as in- 
country observations, surveys, and interviews.
In this analysis the processes of forgiveness and revenge share the same root 
emotion, rage. Rage has been identified as a shared source of both by Arendt, 
Enright, and others in post-conflict societies (see following discussions on Passive 
Resentment). Philosopher Hannah Arendt, a Jew who had witnessed the systematic 
extermination of Jews and others in World War II, sought to better understand how
society could reconcile in the aftermath of these acts. She concluded that the root 
emotion of both forgiveness and revenge was rage, but with very different results. 
"Forgiveness is the exact opposite of vengeance, which acts in the form of re-acting 
against an original trespassing, whereby far from putting an end to the consequences 
of the first misdeed, everybody remains bound to the process..." (Arendt, 1958, 
240-1)
Robert D. Enright, a pioneer who led early empirical research into the effects 
of forgiveness also identified the reciprocal relationship between rage, forgiveness 
and revenge, and between the "sufferer and the agent of suffering". Enright et al, 
1992, 101)
This reciprocity lies at the heart of the evolution of revenge... 
Remembrance is unquestionably a form of revenge, but, in 
one of the great paradoxes of civilized life, it is equally 
indispensable to the attainment of true forgiveness.
(Enright et al, 1992,107)
Enright, a psychologist, developed one of the most detailed and relevant 
descriptions of the parallel processes of forgiveness and revenge. Based on 
empirical work with individuals, he created a forgiveness model that depicted the 
same interaction between forgiveness, revenge, perceptions of justice, and 
victim/perpetrator identity, that was observed in fieldwork nearly twenty years later. 
It describes a step-by-step process for varying degrees of conditional forgiveness 
which include elements of revenge and justice, until achieving the final goal of 
genuine forgiveness which is the final, unconditional release of all animosity by the 
victim. Titled "Stages of justice and styles of forgiveness development", the first 
five stages use a form of justice that corresponds with the equivalent "styles" or 
phases of "pseudo" forgiveness. (Enright et al, 1992,104-6)
Stage 1 is justice as "Heteronomous Morality. I believe that justice should be 
decided by the authority, by the one who can punish." This leaves the outcome in 
the hands of others, and absolves the person of responsibility for the decision. Style 
1 for forgiveness is "Revengeful Forgiveness. I can forgive someone who wrongs 
me only if I can punish him to a similar degree to my own pain." (Enright et al, 
1992,104-6) This type of forgiveness is completely dependent upon making an 
individual and/or group who has been perceived to have committed the original 
offence, suffer in equal measure as the victim by taking retribution either 
institutionally through the legal, legislative, or political system, or otherwise.
Justice Stage 2 is "Individualism. I have a sense of reciprocity that defines 
justice for me. If you help me, I must help you." Forgiveness Style 2 is 
"Conditional or Restitutional Forgiveness. If I get back what was taken away from 
me, then I can forgive. Or, if I feel guilty about withholding forgiveness, then I can 
forgive to relieve my guilt." In this case, both depend on the positive action of 
another party. The individualistic approach is an openness to helping another but 
only if the victim is the first recipient of a positive overture by the offender. 
Conditional forgiveness is similar in that an apology is usually demanded from the 
offender. This is the phase where restitution, usually monetary or in-kind is 
demanded for suffering caused. Elements of revenge are very much still present in 
this phase.
Justice Stage 3 is "Mutual Interpersonal Expectations. Here, I reason that the 
group consensus should decide what is right and wrong. I go along so that others 
close to me will like me." Forgiveness Style 3 is "Expectational Forgiveness. I can 
forgive if others put pressure on me to forgive. I forgive because other people 
expect it." Justice Stage 4 is "Social System and Conscience. Societal laws are my
guides to justice. I uphold laws, except in extreme cases, to have an orderly 
society." Forgiveness Style 4 is "Lawful Expectational Forgiveness. I forgive 
because my religion demands it. Notice that this is not Stage 2 in which I forgive to 
relieve my own guilt about withholding forgiveness."
In both three and four, phases of justice and forgiveness are dependent on 
external pressure in order for forgiveness to be granted. This is a statement of 
forgiveness driven by social and/or religious pressure and not internally driven by a 
genuine readiness to extend a form of justice as fairness or to forgive. While it is not 
dependent on an apology or direct reciprocal action, it is often a softer and less 
overtly coercive approach to a similar situation.
Aid conditionality set by the international community, such as external 
demands for formation of a truth and reconciliation commission, can exert pressure 
to make forgiveness statements. Religious pressures can be equally coercive, 
especially if one is a member of a religion that tells individuals or groups that they 
must forgive if they want to be members in good standing, without taking into 
account the differing capacities to forgive.
Justice Stage 5 is a "Social Contract. I am aware that people hold a variety of 
opinions. One usually should uphold the values and rules of one's group. Some 
non-relative values (life, liberty) must be upheld regardless of majority opinion." 
Forgiveness Style 5 is "Forgiveness as Social Harmony. I forgive because it 
restores harmony or good relations in society. Forgiveness decreases friction and 
outright conflict in society. Note that forgiveness is a way to control society; it is a 
way of maintaining peaceful relations." (Enright et al, 1992, 104-6)
While this phase is not coercive, it is still nevertheless tied to a notion of 
obligation to the good of others rather than an internally driven will to forgive. The
exhortations to forgive that were tied to the interpretation of reconciliation during 
the TRC in South Africa, exemplify Forgiveness Style 5, and were not necessarily 
indicative of a genuine and unconditional forgiveness.
In Enright's model, only the sixth step is recognised as genuine forgiveness, as 
it is an unconditional act of mercy and complete abandonment of revenge. While 
"forswearing of personal justice", Justice Stage 6 "Universal Ethical Principles", 
states that "My sense of justice is based on maintaining the individual rights of all 
persons. People are ends in themselves and should be treated as such." Forgiveness 
Style 6 is "Forgiveness as Love. I forgive because it promotes a true sense of love. 
Because I must truly care for each person, a hurtful act on her part does not alter that 
sense of love."
Most importantly, this stage of forgiveness is an act of self love and positive 
group identification where the burden of the offence is released by the victim(s). 
Forgiveness is no longer dependent on a social context, the presence of an offender, 
or a process of equivalent negotiated action. "The forgiver does not control the 
other by forgiving; he releases her." This version of forgiveness acknowledges the 
presence of an injustice while releasing the hurt of the act. While the offended 
realise they have been treated unfairly, and have no duty to show compassion, they 
decide to go beyond seeking a "fair solution", tied to a conditional justice of 
retribution or reparation, to reach for a compassionate one. (Enright et al, 1992, 
104-6) This last stage is seen as a final resolution and answer to the offence and it 
will not be revisited again by either the individual or group involved.
Enright's description of the process of forgiveness allows individuals the 
freedom to forgive each other without necessarily forgiving their representative 
group, and vice versa. It also best shows ways in which it may be possible to
overcome the contentious problem of identifying victims and perpetrators. While 
Enright's model can be described as a type of "unilateral forgiveness" focused on 
the individual, and not dependent or conditional on the action or even existence of 
an offender, more recent descriptions of varying types of forgiveness fit well within 
his descriptive framework. A type of "negotiated" and "positional" forgiveness 
have been identified by Molly Andrews, and peace/political psychologist Cristina 
Montiel, has defined a form of "socio-political forgiveness" specific to post conflict 
environments. (Andrews, 2000, 75-6)
Andrews described a "negotiated forgiveness" that is primarily conditional, 
and dependent on proportional, reciprocal actions. This process is conducted as a 
dialogue between the offender and wronged, encompassing at least three major 
steps; confession, ownership, and repentance. "First the wrongdoer must admit that 
he or she has committed the offending action. Secondly s/he must take 
responsibility for the action.. ..thirdly, the offending party must express remorse for 
what they have done". This action is dependent on the offender acknowledging the 
transgression and repenting. The offended makes the final decision on whether 
conditions have been satisfied in order to offer forgiveness. (Andrews, 2000, 75-6)
A type of "positional forgiveness" also observed by Andrews, describes an 
integrated type of a forgiveness process that is helpful in understanding interaction 
between individuals and groups during the process of forgiveness in post-conflict 
environments.
Here, one who has been harmed engages with the position of the 
offender, while avoiding any direct contact with them. As individuals 
embody social position and values, an opponent's motivations may be 
discernible through an investigation of their belief system, which may 
or may not entail conversation with them. For instance, one who 
engages in 'armed struggle' does so not only as an individual but as a 
member of a group, and this position can be confronted, understood 
and potentially forgiven. (Andrews, 2000, 85)
Peace/political psychologist, Cristina Montiel, has defined a form of "socio- 
political forgiveness" that occurs when a "whole group of offended people cease 
their collective resentment and condemnation of another group .. .perceived to have 
caused the social offense". According to Montiel, when forgiveness is acted out 
collectively, as opposed to individually, new considerations appear. These include 
the quality of leadership across boundaries ("Are there leaders among the victimized 
groups who can simultaneously relate to the perpetrators in a politically effective yet 
forgiving manner?"); a support of public statements by individuals affected ("Are 
public declarations of forgiveness sensitive to the pained conditions of other 
members of the offended social group?"); and restoration of intergroup social 
fairness. (Montiel, 2000, 95)
For Montiel, it is the combination of the individual victim's "readiness to 
forgive" combined with the "offender's remorseful apology, initiatives toward 
reconciliation and the attainment of justice" that determine the constructive or 
destructive effects of forgiveness on individuals and society. She cites "receiving 
fair treatment" as the type of justice most effective in order to create a post conflict 
environment that reflects "positive social transformations" arising as "beneficial 
effects of the terminated political turmoil". (Montiel, 2000, 96) 
Comments on forgiveness models
The most significant finding from my work was discovering the phase of 
passive resentment in the current post-conflict generation and the need for seeking 
unconditional forgiveness in subsequent generations and diasporas (see discussion 
below). Both Enright and Monteil's models of forgiveness are highly relevant to 
this. Both are derived from empirical work; Enright's from work with individuals in 
the United States, and Monteil's from work in post-conflict environments. Both
proved to most closely reflect material gathered in fieldwork interviews and to most 
directly address realities observed within all three countries. While Anderson aptly 
describes a process that is certainly reflected in the Enright model, she appears to be 
overly dependent on interaction between the offended and offender(s). For this 
reason, I found this model to be least relevant to my experience in the field. For 
most, the greatest offender was the state or a paramilitary or rebel group where 
individuals responsible for carrying out acts were hard to identify or were dead. It 
was the same situation for perpetrators who might wish to demonstrate remorse for 
their actions.
Especially relevant was Enright's depiction of the evolutionary, phased and 
intertwined relationship between justice, forgiveness, and revenge. In each 
country, Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South Africa, the early stages of Enright's 
model most accurately described the individual, group, and political scenario that I 
had witnessed on the ground. Both negotiated and positional forgiveness can be 
seen as mid-phases in the Enright model, and Monteil's socio-political model is a 
good description of the political relevance of a process of forgiveness in a post- 
conflict environment. As evidenced by comments recorded throughout this thesis, 
citizens of these societies readily recognised the link between justice, forgiveness, 
and revenge. The weakness of Enright's model was that it had been originally been 
developed solely with individuals.
On the other hand, Monteil has developed a model that more accurately 
describes group interaction in a post-conflict environment. Her assessment of the 
role of political leadership across boundaries in enacting forgiveness on a group 
level is particularly appropriate to the political situation in Northern Ireland where 
Gerry Adam's Sinn Fein Party has had direct links to and influence on (perhaps
more in the earliest post-conflict years than now) the I.R.A., and the opposite side of 
the spectrum where the fundamentalist lan Paisley's DUP (Democratic Unionist 
Party) has held sway (see Introduction, Chapter Three, Chapter Six).
A description of a forgiveness process that mirrors the definition of passive 
resentment, defined as a middle ground between forgiveness and revenge and 
addressed later in this chapter, as well as the first five steps of the Enright 
framework, has been suggested by Michelle Nelson. In her model she describes a 
type of "detached", "limited", and "complete" forgiveness. Detached forgiveness is 
"reduction in negative affect toward the offender, but no restoration of the 
relationship" while limited forgiveness is a "reduction in negative affect toward the 
offender and partial restoration of and decreased emotional investment in the 
relationship". In her interpretation, full or complete forgiveness is closest to 
Enright's final stage of genuine forgiveness, which includes "total cessation of 
negative affect towards the offender and full restoration and growth of the 
relationship". (Enright et al, 1998, 101)
Monteil has maintained that a form of sociopolitical forgiveness could be 
especially effective when "a pragmatic combination of forgiveness and justice in 
post-conflict societies" could help to create "the necessary transformational social 
power needed to heal both the subjective-psychological and objective-systemic 
damages of a war", helping to prevent the "escalation of future intergroup 
antagonisms". (Montiel, 2000,100)
This phase allows individuals and groups to acknowledge feelings of revenge, 
while allowing cooperation with former enemies. It also embodies a willingness to 
consider forgiveness. While the decision to forbear from a vengeful act is not the
same as extending unconditional forgiveness, it is a good beginning. A sincerely 
stated intent to forgive, or at least to try, is a definite step in that direction. 
Models of revenge
While less empirical work has been done with the process of revenge, it is still 
clear that there is an interaction between perceptions of justice, forgiveness and 
revenge throughout its evolution. In almost all literature on forgiveness and revenge 
cited in this chapter, there is an awareness that the natural core expression of rage is 
revenge not forgiveness. It is equally clear from fieldwork observation, interviews, 
and subsequent description of passive resentment, that a key heroic act for many 
post-conflict survivors is forbearance from revenge. For them, a process of 
forgiveness is valued as a way to support this resolve.
A three phase model called "norms of revenge", derived from research in 
Montenegro, where revenge is enacted as part of a social code of honor, was 
constructed in the late 1980s by Jon Elster. The first phase, based on a rational 
behavior model, cites the risk of social exclusion if there is no form of retaliation, 
such as intimidation, and/or perceived unwillingness of the offended to take revenge 
for an offence, by punishing the offenders. The second phase is revenge enacted in 
the passion of the moment, where rage and impulse guide the act. The third stage is 
revenge motivated by shame, anger, embarrassment, and contempt, and dictated by 
socially shared and enforced rules controlling its enactment. (Elster, 1990, 862-3, 
872-3)
In a wide ranging study, anthropologist Alison Renteln found a connection 
between vengeance and forgiveness in the settling of feuds, where the "process of 
taking [retaliatory blood] revenge .. .leads to mutual forgiveness as the "point is not 
to punish but to restore harmony". While she cites the standard interpretation of
forgiveness as forgiving an act without retaliation, she states that "forgiveness in 
other social contexts requires action". (Renteln, 1990,12-30)
Laying the groundwork for Richard Wilson's later model, political theorist 
Robert Nozick listed five ways to distinguish retribution, a limited retaliatory 
response to a wrong, from revenge, a disproportionate and invariably destructive 
response to the same situation.
The first is that retribution directly addresses a concrete offence, as compared 
to revenge, which may be carried out for a real or perceived slight or imagined 
offence. (This could apply to bombs set off to indiscriminately kill innocent 
civilians.) The second is that "retribution sets an upper limit on punishment" or 
proportionality in accordance to the wrongful act while "revenge sets no such 
limits". Third, "revenge is personal", while "agents of retribution need have no 
personal tie to the victim.. .for whom they exact retribution". Fourth, revenge 
"involves a specific emotional tone-pleasure in the suffering of the punished" while 
retribution "either involves no such emotional tone" or derives pleasure from a 
different source such as "justice being done". Finally, revenge is specifically 
targeted back toward the individuals or members of groups who perpetrated the 
original transgression, while retribution is "committed to general principles 
mandating similar punishment in similar circumstances". (Nozick, Robert, as cited 
in Wilson, 2001, 161-2)
Utilising both township interviews in the Johannesburg area during and after 
the South African TRC, and Nozick's definitions, Richard Wilson developed a 
three-stage model depicting vengeance, retribution, and revenge. The beginning 
point, vengeance, is interpreted as being linked "to a language and an emotion of 
reciprocal punishment and suffering of the offender as compensation for
wrongdoing or perceived harm". Retribution, "although motivated by a desire for 
revenge" is seen as a punitive type of justice "dispensed by more institutionalised 
types of mediation and adjudication", such as in South African townships and 
magistrates' courts. Revenge is unconditional with "unchecked violent acts of 
individuals and armed gangs motivated by the desire for vengeance with no element 
of proportionality". (Wilson, 2001,162)
Like Elster, Wilson's model shows the process of revenge not as a free- 
floating and independent discourse, but as a simultaneously emotional and rational 
reaction to a situation where "more institutionalized forms of retribution (be they 
state or informal) are lacking". His definition of vengeance and retribution parallels 
with the early to mid- stages of Enright's forgiveness model, while the final stage of 
revenge is the antithesis of genuine forgiveness. (Wilson, 2001, 160)
Wilson acknowledges that a "permeable boundary" and inherent ambiguity 
exist between "institutions of retribution" which "feed off the unrefined emotion of 
vengeance, channeling it into conventional procedures, but never quite breaking 
with the expectation of due punishment for wrongs and suffering for the offender". 
The "raw power of vengeance" supports the legitimacy and power of judges 
handing down sentences. "Every informal and state court in South Africa albeit in 
different ways, not only relies upon the construction of these categories but at the 
same time blurs their limits." (Wilson, 2001, 164) South African Justice Albie 
Sachs described the court system as a form of "soft vengeance" as opposed to the 
"hard vengeance" of fighting in the streets. (Sachs, 2003)
Desire for and justification of revenge were rarely articulated in my 
fieldwork interviews. One notable exception was a woman in Northern Ireland who 
worked openly with Republicans in a Belfast community group, while
simultaneously staying on good terms with her local Loyalist paramilitaries, who 
she spoke of appreciatively as doing the 'real' policing such as disciplining joy 
riders and petty criminals. Her brother's death was something she couldn't forget 
and she declared unequivocally that she wanted to take revenge on her brother's 
killers who had been his fellow Loyalist paramilitary members. (Northern Ireland 
Interview, 2000, West Belfast: see Appendix)
A key problem with acting out revenge is, as Martha Minow observed in 
Bosnia and Rwanda, is that it can lead to "horrible excesses" while still failing to 
restore what was lost. This can result in "devastating, escalating intergroup 
violence" where "mass killings are the fruit of revenge for perceived past harms". 
(Minow, 1998,11) Another problem is that while revenge can be euphorically 
addictive, its' 'high' is of short duration. (Judah, 2002, 246-7) Arendt saw acts of 
revenge as self-perpetuating , unending, and predictable responses which stimulated 
new cycles of revenge, while unconditional forgiveness was depicted as a stronger 
force that could stop revenge forever.
Forgiving, in other words, is the only reaction which does not 
merely re-act but acts anew and unexpectedly, unconditioned by 
the act which provoked it... .Without being forgiven, released 
from the consequences of what we have done, our capacity to act 
would, as it were, be confined to one single deed from which we 
could never recover; we would remain the victims of its consequences 
forever... (Arendt, 1958, 240-1)
Passive resentment
In many early post-conflict environments, it has been observed that a point is 
arrived at when all sides begin to consciously practice forbearance from acting out 
feelings of revenge, while simultaneously acknowledging their presence. This 
phase has been identified as a type of "passive resentment", first coined during 
conversations with researcher, Frances McLernon, University of Ulster, Northern
Ireland. During interviews and in public we had both observed clear indication of a 
middle ground that combined distinct elements of both forgiveness and revenge. In 
her work with forgiveness groups in Northern Ireland, McLernon observed evidence 
of a negative, volatile, but neutral non-action oriented middle ground characterised 
by anger, frustration, and confusion. (McLernon, 2000) This 'passive resentment', 
a forbearance from revenge accompanied by a reluctance to forgive, has emerged as 
an emotionally ambivalent but politically pragmatic stance.
A declaration of an "intention to forgive" on both an individual and group 
level was felt by one Republican woman to be a constructive first step in beginning 
dialogue with a community with whom one had been formerly engaged in violent 
conflict. (Northern Ireland Interviews, 2000, Ballymurphy Women's Group, 
Belfast: see Appendix)
In north Belfast, Brendan Bradley told me that an "intention toward 
forgiveness is OK", it "means you forgive things that prevent... change. .. .People 
tell me they don't intentionally forgive but don't blame anyone either. No one has a 
monopoly on crimes against humanity." (Northern Ireland Interview, 2000, 
Bradley: see Appendix)
A similar attitude was expressed among six focus groups led by McLernon 
and others. Two 'victims' groups were composed of "Nationalists" (Catholics), one 
of Unionists ("Protestants"), one of members of church based community relations 
organisations, another of lay conflict resolution organisations, and one of members 
of a victim support organisation. One Unionist felt that not holding "all members 
of the group responsible for the deeds of a few" didn't mean that "you have forgiven 
each and every nationalist in the country" but that this prevented one "resenting
people just because they are labeled as part of that group". (McLernon and Cairns, 
1999, 34)
Subsequent interviews in Serbia and South Africa reinforced this pragmatic 
attitude, and also showed that it could be selective. In Serbian interviews and 
conversations in January and April 2001, a short time after Milosevic lost the 
October election, it was clear that what independent Belgrade journalist, Bratislav 
Grubacic called "passive resentment" existed between Croats and Serbs, and 
Muslims and Serbs, but that outright hostility and distrust characterised most of the 
relationships between Albanians and Serbs. (Serbia Interviews, January 2001, 
Grabacic: see Appendix) In South Africa, one former activist made the point that "I 
can easily live with people who are trying to address issues rather than those not 
willing to look at them." (SA Interviews, 2002, Hartzenburg: see Appendix)
As one north Belfast Republican community activist asserted, "people need 
to meet people." They "may never see eye to eye politically, but see each other as 
people" and cause "a break down there" (in hostility). He believed that "leaders of 
factions" needed "to ask for forgiveness and to extend forgiveness" and that 
political leaders needed to "ask each other for forgiveness for attacking" the other's 
"political base". There needed to be a "mass movement of people who forgive 
themselves and forgive each other". (Northern Ireland Interview, 2000, Bradley: 
see Appendix) 
Forgiveness in Northern Ireland
"There is no forgiveness in Northern Ireland", was the sardonic reply when I 
described my research project to a Belfast librarian and veteran civil rights marcher 
in April 2000. While this proved to be untrue it did point out several cultural 
aspects regarding its discussion. In Northern Ireland, a distinction between
politicians and/or political groups, and individuals was often made. While working 
with forgiveness discussion groups in Northern Ireland, it was observed that "based 
on the link between forgiveness and trust" most found it easier "to forgive an 
individual than to forgive a group, because it is easier to place trust in an 
individual". It was also thought to be "harder to forgive leaders of a group than its 
members". (Cairns and Roe, 2003, 138-9)
As Cairns noted, "few politicians in Northern Ireland appear to be prepared to 
risk alienating their electorate by speaking openly about the need to forgive" as 
early prisoner releases have continued to remain a serious point of controversy. 
Fear of intrusion on personal grief, and the fact that "some groups may feel that acts 
of violence have been a justifiable means to an end and that forgiveness is, 
therefore, not necessary", have also contributed to the silence. (Cairns and Roe, 
2003, 134) Norman Porter has also noted that open discussion of forgiveness is 
"either thought to muddy the waters of reconciliation or not to be relevant to 
political discourse". (Porter, 2003, 23)
The bulk of my Northern Ireland interviews took place during the extremely 
tense environment following the February 2000 suspension of the Northern Ireland 
Assembly. Although this turned out to be first in a series of suspensions, it was 
perhaps one of the most uncertain, as tensions were running high and this action had 
removed the only formal political institutional setting in which all could debate and 
solve grievances. Many individuals I spoke to, from all sides, were under death 
threat, a common situation, and well aware that it was only their and others' 
determination to have peace that prevented the conflict from exploding again.
During Belfast interviews, politicians were often referred to when discussing 
forgiveness. A Republican woman insisted that".. .Politicians are playing a game
with us all. I think Unionist politicians don't want peace. Ordinary Protestant 
people want peace but politicians are the problem." (Northern Ireland Interviews, 
April 2000, Survivors of Trauma: see Appendix).
Another man felt that a key acknowledgement needed to be made by all 
parties in N.I. and in Great Britain that "there had been a war on" and that the best 
possible action by leaders of political parties would be to apologize and ask for 
forgiveness on behalf of the members of their party as a symbolic way to advance 
political reconciliation. This, he felt, would send a signal from the top down to 
individual group members, creating space for individuals and groups in opposing 
communities to work together. (Northern Ireland Interviews, 2000, Bradley: see 
Appendix) When asked about how he thought IRA prisoners/ Republicans/ 
Catholics would react to a police apology (then called the Royal Ulster 
Constabulary or RUC, renamed the Police Service of Northern Ireland or PSNI), 
one Republican ex-prisoner, initially looked stunned, then thoughtful, saying that an 
RUC officer had once told him that there had been "some bad apples in the bunch". 
(Northern Ireland Interviews, April 2000, ex-prisoner: see Appendix)
Following a conversation with a member of the police force several months 
later, I asked if the RUC had ever considered making a public apology. He said yes 
they had talked about it but discussion had focused on who should apologise to 
whom and for what. Many in the force felt that the police had been following 
orders of others who were accountable as well. When I described the reaction of the 
ex-prisoner to the concept of an RUC apology, he stopped, deep in thought for a 
moment, and replied that sooner or later the police and the paramilitaries were going 
to have to sit down face to face and talk to each other. (Northern Ireland Interviews, 
November 2000, Police Headquarters Belfast: see Appendix)
One reason is that while on the surface the Good Friday Agreement holds, and 
groups have ceased fighting each other in open conflict, "Northern Ireland remains a 
deeply divided society. The legacy of a generation of violence has left scars of 
bitterness and fear among citizens of all religious and political persuasions", and a 
"climate of mistrusts exists between large numbers of unionists and nationalists". 
(Porter, 2003, 25)
In his book, The Elusive Quest, Reconciliation in Northern Ireland (2003), 
Norman Porter has noted that the concept of reconciliation is still a debated issue in 
Northern Ireland. While he feels that a majority of people have declared themselves 
to be in favour of reconciliation, "what they understand by it is often too vague or 
too weakly held to withstand the assaults of its detractors". (Porter, 25) Long 
standing cultural differences between unionists and nationalists remain and continue 
to create tense situations, particularly during the summer marching season, and 
"housing and educational segregation between Protestants and Catholics in 
working-class areas of Belfast.. .is virtually complete and shows little sign of 
changing." (Porter, 2003, 3) Despite official and pervasive pessimism about the 
situation, there have consistently been signs that people in Northern Ireland are 
thinking about forgiveness.
"If people do not forgive to live in peace", they "won't fulfill that element of 
life - no forgiveness turns into hatred", you "have to let it grow". "Genuine 
forgiveness is a process" like, "planting a furrow". (Northern Ireland Interviews, 
2000, Bradley: see Appendix)
A Republican woman whose husband was killed, readily spoke about 
forgiveness at a community centre in North Belfast.
Forgiveness is personal, it makes you happy. .. .1 don't 
think of the people who murdered my husband. I'm happier
and the children see another way .. .the person is remembered
as a person not as a something. .. .1 had to forgive my husband
for staying here and knowing the threat. I had to forgive myself
for knowing. I had to forgive God for letting it happen... .The
politicians are the hardest ones to forgive. They are the ranting
and raving of very sick men.
(Northern Ireland Interviews, 2000, Survivors of Trauma: see Appendix)
Revenge in South Africa
Since the mid 1990s, South Africa has been assumed by many in the 
international community to be one of the least likely countries to provide material 
for a contemporary model of revenge (as, for instance, developed by anthropologist 
Richard Wilson). The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) launched the 
country's worldwide image as a symbol for forgiveness and reconciliation in a post- 
conflict environment, and following the 1994 democratic elections, a concept of 
"reconciliation, restorative justice and 'African jurisprudence' known as ubuntu", 
was championed by the head of the TRC, Archbishop Desmond Tutu. This concept 
represented an idealised rural African community that embraced "reciprocity, 
respect for human dignity, community cohesion and solidarity", and soon after 
"ubuntu became a key political and legal notion in the immediate post-apartheid 
order". (Wilson, 2001, 9)
In the short term, the significant advantage of what Richard Wilson 
describes as this "thick" or "religious-redemptive version of reconciliation" 
consisting of "confession, forgiveness, sacrifice and redemption", was that it was 
the "only version of reconciliation with any pretensions to reshaping popular legal 
and political consciousness". In the long term, it became problematic in its attempt 
to construct an encompassing "post-apartheid dominant theology" as it strongly 
polarized both supporters and opponents. (Wilson, 2001, 122-3)
Upon my arrival in Cape Town on 30 October 2002, the country was reeling 
from news about an early morning bombing in Soweto, a large township outside
Johannesburg, and immediately attributed it to an extreme right-wing Afrikaner 
secessionist paramilitary group (see Chapter Two). Over the next six weeks, against 
the backdrop of the investigation, government reaction, and public warnings that 
this indicated deeper, more pervasive unrest, I conducted interviews in the Cape 
Town region. Long considered by many South Africans to be one of the most 
'mixed' and least racially tense areas in the country, I found that while tensions 
were not as close to the surface as in other areas, hardly anyone viewed the area as 
having racial harmony or the TRC as having been more than a "good way to write 
accurate history". (SA Interviews, 2002, Mattes: see Appendix)
The TRC certainly was not seen as having a long term impact toward 
advancing reconciliation or in solving any of the most pressing political, social, or 
economic problems, and there appeared to be much anger and disappointment that 
things hadn't changed fast enough. This attitude was reflected both in Cape Town 
interviews and in stories and articles which appeared in local and national media.
During a meeting near the end of my stay and in subsequent communication 
with Karin Lombard, who was beginning to coordinate nationwide cross-group 
responses to a survey called "The SA Reconciliation Barometer", organized by the 
Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, we both questioned the underlying meaning 
behind the use of the word "forgiveness" by the black population in reference to 
their feelings about the years of apartheid. In conversations and interviews with 
black Africans and Coloured populations, the possibility had occurred to us that the 
word was being used as an expression of tolerance of whites by populations of 
colour, as many comments had been heard stating that 'they', meaning 'whites', 
were never going to change. (SA Interviews, 2002, Lombard: see Appendix)
The fear of black violence has been conveyed as a legacy of apartheid when 
fear of the African majority was often used as rationale for its continuation. It was 
perpetuated as necessary to protect the 'haves' from the 'have nets'. During 
apartheid, the white population was seen as one group by most outsiders, but there 
had always been tensions between those of English and Afrikaner descent. Despite 
this split, there was a strong feeling among other groups of colour that the two 
groups had united to preserve their privileges under apartheid. Resentment of this 
stance was especially strong in the English dominated Cape Town area.
The "English sons went into military, and they were always anti-Black, 
always anti-Afrikans, because they weren't subtle. The Afrikaner had heavy 
politics." The English are "having a hard time today...being English isn't what it 
used to be", they "don't speak with marbles in their mouth.. .don't have an old 
school tie anymore... during apartheid Afrikaners and English were together ... 
white English speaking went with what was secure, the protection of property" and 
persons. "White people were seduced by white privilege." (SA interviews 2002, 
Kolbe: see Appendix)
Another, a well known artist and 1980s activist, of Coloured background, 
spoke about how his experiences during apartheid had been very different from his 
English Cape Town contemporaries. The "English, referred to as Anglo Saxons, 
held sway in the City of Cape Town. The University was a bastion of English 
language types - the educated and professional class". They were "extremely 
arrogant" and "fear" made them "employ whatever means they could to preserve 
themselves".
In the "heart of the 1980s" things were very difficult on the Cape Flats 
(Coloured area adjacent to Cape Town) "in terms of struggle and political actions".
We "heard about a writers conference at the University of Cape Town.. .all 
interested could come up and deliver a paper". We attended and "listened to what 
was happening and thought we were on another planet". They were "out of sync 
with the raw experience we were having in the Flats". (SA Interviews, 2002, 
Hartzenburg: see Appendix)
As an activist who had fought for the end of apartheid he has found that his 
vision of the new world is very different from those of young people in post 1994 
South Africa. "For myself, something I find partly lacking are structures that people 
can relate to and work within in a meaningful way to bring people together to see a 
forward movement. .. .What I find distasteful is that the strata that was privileged 
.. .wants to hang on to their supreme position", it's "something they haven't shaken 
off yet" and "makes for a problematic scenario ...a power positioning" which they 
haven't relinquished. "I expected white people to change but it hasn't been 
forthcoming [and we] haven't created the necessary structures so it can happen." 
(SA Interviews, 2002, Hartzenburg: see Appendix)
Instead of the more equitable distribution of wealth as he had envisaged, other 
groups have assumed superior economic and social positions. He was especially 
critical of a new wealthy, privileged Indian class centred in Natal. Although 
hopeful, he expressed disillusionment with the way things have turned out so far as 
exclusiveness "doesn't embody a sense of a country in which we can share the 
future". (SA Interviews, 2002, Hartzenburg: see Appendix)
Conducting a series of interviews with African township inhabitants in the 
Vaal region south of Johannesburg, during and after the TRC, anthropologist 
Richard Wilson found that the Commission's vision of reconciliation which had 
emphasized public testimonials as a way to encourage the population to defuse and
abandon revenge, did not always have a positive effect. On the local level he 
observed that reaction was split into three categories: "adductive affinities", where 
local values and expression of human rights shared the same expression and values; 
"pragmatic proceduralism", where victims/survivors participate in human rights 
procedures in order to achieve personal goals rather than being motivated through 
sincere belief in their value; and "relational discontinuities' where victims/survivors 
resisted the restorative justice model to seek a more retributive and vengeful style of 
justice. (Wilson, 2001, xix)
In his work in townships, Wilson found the existence of a "dual 
consciousness" regarding formal justice as shaped by state institutions and informal 
understandings of local justice, where humanitarian and Christian values of 
forgiveness, as religious-redemption reconciliation, coexisted with "vengeful 
notions of punishment." (Wilson, 2001, 156, 190)
Following the 1940s' urbanization of African workers and the subsequent 
growth of gang culture, two different systems of South African justice had begun to 
develop. In the townships, where the government did not provide an official police 
force, perceptions of justice tended to run to a vigilante style of 'wild' or 'rough 
justice', where score settling and "popular policing" were handled by gang 
members. This informal type of policing and justice was tolerated by the South 
African government. (Wilson, 2001,156,190)
Wilson noted that this situation was exacerbated by the way in which the 
TRC operated. Despite good intentions, the TRC hearings lacked "concrete 
mechanisms to pursue conflict resolution" and tended to interact with local 
communities "primarily through progressive mainstream church networks", without 
connecting to "punitive structures at the local level-warring party political branches,
township courts or Special Defense Units". While acknowledging that this style of 
physical punishment was distasteful for many TRC commissioners, Wilson 
maintained that human rights organisations ignored "popular conceptualisations of 
justice at their own peril". (Wilson, 2001, 227)
Wilson pointed out that "despite her public vilification", Winnie Madikizela- 
Mandela, the former wife of Nelson Mandela who "never quite made the transition 
from "Mother-of-the-Nation-yet-to-Become to the Mother-of-the-Nation-that-has- 
now-Come-to-be", continues to represent "one of the main symbols of black anger 
and vengeance". Despite her links to the murderously violent 'Mandela United 
Football Club' and her 1991 conviction for the kidnapping of Stompie Seipei (who 
was later murdered by the Club), she is still best able to articulate what Wilson 
describes as the "widespread emotions of anger at the continued racialization of 
privilege in the 'new' South Africa" as well as "the lack of economic betterment for 
the majority of black South Africans". She has been an embarrassment to the ANC 
government, who has tried to break with the "excesses of the 1980s struggle" to 
create a "new national historicity" by elevating Desmond Tutu as a "symbol of 
reconciliation" and "continuity between humanitarian motives in the past and 
present". (Wilson, 2001, 165)
This disparity between the official government politically correct position 
and personal attitudes was also observed in equal measure in the way a 'new' 
outdoor cafe eating trend was being practiced in suburban Johannesburg among 
affluent young whites, whose personal preferences and spending habits were seen as 
an indicator of how South Africa was succeeding in racial integration.
Notably, many of the restaurants in Johannesburg and their 
customers are white. Some of the younger customers are 
black-they tend to be students or scholars, children of those 
black people who have migrated from the townships. The
groups behave non-racially, mainly because the majority are 
white.
This says two things and they're not comfortable. Official 
rhetoric in South Africa oscillates between 'rainbow nation', 
although this is heard less today and a certain retributive 
criticism of whites for not putting their weight behind the 
new democracy. The notion of South Africa as one, unified 
and blending, runs through both official rhetoric and South 
Africans' attitudes.
.. .The eat-out revolution suggests something different, more 
intricate. First, it suggests a growing gulf between official 
and unofficial South Africa. Second, it suggests the gulf is 
between notions of national unity. One notion is of the soup, 
where flavours blend; the public notion is of the stew where 
flavours are juxtaposed. Governments use the undifferentiated 
'we', citizens T and 'us'. Governments evoke a future which 
they confuse with the present, deliberately or wishfully. 
(Greig, 2002, The Sunday Independent)
In 2003, the summarizing report of an extensive and ongoing national survey 
"The SA Reconciliation Barometer", a project of the Institute for Justice and 
Reconciliation based in Cape Town, found that "30% of South Africans were unable 
or unwilling to offer any meaning of reconciliation", that "Black South Africans 
appear to favour notions of forgiveness above notions of racial integration, which 
are favoured by Whites", "only one in five South Africans believe they need to take 
considerable personal responsibility for the national reconciliation process", and that 
"fully 13% of South Africans think it is justified to resort to violent means" like 
taking hostages or damaging property" if the government does not protect their 
human rights". (Lombard, 2003,16: Newsletter, Vol. 1, Issue 3)
It appeared that one of the greatest disparities in racial opinion was over a 
response to the statement that "Whites profited from Apartheid and continue to do 
so today". While only 22% of the white population agreed, a solid 74% of the black 
population thought it to be true. Another deep racial divide was reflected in 
responses to the question, "Do you agree, are uncertain, or disagree with the 
following statement: I feel that white people should be ready to apologise for what
happened to the people under Apartheid". Three quarters of blacks, 68 % of 
coloureds, and 57% of Indian respondents agreed, while only 29% of the white 
population thought an apology was necessary. (Lombard, 2003,16) 
The report notes that
whatever the reasoning, Blacks and Whites differ greatly on this 
issue. The massive disparity between the majority of Blacks 
(and Whites) feeling those who suffered should now forgive and 
the majority of Whites who feel they do not continue to benefit 
and need not apologise may have long-term repercussions for the 
nation-building process.
(Lombard, 2003,16: Newsletter, Vol. 1, Issue 3)
One black South African in his mid twenties, a member of the first 'cross- 
over' generation, having received an integrated primary and university education, 
and still living with his family in a township, saw "forgiveness from all points of 
view". Mentioning that he still experienced a subconscious type of racism exuded 
by well meaning whites, he defined two types of forgiveness. One was where blacks 
wanted apologies from whites "who caused pain" the "white people who passed 
legislation.. .white people who dragged them from the back of their bakkies [pickup 
trucks]" . The other was blacks forgiving each other. "We're very forgiving.. .we're 
brought up that way.. .to forgive and be forgiven... .Black people need to do it, they 
caused a lot of harm to each other." (SA interviews, 2002, Melane: see Appendix) 
This last point of forgiveness between blacks is important as many colluded with the 
apartheid regime, directly and indirectly, in ways that resulted in betrayal and abuse 
and of fellow blacks.
One strong point of agreement for the majority of all races in the 
Reconciliation Barometer focused on a "perceived readiness to gain closure on the 
past". As Lombard noted,
In light of the widespread White refusal to acknowledge or apologise 
for their beneficiation, this comes as quite a relief. Whilst White 
recognition and acknowledgement of the past does not appear to be a
mandatory pre-condition for forgiveness and moving on, the patience 
of people who since 1994 have not seen any concerted efforts by Whites 
to change the apartheid era socio-economic status quo should not be 
overestimated. (Lombard, 2003, 16: Newsletter, Vol. 1, Issue 3)
As Vincent Kolbe noted "Mandela was useful" and the "80s brought all of South 
Africa together", but warned that there's still a "lot of work to be done.. .still a lot of 
violence, unhappiness." (SA interviews 2002, Kolbe: see Appendix)
The survey also made clear that reconciliation and development were 
perceived as two different issues. Reconciliation was referred to as the "rebuilding 
of relationships between people", while development was interpreted as "dealing 
with unemployment, crime, a lack of housing", and an array of "so-called socio- 
economic rights". (Lombard, 2003, 16: Newsletter, Vol. 1, Issue 3)
Regardless of background, there seems to be a general consensus among South 
Africans that the hard work of reconciliation has only just begun. As President 
Thabo Mbeki noted,
it's a very delicate thing to handle the relationship between these two 
elements.. .it's not a mathematical thing; it's an art.. .if you handle 
transformation in a way that doesn't change a good part of the status 
quo, those who are disadvantaged will rebel, and then goodbye 
reconciliation. (Lombard, 2003,16: Newsletter, Vol. 1, Issue 3)
Serbia
My fieldwork in Serbia provided an opportunity to observe these processes in 
their earliest development. My first visit to Belgrade was in late January 2001. This 
visit, just after Milosevic had been deposed the previous October, and again in 
April, required an official 'letter of invitation'. The final trip in June 2002 fell 
under a new tourism visa in effect during the summer months.
In January 2001, when asked about forgiveness, one student referred to the 
NATO bombing, about which there were angry feelings in Belgrade, saying it was 
something she felt "very bitter about". However, she said she could forgive the
United States for the 'intervention' because they were a superpower and "that's how 
superpowers act", but what did Britain think it was doing, it was part of Europe? No 
one spoke directly of the Albanians. (Serbia Interviews, January 2001, Belgrade IT 
students: see Appendix)
A year and a half later, when anti-NATO feelings had cooled somewhat in 
Belgrade, they were still running high in Novi Sad, a city located on the Danube 
River about eighty miles north of Belgrade. Stories of the nightly NATO bombings 
were vividly recalled and a large bridge that had been destroyed was still being 
angrily pointed out by locals. An American NGO worker based in Belgrade, who 
had worked in the Balkans for some time, told me he suspected that the prolonged 
NATO bombing in Novi Sad had been carried out to teach Serbs a lesson, as there 
had been no other strategic reason for targeting the city. (Serbia Interviews, June 
2002, Novi Sad, Belgrade: see Appendix)
Acknowledgement of actions against other groups done in the name of Serbs 
by the government and its satellite paramilitary organisations has been an extremely 
difficult issue. "Serbs need to know what was done in their name", maintained 
Belgrade journalist Bratislav Grubacic when speaking of the massacre at Srebrencia. 
In order not to repeat another war, Grubacic felt that Milosevic needed to "go to the 
Hague"; that Serbia needed an "open process where basic elements of Serb 
nationalism need to be examined and politics adjusted to the modem world", and 
that a truth commission needed to be established to "open the eyes of the Serb 
population. ...Responsibility? Individual versus collective responsibility? It's 
useful- can't say they're all responsible but in fact I believe we are all in some 
measure responsible." (Serbia Interviews, January 2001, June 2002, Grubacic: see 
Appendix)
From the first visit there appeared to be a resigned acceptance for the final 
parting of ways with Croatia, Bosnia, and even Montenegro. A student interviewed 
in January 2001 talked about the anticipated split of Serbia and Montenegro as a 
"divorce". I was asked at the same time by a group of students about what the 
outside press was saying about the necessity for sending Milosevic to the Hague in 
order for Serbia to receive economic aid. The feeling was strong among this group 
that the outside world was using Milosevic to teach Serbs a lesson. Most in the 
room had voted him out of office but felt that they would rather try him in Serbian 
courts than have the world humiliate him, which they perceived as public 
condemnation of all Serbs. (Serbia Interviews, January 2001: see Appendix)
In 2003 (10 September) a negotiated political forgiveness began to emerge 
between Croatia and Serbia when the Serb President Svetozar Marovic, made an 
unexpected apology to the Croatian President Stjepan Mesic during his first visit to 
Belgrade since the war," for all the evils any citizen of Serbia and Montenegro has 
committed against any citizen of Croatia". President Mesic spontaneously 
responded by apologising "to all those who have suffered pain or damage at any 
time from citizens of Croatia who misused or acted against the law". While it is 
uncertain whether these apologies were official or closer to personal, symbolic 
statements, it has become clear that both countries need to "improve regional co- 
ordination" if they are to become members of the European Union and other 
international institutions. (BBC News, 10 September 2003)
The initial apology may have also been motivated by Serbia's pressing 
Croatian Serb refugee problem. Of the nearly one million refugees and internally 
displaced Serbs expelled from Croatia, Bosnia, and Kosovo since 1991, around 
22,000 Croatian Serbs have remained in Serbia's 'temporary' refugee centres,
consuming "more than 80% of Serbia's refugee budget". Serbia has been anxious to 
defuse the tensions their presence has caused among local Serbs by returning them 
to their original homes in Croatia. (BBC News, 20 June 2003)
While the relationship with the other countries in the former Yugoslavia 
show signs of settling, for many Serbs, Kosovo is still a volatile political issue. One 
Serb viewed the situation as one that "will go on for ten years.. .it will last a long 
time." (Serbia Interviews, January 2001, Belgrade IT students: see Appendix)
In commenting on the dangers of the rebirth of the Nationalist Party in the 
Serb elections of 28 December 2003, David Owen maintained that Milosevic had 
used his trial at the Hague "very cleverly .. .speaking directly to supporters in 
Serbia". The "referendum on international criminal court at the Hague" is "feeding 
nationalist forces". All of us "need to settle this issue of Kosovo". There "needs to 
be a commitment from the EU on Serbia" and we "need closure on the issue of 
Milosevic. .. .If Serbia continues to go down into the pit.. .the Balkans would find it 
very difficult to come out of it... Kostunica is a genuine Serbian nationalist." He 
felt that we, in the West, "need to engage him and need to be more generous toward 
Serbia." (Owen, 2003, BBC Radio Four)
In April 2003, an "exploratory brainstorming" workshop on the Balkans, 
"Reconciling for the future", sponsored by the CDRSEE (Center for Democracy and 
Reconciliation in Southeast Europe) was held in Thessaloniki, Greece. One of the 
first speakers, Elisabeth Rehn, began by acknowledging that "..I think we all agree 
that today we are still far away from a truly reconciled region." A divided society 
exists in the former Yugoslavia along "religious, ethnic, social, cultural and political 
lines", with the deepest separation between the Serbs and Albanians. 
".. .Reconciliation does not only mean the mere absence of physical violence, but,
in a positive and more ambitious approach, a process in which the persisting pattern 
of hostility and conflicts is transformed into cooperation and respect of common 
values". (Rehn, 2003, Speech 3)
Another contributor, Erhard Busek, Special Co-ordinator, Stability Pact for 
South Eastern Europe, emphasized that discussing reconciliation means that we will 
have to meet the emotions of many individuals.
We will have to meet people whose emotions were (and still are) 
mobilised by the media, by the ideological apparatuses of the states, 
by the ethnic nations. Beyond those emotions - and this might be 
hard to hear for many of my colleagues present here- we will find 
that dealing with the hatred, which is a very important emotion in 
this context, is not going to be the real problem. The real and 
unpleasant problem ...to face in the future is going to be nothing 
else but love.
Many among the unfortunate actors of these bloody wars have
been ready to kill, and they have actually killed, just for
.. .patriotism and the like and, therefore, they do not have a feeling
of having a bad conscience. They simply do not feel guilty.
Love, therefore, is the problem that is going to be present in
our efforts to change the social fabric (at least in socio-psychological
terms),... not only love in terms of ethno-nationalistic interpretation
of patriotism, but also love in terms of internal family relations.
In these terms, the process of reconciliation, as we might understand 
it, would have to start with an attempt to use some rational concepts, 
to discuss some concrete elements, not just broad social or moral 
concepts. (Busek, 2003, Speech 4)
Marie Therese Mauro, a UN Political Officer based in the Liaison Office in 
Belgrade, since the early 1990s, felt hopeful about Serbia's future because people 
had changed the government themselves, as a bottom-up transformation of power is 
one of the strongest forms of political change. (Mauro, April 2001, Belgrade) That 
feeling was also present among students in Belgrade who said that voting out 
Milosevic had been the "first time in Serbian history that we changed our authorities 
peacefully". (Serbia Interviews, January 2001: see Appendix)
In Subotica, Vjolvodina, the northern Serb province and city bordering 
Hungary, a Croatian woman who had a long standing marriage with a Serb, voiced 
her hatred for Milosevic and what he had done to the former Yugoslavia. "I don't 
have political forgiveness.. .1 hate him, not as a man because I don't know him" but 
because if "you're from Serbia you have a problem wherever you go". She hated 
his wife because of her mother's experience who "didn't have a chance as a 
business woman to work like Milosevic's wife and children. .. .in my heart I hate 
him but don't want revenge". I "want change but not revenge". (Serbia Interviews, 
April 2001, Zvecic: see Appendix)
Conclusion
Throughout this thesis, the process of political forgiveness and revenge is 
depicted as a series of steps taken by an individual and/or collectively by a group 
toward a final goal of unconditional forgiveness or revenge. (Unconditional revenge 
is defined here as retaliation that may be targeted toward innocent victims and is 
disproportional to the offence committed.) In an evolution that closely mirrors the 
Enright model, while incorporating elements from those of Andrews and much of 
Monteil, the achievement of genuine forgiveness is defined as total and 
unconditional cessation and release of all desire for revenge. Each phase is depicted 
as a constantly evolving dynamic interaction of bottom-up, individuals influencing 
group behaviour and identity; and top-down, groups, represented by acknowledged 
leaders who influence individual beliefs.
In much of the discussion surrounding forgiveness, one of the most pervasive 
questions is if its enactment is necessary in order to stop fighting, and if so, who is it 
necessary for? It is clear from the evidence that while genuine forgiveness does
release all feelings of revenge, it must be internally driven and unconditional, 
making it an extremely difficult state for many to achieve.
At the present time, there tends to be a myopic intensity focused on former 
combatants forgiving each other before they can move on, but as has been indicated 
earlier in this chapter, evidence is beginning to suggest that a solidly developed state 
of "passive resentment", pointed in the direction of forgiveness, may be sufficient to 
allow individuals and groups to work together in shaping new institutions. (The 
continued presence of violence is not necessarily indicative of failure and is 
discussed in a Chapter Six.) While not every person or group is capable of 
unconditionally forgiving the other, former enemies are the ones who know best the 
costs of acting out revenge.
Ways to contain revenge within a system of justice that will be held as fair by 
all have been discussed for centuries. (Rawls, 1999: Sarat, 1997) While often called 
retribution within a formal institutionalised justice system, and revenge when 
enacted as informal or rough justice on the streets, they are essentially the same in 
their source. (While most literature cited in this chapter uses the word vengeance 
interchangeably with revenge, Wilson defines vengeance as a lesser degree of 
retribution.) It is the difference in their expression of response to the proportion of 
an offence that tips the scales. While in some cases, a measured act of revenge 
embodied in a formal judicial institution and limited by law may settle a dispute, 
more often revenge is enacted in the form of rough or informal justice, leaving the 
cycle of retaliation open-ended.
Another point overlooked in many depictions of forgiveness and revenge is 
that identification of victims and perpetrators is often extremely contentious, 
making the question of who should forgive whom, equally problematic (see Chapter
Two). While some situations are public and well understood such as well- 
documented genocide and targeted killings, others are less publicly acknowledged 
in an 'eye for an eye' retaliation by the offended group which results in an equally 
vicious settling of the score. This pattern, familiar to those who have engaged in 
conflict, is usually not well understood by outsiders such as external interveners, aid 
givers, international governments, peacekeeping forces, diasporas, and others with 
physical and/or generational distance from the conflict.
Another problem has been the assumed presence or availability of an 
offender who is capable of apologising to and asking forgiveness from the victim. 
This is often an unrealistic scenario as the perpetrator may be dead, unavailable, or 
unrepentant. This situation emphasizes the need for a more independent 
interpretation of forgiveness that allows political cooperation, while at the same 
time allowing space for the offended to individually internalize a process that 
acknowledges and releases the past.
Significantly, as made clear by the Enright model, the presence of vengeful 
feelings is not in itself a deterrent to the process of forgiveness, nor a guarantee of 
acting out revenge. More importantly, acknowledging the presence of revenge may 
help the offended to eventually forgive. The link between the two appears to be 
perceptions of and reactions to justice as fair or unfair treatment, reaction to 
perceived victimization, and the way in which they play a prominent and parallel 
role in the early stages of revenge. It is also clear that what is often heard as a call 
for 'justice' - certain types of trials, punitive actions, conditionalities, etc., is driven 
by a motivation for revenge rather than a quest for fair treatment.
In Wild Justice (1985), Susan Jacoby noted that a fine line between retribution 
and revenge is often present in formalised legal systems where the role of
retribution in society is determined as much by the type of punishment given as by 
the procedure used to arrive at the decision.
The fact that a judge rather than a mob designates drawing-and-quartering 
as a proper mode of execution is, in strict legal terms, an advance in 
the social control of revenge, but it also means that the values of those 
who control the social order are scarcely more advanced than those of 
the mob. (Jacoby, 1985, 5)
This is echoed in the sentiments of Aladjem who claims that "vengeance always 
cloaks itself in the most current styles of 'justice'. The demand for victims' rights 
and the insistence that we hear the voices of the victims are just the latest 'style' in 
which vengeance has disguised itself." (as quoted in Sarat, 1999, 171) This link 
between victims' rights and enactment of justice as revenge highlights implications 
of the tendency for all groups to assume an identity of victimisation identity during 
post-conflict transitions. (Chapter Two)
In his analysis of the relationship between vengeance, victims, and formal law, 
legal scholar, Austin Sarat, has noted that the recent use of the language of victims' 
rights is a euphemistic signal for revenge and a reminder that "modern legal orders 
are built on the edge of fear and anger and that they must walk a fine line in their 
efforts to ally that fear and calm that anger". For him it is an indication of growing 
doubt, especially in Western societies, that "public processes can be built on 
anything but rage and grief. (Sarat, 1997, 180)
Ironically, it may be the groups who are most distant from the conflict and 
who have been most disassociated from its costs- the third, in some cases second 
generations, and diasporas, both contemporary and historic, who may have the 
greatest need to understand and enact forgiveness. Subsequent generations tend to 
receive verbal and nonverbal transmissions of anger for wrongs done to their 
predecessors, while diasporas carry with them an image of a country that no longer
exists, creating a new image in a new environment which may exacerbate old 
grudges and disagreements. Renewal of conflicts often involves direct participation 
by both of these groups. For them, genuine forgiveness, which releases all desire for 
revenge, could be of the greatest help in moving on.
By better defining the processes of forgiveness and revenge, as well as their 
relationship to perceptions of justice as fairness and formation of post conflict 
identities, a more accurate set of concrete indicators which reflect dynamics 
underlying motivations in post-conflict transitions can be developed and utilised to 
assist in clarifying intentions of individuals and groups. Understanding these 
processes and how they evolve is directly relevant to security issues on the ground. 
This awareness will help outsiders to understand the varying nuances and 
interaction between coded talk and violent action, and assist in identifying potential 
flash points where lethal violence might quickly erupt in early post-conflict 
environments.
Mahmood Mamdani has observed that "There is no Chinese Wall between 
good and evil; the two are interred in the same bones. The dilemma is how to live 
with evil: Love Thy Enemy." He has suggested an alternative paradigm of 
reconciliation where the "old order" could be redefined "not through a relationship 
between winners and losers, between its beneficiaries and victims as the majority" 
but by viewing the number of perpetrators and victims as a minority. In other 
words, treating perpetrators as "agents of the state", and victims as "political 
activists victimized personally and individually", will circumvent focus on 
"systemic group disadvantage", and shift instead to specific individual violations. 
"Responsibility for the old order is pinned on individual perpetrators, agents, not
even on the old political elite. Guilt, evil, is defined in strictly individual terms." 
(Mamdani, 1997, 23-24)
This prevents a "quest for justice" that is "unbounded and self-righteous", 
which instead "can be framed as historically as was the injustice to which it is a 
response. The challenge is to bound that quest within a larger objective, the quest 
for a re-defined political community in which the identities victim and perpetrator, 
victim and beneficiary, can be transcended as those of survivors of an era gone by." 
(Mamdani, 1997, 25)
Jacoby has maintained that "boundless vindictive rage" is not the only choice 
other than "unmerited forgiveness" as
once the possibility of a balance between compassionate and 
retributive impulses is acknowledged, individuals and societies 
turn their attention to the question of which forms of retribution, 
and which forms of forgiveness, afford the opportunity of an 
existence that encompasses both justice and love. (Jacoby, 1985, 352)
In the preceding descriptions, revenge is depicted as a process strongly 
influenced by perceptions of justice as fairness. Enright and fellow researchers have 
observed that "forgiveness is possible only when a person first has a sense of 
justice. One cannot feel a deep sense of moral injury without a sense of fairness."
(Enright et al, 1992,101,107)
An acknowledgement of the suffering of all, the extension of dignity and 
respect for different experiences, and consideration in the way memories of the 
conflict are transmitted to future generations and diasporas, may be key issues in 
stopping a cycle of revenge. Above all, it is important to remember that along with 
'war', 'peace' is a community living in our imagination.
Reconciliation must reach into the shared inheritance of the 
democracy of death to teach the drastic nullity of all struggles 
that end in killing, the unending futility of all attempts to avenge 
those who are no more. For it is an elementary certainty that
killing will not bring the dead back to life. This is an inheritance 
that can be shared, and when it is shared there can be that deep 
knowing that sometimes comes when one wakes from a dream.
(Ignatieff, 1998,190)
In the end it needs to be remembered by everyone, that it is not just a choice 
between forgiveness and revenge that drives survivors to reach toward an equitable 
solution, but the opportunity to live the joys of a peaceful life.
Chapter Eight: Conclusions and Reflections on Peace Processes
As the international community has come to learn, a peace agreement can 
signal the beginning rather than the end of a conflict story. How events unfold, and 
the way in which they are perceived both internally and externally, are keys to the 
success or failure of peace in the long term. During this time, one of the most 
challenging phases occurs when individual and group expectations of benefits to be 
gained from a declared peace meet the reality of slow change on the ground. This 
does not mean that a peace process has been unsuccessful, rather just different to 
what had been imagined.
This especially applies to continuation of violence following a formal 
declaration of peace. As has been previously described, instead of the 
instantaneously non-violent society envisaged, certain types of criminal acts, 
domestic violence, and 'score settling' such as harassment, vandalizing, physical 
intimidation, punishment beatings and targeted murders, enacted by individuals 
and/or gangs or paramilitaries may continue at the same level or increase. Much of 
this violence will be focused intra-group or toward security forces rather than 
directed at traditional enemies (see Chapter Six). Northern Ireland, which has had 
one of the longest running conflicts, while now arguably pursuing one of the more 
difficult peace processes, reflects many of these problems. This situation has been 
equally observed in Serbia and South Africa, and has posed difficulties for all sides.
The goal of this thesis has been to identify important internal views and 
underlying issues in the process of political cooperation necessary to rebuild 
institutional infrastructure and accompanying processes during post-conflict 
transitions. These are often different from views and assumptions held by those on
the outside. In doing so it has sought to identify and re-prioritise the importance of 
these issues from an internal point of view. This view, constructed from 
observation, surveys, and interviews in the relevant countries, has been utilised to 
model an analytical framework that most accurately describes these underlying 
forces that shape a process of political cooperation. These factors have been 
identified as the relationship between evolutionary processes of forgiveness and 
revenge, perceptions of justice as fairness, and formation of identity in post-conflict 
transitions.
The relevance of understanding processes of forgiveness and revenge in 
relation to post-conflict transitions has been attracting serious international attention 
since the mid 1990s, when survivors of civil wars and members of the global aid 
community accelerated their search for more effective ways to facilitate post- 
conflict reconciliation. In particular the political use of forgiveness in a post- 
conflict transitional justice format, while previously utilised in Latin America, had 
attracted international attention in the late 1990s as a Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission (TRC) was conducted in South Africa.
Overall there has been remarkably little clarity about what a peace process and 
reconciliation actually mean in the international community. A constant theme 
running throughout this thesis has been that many problems during both the conflict 
and post-conflict transition have resulted from mistaken assumptions and misguided 
interpretations made by outsiders. Rather than making an effort to engage with 
these populations in a slightly more complex way, or to gather what in most cases is 
readily available information from regional and local sources, many in the 
international community still prefer to deal with the highest tiers of government and 
to pursue whatever is seen as the 'quick fix' of the moment.
Key findings
Prior to fieldwork conducted for this thesis, it was apparent from a wide range 
of sources that a set of dynamics underlying post-conflict transitions, strongly 
motivated individual and group cooperation in the political sphere. These dynamics 
were best described as overarching phases of forgiveness and revenge that worked 
simultaneously on both an individual and group level. Perceptions of justice - 
whether or not individuals as members of groups felt they were being fairly treated 
in the process of decision making - was intertwined throughout and strongly 
influenced positive or negative outcomes as demonstrated in formal cooperation and 
political decisions.
Formation of post-conflict identities was influenced by all these factors, and as 
explained in Chapter Two, the most common development was a sense of 
victimisation by all groups. In Chapter Seven evidence that political processes of 
forgiveness and revenge in the early post-conflict environment do not require more 
than forbearance from revenge to enable former enemies to cooperate in the short 
term, was demonstrated through interviews. However, as peace processes evolve 
over time priorities change, a different set of concerns arise, and implications of 
these issues loom large.
An important understanding that appears to be have been consistently missed 
by external observers is that a peace agreement is only a benchmark. It indicates 
that for variety of reasons a conflict has slowed and that former combatants are 
ready to discuss fas possibility of peace and cessation of open warfare. If the peace 
process holds, the original set of grievances are not "dead" they simply transfer to 
the political forum. While it is clear that one cannot be forced to forgive 
unconditionally, it is equally clear that unless former combatants and subsequent
generations find some way to address and release the animosities of the past, they 
will simply lie in wait for the next opportunity to emerge.
A key finding of this thesis has been the possibility that an act of forgiveness 
is more important to post-conflict generations and diasporas than to current post- 
conflict populations. Forbearance from revenge, embodied in a type of 'passive 
resentment', and an intention to forgive may be the most that can realistically be 
expected between former combatants in the short term (see Chapter Seven). 
While interpersonal reconciliation is often described in terms of forgiveness, 
political reconciliation on a national scale appears to work perfectly well in the 
"passive resentment" phase described as a forbearance from revenge (see Chapter 
Seven). Political reconciliation "can forego the psychological and moral challenges 
that many aggrieved individuals face, but often choose never to deal with in a 
thoroughgoing manner" while at the same time providing a way to negotiate a type 
of democratic process that sustains peace. This type of negotiation and tolerance has 
been said to be "the heart of democratic politics." (Lombard, May 2004, 8-9)
If political processes of forgiveness and revenge assume their greatest 
importance in future generations and diasporas, then the ways in which stories are 
passed on in the form of social and cultural memory in the name of 'history' utilised 
by political power, may be where the final pursuit of reconciliation lies. Much of 
the way in which a post-conflict society constructs its future lies in the way it 
interprets and commemorates its past. As has been evident in the case studies in 
this thesis, memory, like truth, is highly subjective and can be carried as a vengeful 
torch from one generation to the next. The central issue is not z/but how events are 
remembered. For survivors and successive generations, "understanding the past as 
the past- is always an achievement." (Hoffman, 2003, 294)
The mythology of war experience projects a "world divided into two opposing 
forces: the force of evil and of idealized victimhood, of persecutor and persecuted." 
The greatest danger of rekindling conflicts lurks where successive generations do 
not remember to examine their past "thoughtfully and critically" as violence can be 
perpetuated and repeated in the form of aggressive regimes that "can last a long time 
and reproduce themselves very successfully." (Hoffman, 2003, 294-7) In one way 
memory operates remarkably similarly to religion as it is a shared practice, focuses 
on identity, and "leads to the kind of moral certainty whose dark side is moral 
absolutism" (Muller, 2002, 32), and as was proven in the case of Serbia, cannot 
always be repressed by attempting to impose an overarching Yugoslav identity (see 
Chapter Four).
As Richard Wilson found, a body meant to discover one "truth" for the 
purpose of universal reconciliation such as the TRC in South Africa, may result in 
two very different approaches to history split between human rights advocates who 
look "forward to a future of rehabilitation, redemption and reconciliation", and 
"retributionists" who "look back at the past and still feel the burden of a crime that 
has not been cancelled by punishment." (Wilson, 2001, 209)
Wilson found that advocates of punishment were more likely to adhere to 
construction of a "new historicity of a reconciling political elite" with urban courts 
and human rights organizations commemorating "the place of suffering in their 
construction of justice." In contrast lex talionis ruled in township courts where 
justice was conceived as repaying one wrong with the same in kind and where 
physical suffering could only "be repaid with commensurate physical suffering", or 
by monetary compensation that adequately represented it. There are also 
fundamental differences in each group's approach to equality, where "equality of
rights and moral worth is a key tenet of Christianity and human rights doctrines" but 
fundamentally rejected in "imbizo procedures where certain men assume the right 
denied to others (women, young unmarried men) to apprehend, try, sentence and 
punish." (Wilson, 2001, 209)
Similarly, diasporas, often created by refugees who have survived from both 
sides of a conflict, carry their memories to foreign lands. Unlike those who have 
stayed they tend to envisage a place that no longer exists. This isolation of memory 
is akin to "wrestling with shadows" that can be more disorientating than facing 
reality, and can lead to misinformed and skewed images being passed on to 
successive generations. Like the post-generation, the second generation "that comes 
after disaster" inherits the experience of violence as a "still living memory". 
(Hoffman, 2003, 291, 294) This inheritance is molded and converted into a body of 
collective memory or historical knowledge.
Jan Werner Muller has made clear distinctions between memory, power, and 
history. He maintains that one way to understand the relationship between memory 
and power is to envisage memory as a kind of "symbolic power" that influences 
policymaking where policymakers rely on various versions of collective, national, 
and personal memory, and "on historical analogies in particular" to create an instant 
legitimacy for political strategies and actions that bypass reflective examination. 
History, he maintains, is highly interconnected to memory, but in its most successful 
manifestation, stands apart as both a product and critic of collective memory. Both 
history and collective memory influence formation of identity in the positive and 
negative ways that have been described in this thesis, which can be reconfigured 
into a "narrative of victimisation, which then becomes an incentive for aggression." 
(Muller, 2002, 25-7, 22-3, 21)
For Eva Hoffman, member of a family of Polish Jews who survived the 
Holocaust of World War II, "the haunting is not ended" if a clean break is not made 
between the past and present. "It is in this crucial interval that the past can be 
frozen into fixed mythology, or comprehended in its historical complexity; and in 
which the cycles of revenge can be perpetrated or interrupted. The moment of 
transmission is worth dwelling on, because it is a moment of real danger; but also of 
genuine possibility and hope." (Hoffman, 2003, 294)
Inheriting these catastrophic histories is unfair to children from all sides of a 
conflict. There is a necessity for post-generations on both sides "to move away 
from the logic of identification with an ancestral past, to the logic of broader 
understanding- and the kind of dialogue that can lead to a recognition rather than 
mis-recognition of the other." (Hoffman, 2003, 296-7)
Sharing the possibility of dialogue or mutual sympathy, where "no such 
sympathy can really be expected in the immediate aftermath of atrocity" facilitates 
and implies the type of understanding needed and questions that need to be asked by 
later generations. Generational changes and the possibility of transformative 
relationships can be used to reinforce the understanding that no group is either 
"intrinsically aggressive or intrinsically innocent" and that no conflict is predestined 
or predetermined. (Hoffman, 2003, 300)
Summary
In all three case studies it has become evident that perceptions of justice as
fairness are utilised by all sides to judge how they feel they will be treated in the 
long term. As has been previously observed the early post-conflict transition is a 
hypersensitive, fearful time for all. This perception of justice through the lens of 
victimisation is especially relevant for the way formerly dominant or strongly 
aggressive groups form their process of political cooperation (see Chapters One,
Two). The lower socio-economic individuals and groups who are usually most 
affected by the conflict will be the ones who have the strongest reaction to 
unfolding events (see Chapters One, Two, Seven). The way that aid is allocated by 
the international community, whether to groups labeled by the outside as victims or 
by overall need regardless of group affiliation, is a critical factor in forming 
perceptions of justice by all groups.
In the poverty stricken working class areas of Belfast, Northern Ireland, there 
was much awareness of which groups were given external aid money and for what 
purpose. There was strong feeling in low income Protestant/Loyalist areas, that 
while equally lacking in resources, they were the ones branded as perpetrators, 
resulting in all substantive international financial support going to the 
Catholic/Republican community, while their needs were ignored. This is the 
perception that has driven Protestant/ Loyalist street rioting in Belfast during 
September 2005.
Interviews and observations in all three countries included in this thesis 
indicate that the post-conflict reality for most has been an interactive mixture of 
cynicism and enthusiasm that strongly influences their perceptions of justice, 
identity, and inclinations toward forgiveness or revenge. Cynicism was usually 
expressed in their assessment and implied tolerance of the other group(s) and 
resignation that many members were never going to change their attitudes. This 
sentiment was specifically articulated in South Africa (see Chapter Five), but 
alluded to in all three case studies. Enthusiasm, often expressed first in 
expectations, then hope for a better future, was also included. For most individuals 
and groups interviewed, a mixture of both balanced in a kind of 'cynical optimism' 
appeared to help keep a deep bitterness at bay and formed the core of the attitude of
passive resentment. For some, forbearance from revenge may be the limit of their 
capability while others may be fully able to extend genuine forgiveness. (Porter, 
2003, 42)
Many post-conflict environments have seen the emergence of political 
indifference, a disassociation from political change, and a refusal to participate or 
vote in elections. This attitude "may be a reflection of political apathy shared by a 
cross-section of citizens or a product of disillusionment." (Porter, 2003, 39) 
Although not restricted to any particular group or class, Porter sees many of the 
politically apathetic as members of the "contented classes, .. .namely those who 
have enjoyed the economic benefits of direct rule, without having had to incur any 
of the political costs and those who have opted out of participation in politics on any 
level. (Porter, 2003, 39-40)
This attitude of those whose lives have been virtually unaffected, or in some 
cases enhanced by a conflict is worth noting and perhaps deserving of more 
attention than previously assumed. While rebel and paramilitary motives are usually 
high profile and grab much attention, there may well be another law-abiding middle 
range socio-economic group whose commitment to a peace process should not be 
taken for granted.
The initial hypothesis that perceptions of justice as fairness, known as "justice 
judgments", while not replacing formal legal justice, were formed early by all 
groups and influenced the beginning of a pragmatic form of reconciliation was 
found to hold in all three cases. As discussed in the previous chapter, the formation 
of passive resentment or forbearance from revenge in order to initiate a process of 
political cooperation and stop conflict on the ground, was strongly evident in 
Northern Ireland, as well as Serbia and South Africa. The second hypothesis that
post-conflict individual and group identities are re-negotiated through these 
perceptions of fair treatment and relied upon in shaping political processes of 
forgiveness or revenge was specifically discussed in Chapter Two and previous 
chapters.
The third hypothesis that political forgiveness and revenge are parallel 
complex evolutionary processes present in all national and international political 
systems, directly related to perceptions of justice has been borne out by observations 
and interviews in this thesis. This finding is the basis for the following points that 
have been identified as ones which need to be urgently addressed by the 
international community if there is to be better understanding of early post-conflict 
transitions and external interaction with and impact on them. 
Practical application of key findings
While much aid and peacekeeping has been well intentioned, it has become 
increasingly obvious that in order to understand accurately the effects of domestic 
and military interventions there is a need for policy makers to develop better 
understanding and recognition of the fluid and evolutionary nature of peace and 
reconciliation processes. With more attention directed toward areas that have 
previously been assumed to be irrelevant, they provide a way to graph benchmarks 
of intent or will of populations to pursue sustainable peace, or a return to a new 
version of an old conflict. In this context, some of the most important observations 
derived from this thesis are the following:
Importance of monitoring perceptions of recipient populations 
Allusions to perceptions of threats to personal, political, economic, and social 
security and their relationship to the post-conflict environment have dominated 
fleldwork interviews, observations, and related literature. The relationship between
these threats and perceptions of justice as fairness has been outlined in this thesis 
(see Chapters Two, Three, Seven). Theoretical writing about cultural and internal 
influences on formation of social perception presupposes agency in perceivers as 
internally encapsulating "intent, belief, desire", while simultaneously interacting 
with external institutions, public discourses, and with the more prominent public 
symbols and representations of society that are easily accessible in a perceiver's 
mind. This framework of perceptions of both individuals and groups provides 
answers for interpretation of an eruption of violent conflict that might otherwise be 
variously "attributed to wiles of a leader, the will of a nation, or the wrath of God, 
depending on the specific conception of agency guiding the perceiver." (Morris et 
al, 2001, 169-70)
The hypersensitivity inherent in early post-conflict environments makes 
understanding the basis for formulation of social perceptions a particularly 
important indicator for gauging the possibility of violent reaction on the ground. In 
correspondence with their perceptions, demands by different groups for 
implementation of different types of institutions and reconciliation mechanisms will 
evolve and change over time in accordance with perception of personal and group 
security, making openings for effective positive interventions small and short-lived. 
Surveying perceptions
One way to undertake a survey of perceptions would be to use a form of 
"conflict impact assessment" to assess effectiveness of specific aid projects on 
"cleavages of class, ethnicity and region that form the fault lines of violent conflict" 
to give direct insight into how aid programmes and peacekeeping interventions are 
perceived. This could include all groups and individuals by identifying and 
requesting well-known and marginalised organisations and emissaries to gather
more information through informal networking channels. A similar all-inclusive 
national survey strategy has been implemented in South Africa by the Institute of 
Justice and Reconciliation in tracking socio-political trends for their SA 
Reconciliation Barometer. (Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, 2004)
An extensive three-year project was undertaken by the US based 
Collaborative for Development Action (CDA) in order to more clearly understand 
the effectiveness of aid tied to 'peacebuilding' conditionality. Following a 2003 
survey of over two hundred international, national, and local peace agencies the 
following points were identified. A positive effect was said to be achieved when the 
action taken motivated participants and communities to develop their own initiatives 
for peace; to create or reform political institutions to handle grievances that had 
fuelled the conflict; when they increasingly resisted "violence and provocations to 
violence", and when everyone's sense of security, both real and perceived, 
increased. (Anderson and Olson, 2003,17-8)
A negative effect was declared when a programme inadvertently worsened 
divisions between groups in conflict, increased danger for participants involved in 
peace activities, reinforced "structural or overt violence", diverted "human and 
material resources from productive peace activities", increased cynicism, and 
disempowered local people. (Anderson and Olson, 2003, 21-6) Reducing 
perceptions of threat to personal and group security was considered to be a key 
achievement. "If perceptions of threat are reasonable, then the impact will be seen 
in concrete efforts to protect vulnerable groups and reduce the threat of violence." 
If these perceptions are exaggerated, then efforts to promote contact, supply 
accurate information, and efforts to "reduce 'hate talk' in public discourse" will 
alleviate this problem. (Anderson and Olson, 16-19)
As Boyce noted, "like the environmental impact assessments introduced to 
most aid agencies in the past two decades, these assessments must proceed through 
a learning curve" as these groups will differ according to circumstance and 
evolutionary timeline of the peace and reconciliation process. (Boyce, 2002, 35) 
Despite imperfections, even minimal assessment is likely to provide basic 
understanding of support or nonsupport of a peace process within communities.
 Need for better identification of groups at risk
More sophisticated identification of marginal socio-economic groups is vital 
as they react strongest toward and are most vulnerable to interventions of all kinds. 
Groups who feel they have little to gain from different phases of a peace process 
and who perceive that their needs are being ignored are among the best barometers 
of perceptions. They tend to share perceptions of vulnerability toward or rejection of 
interventions, policies and changes being implemented at that moment and their 
reactions give insights into potential success or failure of a peace and reconciliation 
process. These groups are the most likely to express physical and verbal reaction 
through violence, public statements, or conspicuous silences.
In my observation, the groups who have potential to be highly valuable 
indicators of how a peace process is or is not progressing are:
  Groups that have undergone a traumatic loss of power, usually the formerly 
dominant or aggressive populations who feel they have the least to gain from a 
peace process. They are usually the ones most affected by loss of previous 
privilege and can belong to any socio-economic class.
  Marginal socio-economic groups of all sides, especially the most poverty 
stricken, as they are highly reactive to change. They have often borne the brunt 
of the conflict and have much more in common with mirror groups on the
opposite side of a conflict, than with members of middle and upper socio- 
economic classes within their own groups.
  Volatile young males in formerly dominant or aggressive populations. They 
are usually ex-combatants or members of a lower socio-economic class who 
do not perceive any personal gains from peace and can often instigate and lead 
serious violence.
  Pensioners who have least to gain in future earnings and benefits from the 
peace and who have lost savings and pensions during the conflict without 
potential for recovery, as they can become very bitter and delay or reverse 
political transitions to democracy by voting to bring fundamentalist or 
nationalist parties to power. This was a particularly disillusioned group in 
Serbia as middle class members of this age group had experienced peak career 
and quality of life benefits from socialism, but subsequently had seen their life 
savings stolen from the country's state-run banks, and were left in marginal 
poverty at the end of the Yugoslav war.
  Non-elite members of paramilitary and rebel groups from all sides of the 
conflict who do not have access to political power, education, good jobs, or 
legitimate ways of achieving greater financial success. For them a 'normal 
life' in peace has no advantage over continuing to engage in and expand their 
range of criminal activities. Their peacetime criminal activities have often 
expanded into lucrative non-war revenue areas and have established links with 
international criminal syndicates.
 Need for better understanding of language used in the public sphere
The coded use of language has been often underestimated and misunderstood 
by external interveners as an indicator to signal peaceful or violent intent. During
conflict, social coding of language assumes hugely significant importance. 
Apparently neutral words and harmless questions such as "Where do you live? 
Where did/do you go to school? Who do you work for?" can signal inclusion or 
exclusion, or in more serious situations, life threatening danger.
While adversarial groups may technically speak the same language, they often 
use common words to indicate different meanings. Decoding this language is 
extremely important for understanding perceptions of aid and military intervention 
on the ground. Northern Ireland has been an outstanding example of the ways in 
which same words can have vastly different meanings.
A 1999 trip during the first suspension to the Belfast Stormont Assembly, 
revealed the word "terrorist" inscribed on a public statue to memorialise Unionist 
dead, placed in the lobby of the former Unionist stronghold. This inscription was 
carved into the stone and had been placed there by the government officials. To 
former republican prisoners and ex-paramilitary members, who were leading 
opposition parties in the newly formed Parliament, public display of that word in an 
environment that was heavily symbolic of their former enemies, was essentially a 
coded way to de-legitimise political causes for the conflict and to lessen validity of 
their personal sacrifice. To Unionists this expressed an equally personal sacrifice 
made for the preservation of the union and what they saw as their vital contribution 
to its welfare.
The different views among the Northern Ireland communities on the release of 
prisoners has been rooted in their different understandings of the conflict. "For 
many Unionists, 'terrorism' was an aberration on the body politic, a problem 
perpetuated by a few irredentist 'men of violence'" (McEvoy, 1999,1575-6) while 
the Republican community saw the struggle as one of group survival. It has been
suggested that part of the difficulty in promoting reconciliation in Northern Ireland 
"is that unionists and republicans...invoke different moral and political vocabularies 
and so succeed mostly in speaking past one another." Occasionally the difference 
can be so great as to evoke a necessity for both sides to learn "a second first 
language" or a "common idiom that will allow them to articulate shared values and 
overlapping aspirations without having to submit them to the litmus test of mutually 
exclusive political legitimacies- if they are ever to explore common ground." 
(Porter, 2003, 112-3)
During the thirty year Northern Ireland conflict, political language was 
primarily used in two ways. The earliest, circa 1970s, was the "language of 
violence", traditionally known in Ireland as "physical force republicanism" or the 
idea that the use of "bombs and bullets" served as an effective political language 
and was the only political language that the British government would understand. 
(Porter, 2003, 114-5)
This evolved into a "language of reconciliation", which while often evoking 
unionist cynicism, is, as Norman Porter has noted, a strong indicator for peaceful 
intent. In moving "from one language to another, republicans' interpretation of 
political reality and of their goal are subtly transformed". This language has 
signaled a transition from disregard for and marginalisation of unionist identity to 
one of inclusiveness and tolerance for building a future "cultural plurality that 
would accommodate unionists' Britishness." (Porter, 2003, 115-6)
Public statements by paramilitaries and rebel groups are akin to raising flags 
of intent. Using a style of language that, while confrontational, simultaneously 
implies forbearance from revenge or openness to exploring a peace process can be 
huge steps forward. "Reduced use of inflammatory language and content by the
media" and other indications of a shift toward moderation in overall public opinion 
signal a reduced level of fear and tension. (Anderson and Olson, 2003, 70) This 
situation was observed by General John de Chastelain, head of Northern Ireland 
Decommissioning body, who when interviewed acknowledged that he and other 
members of his group understood that paramilitaries of all sides were using the 
process of decommissioning as a neutral public forum through which they could 
negotiate with officials and other paramilitaries rather than to solely decommission 
weapons (See Northern Ireland Interviews in Appendix).
Conversely, public escalation of accusatory language completely absent of 
attempts at moderation can signal a rise in physical violence and intent to renew 
conflict. Monitoring and decoding verbal reaction, directly or indirectly (by tracking 
perceptions), to interventions, or deciphering casual comments made publicly by all 
sides will give external interveners excellent insight into intentions of different 
groups and how their efforts are being perceived. 
 Need for better communication between internal populations and donors
A mistake often made by aid givers and peacekeepers is to assume their 
intentions are clear to recipient groups. Transparency and honesty about what an 
international humanitarian organization, and/or peacekeeping mission has to offer, 
both advantages and limitations, are highly respected in post-war environments 
where warfare has been dependent on deception, manipulation, propaganda, and 
misinformation. Clearly stating "why you have come, what you have to offer, and 
what you can and cannot do", will avoid tragic misunderstandings. (Anderson and 
Olson, 2003, 28)
There is a vital need to develop effective links with local organizations 
below government level and to speak with diverse representatives of local
populations that include "qualified local actors" while engaged in the process of 
policy making and implementation. (Oxfam/Peace, 2004,1) The scope of sources 
can easily be widened beyond the usual 'official' range by ringing or emailing a list 
of secondary sources - a range of CSOs not ordinarily consulted by large 
international donors, for example, and requesting a list of contacts. 
 Necessity for improved communication between donors
Failure to widen the scope of information and dialogue has resulted in 
spectacular failures that could have been avoided if interveners had been more open 
to formal and informal sources from a broader range of individuals and groups. 
Bosnia-Herzegovina has consistently been citied as an example of problems 
generated by limited and/or lack of communication, both between aid givers and 
their recipients, but especially among the international community. (Oxfam/Peace, 
2004, 1)
Donor failure to communicate in 1994 regarding an electric power project in 
Mostar, western Bosnia, resulted in "giving Mostar the dubious distinction of being 
the only city in the world with de facto apartheid in its electricity grid." (Boyce, 
2002,17) During the Yugoslav war, Bosnian Muslims (Bosniacs) had been driven 
across the Neretva River into east Mostar while on the west side of the river, 
Bosnian Croats took control. When the European Union (EU) arrived they took 
responsibility for Mostar's reconstruction, and after the creation of the Muslim- 
Croat Federation, they insisted that the two sides must agree to share electricity as a 
precondition for refurbishing the city's two hydroelectric plants. However, during 
the same period, the World Bank struck a deal solely with Bosniacs to repair one of 
the plants, completely sabotaging cooperation by the Croats, thus creating the
expensive and completely avoidable result of rebuilding two hydroelectric plants in 
the same city to supply former enemies with separate sources of electricity.
This lack of communication or preferred solo operation of many NGOs has 
resulted in an overabundance in one type of aid designated to one area. In Belfast 
there was a noticeable proliferation of small well funded organisations with the 
name "justice" in their title located in dominantly Catholic/Republican areas.
Need for better analysis of transitional violence
Interpreting the significance of physical violence in early post-conflict 
environments has been a challenge to both aid workers and military peacekeepers as 
it tends to escalate at a time when expectations are greatest it will cease. A review of 
historic patterns of violence in the area and within the recent conflict, such as the 
extent and pattern of police and/or military abuse, nature of violence targeted 
toward civilians, and extent of vigilantism, will help give external interveners 
perspective to answers for interpreting violence as it occurs (see Chapter Six).
A major shift from inter-group to intra-group targets is usually an indicator of 
a serious peace process. Punishment beatings and score settling such as 
kneecapping, non-life threatening injuries, occasional murder, is one way former 
combatants can express internal group grievances sublimated during combat. An 
immediate escalation of this sort of transitional violence has been seen in South 
Africa, Northern Ireland, and other post-conflict environments.
A second phase which supersedes or follows closely behind the first, is a 
shift of focus from political to predominantly criminal violence. The rise in 
criminal violence, in this case referring to organised activities, punishment, 
coercion, assault, and robbery, may be a perverse sign peace is taking hold. This is 
not to say earlier political violence was not in tandem with criminal activities, but
that there is no longer any attempt to cover or link criminal actions with political 
motives. This has been the case in Serbia.
Finally, another sign of peaceful transition may be a shift from ethnic war to 
hate crime. Hate crime or "crimes of bias" is a type of personal and group violence 
present in most developed societies throughout the world. It has been defined as a 
"mechanism of power and oppression involving acts of violence and intimidation 
against already stigmatised and marginalised groups", used to "re-affirm the 
precarious hierarchies that characterise the given social order." (Burke and Pollock, 
2004, 2)
Perpetrators of these crimes are generally "unaccepting of the heterogeneous 
nature of the contemporary societies in which they live" and "primarily characterise 
social groups according to their visible ethnic, racial or sexual identity rather than 
their personal attributes." This type of targeting is based on "'what' someone is, 
rather than 'who' they actually are." (Burke and Pollock, 2004, 2) Hate crime has 
begun to emerge as a significant problem in Northern Ireland against groups such as 
the Chinese and others who were present throughout much of the Troubles.
In assessing risks of violence toward internal populations and external 
interveners key questions to be asked are: Is it being caused by "spoilers" to the 
peace process? Is it politically motivated? Is it being used to settle internal scores? 
What does the timing and location reveal - is it occurring early during the transition 
or later in one 'trouble' spot? Has racial or hate crime increased? If increases in 
crime rates are becoming problematic, then where is this occurring? Which 
regions? Is there a distinct difference in types and rates of crime in urban versus 
rural locations?
While endemic to the peace and reconciliation process, it is the choice of 
targets during this time that is key to understanding intent. Through more realistic 
preparation, cooperation, and communication, peacekeepers and aid workers can 
more accurately assess risk to themselves and populations they serve for what 
appears to be an almost inevitable rise in violence during a post-conflict transitional 
period. Better understanding of the ways in which violence of this type occurs will 
aid peacekeepers and security forces in developing and implementing more 
effective protection strategies for civilians and themselves. 
Dilemmas for transitional justice
In societies recovering from violent conflict, the function of the law is to help 
move society between radically different political environments. The way in which 
legal and other relevant institutions were shaped in the political environment prior 
to the conflict has often contributed to, or underscored the original reasons for 
ongoing violence. Transformation of institutions, often seen to have been biased by 
at least one group formerly in conflict, are part of political processes of cooperation 
with their basic tenets in negotiated peace agreements. The way in which their 
transformation evolves is rooted in "markedly different views on the role and 
legitimacy of the actions of legal institutions and actors during the conflict." (Bell et
al, 2004, 313)
The relationship between conflict and law is vital to understanding 
the post-conflict transition. In many respects the success of the 
transition in a law-based state turns on a reversal of the kind of 
legal de-legitimation that occurred during the conflict: There is 
an attempt to rebuild the legitimacy of domestic law and of legal 
institutions. If rule of law deficits can be linked to conflict escalation, 
then rule of law cures play a vital part in any attempt to negotiate and 
end to conflict. (Bell et al, 2004, 312)
As has been described in earlier analysis of perceptions of justice, the way in 
which law and legal procedures are conducted and enforced have a key impact on
formation of identity, processes of forgiveness and revenge, and political 
cooperation (see Chapter One, Seven). How issues of justice are approached in the 
post-conflict transition can be seen as part of the problem and part of the solution in 
supporting a process of political cooperation. The general interpretation of 
transitional justice, encompassing legal, moral and political dilemmas that arise 
regarding human rights violators held accountable for their actions at the end of a 
conflict, is broadening and evolving as the international political landscape changes. 
(Bell et al, 2004, 305-6)
As demands for justice dominate post-conflict environments, transformation 
of judicial, legal processes and related institutions assume compelling importance. 
However, in this quest for justice the relationship between forms of revenge and 
enactment of law, described in Chapter Seven, have a direct impact on formation of 
post-conflict legal institutions. In post-conflict societies the "crisis of legitimacy 
suggests that in transitional societies, law must be both the subject and object of 
change: It must simultaneously both produce change and be changed itself." (Bell et 
al, 2004, 309)
In seeking to reframe and support further discussion of the transitional justice 
debate, Christine Bell, Colm Campbell, and Fionnuala Ni Aolain have sought to 
integrate contemporary global and political views with the law and legal processes. 
Internationally, there are four important areas of consideration.
The first is the advent of negotiated settlements or peace agreements as the 
way to deal with international conflicts. This has given "rise to on-going dilemmas" 
that have focused on the law's role in negotiating a successful peace as issues 
related to peace conditionality often play a role in this phase. Second, there is an 
increasingly elevated status of human rights law acknowledged on a global level
that has broadened in recent years to include social economic and cultural rights, as 
well as people's or solidarity rights beyond the original concepts of civil and 
political rights. This trend points to a "clear role for law in assisting a move away 
from violence to political accommodation." (Bell et al, 2004, 306-7)
A third area is the increasing interaction between human rights and 
humanitarian law as a way of dealing with both state and non-state actors, thus 
emphasising more accountability. This can be problematic as in cases like Serbia 
(see Chapter One, Four) where the high profile trial of Milosevic was seen less as a 
fitting punishment of one individual and more as a public humiliation of all Serbs, 
thus highlighting an ongoing problem of matching legal standards to pragmatic 
peace-making. (Prisoner amnesties in Northern Ireland and South Africa were also 
perceived to be problematic for their implied impunity of violent actions). A fourth 
area has centred on the unclear implications of post-September 11 unilateral military 
action taken by the United States, the world's leading economic and military power, 
for international law. U.S. action may produce a dramatic shift in international law 
or a new international legal consensus may emerge. In any case, it will have an 
effect on the implementation of transitional law within post-conflict societies. (Bell 
et al, 2004, 306-7)
All four external issues impact three key legal areas focusing on the internal 
role of transitional law that include challenges of institutional transformation, 
mechanisms and measures aimed at dealing with the past, and measures directed 
toward political compromise and accommodation. (Bell et al, 2004, 307)
Discussion of mechanisms and measures for dealing with the past, particularly 
in the form of truth commissions, has dominated much of this thesis (see Chapters 
One, Five, Seven). Attempting to structure a way to depict "one great truth" about a
conflict may ignore the multiplicity of realities of its participants but there appears 
to be a fundamental need and desire to construct some sort of overarching 
interpretation that can "keep past-focused initiatives operating in tandem with the 
political accommodation", the primary goal of "peace-building". (Bell et al, 2004, 
In a June 2002 report by a Northern Ireland project called Healing Through 
Remembering, the overwhelming conclusion was that, more than a truth 
commission, all sides of the conflict wanted some form of acknowledgement and 
recognition of suffering caused by the political violence over the duration of the 
Troubles. One form of public acknowledgement recommended was delivery of 
honest and public declarations by all organizations and institutions that had been 
engaged in the conflict. This included the British and Irish States, all the political 
parties, and Loyalist and Republican paramilitaries, for their responsibility in acting 
out or perpetuating past political violence "due to their acts of omission and 
commission" during the conflict. (Healing Through Remembering, 2002, 50)
The advantage of utilising forms of acknowledgement as a factor in 
motivating all parties to pursue a long-term reconciliation is that it is relatively easy 
to accomplish. A real difficulty with a process of this type may lie less with the 
former enemies, than with members of former and present governments, security 
forces, and others, as the acknowledgement sought could be from the very peace 
negotiators, donors, and interveners who have preferred to see themselves as 
neutral.
Incorporation of political accommodation within transitional law has also 
become a concern within the international legal community. The inclusion of self- 
determination as an international human right, and increased prominence of
minority rights, has blurred the distinction between political and legal mechanisms. 
External self-determination, which has clear legal basis, changes the status of states, 
reforming borders or transformation from colonial to independent status. Internal 
self-determination focuses on the relationship between a group who challenge the 
legitimacy of the state, and their government and their legal rights are less clear. 
(Bell etal, 2004, 317)
The difficulties inherent in the association between political accommodation 
and law have been apparent in Northern Ireland. A consociational form of 
government was incorporated in the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 that 
recognized "competing nationalisms" by conferring equal acknowledgement to all 
groups. However, this is in itself contentious as some attack it as "politically 
unnecessary" while still others, often from a unionist perspective, push for the type 
of "majority devolution" that has been implemented in Scotland or Wales. Those 
who pursue a more legalistic viewpoint dislike the arrangement as it tends to "ossify 
and entrench competing nationalisms, while excluding those who do not wish to be 
defined within these groups." (Bell et al, 2004, 320)
Played out against a backdrop of successive suspensions of the Northern 
Ireland Assembly, these debates affect the reform and future structure of legal 
institutions. These ongoing discussions can be considered as negotiation of a 
dilemma permanently present in any consociational formula proposed as a remedy 
for "entrenched violent communal conflict". The challenge for transitional justice 
mechanisms is "how to keep energy and innovation in the political system; how to 
create democratic stability without ossification and stagnation", and how not to 
exclude groups such as women who were instrumental throughout the conflict and 
peace phases but whose political voice have been silenced in post-conflict political
deal making. (Bell et al, 2004, 320) The way these challenges are negotiated will 
directly impact the way in which justice is perceived to be fair, the formation of 
identity, and forgiveness and revenge as enacted in the process of political 
cooperation. 
Conclusion
In the past peace and reconciliation were assumed to be identical and static 
rather than evolutionary processes. More recently there has been increased 
understanding and acknowledgement that a peace process is the direct result of a 
pragmatic negotiated agreement that benefits from an ongoing process of political 
cooperation. This process is analogous to drawing up an architectural blueprint for 
a 'dream' house envisaged by future inhabitants. As construction begins, the 
blueprints are put to the test and either followed precisely or changed to 
accommodate problems encountered on the ground. Reconciliation can be seen as 
the end result of building a house that will withstand all types of severe weather. 
The 'real' work of reconciliation begins at the point when individual and group 
expectations of what 'peace' will bring collide with the unanticipated difficult 
reality of reforming and creating new institutions with former enemies. This phase, 
the most susceptible to disillusionment, apathy, and bitterness, will rigorously test 
both the political will of the population and the original premise of the peace 
agreement.
It is clear from all literature and empirical evidence regarding processes of 
forgiveness and revenge, that unconditional forgiveness cannot be enforced. While 
the process of forgiveness can be supported and encouraged there is no empirical 
evidence that anything beyond an openness to the possibility of forgiveness by all 
sides, and a conscious decision taken to not seek revenge, embedded in a benign
passive resentment', is necessary in order to drive a post-conflict transition 
forward. For both the fully and marginally bitter, it may be the perceived 
"requirement of forgiveness" publicly promoted as a precondition for many types of 
reconciliation that is most problematic. (Porter, 2003, 42-3)
For this group forgiveness is "too exacting a request and too naive a remedy. 
Too exacting as it demands more than the emotional and moral resources many 
victims are capable of mustering .. .and too naive because forgiveness, even if 
forthcoming, would not be the panacea some imagine" and would not "constitute an 
adequate assault on the cultural-political conditions that cast some in the role of 
oppressors and others in the role of victims." (Porter, 2003, 42-3)
Correspondingly, it has become increasingly clear that the type of forgiveness 
promoted in many of the donor-driven reconciliation projects might be more 
effectively directed at second and third post-war generations and diasporas. Among 
survivors "the realities troubling memory are sometimes too weighty to be put 
completely in the past; one lifetime may not be enough to forgive and forget" but 
for the second generation "separation is its task, even its obligation." (Hoffman, 
2003, 294)
Violence is another matter. As has been explained in Chapter Six, some form 
of violence almost always remains in the post-conflict environment. However, for 
most civilians a political battle no matter how heated or bitter, is preferable to 
contained violence on the streets, which is in turn, preferable to wide ranging 
conflict on the ground. Political cooperation then becomes the key process of 
negotiation.
Political cooperation is depicted in this thesis as being driven primarily by 
followers rather than leaders. This is the case even when paramilitary or rebel
groups restart conflict. While leaders can be very disruptive in instigating problems 
during the post-conflict phase, as explained in Chapter Six, there is often a split 
between the elite and non-elite members of the same group during the post-conflict 
phase. The motivation for peace to take hold must come from the bottom up rather 
than top down. As evidenced in all three case studies, whether leading political 
parties or rebel groups through coercion and/or cooperation, leaders will sooner or 
later need some critical element of follower support. If civilians are ready to stop 
they will find a way to defuse support for these groups by refusing their direct or 
indirect support or by appealing to outside help in ridding themselves of the 
problem. For that reason, the focus of research and interviews conducted for this 
thesis was primarily on followers.
In the end the most difficult challenge for all those who live or have lived in 
the shadow of earlier conflicts, either through memories of previous generations, 
commemoration of old tragedies, or recreated stories, is learning how to fight the 
seduction of revenge. To the naive and uninitiated revenge is the ultimate imagined 
justice for all wrongs - the balm for the festering, unhealed wounds of others - but 
almost all evidence from those closest to conflict points to the opposite result of 
short term satisfaction and unrequited rage.
Although an act of unconditional forgiveness is not essential for survivors 
emerging from conflict in order to cooperate, a continued pursuit of the process of 
forgiveness may offer ways for subsequent generations to develop a negotiated 
memory that allows them to construct more equitable systems of justice, 
reconciliation, and democratic institutions. If a multitude of internal voices are 
acknowledged, and diversity of memories respected, it may be possible to create a 
positive legacy of peace that allows everyone to move on to a hopeful future.
Bibliography
Acemoglu and Robinson: Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A. (2001) "A 
Theory Of Political Transitions", The American Economic Review, September 
2001,Volumel9,Issue4
Acemoglu and Robinson: Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A. (2000) "Why Did 
the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical 
Perspective", The Quarterly Journal of Economics. November 2000
Adebajo and Sriram: Adekeye Adebajo, Chandra Lekha Sriram ed (2001) Managing 
Armed Conflicts in the 21st Century. Frank Cass, London
Alden, Chris (1996) Apartheid's Last Stand. The Rise and Fall of the South African 
Security State. MacMillian Press Ltd
Ali, Rabia; Lifschultz, Lawrence (1994) "Why Bosnia?", Third World Quarterly. 
Voll5,No3, 1994, p. 368
Amnesty International FRY (1999) FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA 
The forgotten resisters: the plight of conscientious objectors to military service after 
the conflict in Kosovo. October 1999, SUMMARY AI INDEX: EUR 70/111/99, 
aireport-sz.htrnaireport-sz.htm
Amoo, Sam G;Odendaal, Andries (2002) The Political Management of Ethnic 
Conflict in Africa, A human needs-based approach, Track Two, Occasional Paper, 
Centre for Conflict Resolution, Vol. 11, No. 4, September 2002, pp. 13-4
ANC (2003) African National Congress website. "Biographies of current ANC 
Leaders" (13 May 2003) http://www.anc.org.za/; 
http://www.anc.org.za/people/ffCURRENT
Anderson and Olson: Anderson, Mary B.; Olson, Lara (2003) Confronting War: 
Critical Lessons for Peace Practitioners The Collaborative for Development Action, 
Inc: www.cdainc.com. pp. 16-28, 70
Anderson, Mary B (1999) Do No Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace-or War, 
Lynne Rienner Publishers Inc
Andrews, Molly (2000) "Forgiveness in Context", Journal of Moral Education, Vol. 
29, No. 1, pp. 75-85
Arendt, Hannah (1958) The Human Condition, University of Chicago Press, pp. 
240-1
Arnold, Guy (1999) Historical Dictionary of Civil Wars in Africa, Historical 
Dictionaries of War, Revolution, and Civil Unrest, No. 12, The Scarecrow Press, 
Inc, pp. 257-9
B92 (26 January 2004) Croatian President Stjepan Mesic, Serbian politics "can't 
destabilise" region,
http://www.b92.net/english/news/mdex.php?version=print&nav id=26615&dd=26&m
B92 (8 September 2004) Kostunica savs incidents are isolated and Hungary moves 
on Vojvodina violence http://www.b92.net/english/news (B92/News/Archive)
B92 (13 September 2004) EU ministers duck Vojvodina issue 
http://www.b92.net/english/news (B92/News/Archive)
B92 (29 March 2004 ^Independent Intellectuals from Kosovo on violence against 
Serbs. Standing together against violence, broadcast interview with Pristina artist 
Enver Petrovci, Djakovica lawyer Teki Boksho, NGO forum coordinator Jetmir 
Balaj, interviewed by B92's Nikola Tomic 
http://www.b92.net/english/news/b92_focus.php?version^rint&yyy=2004&mm=03
B92 (13 April 2004) Underworld bosses to give evidence in Djindjic trial; Diindjic 
trial hears suspect's statement: Ex-police chief confirms eyewitness to Curuvija 
murder; Security Council to discuss Kosovo 
http://www.b92.net/english/news/index.php?version=print&order=priority
B92 (16 April 2004) EU savs too early to address Kosovo's future after clashes, 
http://www.92.net/english/news/index,.php?version=print&order=priority
B92 (8 September 2004) Kostunica savs incidents are isolated 
http ://www. b92.net/english/news
BBC News, Saturday 21 August 2004, "Timing 'the key' to political progress" 
Martina Purdy: http://news.bbc.co.uk/l/hi/northern_ireland/3584154.stm
BBC News (2003) Wednesday 21 May, "Milosevic spars with ex-colleague", UK 
edition, http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/world/europe/3046689.stm
BBC News, Djindjic (2003)
Wednesday 12 March, "Djindjic leaves political vacuum", UK edition,
http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/world/europe/2844551 .stm
Thursday 13 March, "Obituary: Zoran Djindjic",
http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/world/europe/2844081 .stm
BBC News (20 June 2003) Uncertain future for Croatian Serbs, 
http://news.bbc.c.uk/l/hi/world/europe/2997628.stm
BBC News (10 September 2003) Presidents apologise over Croatian war,
http://news.bbc.c.uk/l/hi/world/europe/3095774.stm
BBC News (21 October 2003)
Adams speech in full, http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/northern ireland/3210312.stm
IRA statement in full, http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/northern ireland/3210726.stm
IRA arms move 'largest vet',
http://news.bbc.co.uk//hi/northern ireland/3210160.stm
BBC NEWS UK edition (12 March 2003) "Djindjic leaves political vacuum", 
http://news.bbc.co.Uk/l/hi/world/europe/2844551 .stm
Bell et al: Bell, Christine: Campbell, Colm; Ni Aolain, Fionnuala (2004) "Justice 
Discouses in Transition", Social & Legal Studies. Volume 13, Issue 3, pp. 305-320
Bell, Christine (2003) "Dealing With the Past in Northern Ireland", ", Fordham 
International Law Journal. Volume 26, No.4, April 2003, pp. 1146 - 7 
http://www.heinoniine.org/HOL/Paage?handle=hein.iournals/frdint26&id=:0&collectior
Bew, Paul, Gillespie, Gordon (1996) The Northern Ireland Peace Process 1993- 
1996; A Chronology, Serif, pp. 63-84,101-166
Boraine, Alex (1999) All Truth is Bitter, A Report of the Visit of Doctor Alex 
Boraine Deputy Chairman of the South African Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, to Northern Ireland. NIACRO (Northern Ireland Association for the 
Care and Resettlement of Offenders) 
also available: www.community-relations.org.uk/reports/truth/boraine.pdf
Borneman, John, 1997, Settling accounts: violence, justice, and accountability in 
postsocialist Europe, Princeton University Press
Boyce, James K. (2004) "Aid Conditionality as a Tool for Peacebuilding: 
Opportunities and Constraints", Development and Change,Volume 33, Issue 5
Boyce, James K. (2002), Investing in Peace: Aid and Conditionalitv after Civil 
Wars, Adelphi Paper 351, The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), 
pp. 17-35
Braithwaite, John (2002) "Setting Standards for Restorative Justice", British Journal 
of Criminology , Volume 42, p. 563
Burke and Pollock: Burke, Roger Hopkins; Pollock, Ed (2004) A Tale of Two 
Anomies: Some Observations on the Contribution of (Sociological) Criminological 
Theory to Explaining Hate Crime Motivation, Internet Journal of Criminology 
(IJC), New University Press (NUP); http://www.flashmousepublishing.com/, p. 2
Busek, Erhard (2003) "Final plenary session-Closing Remarks", Reconciling for the 
future-Workshop 6th April 2003, 
http://www.reconcilingforthefuture.org/speech4.html
Cairns and Roe: Cairns, Ed; Roe, Michael D. eds (2003) The Role of Memory in 
Ethnic Conflict Palgrave (Macmillan), pp. 16, 79, 132-139, 175
Cairns, Ed (1999) Conversational interview conducted at the University of Ulster, 
Coleraine, Northern Ireland: March 1999. In discussion he emphasised that his 
experience of the Troubles was very different from others' and that a multiplicity of 
experiences was true throughout the region.
Campbell and Aolain: Campbell, Colm; Fionnuala Ni Aolain (2003)"Preface", 
Fordham International Law Journal. Volume 26, No.4, April 2003, pp. vii, 870
http://www.heinonltne.org/HOL/Paage?handle=hein.iournals/frdint26&id=0&collec 
tior..
Campbell et al: Campbell, Bruce; Brenner, Arthur D. editors (2000) Death Squads 
in Global Perspective, Murder with Deniabilitv. MacMillan, pp. 1-6, 287-307
Cape Times Opinion Letters (2002) "Coloureds don't need to be 'liberated' from 
their culture"; "Twisted thinking", "Who we are", Cape Times, 14 November 2002: 
Hromnik, Cyril A. (20 November 2002) "What is a Coloured Person? Historical 
search for identity": Gebhuza, Manwabisi (20 November 2002)"Don't suffocate the 
coloured identity", Cape Town, South Africa
Carothers, Thomas (2001) "Ousting Foreign Strongmen: Lessons from Serbia", 
Policy Brief. Volume 1, Number 5, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
May 2001, pp. 6-7, http://www.ceip.org/pubs: 
http://www.ceip.org/files/pdf/demPolBrief5.pdf
Chief Constable's Annual Report (1988-2003) Casualties as a Result of 
Paramilitary-Style Attacks 1988/89 - 2002/03. CAIN Web Service: Violence: 
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/issues/violence/punish.htm
CNN World (2000) "Chronology of Milosevic Rule in Yugoslavia", 
http://www.cnn.com/2000/WQRLD/europe/Q925/milosevic.chronologv.reut/
Cochrane and Dunn: Cochrane, Feargal; Dunn, Seamus (1999) 22: International 
Study of Peace/Conflict Resolution Organisations (ISPO), Northern Ireland Report 
June, 1999, p. 16-34,167,197
Conversi, Daniele (2000) "Central secession: towards a new analytical concept? The 
case of former Yugoslavia", Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. Volume 26, 
No.2, April 2000, pp. 339-343
Cox et al: Cox, Michael; Guelke, Adrian; Stephen, Fiona eds (2000) A Farewell to 
arms? From 'long war' to long peace in Northern Ireland. Manchester University 
Press, pp. 2-3, 62-3
CrisisWatch N 17(2005) 1 January 2005, International Crisis Group: 
http://www.icg.org/home/index.cfm?l=l&id=3201
Cuk, Nadia Skenderovic, Podunavac, Milan ed (1999) Civil Society in the 
Countries in Transition, Comparative Analysis and Practice. Center-Agency of 
Local Democracy Subotica, Open University Subotica
Cunningham, Michael (2001) British Government Policy in Northern Ireland. 1969- 
2000, Manchester University Press, pp. 1-4
Danforth, Loring M.(1995) The Macedonian Conflict: Ethnic Nationalism in a 
Transnational World1 Princeton University Press, pp. 28-42
Davies et al: Davies, Rob; O'Meara, Dan; Dlamini, Sipho (1985) The Struggle for 
South Africa. A Reference Guide to Movements Organizations and Institutions, 
Volume One, Zed Books Ltd
Deane, Nawaal (2002) "Bombings: Afrikaners 'feel alienated', Mail&Guardian, 
November 8 to 14 2002, South Africa
De Breadun, Deaglan (2001), The Far Side of Revenge. Making Peace in Northern 
Ireland. The Collins Press, pp. 1-3, 111-163, 364
De Klerk, FW (1999) The Last Trek. A New Beginning: The Autobiography, St 
Martin's Press
Digeser, P.E. (2001) Political Forgiveness. Cornell University Press 
Duffy, Sean ed (2000), Atlas of Irish History. Gill & Macmillan, p. 114
Dunn and Morgan: Dunn, Seamus: Morgan, Valeric (1995) "Protestant Alienation 
in Northern Ireland", Studies in Conflict and Terrorism, Volume 18, p. 178
Elliott and Flackes: Elliott, Sydney; Flackes, W.D. (1999), Northern Ireland. A 
Political Directory 1968-1999, The Blackstaff Press, pp. 168-265. 607-668
Elster, Jon (1990) "Norms of Revenge", Ethics. Vol 100, July 1990, pp. 862-73
Enright et al: Enright, Robert D. (1992) Gassin, Elizabeth A. Gassin, Ching-Ru Wu: 
"Forgiveness: A Developmental View" Journal Of Moral Education: Vol. 21: No. 2, 
pp. 101-7
Exline et al: Exline, J.J.; Worthington Jr.,E.L.; McCullough,M.E.(2003) 
"Forgiveness and Justice: A Research Agenda for Social and Personality 
Psychology", Personality and Social Psychology Review. Volume 7, Issue 4, p. 345
Feldman, Alien (1991) Formations of Violence: The Narrative of the Body and 
political Terror in Northern Ireland, The University of Chicago Press
Ford, Nathan (2001) "Afghanistan-humanitarian aid and military intervention don't 
mix" (p.946) The British Journal of General Practice, Volume 51 (472)November 
Forma,Virginia Page (2004) "Does Peacekeeping Keep peace? International 
Intervention and the Duration of Peace After Civil War", International Studies 
Quarterly Volume 48
Garland, Roy (2001), Gusty Spence. The Blackstaff Press, p. 220
Gibson and Gouws: Gibson, James L; Gouws, Amanda (2003), Overcoming 
Intolerance in South Africa: Experiments in Democratic Persuasion, Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 18-37, 76, 87
Giliomee, Hermann (2003) The Afrikaners: biography of a people, C.Hurst London, 
pp. xiv-xv, 283-487
Giliomee, Hermann (2003) "The Making of the Apartheid Plan, 1929-1948", 
Journal of Southern African Studies. Volume 29, Number 2, June 2003
Gilligan et al: Gilligan, Michael; Stedman, Stephen John (2003) "Where Do the 
Peacekeepers Go?" International Studies Review Volume 5(4)
Goodwin and Schiff: Goodwin, June; Schiff, Ben (1995) "Afrikaners Face Black 
Rule in the New South Africa"Heart of Whiteness, ,Scribner Greig, Rober (2002) 
The Sunday Independent. "New 'eat and run' generation makes a meal out of 
conspicuous consumption", 10 Nov 2002, Cape Town, South Africa
Gradstein and Milanovic: Gradstein, Mark; Milanovic, Branko (2004) "Does 
Liberte =Egalite? A Survey of the Empirical Between Democracy and Inequality 
With Some Evidence on the Transition Economies", Journal of Economic Surveys, 
Vol.l8,No.4
Greenstein, Ran ed (199%) Comparative Perspectives on South Africa, MacMillian 
Press Ltd, p. 291
Guelke, Adrian (2000) "Interpretations of political violence during South Africa's 
transition", Politikon, Vol 27(2), pp. 240-53
Guelke, Adrian (1999) South Africa in Transition: The Misunderstood Miracle, I.B. 
Tauris Publishers, pp. 1-13
Guelke, Adrian (1995) The Age of Terrorism and the International Political System, 
I.B.Tauris Publishers, p. 107
Gurr, Ted Robert (1993): "Why Minorities Rebel: A Global Analysis of Communal 
Mobilization and Conflict Since 1945", International Political Science Review: 14, 
pp.173-177
Halliday, Fred (2000) "Peace processes in the late twentieth century: a mixed 
record", Chapter 20 in Cox, Michael; Guelke, Adrian; Stephen, Fiona eds (2000) A 
Farewell to arms? From 'long war' to long peace in Northern Ireland, Manchester 
University Press, pp. 275-289iblio
Halliday, Fred (1999) "The potentials of Enlightenment" Review of International 
Studies, 25: 105-125 Cambridge University Press,doi: 10.1017/S0260210599001059 
p. 27
Hamber, Brandon (2003) Flying Flags of Fear: The role of fear in the process of 
political transition. Working Paper presented at the Risk, Complex Crises & Social
Futures Conference, Amman, Jordan 11-13 October 2003, 
http://www.brandonhamber.com
Hamber, Brandon (2003) Are lessons transferable? The importance of research for 
policy on transitional justice mechanisms. 3 July 2003,from paper presented at the 
"Empirical Research Methodologies of Transitional Justice mechanisms 
Conference", 18-20 November 2002, Stellenbosch, South Africa, 
http://www.brandonhamber.com.
Hamber, Brandon (2003) "Rights and Reasons: Challenges for Truth Recovery in 
South Africa and Northern Ireland", Fordham International Law Journal 26(4), pp. 
1074-1094
Hamber, Brandon ed (1999) Past Imperfect: Dealing with the Past in Northern 
Ireland and Countries in Transition. INCORE/University of Ulster, pp. 34-49
Hampshire, Stuart (1999) Justice is Conflict. Gerald Duckworth & Co, pp. 35-9
Hartwell, Marcia (2000) The Role of Forgiveness in Reconstructing Society After 
Conflict. The Journal of Humanitarian Assistance, 3 June 2000, 
http://www.jha.ac/articles/a048 .htm
Hayes and McAllister: Hayes, Bernadette C; McAllister, lan (2001) "Sowing 
Dragon's Teeth: Public Support for Political Violence and Paramilitarism in 
Northern Ireland", Political Studies. Vol 49, p. 901-2
Hayner, Priscilla B. (2001) Unspeakable Truths. Confronting State Terror and 
Atrocity. Routledge, pp. 41-45, 291-7
Haysom, Nicholas (2002) Negotiating the Political Settlement in South Africa. Are 
there lessons for other countries?, track two, Constructive Approaches to 
Community ad Political Conflict, Centre for Conflict Resolution, Occasional Paper, 
Vol ll.No.3, May 2002
Haysom, Nicholas (1986) Apartheid's Private Army, Mabangalala: The Rise of 
Right-wing Vigilantes in South Africa, Occasional Paper No. 10, Centre for Applied 
Legal Studies/University of Witwatersrand, Catholic Institute for International 
Relations, London, pp. 7-11
Healing Through Remembering, 2002, The Report of the Healing Through 
Remembering Project, Belfast, N.I. June 2002, website: 
www.healingthroughremembering.org, p.2
Hewstone and Greenland: Hewstone, Miles; Greenland, Katy (2000), "Intergroup 
Conflict", International Journal of Psychology, Vol 35 (2), pp. 138-9
Hoffman, Eva (2003) "The Balm of Recognition: Rectifying Wrongs through the 
Generations" in Owen, Nicholas ed (2003)" Human Rights. Human Wrongs. The 
Oxford Amnesty Lectures 2001 ,Oxford University Press, pp. 281-300
Hyslop, Jonathan (1999) Shopping During a Revolution: Enterpreneurs. Retailers 
and 'White' Identity in South Africa's Democratic Transition"; published by the 
conference: The TRC: Commissioning the Past, 11-14 June 1999, co-hosted by the 
History Workshop,University of the Witwatersrand, and the Centre for the Study of 
Violence and Renconciliation, pp. 1-2
Ignatieff, Michael (1998) The Warrior's Honor. Ethnic War and the Modern 
Conscience. Chatto &Windus, p. 190
Ignatieff, Michael (1999) Lecture Series on the Moral Imagination, London School 
of Economics, 10 November 1999
Institute for Justice and Reconciliation (2004) "SA Monitor", http://www.ijr.org.za/
Jacoby, Susan (1985) Wild Justice: The Evolution Of Revenge ,Wm Collins & 
Sons & Co. Ltd, pp. 5, 352
Janjic, Dusan (1994) Conflict or Dialogue. Serbian-Albanian Relations and the 
Integration of the Balkans, Subotica open University, European Centre for Conflict 
Resolution, pp. 117-176
Jenkins, Richard (1997), Rethinking Ethnicity: Arguments and Explorations, SAGE 
Publications, pp. 72-3,166,
Judah, Tim (2002) Kosovo. War and Revenge, Yale University Press, pp. 246-7
Judah, Tim (1997) The Serbs: History, Myth and the Destruction of Yugoslavia, 
Yale University Press
Judah, Tim (2002) Kosovo, War and Revenge, Yale University Press, pp. 59-247
Judah, Tim (1997) The Serbs, History, Myth and the Destruction of Yugoslavia, 
Yale University Press
Judt, Tony (1999) "On Kosovo, The Reason Why", The New York Review of 
Books, Volume XLVI, Number 9, May 20,1999
Keen, David (2001) "War and Peace: What's the Difference?", Managing Armed 
Conflicts in the 21 st Century, Adekeye Adebajo and Chandra Lekha Srirarn eds, 
International Peace Academy, Frank Cass, pp. 9-19
Kennedy, Liam (2001) They Shoot Children Don't They?, A Report prepared for 
the Northern Ireland Committee Against Terror (NICAT) and the Northern Ireland 
Affairs Committee of the House of Commons, CAIN Web Service: Violence: 
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/issues/violence/docs/kennedvO 1 .htm, pp. 4-7
Kitchen et al: Helen; Kitchen, J. ed (1994) South Africa. Twelve Perspectives on the 
Transition, The Center for Strategic Studies and International Studies Washington 
D.C., Praeger, pp. 176-7
Knight, Jack (1998) "Justice and Fairness", Annual Review of Political Science, 
Lerner, Melvin J.(2003)"The Justice Motive: Where Social Psychologists Found It, 
How They Lost It, and Why They May Not Find It Again", Personality and Social 
Psychology Review T ?Ofn Volume 7, No.4, p. 396
Lind, Allan E. (1995), "Social Conflict And Social Justice: Lessons From The 
Social Psychology Of Justice Judgments", Inaugural oration for the Leiden 
University Fund Chair in Social Conflict: Presented to the Faculty of University, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, Rijks Universiteit Leiden, pp. 11-25
Lombard, Karin (2004) "Opportunities and Obstacles: The State of Reconciliation": 
Report of the Second Round of the SA Reconciliation Barometer Survey: The SA 
Reconciliation Barometer, Tracking Socio Political Trends, May 2004: Institute for 
Justice and Reconciliation http://www.iir.org.za/barometer/, pp. 8-9
Lombard, Karin (2003) Revisiting Reconciliation: The People's View, Research 
Report of the Reconciliation Barometer Exploratory Survey, Institute for Justice and 
Reconciliation, 15 March 2003 http://www.ijr.org.za/baro.html
Lombard, Karin (2003) "Party Politics Dividing South Africa-Major Survey 
Finding", The SA Reconciliation Barometer, Track Socio Political Trends, Volume 
1; Issue 3, October 2003: Institute for Justice and Reconciliation 
http://www.ijr.org.za/barometer/single%20A4%20.pdf
Mail & Guardian Online (2003) archive, 5 September 2003 http://www.mg.co.za/ 
Neither saint nor saviour, 9 April 2003
http://archive.mg.co.za/NXT/gatewav.dll/PrmtEdition/MGP2003/31v00657/41v007 
Mail & Guardian Online (2003) archive, 5 September 2003 http://www.mg.co.za/ 
Controversy over final TRC reports, 16 Aug 2002
http://archive.mg.co.za/NXT/gatewav.dn/PrintEdition/MGP2002/31v00682/41v007 
Mail & Guardian Online (2003) archive, 5 September 2003 http://www.mg.co.za/ 
The ultimate test of faith, 12 April 1996
http://archive.m2.co.za/NXT/satewav.dll/PnntEdition/MGP2002/31v00682/41v007 
Malan, Rian (1990) Mv Traitor's Heart, Vintage, p. 421
Mamdani, Mahmood (2001) When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, 
Nativism. and the Genocide in Rwanda,Princeton University Press, pp. 272-4
Mamdani, Mahmood (1997) Leys, Colin, "From Justice To Reconciliation: Making 
Sense Of The African Experience": Crises And Reconstruction- African 
Perspectives, Discussion Paper 8, Nordiska Afrikainstitutet, p. 22-25
Mamdani, Mahmood (1996) Citizen and Subject, Contemporary Africa and the 
Legacy of Late Colonialism, Princeton University Press, pp. 6-7, 102
Manning, Carol L. (2002) The Politics of Peace in Mozambique. Post-Conflict 
Democratization. 1992-2000; Praeger
Marks, Monique (2001) Young Warriors: Youth Politics. Identity and Violence in 
South Africa. Witwatersrand University Press, pp. xi, 133-136
Mauro, Marie Teresa (January, April 2001; June 2002) UN Political Officer, 
Liaison Office Belgrade, Series of ongoing interviews and conversations in 
Belgrade: An Italian national who had been working in Belgrade since the early 
1990s who has both an insider's and outsider's view on the processes of the conflict 
and post conflict environment.
Mayibuye Centre, for History and Culture in South Africa (1993) University of 
Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa, Oral History of Exiles Project 
Binda. Sipha (24 March 1993) Interview with Siphi Binda (Alias Mandla Jawara), 
MCA 6-245, 3 tapes
McEvoy et al: McEvoy,Kieran; Mika, Harry; Hudson, Barbara (2002) 
"Introduction: Practice, Performance and Prospects for Restorative Justice", British 
Journal of Criminology, Volume 42, No. 3, pp. 469-556
McEvoy and Mika: McEvoy, Kieran; Mika, Harry (2002) "Restorative Justice and 
the Critique of Informalism in Northern Ireland", The British Journal of 
Criminology,Volume 42,No. 3, pp. 536-7
McEvoy, Kieran (1999) "Prisoners, The Agreement, and the political Character of 
the Northern Ireland Conflict", Fordham International Law Journal, Vol 22, No 4, 
pp. 1574-6
McEvoy, Kieran (1998) "Prisoner Release and Conflict Resolution: International 
Lessons For Northern Ireland", International Criminal Justice Review, Volume 8, 
McGarry, John ed (2001), Northern Ireland and the Divided World, Post- 
Agreement Northern Ireland in Comparative Perspective, Oxford University Press, 
pp. 1-5
McGarry and O'Leary: McGarry, John, O'Leary, Brendan (1999) Policing Northern 
Ireland: Proposals for a new start,The Blackstaff Press, pp. 4-7, 291-355, 408
McGarry and O'Leary: McGarry John; O'Leary, Brendan (1995) Explaining 
Northern Ireland: Broken Images, Oxford University Press
McGarry and O'Leary: McGarry, John; O'Leary, Brendan (1993) The Politics of 
Ethnic Conflict Regulation, Case Studies of Protracted Ethnic Conflicts, Routledge, 
pp. 172-229
McGinty, Roger (2001) "Ethno-National Conflict and Hate Crime", The American 
Behavioral Scientist Dec 2001: Vol 45 (4), pp. 640- 2
McGuinness, Martin (2003), Department of Education-Martin McGuinness, 
http://www.stratagem-ni.org/biogs/martin.html
McKittrick et al: McKittrick, David, Kelters, Seamus, Feeney, Brian, Thornton, 
Chris (1999) Lost Lives: The Stories of the men, women and children who died as a 
result of the Northern Ireland troubles ,Mainstream Publishing, p. 53, 1437
McLernon and Cairns: McLernon, Frances; Cairns, Ed (1999) unpublished 
manuscript Forgiveness in Northern Ireland Project, University of Ulster, Coleraine, 
p. 34 [Essentially same manuscript appeared as a book chapter "Conflicting 
Memories and Conflict Resolution", in Cairns et al (2003) The Role of Memory in 
Ethnic Conflict Palgrave (Macmillan) in particular pp 126-139:142-3]
McLernon, Frances (2000) Conversations during April at the University of Ulster, 
Coleraine, Northern Ireland regarding Forgiveness in Northern Ireland Project, 
underway 1999
Meredith, Martin (1999) Coming to Terms, South Africa's Search for Truth, 
PublicAffairs Ltd, pp. 15-7
Mgobozi and Mavata (2002): Mgobozi, Idris Lindel; Mavata, "The Debate"; 
"Caught Between Two Worlds, the twisted politics of colour", Cape Times (12 
November 2002) Cape Town, South Africa
Mikulah and Wenzel: Mikulah, Gerold, Wenzel, Michael (2000), "Justice and 
Social Conflict", International Journal of Psychology, Volume 35, Issue 2, April, 
pp. 128-9
Minow, Martha (1998) Between Vengeance and Forgiveness. Facing History after 
Genocide and Mass Violence, Beacon Press, p. 11
Mitchell and Bradbury: Mitchell, James; Bradbury, Jonathan (2004) "Devolution: 
Comparative Development and Policy Roles", Parliamentary Affairs, Vol. 25 No. 2
Monteil, Christina Jayme (2000) "Constructive and Destructive Post-Conflict 
Forgiveness", Peace Review, Volume 12, No. 1, 95-100
Morris et al: Morris, Michael W.; Menon, Tanya; Ames, David R (2001) 
"Culturally Conferred Conceptions of Agency: A Key to Social Perception of 
Persons, Groups, and Other Actors", Personality and Social Psychology Review 
Volume 5 No.2, pp 169-70
Muller, Jan-Werner editor (2002) Memory & Power in Post-War Europe. Studies in 
the Presence of the Past, Cambridge University Press, pp. 13-32
Murray, Dominic ed (2000) Protestant Perceptions of the Peace Process in Northern 
Ireland , Centre for Peace and Development Studies, University of Limerick 
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/peace/murrav/eames.htm^four
Newsinger, John (2002) British Counterinsurgencv, From Palestine to Northern 
Ireland. Palgrave, pp. 2, 536
Nozick. Robert, as cited in Wilson, Richard A, (2001) The Politics of Truth and 
Reconcilation in South Africa. Legitimizing the Post-Apartheid State, Cambridge 
University Press, pp 161-2
O'Dochartaigh, Niall (1997) Chapter 4: "The British Army", From Civil Rights to 
Armalites: Perry and the Birth of the Irish Troubles, Cork University Press
O'Toole, Fintan (2003), "The Taming of a Terrorist", The New York Review of 
Books, February 27, 2003, p. 14
Oxfam (2004) Winning the Peace? Some lessons from the EU's aid to South 
Eastern Europe, June 1999-June 2000, 
http://www.oxfam.org/advocacy/papers/balkans0108.html
Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief (12 March 2003) "Serbia-Montenegro: Crisis as
Djindjic murdered",
http://www.oxresearch.oxweb.com/daily briefprint.asp?NewsItemID=90089&Link=T
Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief (14 March 2003) "Serbia-Montenegro: Search on for
Djindjic's successor",
http://www.oxresearch.oxweb.com/daily briefprint.asp?NewsItemlD-90150&Link=T
Oxford Analvtica Daily Brief (25 March 2003) "Serbia-Montegro: Djundjic 
successor purges enemies", 
http://www.oxresearch.oxweb.com/daily_briefprint.asp?NewsItemID=90437&Link=T
Owen, David (2003) commenting on the Serbia elections, on BBC Radio Four, 'The 
World This Weekend" news programme, 1 to 1:30 pm; Sunday 28 Dec 03
Owen, Nicholas ed (2003)"The Balm of Recognition: Rectifying Wrongs through 
the Generations" (Eva Hoffman), Human Rights, Human Wrongs, The Oxford 
Amnesty Lectures 2001 ,Oxford University Press
Pantich and Leys: Pantich, Leo and Leys, Colin eds, Fighting Identities: Race, 
religion and ethno-nationalism, Social Register 2003, 2002, The Merlin Press, 
p. 140
Pastor and Boyce: Pastor, Manuel; Boyce, James (1997) "The political economy of 
complex humanitarian emergencies: lessons from El Salvador", WIDER working 
papers, 0782-8233, no. 131, UNU World Institute for Development Economics 
Research (UNU/WIDER)
Patten, Chris (1999) The Report of the Independent Commission on Policing for 
Northern Ireland, http://www.he1fast.org.uk/report.htm
Pavkovic, Aleksandar (1997) The Fragmentation of Yugoslavia, Nationalism in a 
Multinational StatgJ MacMillian Press Ltd, pp. 4,13, 80-179
Porter, Norman (2003) The Elusive Quest. Reconciliation in Northern Ireland, The 
Blackstaff Press, pp. 2-43,112-6
Puhovski, Zarko (2003) "First plenary session-Speech", Reconciling for the future- 
Workshop 4th April 2003, http://www.reconcilingforthefuture.org/speech4.html
PUP (2003) Progressive Unionist Party website. "News Headlines: Party Breaks 
Contact With Sinn Fein -UVF Breaks Contacts With Decommissioning Body", 13 
May 2003 http://www.pup-ni.org.uk/
Ramet and Adamovich: Ramet, Sabrina Petra; Adamovich, Ljubisa S. (1995) 
Beyond Yugoslavia. Politics, Economics, and Culture in a Shattered 
Community.Westview Press, pp. 101-122
Rawls, John as quoted in Knight, Jack (1998) "Justice and Fairness", Annual 
Review of Political Science, Vol 1, p. 430
Rawls, John (1999) A Theory of Justice revised edition, Oxford University Press, 
pp. 6-15
Rehn, Elisabeth (2003) "Speech by Elisabeth Rehn at the Reconciliation 
Workshop", http ://www.reconcilingforthefuture. org/speech3.html
Renteln Alison Dundes (1990) International Human Rights, Universalism Versus 
Relativism, Sage Publications, pp. 12-30
Ruane and Todd: Ruane, Joseph; Todd, Jennifer (1998) The Dynamics of Conflict 
in Northern Ireland: Power, conflict and emancipation, Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 16-51,194-205
Sachs, Albie (2003) Justice Albie Sachs, interview on BBC Radio 4, Start the Week, 
25 February 2003: http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/factual/starttheweek.shtml
Sarat, Austin (1997) "Vengeance, Victims and the Identities of Law", Social & 
Legal Studies, Volume 6, No 2, pp. 171,180
Sell, Louis (2002) Slobodan Milosevic and the Destruction of Yugoslavia, Duke 
University Press, pp. 325-7
Shirlow, Peter (2003) "No Middle Way: We need political risk-takers to emerge 
from the Big Four", The Observer. Sunday 14 December 2003, p. 2002 
http://observer.guardian.co.Uk/nireland/storv/0.l 1008.1106762,00.html
Shirlow, Peter (2002) "Peaceline Peace?" reprinted from The Belfast Telegraph, 11 
January 2002: http://lark.phoblacht.net/Deaceline.html
Shriver, Donald (1995) An Ethic For Enemies. Forgiveness in Politics. Oxford 
University Press, p. x
Silber, Laura; Little, Allan (1995) The Death of Yugoslavia. Penguin Books and 
BBC Books, pp. xxvi-ii
Skitka, Linda J. (2003) "Of Different Minds: An Accessible Identity Model of 
Justice Reasoning",Personalitv and Social Psychology Review, 2003, Volume 7, 
No. 4, p. 294
SMMRI Media Monitoring, Elections 2000, privately owned research institute, as of 
1 May 2002 by AGB, now known as AGB Strategic Research Serbia, 
http://www.mediacenter.org.yu/english/monitoring/2000/10/m031000e.pdf
SA Reconciliation Barometer (2004) Volume 2, Issue 1, June 2004, Institute for 
Justice and Reconciliation, http://www.iir.org.za/
South African History Online (2004) review of legislation enacted, 
http://www.sahistory.org.za/pages/mainframe.htm
Spence, Augustus (Gusty) Andrew (1977) Oration delivered by the Commanding 
Officer, Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) in Long Kesh (prison - a.k.a. the Maze), 
Mr. Spence; 12 July 1977
St. Antony's College (2005) "Visiting Parliamentary Seminar on Conflict 
Resolution", at Oxford University, 15 February 2005
Stedman, Stephen John (1997) "Spoiler Problems in Peace Processes", International 
Security. Volume 22, No. 2 (Fall 1997), pp. 5-18, 52-3
Steinberg, Jonny (2002) Midlands. Jonathan Ball Publishers, Johannesburg & Cape 
Town, pp. 39-40
Stewart, A.T.Q. (1997), The Narrow Ground. Aspects of Ulster 1609-1969. The 
Blackstaff Press, pp. 21-12,162
Stewart, Frances (2000) Crisis Prevention: Tackling Horizontal Inequalities. 
Working Paper Number 33, QEH Working Paper Series -QEHWPS33, February 
2000, http://www.qeh.ox.ac.uk/research/wpaction.html7ior id=40
Steyn, Melissa (2002) "Learning to Let Go of Privilege, Whites still battling to find 
their place in Africa", Cape Times, 25 November 2002, Cape Town, South Africa
Sudetic, Chuck (1998) Blood and Vengeance. One Family's Story of the War in 
Bosnia, W.W. Norton & Company, pp. xxv, xxxv
Summerfield, Derek (1998) "Children affected by war must not be stigmatised as 
permanently damaged", British Medical Journal 31 October 1998:317,1249: 
bmj.com Summerfield et al. 317 (7167): 1249 
http://bmi.bmiiournals.com/cVi/content/full/317/7167/1249
Summerfield, Derek (1997) "South Africa: does a truth commission promote social 
reconciliation?", British Medical Journal. No 7120, 29 November 1997, p. 1393
Szeftel, Morris (2004) "Two Cheers? South African Democracy's First Decade", 
Review of African Political Economy. June 2004,No. 100, Vol. 31
Teitge, Dennis W., Teitge, Joyce Smith, Weigert, Andrew J. (1986) Society and 
Identity. Cambridge University Press
Terreblanche, Sampie (2002) A history of inequality in South Africa. 1652 -2002, 
University of Natal Press: KMM Review Publishing, pp. 239-271
The Economist (1998) "The Balkans Survey", January 24th-30th 1998 
The Guardian Weekend (1999) "Exiles in the Enemy Camp", May 8 1999
The New Serbia Forum (2000) A Programme for the Reconstruction of Yugoslavia, 
December 2000, Second Report, British Association for Central & Eastern Europe, 
pp. 64-5
The New Serbia Forum (2000) A programme for the Reconstruction of Yugoslavia, 
Second Report, December 2000, British Association for Central & Eastern Europe, 
London, www.NewSerbiaForum.org
Thomas, Robert (1999) Serbia Under Milosevic, Politics in the 1990s, Hurst & 
Company, pp. 20-94, 236-316
TRC website (September 2003) Truth and Reconciliation Commission Website, 
Department of Justice & Constitutional Development, South Africa, 
http://www.doi .gov.za/trc/
TRC website (September 2003) "The Committees of the TRC", Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission Website, Department of Justice & Constitutional 
Development, South Africa, http://www.doi.gov.za/trc/trccom.htm
Tyler and Blader (2003): Tyler, Tom R.; Blader, Steven L., "The Group 
Engagement Model: Procedural Justice, Social Identity, and Cooperative Behavior: 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 349-361
Tyler, Tom R. (2000) "Social Justice: Outcome and Procedure", International 
Journal of Psychology, Volume 35 (2), pp. 117-121
Tyler, Tom R. (1994) "Psychological Models Of The Justice Motive: Antecedents 
of Distributive and Procedural Justice", Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. Vol 6,No 5, p. 850
Udovicki et al: Udovicki, Jasminka; Ridgeway, James, editors (1997) Burn This 
House, The Making and Unmaking of Yugoslavia, Duke University Press
Van Kessel, Ineke (2000) Beyond Our Wildest Dreams. The United Democratic 
Front and the Transformation of South Africa. University Press of Virginia, 
pp. x-xviii, 1-5, 109
Vastag, Brian (2001) "Afghanistan Aid Workers Struggle Through Threats" in 
"Medical News & Perspectives", JAMA (Journal of the American Medical 
Association) Volume 286, No. 19 (November 21,2001)
Walzer, Michael (1997) On Toleration. Yale University Press, pp. 2-12
Welsh, Frank (2000) A History of South Africa. HarperCollins, pp. xx-xxvi,l-2, 50- 
152,430,464
Wendorf and Alexander: Wendorf, Craig A.; Alexander, Sheldon (2001) Justice 
Context and Changes in Fairness-Related Criteria Over Time, presented at the 73d 
Annual Meeting of MPA May 2001 (Midwestern Psychology Association); 
Chicago, Illinois: http://www.uwsp.edu/psych/cw/publications/wendorf- 
justice_changes.pdf
Whyte, John (1990), Interpreting Northern Ireland. Oxford University Press, 
pp.51-283
Wilson, Richard A, (2001) The Politics of Truth and Reconcilation in South Africa. 
Legitimizing the Post-Apartheid State. Cambridge University Press, pp. xix; 6-9, 
59-60, 122-229
Wilson, Richard (2001) "Human Rights, Reconciliation and Revenge", Sussex 
Development Lecture, Feb. 15, 2001 (drawn prior to 2001 publication of The 
Politics of Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa)
Wilson, Robin ed (2001), A Guide to the Northern Ireland Assembly, Agreeing to 
Disagree?, The Stationery Office Ltd, UK
Appendix: Fieldwork Interviews
Fieldwork was conducted in three countries; Northern Ireland, Serbia, and South 
Africa, during a three year period from 1999 to 2002. Anonymity of those 
interviewed was respected upon their request, however I have also exercised 
caution in using names in the text if there was any concern on my part for the 
individuals and groups interviewed. Certain individuals interviewed, particularly 
professionals, are included in the bibliographic listing and clearly identified.
Northern Ireland Interviews:
Fieldwork was conducted in Northern Ireland in March 1999, for the month of April 
2000, and from mid to late November 2000.). It was also visited several other 
times for the purpose of presenting at a conference (Belfast July 2001) and for 
research trips to The Linen Hall Library, Politics Collection (one of the most 
comprehensive collection of primary materials in the world on the NI conflict), 
Belfast.
Belfast, Coleraine, and Londonderry/Derry (March 1999):
This was primarily a reconnaissance visit to Belfast, with an overnight visit to 
Londonderry/Derry (aka "Stroke City"), a day visit to Coleraine, with the aim of 
talking to as many researchers and observers as possible for an extended visit in the 
spring, 2000. While there I spoke to:
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
Coleraine (March 1999)
Londonderry/Berry (March 1999)
Belfast and Colraine (April 2000)
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
Belfast (November 2000)
Serbia Interviews:
Fieldwork in Serbia took place in three blocks of approximately 1-2 weeks each. 
The first visit was to Belgrade in late January 2001, just a few months after 
Milosevic had been deposed. A series of interviews were conducted in March/April 
2001, in and around the Subotica, located on the Hungary/Serbia border northern 
province of Vjovidina, and Belgrade. The interviews in June 2002 were conducted 
in Novi Sad and Belgrade. The first two visits in 2001, (January, 18-30; April 1-9) 
required an official 'letter of invitation' from a Serbian resident, while the June 
2002 (17-29) trip fell under a newly initiated open tourism visa during the summer 
months.
Belgrade (January 2001)
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
Belgrade and Subotica (April 2001)
Novi Sad and Belgrade (June 2002)
Novi Sad, Vojvodina:
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
South Africa Interviews:
Fieldwork in South Africa was left for the final phase, (30 October - 15 December 
2002) as both an observational and progress cross reference comparison with the 
two other countries. It was done in the Western Cape region including, Cape Town 
and Stellenbosch.
Cape Town and Stellenbosch (November - December 2002)
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
The list of interviewees has been redacted from the online version of this thesis.
Interview Questions (Northern Ireland April 2000)
  Do you identify yourself as a member of a group and/or a community in Northern 
Ireland? If yes, which one(s)?
  Do you see you and/or your group and community, are being treated fairly, 
politically, economically, socially, in Northern Ireland? If not, why?
  Do you feel that/air or unfair treatment of individuals, groups, communities 
directly contribute to overall success or failure of the peace process? How?
  What did you consider to be the most important political issue(s) in Northern 
Ireland?
  What did you consider to be the most important economic issue(s) in Northern 
Ireland?
  Do you feel you have had equal access to political, economic, social resources?
If not, why not?
  Do you think that there is such a concept as a process of political forgiveness or a 
process of political revenge
 How would you describe the concept of "fair treatment" of individuals, groups, 
communities, in a political and the economic sense?
  Do you feel that perceptions of fair or unfair treatment to individuals, groups, 
communities directly contribute to a process of political forgiveness or political 
revenge? How?
 How important is the issue of security of you and your community? Does it 
affect your choice of where your job is located and which company you work for? 
Does it influence your choice of where you live, work, choice of schools or 
universities? Choice of taxi companies?
  How have these issues affected your view of the peace process?
  Do you think that intervention by outside international governments and
economic, political, social humanitarian organizations can help or harm a peace 
process? How? When?
  How would you describe the concept of "justice" Do you think perceptions of 
fairness in the way investigations and inquiries are carried out are more or less or 
as important as a formal criminal trial?
  Do you think that there is a relationship between justice, political forgiveness, and 
political revenge*? If yes, please describe.
  Are there any other issues that you feel are especially important to this discussion?
Draft MARCIA HARTWELL April 2000
Interview Questions (Serbia 2001)
 How do you identify yourself ?
(in Serbia)-as a member of a group and/or a community and/or nation ?
 Do you see you and/or your group and community, are being treated fairly, 
politically, economically, socially, by internal and/or external forces?
 Do you think that there is such a concept as a process of political forgiveness or a 
process of political revenge
 How does that apply to your own group or community?
 How does that apply to other groups who are enemies?
 Do you feel you have had equal access to political, economic, social resources?
If not, why not?
 How would you describe the concept of "fair treatment' of individuals, groups, 
communities, in a political and the economic sense?
 How important is the issue of security of you and your community? Does it 
affect your choice of where your job is located and which company you work for? 
Does it influence your choice of where you live, work, choice of schools or 
universities? Choice of taxi companies?
 How have these issues affected your view of the peace process?
 Do you think that intervention by outside international governments and
economic, political, social humanitarian organizations can help or harm a peace 
process? How? When?
 How would you describe the concept of "justice"* Do you think perceptions of 
fairness in the way investigations and inquiries are carried out are more or less or 
as important as a formal criminal trial?
 Do you think that there is a relationship between justice, political forgiveness, and 
political revenge? If yes, please describe.
bo VO
