Cellular effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from 
legumes in prostate cancer  
Gianfranco Bartolini MSc BSc 
Research conducted within 
The Northern Ireland Centre for Food and Health (NICHE) 
The Faculty of Life and Health Sciences of the University of Ulster 
A thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
February 2014 
I confirm that the word count of this thesis is less than 100,000 words 
Dedicated   to Laima with all my love 
  Contents   
Page Number 
  Acknowledgements  
Summary  iii 
Abbreviations  iv 
Notes on access to content  viii 
Chapter 1: 
Chemopreventive effects of protease inhibitors from food sources in 
prostate carcinogenesis and their possible role as anti-cancer agents 
1  60 
Chapter 2: 
Modulation of DNA damage in human prostate cancer cell lines by 
chickpea and soybean protease inhibitor concentrates                                              
61  98 
Chapter 3:  
Effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from chickpea and soybean on 
the growth of human prostate cancer cells                                                                 
99  157 
Chapter 4:  
Effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from chickpea and soybean on 
the invasiveness of human prostate cancer cells in vitro                                                 
158  183  
  Chapter 5:  
  General discussion 
184  191 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all the people who directly or indirectly 
contributed to this PhD.  
First of all, I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisors, Dr. Pamela Magee, 
Dr. Chris Gill and Dr. Richard Owusu-Apenten. Thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to carry out this project. Your help, guidance and support has been 
invaluable to me, and words are not enough to express how grateful I feel.  
Warm thanks go to my advisor Prof. Ian Rowland for his insights into the project 
design. 
I am also grateful to Dr. Jenny Worthington who provided technical support during the 
animal pilot study. 
Many thanks to Dr. Philip Allsopp, who, on more than one occasion, has been a true 
friend to me. 
I would like to acknowledge the University of Ulster for funding my project through a 
VCRS scholarship. 
I wish to express my gratitude to all NICHE staff who were of great help and support 
during my project, especially Miss Tonina Sechi. 
I am also grateful to all NICHE PhD/placement students I had the pleasure to meet and 
share my time with during my studies in Coleraine.  
My thanks go to the University of Ulster Library staff, especially Miss Joan Atkinson, 
for their kind help. 
Thanks also to my friends in Ireland and Italy and to my family for their support and 
encouragement. 
Last but not least, I want to thank Laima, thank you so much for your love and 
understanding during this PhD, thanks for believing in me, I would have never made it 
to the end without you. 
Summary 
Prostate cancer is the most prevalent male cancer in the United Kingdom. The etiology 
of prostate cancer is complex and multifactorial, with diet appearing to play a crucial 
role in disease prevention. Diets consumed in Westernized societies are rich in fats 
and processed foods, while diets consumed in Asia, where prostate cancer incidence is 
comparatively lower, are rich in plant based foods. Epidemiological evidence supports 
the protective role of legumes and pulses, such as soybean, against prostate 
carcinogenesis. A putative chemo-preventive agent present in soybean and legumes is 
the Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI), a protease inhibitor whose anti-cancer potential has 
been demonstrated in in vitro and in vivo models , including prostate cancer. The aim of 
this thesis was to investigate the effects of soybean and chickpea protease inhibitor 
concentrates (PICs) in LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 prostate cancer cell models that 
represented differing stages of carcinogenesis, namely initiation, promotion and 
metastasis. A pilot in vivo study was also carried out in mice injected with DU 145 cells 
to investigate the effect on  tumour mass growth. Our study highlights  anti-genotoxic 
activity of chickpea PIC that induced a reduction in H2O2-induced DNA strand breaks 
assessed by the Comet assay in LNCaP cells. Both PICs proved effective against cancer 
promotion, decreasing cell proliferation in all three cell lines in vitro, with cell-cycle 
arrest apparent at the S phase in PC-3 cells  The findings suggest that soybean PIC may 
possess anti-metastatic activity given the observed inhibition of  highly invasive PC-3 
cells through Matrigel and associated down-regulation of MMP-1. A beneficial 
modulation of genes linked to the initiation, promotion and progression stages of 
prostate carcinogenesis was observed. In conclusion, our study supports the role of PICs 
as anti-cancer agents against prostate cancer and suggests possible mechanisms of 
actions accounting for the observed effects. 
Abbreviations 
% Percentage 
C Degrees Celcius 
m                       Nanometer 
g                        Nanogram 
g Micrograms 
l  Microlitre 
M                       Micromolar 
m                        Micrometre 
1,25(OH)2,D3       1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 
25(OH)D              25-hydroxivitmin D 
ANOVA Analysis of varience 
AR                       Androgen receptor 
BBI                      Bowman-Birk Inhibitor 
BBIC                    Bowman-Birk Inhibitor Concentrate 
BP                        Benzopyrene 
BPH                      Benign prostatic hyperplasia 
BTNA                   N-benzoyl tyrosine p-nitroanilide 
CaCl2                             Calcium Chloride 
cDNA                   Complementary deoxyribonucleic acid 
CI                          Confidence Interval 
CIA                       Chymotrypsin Inhibitor Activity 
CIU                      Chymotrypsin Inhibitor Unit 
CO2                                 Carbon dioxide 
Cp                         Crude Protein 
Da                         Dalton 
DDR                     DNA Damage Response 
DMH                     Dimethylhydrazine 
DMSO                   Dimethylsulfoxide 
DNA                      Deoxyribonucleic acid 
EDTA                    Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
ER                          Oestrogen Receptor 
EtOH                      Ethanol 
FBS                        Foetal Bovine Serum 
FDA                       US  Food and Drug Administration 
g                             Grams 
G1                          Growth 1 
G2                          Growth2 
G2/M                      Growth2/Mitosis 
GMD                      Geometric Mean Diameter 
GPR                        General Purpose Reagent 
h                              Hours 
H2O2                                   Hydrogen peroxide 
HCl                          Hydrochloric Acid 
HGPIN                    High-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
IGF-1                      Insulin-like growth factor 1 
I-PSS                      International Prostate Symptom score 
IU                           Inhibitory Unit 
K                            Kilo 
LSD                        Least Significant Difference 
LUTS                     Lower urinary tract symptoms 
mA                         Milliampere 
Mg                          Milligrams 
min                         Minutes 
ml                    Millilitres 
mM                         Millimolar 
mRNA                    Messenger ribonucleic acid 
MTT                       [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide]   
n                              Number of independent experiments 
NaOH                      Sodium Hydroxide 
NFkB                       Nuclear factor kappa B 
NMBzA                   N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine 
NR                           3-amino-7-dimethylamino-2-methyl-phenazine-hydrocloride 
O2                            Oxygen 
P                              Significance Value  
PBBI                       Purified BBI 
PBS                         Phosphate Buffered saline 
PCR                     Polymerase Chain Reaction 
PIC                       Protease Inhibitor Concentrate 
PIN                       Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia 
PMN                     Polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
PSA                      Prostatic Specific Antigen 
qPCR                    Quantitative Polymerase Chain reaction 
Rb                         Retinoblastoma 
ROS                      Reactive Oxygen Species 
Rpm                      Rounds per minute 
RR                         Relative risk 
S                            Synthesis 
SCE                       Sister-chromatide exchange 
SCGE                    Single-Cell Gel Electrophoresis 
SCID                     Severe Combined Immunodeficiency 
SDAI                     Sutherland Disease Activity Index 
SEM                      Standard error of the mean      
SPSS                      Statistical Package for the Social Sciences                
UK                         United kingdom 
US                          United States of America 
V                             Volt 
Note on access to contents 
I hereby declare that with effect from the date on which the thesis is deposited in the 
Library of the University of Ulster, I permit: 
1. The Librarian of the University to allow the thesis to be copied in whole or in 
part without reference to me on the understanding that such authority applies to 
the provision of single copies made for study purposes or for inclusion within 
the stock of another library.  
2. The thesis to be made available through the Ulster Institutional Repository 
and/or EThOS under the terms of the Ulster eTheses Deposit Agreement which I 
have signed. 
IT IS A CONDITION OF USE OF THIS THESIS THAT ANYONE WHO 
CONSULTS IT MUST RECOGNISE THAT THE COPYRIGHT RESTS WITH THE 
AUTHOR AND THAT NO QUOTATION FROM THE THESIS AND NO 
INFORMATION DERIVED FROM IT MAY BE PUBLISHED UNLESS THE 
SOURCE IS PROPERLY ACKNOWLEDGED. 
Signed 
Chapter 1 
Chemopreventive effects of protease inhibitors from food sources in prostate 
carcinogenesis and their possible role as anti-cancer agents 
1.1 Prostate cancer incidence  2 
1.2. Prostate cancer development 2 
1.2.1. Genes implicated in prostate cancer 4 
1.3. Modifiable risk factors for prostate cancer 5 
1.4. Diet and prostate cancer 6 
1.4.1. Soy 6 
1.4.2. Green tea 7                                                                                                         
1.4.3. Lycopene 8  
1.4.4. Selenium 9 
1.4.5. Vitamin D 9  
1.4.6. Dairy products and calcium 10 
1.5. Dietary Protease Inhibitors and Prostate Cancer 11 
1.5.1 The Bowman-Birk Inhibitor as an anticarcinogenic agent 11 
1.5.1.1. Potential mechanisms of action of BBI 16 
1.5.1.2.Bioavailability of BBI 19 
1.5.1.3. Anti-cancer effects of protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) from soybeans in 
vitro 21 
1.5.2. Other dietary protease inhibitors and  cancer 25 
1.5.2.1. Anti-cancer effects of Protease Inhibitor Concentrates (PICs) from other 
legumes in vitro 26 
1.6. Conclusions 29 
1.7. Aim of study 30 
References 36 
1.1 Prostate cancer incidence 
Prostate cancer is a major social burden for the health systems of industrialised 
countries. Worldwide, the highest incident rates for prostate cancer are reported in 
Australia/ New Zealand, while the lowest rates occur in South-Central Asia (Cancer 
Research UK 2011) (Fig.2). In the United States, prostate cancer is the second most 
common cause of cancer related mortality among males (9% of total deaths ) with 
241,740 new cases in 2012 (Siegel, Naishadham & Jemal 2012). Prostate cancer is the 
most commonly diagnosed male malignancy in the United Kingdom (Cancer Research 
UK 2012a) (Fig.1), where 40,841 new cases were diagnosed in 2009, of which 1,072  
were in Northern Ireland (Cancer Research UK 2012b)  
Although mainly diagnosed in the elderly (Sakr et al. 1994), recovery of prostate cancer 
at authopsy is not unusual in patients in the fourth decade of life (Sakr et al. 1994). The 
aetiology of prostate cancer is not well defined, but several hypotheses have been 
proposed, identifying  possible key mechanisms and feasible risk factors implicated in 
the disease. Among the latter, environmental factors such as poor diet and lifestyle are 
thought to greatly contribute to a higher risk of prostate cancer (Nelson, De Marzo & 
Isaacs 2003), with genetic predisposition also contributing to disease risk. 
1.2. Prostate cancer development 
The function of the prostate gland is to enrich seminal fluid with secretory proteins. It 
can be anatomically divided into three zones (McNeal 1981): the central zone, 
peripheral zone, and transition zone. 95% of prostatic neoplasms are adenocarcinomas 
and have similarities with other epithelial cancers, such as those of the breast and colon. 
The different sites of the prostate are differently affected, with 75% of cancers arising in 
the peripheral zone and 15% in the transition zone (Henley, Ulbright 2007). 
The development of human prostate is based on the interaction of stromal and epithelial 
cells and disruption of these physiological patterns might have a role in the occurrence 
of cancer. Human prostate epithelium is composed of three cell types, i.e. luminal, basal 
and neuroendocrine cells. Luminal cells secrete prostatic protein products and, similar 
to basal cells, are androgen sensitive, expressing androgen receptors, while 
neuroendocrine cells are insensitive to androgen levels and are thought to have a role in 
supporting the growth of luminal cells (Abate-Shen, Shen 2000). 
Prostate cancer is a disease that is manageable in its early stages, by means of surgery or 
radiation therapy, but it becomes an aggressive pathology as it progresses and invades 
surrounding tissues and eventually metastasizes to secondary sites, such as the bone. 
Advanced stages of prostate cancer are characterized by an insensitivity to androgens, 
possibly as a consequence of androgen ablation therapy.  The mechanisms of prostate 
cancer initiation and progression have not been fully elucidated, and precancerous 
lesions can remain indolent for long time periods, before becoming clinically 
significant. Thus, many men die with rather than from prostate cancer. 
One of the reasons hindering the understanding of the causes of prostate cancer is the 
lack of homogeneous prostate samples on which analyses can be carried out, given the 
heterogeneity and multifocality of prostate lesions, often composed of cells of nonclonal 
origin (Bostwick et al. 1998, Macintosh et al. 1998) and showing markers of different 
stages of development. 
The stages of prostate carcinogenesis are thought to be characterized by the loss of 
alleles in different loci, thus resulting in the deletion of genes presumably responsible 
for the control of the normal development of the prostate gland.  
The first step in prostate cancer initiation is the occurrence of lesions known as Prostatic 
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) (McNeal, Bostwick 1986), characterized by the 
disruption of the layer of basal cells. PIN shares common features with carcinoma, 
unlike other prostate abnormal growths, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 
that arises in a different location within the gland (i.e. the transition zone) and does not 
involve the loss of basal cells. PIN usually precedes prostate cancer by 10 years (Sakr et 
al. 1993) and is localized in the peripheral zone, causing lesions histologically similar to 
those determined by malignancies, being heterogenous and multifocal. In contrast to 
prostate cancer cells, however, PIN lesions do not secrete detectable levels of prostate 
specific antigen (PSA) (Haggman et al. 1997), thus making its diagnosis difficult 
without biopsy, and do not involve the complete disruption of the basal cell layer, a 
hallmark of invasive carcinoma. 
1.2.1. Genes implicated in prostate cancer 
Inititation of prostate cancer and consequent development of PIN lesions is 
characterized by the loss of regions in chromosome 8, ie 8p12-21 (Macoska et al. 1995). 
This is a characteristic of the majority of prostate carcinomas and is a feature common 
to other  cancers including that of the colon and breast (Abate-Shen, Shen 2000). It is 
not fully clear what other genes are effected in cancer initiation, but feasible candidates 
have been hypothesized.  The NKX3.1 homeobox, for instance, has been shown to be 
responsible for defects in normal prostate development (Bhatia-Gaur et al. 1999) and 
might be a switch triggering further mutations.  
Cancer progression is characterized by a disrupted balance between the rates of cell 
proliferation and apoptosis,  with both PIN and invading carcinoma sharing abnormal 
proliferation rates, but with the latter having a significant reduction in the number of 
cells undergoing apotosis. Thus, it is conceivable that genes responsible for cell cycle 
regulation are lost at later stages of prostate carcinogenesis.  
The pathway leading from PIN to invasive carcinoma and eventually metastasis is 
characterized by the loss of  regions  in chromosomes 10, 13 and 17. PTEN is a 
candidate regulatory gene mapping to 10q23, coding for a lipid phosphatase involved in 
the control of cell sensitivity to cell death. The role for PTEN in prostate carcinogenesis 
is, however, controversial, due to contradictory experimental evidence (Vlietstra et al. 
1998, Wang, Parsons & Ittmann 1998, Dong et al. 1998, Facher, Law 1998). Other 
genes feasibly involved in prostate carcinogenesis are the Retinoblastoma (Rb) gene 
(Cooney et al. 1996), mapping to 13q  and playing a role in apoptosis (Zhao et al. 1997) 
and the cell cycle regulatory genes p27 and p16 reviewed by Abate-Shen, Shen (2000). 
The switch to metastatic disease is characterized by cells refractory to androgens and 
loss of chromosome 17p (Cher et al. 1994, Saric et al. 1999), where the p53 gene maps, 
and overexpression of Bcl2 gene, the latter inhibiting apoptosis (reviewed by Abate-
Shen, Shen (2000)) and inducing in vitro resistance to chemotherapy (Tu et al. 1995). 
1.3. Modifiable risk factors for prostate cancer 
Environmental factors may play a crucial role in the development of prostate cancer, 
and the focus of much research has been on the identification of modifiable risk factors 
(Bostwick et al. 2004).  Epidemiological studies on migrating populations from areas 
with low incidence of prostate cancer to areas at higher risk, show a shift of the 
incidence rates of the disease toward those of the host country, further supporting the 
hypothesis of an important role for exogenous factors (Whittemore et al. 1995, 
Haenszel, Kurihara 1968, Shimizu et al. 1991, Locke, King 1980, Yu et al. 1991, 
Tominaga 1985). The establishment of lifestyle and environmental factors responsible 
for prostate cancer has proven somewhat elusive, however diet, obesity, occupation, 
physical activity, sexual habits, chronic inflammation, sexually transmitted diseases,  
and vasectomy might have a role in the carcinogenesis of the prostate (Bostwick et al. 
2004, Hsing, Chokkalingam 2006).   
1.4. Diet and prostate cancer 
It has been postulated that the diet is a key factor in accounting   for the different 
prostate cancer rates observed between Eastern and Western countries. The increase in 
prostate cancer incidence in Asians that have migrated to Western countries 
(Whittemore et al. 1995, Haenszel, Kurihara 1968, Shimizu et al. 1991, Locke, King 
1980, Yu et al. 1991, Tominaga 1985) reflects the adoption of a Westernised lifestyle 
including a westernised diet, thus spurring  research into the anti-cancer effects of 
specific food constituents. Typical western diets are rich in saturated and processed 
polyunsaturated fats, refined carbohydrates and poor in fibre (Strom et al. 1999, 
Adlercreutz 1990), while typical dietary patterns in countries where the risk and 
mortality rates of prostate cancer are lower, such as Japan and China, are less calorie-
dense and richer in plant based foods, pulses and legumes (Strom et al. 1999, Herman et 
al. 1995, Severson et al. 1989).  
Research to date has not unequivacally advocated a specifc food or food nutrient that 
might prevent/ cause prostate cancer, as the evidence is rarely univocal, however some 
food components and nutrients may play a key role in prostate cancer risk/ development 
as discussed below.  
1.4.1. Soy 
Soy and its potential anti-cancer effects have been the focus of many epidemiologic 
studies and there is some evidence supporting its protective role. A prospective study 
conducted by Severson et al. (1989) on a cohort of 7999 men of Japanese ancestry in 
Hawaii found an association between increased consumption of tofu and rice and 
decreased risk of prostate cancer. Even though the decreased risk for subjects who 
consumed more tofu was not statistically significant (P = 0.054), the results obtained are 
suggestive of a potential protective effect. 
Jacobsen, Knutsen & Fraser (1998) carried out a prospective study on 12,395 California 
Seventh Day Adventist men to assess the anti-cancer effects of soy milk and reported a 
70% decrease  (P = 0.03) in the risk of the disease in men who drank soy milk more 
than once a day. A  protective effect for soy also emerged from a case-control study 
conducted by Kolonel et al. (2000) on African-American, white, Japanese and Chinese 
men. Bio-active components within soy, including isoflavones and the Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor (see section 1.4.1) are thought to be responsible for these protective effects. 
Strom et al. (1999) investigated the connection between phytoestrogen intake and 
prostate cancer, and found protective associations for the soy isoflavones genistein and 
daidzein. The effects of soy isoflavones in prostate cancer are demonstrated by several 
clinical studies and meta-analyses (reviewed by Hori, Butler & McLoughlin (2011)). 
1.4.2. Green tea                                                                                                          
Green tea is a traditional beverage in Asian cultures. The anti-cancer properties of green 
tea polyphenols have been demonstrated within  in vitro and in vivo models of prostate 
cancer (Khan, Adhami & Mukhtar 2009),  and may be attributed to the induction of 
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest,  down-regulation of inflammatory pathways, the insulin-
like growth factor axis and the modulation of gene and protein expression of the 
androgen receptor (Johnson, Bailey & Mukhtar 2010). The results of clinical studies 
support a role for green tea as a possible  agent for prostate cancer chemoprevention. 
The Japan Public Health Center-based Prospective Study (Kurahashi et al. 2008) was 
carried out on 49,920 Japanese men and showed a dose-dependent decrease in advanced 
prostate cancer in individuals who drank more than five cups per day. In a clinical trial 
carried out by Bettuzzi et al. (2006) the daily supplementation of  green tea catechins 
(600 mg per day) in volunteers with high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
(HGPIN) led to a significant reduction in the number of tumours diagnosed. Although 
green tea consumption might be effective in prostate cancer prevention, to date its role 
as a treatment for patients with prostate cancer is not supported by scientific evidence 
(Jatoi et al. 2003, Choan et al. 2005). 
1.4.3. Lycopene 
Lycopene is a bright red carotenoid pigment, with tomatoes providing a rich dietary 
source. It has been hypothesised that lycopene might be beneficial in prostate cancer 
chemoprevention due to its antioxidant properties (Sies, Stahl 1995) and on the basis of 
the results of several epidemiological studies (Giovannucci 1999). Lycopene has also 
been shown to posses antiproliferative properties by arresting the cell cycle at G0/G1 
phase (Amir et al. 1999, Matsushimanishiwaki et al. 1995),  to negatively modulate the 
serum levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF- 1) (Karas et al. 2000), a putative risk 
factor for prostate cancer (Santillo, Lowe 2006), and to reduce  DNA damage in 
peripheral lympocytes as measured by the Comet assay (Pool-Zobel et al. 1997). A 
meta-analysis of 21 observational studies on the use of tomato, tomato products, or 
lycopene, carried out by Etminan, Takkouche & Caamano-Isorna (2004), suggests that a 
high intake (5th quintile of intake) of raw tomato and cooked tomato products might 
exert a modest role in prostate cancer prevention, with a relative risk (RR) of 0.89 (95% 
CI 0.80  1.00) and 0.81(95% CI 0.71  0.92), respectively. Lycopene intake might also 
be beneficial for patients with clinically diagnosed prostate cancer (Hori, Butler & 
McLoughlin 2011), however, although the evidence is suggestive, further research is 
needed to confirm the hypothesis of tomato products and lycopene as important agents 
in the prevention and management of prostate crcinogenesis. 
1.4.4. Selenium 
Selenium is an essential nonmetal trace element found in various plant and animal food 
sources such as Brazil nuts, fish, molluscs (Hori, Butler & McLoughlin 2011). The anti-
carcinogenic activity of selenium may be attributed to its antioxidant properties or the 
ability to induce apoptosis, inhibit angiogenesis or cellular proliferation in vitro  (Chan, 
Gann & Giovannucci 2005). The potential use of selenium supplementation as a means 
of chemoprevention of prostate cancer stemmed from encouraging results from the 
Nutritional Prevention of Cancer trial (Clark et al. 1996), a large randomised clinical 
trial set up to investigate the recurrence of skin cancer in 1312 men with a past history 
of basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, where a daily oral administration 
of 200 g of selenium resulted in a 50% reduction in prostate cancer incidence, 
measured  as a secondary endpoint (RR 0.5, 95% CI 0.3  0.9). The possible protective 
role of selenium in prostate cancer is further supported by a meta-analysis of 20 
epidemiological studies (Brinkman et al. 2006), showing an inverse association between 
levels of selenium and prostate cancer risk (P = 0.01). However, subsequent studies 
have questioned the anticancer properties of selenium supplementation, showing either 
lack of effect in the prevention of prostate cancer (Lippman et al. 2009, Marshall et al. 
2011) or  a higher incidence of more aggressive cancer phenotypes in patients 
diagnosed with prostate cancer and with a specific genotype for the manganese 
superoxide dismutase (SOD2) enzyme (Chan et al. 2009). 
1.4.5. Vitamin D                                                    
Vitamin D is a hormone synthesized in the skin  following exposure to sunlight (UV-B 
radiation) (Hollis et al. 1993) with dietary sources including eggs, liver, butter and oily 
fish (Hori, Butler & McLoughlin 2011). The function of vitamin D is not only to 
maintain calcium homeostasis, but it also plays a key role in the cellular health of other 
tissues, such as the prostate (Holick 2003). There is biological evidence from in vitro, 
animal and clinical studies supporting the beneficial role of vitamin D in the progression 
and metastasis of prostate cancer (Giovannucci 2005), however the epidemiologic data 
provide controversial results. A longitudinal nested case-control study from Finland, 
Norway and Sweden suggests a U-shaped association with increased risk of prostate 
cancer with very low ( 19nm/l) and very high ( 80nm/l) vit D levels (Tuohimaa et al. 
2004). Increased risk of prostate cancer may be attributed to a limited 1--hydroxylase 
activity in prostate cancer cells and a consequent reduction of the intracellular 
production of 1,25(OH)2,D3 (1,25 vitamin D), the most biologically active form of 
vitamin D, from its precursor 25(OH)D (Chen et al. 2003, Hsu et al. 2001). 
1.4.6. Dairy products and calcium 
A substantial body of evidence supports a positive association between dairy product 
consumption and  risk of carcinogenesis of the prostate, especially advanced prostate 
cancer (Giovannucci et al. 2006, Chan et al. 2001, Chan et al. 1998). Calcium content 
might be responsible for the higher frequency of prostate cancer in individuals with 
greater consumption of dairy products, however research to date has provided mixed 
results (Giovannucci et al. 2006). In a prospective cohort study conducted on 47,750 
cancer free (except for nonmelanoma skin cancer) males Giovannucci et al. (2006) 
reported that calcium intakes higher than 2,000 mg/ day positively correlate with a 
decrease in differentiation in prostate cancer and consequently with a higher risk of the 
advanced and fatal type of the disease, possibly by lowering circulating levels of 1,25 
(OH)2  vitamin D levels 
1.5. Dietary Protease Inhibitors and Prostate Cancer 
Legumes and pulses are food sources rich in proteins and peptides with important bio-
activity in the human body. Among these macromolecules are protease inhibitors 
(Duranti 2006, Kennedy 1998c). Protease inhibitors account for at least 6% of the total 
protein fraction in soybeans (Hwang et al. 1977, Rackis, Anderson 1964) and are 
capable of inhibiting the activity of proteolytic enzymes involved in several biological 
processes relevant to human health and well-being. The physiological role of protease 
inhibitors in legumes may be linked to a defense role, protecting plants against the 
attack of insects or pathogens (Hilder et al. 1987, Johnson et al. 1989, Ryan 1990), or to 
the regulation of endogenous plant proteases (Poerio et al. 1989). 
1.5.1 The Bowman-Birk Inhibitor as an anticarcinogenic agent 
It is not fully elucidated how leguminous sources exert their chemoprotective effects, 
however, specific components have been identified as possible chemopreventive agents. 
The Bowman-Birk inhibitor (BBI), isolated from the soybean and other legumes, has 
been shown to be a potent anti-cancer agent in numerous in vitro and in vivo cancer 
models including those of prostate cancer (Kennedy, Wan 2002, Wan et al. 1999a, 
McCormick et al. 2007). BBI is not the only potential anti-cancer agent found in 
soybeans; phytic acid and the sterol -sitosterol have also preventive effects against 
carcinogenesis in vivo, however BBI has proven a far more potent agent in suppressing 
carcinogenesis in animals (Kennedy 1995). There is also some evidence for the 
protective action of isoflavones from soybeans (see section 1.4.1.). BBI is a protein with 
a molecular weight of 8000 and is known to inhibit trypsin and chymotrypsin (Kennedy 
1998a). The biological properties of BBI have been widely reviewed by Kennedy 
(1998b) and BBI has been identified as a potential pharmaceutical product suitable for 
use in human cancer prevention.  A concentrated form of soybean BBI, termed BBIC, 
has been developed, so as to overcome the prohibitive cost of the use of purified BBI in 
large scale human trials. Both BBI and BBIC have comparable effects over a range of 
doses in inhibiting transformation in vitro and suppressing carcinognesis in vivo (Stclair 
et al. 1990, Kennedy et al. 1993). BBI targets the proteolytic activity of proteases 
involved in cancer development, progression and metastasis (Castro-Guilln, Garca-
Gasca & Blanco-Labra 2010).  While the anti-cancer properties of BBI are traditionally  
linked solely to its chymotrypsin inhibtory activity (Yavelow et al. 1985) and the doses 
of this protease inhibitor concentrate are thus measured in terms of chymotrypsin 
inhibitor units (CIUs) (Kennedy et al. 1993), a recent paper by Clemente et al. (2010) 
supports the likely involvement of BBI trypsin inhibitory activity in the growth 
inhibition of colon cancer cells (see 1.5.2). The chymotrypsin inhibitory activity of BBI 
makes it a potential anti-cancer agent due to the inhibition of the activity of the 26S 
proteasome, wich results in cell homeostasis disruption, accumulation of proteasome 
substrates and cell cycle arrest leading to apoptosis (Chen et al. 2005), as described in 
sections 1.5.1.1 and 1.5.1.3. This hypothesis is consistent with the up-regulated 
proteolytic activity observed in cancer cells compared to non-cancer cells  and the 
emerging role of the proteasome as a  target for cancer therapy (Voorhees et al. 2003, 
Bossola et al. 2003). Trypsin inhibitory activity in cancer prevention has been linked to 
serine protease inhibition with a key role in tumorigenesis and metastasis, such as 
matriptase (MT-SP1) (Bhatt et al. 2003, Bugge, List & Szabo 2007). However, further 
research is required for  this phenomenon  to be fully elucidated. BBIC has gained 
Investigational New Drug Status (IND No. 34671; sponsor Ann R. Kennedy) by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and it has been tested in human phase IIa clinical 
trials for oral leucoplakia (Armstrong et al. 2000), an ideal model for the study of cancer 
chemoprevention, given the prompt accessibility to the study of the lesions, where it 
proved to be well tolerated, without significant side effects and determined a 24.2% 
decrease in total lesion area (P < 0.004). BBIC was also tested in a Phase I clinical trial 
where it was shown to be safely effective at significantly reducing serum levels of 
prostate specific antigen (PSA) (up to 43%, P = 0.023) when administered to 19 men 
affected by medically diagnosed  BPH and lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), at 
doses comparable to those of the traditional Japanes diet (400-800 CIUs daily) over a 6 
month period (Malkowicz et al. 2001). There was also a decrease in prostate volume in 
three patients for whom data were available (38% and 23% in the 100 CIUs group, and 
25% in the 800 CIUs group), and an overall significant improvement in urinary 
activities (P =0.04), as measured with the urinary symptom questionnire (I-PSS). 
Biopsy samples were available  for only two patients enrolled in the lowest BBIC 
dosage group (100 CIUs per day) of the trial, however, the results of the 
histopathological analysis of the benign prostatic tissue are suggestive of an anti-
inflammatory role of the treatment in the prostate of one patient,  resulting in areas of 
atrophy and focal atrophy, and a reduction of prostatitis. The interpretation of this 
bioptic sample analysis correlates well with the potent anti-inflammatory activity of 
BBI in other organs (Kennedy 1998b, Ware et al. 1999), and also with the reduced 
prostate volume and improved urinary symptoms observed in the study, as these 
beneficial effects might be linked to BBIC-induced prostate cell death, as suggested by 
areas of atrophy and phocal atrophy. Interestingly, the 38% reduction in prostate 
volume in one of the patients was associated with an 18% increase in PSA 
concentration after the therapy period, while the other two patients experienced a 
reduction of their serum PSA concentration, a phenomenon which might be explained 
by the leakage of PSA into the bloodstream following destruction of atypical prostate 
epithelial cells. A similar trend in the increase of serum PSA concentration  was 
reported in an animal study conducted by Wan et al. (1999b). Briefly, the authors 
established human prostate cancer xenografts by injecting LNCaP cells directly into the 
posterior lobes of NCRNU-M athymic nude mice, which were then assigned to either a 
control diet or diets supplemented with 1% BBI, or 1%, 2% or 3% BBIC for 6 weeks. 
Over the treatment period, the mice fed the diet supplemented with 1% BBI experienced 
an 18% decrease in their serum PSA concentration, a significant reduction  in the 
tumour load (P < 0.05) and a significantly longer tumour doubling time (P < 0.05), as 
compared to the control group. Treatment with BBIC, however, was associated with an 
increase in serum PSA concentration, while the differences in tumour load and tumour 
doubling time between the control and the BBIC-treated groups, although suggestive of 
a beneficial effect, did not reach statistical significance.  When PSA densities were 
taken into account, the results clearly demonstrate a higher PSA concentration for a 
given tumour load in the BBI- and BBIC-treated animals when compared to the control, 
in agreement with the hypothesis of a release of PSA into the circulation as a 
consequence of the destruction of some prostate cancer cells. Altogether, the results 
obtained from the aforementioned study demonstrate that BBI and BBIC can inhibit the 
growth of LNCaP human cancer xenografts in nude mice, albeit this effect is associated 
with a temporary increase in serum PSA concentration, due to a cell killing effect or an 
inhibition of the degradation and clearance of PSA in the circulation. BBIC has been 
recently used in a human trial in patients with active ulcerative colitis (Lichtenstein et 
al. 2008), a condition with an associated risk of developing colon cancer 8-10 years 
following diagnosis and with a subsequent increased risk of 0.5-1% per year. A total of 
28 patients were enrolled in the study and the treatment group (14 patients) received a 
daily BBIC dosage of 800 CIUs for 12 weeks. Treatment with BBIC was suggestive of 
beneficial effects over placebo for achieving both a clinical response and induction of 
remission, as measured by the Sutherland Disease Activity Index (SDAI), although  
statistical significance was not achieved for the set of data (P = 0.082; P = 0.22, 
respectively). No serious adverse symptoms or toxicity were reported in the examined 
patients. The benefits for patients observed in this study correlate well with the anti-
inflammatory activity of BBI, as also observed in an acute injury/colitis mouse model 
(Ware et al. 1999), due to the inhibition of key proteases in inflammation (see next 
section). 
The anti-cancer activity of BBI, both in its purified form or as BBIC, is widely 
supported by the suppressive effect in various animal carcinogenesis model systems 
(Kennedy 1998a), including dimethylhydrazine-induced gastrointestinal tract (Stclair et 
al. 1990, Weed, Mcgandy & Kennedy 1985, Billings, Newberne & Kennedy 1990) and 
liver carcinogenesis in mice (Stclair et al. 1990); dimethylhydrazine-induced colon 
carcinogenesis in rats (Kennedy et al. 2002); oral carcinogenesis in hamsters induced by 
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (Kennedy et al. 1993, Messadi et al. 1986); 3-
methylcholanthreneinduced murine lung tumorigenesis (Witschi, Kennedy 1989); 
esophageal carcinogenesis induced by N-nitrosomethylbenylamine in rats (Vonhofe, 
Newberne & Kennedy 1991); radiation-induced lymphosarcoma in C57Bl mice, where 
BBIC also exerted anti-metastatic effects (Evans et al. 1992); colon carcinogenesis in 
Min mice, bearing a genetic mutation similar to that of patients affected by familial 
adenomatous polyposis and more prone to develop intestinal cancer (Kennedy et al. 
1996). A recent study by McCormick et al. (2007) reports the chemopreventive effects 
of BBIC against prostate carcinogenesis in rats. The effects of dietary administration of 
BBIC (0, 200 or 2000 mg/kg diet) over a 13-month period on prostate carcinogenesis 
were evaluated in male Wistar-Unilever rats where prostate cancer was induced by a 
sequential regimen of cyproterone acetate testosterone propionate, N-methyl-N-
nitrosourea and chronic androgen stimulation. BBIC treatment conferred a modest dose-
related protection against carcinogenesis in the dorsolateral + anterior prostate, which 
reached statistical significance for the 2000 mg/kg diet dose (P = 0.05). The results also 
show a statistically significant linear trend with increasing BBIC dose (P < 0.05). 
Dietary administration of BBIC did not affect animal survival, was not toxic and did not 
have a negative impact on the body weight of the rats.  
A unique characteristic of BBI, which underlies its strength as an anticarcinogenic agent 
and sets it apart from other protease inhibitors, is its ability to inactivate initiated cells 
by reversing the initiation process (Kennedy 1994). It is hypothesised that BBI might 
turn off a process initiated by a high frequency change in gene expression determined 
by exposure to carcinogens (Fahmy, Fahmy 1980) which could confer to cells a higher 
likelihood of subsequent malignant transformation (Kennedy 1985b, Kennedy 1984) by 
acting in a switch-like fashion (Kennedy 1989, Kennedy 1991).  
The amount of dietary BBI that could potentially induce anticancer effects is estimated 
to be about the quantity present in a single serving of tofu (228 g) (Kennedy 1998a), 
corresponding to approximately 30 mg of chymotrypsin inhibitor activity. This is in line 
with values obtained if we extrapolated the results from animal studies to humans, 
where dietary amounts of BBI and BBIC as low as 0.01% exerted anticarcinogenic 
effects (Kennedy 1998a, Stclair et al. 1990). 
1.5.1.1. Potential mechanisms of action of BBI 
The mechanisms by which BBI inhibits carcinogenesis are controversial, although some 
hypotheses have been formulated to account for its anticarcinogenic activity. BBI can 
modulate the carcinogenic process in a variety of ways, through effects on 
inflammation,  free radical reactions,  gene expression,  protease activity within the cell,  
and various other cell pathways which might lead to the development of malignancies, 
all reviewed by Kennedy (1998b). BBI is known to possess potent anti-inflammatory 
activity (Kennedy 1998b). In a study by Vonhofe, Newberne & Kennedy (1991) a 45% 
reduction in N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine(NMBzA)-induced neoplasms (P < 0.01) in 
male Sprague-Dawley rats receiving BBI-supplemented diets (three tablets a week 
containing 180 mg BBI each) paralleled a significantly reduced number of lesions with 
lymphocytic infiltrate per animal (P < 0.0005); the level of extensive lymphoid 
aggregates in the colons of mice treated with the inflammatory agent 
dimethylhydrazine (DMH) were also markedly reduced by purified BBI (PBBI)/BBIC 
(Kennedy 1998b, Stclair et al. 1990).  Addition of 0.5% BBIC to the diet resulted in a 
significant inhibition (P < 0.01) of colon inflammation in the dextran sulfate murine 
model of ulcerative colitis without toxicity (Ware et al. 1999).  Chronic inflammation is 
a factor that plays a crucial role in the promotion and progression of carcinogenesis, 
accounting for as much as one third of all cancers (Ames, Wakimoto 2002, Hsu, Bray & 
Ho 2010).  Inflammatory processes are particularly important for prostate health, with a 
higher incidence of prostate cancer in patients with a prior history of prostatitis 
(Palapattu et al. 2005); similar detrimental effects are exerted by inflammation in the 
etiology of benign prostatic hyperplasia, a condition that often precedes and coexists 
with prostate cancer and where the majority of human specimens highly expresses pro-
inflammatory cytokines and shows inflammatory infiltration (Kramer, Mitteregger & 
Marberger 2007). Inflammation might contribute to the development of tumours as a 
consequence of the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMN), with consequent mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of the inflammed 
tissue. BBI may have a suppressive effect on inflammation by several mechanisms. Of 
note is the ability of BBI to prevent oxygen free radical (H2O2) production in human 
PMN, thereby decreasing oxidative damage (Frenkel et al. 1987). Another target of BBI 
anti-inflammatory activity might be the nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) pathway, which 
is overexpressed in human prostate adenocarcinomas (Sethi, Sung & Aggarwal 2008, 
Pajonk, Pajonk & McBride 1999, Palayoor et al. 1999) and which might be down-
regulated via inhibition of the  26S proteasome (Chen et al. 2005, Saito et al. 2007). The 
inhibitor of NFkB (IkB) is a protein regulated by the proteasome and its stabilization 
upon proteasome inhibition mediated by BBI might inhibit nuclear transloction of 
NFkB with a consequent inhibition of NFkB-dependent transcription of genes crucial in 
tumour cell survival, proliferation, invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis (Voorhees et 
al. 2003). BBI is also known to potently and directly inhibit the activity of proteases 
involved in inflammation, such as mast cell chymase (Ware et al. 1997), associated with 
a series of pro-inflammatory functions, including the activation of interleukin-1 
(Kinoshita et al. 1991) and procollagenase (Johnson, Barton 1992), granulocyte elastase 
and leukocyte cathepsin G (Larionova et al. 1993), which can degrade matrix proteins. 
Gene expression is an endpoint important in malignant transformation and BBI might 
exert its anti-cancer effects by modulating the expression of certain proto-oncogenes 
which play crucial roles in the carcinogenic process. For example, BBI has been shown 
to reduce radiation-induced high levels of c-myc  and c-fos gene expression to basal 
levels in the mouse (Stclair, Billings & Kennedy 1990) and rat colon (Stclair, Stclair 
1991). It has been hypothesized that BBI  counteracts the over-expression of c-myc by 
inhibing the radiation-induced proteolitic activity responsible for the destruction of a 
regulatory protein and the decrease of its binding to the promoter region of the c-myc 
gene (Kennedy 1998b). C-fos is thought to act as a master switch, whose gene 
product, the protein cFos, plays a role in the up-regulation of several proteases whose 
levels are increased following exposure to radiation or chemical carcinogens (Kennedy 
1998b) and which might regulate a number of secondary genes (Lucibello, Mueller 
1991), including c-myc (Muller et al. 1984, Su et al. 1995).  Other mechanisms which 
may account for BBIs anti-cancer activity are linked to the inhibition of several 
proteolytic activities associated with the establishment of carcinogenesis (Kennedy 
1998a). It is important to note that BBI has the ability to return the levels of various 
endpoints altered by carcinogen exposure, such as amounts of proto-oncogene 
expression, gene amplification, and proteolytic activity, to a normal state, while not 
affecting their endogenous levels, which is particularly important in light of the 
potential use of BBI as an anti-cancer agent in humans. 
1.5.1.2.Bioavailability of BBI 
It is believed that the uptake of BBI into the bloodstream and  the gastrointestinal tract 
following dietary ingestion results in a sufficient amount reaching most organ systems 
able to suppress carcinogenic processes (Kennedy 1998a). Animal studies with 
radiolabelled [125I] BBI provide an insight into the absorption,  biodistribution and 
excretion of BBI. In reviewing studies on the bioavailability of BBI, Kennedy (1998a) 
reported that around 40-50% of the labelled BBI is excreted in the feces in an unaltered 
form, while the rest is either internalised by colonic epithelial cells (Billings, Brandon & 
Habres 1991), thus exerting anti-cancer effects by inhibiting critical intracellular 
proteolytic activities, or crosses the intestinal lumen through paracellular transport, 
becoming detectable in tissues outside the colon (Billings et al. 1992). In mice receiving 
[125I] BBI by oral gavage, about half of the BBI was widely distributed in the body  or 
excreted in the urine three hours after oral administration, reaching also the esophagus, 
stomach, intestine, liver, lung and serum in an intact active form  (Billings et al. 1992). 
Some of the BBI recovered from the urine also maintains its functional protease 
inhibitory activity (Billings et al. 1992, Yavelow et al. 1983). In a study carried out by 
Clemente et al. (2008) on 5 cannulated pigs fed chickpea-based diets the authors report 
the detection of significant amounts of functionally and biologically active BBI at the 
terminal ileum of  the animals, supporting the possibility of BBI bioactivity in the large 
intestine. Further studies (Carmen Marin-Manzano et al. 2009) have demonstrated that 
the protease inhibitory activity of physiologial concentrations (93 M) of soybean BBI 
is not affected by microbiota in vitro, thus retaining its potential chemopreventive 
bioactivity in the human gastointestinal tract. In considering the physiological relevance 
of the effects of these dietary components in humans, the data from biodistribution 
studies have been extrapolated to determine the actual amounts of BBI reaching internal 
organs where malignant transformation can be prevented or suppressed. Stclair et al. 
(1990) report that dietary protease inhibitor concentrations as low as 0.01% are able to 
suppress DMH-induced angiosarcoma in mouse liver, which could correspond to a 
dietary intake of 0.5mg of BBI with 5g (or 6.25 x 10-10 mol) of the pure compound 
subsequently reaching the liver. These values are within the range of concentrations of 
BBI which were shown to inhibit malignant transfomation in vitro in C3H/10T cells 
(Yavelow et al. 1985, Kennedy 1985a). The lowest amounts of BBI capable of blocking 
radiation-induced transformation or DMH-induced carcinogenesis in the in vitro and in 
vivo systems mentioned above have not been determined, however lower doses than 
those tested might be equally effective at exerting protective effects. The 
aforementioned findings show that dietary concentrations of BBI are capable of 
reaching internal organs where they can exert protective effects against the development 
of malignancies, and, given that BBI is able to survive the digestive process and be 
distributed to organs outside the gastrointestinal tract, it is likely to exert similar 
protective effects in the colon (Stclair et al. 1990) and in the prostatic tissue. 
Biodistribution studies conducted on rats administered BBI via oral gavage (Kennedy 
1998b) show similar concentrations of the compound reaching breast and liver tissue at 
different timepoints post-gavage, thus supporting the hypothesis that BBI has the 
potential to exert comparable anti-cancer effects at both sites. Human pharmacokinetic 
studies on bioavailability and biodistribution of BBI have been performed using 
antibodies which react with reduced BBI, showing a trend similar to that observed in 
animal studies, with BBI being quickly cleared from the bloodstream and detectable in 
urine samples up to 24 hours after oral administration (Kennedy 1998a).   
1.5.1.3. Anti-cancer effects of protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) from soybeans 
in vitro 
Epidemiological evidence suggests that diets rich in legumes and pulses correlate with a 
lower risk of prostate cancer (Severson et al. 1989, Mills et al. 1989, Schuurman et al. 
1998). The mechanisms accounting for this anti-cancer effect have not been fully 
elucidated to date, however, as discussed above,  the protease inhibitor Bowman Birk 
Inhibitor (BBI) isolated from the soybean is a strong candidate as a potential 
chemopreventive substance. There is a substantial amount of in vitro and in vivo data 
advocating the role of BBI, purified or as a concentrated preparation (BBIC), as an anti-
cancer agent (Kennedy 1998b). Table 1 summarizes the effects of PICs, including 
soybean BBI and those isolated from other dietary sources, on cancer cell models in 
vitro. 
BBI is able to irreversibly suppress x-ray induced transformation in mouse embryo 
C3H/10T fibroblasts due to its chymotrypsin inhibitory activity, at concentrations as 
low as 1 g/ml even several days after exposure to the carcinogen (Yavelow et al. 
1985).                                                                        
Further studies by Yavelow et al. (1987) that aimed to address the site of action of BBI 
at a cellular level, identified that BBI had a specificity for two chymotrypsin-like 
enzymes which are membrane associated and whose activity rises during 
transformation. 
In vitro experiments have demonstrated potent anti-inflammatory and indirect anti-
oxidant BBI activity, by decreasing H2O2 formation by activated human 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (Frenkel et al. 1987), thus suggesting additional 
potential mechanisms for BBIs chemopreventive properties. 
BBI is known to specifically inhibit the chymotrypsin-like activity of 26S proteasome in 
MCF7 breast cancer cells (Chen et al. 2005), with a subsequent upregulation of the 
proteasome target substrates p21Cip1/WAF1 and p27Kip1, followed by the downregulation 
of the cell cycle regulatory cyclins cyclin D1 and cyclin E and a possible arrest of the 
cell cycle at G1/S phase. Chen and colleagues also demonstrated that BBI inhibited the 
growth of MCF7 cells in a non-cytotoxic manner (5  40 M) and induced MAP kinase 
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), with the subsequent inactivation of phosphorylated 
extracellular signal-related kinases (ERK1/2).  
Few studies have investigated the in vitro effects of BBI in prostate cancer. BBI and 
BBIC (100 g/ml) were significantly cytotoxic towards LNCaP human prostate 
adenocarcinoma cells after 24 hours, while BBI (5, 25, 100 g/ml) did not stimulate 
synthesis and/or secretion of PSA in the same cell line following a 3 day exposure (Wan 
et al. 1999a).  
Similar inhibitory effects on LNCaP cells was seen in Kennedy, Wans experiments 
(2002), with treatment of 50 g/ml BBI or BBIC inducing a 23% extension in the cell 
doubling time. Treatment with BBIC (100 g/ml) led to a significant inhibition of cell 
growth also in 267B1, BRF-55T, 267B1/Ki-ras and PC-3 cells. Interestingly, the growth 
of normal prostate epithelial cells was not inhibited. Furthermore BBI was able to 
modulate the invasive properties of LNCaP cells , with a 26.10% reduction in the 
number of cells invading across the Matrigel-coated filter membrane. Lastly, BBI 
and/or BBIC (100 g/ml) significantly decreased the clonogenic survival of the selected 
cell lines (except LNCaP and PC-3 treated with BBI). Overall, BBIC exerted  stronger 
effects than pure BBI. In a study by Tang et al.  (2009), treatment of LNCaP cells with 
500 g/ml BBI for 24 hours caused a significant reduction in viability, with induction of 
connexin 43 (Cx43), thus resulting in induction of apoptosis. A negative growth control 
mediated by induction of Cx43 was also observed by Saito et al. (2007) in human 
osteosarcoma cells (U2OS cells) in vitro. Briefly, BBI significantly reduced  cell 
viability in a dose-dependent manner following exposure to 200 and 400 mg/ml for 6 
days (P  0.05), suppressing also the saturation density at 200 g/ml for 8 days (P  
0.05). Cells treated with 200 g/ml BBI for 8 days also showed a cell cycle arrest at G1 
phase and a significant increase of the apoptotic population, thus demonstrating an 
effect of BBI which is both cytostatic and cytotoxic. The cytostatic effects observed in 
this study correlate well with the documented role of Cx43 in cell cycle regulation 
through accumulation of cell cycle regulators p27kip1 and p21Cip1/WAF1 and down-
regulation of cell cycle stimulators Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E (Gorbe et al. 2005), thus 
suggesting that BBI might modulate the growth of U2OS cells by regulating proteins 
involved in cell cycle control through the induced expression of Cx43.  The effects of 
BBI on U2OS cells were linked to the elevation of Cx43 expression, as demonstrated by 
the significantly (P  0.05) increased levels of Cx43 mRNA assessed by realtime PCR 
and by a 50% increased saturation density following down-regulation of Cx43 by a 
Cx43 antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotide as compared to treatment with 
BBI (200 g/ml) alone. The authors demonstrated that BBI is capable of suppressing 
the chymotrypsin-like activity of 26S proteasome in U2OS cells, in agreement with the 
effects observed by Chen et al. (2005) in MCF7 cells, and suggest that the stabilization 
of Cx43 protein is due to the inhibition of proteasomal-dependent protein degradation 
by BBI.  
The anti-cancer potential of BBI not only lies in its ability to beneficially modulate key 
processes in carcinogenesis, but also to act as an agent that enhances the efficacy of 
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Zhang et al. (1999) studied the effects of BBI and/or 
BBIC on cisplatin- or radiation-induced cytotoxicity in a selection of tumorigenic 
(human breast, cervical and head and neck cancer cells) and non-tumorigenic cell lines 
with a different sensitivity to cisplatin and x-rays. Overall, BBI and/or BBIC showed 
their potential as adjuvants for cancer treatments  reducing the clonogenic survival of 
MCF7, SCC61 andSQ20B cells and enhancing the cytotoxicity of  cisplatin in HeLa, 
HeLa-R1 and HeLa-R3 cells and of radiation in SCC61 and SQ20B cells. It is 
noteworthy that there was a lack of significant effects in the non-malignant selected cell 
lines. 
In a study conducted by Clemente et al. (2010), the effects of soybean native BBI and 
two major soybean BBI isoinibitors, IBB1 and IBBD2, on the proliferation and 
modulation of the cell cycle distribution pattern of HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cells 
were investigated. IBB1 is an inibitor of both trypsin and chymotrypsin, while IBBD2 
inhibits trysin only. The viability of HT29 cells was assessed by the NR (3-amino-7-
dimethylamino-2-methyl-phenazine-hydrocloride) assay, for a treatment period of 96 
hours. Treatment with BBI (31.2 M; 62.5 M; 125 M) inhibited cell proliferation in a 
dose-dependent fashion, with a similar trend observed for both of the isoinhibitors 
tested (P < 0.05). IBBD2 exerted more potent effects than IBB1 at 32 M and 62 M. 
Chemically inactivated BBI (by alkylation of the sulfhidryl groups) was also tested to 
study the link between cell proliferation inhibitory properties and the inhibition of 
trypsin and chymotrypsin-like proteolytic activities. Denatured BBI had a much weaker 
and non-significant effect than native BBI at reducing the growth of HT29 cells. 
Interestingly, both BBI and inactive BBI did not inhibit the proliferation of human 
colonic fibroblasts CCD-18Co, used as a control under the same experimental 
conditions. 24-hour exposure of HT29 cells to 62 M BBI also resulted in a significant 
(P < 0.05) arrest of the cell cycle at G0-G1 phase (from 62.70.2% to 89.11.6%), and 
in a decrease of the fraction of cells in G2-M (from 28.21.2% to 4.31%) and S (from 
9.21% to 6.60.6%) stages. The results of this study support the role of protease 
inhibition in the reduction of proliferation of HT29 colorectal cancer cells and also 
suggest a contributory role of the trypsin inhibitory activity in the modulation of cell 
growth. The BBI-mediated inhibition of 26S proteasome (Chen et al. 2005) might also 
be linked to the observed effects on the cell cycle distribution pattern, due to the role of 
its proteolytic activities in the processing of regulatory proteins, such as cyclin D1, 
cyclin E (Chen et al. 2005) and cyclin-dependent kinases.    
1.5.2. Other dietary protease inhibitors and  cancer  
To date, most of the research into the anticancer effects of protease inhibitors has 
focused on soybean BBI. Comparatively little data is available regarding the 
chemopreventive effects of protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) from other 
leguminous sources. Magee et al. (2012) were the first to report the antiproliferative 
effects of chickpea PICs on prostate and breast cancer cell lines.  The authors also 
investigated the antiprolifeartive effects of other PICs isolated from various legumes 
(see 1.5.2.1.) 
Fernandes, Banerji (1995) investigated the anti-cancer effects of a PIC from the field 
bean (FBPI) against benzopyrene(BP)-induced forestomach tumours in mice.  
Administration of the PIC by oral gavage for a period  3 months  at a concentration of 
20 mg/kg  daily, 6 times a week, either from the initiation of carcinogenesis or after BP 
treatment, led to a statistically significant (P < 0.001) suppression of the multiplicity of 
forestomach tumours without affecting  tumour incidence, with a greater potency 
observed when the PIC was given simultaneously with the carcinogen treatment (P < 
0.01). It was also interesting to observe the lack of toxicity of PIC treatment.  Another 
study by the same authors (Fernandes, Banerji 1996) report the effectiveness of FBPI at 
suppressing 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice, where 
treatment with 1 or 2 mg of FBPI three times a week for 15 weeks significantly reduced 
the incidence of skin tumours (P < 0.01  001). Other studies have investigated the 
potential anticarcinogenic effects of PICs isolated from amaranth seeds (Tamir et al. 
1996), the pea (Clemente et al. 2005, Clemente et al. 2012), the lentil (Caccialupi et al. 
2010), the tepary bean (Garcia-Gasca et al. 2002), the black-eyed pea (Joanitti, Azevedo 
& Freitas 2010). These in vitro studies are further dicussed in section 1.5.2.1. 
1.5.2.1. Anti-cancer effects of Protease Inhibitor Concentrates (PICs) from other 
legumes in vitro 
A recent study by Magee et al. (2012) investigated the effects of PICs from chickpea 
and various leguminous sources (including soybean) routinely included in European 
diets on the proliferation of breast and prostate cancer cells in vitro. The effects of PICs 
extracted from kidney bean, linseed, soybean, chickpea, mungbean, peas, and lentils on 
the proliferation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and LNCaP and PC-3 
prostate cancer cells were assessed using the MTT assay. Cells were exposed to PICs 
for 48 hours at a concentration range of 0-400 g/ml. Briefly, all the tested 
concentrations of chickpea PIC resulted in a significant (P  0.01 and P  0.001) 
although small (~12-15%) reduction in the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells. The 
growth of LNCaP cells was significantly inhibited by kidney bean PIC (200, 400 g/ml) 
(P  0.05), soybean PIC (50, 100 g/ml) (P  0.05), chickpea PIC (25-400 g/ml) (P  
0.05) and mungbean PIC (100, 200 g/ml) (P  0.05), with the highest concentration of 
kidney bean being the most potent; PC-3 cell viability was significantly suppressed by 
the full range of chickpea PIC concentations (P  0.001 and P  0.01) and by kidney 
bean PIC at 25 g/ml (P  0.05). Overall, in this study chickpea PIC proved to exert 
more potent effects on the selected prostate cancer cell lines than those observed in 
breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7.  The authors highlight the potential role 
played by a 4000 Da peptide found in the majority of the prepared extracts, except that 
of chickpea BBI, as determined by mass spectrometry, which may be lunasin, a soybean 
peptide with anti-cancer activity (de Lumen 2005). 
Clemente et al. (2005) compared the effects of soybean BBI with those of rTI1B and 
rTI2B, two variant recombinant protease inhibitors from the pea (Pisum sativum L.), 
and a Pea Protease Inhibitor Concentrate (PPIC), on the growth of human colorectal 
adenocarcinoma HT29 cells in vitro. rTI1B and rT2B are homologous to BBI but 
present a different amino acid sequence at the two inhibitory sites. In a first comparison 
between BBI (300-1200 CIUs) and PPIC (60-300 CIUs), the two protease inhibitors 
both reduced, in a statistically significant dose-dependent fashion (P < 0.001), the 
growth of HT29 cells, as assessed by the NR (3-amino-7-dimethylamino-2-methyl-
phenazine-hydrocloride) assay following a 96-hour treatment, with PPIC exerting a 
more potent effect. rTI1B and rT2B also inhibited the growth of HT29 cells in the NR 
assay in a dose-dependent manner (P < 0.001) at a concentration range of 75-300 CIUs, 
showing a more effective inhibition of  cell growth than BBI, when the chymotrypsin 
inhibitory activity was equivalent. The pan-caspase inhibitor, Boc-D-FMK, was also 
included in the cytotoxicity assays (75 M), to determine if rTI1B and rT2B (300 CIUs) 
induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, but no significant changes were induced by Boc-
D-FMK  on the antiproliferative effects of the selected protease inhibitors in HT29 
cells. Thus, the authors suggest a suppressive effect of PPI on cell growth which is not 
linked to modulation of apoptotic pathways, but is possibly due to the antiproteolytic 
activity. The authors also support the link between inhibition of chymotrypsin like 
proteases and suppression of cell growth in vitro, and highlight the importance of 
amino-acid variation in the catalytic sites of protease inhibitors in their anti-cancer 
effects. 
The importance of serine proteases as a target of the protease inhibitors of the Bowman-
Birk family is supported by a study by Clemente et al. (2012), where they compared the 
anti-proliferative in vitro effects of rTI1B with a related mutant protein lacking 
chymotrypsin and trypsin inhibtory activities, in HT29 cells and non-malignant colonic 
fibroblastic CCD-18Co cells. Cell viability was measured following exposure to 
protease inhibitors (0-61 M) for 96 hours by means of the NR-assay. Briefly, the 
growth of HT29 cells was significantly (P < 0.05) inhibited by rTI1b in a concentration-
dependent fashion, in agreement with the effects observed by Clemente et al. (2010) 
with soybean BBI, while the mutant protein did not exert any inhibitory effects. Growth 
of CCD-18Co cells, used as a control, was unaffected by both treatments. The anti-
proliferative effects of BBI from lentils was studied in vitro by Caccialupi et al. (2010). 
When HT29 were treated with lentil BBI (19  76 M) for 72 hours, the growth was 
inhibited in a dose-dependent manner for concentrations higher than 19 M (P < 0.05), 
as assessed by the NR cytotoxicity assay. Lentil BBI did not affect the growth of 
colonic fibroblasts CCD-18Co. The effectiveness of lentil BBI at suppressing the 
growth of HT29 cells in vitro correlates well with that observed by Clemente et al.  
(2005) for pea rTI1B; the two BBI proteins share similar sequences at the chymotrypsin 
inhibitory site which differ from those of rTI2B and soybean BBI, which have weaker 
growth inhibitory properties (Clemente et al. 2005), so their comparable potency might 
highlight the importance of amino-acid variation at the chymotrypsin inhibitory domain 
in the observed cytotoxicity experiments. In contrast, the lack of inhibitory effects of 
lentil BBI on the proliferation of breast and prostate cancer cells reported by Magee et 
al. (2012) might be due to the different preparation of BBI, possibly resulting in 
different doses of the active compound, or to the different assays used to assess cell 
growth, based each on a different physiological endpoint (i.e. the uptake of the vital dye 
neutral red and its incorporation into lysosomes or the reduction by a mitochondrial 
dehydrogenase enzyme of MTT to formazan crystals, in viable cells) (Mosmann 1983, 
Borenfreund, Puerner 1985). Garcia-Gasca et al.  (2002) investigated the effects of a 
protease inhibitor fraction from tepary bean (TPIF) on the proliferation of normal and 
malignant cells in vitro. TPIF was shown to be cytotoxic (250, 500 Inhibitory Unit 
(IU/ml) and cytotoxic (750, 1000 IU/ml) to mouse transformed fibroblastic NIH 3T3/v-
mos cells, whose growth was decreased in a dose-dependent manner, while was only 
cytostatic for normal fibroblastic 3T3 cells at the highest concentration assayed (1000 
IU/ml). The growth of human carcinoma HeLa cells, chosen as a model for epithelial 
tissue, was not affected by the treament. Furthermore, treatment with TPIF was 
observed to increase cell adhesion of poorly adherent NIH 3T3/v-mos cells.  Joanitti, 
Azevedo & Freitas (2010) conducted a study to investigate the effects of a PIC extracted 
from the black-eyed pea (BTCI) on MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The treatment of cells 
with BTCI (200-400 M) over a 72-hour period resulted in a significant (P < 0.01) 
dose-dependent reduction of cell viability, as assessed by the MTT assay. Cells exposed 
to 200 M BTCI for 72 hours also showed a reduction (60%, P = 0.0001) of their total 
number, an arrest of the cell cycle at S and G2/M phases, a series of acute 
morphological modifications and lysosome membrane permeabilization. In a study 
conducted by Banerji, Fernandes (1996) a field bean PIC was able to significantly (P < 
0.001) suppress the high sister-chromatide exchange (SCE) frequencies induced by the 
mutagen trihalomethane-bromoform (CHBr3) in human lymphocytes in vitro. 
Tamir et al. (1996) isolated an 8 KDa trypsin-chymotrypsin inhibitor from amaranth 
seeds which was shown to suppress the anchorage-independent growth of MCF-7 breast 
cancer cells, thus supporting its likely cancer chemopreventive role. 
1.6. Conclusions 
Much reserch has focused on the discovery of strategies which could reduce the 
incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer, studying the mechanisms involved in 
the development of the disease and how these could be beneficially modulated thorugh 
the diet or food bioactive compounds. Diets rich in legumes and pulses have been 
shown to reduce cancer incidence (Severson et al. 1989, Mills et al. 1989, Schuurman et 
al. 1998, Mathers 2002). To date, there is a large body of evidence showing the 
chemopreventive effects of PICs from leguminous sources in in vitro and in vivo models 
of carcinogenesis in different organ systems. A great wealth of research has focused on 
soybean BBI, which, as BBIC, in 1992 achieved Investigational New Drug Status from 
the Food and Drug Administration and has been tested in human trials for BPH 
(Malkowicz et al. 2001), oral leukoplakia (Armstrong et al. 2000) and ulcerative colitis 
(Lichtenstein et al. 2008). The mechanisms through which BBI exerts its chemoprevent 
activity may be linked to its anti-inflammatory properties and inhibition of 26S 
proteasome in cancer cells (section 1.5.1.1.) While evidence supports the potential role 
of PICs derived from leguminous sources other than soybean as anticancer agents, few 
studies have been published to date, with most only investigating the effects on cell 
growth (section 1.5.2.). 
1.7. Aim of study 
The aim of the study was to investigate the ability of two PICs isolated from soybean 
and chickpea to influence various cancer-related endpoints in the PC-3, DU145 and 
LNCaP human prostate cancer cell lines. Given the paucity of data on the anti-cancer 
effects of PICs from legumes other than the soybean, the chickpea was chosen as a 
suitable and scientifically valid source for the preparation of one of the PICs. Previous 
research conducted within NICHE also demonstrated demonstrated anticancer effects of 
chickpea PIC in LNCaP and PC-3 prostate cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 breast 
cancer cells (Magee et al. 2012).  
The selected cell lines represent appropriate in vitro models of prostate cancer, from an 
androgen-independent and poorly aggressive state (LNCaP) to a more invasive and 
metastatic phenotype (DU145 and PC-3) and thus mimick subsequent stages of the 
carcinogenic process. LNCaP cells were employed to assess the ability of PICs to 
reduce H2O2-induced DNA damage (chapter 2) and/or modulate the expression of genes 
with antioxidant / DNA repair function. DNA damage is a biomarker of cancer 
initiation, and this is noteworthy in light of the potential development of extracts as 
cancer preventative agents in healthy patients or as a treatment capable to inhibit further 
progression of carcinogenesis. LNCaP, DU145 and PC-3 cell lines were used to 
measure the modulation of endpoints relevant to cancer cell proliferation (chapter 3) and 
a pilot animal study was carried out to assess the efficacy of chickpea PIC  on the 
growth of tumours induced in SCID mice injected with DU145 cells. The effects of 
PICs on the metastasis stage of prostate carcingogenesis were invesitigated on PC-3 and 
DU145 cells, given their higher metastatic potential compared to LNCaP cells and to 
evaluate the putative role of PICs as a therapeutic agent in patients with advanced 
prostate cancer.   The present study aimed to assess the role of PICs in the 
physiopathology of prostate cancer. However, further studies of normal / non-
tumourigenic prostate cells, such as PNT1A, would allow the investigation of the 
effects of PICs in non-malignant cells where the carcinogenic process has not been 
initiated. 
Fig. 1: The 10 most commonly dignosed cancers in males, UK, 2009 (Cancer Research 
UK 2012) 
Fig.2: Prostate cancer, world age-standardised incidence and mortality rates, regions of 
the world, 2008 estimates (Cancer Research UK 2011) 
PIC source (Cancer) Cells tested Effect Authors 
Soybean (BBI) C3H/10T (mouse fibroblast cells)(non 
cancerous cells) 
Inhibition and suppression of transformation Yavelow et al. (1985) 
Soybean (BBI) C3H/10T (normal and transformed mouse 
fibroblast cells) 
Inhibition of membrane-associated proteolytic 
enzymes associated with cell transformation 
Yavelow, Caggana & Beck  (1987) 
Potato (PtI-1, PtI-2, PCI-2); Soybean (BBI; 
Kunitz); Lima Bean (LBI) 
Polymorphonuclear leucicytes (PMNs) Inhibition of free radical production by 
chymotrypsin protease inhibitors 
Frenkel et al. (1987) 
Soybean (BBI) MCF7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) Inhibition of proteasome function; accumulation 
of ubiquinated proteins and proteasome 
substrates; downregulation of cyclin D1 and 
cyclin E (feasible cell cycle arrest at G1/s phase);  
suppression of cell growth;  decrease of ERK1/2 
Chen et al. (2005) 
Soybean (BBI and BBIC) LNCaP (human prostate adenocarcinoma) BBI: unaffected synthesis and/or secretion of 
PSA.                                BBI and BBIC: 
significant decrease in cell viability 
Wan et al. (1999a) 
Soybean (BBIC, BBI) 267B1 (immortalized non-tumorigenic human 
epithelial cells), BRF-55T (immortalized pre-
malignant human prostate epithelial cells), 
267B1/Ki-ras (transformed prostate epithelial 
cells), LNCaP, PC-3 (human prostate 
adenocarcinoma) 
BBIC: inhibition of growth and clonogenic 
survival of BRF-55T, 267B1/Ki-ras, LNCaP and 
PC-3 cells.   BBI: inhibition of growth of LNCaP 
cells and clonogenic survival of BRF-55T and 
267/Ki-ras cells; decrease of LNCaP cells 
invasion across Matrigel membrane 
Kennedy, Wan  (2002) 
Soybean (BBI) LNCaP (human prostate adenocarcinoma) Reduction in viability; induction of connexin 43 
and apoptosis 
Tang et al. (2009) 
Soybean (BBI) U2OS (human osteosarcoma) Reduction in cell viability; suppression of the 
saturation density; cell cycle arrest at G1 phase; 
significant increase of apoptosis; increased levels 
of Cx43 mRNA; stabilization of Cx43 protein 
Saito et al. (2007) 
Soybean (BBI and BBIC) MCF7 (human breast carcinoma); SCC61, 
SQ20B (human head and neck carcinoma); HeLa, 
HeLa-R, HeLa-R3  (human cervical carcinoma) 
BBI and BBIC: suppression of the clonogenic 
survival of MCF7 and SCC61 cells.                                   
BBIC: suppression of the survival of SQ20B 
cells; enhanced radiation-induced cell killing in 
SCC61 and SQ20B cells; enhanced cisplatin-
induced cell killing in HeLa, HeLa-R1 and HeLa-
R3 cells 
Zhang et al. (1999) 
Soybean (BBI, IBB1, IBBD2) HT29 (colon adenocarcinoma) 
BBI, IBB1, IBBD2: Inhibition of cell 
proliferation.                                          BBI: 
arrest of the cell cycle at G0-G1 phase; decrease 
of the fraction of cells in G2-M and S stages 
Clemente et al. (2010) 
Kidney bean, linseed, soybean, chickpea, 
mungbean, peas, lentil 
MCF7, MDA-MB-231(human breast 
adenocarcinoma); LNCaP, PC-3 (human prostate 
adenocarcinoma) 
Chickpea: inhibition of proliferation of MDA-
MB-231, LNCaP and PC-3 cells.  Kidney bean: 
inhibition of proliferation of LNCaP and PC-3 
cells.                      Mungbean: inhibition of 
proliferation of LNCaP cells.                                                   
Soybean: Inhibition of proliferation of LNCaP 
cells                                                                     
Magee et al. (2012) 
Pea (Pisum Sativum L.)(rTI1B, rTI2B); Soybean 
(BBI) 
HT29( human colorectal adenocarcinoma) Inhibition of cell growth Clemente et al. (2005b) 
Pea (Pisum Sativum L.)(rTI1B) HT29 (human colorectal adenocarcinoma) Inhibition of cell growth Clemente et al. (2012) 
Lentil HT29 (human colorectal adenocarcinoma) Inhibition of cell growth Caccialupi et al. (2010) 
Tepary bean (TPIF) NIH 3T3/v-mos (mouse transformed 
fibroblasticcells); HeLa (human cervical 
carcinoma) 
Inhibition of cell growth and increase of cell 
adhesion of NIH 3T3/v-mos cells 
Garcia-Gasca et al.  (2002) 
Black-eyed pea (BTCI) MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) Reduction of cell viability and proliferation; 
induction of apoptosis and lysosome membrane 
Joanitti, Azevedo & Freitas (2010) 
permealization 
Field Bean (FB) Human lymphocytes Suppression of high sister-chromatide exchange 
frequencies induced by the mutagen 
trihalomethane-bromoform CHBr3 
Banerji, Fernandes (1996) 
Amaranth seeds (AmI) MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) Inhibition of anchorage-independent growth Tamir et al. (1996) 
Table 1: Effects of PICs on cancer cell models in vitro
References 
Abate-Shen, C. & Shen, M.M. 2000, "Molecular genetics of prostate cancer", Genes & 
development, vol. 14, no. 19, pp. 2410-2434.  
Adlercreutz, H. 1990, "Western Diet and Western Diseases - some Hormonal and 
Biochemical-Mechanisms and Associations", Scandinavian Journal of Clinical & 
Laboratory Investigation, vol. 50, pp. 3-23. 
Ames, B.N. & Wakimoto, P. 2002, "Are vitamin and mineral deficiencies a major 
cancer risk?", Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 694-704.  
Amir, H., Karas, M., Giat, J., Danilenko, M., Levy, R., Yermiahu, T., Levy, J. & 
Sharoni, Y. 1999, "Lycopene and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3 cooperate in the 
inhibition of cell cycle progression and induction of differentiation in HL-60 
leukemic cells", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 
105-112.  
Armstrong, W.B., Kennedy, A.R., Wan, X.S., Taylor, T.H., Nguyen, Q.A., Jensen, J., 
Thompson, W., Lagerberg, W. & Meyskens, F.L. 2000, "Clinical modulation of 
oral leukoplakia and protease activity by Bowman-Birk inhibitor concentrate in a 
phase IIa chemoprevention trial", Clinical Cancer Research, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 
4684-4691.  
Banerji, A.P. & Fernandes, A.O. 1996, "Field bean protease inhibitor mitigates the 
sister-chromatid exchanges induced by bromoform and depresses the spontaneous 
sister-chromatid exchange frequency of human lymphocytes in vitro", Mutation 
Research-Environmental Mutagenesis and Related Subjects, vol. 360, no. 1, pp. 29-
Bettuzzi, S., Brausi, M., Rizzi, F., Castagnetti, G., Peracchia, G. & Corti, A. 2006, 
"Chemoprevention of human prostate cancer by oral administration of green tea 
catechins in volunteers with high-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia: A 
preliminary report from a one-year proof-of-principle study", Cancer research, vol. 
66, no. 2, pp. 1234-1240.  
Bhatia-Gaur, R., Donjacour, A.A., Sciavolino, P.J., Kim, M., Desai, N., Young, P., 
Norton, C.R., Gridley, T., Cardiff, R.D., Cunha, G.R., Abate-Shen, C. & Shen, 
M.M. 1999, "Roles for Nkx3.1 in prostate development and cancer.", Genes & 
development, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 966-977.  
Bhatt, A., Takeuchi, T., Ylstra, B., Ginzinger, D., Albertson, D., Shuman, M. & Craik, 
C. 2003, "Quantitation of membrane type serine protease 1 (MT-SP1) in 
transformed and normal cells", Biological chemistry, vol. 384, no. 2, pp. 257-266. 
Billings, P.C., Brandon, D.L. & Habres, J.M. 1991, "Internalization of the Bowman-
Birk Protease Inhibitor by Intestinal Epithelial-Cells", European journal of cancer, 
vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 903-908.  
Billings, P.C., Newberne, P.M. & Kennedy, A.R. 1990, "Protease Inhibitor Suppression 
of Colon and Anal Gland Carcinogenesis Induced by Dimethylhydrazine", 
Carcinogenesis, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1083-1086.  
Billings, P.C., Stclair, W.H., Maki, P.A. & Kennedy, A.R. 1992, "Distribution of the 
Bowman Birk Protease Inhibitor in Mice Following Oral-Administration", Cancer 
letters, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 191-197.  
Borenfreund, E. & Puerner, J.A. 1985, "Toxicity Determined Invitro by Morphological 
Alterations and Neutral Red Absorption", Toxicology letters, vol. 24, no. 2-3, pp. 
119-124.  
Bossola, M., Muscaritoli, M., Costelli, P., Grieco, G., Bonelli, G., Pacelli, F., Fanelli, 
F., Doglietto, G. & Baccino, F. 2003, "Increased muscle proteasome activity 
correlates with disease severity in gastric cancer patients", Annals of Surgery, vol. 
237, no. 3, pp. 384-389. 
Bostwick, D.G., Burke, H.B., Djakiew, D., Euling, S., Ho, S.M., Landolph, J., 
Morrison, H., Sonawane, B., Shifflett, T., Waters, D.J. & Timms, B. 2004, "Human 
prostate cancer risk factors", Cancer, vol. 101, no. 10 Suppl, pp. 2371-2490.  
Bostwick, D.G., Shan, A., Qian, J., Darson, M., Maihle, N.J., Jenkins, R.B. & Cheng, L. 
1998, "Independent origin of multiple foci of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia: 
comparison with matched foci of prostate carcinoma.", Cancer, vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 
1995-2002.  
Brinkman, M., Reulen, R.C., Kellen, E., Buntinx, F. & Zeegers, M.P. 2006, "Are men 
with low selenium levels at increased risk of prostate cancer?", European journal 
of cancer, vol. 42, no. 15, pp. 2463-2471.  
Bugge, T.H., List, K. & Szabo, R. 2007, "Matriptase-dependent cell surface proteolysis 
in epithelial development and pathogenesis", Frontiers in Bioscience, vol. 12, pp. 
5060-5070.  
Caccialupi, P., Ceci, L.R., Siciliano, R.A., Pignone, D., Clemente, A. & Sonnante, G. 
2010, "Bowman-Birk inhibitors in lentil: Heterologous expression, functional 
characterisation and anti-proliferative properties in human colon cancer cells", 
Food Chemistry, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 1058-1066.  
Carmen Marin-Manzano, M., Ruiz, R., Jimenez, E., Rubio, L.A. & Clemente, A. 2009, 
"Anti-carcinogenic soyabean Bowman-Birk inhibitors survive faecal fermentation 
in their active form and do not affect the microbiota composition in vitro", British 
Journal of Nutrition, vol. 101, no. 7, pp. 967-971.  
Castro-Guilln, J.L., Garca-Gasca, T. & Blanco-Labra, A. 2010, "Protease inhibitors as 
anticancer agents" in New Approaches in the Treatment of Cancer, eds. C.M. 
Vazquez & S. Navarro, Nova Science Publishers, Hauppauge NY, pp. 91-93.  
Chan, J.M., Gann, P.H. & Giovannucci, E.L. 2005, "Role of diet in prostate cancer 
development and progression", Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 23, no. 32, pp. 
8152-8160.  
Chan, J., Giovannucci, E., Andersson, S., Yuen, J., Adami, H. & Wolk, A. 1998, "Dairy 
products, calcium, phosphorous, vitamin D, and risk of prostate cancer (Sweden)", 
Cancer Causes & Control, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 559-566.  
Chan, J., Stampfer, M., Ma, J., Gann, P., Gaziano, J. & Giovannucci, E. 2001, "Dairy 
products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk in the Physicians' Health Study", 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 549-554.  
Chan, J.M., Oh, W.K., Xie, W., Regan, M.M., Stampfer, M.J., King, I.B., Abe, M. & 
Kantoff, P.W. 2009, "Plasma Selenium, Manganese Superoxide Dismutase, and 
Intermediate- or High-Risk Prostate Cancer", Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 
27, no. 22, pp. 3577-3583.  
Chen, T.C., Wang, L.L., Whitlatch, L.W., Flanagan, J.N. & Holick, M.F. 2003, 
"Prostatic 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1 alpha-hydroxylase and its implication in prostate 
cancer", Journal of cellular biochemistry, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 315-322.  
Chen, Y.W., Huang, S.C., Lin-Shiau, S.Y. & Lin, J.K. 2005, "Bowman-Birk inhibitor 
abates proteasome function and suppresses the proliferation of MCF7 breast cancer 
cells through accumulation of MAP kinase phosphatase-1.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 
26, no. 7, pp. 1296-1306.  
Cher, M.L., MacGrogan, D., Bookstein, R., Brown, J.A., Jenkins, R.B. & Jensen, R.H. 
1994, "Comparative genomic hybridization, allelic imbalance, and fluorescence in 
situ hybridization on chromosome 8 in prostate cancer.", Genes, chromosomes & 
cancer, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 153-162.  
Choan, E., Segal, R., Jonker, D., Malone, S., Reaume, N., Eapen, L. & Gallant, V. 2005, 
"A prospective clinical trial of green tea for hormone refractory prostate cancer: An 
evaluation of the complementary/alternative therapy approach", Urologic 
Oncology-Seminars and Original Investigations, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 108-113.  
Clark, L.C., Combs, G.F., Turnbull, B.W., Slate, E.H., Chalker, D.K., Chow, J., Davis, 
L.S., Glover, R.A., Graham, G.F., Gross, E.G., Krongrad, A., Lesher, J.L., Park, 
H.K., Sanders, B.B., Smith, C.L. & Taylor, J.R. 1996, "Effects of selenium 
supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin a 
randomized controlled trial - A randomized controlled trial", Jama-Journal of the 
American Medical Association, vol. 276, no. 24, pp. 1957-1963.  
Clemente, A., Gee, J.M., Johnson, I.T., MacKenzie, D.A. & Domoney, C. 2005a, "Pea 
(Pisum sativum L.) protease inhibitors from the Bowman-Birk class influence the 
growth of human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT29 cells in vitro", Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, vol. 53, no. 23, pp. 8979-8986.  
Clemente, A., Carmen Marin-Manzano, M., Jimenez, E., Carmen Arques, M. & 
Domoney, C. 2012, "The anti-proliferative effect of TI1B, a major Bowman-Birk 
isoinhibitor from pea (Pisum sativum L.), on HT29 colon cancer cells is mediated 
through protease inhibition", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 108, pp. S135-S144.  
Clemente, A., Javier Moreno, F., del Carmen Marin-Manzano, M., Jimenez, E. & 
Domoney, C. 2010, "The cytotoxic effect of Bowman-Birk isoinhibitors, IBB1 and 
IBBD2, from soybean (Glycine max) on HT29 human colorectal cancer cells is 
related to their intrinsic ability to inhibit serine proteases", Molecular Nutrition & 
Food Research, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 396-405.  
Clemente, A., Jimenez, E., Marin-Manzano, M.C. & Rubio, L.A. 2008, "Active 
Bowman-Birk inhibitors survive gastrointestinal digestion at the terminal ileum of 
pigs fed chickpea-based diets", Journal of the science of food and agriculture, vol. 
88, no. 3, pp. 513-521.  
Cooney, K.A., Wetzel, J.C., Merajver, S.D., Macoska, J.A., Singleton, T.P. & Wojno, 
K.J. 1996, "Distinct regions of allelic loss on 13q in prostate cancer.", Cancer 
research, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1142-1145.  
de Lumen, B.O. 2005, "Lunasin: A cancer-preventive soy peptide", Nutrition reviews, 
vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 16-21.  
Dong, J.T., Sipe, T.W., Hyytinen, E.R., Li, C.L., Heise, C., McClintock, D.E., Grant, 
C.D., Chung, L.W. & Frierson, H.F.,Jr 1998, "PTEN/MMAC1 is infrequently 
mutated in pT2 and pT3 carcinomas of the prostate.", Oncogene, vol. 17, no. 15, 
pp. 1979-1982.  
Duranti, M. 2006, "Grain legume proteins and nutraceutical properties", Fitoterapia, 
vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 67-82.  
Etminan, M., Takkouche, B. & Caamano-Isorna, F. 2004, "The role of tomato products 
and lycopene in the prevention of prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of observational 
studies.", Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 340-
Evans, S.M., Vanwinkle, T., Szuhaj, B.F., Michel, K.E. & Kennedy, A.R. 1992, 
"Protection Against Metastasis of Radiation-Induced Thymic Lymphosarcoma and 
Weight-Loss in C57bl/6ncr1br Mice by an Autoclave-Resistant Factor Present in 
Soybeans", Radiation research, vol. 132, no. 2, pp. 259-262.  
Facher, E.A. & Law, J.C. 1998, "PTEN and prostate cancer.", Journal of medical 
genetics, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 790-790.  
Fahmy, M.J. & Fahmy, O.G. 1980, "Intervening Dna Insertions and the Alteration of 
Gene-Expression by Carcinogens", Cancer research, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 3374-3382.  
Fernandes, A.O. & Banerji, A.P. 1996, "The field bean protease inhibitor can effectively 
suppress 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice", 
Cancer letters, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 219-224.  
Fernandes, A.O. & Banerji, A.P. 1995, "Inhibition of Benzopyrene-Induced 
Forestomach Tumors by Field Bean Protease Inhibitor(s)", Carcinogenesis, vol. 16, 
no. 8, pp. 1843-1846.  
Frenkel, K., Chrzan, K., Ryan, C.A., Wiesner, R. & Troll, W. 1987, "Chymotrypsin-
specific protease inhibitors decrease H2O2 formation by activated human 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1207-1212.  
Garcia-Gasca, T., Salazar-Olivo, L.A., Mendiola-Olaya, E. & Blanco-Labra, A. 2002, 
"The effects of a protease inhibitor fraction from tepary bean (Phaseolus 
acutifolius) on in vitro cell proliferation and cell adhesion of transformed cells", 
Toxicology in Vitro, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 229-233.  
Giovannucci, E. 2005, "The epidemiology of vitamin D and cancer incidence and 
mortality: A review (United States)", Cancer Causes & Control, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 
83-95.  
Giovannucci, E. 1999, "Tomatoes, tomato-based products, lycopene, and cancer: 
Review of the epidemiologic literature", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 
vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 317-331. 
Giovannucci, E., Liu, Y., Stampfer, M.J. & Willett, W.C. 2006, "Prospective study of 
calcium intake and incident and fatal prostate cancer", Cancer Epidemiology 
Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 203-210.  
Gorbe, A., Becker, D.L., Dux, L., Stelkovics, E., Krenacs, L., Bagdi, E. & Krenacs, T. 
2005, "Transient upregulation of connexin43 gap junctions and synchronized cell 
cycle control precede myoblast fusion in regenerating skeletal muscle in vivo", 
Histochemistry and cell biology, vol. 123, no. 6, pp. 573-583.  
Haenszel, W. & Kurihara, M. 1968, "Studies of Japanese migrants. I. Mortality from 
cancer and other diseases among Japanese in the United States.", Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 43-68.  
Haggman, M.J., Macoska, J.A., Wojno, K.J. & Oesterling, J.E. 1997, "The relationship 
between prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer: critical issues", 
Journal of Urology, vol. 158, no. 1, pp. 12-22.  
Henley, J.D. & Ulbright, T.M. 2007, "Male genital tract" in The Cancer Handbook, ed. 
L.M. Weiss, 2007th edn, John Wiley and Sons, Inc, Wiley Online Library, pp. 1-8.  
Herman, C., Adlercreutz, T., Goldin, B.R., Gorbach, S.L., Hockerstedt, K.A.V., 
Watanabe, S., Hamalainen, E.K., Markkanen, M.H., Makela, T.H., Wahala, K.T., 
Hase, T.A. & Fotsis, T. 1995, "Soybean phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk", 
Journal of Nutrition, vol. 125, no. 3 Suppl., pp. 757S-770S.  
Hilder, V.A., Gatehouse, A.M.R., Sheerman, S.E., Barker, R.F. & Boulter, D. 1987, "A 
Novel Mechanism of Insect Resistance Engineered into Tobacco", Nature, vol. 
330, no. 6144, pp. 160-163.  
Holick, M.F. 2003, "Vitamin D: A millenium perspective", Journal of cellular 
biochemistry, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 296-307.  
Hollis, B.W., Kamerud, J.Q., Selvaag, S.R., Lorenz, J.D. & Napoli, J.L. 1993, 
"Determination of Vitamin-D Status by Radioimmunoassay with an I-125 Labeled 
Tracer", Clinical chemistry, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 529-533.  
Hori, S., Butler, E. & McLoughlin, J. 2011, "Prostate cancer and diet: food for 
thought?", BJU international, vol. 107, no. 9, pp. 1348-1359.  
Hsing, A.W. & Chokkalingam, A.P. 2006, "Prostate cancer epidemiology", Frontiers in 
Bioscience, vol. 11, pp. 1388-1413.  
Hsu, A., Bray, T.M. & Ho, E. 2010, "Anti-inflammatory activity of soy and tea in 
prostate cancer prevention", Experimental biology and medicine, vol. 235, no. 6, 
pp. 659-667.  
Hsu, J.Y., Feldman, D., McNeal, J.E. & Peehl, D.M. 2001, "Reduced 1 alpha-
hydroxylase activity in human prostate cancer cells correlates with decreased 
susceptibility to 25-hydroxyvitamin D-3-induced growth inhibition", Cancer 
research, vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2852-2856.  
Hwang, D.L., Lin, K.T., Yang, W.K. & Foard, D.E. 1977, "Purification, partial 
characterization, and immunological relationships of multiple low molecular 
weight protease inhibitors of soybean.", Biochimica et biophysica acta, vol. 495, 
no. 2, pp. 369-382.  
Jacobsen, B.K., Knutsen, S.F. & Fraser, G.E. 1998, "Does high soy milk intake reduce 
prostate cancer incidence? The Adventist Health Study (United States).", Cancer 
Causes & Control, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 553-557.  
Jatoi, A., Ellison, N., Burch, P.A., Sloan, J.A., Dakhil, S.R., Novotny, P., Tan, W., 
Fitch, T.R., Rowland, K.M., Young, C.Y.F. & Flynn, P.J. 2003, "A phase II trial of 
green tea in the treatment of patients with androgen independent metastatic prostate 
carcinoma", Cancer, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 1442-1446.  
Joanitti, G.A., Azevedo, R.B. & Freitas, S.M. 2010, "Apoptosis and lysosome 
membrane permeabilization induction on breast cancer cells by an anticarcinogenic 
Bowman-Birk protease inhibitor from Vigna unguiculata seeds", Cancer letters, 
vol. 293, no. 1, pp. 73-81.  
Johnson, D.A. & Barton, G.J. 1992, "Mast-Cell Tryptases - Examination of Unusual 
Characteristics by Multiple Sequence Alignment and Molecular Modeling", 
Protein Science, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 370-377.  
Johnson, J.J., Bailey, H.H. & Mukhtar, H. 2010, "Green tea polyphenols for prostate 
cancer chemoprevention: A translational perspective", Phytomedicine, vol. 17, no. 
1, pp. 3-13.  
Johnson, R., Narvaez, J., An, G.H. & Ryan, C. 1989, "Expression of Proteinase 
Inhibitor-i and Inhibitor-Ii in Transgenic Tobacco Plants - Effects on Natural 
Defense Against Manduca-Sexta Larvae", Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 86, no. 24, pp. 9871-9875.  
Karas, M., Amir, H., Fishman, D., Danilenko, M., Segal, S., Nahum, A., Koifmann, A., 
Giat, Y., Levy, J. & Sharoni, Y. 2000, "Lycopene interferes with cell cycle 
progression and insulin-like growth factor I signaling in mammary cancer cells", 
Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 101-111.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1984, "Promotion and other interactions between agents in the induction 
of transformation in vitro in fibroblasts." in Mechanisms of Tumor Promotion, Vol. 
III, Tumor Promotion and Carcinogenesis In Vitro, ed. T.J. Slaga, CRC Press, Inc., 
Boca Raton, pp. 13-55.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998a, "The Bowman-Birk inhibitor from soybeans as an 
anticarcinogenic agent", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 68, no. 6 
Suppl., pp. 1406S-1412S.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998b, "Chemopreventive agents: Protease inhibitors", Pharmacology & 
therapeutics, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 167-209.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998c, "Chemopreventive agents: Protease inhibitors", Pharmacology & 
therapeutics, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 167-209.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1995, "The evidence for soybean products as cancer preventive agents", 
Journal of Nutrition, vol. 125, no. 3 Suppl, pp. 733S-743S.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1994, "Prevention of Carcinogenesis by Protease Inhibitors", Cancer 
research, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. S1999-S2005.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1991, "Is there a Critical Target Gene for the 1st Step in 
Carcinogenesis", Environmental health perspectives, vol. 93, pp. 199-203.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1989, "Initiation and Promotion of Radiation-Induced Transformation 
Invitro - Relevance of Invitro Studies to Radiation-Induced Cancer in Human-
Populations" in Cell Transformation Systems Relevant to Radiation-induced 
Cancer in Man, eds. K.H. Chadwick, C. Seymour & B. Barnhart, IOP Publishing, 
Ltd, Bristol, England, pp. 263-270. 
Kennedy, A.R. 1985a, "The Conditions for the Modification of Radiation 
Transformation Invitro by a Tumor Promoter and Protease Inhibitors", 
Carcinogenesis, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 1441-1445.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1985b, "Evidence that the First Step Leading to Carcinogen-Induced 
Malignant Transformation is a High Frequency Common Event", Barrett, J.C.and 
R.W.Tennant (Ed.).Carcinogenesis: a Comprehensive Survey, Vol.9.Mammalian 
Cell Transformation: Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis and Assays for Carcinogens; 
Meeting, Research Triangle Park, N.C., Usa, Sept.11-13, 1984, pp. 355-364.  
Kennedy, A.R., BeazerBarclay, Y., Kinzler, K.W. & Newberne, P.M. 1996, "Of 
carcinogenesis in the intestines of min mice by the soybean-derived bowman-birk 
inhibitor", Cancer research, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 679-682.  
Kennedy, A.R., Billings, P.C., Maki, P.A. & Newberne, P. 1993, "Effects of various 
Preparations of Dietary Protease Inhibitors on Oral Carcinogenesis in Hamsters 
Induced by Dmba", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 19, no. 2, 
pp. 191-200.  
Kennedy, A.R., Billings, P.C., Wan, X.S. & Newberne, P.M. 2002, "Effects of 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor on rat colon carcinogenesis", Nutrition and Cancer-an 
International Journal, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 174-186.  
Kennedy, A.R., Szuhaj, B.F., Newberne, P.M. & Billings, P.C. 1993, "Preparation and 
Production of a Cancer Chemopreventive Agent, Bowman-Birk Inhibitor 
Concentrate", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 
281-302.  
Kennedy, A.R. & Wan, X.S. 2002, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk inhibitor on growth, 
invasion, and clonogenic survival of human prostate epithelial cells and prostate 
cancer cells.", Prostate, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 125-133.  
Khan, N., Adhami, V.M. & Mukhtar, H. 2009, "Review: Green Tea Polyphenols in 
Chemoprevention of Prostate Cancer: Preclinical and Clinical Studies", Nutrition 
and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 836-841.  
Kinoshita, A., Urata, H., Bumpus, F.M. & Husain, A. 1991, "Multiple Determinants for 
the High Substrate-Specificity of an Angiotensin-Ii-Forming Chymase from the 
Human Heart", Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 266, no. 29, pp. 19192-
19197.  
Kolonel, L.N., Hankin, J.H., Whittemore, A.S., Wu, A.H., Gallagher, R.P., Wilkens, 
L.R., John, E.M., Howe, G.R., Dreon, D.M., West, D.W. & Paffenbarger, R.S.,Jr 
2000, "Vegetables, fruits, legumes and prostate cancer: a multiethnic case-control 
study.", Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 795-
Kramer, G., Mitteregger, D. & Marberger, M. 2007, "Is benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH) an immune inflammatory disease?", European urology, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 
1202-1216.  
Kurahashi, N., Sasazuki, S., Iwasaki, M., Inoue, M., Tsugane, S. & JPHC Study Grp 
2008, "Green tea consumption and prostate cancer risk in Japanese men: A 
prospective study", American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 167, no. 1, pp. 71-77.  
Larionova, N.I., Gladysheva, I.P., Tikhonova, T.V. & Kazanskaia, N.F. 1993, 
"[Inhibition of cathepsin G and elastase from human granulocytes by multiple 
forms of the Bowman-Birk type of soy inhibitor].", Biokhimii a (Moscow, Russia), 
vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 1437-44.  
Lichtenstein, G.R., Deren, J.J., Katz, S., Lewis, J.D., Kennedy, A.R. & Ware, J.H. 2008, 
"Bowman-birk inhibitor concentrate: A novel therapeutic agent for patients with 
active ulcerative colitis", Digestive diseases and sciences, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 175-
Lippman, S.M., Klein, E.A., Goodman, P.J., Lucia, M.S., Thompson, I.M., Ford, L.G., 
Parnes, H.L., Minasian, L.M., Gaziano, J.M., Hartline, J.A., Parsons, J.K., Bearden, 
J.D.,III, Crawford, E.D., Goodman, G.E., Claudio, J., Winquist, E., Cook, E.D., 
Karp, D.D., Walther, P., Lieber, M.M., Kristal, A.R., Darke, A.K., Arnold, K.B., 
Ganz, P.A., Santella, R.M., Albanes, D., Taylor, P.R., Probstfield, J.L., Jagpal, T.J., 
Crowley, J.J., Meyskens, F.L., Jr., Baker, L.H. & Coltman, C.A., Jr. 2009, "Effect 
of Selenium and Vitamin E on Risk of Prostate Cancer and Other Cancers The 
Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial ( SELECT)", Jama-Journal of 
the American Medical Association, vol. 301, no. 1, pp. 39-51.  
Locke, F.B. & King, H. 1980, "Cancer mortality risk among Japanese in the United 
States.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 1149-1156.  
Lucibello, F.C. & Mueller, R. 1991, "Proto-Oncogenes Encoding Transcriptional 
Regulators Unravelling the Mechanisms of Oncogenic Conversion", Critical 
reviews in oncogenesis, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 259-276.  
Macintosh, C.A., Stower, M., Reid, N. & Maitland, N.J. 1998, "Precise microdissection 
of human prostate cancers reveals genotypic heterogeneity.", Cancer research, vol. 
58, no. 1, pp. 23-28.  
Macoska, J.A., Trybus, T.M., Benson, P.D., Sakr, W.A., Grignon, D.J., Wojno, K.D., 
Pietruk, T. & Powell, I.J. 1995, "Evidence for three tumor suppressor gene loci on 
chromosome 8p in human prostate cancer.", Cancer research, vol. 55, no. 22, pp. 
5390-5395.  
Magee, P.J., Owusu-Apenten, R., McCann, M.J., Gill, C.I. & Rowland, I.R. 2012, 
"Chickpea (Cicer arietinum) and Other Plant-Derived Protease Inhibitor 
Concentrates Inhibit Breast and Prostate Cancer Cell Proliferation In Vitro", 
Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 741-748.  
Malkowicz, S.B., McKenna, W.G., Vaughn, D.J., Wan, X.S., Propert, K.J., Rockwell, 
K., Marks, S.H.F., Wein, A.J. & Kennedy, A.R. 2001, "Effects of Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor concentrate (BBIC) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia", 
Prostate, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 16-28.  
Marshall, J.R., Tangen, C.M., Sakr, W.A., Wood, D.P.,Jr., Berry, D.L., Klein, E.A., 
Lippman, S.M., Parnes, H.L., Alberts, D.S., Jarrard, D.F., Lee, W.R., Gaziano, 
J.M., Crawford, E.D., Ely, B., Ray, M., Davis, W., Minasian, L.M. & Thompson, 
I.M.,Jr. 2011, "Phase III Trial of Selenium to Prevent Prostate Cancer in Men with 
High-grade Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia: SWOG S9917", Cancer Prevention 
Research, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 1761-1769.  
Mathers, J.C. 2002, "Pulses and carcinogenesis: potential for the prevention of colon, 
breast and other cancers", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 88, pp. S273-S279.  
Matsushimanishiwaki, R., Shidoji, Y., Nishiwaki, S., Yamada, T., Moriwaki, H. & 
Muto, Y. 1995, "Suppression by Carotenoids of Microcystin-Induced 
Morphological-Changes in Mouse Hepatocytes", Lipids, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1029-
1034.  
McCormick, D.L., Johnson, W.D., Bosland, M.C., Lubet, R.A. & Steele, V.E. 2007, 
"Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by soy isoflavones and by 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 57, 
no. 2, pp. 184-193.  
McNeal, J.E. 1981, "The zonal anatomy of the prostate.", Prostate, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 35-
McNeal, J.E. & Bostwick, D.G. 1986, "Intraductal dysplasia: a premalignant lesion of 
the prostate.", Human pathology, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 64-71.  
Messadi, D.V., Billings, P., Shklar, G. & Kennedy, A.R. 1986, "Inhibition of Oral 
Carcinogenesis by a Protease Inhibitor", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 
vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 447-452.  
Mills, P.K., Beeson, W.L., Phillips, R.L. & Fraser, G.E. 1989, "Cohort study of diet, 
lifestyle, and prostate cancer in Adventist men.", Cancer, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 598-
Mosmann, T. 1983, "Rapid Colorimetric Assay for Cellular Growth and Survival - 
Application to Proliferation and Cyto-Toxicity Assays", Journal of immunological 
methods, vol. 65, no. 1-2, pp. 55-63.  
Muller, R., Bravo, R., Burckhardt, J. & Curran, T. 1984, "Induction of C-Fos Gene and 
Protein by Growth-Factors Precedes Activation of C-Myc", Nature, vol. 312, no. 
5996, pp. 716-720.  
Nelson, W.G., De Marzo, A.M. & Isaacs, W.B. 2003, "Prostate cancer", New England 
Journal of Medicine, vol. 349, no. 4, pp. 366-381.  
Pajonk, F., Pajonk, K. & McBride, W.H. 1999, "Inhibition of NF-kappa B, 
clonogenicity, and radiosensitivity of human cancer cells", Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute, vol. 91, no. 22, pp. 1956-1960.  
Palapattu, G.S., Sutcliffe, S., Bastian, P.J., Platz, E.A., De Marzo, A.M., Isaacs, W.B. & 
Nelson, W.G. 2005, "Prostate carcinogenesis and inflammation: emerging 
insights", Carcinogenesis, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1170-1181.  
Palayoor, S.T., Youmell, M.Y., Calderwood, S.K., Coleman, C.N. & Price, B.D. 1999, 
"Constitutive activation of I kappa B kinase alpha and NF-kappa B in prostate 
cancer cells is inhibited by ibuprofen", Oncogene, vol. 18, no. 51, pp. 7389-7394.  
Poerio, E., Carrano, L., Garzillo, A.M. & Buonocore, V. 1989, "A Trypsin-Inhibitor 
from the Water-Soluble Protein-Fraction of Wheat Kernel", Phytochemistry, vol. 
28, no. 5, pp. 1307-1311.  
Pool-Zobel, B.L., Bub, A., Muller, H., Wollowski, I. & Rechkemmer, G. 1997, 
"Consumption of vegetables reduces genetic damage in humans: first results of a 
human intervention trial with carotenoid-rich foods", Carcinogenesis, vol. 18, no. 
9, pp. 1847-1850.  
Rackis, J.J. & Anderson, R.L. 1964, "Isolation of four soybean trypsin inhibitors by 
DEAE-cellulose chromatography.", Biochemical and biophysical research 
communications, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 230-235.  
Ryan, C.A. 1990, "Protease Inhibitors in Plants - Genes for Improving Defenses Against 
Insects and Pathogens", Annual Review of Phytopathology, vol. 28, pp. 425-449.  
Saito, T., Sato, H., Virgona, N., Hagiwara, H., Kashiwagi, K., Suzuki, K., Asano, R. & 
Yano, T. 2007, "Negative growth control of osteosarcoma cell by Bowman-Birk 
protease inhibitor from soybean; involvement of connexin 43", Cancer letters, vol. 
253, no. 2, pp. 249-257.  
Sakr, W.A., Grignon, D.J., Crissman, J.D., Heilbrun, L.K., Cassin, B.J., Pontes, J.J. & 
Haas, G.P. 1994, "High grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) and 
prostatic adenocarcinoma between the ages of 20-69: an autopsy study of 249 
cases.", In Vivo, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 439-443.  
Sakr, W.A., Haas, G.P., Cassin, B.F., Pontes, J.E. & Crissman, J.D. 1993, "The 
frequency of carcinoma and intraepithelial neoplasia of the prostate in young male 
patients.", Journal of Urology, vol. 150, no. 2 Pt 1, pp. 379-385.  
Santillo, V.M. & Lowe, F.C. 2006, "Role of vitamins, minerals and supplements in the 
prevention and management of prostate cancer.", International braz j urol : official 
journal of the Brazilian Society of Urology, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3-14.  
Saric, T., Brkanac, Z., Troyer, D.A., Padalecki, S.S., Sarosdy, M., Williams, K., 
Abadesco, L., Leach, R.J. & O'Connell, P. 1999, "Genetic pattern of prostate 
cancer progression.", International Journal of Cancer, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 219-224.  
Schuurman, A.G., Goldbohm, R.A., Dorant, E. & van den Brandt, P.A. 1998, 
"Vegetable and fruit consumption and prostate cancer risk: A cohort study in the 
Netherlands", Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 
673-680.  
Sethi, G., Sung, B. & Aggarwal, B.B. 2008, "Nuclear factor-kB activation: From bench 
to bedside", Experimental biology and medicine, vol. 233, no. 1, pp. 21-31.  
Severson, R.K., Nomura, A.M.Y., Grove, J.S. & Stemmermann, G.N. 1989, "A 
Prospective-Study of Demographics, Diet, and Prostate-Cancer among Men of 
Japanese Ancestry in Hawaii", Cancer research, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1857-1860.  
Shimizu, H., Ross, R.K., Bernstein, L., Yatani, R., Henderson, B.E. & Mack, T.M. 
1991, "Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immigrants in 
Los Angeles County.", British journal of cancer, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 963-966.  
Siegel, R., Naishadham, D. & Jemal, A. 2012, "Cancer statistics, 2012.", CA: a Cancer 
Journal for Clinicians, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 10-29.  
Sies, H. & Stahl, W. 1995, "Vitamin-E and Vitamin-C, Beta-Carotene, and Other 
Carotenoids as Antioxidants", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 62, no. 
6 Suppl., pp. 1315S-S1321S.  
Stclair, W.H., Billings, P.C., Carew, J.A., Kellermcgandy, C., Newberne, P. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1990, "Suppression of Dimethylhydrazine-Induced Carcinogenesis 
in Mice by Dietary Addition of the Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor", Cancer 
research, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 580-586.  
Stclair, W.H., Billings, P.C. & Kennedy, A.R. 1990, "The Effects of the Bowman-Birk 
Protease Inhibitor on C-Myc Expression and Cell-Proliferation in the Unirradiated 
and Irradiated Mouse Colon", Cancer letters, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 145-152.  
Stclair, W.H. & Stclair, D.K. 1991, "Effect of the Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor on 
the Expression of Oncogenes in the Irradiated Rat Colon", Cancer research, vol. 
51, no. 17, pp. 4539-4543.  
Strom, S.S., Yamamura, Y., Duphorne, C.M., Spitz, M.R., Babaian, R.J., Pillow, P.C. & 
Hursting, S.D. 1999, "Phytoestrogen intake and prostate cancer: a case-control 
study using a new database", Nutrition & Cancer, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 20-25.  
Su, Z.Z., Yemul, S., Stein, C.A. & Fisher, P.B. 1995, "C-Fos is a Positive Regulator of 
Carcinogen Enhancement of Adenovirus Transformation", Oncogene, vol. 10, no. 
10, pp. 2037-2049.  
Tamir, S., Bell, J., Finlay, T.H., Sakal, E., Smirnoff, P., Gaur, S. & Birk, Y. 1996, 
"Isolation, characterization, and properties of a trypsin-chymotrypsin inhibitor from 
amaranth seeds.", Journal of protein chemistry, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 219-229.  
Tang, M., Asamoto, M., Ogawa, K., Naiki-Ito, A., Sato, S., Takahashi, S. & Shirai, T. 
2009, "Induction of apoptosis in the LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cell line and 
prostate adenocarcinomas of SV40T antigen transgenic rats by the Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor.", Pathology international, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 790-796.  
Tominaga, S. 1985, "Cancer incidence in Japanese in Japan, Hawaii, and western 
United States.", National Cancer Institute Monographs, vol. 69, pp. 83-92.  
Tu, S.M., McConnell, K., Marin, M.C., Campbell, M.L., Fernandez, A., von 
Eschenbach, A.C. & McDonnell, T.J. 1995, "Combination adriamycin and suramin 
induces apoptosis in bcl-2 expressing prostate carcinoma cells", Cancer letters, vol. 
93, no. 2, pp. 147-155.  
Tuohimaa, P., Tenkanen, L., Ahonen, M., Lumme, S., Jellum, E., Hallmans, G., Stattin, 
P., Harvei, S., Hakulinen, T., Luostarinen, T., Dillner, J., Lehtinen, M. & Hakama, 
M. 2004, "Both high and low levels of blood vitamin D are associated with a higher 
prostate cancer risk: A longitudinal, nested case-control study in the Nordic 
countries", International Journal of Cancer, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 104-108.  
Vlietstra, R.J., van Alewijk, D.C., Hermans, K.G., van Steenbrugge, G.J. & Trapman, J. 
1998, "Frequent inactivation of PTEN in prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts.", 
Cancer research, vol. 58, no. 13, pp. 2720-2723.  
Vonhofe, E., Newberne, P.M. & Kennedy, A.R. 1991, "Inhibition of N-
Nitrosomethylbenzylamine-Induced Esophageal Neoplasms by the Bowman-Birk 
Protease Inhibitor", Carcinogenesis, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 2147-2150.  
Voorhees, P.M., Dees, E.C., O'Neil, B. & Orlowski, R.Z. 2003, "The proteasome as a 
target for cancer therapy", Clinical Cancer Research, vol. 9, no. 17, pp. 6316-6325.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999a, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice.", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L.L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999b, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Wang, S.I., Parsons, R. & Ittmann, M. 1998, "Homozygous deletion of the PTEN tumor 
suppressor gene in a subset of prostate adenocarcinomas.", Clinical Cancer 
Research, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 811-815.  
Ware, J.H., Wan, X.S., Newberne, P. & Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Bowman-Birk inhibitor 
concentrate reduces colon inflammation in mice with dextran sulfate sodium-
induced ulcerative colitis", Digestive diseases and sciences, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 986-
Ware, J.H., Wan, X.S., Rubin, H., Schechter, N.M. & Kennedy, A.R. 1997, "Soybean 
Bowman-Birk protease inhibitor is a highly effective inhibitor of human mast cell 
chymase", Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, vol. 344, no. 1, pp. 133-138.  
Weed, H.G., Mcgandy, R.B. & Kennedy, A.R. 1985, "Protection Against 
Dimethylhydrazine-Induced Adenomatous Tumors of the Mouse Colon by the 
Dietary Addition of an Extract of Soybeans Containing the Bowman-Birk Protease 
Inhibitor", Carcinogenesis, vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 1239-1241.  
Whittemore, A.S., Kolonel, L.N., Wu, A.H., John, E.M., Gallagher, R.P., Howe, G.R., 
Burch, J.D., Hankin, J., Dreon, D.M. & West, D.W. 1995, "Prostate cancer in 
relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the 
United States and Canada.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 87, no. 
9, pp. 652-661.  
Witschi, H. & Kennedy, A.R. 1989, "Modulation of Lung-Tumor Development in Mice 
with the Soybean-Derived Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor", Carcinogenesis, vol. 
10, no. 12, pp. 2275-2277.  
Yavelow, J., Caggana, M. & Beck, K.A. 1987, "Proteases occurring in the cell 
membrane: a possible cell receptor for the Bowman-Birk type of protease 
inhibitors.", Cancer research, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1598-1601.  
Yavelow, J., Collins, M., Birk, Y., Troll, W. & Kennedy, A.R. 1985, "Nanomolar 
concentrations of Bowman-Birk soybean protease inhibitor suppress x-ray-induced 
transformation in vitro.", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, vol. 82, no. 16, pp. 5395-5399.  
Yavelow, J., Finlay, T.H., Kennedy, A.R. & Troll, W. 1983, "Bowman-Birk Soybean 
Protease Inhibitor as an Anticarcinogen", Cancer research, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 2454-
2459.  
Yu, H., Harris, R.E., Gao, Y.T., Gao, R. & Wynder, E.L. 1991, "Comparative 
epidemiology of cancers of the colon, rectum, prostate and breast in Shanghai, 
China versus the United States.", International journal of epidemiology, vol. 20, 
no. 1, pp. 76-81.  
Zhang, L., Wan, X.S., Donahue, J.J., Ware, J.H. & Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Effects of the 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor on clonogenic survival and cisplatin- or radiation-induced 
cytotoxicity in human breast, cervical, and head and neck cancer cells.", Nutrition 
& Cancer, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 165-173.  
Zhao, X., Gschwend, J.E., Powell, C.T., Foster, R.G., Day, K.C. & Day, M.L. 1997, 
"Retinoblastoma protein-dependent growth signal conflict and caspase activity are 
required for protein kinase C-signaled apoptosis of prostate epithelial cells.", 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 272, no. 36, pp. 22751-22757.  
Chapter 2 
Modulation of DNA damage in human prostate cancer cell lines by chickpea and 
soybean protease inhibitor concentrates 
Authors: 
Gianfranco Bartolini1, Chris I.R. Gill1, Richard Owusu-Apenten1, Ian R. Rowland2 and 
Pamela J. Magee1 
1Northern Ireland Centre for Food and Health, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Northern 
Ireland, BT52 1SA 
2Department of Food Biosciences, University of Reading, UK, RG6 6AH 
Abstract 
Epidemiological studies support a role for diets rich in legumes and pulses in prostate 
cancer prevention. A protease inhibitor from soybean (Bowman-Birk Inhibitor; BBI) 
has been shown to exert anti-cancer properties in several in vitro and in vivo 
carcinogenesis model systems, including those of prostate cancer. The anti-cancer 
effects of protease inhibitors from other legumes have been poorly investigated. BBI 
and other protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) have previously been shown to 
decrease oxidative damage by inhibiting free radical production. This mechanism may 
account for BBIs potent anti-inflammatory effects and consequently BBIs anti-cancer 
properties. The ability of PICs to modulate oxidatively-induced DNA damage is not 
fully elucidated and the aim of the current study was to determine if PICs from 
leguminous sources exert anti-genotoxic effects on LNCaP and DU 145 human prostate 
cancer cells in vitro. Cells were treated with PICs from soybean and chickpea (0.05, 0.1, 
0.3, 1 and 3 mg/ml) for 24 hours and the Comet assay was used to assess the reduction 
of  DNA strand breaks induced by a H2O2 challenge (75 M, 5 min, 4C). Purified BBI 
was used as a reference. The genotoxicity of PICs was assessed using the Comet assay 
following exposure to PBS. The toxicity of PICs was assessed in LNCaP cells using the 
MTT assay. Both soybean and chickpea PICs (1, 3mg/ml) reduced H2O2-induced DNA 
damage in LNCaP cells by up to 25.6%, although statistical significance was reached 
only with chickpea PIC (P < 0.01). Similar effects were apparent with BBI (0.1, 0.3 
mg/ml). No PIC tested was genotoxic to LNCaP cells. Pre-incubation with PICs (3 
mg/ml) also significantly modulated the level of expression of genes linked with 
detoxifying or DNA repair properties. In conclusion soybean and chickpea PICs exerted 
anti-genotoxic effects on LNCaP cells supporting previous findings that BBI and 
protease inhibitors have a protective effect on oxidative damage. Soybean and chickpea 
PICs may therefore play a role in prostate cancer prevention, however, further research 
is needed to fully understand the molecular mechanisms involved. 
Introduction 
Prostate cancer, accounting for 25 % of all new cases of cancer in males, is the most 
commonly diagnosed malignancy in men in the United Kingdom, where 40,975 new 
cases were reported in 2010 (Cancer Research UK 2012a). In Northern Ireland alone, 
there were 942 new cases of prostate cancer in the same year (Cancer Research UK 
2012b). The etiology of prostate cancer is not fully elucidated , however, given the high 
impact of this disease on the health systems of the westernized world, much effort has 
been invested in the identification of behavioral factors which could confer protection 
against it. Epidemiological evidence highlights the clear link between the intake of 
legumes and pulses and a lower risk of prostate cancer incidence (Mathers 2002, 
Schuurman et al. 1998, Mills et al. 1989, Severson et al. 1989). Multiple mechanisms 
have been proposed in relation to how leguminous food sources can modulate 
carcinogenesis in prostatic tissue, however a  wealth of research supports  the role of 
protease inhibitors of the Bowman-Birk family as potential chemopreventive agents. 
The Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI), a protease inhibitor isolated from the soybean, has 
been shown to exert anti-cancer properties in several in vitro and in vivo cancer model 
systems, including those of prostate cancer (Troll, Wiesner 1983, Kennedy, Wan 2002, 
Tang et al. 2009, McCormick et al. 2007, (Magee et al. 2012, Armstrong et al. 2013, 
Souza et al. 2014). A soybean extract enriched in BBI (BBIC) has been developed as a 
potential anti-cancer agent for human use and has achieved Investigational New Drug 
status by the US Food and Drug Administration in 1992. BBIC has been successfully 
used in clinical trials for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (Malkowicz et al. 
2001), oral leukoplakia (Armstrong et al. 2000a, Armstrong et al. 2000b) and ulcerative 
colitis (Lichtenstein et al. 2008). The precise mechanism/s through which BBI exerts its 
anti-cancer action has not been fully elucidated to date, however its protective effects 
may be due to its potent anti-inflammatory activity (Kennedy 1998) and the ability to 
inhibit  the proteolytic activity of the 26S proteasome (Chen et al. 2005) in cancer cells, 
the latter possibly being linked to a beneficial modulation of molecules involved in the 
carcinogenic pathway. Prostate cancer occurs with higher frequency in the elderly male 
(Quinn, Babb 2002, Baade, Youlden & Krnjacki 2009), presumably due to the 
accumulation of  radical-induced oxidative DNA damage (Malins et al. 2001). Reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), which can be produced by endogenous (e.g. mitochondria, 
peroxisomes, cytochrome P450, inflammatory cells) (Klaunig, Kamendulis 2004) and 
exogenous sources (e.g. UV light, inflammatory cytokines, pathogens), can cause a 
situation of oxidative stress when not efficiently counterbalanced by the cellular 
antioxidant defenses,  with consequent damage to the genetic material and initiation of 
the carcinogenic process (Fig. 1) (Klaunig, Kamendulis & Hocevar 2010).  An 
important property of BBI is the ability to prevent the release of oxygen free radicals in 
human polymorphonuclear cells and HL-60 human lymphocytic cells, thereby 
decreasing the likelihood of oxidative DNA damage (Frenkel et al. 1987). BBI is also 
known to have anti-oxidant (Huang et al. 2010) and anti-inflammatory properties 
(Kennedy 1998). The potential of BBI-type protease inhibitors as agents capable of 
inhibiting induced DNA damage in human prostate cancer cells has not been 
investigated to date. Diets rich in legumes and pulses, such as those consumed in Asian 
countries of the Pacific basin, are rich in protease inhibitors of the Bowman-Birk family 
and linked with a lower incidence of prostate cancer (Mathers 2002, Schuurman et al. 
1998, Mills et al. 1989, Severson et al. 1989) thus it is plausible that dietary PICs play a 
key role in conferring protection against prostate cancer. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the effects of protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) from soybean and 
chickpea on DNA damage in prostate cancer cells and their ability to protect against 
DNA damage induced by H2O2, an important biomarker of cancer initiation, by means 
of the Comet assay. The cell lines selected for the study, LNCaP and DU 145, constitute 
a valuable model of different stages of prostate cancer, an earlier androgen sensitive 
phase and a later androgen irresponsive stage, respectively. The MTT assay was used in 
PIC-treated LNCaP cells in order to exclude the possibility that the observed anti-
genotoxic effects were due to cytotoxic effects of the PICs. The effects of PICs on the 
expression of anti-oxidative and DNA repair genes were investigated in LNCaP cells 
using real-time PCR. 
Materials and Methods 
Tissue culture 
The prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP and DU 145 were kindly provided by Dr Jenny 
Worthington (University of Ulster). The LNCaP cell line was derived from a left 
supraclavicular lymph node metastasis of a 50 year old patient with prostate cancer 
(Horoszewicz et al. 1983). LNCaP cells are androgen dependent and express a mutated 
androgen receptor (AR) able to bind also oestrogens, in addition to being oestrogen 
sensitive via oestrogen receptors (ERs)  and  (Webber, Bello & Quader 1997).  The 
LNCaP cell line constitutes a model of early stages of prostate carcinogenesis. The DU 
145 cell line was derived from a brain metastasis of prostate carcinoma (Stone et al. 
1978). DU 145 cells are androgen receptor negative (AR-) and are a model of androgen  
independent prostate cancer, where the AR gene is not expressed due to the methylation 
of its promoter region (Chlenski et al. 2001). Cell culture media and supplements were 
purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK) unless otherwise stated. LNCaP cells were 
cultured in Roux flasks as monolayers in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 
2.0mM L-glutamine, 10.0mM Hepes (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK), 1% penicillin-
streptomycin, 12.5 mM glucose in genomic grade water (sterilized with a 0.22 m filter) 
and 10% foetal bovine serum. DU 145 cells were cultured in Roux flasks as monolayers 
in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin and 10% foetal 
bovine serum. Cells were incubated at 37 C with 5% CO2 and 95% filtered air and 
harvested when a confluency < 75% was reached. For cell subculturing the medium was 
removed from the flasks and the cells were rinsed with PBS for 2 min (LNCaP cells 
were not washed with PBS to avoid cell dislodgement due to the weaker attachment to 
the growth surface of the flask), and re-suspended by the addition of trypsin (0.25% 
trypsin-EDTA) at 37C for 3-5 min. Cells were centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 3 min and 
the cell pellets were resuspended in their specific growth medium. Cell viability was 
assessed by the trypan blue exclusion assay using a Neubauer hemocytometer (50 l of 
cell suspension + 50 l of tryplan blue dye) (Pool-zobel et al. 1994) and a cell count 
was performed under an inverted microscope using a 20x objective.  
Preparation of Protease inhibitor concentrates 
Protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) were extracted from soybeans and chickpeas 
purchased from Neals Yard (Burton upon Trent, UK) and that had been grown and 
packed to organic standard. PICs were prepared from acetone defatted flour and 
subsequently freeze-dried, according to a cold temperature method developed in house 
based on a modification of the one described by Kassell (1970). To prepare the legume 
flour, soybeans and chickpeas were ground and the powder was dispensed in a beaker 
and covered with  an approximately equal volume of acetone GPR. The flour was 
stirred for one hour and after two hours the acetone phase, containing isoflavones, was 
removed. The acetone extraction was repeated three times and the flour was eventually 
air dried. Subsequently, 600 ml of deionized water was dispensed in a beaker and the 
pH was adjusted to 5.0 (a pH range of 5.0  5.5 was considered acceptable). 100 g of 
legumes (i.e. soybean or chickpea) were weighed out and added to the previous beaker, 
and stirred for at least 60 minutes, so as to allow the protein fraction, having a low 
solubility, to precipitate. The pH was monitored throughout the process, and, if 
necessary, adjusted to the required value (i.e. 5.0  5.5) with HCl or NaOH. The flour / 
water mixture was then centrifuged (3000 rpm, 10 C, 10 minutes) and the aqueous 
soluble fraction was paper filtered and three times the volume of acetone was added  to 
allow the precipitation of the Bowman-Birk Inhibitor and left overnight. The acetone 
was then decanted, leaving a small amount covering the powder and the residual powder 
/ acetone was paper filtered to virtually dry. The filter was removed and put in a beaker 
with 100 ml of deionized water and stirred to resuspend the powder. Following the filter 
removal, the powder was stirred for 30 minutes and the mixture was then dispensed in 
50 ml centrifuge tubes. The tubes were centrifuged (8000 rpm, 4 C, 10 minutes) and 
stored at -70 C for 24 hours, and then freeze-dried. The aliquots from several 
preparations were mixed to make a batch of PIC that was used for all studies within the 
PhD research project and stored at -20 C. PICs isolated from soybean and chickpea 
were assigned the codes PIC5 and PIC7, respectively. For genotoxicity and cytotoxicity 
testing (Comet assay and the MTT assay) dilutions (0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3 mg/ml) were 
obtained from a 3 mg/ml stock solution prepared by dissolving the required amount of 
PIC powder in the appropriate growth medium, previously warmed  in a water bath at 
37 C. Briefly, the powder was weighed out and added to the appropriate amount of 
medium in a 25 ml universal tube. The tube was vortexed for 2 min and then the 
medium with PIC was transferred into a beaker and stirred for 2 hours. The mixture was 
subsequently centrifuged (8000 rpm, 4 C, 30 min) to remove starches and the 
supernatant syringe filtered (0.22 m). Commercially available BBI (Sigma-Aldrich) 
was used as a control at 0.3 and 0.1 mg/ml. A 0.3 mg/ml stock solution was prepared by 
dissolving the powder in previously warmed growth medium by vortexing and the 0.1 
mg/ml solution was then prepared and filtered with a 0.22 m filter. 
Analysis of PIC protein concentration 
The net protein and peptide content of PICs was determined by using the manual 
Ninhydrin assay (Hirst, 1967; Brewer et al., 1995). This method is based on the 
hydrolysis of protein and peptides into the constituent amino acids, which are then 
neutralized to pH 4  7 and reacted with ninhydrin (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). A 
colorimeter is used to detect the colour formed at 570 m (E = 20,000 M-1 cm-1). To 
carry out the analysis, 150 l of a 1 mg/ml PIC solution in deionized water was pipetted 
into propylene tubes and oven dried (110 C, 2 hours). Then 150 l of 10.0 M NaOH 
was added and the tubes were autoclaved at 121 C (15 psi) for 20 minutes. The 
samples were neutralized with concentrated glacial acetic acid (250 l) until the pH was 
higher than 4 and transferred to glass tubes. Two ml of 15 mM PBS was added to the 
tubes followed by 0.5 ml of ninhydrin solution. The mixture was boiled for 15 minutes 
and allowed to cool, and 2.5 ml of ethanol (50 % v/v) was added. The tubes were 
vortexed, and absorbance readings were recorded at 570 m. Isoleucine  (1.5 mM; 50 
l) was prepared as a standard and treated as per the samples. The analysis of PIC 
protein concentration was determined as the average of at least three independent 
experiments carried out in triplicate. 
Determination of PIC chymotrypsin inhibitor activity (CIA) 
The activity of PICs was measured as chymotrypsin inhibitor activity (CIA), where one 
CIA unit is defined as the amount of PIC needed for the inhibition of one unit of 
chymotrypsin according to the Hummel Assay (Rafiq, Bailey 1998); a unit of 
chymotrypsin is the amount of enzyme required for the hydrolysis of 10-6 moles of N-
benzoyl tyrosine p-nitroanilide (BTNA) per minute. The activity of chymotrypsin was 
determined using 1 mg/ml solution of commercial chymotrypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, 
Dorset, UK). Differing amounts of enzyme (10, 25, 50, 100 l) were aliquoted in 1.5 ml 
cuvettes with 12.5 l of BTNA (Sigma-Aldrich) and 900 l of reaction buffer (50 mM 
Tris, 20 mM CaCl2 pH 8.2). The mixture was incubated at constant temperature and 
absorbance was read at 410 m using a spectrophotometer. The absorbance was 
recorded again after ten minutes. To determine the CIA, PICs were dissolved in reaction 
buffer by vortexing at a concentration of 2 mg/ml. Different aliquots of the PICs 
solution (0, 10, 25, 50 l) were then added to Eppendorf tubes with 18 l of 1 mg/ml 
chymotrypsin in 1 mM HCl, and the final volume was brought to 100 l with reaction 
buffer. The Eppendorf tubes were left at room temperature for 10 minutes, then the 
solution PIC / chymotrypsin was aliquoted in cuvettes with 900 l of reaction buffer and 
12.5 l of 10 mM BTNA in DMSO. The absorbance was read at 410 m with a 
spectrophotometer and a further reading was carried out after 10 minutes. PIC 
chymotrypsin activity was determined as the average of at least two independent 
experiments carried out in triplicate. 
Comet Assay 
The Comet assay exploits a single-cell gel electrophoresis (SCGE) and is a sensitive and 
rapid technique for measuring and analyzing DNA damage leading to strand breakage in 
individual eukaryotic cells. The Comet assay is widely used for testing the genotoxic 
potential of chemicals and for cancer research. The assay is also used for assessing 
potential anti-cancer properties of dietary compounds / extracts in terms of reduction of 
DNA damage induced by an oxidant such as hydrogen peroxide (Gill et al. 2005). The 
damaged DNA (single-strand or double-strand breaks)  loses its supercoiling and is free 
to migrate towards the anode during the electrophoretic process (Collins 2004), 
resulting in structures resembling comets, with the heads containing intact DNA 
(Figure 2). The cells are observed using a fluorescence microscope and the amount of 
DNA displaced from the comet head is directly proportional to the extent of DNA 
damage. 
The assay was carried out as described by Gill et al. (2005). 3.8x105 DU145 cells and 
1.5x106 LNCaP cells were seeded in 25 cm2 flasks. Cells were incubated for 24 hours 
before pre-treatment with PICs. LNCaP and DU 145 cells were incubated with selected 
concentrations of PICs (0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3 mg/ml for soybean and chickpea PICs; 
0.1, 0.3 mg/ml for BBI) for 24 hours before being harvested. A cell suspension of 
1.5x105 cells/ml was obtained and 450 l were dispensed  in 1.5 ml eppendorf tubes and 
were challenged with 50 l of H2O2 (Sigma-Aldrich) (75 M for LNcaP cells and 200 
M for DU 145 cells) or PBS, for positive and negative controls, respectively, for 5 min 
on ice. The eppendorf tubes were then centrifuged for 5 min at 1250 rpm at 4 C and the 
supernatant removed and replaced with warm (40 C) low melting point agar (0.85 % in 
PBS). 85 l of the mixture of low melting agar/ cell suspension was dispensed onto 
chilled normal melting agar gels (previously prepared on frosted slides) and covered 
with a coverslip. Gels were allowed to set in the fridge for approximatley 15 min. The 
coverslips were removed and the slides were immersed for 1 hour at 4 C in lysis buffer 
(2.5 M NaCl, 100 mM Na2EDTA, 10mM TRIS, pH 10.0) with 1% Triton-X added 
immediately prior to use. The slides were then transferred to the electrophoresis tank 
with the electrophoresis buffer (300 mM NaOH/ 1mM EDTA) for 20 min, to allow the 
DNA to unwind before running the electrophoresis at 26 V, 300 mA, 4 C, 20 min. 
After electrophoresis, the slides were collected and washed (3 times, 3 min each) with 
neutralising buffer (0.4 M TRIS, pH 7.5). Each gel was then stained with 20 l of 
ethidium bromide (20 g/ml) and coverslips added. The gels were visualised with a 
Nikon Eclipse 600 epi-fluorescence microscope (400x magnification) and analysed by 
means of Komet 3.0 image analysis software (Kinetic Imaging Ltd, Liverpool, UK). It 
is important to note that the Comet assay is prone to subjectivity due to the manual 
input of software gating. 100 cells were analysed for each gel and the mean DNA 
damage of each sample was calculated from 3 gels. The mean values from at least 3 
independent experiments were used in the statistical analysis.  
MTT viability assay 
The MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay is a 
method that detects cell viability as a response to external factors and is based on the 
theoretical principle of the ability of a dehydrogenase enzyme from the mitochondria of 
viable cells to reduce the tetrazolium rings of the pale yellow MTT, with the subsequent 
formation of purple formazan crystals. The ability of cells to cleave MTT is indicative 
of the degree of their mitochondrial / cellular respiration. The formazan crystals 
accumulate in the cell, due to their inability to pass through the cell membrane. They 
can be solubilized by a detergent and quantified by spectrophotometric analysis 
(Mosmann 1983). Fifty thousand cells in 100 l of growth medium were seeded in each 
well of a 96-well plate. The cells were incubated for 24 hours to obtain a firm 
monolayer, then medium was tapped out onto tissue paper and the PIC treatment (0.05  
3 mg/ml) was added (100 l/well). Eight replicates of each treatment were performed. 
Growth medium was used as a negative control and commercially available soybean 
BBI was used as a positive control. The cells were exposed to the treatment for 24 
hours. At the end of the treatment period  the cells were washed with PBS and 15 l of 
MTT dye solution (0.5mg/ml of MTT powder, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS and sterilized 
with a 0.22 m filter was added to each well and the plates were incubated at 37 C in a 
humidified incubator (95 % air, 5 % CO2) for 4 hours. 100 l of solubilizing solution 
(89.2 % isopropanol (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 % Triton-X (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.8 % HCl) was 
then added to wells and the plates were placed back in the incubator overnight. The 
plates were eventually read at 570 m, reference 650 m with a VERSAmax microplate 
reader and results analysed with the SoftMax Pro 5.4 software. The results were 
presented as % viability normalized to the negative control. Each experiment was 
repeated on at least 3 independent occasions.  
Quantitative real-time PCR 
LNCaP cells were seeded in 25cm2 tissue culture flasks (106 cells per flask) and 
incubated for 24 hours at 37 C, 5 % CO2, before treatment. Growth medium was then 
removed and the cells were treated with soybean or chickpea  PICs (0 and 3 mg/ml, 
prepared as described for the Comet and the MTT assays) for 96 hours, with the 
treatment refreshed after 48 hours. At the end of the treatment period cells were 
harvested and counted by means of the trypan blue exclusion test using a Neubauer 
hemocytometer, as described previously. RNA was isolated from cells following 
homogenization with QIAshredder homogenizers using an RNeasy Mini Kit and treated 
with DNase I (Qiagen, Crawley, Germany) according to the manufacturers guidelines. 
cDNA was synthesized using the Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche 
Diagnostics, Penzberg, Germany). Briefly, 2.5 g total RNA was mixed with PCR-
grade water and 2 l Random Hexamer Primer to give a final volume of 13 l. To the 
tube  containing the  template-primer mixture was then added a mix containing 4 l 
Transcriptor Reverse Transcriptase Reaction Buffer, 0.5 l Protector RNase Inhibitor, 2 
l Deoxynucleotide Mix, 0.5 l Transcriptor Reverse Transcriptase. The resulting 20 l 
mix was subjected to 25C for 10 minutes, followed by 55C for 30 minutes, and 85C 
for 5 minutes. The reaction tubes were stored at -20C prior to use. Gene expression 
quantification was carried out using RealTime ready Custom Panel Plates (Roche 
Diagnostics) containing function tested assays for genes  with anti-oxidant or DNA 
repair function (see Table 1), and beta-actin (ACTB), glyceraldeide-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (HPRT1) as 
reference genes. Genes tested were SOD1, SOD2, GSTA1, GSTA4, GPX1, GPX4, 
CAT, ATM, ATR, AC103686.3, and were chosen on the basis of their specific role in 
protection against DNA damage and in the etiology of prostate cancer. Real-time qPCR 
was carried out in triplicate by means of the LightCycler 480 instrument (Roche 
Diagnostics) using 10 l LightCycler 480 Probes Master (Roche Diagnostics), 50 g 
cDNA and genomic-grade water for a final volume of 20 l per well. The plates, 
covered with an optical adhesive cover, were exposed to the following  thermal  cycler 
conditions: +95C for 10 minutes, 45 cycles of +95C for 10 seconds, +60C for 30 
seconds, +72C for 1 second and a final cooling step at +40C for 30 seconds. The 
relative quantification of target gene transcripts in comparison to a reference gene 
transcript was calculated using the mathematical model developed by Pfaffl (2001). 
Statistical analysis 
Differences between means were evaluated using ANOVA with LSD post-hoc analysis 
or the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U tests for not normally 
distributed datasets. SPSS statistical package (version 20) was used to perform all 
statistical analysis. 
Results 
Characteristics of PIC Samples 
The crude protein (Cp) content for soybean and chickpea PICs was 29.1  2.6 % and 
25.2  1.9 %, respectively (Table 2). CIA activity was 229.7  12.2 CIA/mg for 
soybean PIC and 154.3  29.1 CIA/mg for chickpea PIC (Table 2). The PIC specific 
activity was 790.6 CIA/mg protein and 611.4 CIA/mg protein for soybean and chickpea, 
respectively (Table 2). Values are expressed as means  SEM. 
Comet Assay 
Genotoxic effects were not observed following pre-incubation (24 h) of LNCaP cells 
with PICs at any of the concentrations tested (Figure 3). Significant anti-genotoxic 
effects were exerted by  chickpea PIC after 24 h pre-incubation in LNCaP cells at 1 and 
3 mg/ml. (Figure 3)  with H2O2 induced damage significantly reduced by 15.4 and 14.1 
%, respectively (P < 0.01). Soybean PIC at the same concentrations produced a 
reduction in % DNA tail of 15.6 and 25.6 %, although statistical significance was not 
quite reached (one-way ANOVA P = 0.056).        
The anti-genotoxic effects of purified BBI in LNCaP cells are shown in Figure 4, where 
equal concentrations of soybean PIC are also represented as a comparison. Pure BBI 
proved to have more potent effects than soybean and chickpea PICs compared to the 
control, with a % reduction of DNA damage of 20 % (P < 0.01) and 15.6 % (P < 0.05) 
for 0.1 and 0.3 mg/ml, respectively, although there was not a statistically significant 
difference between the effect of BBI and soybean / chickpea PIC. Pure BBI did not 
exert genotoxic effects in LNCaP cells (data not shown). 
The effects of soybean and chickpea PICs on the DU 145 cell ine are represented in 
Figure 5. Soybean and chickpea PICs exerted no significant anti-genotoxic effects in 
hydrogen peroxide challenged DU 145 cells.  
In contrast to LNCaP cells, the 2 selected concentrations of purified BBI did not exert 
any anti-genotoxic effects on DU 145 cells, as shown in Figure 6. 
Pre-incubation of DU145 cells with PICs and BBI did not induce any genotoxic activity 
(Figure 5 data not shown for BBI). 
MTT viability assay 
The effects of soybean / chickpea PICs and BBI on the proliferation of LNCaP cells are 
shown in Figure 7.  Exposure of LNCaP cells to PICs or BBI for 24 hours did not 
significantly inhibit cell viability at any of the concentrations tested. 
Quantitative real-time PCR 
To investigate wether the anti-genotoxic effects exerted by PICs were mediated via the 
modulation of the expression of genes with anti-oxidant or DNA repair function, 
quantitative gene expression anlaysis was conducted by means of real-time PCR. The 
effects of 96-h incubation with soybean and chickpea PICs on the level of expression of 
genes involved in anti-oxidative or DNA repair pathways are shown in figure 8. 
Treatment with chickpea PIC  induced a  53.4 % increase in the expression of 
mitochondrial superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD 2) gene (P < 0.01), while soybean PIC 
exerted a significant downregulation of the same gene (28.6 %, P < 0.01). Both PICs 
significantly increased the expression of the ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related 
protein (ATR) gene (32.9 % and 22 % for chickpea and soybean PIC, respectively, P < 
0.05). Although treatment with PICs appeared to upregulate the expression of the other 
genes analysed, statistical significance was not reached. 
Discussion 
The present study has demonstrated, for the first time,  the ability of PICs from soybean 
and chickpea to inhibit DNA damage induced by H2O2 in LNCaP prostate cancer cells 
and to modulate the expression of genes linked to anti-oxidative or DNA repair 
processes. To date there is a lack of scientific evidence demonstrating the modulation of 
oxidative DNA damage exerted by PICs in prostate cancer cells. The findings of this 
study show  that chickpea PIC and BBI confer to LNCaP cells an increased cellular 
capacity to protect against oxidative damage, as demonstrated by the ability to inhibit 
induced DNA damage, following H2O2 insult. The observed anti-genotoxic activity was 
not associated with cytotoxic effects, as assessed by means of the MTT assay. Purified 
BBI exerted significant anti-genotoxic activity in LNCaP cells at lower concentrations 
than the other tested PICs, likely due to a greater amount of the active compund being 
present in the purified BBI sample. Differences in the biochemical composition might 
also account for the different effects observed in soybean and chickpea PICs.  
PICs were characterised in terms of CIA, however several bioactive compounds might 
be present and responsible for their biological activity. Magee et al (2012) report the 
presence of a 4000 Da peptide, possibly lunasin, determined by mass spectrometry in 
PIC samples from various leguminous sources. Lunasin is known for its anti-cancer 
properties (Hernandez-Ledesma, Hsieh & de Lumen 2013, Lam, Galvez & de Lumen 
2003, Galvez et al. 2001) and the further analysis of PIC extracts by means of mass 
spectrometry, sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 
or antioxidant enzyme assays would help identify the key agents responsible for the 
observed biological activity. 
To date, there is only little experimental evidence for the anti-cancer potential of 
chickpea (Giron-Calle et al. 2004) and chickpea PIC (Yavelow et al. 1985, Magee et al. 
2012), so the choice of this legume as the source for the extract was considered 
important for the advancement of scientific knowledge in this area. In contrast to 
LNCaP cells, PICs did not exert significant effects on  DNA damage in DU145 cells. 
This may be due to the fact that the two cell lines model different stages of 
carcinogenesis. LNCaP cells are a model of an early androgen responsive prostate 
cancer, thus BBI might be more effective at inhibiting the initiation process triggered by 
DNA oxidants and might act through a different mechanism as the cancer progresses to 
a later androgen independent stage. This is interesting especially in light of the potential 
use of BBI as a chemopreventive agent, capable of decreasing the risk of developing 
prostate cancer. From this perspective, it is also important to note that the tested PICs 
were not genotoxic at any of the concentrations tested. This finding correlates well with 
a study by Farombi et al.  (2004) where background levels of DNA strand breaks or 
oxidation in liver and colon cells isolated from rats were not affected by dietary 
supplementation with BBI (0.25 and 0.5 %), as assessed by means of the Comet assay. 
LNCaP cells were more prone to H2O2-induced DNA damage than DU145 cells, and 
this is consistent with their higher sensitivity to agents that induce disruption of  genetic 
mterial, such as ionising radiation (Sun et al. 2007), possibly due to functional p53 (van 
Bokhoven et al. 2003) and lower activity of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) (Josson et al. 
2006); the latter is also antagonised by the androgen receptor (Palvimo et al. 1996, 
McKay, Cidlowski 1999). This also correlates with the development of radio-resistance 
of tumour cells following radiotherapy administered in early stage prostate cancer 
(Skvortsova et al. 2008, An et al. 2007), leading to progression to a more aggressive and 
metastatic stage, and supports the potential role of PICs as an adjuvant treatment to 
radiation therapy. The findings of the study also support the documented anti-cancer 
activity of BBI in in vitro and in vivo models of prostate cancer where protective effects 
were observed (Kennedy, Wan 2002, Tang et al. 2009, McCormick et al. 2007, Wan et 
al. 1999). Oxidative DNA damage is an important mutagenic and apparently 
carcinogenic factor  in humans (Loft, Poulsen 1996, Valko et al. 2006, Valavanidis, 
Vlachogianni & Fiotakis 2009) and is involved in the initiation process of 
carcinogenesis. The mechanisms through which PICs exert their observed anti-
genotoxic effects are not fully elucidated to date, however they can be linked to 
antioxidant status or stimulation of DNA repair. A recent study by Huang et al. (2010) 
demonstrated the antioxidant and thus free radical scavenging  activity of BBI in a 
series of in vitro experiments, highlighting the ability to protect against hydroxyl 
radical-induced calf thymus DNA damage. BBI has the ability to suppress the 
production and release of superoxide anion radicals from purified human 
polymorphonuclear cells (Frenkel et al. 1987) and differentiated HL-60 human 
promyeloid leukemic cells in vitro (Ware, Wan & Kennedy 1999), thus decreasing 
oxidative damage to DNA possibly resulting in malignantly transformed phenotypes. 
BBI is involved in the activation of the expression of genes responsible for DNA repair, 
as shown by Dittmnn et al. (1998) in irradiated normal human skin fibroblast.  BBI also 
improves nucleotide excision repair in vitro, (Dittmann et al. 2001, Dittmann et al. 
2000), however, the DNA lesions measured by the Comet assay in the present study are 
strand breaks, thus a different pathway may be involved. The results obtained by real-
time PCR shed light on the molecular pathways through which PICs might reduce 
oxidative DNA damage. It is known that the expression of antioxidant enzymes is lower 
in prostate cancer compared to healthy prostatic epithelium (Bostwick et al. 2000), with 
a shift in the prooxidant-antioxidant balance toward a more oxidative state (Ripple et al. 
1997). The incidence of prostate cancer increases with age (Sakr et al. 1994) and this is 
consistent with an age related decrease in the antioxidant defense mechanisms (Mo, 
Hom & Anderson 1995, Warner 1994) which can in turn lead to a progressive 
accumulation of DNA strand breaks (He, Yasumoto 1994). Treatment of LNCaP cells 
with 3 mg/ml chickpea PIC significantly increased the expression of SOD2, an isoform 
of the superoxide dismutase family (SOD) whose transcript is a mitochondrial enzyme 
with the ability to scavenge superoxide anion radical (Fridovich 1997). Chickpea PIC 
also increased the expression of ATR gene, encoding for a signalling molecule involved 
in DNA damage response (DDR) and cell cycle progression, in a statistically significant 
fashion. While exerting a similar effect on ATR gene expression, soybean PIC 
interestingly significantly downregulated the expression of SOD2 gene. Several studies 
have been published on the anti-oxidant  activity of soy products and soy components 
such as isoflavones, resulting in an increase of SOD activity in various in vitro and in 
vivo model sytems (Liu, Chang & Wiesenborn 2005, Hagen et al. 2009, Barbosa, 
Lajolo & Genovese 2011, Byun, Han & Lee 2010, DiSilvestro et al. 2005, Ho et al. 
2003), however there is a paucity of data on the effects of PICs from the Bowman-Birk 
family. The different effects exerted by soybean and chickpea PICs on the expression of 
SOD2 gene might  reflect different mechanisms of action through which they act. The 
effects of BBI on the expression of the aforementioned genes have not been investigated 
to date. Although treatment with PICs appeared to upregulate the expression of the 
other genes analysed, concurrent with a previous study demonstrating an upregualtion 
of anti-oxidant genes in prostate LAPC-4 cells following genistein treatment (Raschke 
et al. 2006), these effects were not significant. It is worth considering, when studying 
the potential mechanisms through which PICs modulate H2O2-induced DNA damage, 
the experimental limitation posed by the different exposure times and doses used in the 
Comet and Mtt assay versus quantitative real-time PCR (0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3 mg/ml for 
24 hours and 3 mg/ml for 96 hours, respectively). 
To summarize, the present study used an in vitro bioassay to demonstrate the anti-
genotoxic activity  of PICs from soybean and chickpea against H2O2 insult in LNCaP 
prostate cancer cells. These findings support the chemopreventive potential of BBI 
against prostate carcinogenesis and highlight a possible target for these dietary 
compounds, corresponding to  inhibition of the initiation stage of prostate cancer, 
during which events leading to DNA damage take place. Further investigation is needed 
to address the mechanisms through which the anti-genotoxic activity of PICs is exerted.  
The investigation of the effects of PICs on H2O2-induced DNA damage and on genes 
with anti-genotoxic functions should also be carried out under the same experimental 
conditions with regards to dose and exposure time. 
Figure 1 - Oxidative damage induced by ROS and its role in carcinogenesis. From 
Klaunig et al. (2010) 
Figure 2  Various stages of DNA damage as observed using the Comet assay, from 
control (left) to severe damage (right) 
Table 1 
Genes analysed by means of Real-Time PCR and  function of proteins encoded 
SOD1 responsible for destroying harmful free superoxide radicals in the body, converting 
them to molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide 
SOD2 encodes a mitochondrial protein that binds to the superoxide byproducts of 
oxidative phosphorylation and converts them to hydrogen peroxide and diatomic 
oxygen 
GSTA1 detoxification of electrophilic compounds, including carcinogens, therapeutic drugs, 
environmental toxins and products of oxidative stress, by conjugation with 
glutathione 
GSTA4 involved in cellular defense against toxic, carcinogenic, and pharmacologically 
active electrophilic compounds 
GPX1 encodes a member of the glutathione peroxidase family functioning in the 
detoxification of hydrogen peroxide 
GPX4 reduction of hydrogen peroxide, organic hydroperoxide, and lipid peroxides 
CAT encodes catalase, a key antioxidant enzyme converting the reactive oxygen species 
hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen 
ATM encodes a protein functioning as cell cycle checkpoint kinase important for  cell 
response to DNA damage and for genome stability 
ATR encodes a protein required for cell cycle arrest and DNA damage repair in response 
to DNA damage 
AC103686.3 encodes the catalytic subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) with 
functions in DNA double strand break repair and recombination 
Table 2 
Characterisation of PIC extracts 
 PIC source 
 Soybean Chickpea 
Crude protein content (Cp) % 29.1  2.6 25.2  1.9 
CIA activity (CIA/mg) 229.7  12.2 154.3  29.1 
Specific activity (CIA/mg protein) 790.6 611.4 
Data shown are the mean of at least two independent experiments  SEM 
Figure 3  Genotoxic and anti-genotoxic effects of soybean and chickpea PICs (24-h 
incubation) in LNCaP cells. n = 3, 75 M hydrogen peroxide challenge. *P < 0.01 vs. 
control; ANOVA, LSD post-hoc test . Values represent the mean  SEM. 
Figure 4 Anti-genotoxic effects of purified BBI and soybean PIC (24-h incubation) in 
LNCaP cells. n = 3, 75 M hydrogen peroxide challenge. *P < 0.05 vs. control; 
ANOVA, LSD post-hoc test . Values represent the  mean  SEM. 
Figure 5  Genotoxic and anti-genotoxic effects of soybean and chickpea PICs (24-h 
incubation) in DU 145 cells. n = 3, 200 M hydrogen peroxide challenge. Values 
represent the mean  SEM. 
Figure 6 Anti-genotoxic effects of purified BBI and soybean PIC (24-h incubation ) in 
DU 145 cells. n = 3, 200 M hydrogen peroxide challenge. Values represent the mean  
Figure 7 - Effect of soybean / chickpea PIC and BBI (24-h incubation) on the viability 
of LNCaP prostate cancer cells as assessed by means of the MTT assay . n = 3, values 
represent the mean  SEM normalized to untreated cells (control).  
Figure 8  Effects of soybean / chickpea PIC (96-h incubation at 3 mg/ml) on the 
expression of genes with anti-oxidative or DNA repair properties, as determined by 
quantitative real-time PCR. n=3, * P < 0.05 vs. control, Kruskal-Wallis with Mann-
Whitney U test; ** P < 0.01 vs. control, ANOVA, LSD post-hoc test LSD. n = 3, values 
represent the mean of relative gene expression based on untreated control  SEM 
normalized to control. SOD1 = superoxide dismutase 1; SOD2 = superoxide dismutase 
2; GSTA1 = glutathione S-transferase alpha 1; GSTA4 = glutathione S-transferase alpha 
4; GPX1 = glutathione peroxidase 1; GPX4 = glutathione peroxidase 4; CAT = catalase; 
ATM = ataxia telangiectasia mutated; ATR = ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related; 
AC103686.3 = DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit. 
References 
An, J., Chervin, A.S., Nie, A., Ducoff, H.S. & Huang, Z. 2007, "Overcoming the 
radioresistance of prostate cancer cells with a novel Bcl-2 inhibitor", Oncogene, 
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 652-661.  
Armstrong, W.B., Kennedy, A.R., Wan, X.S., Atiba, J., McLaren, E. & Meyskens, F.L. 
2000a, "Single-dose administration of Bowman-Birk inhibitor concentrate in 
patients with oral leukoplakia", Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, 
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 43-47.  
Armstrong, W.B., Kennedy, A.R., Wan, X.S., Taylor, T.H., Nguyen, Q.A., Jensen, J., 
Thompson, W., Lagerberg, W. & Meyskens, F.L. 2000b, "Clinical modulation of 
oral leukoplakia and protease activity by Bowman-Birk inhibitor concentrate in a 
phase IIa chemoprevention trial", Clinical Cancer Research, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 
4684-4691.  
Armstrong, W.B., Taylor, T.H., Kennedy, A.R., Melrose, R.J., Messadi, D.V., Gu, M., 
Le, A.D., Perloff, M., Civantos, F., Goodwin, W.J., Wirth, L.J., Kerr, A.R. & 
Meyskens, F.L., Jr. 2013, "Bowman Birk Inhibitor Concentrate and Oral 
Leukoplakia: A Randomized Phase IIb Trial", Cancer Prevention Research, vol. 6, 
no. 5, pp. 410-418.  
Baade, P.D., Youlden, D.R. & Krnjacki, L.J. 2009, "International epidemiology of 
prostate cancer: Geographical distribution and secular trends", Molecular Nutrition 
& Food Research, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 171-184.  
Barbosa, A.C.L., Lajolo, F.M. & Genovese, M.I. 2011, "Effect of free or protein-
associated soy isoflavones on the antioxidant status in rats", Journal of the science 
of food and agriculture, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 721-731.  
Bostwick, D., Alexander, E., Singh, R., Shan, A., Qian, J., Santella, R., Oberley, L., 
Yan, T., Zhong, W., Jiang, X. & Oberley, T. 2000, "Antioxidant enzyme 
expression and reactive oxygen species damage in prostatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia and cancer", Cancer, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 123-134.  
Byun, J.S., Han, Y.S. & Lee, S.S. 2010, "The Effects of Yellow Soybean, Black 
Soybean, and Sword Bean on Lipid Levels and Oxidative Stress in Ovariectomized 
Rats", International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 
97-106.  
Cancer Research UK 2012a, Prostate cancer incidence statistics [Homepage of Cancer 
Research UK], [Online]. Available: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-
info/cancerstats/types/prostate/incidence/ [15 November 2012, .  
Cancer Research UK 2012b, , Prostate cancer incidence statistics [Homepage of 
Cancer Research UK], [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-info/cancerstats/types/prostate/incidence/ 
[2013, May, 3rd].  
Chen, Y.W., Huang, S.C., Lin-Shiau, S.Y. & Lin, J.K. 2005, "Bowman-Birk inhibitor 
abates proteasome function and suppresses the proliferation of MCF7 breast cancer 
cells through accumulation of MAP kinase phosphatase-1.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 
26, no. 7, pp. 1296-1306.  
Chlenski, A., Nakashiro, K., Ketels, K.V., Korovaitseva, G.I. & Oyasu, R. 2001, 
"Androgen receptor expression in androgen independent prostate cancer cell lines", 
Prostate, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 66-75.  
Collins, A.R. 2004, "The comet assay for DNA damage and repair - Principles, 
applications, and limitations", Molecular biotechnology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 249-
DiSilvestro, R., Goodman, J., Dy, E. & LaValle, G. 2005, "Soy isoflavone 
supplementation elevates erythrocyte superoxide dismutase, but not plasma 
ceruloplasmin in postmenopausal breast cancer survivors", Breast cancer research 
and treatment, vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 251-255.  
Dittmann, K., Knaus-Dittmann, D., Mayer, C. & Rodemann, H.P. 2001, "Bowman-Birk 
proteinase inhibitor-mediated radioprotection against UV irradiation is TP53-
dependent and associated with stimulation of nucleotide excision repair", Radiation 
and environmental biophysics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 163-167.  
Dittmann, K.H., Dikomey, E., Mayer, C. & Rodemann, H.P. 2000, "The Bowman-Birk 
protease inhibitor enhances clonogenic cell survival of ionizing radiation-treated 
nucleotide excision repair-competent cells but not of xeroderma pigmentosum 
cells", International journal of radiation biology, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 223-229.  
Dittmann, K.H., Gueven, N., Mayer, C. & Rodemann, H.P. 1998, "The radioprotective 
effect of BBI is associated with the activation of DNA repair-relevant genes", 
International journal of radiation biology, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 225-230.  
Farombi, E.O., Hansen, M., Ravn-Haren, G., Moller, P. & Dragsted, L.O. 2004, 
"Commonly consumed and naturally occurring dietary substances affect 
biomarkers of oxidative stress and DNA damage in healthy rats", Food and 
Chemical Toxicology, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1315-1322.  
Frenkel, K., Chrzan, K., Ryan, C.A., Wiesner, R. & Troll, W. 1987, "Chymotrypsin-
specific protease inhibitors decrease H2O2 formation by activated human 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1207-1212.  
Fridovich, I. 1997, "Superoxide anion radical (O-2 radical anion), superoxide 
dismutases, and related matters", Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 272, no. 30, 
pp. 18515-18517.  
Galvez, A., Chen, N., Macasieb, J. & De Lumen, B. 2001, Chemopreventive property 
of a soybean peptide (lunasin) that binds to deacetylated histones and inhibits 
acetylation, Cancer research, vol. 61, no. 20, pp. 7473-7478. 
Gill, C.I.R., Boyd, A., McDermott, E., McCann, M., Servili, M., Selvaggini, R., 
Taticchi, A., Esposto, S., Montedoro, G., McGlynn, H. & Rowland, I. 2005, 
"Potential anti-cancer effects of virgin olive oil phenols on colorectal 
carcinogenesis models in vitro", International Journal of Cancer, vol. 117, no. 1, 
pp. 1-7.  
Giron-Calle, J., Vioque, J., del Mar Yust, M., Pedroche, J., Alaiz, M. & Millan, F. 2004, 
"Effect of chickpea aqueous extracts, organic extracts, and protein concentrates on 
cell proliferation", Journal of Medicinal Food, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 122-129.  
Hagen, M.K., Lehenbauer-Ludke, A.R., Paludo, A.C., Schenkel, P., Goncalves, L., 
Fernandes, T.G., Caron, R., Llesuy, S., Mill, J.G. & Bello-Klein, A. 2009, "Diet 
with isolated soy protein reduces oxidative stress and preserves ventricular function 
in rats with myocardial infarction", Nutrition Metabolism and Cardiovascular 
Diseases, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 91-97.  
He, P. & Yasumoto, K. 1994, "Dietary Butylated Hydroxytoluene Counteracts with 
Paraquat to Reduce the Rate of Hepatic Dna Single-Strand Breaks in Senescence-
Accelerated Mice", Mechanisms of ageing and development, vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 43-
Hernandez-Ledesma, B., Hsieh, C.-. & De Lumen, B.O. 2013, Chemopreventive 
Properties of Peptide Lunasin: A Review, Protein and Peptide Letters, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 424-432.  
Ho, K., Li, L., Zhao, L. & Qian, Z. 2003, "Genistein protects primary cortical neurons 
from iron-induced lipid peroxidation", Molecular and cellular biochemistry, vol. 
247, no. 1-2, pp. 219-222.  
Horoszewicz, J.S., Leong, S.S., Kawinski, E., Karr, J.P., Rosenthal, H., Chu, T.M., 
Mirand, E.A. & Murphy, G.P. 1983, "Lncap Model of Human Prostatic-
Carcinoma", Cancer research, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1809-1818.  
Huang, G., Chiu, C., Wu, C., Huang, S., Amegaya, S., Hou, W., Sheu, M., Liao, J., 
Chen, Y. & Lin, Y. 2010, "Redox status of Bowman-Birk inhibitor from soybean 
influence its in vitro antioxidant activities", Botanical Studies, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 
431-437.  
Josson, S., Xu, Y., Fang, F., Dhar, S., St Clair, D. & St Clair, W. 2006, "RelB regulates 
manganese superoxide dismutase gene and resistance to ionizing radiation of 
prostate cancer cells", Oncogene, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1554-1559. 
Kassell, B. 1970, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin Inhibitors from Soybeans-D, .  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998, "The Bowman-Birk inhibitor from soybeans as an 
anticarcinogenic agent", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 68, no. 6 
Suppl, pp. 1406S-1412S.  
Kennedy, A.R. & Wan, X.S. 2002, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk inhibitor on growth, 
invasion, and clonogenic survival of human prostate epithelial cells and prostate 
cancer cells.", Prostate, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 125-133.  
Klaunig, J.E., Kamendulis, L.M. & Hocevar, B.A. 2010, "Oxidative Stress and 
Oxidative Damage in Carcinogenesis", Toxicologic pathology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 
96-109.  
Klaunig, J. & Kamendulis, L. 2004, "The role of oxidative stress in carcinogenesis", 
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, vol. 44, pp. 239-267.  
Lam, Y., Galvez, A. & De Lumen, B. 2003, Lunasin (TM) suppresses E1A-mediated 
transformation of mammalian cells but does not inhibit growth of immortalized and 
established cancer cell lines, Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 
47, no. 1, pp. 88-94.  
Lichtenstein, G.R., Deren, J.J., Katz, S., Lewis, J.D., Kennedy, A.R. & Ware, J.H. 2008, 
"Bowman-birk inhibitor concentrate: A novel therapeutic agent for patients with 
active ulcerative colitis", Digestive diseases and sciences, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 175-
Liu, J., Chang, S. & Wiesenborn, D. 2005, "Antioxidant properties of soybean 
isoflavone extract and tofu in vitro and in vivo", Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2333-2340.  
Loft, S. & Poulsen, H.E. 1996, "Cancer risk and oxidative DNA damage in man", 
Journal of Molecular Medicine-Jmm, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 297-312.  
Magee, P.J., Owusu-Apenten, R., McCann, M.J., Gill, C.I. & Rowland, I.R. 2012, 
"Chickpea (Cicer arietinum) and other plant-derived protease inhibitor concentrates 
inhibit breast and prostate cancer cell proliferation in vitro.", Nutrition & Cancer, 
vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 741-748.  
Malins, D., Johnson, P., Wheeler, T., Barker, E., Polissar, N. & Vinson, M. 2001, "Age-
related radical-induced DNA damage is linked to prostate cancer", Cancer 
research, vol. 61, no. 16, pp. 6025-6028.  
Malkowicz, S.B., McKenna, W.G., Vaughn, D.J., Wan, X.S., Propert, K.J., Rockwell, 
K., Marks, S.H.F., Wein, A.J. & Kennedy, A.R. 2001, "Effects of Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor concentrate (BBIC) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia", 
Prostate, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 16-28.  
Mathers, J.C. 2002, "Pulses and carcinogenesis: potential for the prevention of colon, 
breast and other cancers", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 88, pp. S273-S279.  
McCormick, D.L., Johnson, W.D., Bosland, M.C., Lubet, R.A. & Steele, V.E. 2007, 
"Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by soy isoflavones and by 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 57, 
no. 2, pp. 184-193.  
McKay, L. & Cidlowski, J. 1999, "Molecular control of immune/inflammatory 
responses: Interactions between nuclear factor-kappa B and steroid receptor-
signaling pathways", Endocrine reviews, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 435-459.  
Mills, P.K., Beeson, W.L., Phillips, R.L. & Fraser, G.E. 1989, "Cohort study of diet, 
lifestyle, and prostate cancer in Adventist men.", Cancer, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 598-
Mo, J., Hom, D. & Anderson, J. 1995, "Decreases in Protective Enzymes Correlates 
with Increased Oxidative Damage in the Aging Mouse-Brain", Mechanisms of 
ageing and development, vol. 81, no. 2-3, pp. 73-82.  
Mosmann, T. 1983, "Rapid Colorimetric Assay for Cellular Growth and Survival - 
Application to Proliferation and Cyto-Toxicity Assays", Journal of immunological 
methods, vol. 65, no. 1-2, pp. 55-63.  
Palvimo, J., Reinikainen, P., Ikonen, T., Kallio, P., Moilanen, A. & Janne, O. 1996, 
"Mutual transcriptional interference between RelA and androgen receptor", Journal 
of Biological Chemistry, vol. 271, no. 39, pp. 24151-24156. 
Pfaffl, M. 2001, "A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-
PCR", Nucleic acids research, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. e45.  
Poolzobel, B.L., Lotzmann, N., Knoll, M., Kuchenmeister, F., Lambertz, R., Leucht, U., 
Schroder, H.G. & Schmezer, P. 1994, "Detection of Genotoxic Effects in Human 
Gastric and Nasal-Mucosa Cells Isolated from Biopsy Samples", Environmental 
and molecular mutagenesis, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 23-45.  
Quinn, M. & Babb, P. 2002, "Patterns and trends in prostate cancer incidence, survival, 
prevalence and mortality. Part I: international comparisons", BJU international, 
vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 162-173.  
Rafiq, A. & Bailey, G. 1998, "A more sensitive Hummel assay for chymotrypsin", 
Analytical Biochemistry, vol. 257, no. 2, pp. 233-234.  
Raschke, M., Rowland, I.R., Magee, P.J. & Pool-Zobel, B.L. 2006, "Genistein protects 
prostate cells against hydrogen peroxide-induced DNA damage and induces 
expression of genes involved in the defence against oxidative stress", 
Carcinogenesis, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 2322-2330.  
Ripple, M., Henry, W., Rago, R. & Wilding, G. 1997, "Prooxidant-antioxidant shift 
induced by androgen treatment of human prostate carcinoma cells", Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 40-48.  
Sakr, W.A., Grignon, D.J., Crissman, J.D., Heilbrun, L.K., Cassin, B.J., Pontes, J.J. & 
Haas, G.P. 1994, "High grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) and 
prostatic adenocarcinoma between the ages of 20-69: an autopsy study of 249 
cases.", In Vivo, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 439-443.  
Schuurman, A.G., Goldbohm, R.A., Dorant, E. & van den Brandt, P.A. 1998, 
"Vegetable and fruit consumption and prostate cancer risk: A cohort study in the 
Netherlands", Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 
673-680.  
Severson, R.K., Nomura, A.M.Y., Grove, J.S. & Stemmermann, G.N. 1989, "A 
Prospective-Study of Demographics, Diet, and Prostate-Cancer among Men of 
Japanese Ancestry in Hawaii", Cancer research, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1857-1860.  
Skvortsova, I., Skvortsov, S., Stasyk, T., Raju, U., Popper, B., Schiestl, B., von 
Guggenberg, E., Neher, A., Bonn, G.K., Huber, L.A. & Lukas, P. 2008, 
"Intracellular signaling pathways regulating radioresistance of human prostate 
carcinoma cells", Proteomics, vol. 8, no. 21, pp. 4521-4533.  
Souza, L.D.C., Camargo, R., Demasi, M., Santana, J.M., De Sa, C.M. And De Freitas, 
S.M. 2014, Effects of an Anticarcinogenic Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor on 
Purified 20S Proteasome and MCF-7 Breast Cancer Cells, Plos One, vol. 9, no. 1, 
pp. e86600-e86600. 
Stone, K.R., Mickey, D.D., Wunderli, H., Mickey, G.H. & Paulson, D.F. 1978, 
"Isolation of a Human Prostate Carcinoma Cell Line (Du 145)", International 
Journal of Cancer, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 274-281.  
Sun, Y., Clair, D.K.S., Fang, F., Warren, G.W., Rangnekar, V.M., Crooks, P.A. & Clair, 
W.H.S. 2007, "The radiosensitization effect of parthenolide in prostate cancer cells 
is mediated by nuclear factor-kappa B inhibition and enhanced by the presence of 
PTEN", Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 2477-2486. 
Tang, M., Asamoto, M., Ogawa, K., Naiki-Ito, A., Sato, S., Takahashi, S. & Shirai, T. 
2009, "Induction of apoptosis in the LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cell line and 
prostate adenocarcinomas of SV40T antigen transgenic rats by the Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor.", Pathology international, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 790-796.  
Troll, W. & Wiesner, R. 1983, "Protease Inhibitors - Possible Anticarcinogens in Edible 
Seeds", Prostate, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 345-349.  
Valavanidis, A., Vlachogianni, T. & Fiotakis, C. 2009, "8-hydroxy-2' -deoxyguanosine 
(8-OHdG): A Critical Biomarker of Oxidative Stress and Carcinogenesis", Journal 
of Environmental Science and Health Part C-Environmental Carcinogenesis & 
Ecotoxicology Reviews, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 120-139.  
Valko, M., Rhodes, C., Moncol, J., Izakovic, M. & Mazur, M. 2006, "Free radicals, 
metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer", Chemico-biological 
interactions, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 1-40.  
van Bokhoven, A., Varella-Garcia, M., Korch, C., Johannes, W., Smith, E., Miller, H., 
Nordeen, S., Miller, G. & Lucia, M. 2003, "Molecular characterization of human 
prostate carcinoma cell lines", Prostate, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 205-225.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice.", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Ware, J.H., Wan, X.S. & Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Bowman-Birk inhibitor suppresses 
production of superoxide anion radicals in differentiated HL-60 cells", Nutrition 
and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 174-177.  
Warner, H. 1994, "Superoxide-Dismutase, Aging, and Degenerative Disease", Free 
Radical Biology and Medicine, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 249-258.  
Webber, M.M., Bello, D. & Quader, S. 1997, "Immortalized and tumorigenic adult 
human prostatic epithelial cell lines: Characteristics and applications .2. 
Tumorigenic cell lines", Prostate, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 58-64.  
Yavelow, J., Collins, M., Birk, Y., Troll, W. & Kennedy, A.R. 1985, "Nanomolar 
concentrations of Bowman-Birk soybean protease inhibitor suppress x-ray-induced 
transformation in vitro.", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, vol. 82, no. 16, pp. 5395-5399.  
Chapter 3 
Effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from chickpea and soybean on the 
growth of human prostate cancer cells 
Authors: 
Gianfranco Bartolini1, Chris I.R. Gill1, Richard Owusu-Apenten1, Ian R. Rowland2 and 
Pamela J. Magee1 
1Northern Ireland Centre for Food and Health, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Northern 
Ireland, BT52 1SA 
2Department of Food Biosciences, University of Reading, UK, RG6 6AH 
Abstract 
The Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI) is a protease inhibitor isolated from the soybean 
whose anticancer activity has been widely investigated in in vitro and in vivo models of 
cancer, including those of the prostate. To date there is a paucity of data on the effects 
of protease inhibitors isolated from leguminous sources other than the soybean against 
cancer, although their potential as chemopreventive agents is promising. In this study 
we investigated the effects of 2 protease inhibitor concentrates from soybean and 
chickpea on the growth of androgen-sensitive (LNCaP) and androgen-insensitive (PC-3 
and DU 145) human prostate cancer cells, which represent a model for subsequent 
stages of the carcinogenic process, in vitro. The effects of PICs on the expression of 
genes involved in proliferation and cell cycle control were assessed by using 
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). A pilot animal study was also conducted on Balb/c 
SCID mice injected with DU 145 cells to evaluate the anti-cancer potential of chickpea 
PIC in vivo. Soybean and chickpea PICs inhibited the proliferation of all cell lines at 
various concentrations, and an arrest of the cell cycle at S Phase was observed for PC-3 
cells treated with soybean and chickpea PICs at the highest concentrations tested. The 
anti-proliferative effects of PICs were positively correlated to the beneficial modulation 
of expression of selected genes. Treatment with chickpea PIC did not delay the growth 
of tumour mass in mice. These data obtained show that both soybean and chickpea PICs 
can delay the growth of human prostate cancer cells in vitro. 
Introduction 
Millions of men worldwide are affected by prostate cancer, with the great majority of 
cases recorded in developed countries. Diet appears to play a crucial role in the 
development of the disease, as demonstrated by epidemiological studies highlighting the 
link between the adoption of a westernized lifestyle and an increase in prostate cancer 
risk in Asians migrating to Western countries (Whittemore et al. 1995, Haenszel, 
Kurihara 1968, Shimizu et al. 1991, Locke, King 1980, Yu et al. 1991, Tominaga 1985). 
Legumes and pulses, widely consumed in populations from the Eastern basin, seem to 
be beneficial in modulating the risk of prostate cancer (Mathers 2002, Schuurman et al. 
1998, Mills et al. 1989, Severson et al. 1989), and protease inhibitors have been 
addressed as putative agents responsible for their protective properties against prostate 
cancer. The Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI) is an 8 KDa protein isolated from soybean 
and other legumes, able to inhibit trypsin and chymotrypsin (Kennedy 1998a, Kennedy 
1998b), which has been extensively studied for its anti-cancer properties  in in vivo and 
in vitro cancer models including those of the prostate  (Troll, Wiesner 1983, Kennedy, 
Wan 2002, Tang et al. 2009, McCormick et al. 2007). The potential of BBI for the 
development of a pharmaceutical preparation aimed at preventing and possibly treating 
various cancers led to the development of an extract enriched in BBI, termed BBIC 
(Kennedy et al. 1993) which achieved Investigational New Drug status with the Food 
and Drug Administration and was shown to be safely effective at reducing serum levels 
of prostate specific antigen (PSA) and improving urinary symptoms in a Phase I clinical 
trial in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) following 6 months 
supplementation (Malkowicz et al. 2001). The exact mechanisms accounting for the  
anti-cancer properties of BBI are controversial to date, however anti-inflammatory 
activity (Kennedy 1998b), inhibition of the proteolytic activity of the 26S proteasome 
(Chen et al. 2005) and human mast cell chymase (Ware et al. 1997) and inhibition of 
free radical formation by human polymorphonclear leukocytes (Frenkel et al. 1987) 
have been postulated as mechanisms involved in the chemopreventive activity. Lunasin, 
a 4KDa peptide found in BBIC might also contribute to the observed anti-cancer effects 
through inhibition of core histone acetylation in mammalian cells (Park, Jeong & de 
Lumen 2005, de Lumen 2005). The anti-proliferative effects of protease inhibitors of 
the Bowman-Birk family isolated  from soybean have been documented by various in 
vitro studies conducted on HT29 human colorectal cancer cells (Clemente et al. 2010), 
LNCaP and PC-3 human prostate adenocarcinoma cells (Kennedy, Wan 2002, Wan et 
al. 1999, Magee et al. 2012), MCF-7 breast cancer cells (Chen et al. 2005, Zhang et al. 
1999), human U2OS osteosarcoma cells (Saito et al. 2007), human ovarian cancer cells 
(Wan et al. 1998), and in human breast, cervical and head and neck cancer cells (Zhang 
et al. 1999). Limited studies have been conducted on the effects of soybean BBI on the 
cell cycle of colon (Caccialupi et al. 2010) and breast (Chen et al. 2005) cancer cells and 
both show an induction of cell arrest at G1 Phase. To date little data is available on the 
anti-cancer properties of PICs isolated from leguminous sources other than the soybean, 
however experimental evidence supports the anti-proliferative properties of PICs from 
the chickpea (Magee et al. 2012), amaranth seeds (Tamir et al. 1996), the field bean 
(Fernandes, Banerji 1996), the pea (Clemente et al. 2012, Clemente et al. 2005), the 
black-eyed pea (Joanitti, Azevedo & Freitas 2010), the lentil (Caccialupi et al. 2010, 
Garcia-Gasca et al. 2002) and the tepary bean in in vitro and in vivo models of cancer. 
The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of PICs from the soybean and the 
chickpea on the proliferation of three human prostate cancer cell lines, namely LNCaP, 
DU 145 and PC-3, which constitute a valid model for different stages of prostate 
carcinogenesis. 
Materials and Methods 
Preparation of PIC working solutions 
PICs were prepared as described in chapter 2. For the MTT proliferation assay all the 
PIC dilutions were prepared from a 10 mg/ml stock solution prepared dissolving the 
required amount of PIC powder in the appropriate growth medium, previously warmed 
up in a water bath at 37 C. Briefly, the powder was weighed out and added to the 
adequate amount of medium in a 25 ml universal tube. The tube was vortexed for two 
minutes and then the medium with PIC was stirred for two hours with a magnetic 
stirrer. The mixture was subsequently centrifuged (8000 rpm, 4 C, 30 minutes) to 
remove starches and the supernatant syringe filtered with a 0.22 m filter. The tested 
concentration range for test PICs and control BBI was decided on the basis of similarity 
to concentrations  of  BBI / BBIC previously shown to exert anti-proliferative effects in 
prostate cancer cell lines (Kennedy, Wan 2002, Clemente et al. 2010, Magee et al. 
2012). For control BBI, only 2 concentrations (i.e 0.1 and 0.3 mg/ml) were tested due to 
cost of the treatment.  The tested concentrations prepared from the 10 mg/ml stock 
solutions were 0.05 mg/ml, 0.1 mg/ml, 0.3 mg/ml, 1 mg/ml and 3 mg/ml.  
Commercially available BBI (Sigma-Aldrich) was used as a control at 0.3 mg/ml and 
0.1 mg/ml. A 0.3 mg/ml stock solution was prepared dissolving the powder in 
previously warmed growth medium by vortexing and the 0.1 mg/ml solution was then 
prepared, solutions were filtered through a 0.22 m filter.   
Cell culture 
The prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 were a kind donation of Dr. 
Jenny Worthington (University of Ulster). Both PC-3 (Kaighn et al. 1979) and DU 145 
cells (Stone et al. 1978) are androgen receptor negative (AR-) and are a model of 
androgen independent prostate cancer, where AR is not expressed.  PC-3 cells lack 
expression of AR despite having the normal AR gene (Chlenski et al. 2001, Tilley et al. 
1995), DU 145 do not express AR due to the methylation of its promoter region (Tilley 
et al. 1995). The DU 145 cell line was derived from a brain metastasis of prostate 
carcinoma (Stone et al. 1978),  while PC-3 were obtained from a bone metastatic site of 
a grade IV prostate adenocarcinoma (Kaighn et al. 1979). The LNCaP cell line is a 
prostatic adenocarcinoma cell line which was derived from fragments of biopsy of a left 
supraclavicular lymph node metastasis (Horoszewicz et al. 1983). LNCaP cells are 
androgen-responsive and express a mutated AR in the hormone binding site so that it 
also binds oestrogens, in addition to oestrogen sensitivity through oestrogen receptors 
(ERs)  and  (Webber, Bello & Quader 1997, Sasaki et al. 2002). Cell culture media 
and supplements were purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK) unless otherwise stated. 
Cells were cultured as monolayers in Roux flasks (75 cm2) and incubated at 37 C / 5 % 
CO2. DU 145 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10 % 
FBS and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin. PC-3 cells were maintained in Hams F-12 
medium supplemented with 10 % FBS, 1% penicillin / streptomycin  and 2 mmol/L L-
glutamine. LNCaP cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 
2.0mM L-glutamine, 10.0mM Hepes (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK), 1% penicillin-
streptomycin, 1% of a 45% solution of glucose in genomic grade water (sterilized with a 
0.22 m filter), 10% foetal bovine serum.  Media were replaced three times per week 
for all cell lines and cells were split when confluence reached  70 %. To harvest the 
cells the growth medium was removed, the cells were washed with PBS (except LNCaP 
cells) and treated with trypsin (0.25% trypsin-EDTA) as described in chapter 2. 
Viability of cells was determined by the trypan blue exclusion test using a Neubauer 
hemocytometer (50 l of cell suspension + 50 l of trypan blue) (Poolzobel et al. 1994).  
MTT viability assay 
The MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay is a 
method that detects cell viability as a response to external factors and has its theoretical 
principle in the ability of a dehydrogenase enzyme from mitochondria of viable cells to 
reduce the tetrazolium rings of the pale yellow MTT, with the subsequent formation of 
purple formazan crystals. The ability of cells to cleave MTT is indicative of the degree 
of their mitochondrial / cellular respiration. The formazan crystals accumulate in the 
cell, due to their inability to pass through the cell membrane. They can be solubilized by 
a detergent and quantified by spectrophotometric analysis (Mosmann 1983). The 
number of cells seeded in each well of a 96-well plate was 2x103, 8x103 and 20x103 for 
DU 145, PC-3 and LNCaP cells, respectively. The cell count to be used was determined 
by performing a preliminary MTT assay as described below (without PIC treatment) 
once per each cell line at different cell seeding densities, in order to select an optimal 
plating density yielding an absorbance in the range of 0.75-1.25, falling within the 
linear proportion of the curve obtained when absorbance is plotted versus number of 
cells/ml (American Type Culture Collection 2011). The plates were also observed under 
an inverted microscope using a 20x objective to ensure cell over-confluence was not 
reached, to avoid contact inhibition which may slow down cell metabolism. 100 l of 
cell suspension was added to each well. The cells were incubated for 24 hours to obtain 
a firm monolayer, then medium was tapped out onto tissue paper and the PIC treatment 
(0.05  10 mg/ml) was added (100 l/well). At least 6 replicates of each treatment were 
performed. Growth medium was used as a negative control and commercially available 
soybean BBI was used as a positive control. The cells were exposed to the treatment for 
96 hours and the treatment was refreshed after 48 hours. At the end of the treatment 
period (i.e. 96 hours) the cells were washed with PBS and 15 l of MTT dye solution 
(0.5mg/ml of MTT powder, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS and sterilized with a 0.22 m filter 
was added to each well and the plates were incubated at 37 C in a humidified incubator 
(95 % air, 5 % CO2) for 4 hours. 100 l of solubilizing solution (89.2 % isopropanol 
(Sigma-Aldrich), 10 % Triton-X (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.8 % HCl) was then added to wells 
and the plates were placed back in the incubator overnight. The plates were eventually 
read at 570 nm, reference 650 nm with a VERSAmax microplate reader and results 
analysed with the SoftMax Pro 5.4 software. The results were presented as % viability 
normalized to the negative control. Each experiment was repeated on at least 3 
independent occasions. 
Determination of cell growth curves 
The estimation of growth rates was determined for LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 cells 
treated with PICs (0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10 mg/ml) and BBI (0.1, 0.3 mg/ml) by 
performing viable cell counts every 24 hours. Briefly, LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 cells 
were seeded at a density of 20x104, 2x104 and 3.5x104 cells/ml, respectively,  in a total 
volume of 625 l, in 24-well tissue culture plates for 24 hours at 37 C, 5 % CO2, before 
treatment. Optimal seeding densities were determined in preliminary experiments to 
establish an appropriate cell confluence in control cells at the end of the exposure time. 
Growth media were then removed and the cells were treated with the appropriate 
dilutions of PICs for 96 hours, with the treatment refreshed after 48 hours. Viable cells 
were counted by means of trypan blue exclusion test using a Neubauer hemocytometer, 
as previously described, every 24 hours. At least three independent experiments were 
carried out for each cell line, with 2 replicates for each treatment. 
Cell cycle analysis  
Cell cycle analysis was carried out  using flow cytometry (Ormerod MG 2000). 
Cell supensions were obtained from the 24-well tissue culture plates used for the 
estimation of the growth rates at each timepoint when the cells were counted (24, 48, 
72, 96 h after treatment). The growth medium in each well was removed before 
harvesting the cells and dispensed in 0.5 ml tubes. After trypsin was neutralized with 
fresh growth medium and samples for cell counts aliquoted in eppendorf tubes, the cell 
suspensions were aliquoted in the tubes with the growth medium previously collected, 
centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 5 minutes and the supernatant discarded. The cell pellets 
were then resuspended in 800 l of ice cold 70 % EtOH in genomic grade water and the 
samples were stored at  20 C for later use. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation 
(300 g for 5 minutes), the supernatant discarded, and the cells resuspended in 900 l of 
ice cold PBS and transferred to flow cytometry tubes. 50 l of RNase A (1 mg/ml in 
PBS, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 l of propidium iodide (400 g/ml in genomic grade water, 
Sigma-Aldrich) was then added to the cell suspension. The cells were then incubated at 
37 C, 5 % CO2 for 30 minutes before being analysed with a Gallios Beckman 
Coulter Flow cytometer. The propidium iodide fluorescence emission was detected at 
585 nm using the Gallios Beckman Coulter software. The analysis of DNA content 
was carried out on emission spectra using WinMDI software (J. Trotter, Scripps Inst.). 
For the PC-3 cell line 3 independent experiments were carried out, while the experiment 
was performed only once for LNCaP and PC-3 cells (a first run was used to determine 
the cell line which was most responsive to PIC treatment and chosen for the triplicate). 
Quantitative real-time PCR 
The effects of soybean and chickpea PICs (96 h exposure at 3 mg/ml) on the expression 
of genes with a key function in cell proliferation, apoptosis or cell cycle control were 
investigated in LNCaP and PC-3 cells by means of quantitative real-time PCR. The 
experimental procedure has already been described in detail in chapter 2. The selected 
genes were: MYC, GJA1, BCL2, FASLG, CCNB1, CDC6, BAX, CDKN1B, CDKN1A, 
CCND1, AKT1, BCL2L1, BAK1, BIRC5, CDK4, CASP3, CASP9, CDK2, CDK6, 
FOS, DUSP1, CDC25C, JUN, TGFB1, PARP1, MAPK6. 
Animal Study 
A small pilot animal study was carried out to assess the effect of chickpea PIC on 
tumour growth in SCID mice injected with DU 145 cells. The animal study was carried 
out in accordance with the Animal (Scientific Procedures ) Act 1986 and conformed to 
the UK Home Office guidelines. Eight to ten weeks old Balb/c SCID mice were 
maintained in a sterile environment and injected with 5x106 DU 145 cells in the rear 
dorsum to induce tumour. The size of the tumour mass was measured every 2 days with 
a vernier caliper, once a visible lump was evident in the animals. The tumour volume 
was calculated using the formula volume = 4/3r3 , where r is the radius, which is 
calculated as  geometric mean diameter (GMD) ( 3length x breadth x height). 
Treatment with chickpea PIC started when the tumour volume reached 100-200 mm3. 
Treatment was administered as intratumour injections (100 l of 10 mg/ml PIC 
dissolved in PBS as described for the other bioassays) every two days for two weeks (7 
injections totally). PBS was used as a negative control. Three animals were used for 
each group. The animals were sacrificed when the tumours reached a size four times 
that recorded at the start of the treatment.  
Statistical analysis 
Statistical analysis of the results was carried out using ANOVA, with post-hoc analysis, 
using the SPSS statistical package (version 20). The non-normal data were analysed 
with the Kruskal-Wallis and Man-Whitney U tests. The significance level was P = 0.05. 
Results 
MTT viabilityassay 
The effects of soybean and chickpea PICs on the viability of LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 
are illustrated in table 1. Treatment with soybean PIC resulted in a significant and dose-
dependent inhibition of the viability LNCaP and PC-3 cells at all concentration tested. 
The effect of soybean PIC on the viability of DU 145 cells was also inhibitory, although 
statistical significance was not reached for the lowest tested concentration, 0.05 mg/ml. 
The effect of chickpea PIC on the three cell lines was, overall, weaker than soybean 
PIC. The viability of LNCaP cells was significantly inhibited by all  concentrations 
tested with the exception of  10 mg/ml. Chickpea PIC (0.1  10 mg/ml) also inhibited 
the viability of PC-3 cells. The only concentration resulting in a significant decrease of 
viability in DU 145 cells was the highest concentration tested, 10 mg/ml, although the 
observed effect was the most potent among the three cell lines studied (69.8% inhibition 
vs. control). Commercial BBI was effective at significantly reducing viability of LNCaP 
cells at all tested concentrations  while no significant effect was observed on PC-3 or 
DU 145 cells.  
Soybean PIC exerted more potent inhibitory effects (expressed as a percentage 
reduction from the control) on PC-3 and DU 145 cells than LNCaP, with an inhibition 
of cell viability of 97.9 and 96.8%, respectively, for 10 mg/ml. (Fig. 1). 
Differently from soybean PIC, chickpea PIC exerted a stronger significant inhibitory 
effect on LNCaP  than DU 145 cells at 0.1 (24.2% vs.  13.7%) (P < 0.01) and 0.3 mg/ml 
(32.5% vs. 20.3%) (P < 0.05). At 3 mg/ml, however, the effect of chickpea PIC on 
LNCaP cells, although significantly inhibitory compared to untreated (control) cells, 
was weaker than the one observed both on PC-3 (P < 0.05) and DU 145 cells (P  
0.001) (the effect on DU 145 cells did not differ significantly from the control). 
Interestingly, at the highest tested concentration, chickpea PIC did not alter significantly 
the viability of LNCaP cells, while an inhibitory effect was observed for  PC-3 (38.3% 
reduction of cell viability, P  0.001) and DU 145 cells (69.8% decrease in cell 
proliferation), where the most potent inhibitory effect was observed (P  0.001 vs. 
LNCaP cells, P < 0.01 vs. PC-3 cells) (Fig. 2) 
The effects of commercial BBI on LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 cells are shown in Fig. 3. 
Determination of cell growth curves 
The effects of soybean and chickpea PICs on cell viability of LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 
cells were also investigated by means of the trypan blue dye exclusion assay (Fig. 4 
A,B,C). Soybean PIC (1-10 mg/ml) significantly inhibited the viability of LNCaP cells 
at all timepoints (P < 0.05 for 24 and 72 h timepoints and 3 mg/ml at 48 h timepoint; P 
< 0.01 for 1 mg/ml at 48 h timepoint, 1 and 3 mg/ml at 96 h timepoint; P  0.001for 10 
mg/ml at 48 h timepoint and 1 and 3 mg/ml at 96 h timepoint). A significant drop in cell 
proliferation was also observed for 0.3 mg/ml at 24 h (P < 0.05), 48 h (P  0.001) and 
72 h (P < 0.05) timepoints. Soybean PIC 0.1 mg/ml significantly inhibited the growth of 
the cells 24 h (P < 0.05) and 72 h (P < 0.05) after the start of the treatment. The effects 
of chickpea PIC on the viability of LNCaP cells were weaker, and statistical 
significance was reached only for 10 mg/ml at the 48 h timepoint (P < 0.01). Treatment 
with commercial BBI led to a significant inhibition of cell growth 24 h (0.1 and 0.3 
mg/ml, P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively) and 48 h (0.3 mg/ml, P  0.01) after the 
start of the treatment. 
Growth of PC-3 cells was also inhibited by PICs (Fig. 5 A-C). Soybean PIC induced a 
significant inhibition of cell growth at 48 h (0.05 and 1-10 mg/ml, P  0.05) and 72 h 
(0.05 and 0.3-10 mg/ml, P  0.05) timepoints. Chickpea PIC significantly decreased 
PC-3 cell growth after 48 h (1 mg/ml, P < 0.05), 72 h (0.1-10 mg/ml, P  0.05) and 96 h 
(0.1-10 mg/ml, P  0.05). Commercial BBI had inhibitory effects on the growth of PC-3 
cells at 72 h (P  0.001) and 96 h timepoints (P < 0.05 for 0.1 mg/ml, P  0.01 for 0.3 
mg/ml). 
The inhibitory effects of PICs on the growth of DU 145 cells were weaker, and viability 
was significantly reduced only by the highest concentrations of soybean PIC (3 and 10 
mg/ml)  48 (P  0.05) and 72 h (P < 0.05 for 3 mg/ml, P < 0.001 for 10 mg/ml) after 
exposure to treatment (Fig. 6 A-C). 
Cell cycle analysis 
The cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 cells in the presence or absence of PICs was 
evaluated to investigate the putative link between effects on cell proliferation and cell 
cycle arrest. The PC-3 cell line was deemed the most suitable for the analysis following 
an initial screening (n = 1) of the 3 cell lines used in this study and the assessment of the 
observed trend in  cell cycle modulation. Treatment with soybean PIC was shown to 
have a more pronounced effect on modulating the cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 
cells (Fig. 7 A-D) in comparison to chickpea PIC (Fig. 8 A-D). After 24 h, a cell cycle 
arrest in S Phase was observed in cells treated with 3 and 10 mg/ml of soybean PIC, 
compared with untreated control cells, with a significant increase in cell population in 
the S Phase from 13.24  1.90 % to 20.30  1.51 % (P < 0.01) and  24.95  1.29 % (P < 
0.001), respectively, and a parallel significant decrease  in the G0-G1 peak from 48.59  
0.76 % to 42.85  1.85 % (P < 0.05) and 39.14  0.45 % (P < 0.001) for the same 
concentrations of treatment. After 48 h, a statistically significant decrease in  the cell 
population in G0-G1 (from 56.07  0.67 % to 46.65  4.11 %, P < 0.01) and G2-M 
(from 32.04  0.50 % to 23.61  1.27 %, P  0.001) stages was observed in cells treated 
with the highest concentration of PIC, with an overall trend suggesting a cell cycle 
arrest in S Phase induced by 3 and 10 mg/ml PIC, although statistical significance was 
not reached. The accumulation of cells in S Phase was clearly evident after 72 h in cells 
exposed to 10 mg/ml of PIC (from 14.70  0.86 % to 26.44  1.75 %, P < 0.001). After 
96 h exposure to soybean PIC, the cell population in S Phase was significantly increased 
for the 1 (from 8.29  0.58 % to 11.81  1.14 %, P < 0.05), 3 (from 8.29  0.58 %  to 
17.30  1.22 %, P < 0.001) and 10 mg/ml (from 8.29  0.58 % to 17  0.88 %, P < 
0.001) treatments. Overall, treatment with the highest concentrations of soybean PIC 
resulted in a cell cycle arrest in S Phase for the time points analyzed.  
The effects of chickpea PIC on the cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 cells are 
shown in Fig. 8 A-D. After 48 h exposure to chickpea PIC there was a significant 
decrease (P < 0.05) in the cell population in the G0-G1 stage for 0.3 (from 56.07  0.67 
% to 52.91  1.82 %), 3 (from 56.07  0.67 % to 53.11  0.46 %) and 10 mg/ml (from 
56.07  0.67 %to 52.46  0.92 %)  treatments. A significant accumulation of cells in S 
Phase was observed after 96 h  with 3 (from 8.29  0.58 % to 13.96  2.66 %, P < 0.05) 
and 10 mg/ml (from 8.29  0.58 % to 15.69  1.63 %, P < 0.01) chickpea PIC. 
Commercial BBI did not exert any appreciable effect on the cell cycle distribution 
pattern of PC-3 cells, as shown in Fig 9 A-D. 
Quantitative real-time PCR 
The effects of 96-h incubation with soybean and chickpea PICs on the level of 
expression of genes involved in proliferation, apoptosis or cell cycle control in LNCaP 
and PC-3 cells are shown in figure 10 and 11, respectively. In LNCaP cells, MYC, 
CDK2, CDC25C and TOP2A genes were significanty down-regulated by soybean PIC, 
while BCL2L1, BAK1, CDK4 and CASP9 were up-regulated. Chickpea PIC induced 
significant up-regulation of CDK4, DUSP1 and MAPK6. Exposure to 3 mg/ml soybean 
PIC resulted in significant down-regulation of MYC, BCL2, CCNB1, BAX, CDKN1B, 
BCL2L1, CDK6, CDC25C, TGFB1, TOP2A and MAPK6 in PC-3 cells. Soybean PIC 
also positively modulated the expression of CCND, AKT1 and JUN genes. 
Animal study 
A small pilot animal study was carried out to evaluate if the chickpea PIC concentration 
which proved to be the most effective at inhibiting the growth of DU 145 cells in vitro 
would have similar inhibitory effects in vivo. As shown in Fig. 12, intratumoural 
injections of 10 mg/ml chickpea PIC every two days for two weeks did not noticeably 
slow the growth of tumours when compared to mice injected with PBS. 
Discussion 
The present study investigates the effects of soybean and chickpea PICs on the growth 
of human prostate cancer cell lines, namely LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3, which represent 
the different stages of carcinogenesis, in vitro. The cell growth was assessed using the 
MTT assay and comparing the growth curves of the cells cultured with or without PICs 
over the same periods of time. PICs were screened for their effects on cell cycle 
progression of PC-3 cells by means of flow cytometry, to determine whether or not the 
effects observed on cell proliferation were mediated through alterations in the cell cycle. 
Quantitative real-time PCR was employed to study the effects of PICs on genes 
implicated in cell proliferation and cell cycle control to investigate potential 
mechanisms accounting for the anti-cancer effects.  A small pilot animal study was also 
conducted to determine whether chickpea PIC could beneficially modulate the growth 
of tumour mass induced by injection of DU 145 cells in SCID mice. Soybean PIC 
exerted inhibitory effects on the growth of all 3 cell lines at all concentrations tested 
(except 0.05 mg/ml for DU 145 cells). Significant inhibitory effects on the viability of 
LNCaP cells were also reported by Magee et al. (2012) for 0.05 and 0.1 mg/ml, while 
Kennedy & Wan (2002) demonstrated the inhibition of the growth of LNCaP and PC-3 
cells induced by BBIC (soybean PIC) at concentrations of 0.05 mg/ml and 0.1 mg/ml, 
respectively. At concentration of 1, 3 and 10 mg/ml the effects of soybean PIC were 
significantly bigger in androgen-insensitive PC-3 and DU-145 cell lines than in 
androgen-sensitive LNCaP, thus indicating a putative more potent effect in later stages 
of prostate carcinogenesis.  Chickpea PIC also exerted inhibitory effects on the growth 
of the 3 cell lines, although not all the concentrations tested reached statistical 
significance. These results agree well with those reported in a recent study by Magee et 
al. (2012), where 0.025-0.4 mg/ml chickpea PIC significantly inhibited the viability of 
both LNCaP and PC-3 cell lines. The concentration range tested by Magee et al. (2012) 
is similar to the one used in the present study, with two concentrations (0.05 and 0.1 
mg/ml) being the same. At 0.05 mg/ml, Magee et al. (2012) report a significant 
reduction in cell viability of 24.07 (P  0.05) and 21.74 % (P  0.001) for LNCaP and 
PC-3 cells, respectively, while we observed an inhibition of cell growth of 14.1 % (P  
0.05) for LNCaP cells and 10.23 % for PC-3 cells, although statistical significance was 
not reached for the latter. At 0.1 mg/ml, Magee et al. (2012) report a reduction of 
viability of 27.78 and 23.91 % for LNCaP and PC-3 cells, respectively, close to 24.36 
and 18.18 % observed in our study for the same cell lines. The small differences in the 
observed effects might be due to the different methods of preparation of PICs (we used 
a cold temperature method as described in chapter x vs. a hot temperature method) and 
to the variability occurring in legume flours resulting in different amounts of protease 
inhibitors. Interestingly, chickpea PIC stimulated the growth of LNCaP cells at the 
highest concentration tested, as assessed by  the MTT assay. This could be suggestive of 
a biphasic effect, observed with other plant compounds such as genistein (Magee, 
Rowland 2004), and needs to be further investigated, especially considering the 
potential use of the extract as a prostate cancer chemopreventive agent in healthy 
individuals or for dietary recommendations in relation to chickpea.  The inhibitory 
effects of commercial BBI were limited to the LNCaP cell line and agree with those 
observed in a study by Kennedy &Wan (2002), where the authors report that treatment 
with BBI extended the population doubling time of LNCaP cells by 23 % (P < 0.001). 
The comparison of growth curves of the cells cultured in the presence or the absence of 
PICs show results which seem to substantiate the findings of the MTT assay, however 
not all the concentrations tested achieved statistical significance after 96 hours of 
treatment. The reasons for this variation might be associated with the different 
experimental conditions (i.e. area of plate wells) under which the bioassays were 
performed, which could affect growth properties. Other putative explanation might lie 
in the limitations of the MTT assay as an endpoint for measuring cell viability, relying 
on the activity of a mitochondrial  dehydrogenase enzyme, thus associating the number 
of viable cells to those with an active metabolism. The research conducted on the effects 
of BBI-type proteins on the cell cycle distribution pattern in cancer cells is limited, and 
to date our study is the first to report on the modulation of the cycle exerted by PICs in 
prostate cancer cell lines. A recent study by Clemente et al. (2010) investigated the 
effects of soybean BBI and two purified major soybean isoinhibitors of the BBI family, 
IBB1 and IBBD2, on the viability of HT29 colon cancer cells. The authors discovered 
that both BBI and its isoinhibitors inhibited the cell proliferation in a dose dependent 
fashion, as assessed by the NR (3-amino-7-dimethylamino-2-methyl-phenazine-
hydrocloride) assay over a treatment period of 96 h and at concentrations of 31.2M, 
62.5 M and 125 M, corresponding to 0.25 mg/ml, 0.5 mg/ml and 1 mg/ml, thus well 
within the range used in our study. The effects of 24-h treatment with 62 M soybean 
BBI (0.5 mg/ml) on the cell cycle of HT29 cells were a significant (P < 0.05) arrest of 
the cell cycle at G0-G1 phase (from 62.70.2% to 89.11.6%), and in a decrease of the 
fraction of cells in G2-M (from 28.21.2% to 4.31%) and S (from 9.21% to 
6.60.6%) stages. The modulation of the cell cycle induced by BBI in HT29 cells agree 
with that observed by Chen at al. (2005) in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, where a 12-h 
treatment with 20 M BBI (0.16 mg/ml) resulted in a 15.42 % increase in the proportion 
of cells in the G1 Phase compared with control cells, as a consequence of the 
upregulation of the proteasome target substrates p21Cip1/WAF1 and p27Kip1, followed by 
the downregulation of the cell cycle regulatory cyclins cyclin D1 and cyclin E. The 
findings of our study show a different modulation of the cell cycle pattern of PC-3 
prostate cancer cells induced by PICs. After 24 h, the same exposure time used by 
Clemente et al. (2010), we observed a cell cycle arrest in S Phase and a parallel decrease 
in the cell population in the G0-G1 stage, for the concentrations of 3 and 10 mg/ml of 
soybean PIC, while chickpea PIC did not exert any appreciable effect at this timepoint, 
and neither did commercial BBI. After 96 h treatment, the same exposure time for the 
MTT assay, the overall effects induced by PICs were a cell cycle arrest in S phase for 
the highest concentrations tested (1 and 10 mg/ml for soybean PIC and 3 and 10 mg/ml 
for chickpea PIC). The differences between our results and those obtained by Chen et al. 
(2005) and Clemente et al. (2010) might be due to the different cell lines used which 
might respond differently to the treatment, or to the different biochemical composition 
of our PIC samples compared to the purified commercial form of BBI. Another 
hypothesis might be that the PICs we tested exert anti-proliferative effects through 
alternative pathways than proteasome inhibition, linked to the modulation of 
downstream targets leading to a cell cycle arrest at G1 Phase (Chen et al. 2005, 
Clemente et al. 2010). The cell cycle is a complex process strictly controlled by 
mechanisms acting as checkpoints ensuring that its events occur in an orderly manner 
(Hartwell, Weinert 1989, Kastan, Bartek 2004), thus further research is needed to 
investigate the effects of PICs on the cell cycle regulating factors and shed light on the 
possible mechanisms of action in prostate cancer prevention. 
The results obtained by means of qPCR provide some useful insights into the effects of 
PICs at a transcriptional level on important genes which may be linked to cancer 
development and relevant for putative chemoprevention. A potential mechansim 
through which PICs might exert their anti-proliferative effects is by modulating the 
expression of genes encoding the BCL-2 protein family, which positively or negatively 
regulate apoptosis by forming hetero- or homodimers. In the present study soybean PIC 
significantly reduced the expression of BCL-2  anti-apoptotic genes; BCL2L1 in PC-3  
and LNCaP cell lines and BCL2 in PC-3 cells. The same treatment also significantly up-
regulated the pro-apoptotic BAK gene in LNCaP cells. These results correlate with 
those of Li et al. (2009) that demonstrated pro-apoptotic activity of  a high purity 
recombinant buckwheat trypsin inhibitor (rbTI), which shares structural similarities 
with BBI, in various human solid tumor cell lines mediated via the down-regulation of 
BCL2 and BCL2L1 genes and up-regulation of BAK gene. Considering the  interplay 
between the BCL-2 family of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic genes, such as BAK1 or 
BCL2 and BCL2L1, respectively, in the apoptotic process, and the mitochondrial 
location of their encoded products, our findings  suggest that  modulation of the 
expression of the aforementioned genes mediated by soybean PIC  might induce  
apoptosis in prostate cancer cells through the involvement of the mitochondrial 
signaling pathway. However, further research is needed to investigate the down-
regulation of the pro-apoptotic BAX gene induced by soybean PIC in PC-3 cells. The 
balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins is strictly linked to the 
proteolytic activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3, mediated by the release of 
cytochrome c from the mitochondria into the cytosol (Li et al. 1997, Yang et al. 1997, 
Kluck et al. 1997, Kharbanda et al. 1997). Caspase-9 is a protein factor activated upon 
its binding to Apaf-1 in the presence of dATP and cytochrome c, which cleaves and 
activates caspase-3 and consequently initiates a protease cascade leading to apoptosis 
(Li et al. 1997). In our study exposure of LNCaP cells to soybean PIC induced a 
significant up-regulation of CASP9 gene, suggesting a pivotal role of caspase-9, the 
initiator of the mitochondria-initiated intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Li et al. (2009) found 
that treatment of solid tumour cells with rbTI led to an increase of cytosolic cytochrome 
c with consequent activation of caspase-3 and caspase-9. The effects observed with 
soybean PIC in LNCaP cells correlate positively with those exerted by rbTI, however 
we propose a molecular mechanism acting directly on the CASP9 gene, resulting in an 
increased gene expression and consequent activation of the downstream target caspase-
A study conducted by  Robles-Ramrez et al. (2012) on HeLa cervical cancer cells 
showed that a peptide from germinated soybean protein possibly containing BBI down-
regulated TOP2A mRNA expression and consequently induced apoptosis by caspase 
cascade activation. Similarly, we report a significant down-regulation of TOP2A gene 
in both LNCaP and PC-3 cells; TOP2A encodes a DNA topoisomerase which controls 
and alters the topologic state of DNA during transcription and is also involved in the 
segregation of chromosomes during mitosis (Tsavaris et al. 2009). TOP2A constitutes 
an important biomarker for prostate cancer positively associated with aggressiveness 
(Kosari et al. 2008) and Gleason score (Hughes et al. 2006); the reported down-
regulation of TOP2A in LNCaP and PC-3 cells is consistent with the observed 
inhibition of cell proliferation. 
MYC is an oncogene with a major role in prostate carcinogenesis, whose 
overexpression has been reported at the onset of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) 
(Bethel et al. 2006, Iwata et al. 2010, Jenkins et al. 1997), a putative precursor of 
prostate cancer (DeMarzo et al. 2003). Furthermore,  amplification of MYC  increases 
with cancer progression to a metastatic state (Jenkins et al. 1997, Bubendorf et al. 
1999), positively correlating with an increasing Gleason score (Buttyan et al. 1987, 
Fleming et al. 1986). In the present study, treatment with soybean PIC significantly 
down-regulated the expression of MYC  in both LNCaP and PC-3 cell lines. The down-
regulation of MYC gene expression has been hypothesised as a possible mechanism 
accounting for the cytotoxicity induced by BBI and/or BBIC in MCF7 human breast 
carcinoma cells, SCC61 and SQ20B human head and neck carcinoma cells and the 
enhancement of radiation or cispatininduced cell killing by BBI in SCC61, SQ20B, 
human cervical carcinoma cells; HeLa, HeLa-R1, and HeLa-R3 (Zhang et al. 1999), 
A549 human lung cancer cells and A2780, C30, and C200 human ovarian cancer cells 
(Kennedy, Donahue & Wan 1996). Similar findings have been reported  in carcinogen-
treated or radiation-exposed cell lines or animal models (Stclair, Stclair 1991, Chang et 
al. 1990, Stclair et al. 1990). BBI and BBIC have also been shown to reduce 
carcinogen-induced changes in MYC expression in the colon to background levels 
(Kennedy 1998a, Lippman et al. 1990). 
The results obtained by means of quantitative Real Time-PCR also give some insights 
into the effects of PICs on other genes whose products are involved in the regulation of  
cell cycle progression. We found a statistically significant reduction in the expression of 
CDC25C induced by soybean PIC in both LNCaP and PC-3 cells. The soybean 
isoflavone genistein has been shown to reduce cell proliferation by decreasing  protein 
levels of CDC25C in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and in immortalized non-
malignant human mammary epithelial cells MCF-10F (Li et al. 2008, Frey, Singletary 
2003). The CDC25C gene encodes for a protein pivotal in G2/M transition (Molinari 
2000), thus we could hypothesize a reduced cell proliferation associated with 
accumulation of cells in G2/M phase, however this hypothesis does not correlate with 
the results observed in PC-3 cells by means of flow cytometry and further studies are 
required to fully elucidate the mechanism.  
CDK2, CDK3 and CDK6 encode for cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) which constitute 
the catalytic subunits of protein kinases complex implicated in cell cycle G1/S transition 
(Malumbres, Barbacid 2005). CDK4 and CDK6 bind to their regulatory subunit cyclin 
D1, encoded by the CCND1 gene, and inactivate, by phosphorylation,  members of the 
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumour suppressor protein family (Malumbres, Barbacid 2005), 
which can affect  G1-S transition by inhibiting the release of transcription factors, such 
as E2F family members, whose target E-type cyclins are essential for Cdk2 activation 
(Malumbres, Barbacid 2005, Cobrinik 2005). Although we observed a significant up-
regulation of CDK4 mediated by both soybean and chickpea PICs, and an increase in 
the transcription of CCND1  in PC-3 cells induced by soybean PIC, the down-regulation 
of CDK2 and CDK6 in LNCaP cells and CDK6 in PC-3 cells, triggered by soybean 
PIC, would suggest a growth inhibition possibly by G1/S cell cycle arrest. The 
aforementioned observation seems to positively correlate with the induction of 
CDKN1A (p21Cip1/Waf1) and CDKN1B(p27Kip1) by both PICs in LNCaP cells and 
CDKN1A by soybean PIC in PC-3 cells, although statistical significance was not 
reached. These finding positively correlate with those obtained by Chen et al. (2005), 
who reported an accumulation of p21Cip1/Waf1 and p27Kip1 proteins, which act as 
cdk inhibitors, in MCF7 breast cancer cells induced by proteasome inhibition by BBI. 
However, our findings from cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry implicate the 
involvement of a different pathway  as an S phase cell cycle arrest was observed, and 
further investigation is deemed necessary, also considering the observed down-
regulation of CDKN1B gene in PC-3 cells.  
A molecular mechanism accounting for the inhibition of proliferation reported in 
LNCaP cells following exposure to chickpea PIC might be the up-regulation of DUSP1 
gene, encoding a nuclear inducible mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinase) 
phosphatase which inactivates MAP kinases through concomitant dephosphorylation of 
both  phosphothreonine and phosphotyrosine residues in the activation loop, in response 
to events such as oxidative stress or heat shock (Owens, Keyse 2007, Keyse, Emslie 
1992). The expression of DUSP1 negatively correlates to tumour grade (Boutros, 
Chevet & Metrakos 2008) and its down-regulation is an early event in the development 
of prostate cancer (Rauhala et al. 2005). Consistent with the anti-proliferative effects 
observed in LNCaP cells and the potential role of DUSP1, Chen et al. (2005) report a 
cell growth inhibition in MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with BBI, possibly linked to 
blockage of the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome and consequent 
accumulation of DUSP1 protein leading to dephosphorylation of extracellular signal-
regulated kinases ERK1/2. The inhibition of proliferation in PC-3 cells might be due to 
the down-regulation induced by soybean PIC of mitogen-activated protein kinase 
MAPK6 gene, encoding a nuclear Ser/Thr  kinase (Coulombe, Meloche 2007); this 
phenomenon is important given the high metastatic potential of the cell line and the 
reported increased promotion of cell invasion and metastasis mediated by the encoded 
kinase in human lung cancer (Long et al. 2012). However, the up-regulation of MAPK6 
induced by chickpea PIC in LNCaP cells might reflect a differential mechanism than 
that occurring in PC-3 cells, possibly linked to the different stage of the carcinogenic 
process. In fact, an increase in gene transcription upon proteasome inhibition has been 
described  in MCF7 breast cancer cells, which like LNCaP cells model early stages of 
carcinogenesis (Han, Yang & Frazier 2007), and might be interpreted as an event 
triggering a rescue mechanism defending the cells from the anti-proliferative effect 
induced by proteasome inhibitors.  
Soybean PIC significantly up-regulated the expression of AKT1 gene in PC-3 cells. 
AKT1 encodes a serine-threonine protein kinase involved in the regulation of cell 
survival, cell growth, cell cycle progression and apoptosis (Cully et al. 2006). In PC-3 
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells, reduced levels of AKT1 are known to 
inhibit proliferation, induce loss of cell adhesion followed by apoptosis and decrease 
cell migration (Cariaga-Martinez et al. 2013, Lin, Jiang & Chuu 2012); however, there 
is also contrasting evidence showing an inhibitory role for AKT1 against prostate 
cancer migration and invasion (Virtakoivu et al. 2012), supporting the potential anti-
cancer effects exerted by soybean PIC in our study. 
TGFB1 encodes a member of the transforming growth factor beta (TGFB) family of 
cytokines, which contributes to tissue homeostasis by controlling proliferation, 
differentiation, adhesion and migration  in various cell types, including epithelial, 
endothelial, stromal fibroblasts and immune cells (Siegel, Massague 2003). TGFB1 has 
been shown to confer drug-resistance against docetaxel-based chemotherapy, the first 
therapy of choice in castration-resistant prostate cancer, in PC-3 cells (Marin-Aguilera 
et al. 2012), and the down-regulation of TGFB1 gene mediated by soybean PIC would 
positively correlate with a potential beneficial modulation of carcinogenesis. 
 The observed up-regulation of the proto-oncogene JUN, encoding  a protein involved 
in the formation of the AP-1 early response transcription factor,  which can control the 
cell cycle and apoptosis (Wisdom, Johnson & Moore 1999),  in PC-3 cells induced by 
soybean PIC is controversial and further research is required to fully understand this 
phenomenon. Pure BBI was not used in the experiments. For further studies it would be 
beneficial to investigate the effects of pure BBI on the modulation of gene expression 
and to compare the magnitude of any observed effects with those of the PICs. Although 
PICs significantly modulated the expression of several genes as assessed by quantitative 
real-time PCR, it is important to highlight that the overall effect was small. Therefore, it 
is necessary to conduct further experiments to clarify the molecular mechanisms of the 
growth inhibitory activity of PICs, also including DU145 cells and a wider range of PIC 
concentrations. In particular, Western blot analysis would allow the study of targets of 
PICs at the protein expression level and would substantiate the findings of quantitative 
real-time PCR. 
The anti-cancer effects of BBI have been documented by various in vivo models of 
carcinogenesis, including those of prostate cancer. Wan et al. (1999) conducted study on 
human prostate cancer xenografts established by injecting LNCaP cells in nude mice 
demonstrating that BBI and BBIC, when administered through the diet for 6 weeks (1% 
for BBI, %, 2% or 3% for BBIC), can inhibit the growth of LNCaP xenografts. In a 
recent study carried out by McCormick et al .(2007) to determine the influence of BBIC 
on prostate carcinogenesis in rats the dietary administration of BBIC (0, 200 or 2000 
mg/kg diet) over a 13-month period conferred a modest dose-related protection against 
carcinogenesis in the dorsolateral + anterior prostate, which reached statistical 
significance for the 2000 mg/kg diet dose (P = 0.05). Tang et al. (2009) studied the 
effects of BBIC on androgen-sensitive prostate carcinogenesis in transgenic rats 
developing adenocarcinoma of the prostate (TRAP). Briefly, the authors found that 
feeding 3% (approx. 2000 mg/kg per day) BBIC to rats for 10 weeks inhibited the 
progression to prostate adenocarcinomas  in treated rats, as evaluated by the significant 
reduction (P < 0.05) of the relative epithelial areas in each prostate acini and 
multiplicity of adenocarcinomas (P < 0.01) in the lateral prostate lobes, feasibly due to 
the induction of Cx43 expression.  Our in vivo study did not allow us to conclusively 
state whether or not injections of chickpea PIC directly onto the tumour mass delayed 
tumour growth, despite the beneficial effects observed in the in vitro bioassays 
performed. The reasons for these inconclusive results   might be related to the small 
sample sizes (i.e. three animals per group) or to the different experimental settings 
employed to investigate the anti-cancer effects. In our in vivo systems the injected DU 
145 prostate cancer cells develop as 3-dimensional (i.e. length, width and height) 
masses and might respond to the administered treatment differently from cells organized 
as a monolayer. Besides, there could be differences in the effects of PICs when 
administered through the diet or when directly injected in the tumour mass, due to 
different pharmacokinetics or tissue-clearance mechanisms, therefore a further pilot 
study where mice are fed a diet supplemented with PICs would be scientifically 
appropriate. The discrepancies between our results and the beneficial anti-cancer effects 
observed in other studies might also be due to the use of DU 145 as cells of choice to 
induce tumours, as chickpea PIC might be more effective in vivo in earlier stages of 
prostate carcinogenesis, although this hypothesis disagree with our in vitro findings. 
Thus, testing LNCaP and PC-3 cells in addition to DU145 within the animal model 
would be beneficial to verify a potential selective effect on tumours with different 
aggressiveness and metastatic potential. Besides, the biochemical composition of 
chickpea PIC might differ from that of soybean BBIC and needs further studies to be 
characterized. In the present in vivo study the endpoint of choice was the growth of DU 
145 xenografted tumours, however it is conceivable that PICs might also act on tumour 
metastasis. This could have been evaluated by implanting luciferase-expressing cells 
and analyzing various tissues post mortem for bioluminescence (Ming et al. 2013) and 
would shed light on the potential of PICs as anti-metastatic agents in vivo.  In 
conclusion, the findings of our study support the existing evidence of PICs as potential 
chemopreventive agents against prostate carcinogenesis in vitro, and suggest the need to 
further investigate the role of chickpea PIC as a novel anti-cancer extract to fully 
elucidate its mechanisms of action both in vitro and in vivo. 
The table shows the absorbance (570nm) recorded for the various PIC concentrations, which is directly proportional to cell viability. Data shown are mean of at least 
3 independent experiment  SEM. *P  0.05. **P  0.001 vs. control; 1-way analysis of variance with LSD or Dunnetts T3 (when homogeneity of variances not 
assumed) post hoc analysis or Kruskal-Wallis with Mann-Wnitney U test (for data not normally distributed). 
TABLE 1                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Effect of protease inhibitor concentrates (PICS) on the viability of prostate cancer cells following 96 h exposure as assessed by the MTT assay 
 A570nm 
PIC concentration (mg/ml) 
  0 0.05 0.1 0.3 1 3 10 
LNCaP Soybean 0.77  0.02 0.56  0.02* 0.51  0.01* 0.49  0.02* 0.51  0.01* 0.54  0.02* 0.51  0.01* 
    Chickpea 0.78  0.03 0.67  0.03* 0.59  0.02* 0.53  0.01* 0.48  0.01* 0.60  0.00* 0.70  0.03 
  Commercial BBI 0.77  0.02  0.51  0.04** 0.50  0.03**    
PC-3 Soybean 0.93  0.07 0.68  0.05* 0.61  0.04* 0.52  0.04* 0.48  0.04* 0.42  0.06* 0.02  0.00* 
 Chickpea 0.88  0.05 0.79  0.06 0.72  0.05* 0.62  0.04** 0.58  0.03** 0.58  0.03** 0.54  0.04** 
 Commercial BBI 0.92  0.06  0.87  0.07 0.85  0.06    
DU 145 Soybean 0.90  0.09 0.64  0.06 0.55  0.05* 0.47  0.03* 0.40  0.03* 0.28  0.03* 0.03  0.01* 
 Chickpea 0.91  0.10 0.82  0.10 0.78  0.08 0.72  0.06 0.55  0.04 0.43  0.04 0.27  0.04* 
 Commercial BBI 0.90  0.09  0.83  0.09 0.88  0.10    
[Digitare una citazione tratta dal documento o il sunto di un 
punto di interesse.  possibile collocare la casella di testo in 
qualsiasi punto del documento. Utilizzare la scheda 
Strumenti disegno per cambiare la formattazione della 
citazione.] 
Fig. 1 Effect of soybean PIC on the viability of LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 prostate 
cancer cells. Twenty thousand (LNCaP), 8000 or 2000 cells per well were seeded in 96-
well plates and after 24 hours were treated with soybean PIC (0.05  10 mg/ml) in fresh 
medium. The treatment was refreshed after a further  48 hours. Cell viability was 
assessed by means of the MTT assay following  96 hours exposure to soybean PIC. The 
results represented are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  SEM 
normalized to untreated cells (control). (aP  0.05 vs. control; bP < 0.01 vs. LNCaP 
cells; cP  0.001 vs. LNCaP cells; dP < 0.01 vs. DU145 cells; eP  0.001 vs. DU 145 
cells; fP < 0.01 vs. PC-3 cells; gP < 0.001 vs. PC-3 cells treated with the same 
concentration of soybean PIC; 1-way analysis of variance with LSD post hoc analysis of 
variance or Kruskal-Wallis with Mann-Whitney U test (for data not normally 
distributed). 
Fig. 2 Effect of chickpea PIC on the viability of LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 prostate 
cancer cells. Twenty thousand (LNCaP), 8000 or 2000 cells per well were seeded in 96-
well plates and after 24 hours were treated with chickpea PIC (0.05  10 mg/ml) in fresh 
medium. The treatment was refreshed after a further  48 hours. Cell viability was 
assessed by means of the MTT assay following  96 hours exposure to soybean PIC. The 
results represented are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  SEM 
normalized to untreated cells (control). (aP  0.05 vs. control; bP  0.001 vs. control; cP 
< 0.05 vs. LNCaP cells; dP < 0.01 vs. LNCaP cells; eP  0.001 vs. LNCaP cells; fP < 
0.05 vs. DU 145 cells; gP < 0.01 vs DU 145 cells; hP < 0.001 vs DU 145 cells; iP < 0.05 
vs. PC-3 cells; lP < 0.01vs. PC-3 cells; mP  0.001 vs. PC-3 cells  treated with the same 
concentration of chickpea PIC; 1-way analysis of variance with LSD or Dunnetts T3 
(when homogeneity of variances not assumed) post hoc analysis or Kruskal-Wallis with 
Mann-Whitney U test (for data not normally distributed).  
Fig. 3 Effect of commercial BBI on the viability of LNCaP, PC-3 and DU 145 prostate 
cancer cells. Twenty thousand (LNCaP), 8000 or 2000 cells per well were seeded in 96-
well plates and after 24 hours were treated with chickpea PIC (0.05  10 mg/ml) in fresh 
medium. The treatment was refreshed after a further  48 hours. Cell viability was 
assessed by means of the MTT assay following  a 96 hours exposure to soybean PIC. 
The results represented are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  SEM 
normalized to untreated cells (control). ( aP  0.001vs. control; bP < 0.01 vs. LNCaP 
cells; cP  0.001 vs. LNCaP cells; dP  0.001 vs. DU 145 cells; eP < 0.01 vs PC-3 cells; 
fP  0.001 vs PC-3 cells treated with the same concentration of commercial BBI; 1-way 
analysis of variance with LSD post hoc analysis. 
Fig. 4 Viability of LNCaP cells treated with soybean PIC (A), chickpea PIC (B) or 
commercial BBI (C). Cells were plated at a cell density of 20x104 cells/ml, allowed to 
adhere for 24 hours and subsequently exposed to PICs for 96 hours. Cell viability was 
determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at 24 h intervals after start of the 
treatment till 96 h. Results shown are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  
Fig. 5 Viability of PC-3 cells treated with soybean PIC (A), chickpea PIC (B) or 
commercial BBI (C). Cells were plated at a cell density of 3.5x104 cells/lml, allowed to 
adhere for 24 hours and subsequently exposed to PICs for 96 hours. Cell viability was 
determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at 24 h intervals after start of the 
treatment till 96 h. Results shown are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  
Fig. 6 Viability of DU 145 cells treated with soybean PIC (A), chickpea PIC (B) or 
commercial BBI (C). Cells were plated at a cell density of 2x104 cells/lml, allowed to 
adhere for 24 hours and subsequently exposed to PICs for 96 hours. Cell viability was 
determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at 24 h intervals after start of the 
treatment till 96 h. Results shown are the mean of at least 3 independent experiments  
Fig. 7 Cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 cells after 24 h (A), 48 h (B), 72 h (C) and 
96 h (D) exposure to soybean PIC (0 - 10 mg/ml). Cells were stained with propidium 
iodide and analyzed using flow cytometry as described in Materials and Methods. The 
values shown represent the percentages of cells in the indicated phases. Results shown 
are the mean of three independent experiments  SEM (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P  
0.001 vs. untreated control cells; one-way analysis of variance with LSD post hoc 
analysis of variance). 
Fig. 8 Cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 cells after 24 h (A), 48 h (B), 72 h (C) and 
96 h (D) exposure to chickpea PIC (0 - 10 mg/ml). Cells were stained with propidium 
iodide and analyzed using flow cytometry as described in Materials and Methods. The 
values shown represent the percentages of cells in the indicated phases. Results shown 
are the mean of three independent experiments  SEM (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 vs. 
untreated control cells; one-way analysis of variance with LSD post hoc analysis of 
variance). 
Fig. 9 Cell cycle distribution pattern of PC-3 cells after 24 h (A), 48 h (B), 72 h (C) and 
96 h (D) exposure to commercial BBI (0 - 10 mg/ml). Cells were stained with 
propidium iodide and analyzed using flow cytometry as described in Materials and 
Methods. The values shown represent the percentages of cells in the indicated phases. 
Results shown are the mean of three independent experiments  SEM. 
Fig. 10  Effects of soybean / chickpea PIC (96-h incubation at 3 mg/ml) on the expression of genes with an effect on proliferation and cell cycle 
control, as determined by quantitative real-time PCR, in LNCaP cells. * P < 0.05 vs. control, 1-way analysis of variance with LSD or Dunnetts T3 
(when homogeneity of variances not assumed) post hoc analysis or Kruskal-Wallis with Mann-Whitney U test (for data not normally distributed). n = 
3, values represent the mean of relative gene expression based on untreated control  SEM normalized to control. 
Fig. 11  Effects of soybean / chickpea PIC (96-h incubation at 3 mg/ml) on the expression of genes with an effect on proliferation and cell cycle 
control, as determined by quantitative real-time PCR, in PC-3 cells. * P < 0.05;  **P < 0.01; ***P  0.001 vs. control, 1-way analysis of variance with 
LSD or Dunnetts T3 (when homogeneity of variances not assumed) post hoc analysis or Kruskal-Wallis with Mann-Whitney U test (for data not 
normally distributed). n = 3 for soybean PIC; n = 2 for chickpea PIC, values represent the mean of relative gene expression based on untreated control 
 SEM normalized to control. 
Fig. 12 Effect of chickpea PIC on DU 145 tumour growth in vivo. 1x106 DU 145 cells 
were injected in the rear dorsum of Balb/c SCID mice. Treatment was administerd via 
intratumoural injections (100 l of 10 mg/ml chickpea PIC) every two days from two 
weeks once the tumour reached a size of 100-200 mm3. The tumour size was measured 
every two days. The values shown represent the mean values of the tumour volumes 
measured for three mice in each group  SEM. 
References 
American Type Culture Collection 2011, MTT Cell Proliferation Assay. Available: 
http://www.lgcstandards-
atcc.org/~/media/DA5285A1F52C414E864C966FD78C9A79.ashx [2014, 
May/25]. 
Bethel, C.R., Faith, D., Li, X., Guan, B., Hicks, J.L., Lan, F., Jenkins, R.B., Bieberich, 
C.J. & De Marzo, A.M. 2006, "Decreased NKX3.1 protein expression in focal 
prostatic atrophy, prostatic Intraepithelial neoplasia, and adenocarcinoma: 
Association with Gleason score and chromosome 8p deletion", Cancer research, 
vol. 66, no. 22, pp. 10683-10690.  
Boutros, T., Chevet, E. & Metrakos, P. 2008, "Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
Kinase/MAP kinase phosphatase regulation: Roles in cell growth, death, and 
cancer", Pharmacological reviews, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 261-310.  
Bubendorf, L., Kononen, J., Koivisto, P., Schraml, P., Moch, H., Gasser, T., Willi, N., 
Mihatsch, M., Sauter, G. & Kallioniemi, O. 1999, "Survey of gene amplifications 
during prostate cancer progression by high throughput fluorescence in situ 
hybridization on tissue microarrays", Cancer research, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 803-806.  
Buttyan, R., Sawczuk, I., Benson, M., Siegal, J. & Olsson, C. 1987, "Enhanced 
Expression of the C-Myc Protooncogene in High-Grade Human-Prostate Cancers", 
Prostate, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 327-337.  
Caccialupi, P., Ceci, L.R., Siciliano, R.A., Pignone, D., Clemente, A. & Sonnante, G. 
2010, "Bowman-Birk inhibitors in lentil: Heterologous expression, functional 
characterisation and anti-proliferative properties in human colon cancer cells", 
Food Chemistry, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 1058-1066.  
Cariaga-Martinez, A.E., Lopez-Ruiz, P., Paz Nombela-Blanco, M., Motino, O., 
Gonzalez-Corpas, A., Rodriguez-Ubreva, J., Lobo, M.V.T., Alicia Cortes, M. & 
Colas, B. 2013, "Distinct and specific roles of AKT1 and AKT2 in androgen-
sensitive and androgen-independent prostate cancer cells", Cellular signalling, vol. 
25, no. 7, pp. 1586-1597.  
Chang, J., LI, J., Billings, P. & Kenneddy, A. 1990, "Effects of Protease Inhibitors on 
C-Myc Expression in Normal and Transformed C3h-10t1/2 Cell-Lines", Molecular 
carcinogenesis, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 226-232.  
Chen, Y.W., Huang, S.C., Lin-Shiau, S.Y. & Lin, J.K. 2005, "Bowman-Birk inhibitor 
abates proteasome function and suppresses the proliferation of MCF7 breast cancer 
cells through accumulation of MAP kinase phosphatase-1.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 
26, no. 7, pp. 1296-1306.  
Chlenski, A., Nakashiro, K., Ketels, K.V., Korovaitseva, G.I. & Oyasu, R. 2001, 
"Androgen receptor expression in androgen independent prostate cancer cell lines", 
Prostate, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 66-75.  
Clemente, A., Carmen Marin-Manzano, M., Jimenez, E., Carmen Arques, M. & 
Domoney, C. 2012, "The anti-proliferative effect of TI1B, a major Bowman-Birk 
isoinhibitor from pea (Pisum sativum L.), on HT29 colon cancer cells is mediated 
through protease inhibition.", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 108, no. Suppl 1, 
pp. S135-44.  
Clemente, A., Gee, J.M., Johnson, I.T., Mackenzie, D.A. & Domoney, C. 2005, "Pea 
(Pisum sativum L.) protease inhibitors from the Bowman-Birk class influence the 
growth of human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT29 cells in vitro.", Journal of 
Agricultural & Food Chemistry, vol. 53, no. 23, pp. 8979-8986.  
Clemente, A., Moreno, F.J., Marin-Manzano Mdel, C., Jimenez, E. & Domoney, C. 
2010, "The cytotoxic effect of Bowman-Birk isoinhibitors, IBB1 and IBBD2, from 
soybean (Glycine max) on HT29 human colorectal cancer cells is related to their 
intrinsic ability to inhibit serine proteases.", Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 396-405.  
Cobrinik, D. 2005, "Pocket proteins and cell cycle control", Oncogene, vol. 24, no. 17, 
pp. 2796-2809.  
Coulombe, P. & Meloche, S. 2007, "Atypical mitogen-activated protein kinases: 
Structure, regulation and functions", Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta-Molecular 
Cell Research, vol. 1773, no. 8, pp. 1376-1387.  
Cully, M., You, H., Levine, A. & Mak, T. 2006, "Beyond PTEN mutations: the PI3K 
pathway as an integrator of multiple inputs during tumorigenesis", Nature Reviews 
Cancer, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 184-192.  
de Lumen, B.O. 2005, "Lunasin: A cancer-preventive soy peptide", Nutrition reviews, 
vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 16-21.  
DeMarzo, A., Nelson, W., Isaacs, W. & Epstein, J. 2003, "Pathological and molecular 
aspects of prostate cancer", Lancet, vol. 361, no. 9361, pp. 955-964.  
Fernandes, A.O. & Banerji, A.P. 1996, "The field bean protease inhibitor can effectively 
suppress 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice", 
Cancer letters, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 219-224.  
Fleming, W., Hamel, A., MacDonald, R., Ramsay, E., Pettigrew, N., Johnston, B., 
Dodd, J. & Matusik, R. 1986, "Expression of the Cis-Myc Protooncogene in 
Human Prostatic-Carcinoma and Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia", Cancer research, 
vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1535-1538.  
Frenkel, K., Chrzan, K., Ryan, C.A., Wiesner, R. & Troll, W. 1987, "Chymotrypsin-
specific protease inhibitors decrease H2O2 formation by activated human 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes.", Carcinogenesis, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1207-1212.  
Frey, R. & Singletary, K. 2003, "Genistein activates p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase, inactivates ERK1/ERK2 and decreases Cdc25C expression in immortalized 
human mammary epithelial cells", Journal of Nutrition, vol. 133, no. 1, pp. 226-
Garcia-Gasca, T., Salazar-Olivo, L.A., Mendiola-Olaya, E. & Blanco-Labra, A. 2002, 
"The effects of a protease inhibitor fraction from tepary bean (Phaseolus 
acutifolius) on in vitro cell proliferation and cell adhesion of transformed cells", 
Toxicology in Vitro, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 229-233.  
Haenszel, W. & Kurihara, M. 1968, "Studies of Japanese migrants. I. Mortality from 
cancer and other diseases among Japanese in the United States.", Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 43-68.  
Han, A., Yang, L. & Frazier, A.B. 2007, "Quantification of the heterogeneity in breast 
cancer cell lines using whole-cell impedance spectroscopy", Clinical Cancer 
Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 139-143.  
Hartwell, L.H. & Weinert, T.A. 1989, "Checkpoints - Controls that Ensure the Order of 
Cell-Cycle Events", Science, vol. 246, no. 4930, pp. 629-634.  
Horoszewicz, J.S., Leong, S.S., Kawinski, E., Karr, J.P., Rosenthal, H., Chu, T.M., 
Mirand, E.A. & Murphy, G.P. 1983, "Lncap Model of Human Prostatic-
Carcinoma", Cancer research, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1809-1818.  
Hughes, C., Murphy, A., Martin, C., Fox, E., Ring, M., Sheils, O., Loftus, B. & 
O'Leary, J. 2006, "Topoisomerase II-alpha expression increases with increasing 
Gleason score and with hormone insensitivity in prostate carcinoma", Journal of 
clinical pathology, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 721-724.  
Iwata, T., Schultz, D., Hicks, J., Hubbard, G.K., Mutton, L.N., Lotan, T.L., Bethel, C., 
Lotz, M.T., Yegnasubramanian, S., Nelson, W.G., Dang, C.V., Xu, M., Anele, U., 
Koh, C.M., Bieberich, C.J. & De Marzo, A.M. 2010, "MYC Overexpression 
Induces Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia and Loss of Nkx3.1 in Mouse Luminal 
Epithelial Cells", Plos One, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. e9427-e9427.  
Jenkins, R., Qian, J., Lieber, M. & Bostwick, D. 1997, "Detection of c-myc oncogene 
amplification and chromosomal anomalies in metastatic prostatic carcinoma by 
fluorescence in situ hybridization", Cancer research, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 524-531.  
Joanitti, G.A., Azevedo, R.B. & Freitas, S.M. 2010, "Apoptosis and lysosome 
membrane permeabilization induction on breast cancer cells by an anticarcinogenic 
Bowman-Birk protease inhibitor from Vigna unguiculata seeds", Cancer letters, 
vol. 293, no. 1, pp. 73-81.  
Kaighn, M.E., Narayan, K.S., Ohnuki, Y., Lechner, J.F. & Jones, L.W. 1979, 
"Establishment and Characterization of a Human Prostatic-Carcinoma Cell-Line 
(Pc-3)", Investigative urology, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 16-23.  
Kastan, M.B. & Bartek, J. 2004, "Cell-cycle checkpoints and cancer", Nature, vol. 432, 
no. 7015, pp. 316-323.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998a, "The Bowman-Birk inhibitor from soybeans as an 
anticarcinogenic agent", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 68, no. 6 
Suppl, pp. 1406S-1412S.  
Kennedy, A.R. 1998b, "Chemopreventive agents: Protease inhibitors", Pharmacology & 
therapeutics, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 167-209.  
Kennedy, A.R., Szuhaj, B.F., Newberne, P.M. & Billings, P.C. 1993, "Preparation and 
Production of a Cancer Chemopreventive Agent, Bowman-Birk Inhibitor 
Concentrate", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 
281-302.  
Kennedy, A.R. & Wan, X.S. 2002, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk inhibitor on growth, 
invasion, and clonogenic survival of human prostate epithelial cells and prostate 
cancer cells.", Prostate, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 125-133.  
Kennedy, C., Donahue, J. & Wan, X. 1996, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk protease 
inhibitor on survival of fibroblasts and cancer cells exposed to radiation and cis-
platinum", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 209-
Keyse, S. & Emslie, E. 1992, "Oxidative Stress and Heat-Shock Induce a Human Gene 
Encoding a Protein-Tyrosine Phosphatase", Nature, vol. 359, no. 6396, pp. 644-
Kharbanda, S., Pandey, P., Schofield, L., Israels, S., Roncinske, R., Yoshida, K., Bharti, 
A., Yuan, Z., Saxena, S., Weichselbaum, R., Nalin, C. & Kufe, D. 1997, "Role for 
Bcl-x(L) as an inhibitor of cytosolic cytochrome C accumulation in DNA damage-
induced apoptosis", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, vol. 94, no. 13, pp. 6939-6942.  
Kluck, R., BossyWetzel, E., Green, D. & Newmeyer, D. 1997, "The release of 
cytochrome c from mitochondria: A primary site for Bcl-2 regulation of apoptosis", 
Science, vol. 275, no. 5303, pp. 1132-1136.  
Kosari, F., Munz, J.M.A., Savci-Heijink, C.D., Spiro, C., Klee, E.W., Kube, D.M., 
Tillmans, L., Slezak, J., Karnes, R.J., Cheville, J.C. & Vasmatzis, G. 2008, 
"Identification of prognostic biomarkers for prostate cancer", Clinical Cancer 
Research, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1734-1743.  
Li, P., Nijhawan, D., Budihardjo, I., Srinivasula, S., Ahmad, M., Alnemri, E. & Wang, 
X. 1997, "Cytochrome c and dATP-dependent formation of Apaf-1/caspase-9 
complex initiates an apoptotic protease cascade", Cell, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 479-489.  
Li, Y., Zhang, Z., Wang, Z., Wang, H., Zhang, L. & Zhu, L. 2009, "rBTI induces 
apoptosis in human solid tumor cell lines by loss in mitochondrial transmembrane 
potential and caspase activation", Toxicology letters, vol. 189, no. 2, pp. 166-175.  
Li, Z., Li, J., Mo, B., Hu, C., Liu, H., Qi, H., Wang, X. & Xu, J. 2008, "Genistein 
induces G(2)/M cell cycle arrest via stable activation of ERK1/2 pathway in MDA-
MB-231 breast cancer cells", Cell biology and toxicology, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 401-
Lin, H., Jiang, S.S. & Chuu, C. 2012, "Caffeic Acid Phenethyl Ester Causes p21(Cip1) 
Induction, Akt Signaling Reduction, and Growth Inhibition in PC-3 Human 
Prostate Cancer Cells", Plos One, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. e31286.  
Lippman, S., Lee, J., Lotan, R., Hittelman, W., Wargovich, M. & Hong, W. 1990, 
"Biomarkers as Intermediate End-Points in Chemoprevention Trials", Journal of 
the National Cancer Institute, vol. 82, no. 7, pp. 555-560.  
Locke, F.B. & King, H. 1980, "Cancer mortality risk among Japanese in the United 
States.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 1149-1156.  
Long, W., Foulds, C.E., Qin, J., Liu, J., Ding, C., Lonard, D.M., Solis, L.M., Wistuba, 
I.I., Qin, J., Tsai, S.Y., Tsai, M. & O'Malley, B.W. 2012, "ERK3 signals through 
SRC-3 coactivator to promote human lung cancer cell invasion", Journal of 
Clinical Investigation, vol. 122, no. 5, pp. 1869-1880.  
Magee, P.J., Owusu-Apenten, R., McCann, M.J., Gill, C.I. & Rowland, I.R. 2012, 
"Chickpea (Cicer arietinum) and other plant-derived protease inhibitor concentrates 
inhibit breast and prostate cancer cell proliferation in vitro.", Nutrition & Cancer, 
vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 741-748.  
Magee, P. & Rowland, I. 2004, "Phyto-oestrogens, their mechanism of action: current 
evidence for a role in breast and prostate cancer", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 
91, no. 4, pp. 513-531.  
Malkowicz, S.B., McKenna, W.G., Vaughn, D.J., Wan, X.S., Propert, K.J., Rockwell, 
K., Marks, S.H.F., Wein, A.J. & Kennedy, A.R. 2001, "Effects of Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor concentrate (BBIC) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia", 
Prostate, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 16-28.  
Malumbres, M. & Barbacid, M. 2005, "Mammalian cyclin-dependent kinases", Trends 
in biochemical sciences, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 630-641.  
Marin-Aguilera, M., Codony-Servat, J., Kalko, S.G., Fernandez, P.L., Bermudo, R., 
Buxo, E., Jose Ribal, M., Gascon, P. & Mellado, B. 2012, "Identification of 
Docetaxel Resistance Genes in Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer", Molecular 
Cancer Therapeutics, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 329-339.  
Mathers, J.C. 2002, "Pulses and carcinogenesis: potential for the prevention of colon, 
breast and other cancers", British Journal of Nutrition, vol. 88, pp. S273-S279.  
McCormick, D.L., Johnson, W.D., Bosland, M.C., Lubet, R.A. & Steele, V.E. 2007, 
"Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by soy isoflavones and by 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 57, 
no. 2, pp. 184-193.  
Mills, P.K., Beeson, W.L., Phillips, R.L. & Fraser, G.E. 1989, "Cohort study of diet, 
lifestyle, and prostate cancer in Adventist men.", Cancer, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 598-
Ming, L., Byrne, N.M., Camac, S.N., Mitchell, C.A., Ward, C., Waugh, D.J., 
McKeown, S.R. & Worthington, J. 2013, "Androgen deprivation results in time-
dependent hypoxia in LNCaP prostate tumours: Informed scheduling of the 
bioreductive drug AQ4N improves treatment response", International Journal of 
Cancer, vol. 132, no. 6, pp. 1323-1332. 
Molinari, M. 2000, "Cell cycle checkpoints and their inactivation in human cancer", 
Cell proliferation, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 261-274.  
Mosmann, T. 1983, "Rapid Colorimetric Assay for Cellular Growth and Survival - 
Application to Proliferation and Cyto-Toxicity Assays", Journal of immunological 
methods, vol. 65, no. 1-2, pp. 55-63.  
Ormerod MG 2000, "Flow Cytometry: A Practical Approach" in Analysis of DNA: 
general methods Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 83-97.  
Owens, D.M. & Keyse, S.M. 2007, "Differential regulation of MAP kinase signalling 
by dual-specificity protein phosphatases", Oncogene, vol. 26, no. 22, pp. 3203-
3213.  
Park, J.H., Jeong, H.J. & de Lumen, B.O. 2005, "Contents and bioactivities of lunasin, 
bowman-birk inhibitor, and isoflavones in soybean seed.", Journal of Agricultural 
& Food Chemistry, vol. 53, no. 20, pp. 7686-7690.  
Poolzobel, B.L., Lotzmann, N., Knoll, M., Kuchenmeister, F., Lambertz, R., Leucht, U., 
Schroder, H.G. & Schmezer, P. 1994, "Detection of Genotoxic Effects in Human 
Gastric and Nasal-Mucosa Cells Isolated from Biopsy Samples", Environmental 
and molecular mutagenesis, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 23-45.  
Rauhala, H., Porkka, K., Tolonen, T., Martikainen, P., Tammela, T. & Visakorpi, T. 
2005, "Dual-specificity phosphatase 1 and serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 
are downregulated in prostate cancer", International Journal of Cancer, vol. 117, 
no. 5, pp. 738-745.  
Robles-Ramirez, M.d.C., Ramon-Gallegos, E., Mora-Escobedo, R. & Torres-Torres, N. 
2012, "A peptide fraction from germinated soybean protein down-regulates PTTG1 
and TOP2A mRNA expression, inducing apoptosis in cervical cancer cells.", 
Journal of Experimental Therapeutics & Oncology, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 255-263.  
Saito, T., Sato, H., Virgona, N., Hagiwara, H., Kashiwagi, K., Suzuki, K., Asano, R. & 
Yano, T. 2007, "Negative growth control of osteosarcoma cell by Bowman-Birk 
protease inhibitor from soybean; involvement of connexin 43.", Cancer letters, vol. 
253, no. 2, pp. 249-257.  
Sasaki, M., Tanaka, Y., Perinchery, G., Dharia, A., Kotcherguina, I., Fujimoto, S.I. & 
Dahiya, R. 2002, "Methylation and inactivation of estrogen, progesterone, and 
androgen receptors in prostate cancer", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 
vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 384-390.  
Schuurman, A.G., Goldbohm, R.A., Dorant, E. & van den Brandt, P.A. 1998, 
"Vegetable and fruit consumption and prostate cancer risk: A cohort study in the 
Netherlands", Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 
673-680.  
Severson, R.K., Nomura, A.M.Y., Grove, J.S. & Stemmermann, G.N. 1989, "A 
Prospective-Study of Demographics, Diet, and Prostate-Cancer among Men of 
Japanese Ancestry in Hawaii", Cancer research, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1857-1860.  
Shimizu, H., Ross, R.K., Bernstein, L., Yatani, R., Henderson, B.E. & Mack, T.M. 
1991, "Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immigrants in 
Los Angeles County.", British journal of cancer, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 963-966.  
Siegel, P. & Massague, J. 2003, "Cytostatic and apoptotic actions of TGF-beta in 
homeostasis and cancer", Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 807-820.  
Stclair, W.H., Billings, P.C., Carew, J.A., Kellermcgandy, C., Newberne, P. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1990, "Suppression of Dimethylhydrazine-Induced Carcinogenesis 
in Mice by Dietary Addition of the Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor", Cancer 
research, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 580-586.  
Stclair, W.H. & Stclair, D.K. 1991, "Effect of the Bowman-Birk Protease Inhibitor on 
the Expression of Oncogenes in the Irradiated Rat Colon", Cancer research, vol. 
51, no. 17, pp. 4539-4543.  
Stone, K.R., Mickey, D.D., Wunderli, H., Mickey, G.H. & Paulson, D.F. 1978, 
"Isolation of a Human Prostate Carcinoma Cell Line (Du 145)", International 
Journal of Cancer, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 274-281.  
Tamir, S., Bell, J., Finlay, T.H., Sakal, E., Smirnoff, P., Gaur, S. & Birk, Y. 1996, 
"Isolation, characterization, and properties of a trypsin-chymotrypsin inhibitor from 
amaranth seeds.", Journal of protein chemistry, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 219-229.  
Tang, M., Asamoto, M., Ogawa, K., Naiki-Ito, A., Sato, S., Takahashi, S. & Shirai, T. 
2009, "Induction of apoptosis in the LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cell line and 
prostate adenocarcinomas of SV40T antigen transgenic rats by the Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor.", Pathology international, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 790-796.  
Tilley, W., Bentel, J., Aspinall, J., Hall, R. & Horsfall, D. 1995, "Evidence for a Novel 
Mechanism of Androgen Resistance in the Human Prostate-Cancer Cell-Line, Pc-
3", Steroids, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 180-186.  
Tominaga, S. 1985, "Cancer incidence in Japanese in Japan, Hawaii, and western 
United States.", National Cancer Institute Monographs, vol. 69, pp. 83-92.  
Troll, W. & Wiesner, R. 1983, "Protease Inhibitors - Possible Anticarcinogens in Edible 
Seeds", Prostate, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 345-349.  
Tsavaris, N., Lazaris, A., Kosmas, C., Gouveris, P., Kavantzas, N., Kopterides, P., 
Papathomas, T., Arapogiannis, G., Zorzos, H., Kyriakou, V. & Patsouris, E. 2009, 
"Topoisomerase I and II alpha protein expression in primary colorectal cancer and 
recurrences following 5-fluorouracil-based adjuvant chemotherapy", Cancer 
chemotherapy and pharmacology, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 391-398.  
Virtakoivu, R., Pellinen, T., Rantala, J.K., Perala, M. & Ivaska, J. 2012, "Distinct roles 
of AKT isoforms in regulating beta 1-integrin activity, migration, and invasion in 
prostate cancer", Molecular biology of the cell, vol. 23, no. 17, pp. 3357-3369.  
Wan, X.S., Hamilton, T.C., Ware, J.H., Donahue, J.J. & Kennedy, A.R. 1998, "Growth 
inhibition and cytotoxicity induced by Bowman-Birk inhibitor concentrate in 
cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells.", Nutrition & Cancer, vol. 31, no. 1, 
pp. 8-17.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice.", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Ware, J.H., Wan, X.S., Rubin, H., Schechter, N.M. & Kennedy, A.R. 1997, "Soybean 
Bowman-Birk protease inhibitor is a highly effective inhibitor of human mast cell 
chymase", Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, vol. 344, no. 1, pp. 133-138.  
Webber, M.M., Bello, D. & Quader, S. 1997, "Immortalized and tumorigenic adult 
human prostatic epithelial cell lines: Characteristics and applications .2. 
Tumorigenic cell lines", Prostate, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 58-64.  
Whittemore, A.S., Kolonel, L.N., Wu, A.H., John, E.M., Gallagher, R.P., Howe, G.R., 
Burch, J.D., Hankin, J., Dreon, D.M. & West, D.W. 1995, "Prostate cancer in 
relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the 
United States and Canada.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 87, no. 
9, pp. 652-661.  
Wisdom, R., Johnson, R. & Moore, C. 1999, "c-Jun regulates cell cycle progression and 
apoptosis by distinct mechanisms", Embo Journal, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 188-197.  
Yang, J., Liu, X., Bhalla, K., Kim, C., Ibrado, A., Cai, J., Peng, T., Jones, D. & Wang, 
X. 1997, "Prevention of apoptosis by Bcl-2: Release of cytochrome c from 
mitochondria blocked", Science, vol. 275, no. 5303, pp. 1129-1132.  
Yu, H., Harris, R.E., Gao, Y.T., Gao, R. & Wynder, E.L. 1991, "Comparative 
epidemiology of cancers of the colon, rectum, prostate and breast in Shanghai, 
China versus the United States.", International journal of epidemiology, vol. 20, 
no. 1, pp. 76-81.  
Zhang, L., Wan, X.S., Donahue, J.J., Ware, J.H. & Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Effects of the 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor on clonogenic survival and cisplatin- or radiation-induced 
cytotoxicity in human breast, cervical, and head and neck cancer cells.", Nutrition 
& Cancer, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 165-173.  
Chapter 4 
Effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from chickpea and soybean on the 
invasiveness of human prostate cancer cells in vitro 
Authors: 
Gianfranco Bartolini1, Chris I.R. Gill1, Richard Owusu-Apenten1, Ian R. Rowland2 and 
Pamela J. Magee1 
1Northern Ireland Centre for Food and Health, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Northern 
Ireland, BT52 1SA 
2Department of Food Biosciences, University of Reading, UK, RG6 6AH 
Abstract 
Invasion is a fundamental step in metastasis, the process through which cancer cells 
degrade the basement membrane and the extra cellular matrix and through the 
bloodstream reach a new site where they establish a new tumour mass. Metastasis  
correlates  poorly with the prognosis of the subject and finding new approaches for the 
prevention or management of this condition is essential for the well-being of the 
oncological patient. Protease Inhibitors of the Bowman-Birk family are known for their 
anti-cancer properties however the effects of these compounds on invasion and 
metastasis has not been studied in detail. The aim of  this study was to assess the effects 
of Protease Inhibitor Concentrates (PICs) from soybean and chickpea on the 
invasiveness of prostate cancer cells in vitro by means of the Matrigel Invasion assay 
and the Migration assay. The modulation of three genes involved in cancer invasion and 
metastasis (MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9) was also  investigated using quantitative 
Real-Time PCR.   
Soybean PIC (0.1, 1 mg/ml) inhibited the invasion of PC-3 cells through Matrigel (by 
37.9 and 43.1% respectively), an effect that may have been attributable to the down-
regulation of MMP-1 observed following treatment with soybean PIC (3mg/ml) for 96 h 
(p < 0.05). 
This study highlights the potential role of soybean PIC as a chemopreventive agent 
however further studies are needed to confirm this extracts anti-invasive properties and 
the associated mechanism of action.  
Introduction 
Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer diagnosed in males in the United 
Kingdom (Cancer Research UK 2012), and even though recent screening strategies 
account for early detection at a stage when the tumour is still organ confined, metastasis 
correlates with poor prognosis and plays a vital role in the  morbidity and mortality of 
the disease (Henley, Ulbright 2007).  Metastasis accounts for 90% of deaths from solid 
tumours (Gupta, Massague 2006, Weigelt, Peterse & van't Veer 2005) and is largely due 
to tumour cell invasion. Invasion is an important biological step in the metastatic 
process, and is initiated when  cancer cells adhere to and subsequently degrade the 
basement membrane (BM), via protelytic enzymes. This enables cancer cells to migrate 
through the extracellular matrix (ECM), enter the blood circulation and eventually 
colonize a new site different from the originary tumour micoenvironment 
(Stetlerstevenson, Aznavoorian & Liotta 1993, Chambers, Groom & MacDonald 2002, 
Fidler 2003).  Given the importance of cell invasion in the metastatic process, the 
identification of factors capable of modulating the invasive properties of cancer cells 
would be highly beneficial in the management and potential prevention of advanced 
prostate cancer.  
The mechanisms involved in the progression of prostate cancer are not fully understood, 
however environmental factors, such as the diet, might have an important role by 
interacting with the individuals genetic make-up (Whittemore et al. 1995, Haenszel, 
Kurihara 1968, Shimizu et al. 1991, Locke, King 1980, Yu et al. 1991, Tominaga 1985), 
and much research has been conducted on dietary components putatively correlated 
with a reduction in prostate cancer risk and/or mortality. Diets consumed in Asian 
countries, such as Japan and China, where the risk and mortality rates of prostate cancer 
are lower than that observed in the westernized world, are richer in plant-derived foods, 
pulses and legumes (Strom et al. 1999, Herman et al. 1995, Severson et al. 1989). A 
protease inhibitor isolated from soybean, named Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI), has 
been shown to possess potent anti-cancer properties in both in vitro and in vivo models 
of various cancers, including prostate cancer (Kennedy, Wan 2002, Kennedy, Wan 
2002, Wan et al. 1999, McCormick et al. 2007). A soybean extract enriched in BBI, 
termed BBIC, has been developed for use in large scale human trials and has been 
shown to be safely effective at improving the clinical condition of patients affected by 
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) (Malkowicz et al. 2001). The effects of BBI against 
cell invasion in in vitro models of prostate cancer have been poorly investigated, 
however experimental evidence seems to suggest a potential anti-metastatic effect 
(Kennedy, Wan 2002). PICs from other legumes, e.g. chickpea, possess similar anti-
cancer activities to that of soybean BBI (Yavelow et al. 1985, Giron-Calle et al. 2004), 
however to date the anti-invasive effects of PICs in prostate cancer cell models have 
only been investigated with soybean BBI (Kennedy, Wan 2002).  
In this study the effects of PICs from soybean and chickpea on the invasiveness of PC-3 
and DU 145 cell lines were investigated by means of the Matrigel Invasion Assay, 
which poses a suitable model for measuring the ability of cells to invade the basement 
membrane, mimicked by the Matrigel membrane (Albini et al. 1987), The modulation 
of the invasion of prostate cancer cells in vitro was further studied using the Migration 
Assay and quantitative real-time PCR was used to investigate the effects of PICs on 
genes implicated in invasion and metastasis. 
Materials and Methods 
Preparation of PIC working solutions 
Soybean and chickpea PICs were prepared as described in chapter 2. For the Matrigel 
Invasion Assay and the Migration Assay, a 1 mg/ml PIC stock solution was prepared 
dissolving the appropriate amount of PICs in growth medium previously warmed to 
37C in a water bath. The PIC mixture was vortexed for two minutes, stirred for two 
hours, centrifuged (8000 rpm, 4 C, 30 minutes) and finally sterile filtered with a 0.22 
m filter, as described in chapter 2. A 0.1 mg/ml solution was prepared from the 1 
mg/ml stock solution by dilution. For quantitative real-time PCR a 3 mg/ml PIC 
working solution was prepared as described above. The characterization of PIC protein 
fraction and chymotrypsin inhibitory activity is described in chapter 2. 
Cell culture 
The cell lines used in this study were PC-3, DU 145 and LNCaP, and were a kind gift 
from Dr. Jenny Worthington (University of Ulster). LNCaP cells, isolated from a left 
supraclavicular lymph node metastasis, are a suitable model for early stage prostate 
carcinogenesis, where the tumour is androgen-responsive (Horoszewicz et al. 1983), 
while DU 145 (Stone et al. 1978) and PC-3 (Kaighn et al. 1979) cells constitute a model 
for more advanced stages of the disease, characterized by irresponsiveness to male 
hormones. DU 145 and PC-3 cell lines were derived from brain and bone metastatic 
lesions of prostate adenocarcinoma, respectively, and do not express the androgen 
receptor (AR) (Chlenski et al. 2001, Tilley et al. 1995).  Cell culture media and 
supplements were purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK) unless otherwise stated. All cell 
lines were cultured as monolayers in Roux flasks at 37 C with 5% CO2 and 95% 
filtered air and harvested when  75% confluent, with growth medium replaced three 
times a week. LNCaP cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 
2.0mM L-glutamine, 10.0mM Hepes (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK), 1% penicillin-
streptomycin, sterile-filtered (with a 0.22 m syringe filter) 12.5 mM glucose in 
genomic grade water and 10% foetal bovine serum. DU 145 cells were maintained in 
RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin and 10% foetal 
bovine serum. PC-3 cells were cultured in Hams F-12 medium supplemented with 10 
% FBS, 1% penicillin / streptomycin  and 2 mmol/L L-glutamine. Cells were counted 
and tested for viability under an inverted microscope (20x magnification) by means of 
trypan blue exclusion assay using a Neubauer hemocytometer (Poolzobel et al. 1994). 
Matrigel Invasion Assay and Migration Assay 
The Matrigel Invasion Assay (Albini et al. 1987) was used to investigate the modulation 
of PICs on the metastatic properties of PC-3 and DU 145 cell lines. 
Briefly, 2 ml of MRC-5 cells (2x105 cells/ml) per well were seeded into original BD 
Biocaoat plates (BD Biosciences, Bedford, UK, via Ulster Anaesthetics, Moneyrea, NI, 
UK) and incubated at 37 C in a humidified incubator (95% air, 5% CO2) for two hours 
to allow the cells attach. Invasion inserts were filled with 2 ml of serum free growth 
medium and rehydrated for two hours in a 6 well plate with 2 ml of serum free growth 
medium per well in a humidified incubator (95% air, 5% CO2). Serum free medium was 
removed from the invasion chambers and 2.5 ml of cell suspension (2.5 x 105 cells) 
were seeded in the invasion chambers in the presence or absence of PICs (0.1 and 1 
mg/ml soybean and chickpea PICs) in serum free medium. Each treatment was 
performed in duplicate and 0.1 mg/ml BBI (Sigma) was used as a control. The plates 
were incubated for 24 hours in a humidified incubator (95% air, 5% CO2) and the 
inserts were fixed with 70% ethanol (in deionized water) and stained for 2 minutes 
(both apical and basolateral layers) with hematoxylin (Sigma). Using a cotton bud half 
the surface of the basolateral layer and the opposite half from the apical surface were 
wiped, so as to remove approximately half of the invasive and non-invasive cells, 
respectively. The number of cells in 5 random fields of apical (non-invasive cells) and 
basolateral (invasive cells) surfaces were viewed under x200 magnification using Andor 
IQ imaging software (Andor Technology, Belfast, UK) and counted. The results were 
presented as % invasion, with control cells considered 100%. The Migration Assay is 
similar to the Matrigel Invasion Assay, the only difference being the absence of the 
synthetic matrigel coating on the insert membrane. It is thus a useful means of 
investigating the migration properties of cells, regardless of their ability to hydrolyze 
components of the basement membrane, in the presence or absence of test compounds. 
The Migration Assay was performed on PC-3 cells, under the same experimental 
conditions as the Matrigel Invasion Assay and the results presented as % migration. 
Screening test for LNCaP cell invasion 
A preliminary screening test was also performed on LNCaP cells using PC-3 cells, 
MRC-5 cells or 10% FBS as sources of chemoattractant, to assess whether the LNCaP 
cell line would pose as a suitable model for assessing the modulation of invasiveness, 
using 5 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours as durations of exposure to the 
chemoattractant. To date there is a paucity of published data on the modulation of the 
metastatic potential of LNCaP cells exerted by BBI in vitro, as assessed by means of the 
invasion assay. Kennedy & Wan (2002) conducted a study investigating the potential 
anti-invasive effects of BBI in LNCaP cells, however, when replicating the reported 
experimental conditions, a very low LNCaP cell invasion was observed, in agreement 
with the poor invasiveness reported in the literature (Pulukuri et al. 2005, Zhang et al. 
2012, Hoosein et al. 1991). A pilot study was therefore deemed useful to determine 
whether different chemoattractants and/or durations of incubation could improve the 
invasive capacity of LNCaP cells.   For the trial study on LNCaP cells, the same 
experimental protocol was used, however  medium conditioned by PC-3 (2x105 
cells/ml) or containing 10 % FBS were used as chemoattractant agents, for 5 hours, 12 
hours, 24 hours or 48 hours, after which time cells were stained and counted as 
described above. 
Quantitative real-time PCR 
The effect of soybean and chickpea PICs on the expression of three genes with 
proteolytic activity against components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) (i.e. MMP-1, 
MMP-2, MMP-9) and thus with a potential role in the invasive process, was 
investigated in highly invasive PC-3 cells (Keer et al. 1991) and poorly invasive LNCaP 
cells (Angelucci et al. 2000) using quantitative real-time PCR. The experimental 
protocol has been previously described in chapter 2. Briefly, 15x104 PC-3 and 106 
LNCaP cells were seeded in 25cm2 tissue culture flasks and incubated overnight, before 
being treated with PICs (0 and 3 mg/ml) for 96 hours (with treatment refreshed after 48 
hours). At the end of the 96-hour exposure RNA was extracted from cells using an 
RNeasy Mini Kit following homogenization with QIAshredder (Qiagen, Crawley, 
Germany). 2.5 l total RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA (as detailed in chapter 
2) and real-time PCR was carried out by means of the LightCycler 480 instrument 
(Roche Diagnostics) using 10 l LightCycler 480 Probes Master (Roche Diagnostics), 
50 g cDNA and genomic-grade water, according to the manufacturers guidelines. 
Beta-actin (ACTB), glyceraldeide-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and 
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (HPRT1) were used as reference genes. 
Statistical Analysis 
The effects of PICs on the invasion and migration properties of cells and on the 
expression of relevant genes were compared to untreated controls by means of 
independent-samples t-test (SPSS 20.0). Results from the Matrigel invasion assay and 
the Migration assay are expressed as the mean of three independent experiments carried 
out in duplicate. The real-time qPCR was carried out in triplicate and the relative 
quantification of target gene transcripts in comparison to a reference gene transcript was 
calculated using the mathematical model developed by Pfaffl (2001). One-way Anova 
(SPSS 20.0) with Dunnetts T3 post hoc analysis was used to compare the effects of 
treatment on the expression of selected genes vs. control group. 
Results 
Matrigel Invasion Assay and Migration Assay 
The effects of PICs on the invasion of PC-3 cells are shown in Fig. 1. PC-3 cells were 
highly invasive (18.7 %) through Matrigel. Soybean PIC reduced the invasion of PC-3 
cells by 37.9 and 43.1 % for 0.1 and 1 mg/ml, respectively, however this inhibitory 
effect did not  reach statistical significance. Purified BBI, tested at 0.1 mg/ml, 
significantly reduced the invasion of PC-3 cells  by 65.8 %  (P < 0.05). Chickpea PIC 
had no effect on PC-3 cell invasion. In contrast to PC-3 cells, none of the extracts tested 
affected DU 145 cell invasion (Figure 2).  
In order to determine if inhibition of PC-3 cell invasion was a consequence of anti-
migrative effects, the effects of the extracts on the migration of PC-3 cells were 
determined. In contrast to the effect of BBI on cell invasion, migration was unaffected 
by BBI treatment in PC-3 cells. Furthermore no significant effects were observed on 
PC-3 cell migration  with soybean or chickpea PICs (Figure 3).  
LNCaP cells were poorly invasive through Matrigel under most experimental conditions 
(Table 1). A higher invasiveness was observed when cells were exposed to medium 
conditioned by PC-3 cells for 48 hours (17.5 %) or medium containing 10 % FBS for 12 
or 24 hours (19.1 and 14.1 %, respectively), however the results were obtained from a 
single invasion insert analysed per endpoint and need further investigations to be 
confirmed. 
Quantitative real-time PCR 
The effects of PICs on the expression of MMP-1,  in PC-3 cells are shown in Fig. 4. 
Treatment with soybean PIC significantly down-regulated the expression of MMP-1  (P 
< 0.05) by 68.3 % in PC-3 cells. Chickpea PIC did not affect MMP-1 expression in PC-
3 cells.  MMP-2  and MMP-9  were not expressed in PC-3 cells. LNCaP cells  did not 
express any of the tested genes 
Discussion 
To date, few studies have investigated the effects of PICs on invasion in cancer model 
systems in vitro, and to our knowledge this is the first study to investigate the effects of 
PICs on invasion in PC-3 and DU 145 prostate cancer cell lines. The ability of soybean 
BBI to inhibit invasion of prostate cancer cells has been previously observed  by 
Kennedy & Wan (2002) in LNCaP cells,  where the presence of BBI at 0.1 mg/ml in the 
cell culture medium for 5 hours significantly inhibited LNCaP cell invasion across 
Matrigel (by 26.10%). In support of the findings of Kennedy & Wan (2002), we 
observed an inhibition of PC-3 cell invasion induced by both purified BBI and soybean 
PIC, albeit the effect observed with soybean PIC was not significant. BBI appeared to 
exert a more potent effect on PC-3 cells in our study in comparison to that observed by 
Kennedy & Wan (2002) in LNCaP cells, however PC-3 cells were exposed to BBI for a 
longer period of time (24h vs 5 h) and there were also differences in the chemoattractant 
used. We were unable to investigate the effects of PICs on LNCaP cell invasion as 
under the experimental conditions used by Kennedy & Wan (2002) because LNCaP 
cells exhibited a poor invasive capacity (2.5%). This is in agreement with previous 
studies that have reported LNCaP cells to be a poorly invasive cell-line (Pulukuri et al. 
2005, Hoosein et al. 1991, Zhang, Altuwaijri & Yeh 2004). The selection of the PC-3 
cell line, given the measured endpoint, is scientifically appropriate in light of its 
potential beneficial use in patients with metastatic prostate cancer, which is currently 
incurable (Zhong et al. 2008).  The effects of soybean PIC observed in the current study 
seem to be more potent in PC-3 than in DU 145 cells, and this might suggest a stronger 
efficacy of the extract at a later stage of prostate carcinogenesis, where cancer cells have 
disseminated in the body from the primary tumour site, while chickpea PIC did not 
affect the invasive capacity of either cell-line.  The inhibitory effects observed with 
soybean PIC/ BBI in PC-3 cells were not due to inhibition of migration, supporting the 
hypothesis of a true anti-invasive action, and suggest that patients with metastatic 
prostate cancer might benefit from the consumption of protease inhibitors through 
dietary sources or from food supplements . To date much effort has been put into 
investigating dietary agents which could help reduce the aggressiveness and lower the 
mortality rates of various cancers, including prostate cancer, and thus metastatic 
potential is a key target for chemopreventative strategies. While a beneficial modulation 
of metastatic properties has been previously reported for dietary components from 
legumes, such as isoflavones (Magee et al. 2006, Huang et al. 2005, Zheng et al. 2012),  
this is the first study on  the anti-invasive effects of soybean PICs in PC-3 cells.   
The mechanism associated with the anti-invasive effect of soybean BBI has not been 
investigated, however a recent study by Garcia-Gasca et al. (2012) demonstrated that a 
purified protease inhibitor of the Bowman-Birk family from tepary bean seeds (TBPI) 
decreased the invasiveness of 3T3/v-mos transformed murine fibroblasts by 70%  by 
inhibiting proteolysis of the extra cellular matrix through suppression of Matrix 
Metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) activity.  
Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) might be important players in cancer invasion and 
metastasis, exerting their role through the degradation of the extracellular matrix 
(ECM), the first barrier encountered by malignant cells when spreading from their site 
of origin (Nelson et al. 2000). Besides their action on the ECM, MMPs can promote 
cancer progression  through stimulation of endothelial migration and angiogenesis and 
processing of growth factors (Stetler-Stevenson, Yu 2001, Hart et al. 2002). MMP-1, 
MMP-2 and MMP-9 proteins, which are specific for different substrates (i.e. MMP-1 is 
a collagenase while  MMP-2 and 9 are gelatinases) (Curran, Murray 1999, Nagase, 
Woessner 1999, Seiki 1999), are over-expressed in prostate cancer tissue (Zhong et al. 
2008, Daja et al. 2003, Escaff et al. 2010), thus posing as important prognostic factors 
in patients affected by the disease. In particular, Zhong et al. (2008) examined prostate 
tissue samples from 62 patients with prostate cancer and 15 patients with benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) using immunohistochemical staining, reporting an elevated 
expression of MMP-1 in 80.7 % of patients with prostate cancer compared to normal 
prostate tissue, significantly higher than the group with BPH, suggesting an over-
expression of MMP-1 related to prostate cancer progression. We found a statistically 
significant  down-regulation of MMP-1  in PC-3 cells when treated with soybean PIC, 
which could possibly account for a potential anti-metastatic effect and  might be the 
mechanism responsible for the anti-invasive effects observed  within the invasion assay. 
The most common metastatic site for prostate cancer is the bone (Jacobs 1983), and 
MMP-1 is involved in the establishment of prostatic epithelial cells within bone marrow 
(Hart et al. 2002, Costa et al. 2011, Casimiro et al. 2013), which is a common cause of 
prostate cancer mortality (Coleman 2001, Jemal et al. 2007). A positive correlation 
between a reduction of invasiveness and down-regulation of MMP-1 gene in prostate 
cancer induced by a dietary compound has been also observed by Lewandowska et al. 
(2013), who observed a suppression of gene expression in DU 145 cells following a 72 
hours incubation with evening primrose flavanol preparation. Thus, our results  are 
encouraging and suggest a molecular mechanism through which soybean PIC might 
modulate the metastatic properties of highly invasive PC-3 cells and thus favourably 
regulate a pathological phenomenon linked to high mortality in patients with prostate 
cancer. Of note, for the quantitative Real-Time PCR study a higher concentration (3 
mg/ml vs. 0.1 mg/ml) and a longer duration of exposure (96 hours vs. 24 hours) was 
employed in comparison to the invasion assay, and the same conditions might have 
enhanced the anti-invasive effects in the invasion assay. This should be investigated in 
further studies. 
In conclusion, the present study highlights the potential anti-invasive capacity of 
soybean PIC in prostate cancer, an area where not much research has been conducted, 
and suggests a possible mechanism  for this  effect, however further investigation is 
needed to fully understand the role of protease inhibitors and their mechanisms of action 
at a molecular level. The anti-invasive potential of soybean PIC could also be further 
studied in mouse xenograft models of prostate cancer, where the treatment could be 
administered either by direct injection on the tumour mass (as described in chapter 3) or 
through the diet, allowing assessment of the occurrence of metastases at various sites by 
detection of bioluminescence.  
Table 1 
Comparison of the invasive capacity of LNCaP cells through Matrigel following 5, 12, 24 or 48 
hours exposure to medium conditioned by PC-3 or MRC-5 cells or containing 10 % FBS as 
chemoattractant 
Chemoattractant  % Invasion, duration of exposure to chemoattractant 
5 hours 12 hours 24 hours 48 hours 
PC-3 2.5 % 2 % 9.1 % 17.5 % 
MRC-5 0 % 0 % 1.4 % 3.1 % 
10 % FBS 0 % 19.1 % 14.1 % 4.3 % 
LNCaP cells were seeded into invasion inserts (2.5x105 cells), while PC-3, MRC-5 or 10 % FBS were 
place in original BD Biocoat plates as chemoattractant. Cells were then incubated for 5 hours, 12 hours, 
24 hours or 48 hours. Results shown were obtained from a single insert per each chemoattractant / 
duration of exposure. 
Fig.1 Effects of PICs and BBI on Matrigel invasion of PC-3 cells. Cells received either no 
treatment (control, 0 mg/ml) or PICs/BBI (0.1, 1 mg/ml) for 24 hours. Control cells had a basal 
invasion of 18.7 %. Results are expressed as the mean of three-independent experiments) 
performed in duplicate  SEM. * P < 0.05 vs. control, independent-samples t-test. 
Fig.2 Effects of PICs and BBI on Matrigel invasion of DU145 cells. Cells received either no 
treatment (control, 0 mg/ml) or PICs/BBI (0.1, 1 mg/ml) for 24 hours. Control cells had a basal 
invasion of 29.6 %. Results are expressed as the mean of three-independent experiments 
performed in duplicate  SEM. 
Fig.3 Effects of PICs and BBI on migration of PC-3 cells. Cells received either no 
treatment (control, 0 mg/ml) or PICs/BBI (0.1, 1 mg/ml) for 24 hours. Control cells had 
a basal migration of 38.4 %. Results are expressed as the mean of three-independent 
experiments performed in duplicate  SEM. 
Fig. 4 Effects of soybean / chickpea PIC (96-h incubation at 3 mg/ml) on the expression of 
MMP-1 gene in PC-3 cells, as determined by quantitative real-time PCR. n=3 for soybean PIC, 
n=2 for chickpea PIC, * P < 0.05 vs. control,  ANOVA post-hoc Dunnett T3. Values are means 
of relative gene expression based on untreated control  SEM. 
References 
Albini, A., Iwamoto, Y., Kleinman, H., Martin, G., Aaronson, S., Kozlowski, J. & 
McEwan, R. 1987, "A Rapid Invitro Assay for Quantitating the Invasive Potential 
of Tumor-Cells", Cancer research, vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 3239-3245.  
Angelucci, A., D'Ascenzo, S., Festuccia, C., Gravina, G., Bologna, M., Dolo, V. & 
Pavan, A. 2000, "Vesicle-associated urokinase plasminogen activator promotes 
invasion in prostate cancer cell lines", Clinical & experimental metastasis, vol. 18, 
no. 2, pp. 163-170.  
Cancer Research UK 2012, Cancer incidence for common cancers [Homepage of 
Cancer Research UK], [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-
info/cancerstats/incidence/commoncancers/ [2012, 15 November].  
Casimiro, S., Mohammad, K.S., Pires, R., Tato-Costa, J., Alho, I., Teixeira, R., 
Carvalho, A., Ribeiro, S., Lipton, A., Guise, T.A. & Costa, L. 2013, 
"RANKL/RANK/MMP-1 Molecular Triad Contributes to the Metastatic Phenotype 
of Breast and Prostate Cancer Cells In Vitro", Plos One, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. e63153.  
Chambers, A., Groom, A. & MacDonald, I. 2002, "Dissemination and growth of cancer 
cells in metastatic sites", Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 563-572.  
Chlenski, A., Nakashiro, K., Ketels, K.V., Korovaitseva, G.I. & Oyasu, R. 2001, 
"Androgen receptor expression in androgen independent prostate cancer cell lines", 
Prostate, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 66-75.  
Coleman, R. 2001, "Metastatic bone disease: clinical features, pathophysiology and 
treatment strategies", Cancer treatment reviews, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 165-176.  
Costa, L., Luis, I., Alho, I., Fernandes, A., Casimiro, S., Lee, B.H., Gangolli, E.A., 
Motwani, M., Wang, L. & Modur, V. 2011, "Expression of matrix 
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) and dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in bone metastatic tissue 
(BMT) and in serum of patients with bone metastases (BM) from different solid 
tumors", Bone, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. S25-S26.  
Curran, S. & Murray, G. 1999, "Matrix metalloproteinases in tumour invasion and 
metastasis", Journal of Pathology, vol. 189, no. 3, pp. 300-308.  
Daja, M., Niu, X., Zhao, Z., Brown, J. & Russell, P. 2003, "Characterization of 
expression of matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases 
in prostate cancer cell lines", Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Diseases, vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 15-26.  
Escaff, S., Fernandez, J.M., Gonzalez, L.O., Suarez, A., Gonzalez-Reyes, S., Gonzalez, 
J.M. & Vizoso, F.J. 2010, "Study of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors 
in prostate cancer", British journal of cancer, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 922-929.  
Fidler, I. 2003, "Timeline - The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the 'seed and soil' 
hypothesis revisited", Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 453-458.  
Galvez, A., Chen, N., Macasieb, J. & De Lumen, B. 2001, Chemopreventive property 
of a soybean peptide (lunasin) that binds to deacetylated histones and inhibits 
acetylation, Cancer research, vol. 61, no. 20, pp. 7473-7478. 
Garcia-Gasca, T., Garcia-Cruz, M., Hernandez-Rivera, E., Lopez-Matinez, J., 
Castaneda-Cuevas, A.L., Yllescas-Gasca, L., Rodriguez-Mendez, A.J., Mendiola-
Olaya, E., Castro-Guillen, J.L. & Blanco-Labra, A. 2012, "Effects of Tepary Bean 
(Phaseolus acutifolius) Protease Inhibitor and Semipure Lectin Fractions on Cancer 
Cells", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 1269-
1278.  
Giron-Calle, J., Vioque, J., del Mar Yust, M., Pedroche, J., Alaiz, M. & Millan, F. 2004, 
"Effect of chickpea aqueous extracts, organic extracts, and protein concentrates on 
cell proliferation", Journal of Medicinal Food, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 122-129.  
Gupta, G.P. & Massague, J. 2006, "Cancer metastasis: Building a framework", Cell, 
vol. 127, no. 4, pp. 679-695.  
Haenszel, W. & Kurihara, M. 1968, "Studies of Japanese migrants. I. Mortality from 
cancer and other diseases among Japanese in the United States.", Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 43-68.  
Hart, C., Scott, L., Bagley, S., Bryden, A., Clarke, N. & Lang, S. 2002, "Role of 
proteolytic enzymes in human prostate bone metastasis formation: in vivo and in 
vitro studies", British journal of cancer, vol. 86, no. 7, pp. 1136-1142.  
Henley, J.D. & Ulbright, T.M. 2007, "Male genital tract" in The Cancer Handbook, ed. 
L.M. Weiss, 2007th edn, John Wiley and Sons, Inc, Wiley Online Library, pp. 1.  
Herman, C., Adlercreutz, T., Goldin, B.R., Gorbach, S.L., Hockerstedt, K.A.V., 
Watanabe, S., Hamalainen, E.K., Markkanen, M.H., Makela, T.H., Wahala, K.T., 
Hase, T.A. & Fotsis, T. 1995, "Soybean phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk", 
Journal of Nutrition, vol. 125, no. 3 Suppl, pp. 757S-770S.  
Hoosein, N., Boyd, D., Hollas, W., Mazar, A., Henkin, J. & Chung, L. 1991, 
"Involvement of Urokinase and its Receptor in the Invasiveness of Human 
Prostatic-Carcinoma Cell-Lines", Cancer communications, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 255-
Horoszewicz, J.S., Leong, S.S., Kawinski, E., Karr, J.P., Rosenthal, H., Chu, T.M., 
Mirand, E.A. & Murphy, G.P. 1983, "Lncap Model of Human Prostatic-
Carcinoma", Cancer research, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1809-1818.  
Huang, X., Chen, S., Xu, L., Liu, Y., Deb, D., Platanias, L. & Bergan, R. 2005, 
"Genistein inhibits p38 map kinase activation, matrix metalloproteinase type 2, and 
cell invasion in human prostate epithelial cells", Cancer research, vol. 65, no. 8, 
pp. 3470-3478.  
Jacobs, S. 1983, "Spread of Prostatic-Cancer to Bone", Urology, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 337-
Jemal, A., Siegel, R., Ward, E., Murray, T., Xu, J. & Thun, M.J. 2007, "Cancer 
statistics, 2007", Ca-a Cancer Journal for Clinicians, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 43-66.  
Kaighn, M.E., Narayan, K.S., Ohnuki, Y., Lechner, J.F. & Jones, L.W. 1979, 
"Establishment and Characterization of a Human Prostatic-Carcinoma Cell-Line 
(Pc-3)", Investigative urology, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 16-23.  
Keer, H., Gaylis, F., Kozlowski, J., Kwaan, H., Bauer, K., SinhaI, A. & Wilson, M. 
1991, "Heterogeneity in Plasminogen-Activator (Pa) Levels in Human Prostate-
Cancer Cell-Lines - Increased Pa Activity Correlates with Biologically Aggressive-
Behavior", Prostate, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 201-214.  
Kennedy, A.R. & Wan, X.S. 2002, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk inhibitor on growth, 
invasion, and clonogenic survival of human prostate epithelial cells and prostate 
cancer cells.", Prostate, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 125-133.  
Lewandowska, U., Szewczyk, K., Owczarek, K., Hrabec, Z., Podsedek, A., 
Koziolkiewicz, M. & Hrabec, E. 2013, "Flavanols from Evening Primrose 
(Oenothera paradoxa) Defatted Seeds Inhibit Prostate Cells Invasiveness and Cause 
Changes in Bcl-2/Bax mRNA Ratio", Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 2987-2998.  
Locke, F.B. & King, H. 1980, "Cancer mortality risk among Japanese in the United 
States.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 1149-1156.  
Magee, P.J., Raschke, M., Steiner, C., Duffin, J.G., Pool-Zobel, B.L., Jokela, T., 
Wahala, K. & Rowland, I.R. 2006, "Equol: A comparison of the effects of the 
racemic compound with that of the purified S-enantiomer on the growth, invasion, 
and DNA integrity of breast and prostate cells in vitro", Nutrition and Cancer-an 
International Journal, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 232-242.  
Malkowicz, S.B., McKenna, W.G., Vaughn, D.J., Wan, X.S., Propert, K.J., Rockwell, 
K., Marks, S.H.F., Wein, A.J. & Kennedy, A.R. 2001, "Effects of Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor concentrate (BBIC) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia", 
Prostate, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 16-28.  
McCormick, D.L., Johnson, W.D., Bosland, M.C., Lubet, R.A. & Steele, V.E. 2007, 
"Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by soy isoflavones and by 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 57, 
no. 2, pp. 184-193.  
Nagase, H. & Woessner, J. 1999, "Matrix metalloproteinases", Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, vol. 274, no. 31, pp. 21491-21494.  
Nelson, A., Fingleton, B., Rothenberg, M. & Matrisian, L. 2000, "Matrix 
metalloproteinases: Biologic activity and clinical implications", Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1135-1149.  
Pfaffl, M. 2001, "A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-
PCR", Nucleic acids research, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. e45-45.  
Poolzobel, B.L., Lotzmann, N., Knoll, M., Kuchenmeister, F., Lambertz, R., Leucht, U., 
Schroder, H.G. & Schmezer, P. 1994, "Detection of Genotoxic Effects in Human 
Gastric and Nasal-Mucosa Cells Isolated from Biopsy Samples", Environmental 
and molecular mutagenesis, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 23-45.  
Pulukuri, S., Gondi, C., Lakka, S., Jutla, A., Estes, N., Gujrati, M. & Rao, J. 2005, 
"RNA interference-directed knockdown of urokinase plasminogen activator and 
urokinase plasminogen activator receptor inhibits prostate cancer cell invasion, 
survival, and tumorigenicity in vivo", Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 280, 
no. 43, pp. 36529-36540.  
Seiki, M. 1999, "Membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases", Apmis, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 
137-143.  
Severson, R.K., Nomura, A.M.Y., Grove, J.S. & Stemmermann, G.N. 1989, "A 
Prospective-Study of Demographics, Diet, and Prostate-Cancer among Men of 
Japanese Ancestry in Hawaii", Cancer research, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1857-1860.  
Shimizu, H., Ross, R.K., Bernstein, L., Yatani, R., Henderson, B.E. & Mack, T.M. 
1991, "Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immigrants in 
Los Angeles County.", British journal of cancer, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 963-966.  
Stetlerstevenson, W., Aznavoorian, S. & Liotta, L. 1993, "Tumor-Cell Interactions with 
the Extracellular-Matrix during Invasion and Metastasis", Annual Review of Cell 
Biology, vol. 9, pp. 541-573.  
Stetler-Stevenson, W. & Yu, A. 2001, "Proteases in invasion: matrix 
metalloproteinases", Seminars in cancer biology, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 143-152.  
Stone, K.R., Mickey, D.D., Wunderli, H., Mickey, G.H. & Paulson, D.F. 1978, 
"Isolation of a Human Prostate Carcinoma Cell Line (Du 145)", International 
Journal of Cancer, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 274-281.  
Strom, S.S., Yamamura, Y., Duphorne, C.M., Spitz, M.R., Babaian, R.J., Pillow, P.C. & 
Hursting, S.D. 1999, "Phytoestrogen intake and prostate cancer: a case-control 
study using a new database", Nutrition & Cancer, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 20-25.  
Tilley, W., Bentel, J., Aspinall, J., Hall, R. & Horsfall, D. 1995, "Evidence for a Novel 
Mechanism of Androgen Resistance in the Human Prostate-Cancer Cell-Line, Pc-
3", Steroids, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 180-186.  
Tominaga, S. 1985, "Cancer incidence in Japanese in Japan, Hawaii, and western 
United States.", National Cancer Institute Monographs, vol. 69, pp. 83-92.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice.", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Weigelt, B., Peterse, J. & van't Veer, L. 2005, "Breast cancer metastasis: Markers and 
models", Nature Reviews Cancer, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 591-602.  
Whittemore, A.S., Kolonel, L.N., Wu, A.H., John, E.M., Gallagher, R.P., Howe, G.R., 
Burch, J.D., Hankin, J., Dreon, D.M. & West, D.W. 1995, "Prostate cancer in 
relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the 
United States and Canada.", Journal of the National Cancer Institute, vol. 87, no. 
9, pp. 652-661.  
Yavelow, J., Collins, M., Birk, Y., Troll, W. & Kennedy, A.R. 1985, "Nanomolar 
concentrations of Bowman-Birk soybean protease inhibitor suppress x-ray-induced 
transformation in vitro.", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, vol. 82, no. 16, pp. 5395-5399.  
Yu, H., Harris, R.E., Gao, Y.T., Gao, R. & Wynder, E.L. 1991, "Comparative 
epidemiology of cancers of the colon, rectum, prostate and breast in Shanghai, 
China versus the United States.", International journal of epidemiology, vol. 20, 
no. 1, pp. 76-81.  
Zhang, J., Dhakal, I.B., Zhao, Z. & Li, L. 2012, "Trends in mortality from cancers of the 
breast, colon, prostate, esophagus, and stomach in East Asia: role of nutrition 
transition.", European Journal of Cancer Prevention, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 480-489.  
Zhang, M., Altuwaijri, S. & Yeh, S. 2004, "RRR-alpha-tocopheryl succinate inhibits 
human prostate cancer cell invasiveness", Oncogene, vol. 23, no. 17, pp. 3080-
3088.  
Zheng, W., Zhang, Y., Ma, D., Shi, Y., Liu, C. & Wang, P. 2012, "(+/-)Equol inhibits 
invasion in prostate cancer DU145 cells possibly via down-regulation of matrix 
metalloproteinase-9, matrix metalloproteinase-2 and urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator by antioxidant activity", Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition, 
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 61-67.  
Zhong, W., Han, Z., He, H., Bi, X., Dai, Q., Zhu, G., Ye, Y., Liang, Y., Qin, W., Zhang, 
Z., Zeng, G. & Chen, Z. 2008, "CD147, MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9 Protein 
Expression as Significant Prognostic Factors in Human Prostate Cancer", 
Oncology, vol. 75, no. 3-4, pp. 230-236.  
Chapter 5 
General discussion 
Prostate cancer affects many men worldwide and is the most frequent malignancy 
occurring in males in the United Kingdom. Prostate cancer is a pathological condition 
often diagnosed in the elderly. Increasing life expectancy, especially in the westernized 
world, will expose a higher percentage of men to the risk of developing prostate cancer. 
With this in mind, the discovery of a suitable strategy which could prevent or slow 
down the carcinogenic process is of pivotal importance for the general population. 
Understanding prostate carcinogenesis has proved an elusive scientific challenge, 
however environmental factors such as ones dietary regime are thought to affect the 
etiology of the disease. Epidemiologic evidence suggests a beneficial role of diets rich 
in pulses and legumes, such as those consumed in Asian countries of the Pacific basin, 
while consumption of a western-style diet, rich in saturated fats and processed foods, is 
apparently detrimental for prostate health. Traditional Eastern diets are rich in soybean, 
a legume abundant in protective bio-active compounds, such as isoflavones, particularly 
genistein and daidzein, and a protease inhibitor named Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI). A 
large body of evidence supports the protective role of BBI against carcinogenesis in 
several in vitro and in vivo cancer models including those of prostate cancer (Kennedy, 
Wan 2002, Wan et al. 1999, McCormick et al. 2007).  
The primary aims of this thesis were to investigate the putative anti-cancer effects of 
two protease inhibitor concentrates (PICs) extracted from the soybean and the chickpea 
on three different stages of prostate carcinogenesis, namely initiation, promotion and 
metastasis, and to explore potential mechanisms accounting for the observed effects. 
After PIC extraction, the protein concentration and the chymotrypsin inhibitor activity 
(CIA) was determined.  LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 cell lines were selected as in vitro 
models due to their resemblance to subsequent stages of carcinogenesis, from androgen-
sensitive to a more aggressive androgen-independent phenotype. Oxidative DNA 
damage is predominantly linked to the initiation process, and, if not repaired, 
subsequent gene mutations may accumulate, commencing the cancer process (Loft, 
Poulsen 1996, Valko et al. 2006, Valavanidis, Vlachogianni & Fiotakis 2009).  
The present study highlights a significant anti-genotoxic effect of chickpea PIC in 
LNCaP cells at non cytotoxic concentrations (chapter 2). The observed lack of 
genotoxicity at the selected concentrations and the protection against H2O2 insult in the 
androgen-dependent cell line LNCaP is encouraging and supports the role of PICs as 
putative chemo-preventive agents with the potential ability to decrease the risk of 
prostate cancer. Further research into the modulation of anti-oxidative and DNA repair 
genes suggested  possible molecular mechanisms accounting for the observed anti-
genotoxic effects; it may be that protection of DNA damage induced by chickpea PIC in 
LNCaP cells is linked to up-regulation of SOD2 and ATR genes.  In contrast soybean 
PIC did not exert any significant anti-genotoxic effects in prostate cancer cells. 
In this thesis the bioactivity of PICs on prostate cancer promotion was assessed, a 
process whereby proliferation of cancer cells escapes the cell control machinery 
(chapter 3). Soybean and chickpea PICs significantly inhibited the proliferation of 
LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 cells at various concentrations; in PC-3 cells, a cell cycle 
arrest was observed at the S phase following exposure to chickpea and soybean PICs at 
the highest concentrations tested. A pilot study was also conducted on mice injected 
with DU 145 cells and treated with chickpea PIC, however the results were 
inconclusive, possibly due to the small sample size.  
By means of quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) the effects of PICs at the 
transcriptional level on genes involved in proliferation and cell cycle control were 
assessed. A significant effect on the expression of BCL-2, BCL2L1, BAK, BAX, 
CASP9, TOP2A, MYC, CDC25C, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, DUSP1, MAPK6, AKT1, 
TGFB1, JUN in LNCaP and/or PC-3 cells was detected. Overall, effects on genes 
involved in the modulation of apoptosis or signaling pathways consistent with the 
negative effects on cell growth observed in our bioassays were shown, however some 
controversial results require further research to be substantiated.  
The final stage in prostate carcinogenesis is metastasis, a process involving the spread 
of cancer cells to a different site where they establish a new tumour mass. Prevention of 
metastasis is crucial in prostate cancer patients as it accounts for 90% of deaths from the 
disease (Gupta, Massague 2006). Invasion plays a vital role in metastasis and involves a 
series of phenomena including cell adhesion, degradation of the basement membrane 
(BM) and migration through the extracellular matrix (ECM) to surrounding tissues. In 
this study the potential anti-metastatic effect of PICs in highly invasive PC-3 cells was 
evaluated. Although not statistically significant, the results are suggestive of a potential 
protective effect of soybean PICs against invasion which was independent of migration, 
possibly through modulation of the adhesion or degradation processes. Consistent with 
this hypothesis,  a significant down-regulation of MMP-1 gene, linked to the 
establishment of prostate cancer metastasis in the bone (Costa et al. 2011, Hart et al. 
2002), was also observed. Furthermore, expression of MMP-1 is elevated in humans 
with prostate cancer. (Zhong et al. 2008). These findings are of particular relevance for 
oncological patients with prostate cancer metastases, who could benefit from the 
consumption of PIC extracts and/or  dietary modifications. 
In conclusion, the findings of the present study have shown the chemo-preventive 
activity of soybean and/or chickpea PICs in different stages of prostate carcinogenesis, 
specifically initiation, promotion and progression, and identified potential mechanisms 
through which these effects are exerted.  
Although a large body of research has been dedicated to the anti-cancer effects of 
protease inhibitors from soybean, there is a paucity of data on other dietary sources, 
such as chickpea, and this study sheds light on the beneficial effects of PICs from 
alternative pulse sources and is promising for the development of future agents suitable 
for the prevention and treatment of prostate cancer. Further research is deemed 
necessary to fully elucidate the mechanisms and pathways involved in the observed 
anti-cancer  effects, while exploiting alternative models of prostate cancer not included 
in this study. 
A number of conclusions can be drawn from this thesis: 
1. PICs from chickpea and soybean (commercial BBI) may prevent the initiation of 
prostate cancer, as shown by the reduction of H2O2-induced genotoxicity. 
2. PICs can exert inhibitory effects on the proliferation of prostate cancer cells, via 
modulation of the expression of genes involved in the control of growth processes and 
the cell cycle. 
3. Soybean PIC may beneficially modulate the risk of prostate cancer metastasis. 
Suggested further research 
This study highlights a number of areas that warrant further research 
1. Further characterization of the biochemical properties of PICs to identify 
potential bioactive compounds. Magee et al. (2012) determinded the molecular weights 
of peptides in various PICs extracted from legumes by means of mass spectrometry, 
reporting the presence of a 4000 Da component, possibly lunasin, which has been 
shown to have anti-cancer properties (Hernandez-Ledesma, Hsieh & de Lumen 2013). 
The same method could be used to effectively study the peptide components (other than 
BBI) of the extracts used in this study. Antioxidant enzyme assays would help 
determine the putative beneficial effects of PICs against oxidative stress and would 
support the protection of cellular DNA from H2O2-induced  oxidative damage observed 
by means of the Comet assay. 
2. Investigation of the anti-cancer effects of PICs in non-tumorigenic cell lines 
(e.g. PNTA1). The use of a non-cancerous cell line would be beneficial, e.g. to 
investigate the ability of PICs to reduce H2O2-induced DNA damage by means of the 
Comet assay. DNA damage is a biomarker of cancer initiation, and the results would 
thus support the role of PICs as anti-cancer agents in healthy humans. 
3. Analysis of modulation of protein expression (Western blot) to support qPCR 
results. These experiments would be of benefit to substantiate the modest but significant 
modulations of the genes analysed in this study, and would also enable assessment of 
the biological action of PICs at the level of protein expression. 
4. Analysis of the metabolic profile of prostate cancer cells following treatment 
with PICs. These experiments could be carried out by means of NMR spectroscopy and 
would analyse the tumour metabolome, identifying key metabolites involved in the 
biological effects of PICs in cancer cells. 
5. Evaluation of the anti-cancer properties of PICs prepared by alternative 
methods (e.g. hot extraction versus cold extraction). Testing PICs obtained using 
methods different than the one described in this thesis would help in determining the 
effects of the preparation method on the efficacy of the extracts at reducing prostate 
carcinogenesis. As a control, heat-inactivated PICs (by autoclaving) could be employed.  
References 
Costa, L., Luis, I., Alho, I., Fernandes, A., Casimiro, S., Lee, B.H., Gangolli, E.A., 
Motwani, M., Wang, L. & Modur, V. 2011, "Expression of matrix 
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) and dickkopf-1 (DKK1) in bone metastatic tissue 
(BMT) and in serum of patients with bone metastases (BM) from different solid 
tumors", Bone, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. S25-S26.  
Gupta, G.P. & Massague, J. 2006, "Cancer metastasis: Building a framework", Cell, 
vol. 127, no. 4, pp. 679-695.  
Hart, C., Scott, L., Bagley, S., Bryden, A., Clarke, N. & Lang, S. 2002, "Role of 
proteolytic enzymes in human prostate bone metastasis formation: in vivo and in 
vitro studies", British journal of cancer, vol. 86, no. 7, pp. 1136-1142.  
Hernandez-Ledesma, B., Hsieh, C.-. & De Lumen, B.O. 2013, Chemopreventive 
Properties of Peptide Lunasin: A Review, Protein and Peptide Letters, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 424-432.  
Kennedy, A.R. & Wan, X.S. 2002, "Effects of the Bowman-Birk inhibitor on growth, 
invasion, and clonogenic survival of human prostate epithelial cells and prostate 
cancer cells.", Prostate, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 125-133.  
Loft, S. & Poulsen, H.E. 1996, "Cancer risk and oxidative DNA damage in man", 
Journal of Molecular Medicine-Jmm, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 297-312.  
McCormick, D.L., Johnson, W.D., Bosland, M.C., Lubet, R.A. & Steele, V.E. 2007, 
"Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by soy isoflavones and by 
Bowman-Birk inhibitor", Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, vol. 57, 
no. 2, pp. 184-193.  
Valavanidis, A., Vlachogianni, T. & Fiotakis, C. 2009, "8-hydroxy-2' -deoxyguanosine 
(8-OHdG): A Critical Biomarker of Oxidative Stress and Carcinogenesis", Journal 
of Environmental Science and Health Part C-Environmental Carcinogenesis & 
Ecotoxicology Reviews, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 120-139.  
Valko, M., Rhodes, C., Moncol, J., Izakovic, M. & Mazur, M. 2006, "Free radicals, 
metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer", Chemico-biological 
interactions, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 1-40.  
Wan, X.S., Ware, J.H., Zhang, L., Newberne, P.M., Evans, S.M., Clark, L.C. & 
Kennedy, A.R. 1999, "Treatment with soybean-derived Bowman Birk inhibitor 
increases serum prostate-specific antigen concentration while suppressing growth 
of human prostate cancer xenografts in nude mice.", Prostate, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
243-252.  
Zhong, W., Han, Z., He, H., Bi, X., Dai, Q., Zhu, G., Ye, Y., Liang, Y., Qin, W., Zhang, 
Z., Zeng, G. & Chen, Z. 2008, "CD147, MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9 Protein 
Expression as Significant Prognostic Factors in Human Prostate Cancer", 
Oncology, vol. 75, no. 3-4, pp. 230-236. 
