Drivers and Barriers to Business Growth: A case study of Small Businesses in Nigeria.
Drivers and Barriers to 
Business Growth: A case 
study of Small 
Businesses in Nigeria. 
THESIS 
ABAYOMI DANIEL OLUSHINA 
DOCTORAL RESEARCHER 
GARDNER BUILDING 
SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND ENTERPRISE 
THE UNIVERSITY OF WEST OF SCOTLAND 
DRIVERS AND BARRIERS TO BUSINESS 
GROWTH: A CASE STUDY OF SMALL 
BUSINESSES IN NIGERIA 
ABAYOMI DANIEL OLUSHINA 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements of the University of the West of Scotland 
for the award of Doctor of Business Administration 
Abstract 
Small businesses are the key drivers of most developed and emerging economies 
around the world. According to SMEDAN- the governing regulator for Micro, Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises in Nigeria, approximately 55% of the nations gross domestic 
product (GDP) and an average of 85% of the registered companies that pay taxes to maintain 
social and economic development are small businesses. Literature has highlighted different 
factors that influence business growth without recommending key concepts tailored to 
developing countries with emerging markets like Nigeria that would enhance sustainable 
business growth in Sub-Saharan Africa. This study examines the drivers and barriers to 
business growth for small businesses (micro and small-sized enterprises) in Nigeria.  
 Owners characteristics and firm characteristics are the vital constructs examined for 
this research and attention is drawn to the business and management skills of small business 
owners. An interpretivist approach was adopted, using Churchill and Lewiss model, 
Jovanovics model, and Resource-based view theory. A qualitative data collection approach 
was chosen for this study. Data through semi-structured interviews were drawn from 33 
MSEs across the country to represent the regions with the highest success rate of small 
businesses and the geopolitical zones in Nigeria. 
Findings reflect the barriers to growth such as access to finance, basic infrastructures, 
and other resources but also highlight the lack of business and management skills of small 
business owners. This distinguishes growth for small-sized enterprises identifying growth 
drivers such as customer service, innovation, character, staff retention, and leadership. This 
study puts forward a framework based on existing models to aid small business owners in 
achieving sustainable business growth in Nigeria and sub-Saharan Africa. Limitations to this 
study were limited to gaining access to small business owners in a global pandemic (COVID 
19). Implications for stakeholders and recommendations are given to policymakers to 
enhance communication and support for all small businesses. 
Keywords: MSEs, Business growth, Business and Management skills, Owners 
characteristics, Firm characteristics. 
Dedication 
 I dedicate this study to my late parents, Samuel and Victoria of blessed memory for 
giving me the sound educational foundation on which I have stood for many years and 
continually build on in all my academic endeavours. This doctoral study is for my unborn 
children to serve as a milestone that can be achieved in academics towards the pursuit of 
excellence. 
Acknowledgments 
 Firstly, I give thanks to my heavenly father, the custodian of all things who gave me 
the sufficient grace to start and complete this doctoral study.  
 Special thanks go to my elder sisters; Mrs. Olushola Balogun, Mrs. Olubusayo 
Odeneye-Williams, and Mrs. Olubusola Buhari, and my friends for their time and timely 
encouragement that helped me through the entire doctoral study. I am immensely grateful for 
all the phone calls and messages to keep me motivated and focused especially during the 
nationwide lockdown due to covid-19 movement restrictions that affected a lot of things and 
changed aspects of life to a new normal. 
My sincere gratitude goes to my lead supervisor Dr. Ahmed Beloucif, for exemplary 
supervision, guidance, support, and dedication towards my academic pursuit throughout my 
doctoral study. A Special thanks to Dr. Marie Fletcher (my assessor) and Dr. Muzammal 
Khan (second supervisor) for an immense and pivotal contribution towards narrowing down 
the focus of my research thus making the journey easy. I would like to thank the entire DBA 
supervision team, my cohort, and the admission team at the paisley and Lanarkshire 
campuses. I would like to thank Prof John Struthers and Dr. Adebisi Adewole and the entire 
CAREED team. Special thanks to Dr. Alan Murray and Dr. Kamal Qazi for all the 
recommendations. I would also like to thank Dr. Daniel Turner for the insights on qualitative 
research and data analysis and Dr. Stephanie Zihms for all the didactic workshops. 
 Many thanks to all the participants that took time out to take part in this study and 
share their opinions irrespective of the issues caused by the global pandemic that left almost 
all small businesses gasping to stay afloat in business.  I am grateful. 
CONTENTS 
1.2 Problem Statement.........10 
1.3 Rationale ....11 
1.4 Aim and Objectives ...12 
1.5 Research Questions ...14 
1.8 Theoretical Framework..18 
1.9 Conceptual Framework .21 
1.10 Access issues and Limitations .23 
1.11 Chapter Summary.24 
2.1 Overview....25 
2.3 Selection of Articles for Review....26 
2.4 A Review of Existing Studies....27 
2.4.1 Business Growth for Small Businesses...36 
2.5 Theories..41 
2.5.2 Jovanovics Theory.42 
2.5.3 Churchill and Lewiss Model..44 
2.5.4 Dunkelberg and Coopers Classification of Entrepreneurs.46 
2.6 Drivers and Barriers to Business Growth...46 
2.6.1 Internal Factors....49 
2.6.1c Business and Management Skills......53 
2.6.2 External Factors...55 
2.6.2a Access to Finance..55 
2.6.2b Funding..56 
2.6.2e Other External Factors...60 
2.7 Gap in Literature....64 
2.8 Focus for Research.....65 
3.0 METHODOLOGY...66 
3.1 Overview....66 
3.4.1 Selection of Qualitative Approach..77 
3.5 Research Participants/Sample Population..79 
3.6 Sources of Data......82 
3.7 Data Collection Method.....83 
3.7.1 Interviews....84 
3.9 Reliability and Validity..89 
3.10 Triangulation, Member Checking and Peer Review....89 
3.11 Ethical Considerations..90 
3.12 Data Analysis...92 
4.0 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS.....99 
4.2 Data Presentation99 
4.2.2 Participants101 
4.3 Data Collection.103 
4.4 Analysis and Results104 
4.4.3 Discussion of Themes...106 
4.4.4 Summary of Themes.118 
4.4.5 Interview Questions...119 
4.5 Conceptual MSEs Growth Framework....134 
5.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.139 
5.2 Conclusions..139 
5.3 Application to Professional Practice....142 
5.4 Limitations...145 
5.5 Recommendations for Action...145 
5.6 Recommendations for Further study....149 
5.7 Reflections151 
5.7.1 Timeline of Research.....153 
6.0 References ..156 
7.1 Systematic literature review table of studies done in Nigeria..188 
7.3 Systematic literature review table of studies done in other countries of the World.....200 
7.8 Participants Final Database.....219 
7.9 Participants Details.....220 
1.0  INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background Information 
Small businesses account for a higher percentage of businesses that contribute immensely 
to economic growth across the world and this is evident in academic research and 
policymaking (Curran, 2000; Yu, 2001; Blackburn and Kovalainen, 2009). They have been 
the focus of many studies in the last few decades in Africa, Europe, Asia, and America. 
According to recent studies, the poverty rate across the African continent is projected to drop 
approximately to 25% by 2030 in contrast to the rest of the world projected to drop to 3% 
(Bicaba et al., 2017; Beegle and Christiansen, 2019). The poverty ratio in Africa is linked to 
factors affecting the growth of small businesses as they account for the largest contribution to 
job creation in African countries (Blancher, 2019; Ghassibe et al., 2019). According to 
Ojukwu (2006), Small and medium-sized enterprises provide the pillars on which a countrys 
economic growth and stability rests and depend. 
Small and Medium-sized businesses constitute 85% of companies registered with the 
corporate affairs commission (C.A.C) in Nigeria and they produce approximately 55% of the 
nations gross domestic product (GDP) (Ihugba et al., 2014). They are the most viable 
facilitators for revenue generation for most of the state governments in Nigeria. Small and 
Medium Enterprise Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) was established in 2003 as 
a regulatory body for all micro, small and medium-sized businesses in Nigeria (SMEDAN, 
2012). A jointly conducted national survey of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) revealed that the number of MSMEs grew by 
12% from 37.067 million in 2013 to 41.543 million in 2017 (NBS and SMEDAN, 2017).  
The report showed the total number of registered MSMEs with the Corporate Affairs 
Commission (C.A.C) as of December 2017 was 41,543,028. The report stated that micro-
enterprises were 41,469,947, small and medium enterprises were 73,081. The total 
contribution by the sector towards employment stood at 59,647,954 persons which accounts 
for 86.3% of the national workforce as of December 2017.  
 Previous studies have mainly enumerated key variables/constructs as barriers to business 
growth in Nigeria. One study suggested the discovery of oil triggered the negligence of the 
government towards lucrative sectors such as agriculture which lead to a huge 
transformational change during the post-independence period (Adisa et al, 2014). This 
affected a lot of small businesses in the agriculture sector across Nigeria. Access to finance 
for small businesses seems to be the most identified barrier to business growth in Africa 
(Abor and Quartey, 2010; Adesua-Lincoln, 2011; Ahiawodzi and Adade, 2012; Mambula, 
2002). With the recent influx of foreign investors in Nigeria, it is evident that the countrys 
market is emerging. Most small businesses are struggling with several issues such as the lack 
of basic infrastructure and amenities needed to run their business operations effectively (Dim 
and Ezenekwe, 2014) which could be linked to mass corruption in the country (Akanbi, 
2015).  Small businesses struggle to stay afloat in business even though they contribute 
immensely to the nations gross domestic product (GDP) (Neumark et al, 2011). Most small 
businesses in Nigeria would need to adopt an effective framework that enhances sustainable 
business practices tailored to the economy. This is essential in dealing with emerging factors 
that influence business growth. Most businesses have sort to find an ethical and transparent 
way of carrying out their business operations to enhance sustainable business growth.  
1.2 Problem Statement 
Major policymakers around the sub-Saharan African economies have focused on the need 
to finance the growth and development of small businesses within the region. This notion is 
fuelled by the need for small businesses to be able to compete globally with effective 
production strategies (Quartey et al, 2017). The need for improvements in sustainability for 
business and measures to mitigate challenges facing small businesses in Nigeria cannot be 
overemphasized (Raimi et al, 2014). 85% of the companies in Nigeria that drive the economy 
of the country are small businesses (Ihugba et al., 2014). The contribution of the sector to 
national gross domestic product stood at 55% approx. as of 2010 and there has been a 
consistent drop in the contribution of small businesses to the national GDP in Nigeria from 
55% approx. in 2010 (NBS and SMEDAN, 2010) to 49.78% in 2017 (NBS and SMEDAN, 
2017). Even though micro, small and medium enterprises in Nigeria account for 86.3% of the 
national workforce, contribution towards export receipts only stands at 7.64% (NBS and 
SMEDAN, 2017). A study by Abisuga-Oyekunle et al. (2020), revealed that 60% to 70% of 
small businesses in Sub-Saharan Africa require business loans but only 17% of small-sized 
enterprises and 31% of medium-sized enterprises succeed in accessing finance from various 
sources. These findings do not account specifically for micro-sized enterprises which could 
mean worse, in comparison to the data reported for small and medium-sized firms. Only a 
fraction of small businesses set up yearly remains operational after the first five years of 
business operation (Amoako, 2013; Adisa et al, 2014). The majority of small businesses 
experience poor execution of microfinance lending in Nigeria which has a huge impact on 
business growth (Arogundade, 2010; Aladejebi, 2019). 
While 99% of registered MSMEs in Nigeria fall into the category of micro-sized 
enterprises with employees of up to ten (10) (NBS and SMEDAN, 2017), previous studies 
have rather focused on the larger umbrella termed as SME and the external barriers 
facing small and medium-sized businesses in Nigeria rather than internal factors (Igwe et al., 
2018; Afolabi, 2013; Adesuwa-Lincoln, 2011; Mambula, 2002). It is imperative to note that 
the context of small businesses for the objectives of this study will focus on micro-sized 
and small-sized enterprises.  
This is a problem that could be linked to the barriers facing small businesses which is 
evident in the literature or perhaps the inability of entrepreneurs owning small businesses to 
adopt sustainable business management practices. In other to enhance sustainable growth, 
factors (barriers and drivers) that influence the growth process should be examined and 
recommendations based on existing growth models should be introduced to small business 
owners in Nigeria.  
1.3 Rationale 
Approximately 85% of the organisations that drive the economy in Nigeria are small 
businesses (Ihugba et al, 2014). 59,647,954 persons who account for 86.3% of the national 
workforce as of December 2017 are employed by the micro, small and medium enterprises in 
Nigeria (NBS and SMEDAN, 2017). Nigeria has a large domestic market with surplus raw 
materials yet the progress in the manufacture of value-added goods for local, export, or 
employment creation is diminutive (Mambula, 2002). Evidence put forward by McKinsey 
and Company (2012), submits that privately-owned registered small businesses account for 
90% of job creation across the continent of Africa but also reports that one-third of them 
declared access to funding as the major inhibitor to business growth. Evidence from literature 
reveals the need for mitigating options to combat inhibiting factors to sustainable growth for 
small businesses particularly in emerging markets such as Nigeria in West Africa (Raimi et 
al, 2014). The nations industrial growth hence thrives on the sustainability of small 
businesses. A recent study reveals that firms that havent been in operation for up to two 
years contribute a small share to total employment in Sub-Saharan Africa with a mean of 
9.3% while firms in operation for over five years contribute with a mean of 23% (Abisuga-
Oyekunle et al., 2020). 
It is evident in literature that studies on small businesses especially micro-sized 
enterprises are quite minute particularly in African countries. Perren (1999) argues that little 
attention is drawn to the barriers and drivers to business growth of micro-sized enterprises in 
the literature compared to studies done on small and medium-sized enterprises. There are 
various definitions for micro-sized firms depending on geographic zones hence why theyre 
usually examined under the overall definition of SMEs even though there are distinctions 
between the three categories (Abor and Quartey, 2010; Jere et al., 2015; Obi et al, 2018).  
According to Brixiova et al. (2020), previous literature has focused extensively (though 
relevant) on the economies of developed, developing, and emerging markets which vary in 
their particularities to factors affecting the growth of small businesses. Nichter and Goldmark 
(2009), suggest the need to examine the mechanisms (opportunities and capabilities) through 
which certain factors (internal and external) affect MSEs growth. Though pertinent literature 
has examined the factors that influence the growth of small businesses in Europe, Asia, 
America, and some countries in Africa, it is still worthy of investigation to ascertain whether 
those factors have changed and also to introduce practical recommendations to either enhance 
(drivers) or mitigate (barriers) such factors.  
This study contributes to the existing literature on the discussion around the barriers and 
drivers to sustainable business growth for small businesses. The findings of this study are 
pivotal to the sustainable growth of small businesses in Nigeria and Africa as a whole. It 
would promote the influx of investors to the continent and educate them on the challenges 
facing small businesses and the likely recommendations to mitigate such problems. 
1.4 Aim and Objectives 
The study aims to proffer a practical solution to enhance sustainable growth for small 
businesses by developing a framework based on existing models in the literature. The 
objectives of the study encompass the evaluation of factors that influence business growth 
and barriers to sustainable growth and development of small businesses. 
Table 1a: Aim, Objectives, and Questions 
Aim Research 
Objectives 
Research 
Questions 
Interview Guide 
{open ended questions} 
Reasons Data type 
To develop a 
framework 
based on 
existing 
models to 
enhance 
sustainable 
business 
growth for 
Small 
Businesses 
in Nigeria. 
1. To examine 
the factors that 
influence the 
business 
growth and 
development of 
small 
businesses. 
2. To examine 
the barriers to 
sustainable 
business 
growth and 
development. 
3. To introduce 
a framework 
based on 
existing models 
to improve 
business 
growth and 
development. 
1.   What are the 
characteristics of 
small businesses 
in Nigeria? 
2.  What are the 
characteristics of 
Small business 
owners in 
Nigeria? 
3.   What are the 
barriers to 
sustainable 
business growth 
and development 
of small 
businesses? 
(1a). How long has your 
business been in operation? 
(1b). What is your firms size 
regarding no of employees? 
(1c). Which sector does your 
business belong to according 
to the CAC classification and 
standards? 
 (2a). What is your highest 
educational qualification? 
(2b). Please give a brief 
description of your work 
experience before starting 
your business. 
(2c). What inspired you to 
start your business? 
(3). What are the key barriers 
to the growth of your 
business? 
Q1. To deduce the 
firms 
characteristics. 
Q2. To deduce the 
characteristics of 
the small business 
owner. 
Q3. To deduce the 
barriers to 
sustainable growth 
and development. 
Interviews 
Interviews 
Interviews 
  4.   What are the 
drivers of business 
growth and 
development for 
small businesses 
in Nigeria? 
5.   How can 
Small business 
owners enhance 
sustainable 
business growth 
and development? 
(4). What are the factors that 
propelled the business 
forward to achieve 
sustainable business growth? 
(5a). How would you describe 
your management 
capabilities? 
(5b). Are there any other 
comments you did like to add 
concerning the objectives of 
this research? 
Q4. To deduce the 
indicators that 
drive sustainable 
business growth. 
Q5. To give 
recommendations 
that can be used in 
enhancing 
business growth 
and development. 
Interviews 
Interviews 
In other to achieve these objectives, attention is drawn to the characteristics of 
entrepreneurs that own small businesses, firm characteristics, and the distinctions in the 
growth process or the transition period between moving from a micro-sized enterprise to a 
small-sized enterprise. The first objective is achieved by examining the firm characteristics 
and the entrepreneur (owner)s characteristics. The second objective is achieved by 
examining the barriers entrepreneurs are faced with, in their day-to-day business operations. 
The third objective is achieved by synthesizing the distinctions drawn from the transition 
period (growth period from micro to small-sized enterprise) into a framework to help small 
businesses achieve sustainable growth (see table 1a).  
While a majority of studies have reiterated and highlighted the barriers and drivers to 
business growth especially for small and medium-sized enterprises, this study aims to fill the 
gap in the literature by focusing on micro-sized enterprises which are often examined under 
the cover of SMEs in most studies and more importantly, introduce a practical solution to 
help entrepreneurs.  
1.5 Research Questions 
Stuermer (2009) stresses the importance of developing research questions as they 
influence the theories to be used, methodology, collection of data, and help streamline the 
units of analysis.  Research questions help indicate the problem that the researcher intends to 
investigate (Onwuegbuzie and Leech, 2006). Research questions are inquiring statements that 
depict the premises of the statement of the purpose of the research and also point to the aim 
of the study (Johnson and Christensen, 2004). 
Questions 
Q1. What are the firm characteristics of small businesses in Nigeria? 
Q2. What are the characteristics of small business owners in Nigeria? 
Q3. What are the barriers to sustainable business growth and development of small 
businesses? 
Q4. What are the drivers of business growth and development for small businesses in 
Nigeria? 
Q5. How can small business owners enhance sustainable business growth and 
development? 
The above questions were deduced from literature informing this study (Dobbs and 
Hamilton, 2007; Doern, 2009; Nichter and Goldmark, 2009; Okpara, 2011; Adisa et al., 
2014; Bouazza et al., 2015; Agyapong et al., 2018). According to the literature review of 34 
articles by Dobbs and Hamilton (2007), the synonymous factors pertinent to small business 
growth in literature were categorised (Smallbone and Wyer, 2000) majorly into four namely; 
firms characteristics, characteristics of the entrepreneur (owner), environment or industry-
specific factors and management strategies. Doern (2009), reaffirms in her literature review 
the importance of direct conversations with research participants while bearing in mind that 
some participants are motivated to respond with generic responses rather than the actual 
responses that reflect their stance. These two clauses were taken into consideration in the 
proposition of the questions for this study.  The questions reflect the premises of this study 
and also guided the researcher to avoid deviations throughout the process of research. 
Janesick (2000) stresses the need, to begin with, a series of self-questioning more like 
provisional questions as described by Maxwell (2005) which has helped in developing 
definite questions with the guidance of the lead supervisor for this study. 
These questions were put forward after considering propositions that research questions 
should be exploratory, descriptive, emancipatory, and explanatory (Marshall and Rossman, 
2006) especially for qualitative studies. This proposition has greatly sharpened the direction 
and relevance (Agee, 2009) of this study to the objectives of this research. The first two 
questions (Q1 & Q2) focus on the first objective of the research to examine the factors (firm 
characteristics/Owners characteristics) that influence the business growth and development 
of small businesses. The third question (Q3) focuses on the barriers to sustainable business 
growth and development. The fourth and fifth questions (Q4 & Q5) explore the drivers of 
business growth and introduce the likely recommendations to enhance sustainable business 
growth in business practice for small businesses (see table 1a). 
The first two questions (Q1 & Q2) focus on the firm characteristics and characteristics of 
small business owners of small businesses. The third question (Q3) examines the stages of 
development and barriers to business growth. The fourth and fifth questions (Q4 & Q5) 
explore the drivers of growth that enhance sustainable business growth in business practice. 
The corresponding interview questions were deduced to probe and attract the right responses 
to answer the research questions (firms characteristics, characteristics of the owner 
(entrepreneur), barriers and drivers to business growth) and achieve the objectives for this 
study (see table 1a).  
1.6 Research Method and Appropriateness  
This study has adopted semi-structured interviews as the qualitative research method 
for data collection. Proper consideration was given to the aim and objectives of the research 
hence the suitability of the chosen research method. Previous literature (Ahiawodzi and 
Adade, 2012; Okpara, 2011) have used questionnaires and secondary data to evaluate the 
inhibitors to business growth for small businesses but more recent studies (Agyapong et al., 
2018) have adopted the use of interviews to capture and have a clearer understanding of the 
factors influencing sustainable growth of SMEs.  
Table 1b: Comparison of research methods  
Method Definition Explanation Application 
Descriptive This is defined as the 
description of events or 
phenomena.  
The researcher is a 
collector of data that 
already exists. Uses 
Observations, 
Questionnaires, and 
Interviews 
Quantitative, 
Qualitative, and Mix 
Methods 
Causal This is defined as 
experimental research 
as it adopts the use of 
experimental design.  
The researcher is an 
active participant in the 
data generating process 
by manipulating 
different treatments to 
examine their effects 
on a variable of 
interest. 
Quantitative, 
Qualitative, and Mix 
Methods 
Experimental This is also the same as 
the Causal method. 
Uses Observations, 
Questionnaires, and 
Interviews 
Quantitative, 
Qualitative, and Mix 
Methods 
According to Malterud (2001, p 483), qualitative research methods are founded on 
an understanding of research as a systematic and reflective process for the development of 
knowledge that can somehow be contested and shared, implying ambitions of transferability 
beyond the study setting. While recommendations from previous literature have suggested 
using a larger sample size to capture a wider response using questionnaires (Okpara, 2011), 
the objectives of this study would only be captured through the evaluation of small business 
owners views and interviews with open-ended questions would be more appropriate.   
This study adopts the descriptive method as it aims to examine the factors influencing 
business growth (see table 1b). Semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions as a 
qualitative research method have been selected to capture the views of entrepreneurs to 
answer the questions put forward in this research and achieve the objectives of the study.  
1.7 Research Design and Appropriateness 
 The ground theory-based approach was adopted to carry out this study to develop a 
thorough theoretical conceptualisation of the results (Corbin and Strauss, 1990; Glaser and 
Strauss, 2017). This design adopts a structured approach in line with Braun and Clarke's 
(2006) thematic analysis to gain a better understanding of the factors (barriers and drivers) 
that influence business growth for small businesses. The approach relies solely on the 
unbiased themes resulting from data and ruling prior assumptions (Blum and Muirhead, 
2005; Moustakas, 1994). The grounded theory approach is synonymous with studies aiming 
to generate theory or frameworks based on participants lived experiences (Hays and Wood, 
2011). 
This research design was selected in line with the aim of this study to introduce a 
framework based on existing models in literature pertinent to small business growth. Braun 
and Clarkes thematic analysis includes six comprehensive steps for the analysis of data 
which are explained in chapter 3. The six steps are familiarising yourself with data, 
generating initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, redefining and naming 
themes, and producing the report. These steps are thorough, giving a better understanding of 
the data. Interview questions were deduced from research questions to probe and get the right 
responses (firms characteristics, characteristics of owner (entrepreneur), barriers, and drivers 
to growth) to achieve the objectives of the study (see table 1a).  
Research participants were identified using purposive sampling (regions with the 
highest successful MSEs). This was adopted to capture the drivers for growth from successful 
small-sized business owners.  Triangulation was adopted (see figure 1a) to strengthen the 
validity and reliability of the data through member checking and correlation with existing 
literature. The figure below shows a graphical representation of the research design for this 
study.  
Figure 1a: Diagrammatic representation of the research design. 
1.8 Theoretical Framework 
The word theory is defined as a general proposition or logically-connected system 
of general propositions, which established a relationship between two or more variables in a 
research (Abend, 2008, p.177) or perhaps a set of propositions about relationships between 
various concepts (Liamputtong and Ezzy, 2005, p.14). Gelso (2006) argues that constituents 
of a theory are filled with uncertainty. There are broad theories that are never debunked in 
their entirety even though some of their propositions have to be contradicted (Gelso, 2006; 
Sharma, 2013). As suggested by Troudi (2014), the research design and analysis 
encompassing the process of data collection should be duly informed by the theoretical 
Carry out Interviews via VoIP 
Prepare Interview Guide (choose questions) 
Identify participants 
Collect Data 
Thematic Analysis 
Data Triangulation 
(Compare results) 
Pertinent Literature 
Comparison 
Member Checking  
Recommendations and Conclusions 
framework as a vital requirement for research students in carrying out data-based researches 
in line with laid down criteria in academia.  The quality of a theory is reflected in its 
capability to clarify the interrelation of variables and the cause of the anticipated relationship 
between the variables (Gelso, 2006). A framework is usually used to reflect the structure of a 
theory within the context of a research study.  According to Liamputtong and Ezzy (2005), 
there are three interconnected series of questions that require clarification before embarking 
on qualitative research. These questions are in table 1d. They further stressed the interrelation 
of these questions and emphasise the importance of addressing them as a priority 
(Liamputtong and Ezzy, 2005).  
The theories in table 1c are synonymous with previous studies on business growth for 
small businesses and they underpin this research. These theories have been considered in 
pertinent literature (Agyapong et al., 2018; Bi et al., 201; Ahiawodzi and Adade, 2012; 
Adesua-Lincoln, 2011; Biggs and Shah, 2006; Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001) on business growth 
for small businesses to underpin the framework that informs and addresses the research 
questions put forward for the research. This forms the rationale behind the choice of theories 
considered for this study to duly inform and guide the entire research from the compounding 
of research questions, through the selection of approach and methodology to data collection 
and finally the interpretation of data and conclusions.  
Jovanovics theory put forward the argument why firms grow faster immediately they 
realise they have a competitive edge in their niche market (Goedhuys & Sleuwaegen, 2010; 
Jovanovic, 1982), and this circles around the gradual learning of their capabilities through 
observation within the business environment (Krasniqi and Lajqi, 2018). Literature shows the 
relationship between Jovanovics theory and the resource-based view theory. Once a firm 
realises its capabilities to compete, it uses its available resources to gain a competitive 
advantage over other competitors (Nasir et al, 2017). Gibrats law suggests the notion that 
firm growth is independent and not directly proportional to its size (Gibrat, 1931). Gibrats 
law argues that the growth rate is not dependent on the size of the firm whether it is a micro, 
small or medium-sized firm (Gibrat, 1931; Krasniqi and Lajqi, 2018).  The resource-based 
view theory supports the use of strategic orientation to combine resources through innovation 
to attain better performance. Dunkelberg and Coopers classification divides entrepreneurs 
into different typologies namely craftsman oriented, independence oriented, and growth-
oriented (Dunkelberg and Cooper, 1982). These typologies are based on level of education, 
industry, motivation, growth intention, and experience. 
Table 1c: Theories from previous literature related to this research 
 Article 1 Article 2 Article 3 Article 4 Article 5 
Theory  Jovanovics 
theory 
Churchill and 
Lewis 
theory/Model 
Resource-Based 
View theory 
Dunkelberg and 
Coopers 
Classification 
theory 
Gibrats Law 
Definitions This theory states 
that all firms 
have prior 
beliefs, and 
inferences about 
firm growth are 
drawn from 
aggregate data in 
which learning 
takes place over 
time (Garnsey, 
1998, p.525). 
Small businesses 
are characterised by 
organisational 
structure, different 
styles of 
management, and 
independent action 
but yet still 
experience similar 
problems during 
stages of 
development 
(Churchill and 
Lewis, 1983, p.2). 
Defines the role 
of organisational 
capabilities in 
using available 
resources to 
achieve 
competitive 
advantage and 
better 
performance. 
(Nasir et al, 2017, 
p.2). 
Defines 
entrepreneur 
typologies 
through the 
classification of 
entrepreneurs in 
categories to 
their 
characteristics. 
States that a firms 
growth is 
independent of its 
size (Gibrat, 1931; 
cited in Krasniqi and 
Lajqi, 2018, p. 253). 
Concept of 
theory 
The passive 
learning model 
Stages of 
development for  
SME growth 
Strategic 
Orientation and 
firm performance 
Typologies  Law of proportionate 
effect 
Definitions 
of Concept 
This concept 
argues that firms 
learn over time 
about their 
optimum 
capabilities 
through 
observation in the 
real business 
environment 
(Krasniqi and 
Lajqi, 2018). 
This framework is 
designed to aid 
owners and 
managers of small 
businesses in 
understanding and 
evaluating business 
challenges 
(Churchill and 
Lewis, 1983). 
RBV concept is 
the strategic 
direction 
implemented by a 
firm to create the 
proper behaviours 
for the continuous 
superior 
performance of 
the business 
(Nasir et al, 2017, 
p.3). 
This classifies 
entrepreneur 
typologies into 
three- craftsman 
oriented, 
independence 
oriented, and 
growth-oriented 
(Dunkelberg & 
Cooper, 1982). 
This concept drives 
the ideology that the 
growth of firms in the 
same industry is a 
random phenomenon 
regardless of the size 
of the firm be it large 
or small (Krasniqi 
and Lajqi, 2018, p. 
254). 
Relevance 
of theory 
This model 
explains why 
small firms grow 
faster as soon as 
they discover 
they can stand up 
to the 
competition in 
their niche 
markets 
(Jovanovic, 1982; 
cited in 
Goedhuys & 
Sleuwaegen, 
2010, p. 32). 
This theory divided 
the process of 
growth into stages 
of development 
(Adesua-Lincoln, 
2011, p.5352). 
Illustrates that 
strategic 
orientation on 
innovation 
success and 
performance of 
demonstrates a 
firms capacity to 
combine 
resources to 
innovate and 
improve 
performance 
(Nasir et al, 2017, 
p.2). 
This theory 
classifies the 
characteristics 
of entrepreneurs 
and divides 
them into three 
major categories 
to enable 
researchers to 
measure the 
impact of 
typologies on 
business 
growth. 
This theory suggests 
that expected growth 
should not be 
affected by any other 
variable as the 
probability of a 
particular rate of 
growth during a 
particular period is 
the same for all firms 
within a specific 
industry (Becchetti 
and Trovato; cited in 
Krasniqi and Lajqi, 
2018, p. 254). 
Churchill and Lewiss model is designed to break the growth processes into stages of 
development hence why it is adopted for this study. The stages of small business growth are 
categorised into five based on management style, organisation, the extent of formal systems, 
major strategy, and business and owner (Churchill and Lewis, 1983). The five stages of 
development are existence, survival, success (disengagement/growth), and take-off, and 
resource maturity. The RBV and Churchill and Lewiss model are centred on the firm and as 
such, used in this study to examine how small businesses use resources to gain competitive 
advantages before or during the transition growth period.  
The theories underpinning this study help illustrate the entire growth process for small 
businesses. Once small businesses notice the capacity to compete, they aspire to grow faster 
(Jovanovics theory) by building the capacity through the use of available resources (RBV) to 
gain competitive advantage and transition through the stages of development (Churchill and 
Lewiss model). 
 The table below (1d) illustrates the relevance of the theories in table 1c in answering 
the research questions put forward for this study. These theories/models inform this research 
on the subject of business growth and were chosen to answer the research questions and 
achieve the objectives of the study. 
Table 1d: Research questions and relevant theories. 
Research Questions Applicable theories  
What are the firms characteristics of small 
businesses in Nigeria? 
Jovanovics theory, Gibrats Law, 
What are the characteristics (typologies) of 
small business owners in Nigeria? 
Dunkelberg and Coopers theory of 
Classification. 
What are the drivers and barriers to 
sustainable business growth and development 
of small businesses? 
Churchill and Lewiss model. 
How can small business owners enhance 
sustainable business growth and 
development? 
Resource-based view theory. 
1.9 Conceptual Framework  
Resource-based view theory, Jovanovics theory, Churchill and Lewiss model, 
Gibrats law are the fundamental theories underpinning this research. These are synonymous 
with small business growth in literature. According to the results of the study by Davidsson 
and Wiklund (2001), entrepreneurship research is majorly saturated by micro-level analysis 
adopting the use of individuals or firms as the level of analysis. Davidsson and Wiklund 
(2001), also reiterated that while the use of aggregate-level studies declined, the use of 
individual and firm increased, and this has been adopted for this study. The unit of analysis 
for this study are entrepreneurs (owners) and firms. This study relies on individuals and firms 
to answer the research questions and achieve the objectives of this research. 
Table 1e was adopted to streamline and give a clear understanding of the research 
process. The pointers are meant to serve as guidelines to pinpoint milestones during the entire 
process of the research.  
Table 1e: The Process deduced from The Research Process (Source Mark Saunders, Philip 
Lewis, and Adrian Thornhill 2015). 
Research Inception 
Formulation and Clarification of Research Topic 
Systematic Literature Review 
Understanding Research Philosophy and Approach 
Formulation of Research Design 
Negotiating Access and Ethical approvals 
Planning Data Collection               Semi-structured in-depth interviews 
Analyse Data Qualitative methods 
Write the Thesis 
Submission and Presentation (Viva) 
 This study aimed to introduce a framework hence why the grounded theory method 
was adopted to synthesise the process because of its suitability and compatibility with 
interpretivist philosophical standpoints (Durant-Law, 2005). The conceptual framework in 
figure 1b depicts the flow of the process of this study. The figure shows the concentration for 
this study which are micro and small-sized enterprises. The unit of analysis considered for 
this study is individual and firm (firm and owner (entrepreneur)). Pertinent literature (Biggs 
and Shah, 2006; Nichter and Goldmark, 2009; Bouazza et al., 2015) shows and reflects the 
use of firm and individual as the unit of analysis to examine the barriers and drivers to 
sustainable of small businesses. The variables considered are firm age, firm size, 
industry/sector, owners education, owners work experience, motivation.  
The theories underpinning this study were considered to deduce the research 
questions put forward in this research. The resource-based theory reiterates the use of 
available resources as the disposal of a firm to achieve competitive advantage (Nasir et al., 
2017), Jovanovics theory  explaining why small firms grow rapidly once they can compete 
in their niche markets (Jovanovic, 1982), Gibrats law suggesting that firm growth is random 
with no correlation to firm size (Krasniqi and Lajqi, 2018) and Churchill and Lewis model  
dividing the growth process to stages of development (Churchill and Lewis, 1983). The 
conceptual framework essentialise the need to evaluate the barriers facing small business 
owners and drivers to sustainable business growth for micro and small-sized enterprises by 
examining the transition period of growth from micro-sized to small-sized enterprises. Both 
factors are essential to introduce practical solutions and recommendations to help small 
business owners achieve sustainable growth. 
Figure 1b: Showing the conceptual framework proposed for this study. 
1.10 Access Issues and Limitations 
 Securing approval from the regulatory governmental organisation (SMEDAN) 
presiding over micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises in Nigeria was one of the access 
issues for this research. Securing interviews with small business owners during a global 
pandemic (COVID 19) to cover the specified demographics was a major limitation. 
 The time and cost of traveling to carry out all the data samples were key constraints 
expected to be considered in this study but travelling restrictions were enforced during the 
pandemic and alternate means of data collection had to be used (VoIP- in line with 
recommendations from WHO during the lockdowns).  
Firms' and Owners' 
characteristics
Theories
Drivers and 
Barriers
Business Growth
1.11 Chapter Summary 
 This chapter gives background information on this research and an overview of the 
rationale, aim, and objectives of this study. It illustrates the proposition of theories drawn 
from previous studies through different methodologies and the conceptual framework 
adopted for this research. It also enumerates the access issues encountered and the limitations 
of this study. 
2.0 LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 Overview 
This chapter will explore in phases the pertinent literature on the barriers and drivers 
to business growth for small businesses. Firstly, observation is drawn to the definitions of 
small businesses as this varies for authors and geographical locations. A systematic literature 
review with rationale for selection of literature reviewed for this study is followed by critical 
evaluation of synonymous theories from previous literature such as resource-based view 
theory, Jovanovics model, Churchill, and Lewiss model, and Dunkelberg and Coopers 
classification. The discussion would proceed to the drivers and barriers to sustainable 
business growth for small businesses. Emphasis is drawn to the influence of internal factors 
such as firm characteristics, entrepreneurs characteristics, and business and management 
skills and the rationale for the comparison. Lastly, the gap in the literature is highlighted and 
the focus of the study is reiterated. 
2.2 Definitions and Conceptual Clarifications 
Definitions  
Different authors have adopted a wide range of perspectives in defining small 
businesses. For this study, the defining standard by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) 
and Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria is adopted as the case 
study is on Nigerias MSEs. 
Table 2a: Showing the categories of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises in Nigeria. 
S/N Size Category Employment Assets (Naira 
(Million){excluding 
land and buildings 
1. Micro Enterprises Less than 10 Less than 5 
2. Small Enterprises 10 to 49 5 to less than 50 
3. Medium Enterprises 50 to 199 50 to less than 500 
Source: SMEDAN National Policy on MSMEs 2015 
It is imperative to note that a certain group of authors/researchers do categorise micro, 
small and medium-sized businesses as small businesses. As earlier stated in the introduction 
chapter, the focus is pinned on micro and small-sized enterprises for the aim and objectives of 
this study. While the definitions for MSMEs (Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises) could 
vary in different African countries, the barriers to sustainable business growth are relatively 
the same. For example in Tanzania, the definitions for micro-sized is up to four (4) 
employees with a capital of less than TZS five (5) million, small-sized is between five (5) to 
forty-nine (49) employees with a capital of TZS five (5) million to less than  TZS two 
hundred (200) million and medium-sized is between fifty (50) to ninety-nine (99) employees 
with a capital of TZS two hundred (200) million to less than TZS eight hundred (800) million 
(Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014) while in Nigeria, the definitions are slightly higher for 
each category of small business. In Kenya, the definitions (micro{less than 10 employees, 
small {11-50 employees} and medium {50-100 employees) (Bunyasi et al., 2014) are higher 
than those in Tanzania but slighter lower than the categories in Nigeria.  
2.3 Selection of Articles for Review 
The articles selected for this study were based on phrases and keyword searches 
pertinent to the focus of the study. Searches were done on Google scholar and Web of 
Science. These two databases were used because they offer links to a comprehensive list of 
literature (old and recent) - numerous global publishers such as Elsevier, Scopus, Emerald, 
Taylor & Francis, Wiley, Springer, SAGE, and ProQuest giving access to multiple journals of 
science and social sciences. Keywords and phrases such as business growth, micro-sized 
enterprises, small-sized enterprises, SMEs, MSMEs, entrepreneurs characteristics, firm 
characteristics, business and management skills, barriers to SME business growth, drivers to 
SME business growth, Qualitative researches on SME, Thematic analysis, theories related to 
SME growth/SMEs and MSMEs in Nigeria, Africa as a whole and the rest of the world. 
Attention was also drawn to the quality of journals and the peer review status of articles. The 
number of citations was considered while selecting the articles for research strategy and 
design. The search results from the databases were filtered by scanning the table of contents, 
introduction (textbooks), and abstract (articles) to find literature relevant to business growth 
for small businesses.   
The systematic literature review of selected articles considered for this research shows 
a structured and compendious list of studies related to growth for small businesses (see 
appendix 7.2, 7.3, 7.4). It enumerates the different authors, their year of study, location of 
study, and the name of the journal for publications. It also highlights the purpose of each 
research and the underpinning theories and propositions that informed the research. It shows 
the constructs/variables examined in each study and the key findings and recommendations 
from each author. 
2.4 A Review of Existing Studies 
Out of over 100 articles reviewed, seven articles duly informed this research. The 
articles are as follows: 
1. Bartlett and Hamilton, 2001  informed this study on the barriers to SME growth 
using Jovanovics theory and Blanchards theory. The author examined 
institutional barriers, barriers internal to the firm, financial barriers, and social 
barriers.  
2. Dobbs and Hamilton, 2007 - A summary of the empirical studies since the mid-
1990s evaluating over thirty independent variables to deduce the determinants on 
small business growth was put forward by Matthew Dobbs and R. T Hamilton. 
According to Smallbone and Wyer (2000), these evaluated variables could be 
divided into four categories namely, characteristics of the entrepreneur, 
characteristics of the firm, environment/industry-specific factors, and management 
strategies. The major theories and models adopted across the thirty studies were 
Gibrats law, Jovanovics theory, Resource-based view theory (RBV), Churchill 
and Lewiss model, Dunkelberg and Coopers classification. 
3. Doern, 2009  the author carried out a literature review to critique and give 
suggestions for developing the right methodology in research. She highlighted the 
pitfalls and how they could be mitigated. 
4. Okpara, 2011  focused on factors (Financial constraints, management experience, 
poor infrastructure, corruption) constraining growth and survival of SMEs. 
5. Adisa et al., 2014  carried out an exploratory study of Nigerian small business 
owners. The study findings reflected factors that influence growth such as 
business and management skills, funding, infrastructure, and facilities. 
6. Bouazza et al., 2015  established the factors (internal (owners characteristics) 
and external (access to finance, HR capabilities, legal and regulatory framework) 
affecting the growth of SMEs using Gibrats law as the theoretical foundation. 
7. Agyapong et al., 2018  informed the study on the factors influencing the growth 
of SMEs using owners of SMEs as the unit of analysis and RBV as the theoretical 
foundation. The level of education of the owner, funding, competition, power 
energy supply, inflation, government policies, performance, and technology were 
the factors found to be influencing growth.  
Figure 2a: Bar chart showing the frequency of variables/constructs synonymous to 
studies on business growth for small businesses. 
It is evident from table 2b and the literature review table (appendix 7.1, 7.2, 7.3), that 
the constructs/variables in figure 2a have the highest frequencies. Out of the four categories 
of variables/constructs synonymous with determinants of small business growth as suggested 
by Smallbone and Wyer (2000), three would be considered for this study. Since this study 
intends to focus on recommendations tailored to small business owners rather than to 
policymakers in government, the emphasis is directed to characteristics of the entrepreneur, 
characteristics of the firm, and specific factors and management strategies as put forward by 
Smallbone and Wyer (2000). The third construct is narrowed down to business and 
management skills considering the objectives of this research.  
Access to
Finance
Business and
Management
skills
Entrepreneur's
Characteristics
Firm's
Characteristics
Funding Infrastructure
and Facilities
Performamce
Constructs/Variables Frequency Chart
Constructs/Variables Frequency Chart
Table 2b: Showing the review of variables/constructs in the articles reviewed.  
Constructs/Variables Frequency Authors/Years 
Access to Finance 26 (Abor & Quartey, 2010), (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011), (Adisa et al.,, 2014), 
(Afolabi, 2013), (Agyapong et al., 2018), (Ahiawodzi & Adade, 2012), 
(Bartlett & Bukvic, 2001), (Beck & Demirgue-Kunt, 2006), (Bouazza et 
al., 2015), (Brink et al., 2003), (Brown & Lee, 2019), (Federico et 
al.,2012), (Ibidunni et al, 2018), (Neneh & Vanzyl, 2014), (Nichter & 
Goldmark, 2009) ,(Gill & Biger, 2012), (Gumede, 2000), (Igwe et al, 
2018),(Ihua, 2009),(Mambula, 2002), (Mashenene & Rumanyika, 
2014), (Motta & Sharma, 2019), (North & Smallbone, 1996), (Olawale 
& Garwe, 2010), (Tushabomwe-Kazooba, 2006), (Wang, 2016) 
Business and 
Management skills 
21 (Abor & Quartey, 2010), (Adisa et al.,, 2014), (Bi et al, 2017), (Bouazza 
et al., 2015), (Brink et al., 2003), (Bunyasi et al, 2014), (Cant & Wiid, 
2013), (Foreman-Peck et al, 2006), (Gill & Biger, 2012), (Gumede, 
2000), (Ibidunni et al, 2018), (Ihua, 2009), (Jagongo & Kinyua, 2013), 
(Krasniqi & Mustafa, 2016), (Olawale & Garwe, 2010), (Mashenene & 
Rumanyika, 2014), (Nichter & Goldmark, 2009), (North & Smallbone, 
1996), (Okpara, 2011), (Quartey et al, 2017), (Tushabomwe-Kazooba, 
2006) 
Entrepreneurs 
characteristics (Age, 
level of education, 
Experience, 
Gender)... 
(Motivation, 
Altruism, 
Autonomy). 
18 (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011), (Agyapong et al., 2018), (Ahiawodzi & Adade, 
2012), (Anggadwita & Mustafid, 2013), (Biggs & Shah, 2006), (Cant & 
Wiid, 2013), (Bouazza et al., 2015), (Boubakary, 2015), (Ensari & 
Karabay,2014), (Gherhes et al, 2016), (Goedhuys & Sleuwaegen, 2010),  
(Hazudin et al, 2015), (Kozan et al, 2012), (Neneh & Vanzyl, 2014), 
(Nichter & Goldmark, 2009) (Rogerson, 2010), (Quartey et al., 2017), 
(Yeboah, 2015) 
Firms 
characteristics (Age, 
Size, 
Growth)(Industry 
type) 
22 (Abor & Quartey, 2010), (Ahiawodzi & Adade, 2012), (Biggs & Shah, 
2006), (Federico et al.,2012), (Foreman-Peck et al, 2006), (Goedhuys & 
Sleuwaegen, 2010), (Greenberg et al, 2018), (Hernandez-Canovas & 
Koeter-Kant, 2011), (Hirvonen et al, 2016), (Ipinnaiye & Dineen, 2017), 
(Kozan et al, 2012), (Mather, 2007), (Motta & Sharma, 2019), (Nichter 
& Goldmark, 2009), (Kemayel, 2015), (Robson & Bennett, 2000), 
(Quartey et al., 2017), (Serrasqueiro et al, 2010), (Ullah, 2019), (Yang 
& Meyer, 2019), (Yeboah, 2015), (Wang, 2016) 
Funding 19 (Adisa et al.,, 2014), (Agyapong et al., 2018 ), (Ahiawodzi & Adade, 
2012), (Biggs & Shah, 2006), (Greenberg et al, 2018), (Gumede, 2000), 
(Hazudin et al, 2015), (Ibidunni et al, 2018), (Ihua, 2009), (Mambula, 
2002), (Mashenene & Rumanyika, 2014), (Memba et al, 2012), (Motta 
& Sharma, 2019), (North & Smallbone, 1996), (Okpara, 2011), (Pletnev 
& Barkhatov, 2016), (Rogerson, 2010), (Serrasqueiro et al, 2010), 
(Ullah, 2019) 
Infrastructure and 
Facilities 
12 (Adisa et al., 2014), (Bi et al, 2017), (Bouazza et al., 2015), (Cant & 
Wiid, 2013), (Ibidunni et al, 2018), (Ihua, 2009), (Mambula, 2002), 
(Mashenene & Rumanyika, 2014), (Mather, 2007), (Okpara, 2011), 
(Olawale & Garwe, 2010), (Tushabomwe-Kazooba, 2006) 
Performance 9 (Agyapong et al., 2018), (Asenge et al., 2018), (Bi et al, 2017), 
(Foreman-Peck et al, 2006), (Hirvonen et al, 2016), (McMahon, 2001), 
(Ojukwu, 2006), (Quartey et al., 2017), (Reijonen et al, 2015) 
Even though there are other variables highlighted in literature such as inter-
organisational relationships (Barringer et al., 2005), Leadership styles (Chaganti et al., 2002), 
research and development (Del-Monte and Papagni, 2003; Yasuda, 2005), information 
management (Locke, 2004) and financial reporting (McMahon, 2001), this study would be 
focusing on the three categories suggested by Smallbone and Wyer (2000) which is among 
the variables with the highest frequency (see figure 2a, table 2b) from the literature review 
tables (see appendix 7.1, 7.2, 7.3). 
The last two decades of research studies in Nigeria have cross-examined key variables 
and constructs such as entrepreneurs characteristics (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011), access to 
finance (Ihua, 2009; Adesua-Lincoln, 2011; Afolabi, 2013), infrastructure and facilities 
(Mambula, 2002; Ihua, 2009; Okpara, 2011; Adisa et al., 2014) and business and 
management skills (Ihua, 2009; Okpara, 2011; Adisa et al., 2014; Ibidunni et al., 2018). Other 
variables considered were business alertness (Asenge et al., 2018) or entrepreneurial 
competencies (Ibidunni et al., 2018), corruption (Okpara, 2011), economic conditions, and 
social support (Ihua, 2009). Table 2b is an extract from the systematic literature review table 
for this study. The evaluated variables/constructs considered as determinants of small 
business growth are in line with the four key categories suggested by Smallbone and Wyer 
(2000). This drives the constructs chosen for inclusion in this study  entrepreneurs 
characteristics, firms characteristics, and management skills.  
Table 2c is an extract from the systematic literature review table (see appendix 7.2) 
showing all the selected articles on studies done in Nigeria in the last two decades related to 
business growth for small businesses and the constructs/variables and underpinning theories 
for each study. According to Adesua-Lincoln (2011), barriers facing entrepreneurs in Nigeria 
are gender-neutral as banks would rather focus on individual credit risks than their gender 
contrary to depositions suggested by previous studies (Marlow, 2002). The lack of 
information and support to access finance is a more pronounced barrier than getting access to 
finance due to ineffective communications and support from governmental bodies refusing to 
invest in formal market research (Phiri, 2003; Adesua-Lincoln, 2011). There are evidently, 
ridiculous criteria from the banks to access loans which most Nigerian entrepreneurs cant 
seem to cope with, intentionally fixed to checklist start-up firms and accommodate small and 
medium-sized firms who are already in business for several years (Mambula, 2002; Igwe et 
al., 2018). As stated by Adesua-Lincoln (2011), female entrepreneurs who applied for loans 
were expected to provide land/property (85.7%), guarantors (5%), savings (3%), and physical 
assets as collaterals which are beyond the capacity of an average entrepreneur in Nigeria.  As 
seen in table 2b, business and management skills are vital for small business survival. Most 
small business owners are of necessity, required to multitask in different roles either because 
of inability to afford staff with the required expertise (Rajaram, 2008), or simply cutting 
operational costs by doing all the managerial and operational tasks themselves (Akande and 
Ojokuku, 2008). 
Table 2c: Showing the studies done in Nigeria on business growth in the last two decades. 
NIGERIA   
YEAR Theories in Literature Constructs/Variables 
2002 Schatzs theory Difficulty in acquiring machines 
and raw materials, Funding, 
Infrastructures & facilities. 
2006 Determinist model, 
Social action model, 
Integrationist model 
Business performance, Effects of 
barriers, Investments. 
2009 Dun & Bradstreets 
theory 
Access to finance, Business 
failures, Business and 
Management skills, Competition, 
Economic conditions, Funding, 
High taxes, Improper & poor 
planning, Infrastructure, 
Management skills, Market 
competition, Social support. 
2011 Churchill & Lewiss 
theory, Ansoffs 
framework 
Access to finance, Entrepreneurs 
characteristics (age, experience, 
level of education, motivation), 
Corruption, Funding, 
Infrastructure, Management skills. 
2013 Ogunsiji & Ladamus 
theory 
Access to Finance (Bank credits), 
2014 Van Praags theory Business & management skills, 
Funding, Infrastructures & 
facilities. 
2018 Self-theories of 
Intelligence, Learning-
by-models 
Attitude, Business alertness, 
Creativity, Entrepreneurial 
competencies, Funding, 
Innovativeness, Knowledge, 
Management skills, Technology, 
Performance, Productivity, Risk-
taking, Sustainability, Venture 
capital. 
 Studies reviewed in table 2c point to the efforts by the central bank of Nigeria (CBN) 
to close the widening gap on the issues of access to finance for micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises and alternate finance providers such as microlenders are receiving more 
support from the CBN. Microfinance banks that offer micro-lending options to micro-sized 
enterprises are getting help from the CBN (Eigbiremolen and Anaduaka, 2014) since owners 
of micro-sized firms cant meet up with the collateral demands from big banks who prefer to 
prioritise larger firms (Babajide, 2012). Microfinance banks can approve small loans to small 
businesses through informal appraisals and collateral substitutes to build a credit-worthy 
profile over time to access larger loans which have been more effective than offers from 
commercial banks (Syed et al., 2018). Even though microfinance banks' offers are easier and 
effective, they still offer high-interest rates which lead to default in repayments from small 
business owners (Taiwo et al., 2016). Small business owners would rather prefer to use their 
savings or perhaps credits from cooperative societies than take on offers from microfinance 
banks with high-interest rates or commercial banks with high collateral demands (Aladejebi, 
2019).     
Table 2d is an extract from the systematic literature review table (see appendix 7.3) 
showing all the selected articles on studies done in other countries of Africa by the years and 
the constructs/variables considered for each respective study. Studies across Africa in the last 
two decades have examined different variables and how they influence business growth. 
Some studies have focused on entrepreneurs motivation or autonomy (Neneh and Vanzyl, 
2014; Boubakary, 2015; Hazudin et al., 2015) while others have examined firms 
characteristics (Nichter and Goldmark, 2009; Quartey et al., 2017) or perhaps innovation, 
social media and customer relationship management (Olawale and Garwe, 2010; Jagongo and 
Kinyua, 2013; Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014) (See table 2d). Baron (2007) argues that an 
entrepreneurs values influence managerial practices which is consistent with other studies 
(Lakoff, 2008; Khan et al., 2010) reiterating the influence of leaders values on SME growth. 
Evidence from literature shows that growth interpretation defers (see figure 2b) depending on 
variables being examined and the context in which they are being evaluated. Reijonen et al. 
(2015) examine the influence of entrepreneurial orientation on business growth and business 
branding. This is an aspect of business that most small business owners intentionally avoid 
because it is regarded as appropriate for big firms only (Merrilees, 2007). Some small 
business owners deem it appropriate but uncertain about its value for investment (Leek and 
Christodoulides, 2011) and would rather channel their funds towards other aspects of a 
business. Marketing is inherently part of the integral factors contributing to business growth 
as small businesses are actively searching to access and exploit new markets (Reijonen et al., 
2015). Cultural norms specific to each geographic location with environmental factors have a 
significant impact on growth and entrepreneurship within a specific region (Lee and Peterson, 
2000). Any variable involved in the process of business development would likely influence 
growth. As suggested by Beverland et al. (2007), branding enables small businesses to be 
adaptable to customers requirements but in turn, struggle to keep the value of the brand. 
Integration of branding concepts to business models adopted by small businesses is quite 
daunting (Reijonen et al., 2015). While there are business supports for small businesses in 
western countries to consider brand building in their business models, it is not the same for 
small businesses in African countries. It comes as an advantage for western firms to expand 
into emerging markets in Africa (Xie and Boggs, 2006; Reijonen et al., 2015) but the reserve 
isnt the same for African small businesses. Branding is not considered an important goal in 
development for small businesses (Krake, 2005; Horan et al., 2011) but it is worth exploring 
the potentials that could be unlocked with a strong brand. Most African small businesses are 
facing more stringent obstacles to growth to consider brand-building as a strong determinant 
in business development. There are factors such as taxation, inflation, lack of infrastructure 
and facilities, government policies, and corruption (see table 2c) that require quick and 
effective mitigation plans. 
Musa and Chinniah (2016) in a literature review, discussed the challenges and 
opportunities of green practices by SMEs towards national growth. According to Musa and 
Chinniah (2016), green practices are fundamental for SMEs to gain a competitive edge 
locally and internally. This seems to be getting attention lately especially in the wake of 
COP26 talks about saving the planet and small businesses ought to adopt green practices as 
part of their corporate social responsibility. Africa accounts for only 4% of global fossil fuel 
emissions as reported in 2017 (Ayompe et al., 2017). Even though the continents 
contribution to CO2 emissions is relatively low, Africa is still one of the few to feel the 
effects of global warming. Small businesses should inculcate green practices into their 
models as the planet requires intentionality from all countries irrespective of their CO2 
emissions.  
Evidence from literature also points to the importance of information sharing. 
Efficient flow of information in the value chain between small businesses enhances 
flexibility, responsiveness, and guaranteed customer satisfaction (Lee et al., 2000; Kim et al., 
2006; Bi et al., 2017). Efficient and seamless transactions facilitated by information sharing 
will enhance innovativeness and firm performance (Raymond and Bergeron, 2008). 
Table 2d: Table showing studies done in African countries in the last two decades and the 
constructs/variables considered.  
AFRICA   
Country Year Constructs/Variables 
Algeria 2015 Access to finance, Entrepreneurs characteristics, Human 
resource capacities, Managerial capacities, Marketing skills, 
Technological capacities. 
Cameroun 2015 The desire for autonomy, Ethics, Feeling of achievement, Self-
esteem. 
Ghana 2010, 2012, 
2015, 2018 
Access to finance, Annual Turnover, Entrepreneurs 
characteristics (age, experience, level of education, motivation), 
Firms characteristics (age, legal status, industry sector, size), 
Government policies, Inflation, Management skills, Performance, 
Technology. 
Kenya 2012, 2013, 
Annual sales, Customer relationship management, Growth rate, 
Innovation, Management skills, Market Access, Pricing, 
Profitability, Risk-taking, Social media, Use of venture capital 
Nigeria 2002, 2006, 
2009, 2011, 
2013, 2014, 
Access to finance, Attitude, Business alertness, Competition, 
Corruption, Creativity, Economic conditions, Effects of barriers, 
Entrepreneurial competencies, Entrepreneurs characteristics 
(age, experience, level of education, motivation) Difficulty in 
acquiring machines and raw materials, Funding, Improper & poor 
planning, High taxes, Infrastructures & facilities, Innovativeness, 
Investments, Knowledge, Management skills, Market 
competition, Performance, Productivity, Risk-taking, Social 
support, Sustainability, Technology, Venture capital. 
Uganda 2006 Access to finance, Business failure, Management skills, Poor 
record keeping, Power shortages, Pricing strategy. 
South 
Africa 
2000, 2003, 
2005, 2010, 
2011, 2013, 
Access to finance, Crime, Corruption, Entrepreneurs 
characteristics (age, experience, exposure, gender, level of 
education, motivation), Growth intention, Growth opportunities, 
HIV/AIDS, Inflation, Infrastructure & facilities, Management 
skills, Risk-taking, Taxation, Technology, Tolerance to ambiguity 
& uncertainty, Unemployment 
Saharan 
Africa/Afr
2006, 2009, 
Access to finance, Entrepreneurs characteristics (age, experience, 
gender, level of education, household), Ethnicity, Firms 
characteristics (age, legal status, size), Firm Performance, Inter-
firm cooperation, Productivity, Social networks, Value chains. 
Tanzania 2014 Access to finance, Corruption, Funding, Infrastructures & 
facilities, Management skills 
Adoption of technology/E-platforms boots capability through enhanced business 
process competencies (Bi et al., 2017). Researchers have argued that adopting technology 
will reduce transaction costs and increase market efficiency (Eikebrokk and Olsen, 2007; 
Raymond and Bergeron, 2008). While a lot of small businesses in African countries dont 
embrace the optimum use of technology, social media has been widely accepted and small 
business owners have found it to be cost-effective in running their marketing campaigns. 
Findings from the study done by Bi et al., (2017) suggest that fast-growth small business 
owners ought to merge their business practices and organisational structures with investments 
in information technology to gain business advantage within their niche markets. 
Figure 2b: Theoretical model adopted for this study deduced from Literature. 
 The systematic literature review table (see appendix 7.2, 7.3, 7.4) informs the 
theoretical model (Figure 2b) for this study on the prevalent constructs (firm and 
entrepreneur) synonymous to business growth in literature. It is evident from the literature 
that factors influencing business growth rate could either be internal (firms characteristics 
and characteristics of the owner (entrepreneur) (Biggs and Shah, 2006; Adesua-Lincoln, 
2011) or external (access to finance, taxes, infrastructure, and facilities, etc.) (Brink et al., 
2003; Ihua, 2009; Adisa et al., 2014).  
Increase in Sales 
and Profit
Increase in Job 
creation
Increase in no of 
Employees
Increase in 
Capital
Business 
Expansion
Growth 
Interpretations
Business 
Growth Rate
Internal Factors
Level of Education
Prior Experience
Motivation
Business and 
Management Skills
Firm Size 
Firm Age
Industry
External Factors
Access to Finance
Infrastructures and 
Facilities
Taxes
Factors
Small 
Business 
Owners
According to Boubakary (2015), sales increase is the initial stage of business growth 
correlating with Delmar (1999), suggesting that sales increase could be achieved without 
spending on extra resources or hiring more staff by simply outsourcing or subcontracting. 
Some other authors interpret growth through annual turnover and workforce (Geindre and 
Dussuc, 2012) or perhaps job creation (Janssen, 2004) (see figure 2b). The personal values of 
a small business owner could include the desire to be autonomous (Perren, 2000; Turan and 
Kara, 2007) leading to an exceptional drive to build a successful business. This reaffirms the 
vital role of motivation (Neneh and Vanzyl, 2014) and its impact on business growth. 
2.4.1 Business Growth for Small Businesses 
Many authors have examined the growth and success rate of SMEs (Romar, 2009; 
Sieger, 2011; Pletnev and Barkhatov, 2016). Evidence from literature saturates the business 
environment with the economic advantages of business growth (Doern, 2009; Gill and Biger, 
2012) but also reveals the drawbacks of business failures as a majority of start-ups either fail 
or remain on small scale (Loveman and Sengenberger, 1990). Small businesses have an 
important role to play to achieve economic integration through competitiveness, job creation, 
and the distribution of income across the country (Abisuga-Oyekunle et al., 2019). 
Entrepreneurship remains an aspect of literature that lacks consensus in definition even 
though it has been prioritised in recent years (Hamburg et al., 2019). 
 Entrepreneurial skills are essential for sustainable growth for small businesses that 
are growth-oriented as all small businesses do not aspire to grow. The need for competency in 
skillset to achieve sustainable business growth is imperative and pivotal to value creation and 
capacity building. Bacigalupo et al. (2016), emphasised the need to depict entrepreneurship 
as competence that comprises attitudes, knowledge, and skills. Only a few small businesses 
tend to grow (Storey et al., 1987; Kirchoff, 1994) while a vast number close down within the 
first few years (Cressy, 2006). To get past the stage of new entry or start-ups (Aldrich 
and Auster, 1986) and grow to attain a minimum efficiency scale needed to compete 
efficiently in the market, growth to a minimum level is imminent.  While it is true that not all 
small businesses decide to grow as some prefer to just survive and stay small but those that 
aspire to grow would  of necessity -  strike a balance between owners intentions, 
capabilities of the workforce, and the opportunities in the business environment (Morrison et 
al., 2003). Entrepreneurship competence abbreviated as EntreComp was launched in January 
2015 by Joint Research Centre, the European Commissions in-house science service to 
develop a consensual approach in developing entrepreneurship competence in Europe. 
According to Bacigalupo et al. (2016), EntreComp depicts entrepreneurship as a transversal 
competence, which applies to all facets of life  starting from nurturing personal 
development, or getting involved in activities within the community, to (re)entering the 
labour market as an employee/self-employed or perhaps starting up a new venture. The 
application of this definition to value creation in the private sector, public sector, or third 
sector while enabling the use of ideas/opportunities to create value for society is substantial. 
This depiction encompasses different types of entrepreneurship (intra, green, social and 
digital). Kozan et al. (2012) argued that the dynamics of growth serve as a far better 
quantifier of entrepreneurship than the past growth of businesses.  
Small businesses tend to survive and achieve growth within a competitive economy as 
long as they are good at supplying markets requirements (Foreman-Peck et al., 2006) be it 
goods or services. Small businesses are the most versatile and adaptable firms in the 
emerging market across the world (Moreira, 2016). Business growth is regarded as a measure 
of business success (Neneh and Vanzyl, 2014) and it relies on a favourable business 
environment (Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014). Carton and Hofer (2006) describe the 
business growth of firms widely, as a determinant for success in business for studies on 
entrepreneurship. Doern (2009) concludes that the majority of studies aim to deduce and 
forecast the characteristics of small businesses that achieve sustainable growth. Such 
characteristics would include the level of education and prior experience of the owner of the 
business, the size of the firm, how long the business has been in operation, and the standards 
of firm development. 
Foreman-Peck et al. (2006) suggest that fostering skills set and knowledge specific to 
each business and investing in the appropriate training of staff will be enabling business 
growth. Cosh et al. (2000) agree with Foreman-Peck et al. (2006) through observation, that 
training of staff has a positive relationship with staff growth especially when it covers human 
relations. This enables staff to efficiently execute tasks required of them within the business 
environment and foreman-Peck et al. (2006) termed it as a cyclical process which intention 
is to foster continuous business improvements. Kay (1993) simply describes small 
businesses competencies as a vital key to business growth. Skills acquisition either for small 
business owners or their staff is therefore vital to business growth. There are different 
inhibiting factors to growth identified in previous literature which could be challenging to 
mitigate collectively due to lack of limited resources (Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014) in 
most African countries.  
Business growth could be measured in different perspectives either through the lenses 
of increased capital, sales, the number of employees, and business expansion (Jansen, 2009; 
Sirec and Mocnik, 2010; Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014, Robson and Bennett, 2000) or 
through the lenses of job creation which is vital to the development of the economy (Dobbs 
and Hamilton, 2007; Shepherd and Wiklund, 2009) or perhaps regarded as increase in the 
size of an organisation (Ojukwu, 2006, p.53).  There is a widespread notion in economic 
theory that the growth of firms is positively related to the size of the firm due to scope and 
the economies of scale (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001).  According to Bartlett and Bukvic (2001), 
small businesses rise faster than big firms because of their initial market entry with minimum 
efficiency coupled with the uncertainty of costs which they eventually evolve to achieve over 
some time (Jovanovic, 1982).  Robson and Bennett (2000), agree with the notion that 
business growth ought to be measured with the increase in the number of employees as small 
business growth is one of the key players that tackle unemployment (Storey, 1994). They also 
suggested that business growth could also be measured with sales growth and profitability to 
support the views put forward by Bartlett and Bukvic (2001) and Kalleberg and Leicht (1991) 
respectively. Other suggestions prefer to measure business growth with the personal 
development of management, innovation in technology, or recognition in a profession (Orser 
et al., 1996) or perhaps the differences between small businesses who aspire to grow and 
those who do not desire to grow but concentrate on attaining minimum efficiency scale to 
ensure survival (Hakim, 1989). Based on the theory of embeddedness, Greenberg et al. 
(2018) argue that communication networks integrate people and businesses which gives the 
firm access to essential contacts to gain a competitive advantage by informing its business 
operations. According to Robson and Bennett (2000), there are three main attempts in 
previous studies to illustrate the subject of growth namely: through the lenses of the size of 
the firm, determinants of job creation and new firm formation, or simply an expansion.  
Business growth of small businesses is vital and globally regarded as a key driver 
majorly because of its contributions to employment growth (Bunyasi et al., 2014; Mbonyane 
and Ladzani, 2011). Small businesses play an important role by connecting local products to 
international buyers through the concept of globalisation (Ensari and Karabay, 2014). 
Examples of such are small businesses on eBay and amazon catering to international buyers 
as well as local markets.  
According to Nichter and Goldmark (2009), findings from literature reveal that 
majority of entrepreneurs in developing countries particularly in Africa may never experience 
significant growth irrespective of their creativity and tenacity. Bartlett and Bukvic (2001) 
argued that considering u-shaped cost curves, small businesses that run below minimum 
efficient scale will continue to expand even when prices rise compared to bigger businesses 
firms that operate above minimum efficient scale. They further reaffirm that small business 
wont change in response to price falls while big businesses will be compelled to reduce 
output to mitigate such changes (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001). For businesses to achieve 
sustainable growth, quality products and services are essential for customer retention 
(Ojukwu, 2006) coupled with access to business information to gain a competitive advantage 
in other to compete in a contentious global market (Bunyasi et al., 2014). Small businesses 
seem to grow rapidly in advanced market economies compared to bigger businesses which 
send a keen suggestion to policymakers in transition economies concerning industrial policy 
(Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001). According to Pletnev and Barkhatov (2016), the majority of 
managers think employees personal qualities and how they hold the values of their 
profession are the keys to business success. While this might be subjective to a certain extent, 
Pletnev and Barhatov (2016) gave insights based on the understanding of business success 
through economic efficiency and the interpretation of managers social responsibility to 
correlate the direct relationship between labour wage level and business success. Salaries do 
connote how employees show their best qualities and commitment to work. Previous studies 
in economics and management, have suggested that firms tend to grow in line with 
management objectives and organisational behaviour (Trau, 1996). Evidence from literature 
argues that businesses domiciled within formal networks have a better growth path and are 
likely to be innovative compared to businesses that dont belong to formal networks and are 
domiciled in isolated areas (Beaudry and Swann, 2009; Maine et al., 2010). Powe (2018) on 
rural small businesses conclude the necessity to shift away from dependency culture to a 
pragmatic approach to policymaking that would transform and increase the potential of 
businesses in rural areas. 
According to the European statistical data support (2008), small businesses account 
for 99.8% of registered enterprises, employing 67% of the workforce and reflecting 57% 
value-added in development. A recent factsheet report by the European Commission on 
European industrial Strategy (2020) reaffirms that there are approximately 25 million 
registered SMEs in Europe accounting for two out of every three jobs and contributing 50% 
of Europes GDP. In the United Kingdom, small businesses account for 99.8% of registered 
enterprises providing a 55.6% employment rate and 52% of the total turnover in 2002 
(ODPM, 2005). The national federation of self-employed and small businesses limited (FSB, 
2021) reaffirms that 5.5 million small businesses are representing 99.9% of the business 
population in the UK accounting for three-fifths of jobs and approximately 50% of the annual 
turnover in the private sector. The American economy, which is one of the largest in the 
world rely majorly on small businesses for economic growth and stability with statistics 
(accounts for 99% of employers, 96% of exported goods, 75% of new job creation, and 51% 
employment rate in private sector, and 38% rate in high tech jobs) that correlates with similar 
aggregates in countries across the world (SBA Report, 2000; Twist, 2000). An updated data 
report by the small business and entrepreneurship council (2019), shows that small businesses 
still account for 98.1% of the registered businesses in the US contributing 65.1% of the net 
job creation since the year 2000. There is an established consistency in the data spanning over 
two decades. Small businesses continue to remain the driving force stirring economies across 
the globe. 
In Nigeria, small businesses account for approximately 85% of registered enterprises 
that drive the economy (Ihugba et al, 2014) and accounts for 59,647,954 persons which 
equate to 86.3% of the Nigerian workforce as of December 2017 are employed by the micro, 
small and medium enterprises (NBS and SMEDAN, 2017). Evidence from the literature 
shows a decline in the growth of small businesses and a lot of small businesses seem to be 
closing down. Studies by the federal office of statistics in Nigeria show that 97% of 
businesses employed less than 100 staff (Ojukwu, 2006) which has slowly declined to 85% in 
2014 (Ihugba et al., 2014). Growth is considered to be the most important objective of a 
company after survival and as such, is influenced by various factors (Bunyasi et al., 2014). 
Considering the vast domestic market and abundance of raw materials in Nigeria coupled 
with huge funds/grants that come from developed nations around the world annually to 
support economic development, there is little or no quota of meaningful economic 
progression concerning job creation. The introduction of local goods to substitute imported 
products or goods fit for export (Mambula, 2002) has undermined the contribution of small 
businesses to national economic growth and development (Adisa et al, 2014). Nigeria is 
considered one of the largest economies in Africa with an estimated population of 
126.9million approximately, and a gross national product (GNP) of $41.2 billion 
approximately (World Bank Report, 2000). With such statistics, the rate of growth of small 
businesses in Nigeria is not only vital to the nations stability but the entire Sub-Sahara 
region of Africa (Ojukwu, 2006).  
2.5 Theories 
The resource-based view (RBV) theory based on the concept of Penroses theory of 
the growth of the firm in 1959 (Garnsey, 1998) was considered for this study alongside 
Jovanovics theory. According to Garnsey, (1998), the approach on which RBV is based 
contrasts the inferences drawn from Jovanovic's theory which evaluates firm growth from 
aggregate data rather than observation of internal dynamics which is vital to RBV through the 
stages of business development (Churchill and Lewiss model). The two theories have been 
selected considering the objectives of this study which in part, is to capture owners 
characteristics, management skills, and influence on business growth (RBV) and also firms 
characteristics and stages of development (Jovanovics theory & Churchill and Lewiss 
model). 
2.5.1 Resource-based view theory 
The inception of the resource-based view (RBV) theory is grounded in the pioneering 
work of Penrose to the theory of the growth of the firm. Penrose (1959) holds the view that 
organisational knowledge and the availability of business resources determine the expansion 
of the business. According to Barney (1991), RBV explicates the use of resources and 
capabilities in strategy by businesses to gain a competitive advantage and achieve business 
success. Studies reveal that many authors have used the resource-based view theory in 
different standpoints about business growth, resources, and capabilities.  As suggested by 
Barney (1991), the differences in the capabilities and resources of firms dictate their growth 
and survival. Alvarez and Busenitz (2001), adopted the resource-based view theory in 
examining the impact of competitive advantage and efficiency of certain firm resources while 
others either used it to interpret the implications of information technology as a competitive 
advantage or perhaps used to leverage how rapidly growing small businesses infuse e-
business and innovation to enhance firm performance through the structuring of core 
competencies and vital capacity building (Bi et al., 2017). The distinctive undertone in these 
analogies points to the fact that capabilities are specific to firms and rooted in transformation 
processes to create value (Newbert, 2007).  Javidan (1998) describes that the evolution of 
competitive advantage evolves by converting the resources of the firm to capabilities to 
enhance core competencies within the firm.  
As suggested by Krasniqi and Mustafa (2016), small businesses can easily acquire 
knowledge by simply learning how to use their existing knowledge more effectively. They 
further argued that firms engaged in the same type of activities, using the same technology 
and employees are likely to produce different output levels depending on their unique 
teamwork, knowledge and experiences (Krasniqi and Mustafa, 2016, p.1169). The resource-
based view theory emphasises that the resources and capabilities of a business decide the 
growth of the business (Agyapong et al., 2018). This theory illustrates the combination of 
developed new resources and capabilities with the exploitation of resources by 
entrepreneurial firms as an orderly path-dependent process (Pettus, 2001). Value creations for 
firms are derived from two complementary and unique mechanisms which are capacity 
building and resource picking (Makadok, 2001).  The concept of resource-based view theory 
provides wide-angle premises for small businesses to capitalise on the use of firm knowledge 
and workforce capabilities to enhance business growth. Pertinent literature has been 
facilitative by critically exploring the resource-based view theory and also putting forward its 
application to professional practice for the use of small business owners.  
As this theory facilitates the strategy with which firms attain competitive advantage, 
the concept of this theory would be essential in achieving the research objectives. It is 
imperative from previous studies that resources and capabilities are essential factors to 
sustainable business growth. RBV is used in this study to examine how micro-sized firms 
build capabilities and gain a competitive advantage to transition to small-sized enterprises or 
maintain sustainable business operations for firms that arent growth-driven. 
2.5.2 Jovanovics theory 
There are various models synonymous with pertinent studies on the growth of small 
and medium-sized enterprises. Jovanovic (1982) put forward the notion that firms tend to 
comprehend their optimum efficiency over some time to attain maturity and also that small 
businesses have rapid growth compared to large businesses. According to Krasniqi and Lajqi 
(2018), Jovanovic suggested that firms are not aware of their optimum efficiency and they 
often select their level of output based on their costs in other to maximise profits. This model 
presumes that entrepreneurs starting businesses are unsure about their optimum managerial 
abilities which are quite logical as firms are expected to learn over time. They learn their 
capabilities through observation of their performance in the business environment (Krasniqi 
and Lajqi, 2018).  
According to Goedhuys and Sleuwaegen (2010), Jovanovics theory argues that small 
firms tend to record faster growth as soon as they notice they can withstand competition in 
their niche markets. Jovanovic introduced the time factor (firm age) in the evaluation of 
firms growth (Krasniqi and Lajqi, 2018) hence the justification for consideration concerning 
the focus of this research. While the growth period to attain maturity is essential for the 
objectives of this study, it is important to note the critique against this notion especially as the 
location of study is a developing country with an emerging market plagued by different 
factors that influence the growth rate of small businesses.    
Krasniqi and Mustafa (2016) draw attention to the main critique put forward by 
OFarrell and Hitchens (1988) that many small businesses predominantly operate in secure 
local or regional markets that are relatively uncompetitive  at times enjoying monopoly. 
This critique translate thus, small businesses do not have the system as in a developed system 
where access to resources, skills development, and finance are made available as depicted in 
the resource-based view of business growth. It is an entirely different market in Nigeria and 
the notion might not entirely stick. According to Sleuwaegen and Goedhuys (2002), location 
does influence growth. In their study on firm growth in Nigeria, findings reveal that small 
businesses located in the commercial capital were more likely to take advantage of 
networking and subcontracting between businesses which create a thriving platform for 
business compared to businesses that are operating in other states or even rural communities. 
Krasniqi and Mustafa (2016), agree with the notion that resources available in urban areas 
create a thriving atmosphere for small businesses to grow in developing countries. The only 
drawback to Jovanovics model is its omission of the technological progress of firms which 
isnt considered for this study (Jovanovic, 1982; Garnsey, 1998). Jovanovics model would 
be crucial in understanding the transition period to depict growth from micro-sized to small-
sized enterprises.  As reiterated by Ipinnaiye and Dineed (2017), small businesses entering a 
particular sector or industry with low productivity levels have to improve output forthwith to 
attain the minimum efficiency size required to operate within the sector or industry to avoid 
business failure.  Jovanovics theory would be used in this study to examine how small 
businesses gain knowledge of their true efficiency after gaining market entry into a particular 
business sector and how they adjust their firm size accordingly to improve performance.   
2.5.3 Churchill and Lewiss model 
 Small businesses vary majorly in size and as well as capacity for growth. Capacity for 
growth is simplified for business owners and managers by viewing it through the lenses of 
development. According to Churchill and Lewis (1983), small businesses are characterised 
by organisational structure, different styles of management, and independent action but yet 
still experience similar problems during stages of development. The similarities were collated 
into a framework to aid the understanding of the nature, characteristics, and problems of 
businesses (Churchill and Lewis, 1983).  Churchill and Lewis divided the growth continuum 
into stages of development (Nichter and Goldmark, 2009). This framework is designed to aid 
owners and managers of small businesses in understanding and evaluating business 
challenges (Churchill and Lewis, 1983). 
According to Feindt et al. (2002), the stages in Churchill and Lewiss model are 
differentiated by changing owners personnel goals, managerial capabilities, and strategic 
abilities on one hand and business resources and financial or personnel factors on the other.  
The five stages of development are namely: existence, survival, success 
(disengagement/growth), take-off, and resource maturity. 
Stage I depicts the initial level when a small business kicks off with developed 
products or services which involves direct supervision by the owner. The initial stage focuses 
on getting customers and delivering products and services. Direct supervision means, the 
owner performs all the significant tasks by multitasking with a focus on survival. Stage II 
depicts the next phase when the business can satisfy its acquired customers. The focus moves 
from survival to revenues, employees, and expenses. Stage III depicts the decisive phase to 
either disengage or pursue growth. It is the phase to choose either to take advantage of the 
firms achievement and consider expansion or disengage and keep the business anchored and 
profitable by maintaining the minimum efficiency scale. Stage IV depicts expansion. The 
focus is on rapid growth and how to fund it by evaluating delegation and cash flow. Stage V 
connotes assets maturity. The focus is on integration and control on revenue from rapid 
growth and preserving the precedence of being a small business. At this phase, the 
management is decentralised and the business has enough staff with the required expertise to 
get the job done. 
Table 2e: Extract from Exhibit 3 [Characteristics of Small Business at each Stage of 
Development. (Source: The Five Stages of Small Business Growth: Neil C. Churchill and 
Virginia L. Lewis 1983). 
 Stage I 
Existence 
Stage II 
Survival 
Stage III-D 
Success-
Disengagement 
Stage III-
Success-
Growth 
Stage IV 
Take-off 
Stage V 
Resource 
Maturity 
Management 
style/ 
Organisation 
Direct 
Supervision 
Owner to 3 
approx. 
Supervised 
supervision 
Owner  to 7  
approx. 
Functional 
Owner to 8  
approx. 
Functional 
Owner to 8 
approx. 
Divisional 
Owner to 
8 approx. 
Line and 
Staff 
Owner to 
20 approx. 
Extent of 
formal systems 
Minimal to 
non-existent 
Minimal Basic Developing Maturing Extensive 
Major Strategy Existence Survival Maintaining 
profitable status 
resources 
for growth 
Growth Returns on 
investment 
Business and 
owner 
Table 2e gives a detailed illustration of characterises of the five stages of development 
for small businesses as put forward by Churchill and Lewis. Evidence from the study done by 
Adesua-Lincoln (2011), shows that small business owners consider using formal credit 
sources at phase three (see table 2e) on the development life cycle rather than relying on their 
savings.  Feindt et al. (2002) argue that the vital contribution of this framework is the success 
of disengagement stages where an SME owner could choose not to seek further growth as an 
organisational objective after attaining the level of stability. This vital contribution is 
illustrated in table 2e in stage III-D which signals disengagement after achieving business 
success instead of growth (stage III-G). According to Bartlett and Bukvic (2001), not all 
small businesses are growth-oriented. Some businesses just want to achieve minimum 
efficiency scale to maintain sustainable operation just at stage III on Churchill and Lewiss 
model. So rather than proceed to growth, they simply disengage and strife to maintain the 
level.  This deduction comes into context to the focus of this research which aims to examine 
the growth transition of micro to small-sized enterprises and to deduce small businesses in 
Nigeria that are growth-oriented and those who would prefer to disengage.  
2.5.4 Dunkelberg and Coopers classification of entrepreneurs 
Previous empirical studies have used Dunkelberg and Coopers classification to 
identify different entrepreneur typologies concerning education, background, risk, and future 
orientation (Ensari and Karabay, 2014). There are three major classifications of entrepreneurs 
as suggested by Dunkelberg and Cooper (1982) namely; craftsman oriented, independence 
oriented, and growth-oriented. This classification would enable a better understanding of 
entrepreneurs characteristics and how they influence business growth. 
According to Dincer et al. (2011), Dunkelberg and coopers classification seems to be 
synonymous with problems pertinent to entrepreneurs characteristics in previous studies. 
Craftsman-oriented refers to the type of entrepreneurs who are drawn to particular types of 
businesses more often without formal education but a keen interest to start their own 
business. Independence-oriented refers to those who decided to avoid working for others and 
so became business owners. Such a group would include professionals such as engineers, 
accountants, lawyers, etc. Growth-oriented refers to a group of entrepreneurs who have an 
exceptional drive for sustainable growth while experiencing rapid business changes. As 
explained by Dunkelberg et al. (2013, p.227), creating typologies are simply to describe 
entrepreneurial behaviours and outcomes by evaluating the core motivations of 
entrepreneurs for starting businesses. 
2.6 Drivers and Barriers to Business Growth 
Previous studies carried out to examine the factors that affect business growth for 
small businesses agree with the suggestions put forward for this research. These suggestions 
point to the four major categories suggested by Smallbone and Wyer (2000) and deduced 
from the literature review by Dobbs and Hamilton (2007). The last two decades of research in 
Nigeria concerning small business growth reflect the cross-examination of some of the 
highlighted variables/constructs in Dobbs and Hamiltons literature review. This section 
examines in detail all the selected articles considered for this study for drivers and barriers to 
business growth both internal and external factors. 
One of the widely accepted notions in the literature about the determinants of growth 
is by Storey (1994). In a vivid definition, barriers are simply internal or external factors and 
conditions that inhibit growth in businesses that aspire to grow (Storey, 1994).  Studies on 
barriers have been tagged as providing approaches (Deakins, 1999) to comprehend the 
concept of business growth and introduce models in stages as a contribution to the body of 
literature. The discussion in the article put forward by Doern (2009) is carefully taken into 
consideration for this study as it addresses the loophole in the discussion on barriers' 
influence on business growth, particularly in understanding the impact of barriers on small 
business formations in transition setting. This is vital for this study as the researcher intends 
to consider the transition period of moving from a micro-sized enterprise to a small-sized 
enterprise for prospective research participants in other to achieve the objectives of the 
research.   
Storey (1994) suggested that the factors that determine growth can be categorised into 
three, namely: firm characteristics, management characteristics which encompass owners 
characteristics, and organisational managerial culture and business strategy. Numerous 
factors affect the growth of small businesses in African countries. Previous studies (see table 
2c) reveal that the barriers to growth outweigh the drivers in most African countries with 
emerging economies. Inadequate business training, insufficient capital, competition, anti-
entrepreneurial culture, bureaucratic procedures in business registration, high taxes, 
technological barrier/backwardness, theft, lack of trust, poor infrastructure and corruption 
(Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014, p.1) are a few of the barriers that inhibit sustainable 
business growth in African countries.  
It is obvious from studies on business growth that barriers have been a reoccurring 
subject of discussion. Some authors have used barriers to forecast small businesses with 
tendencies to achieve growth and those without growth tendencies thereby deducting the 
factors responsible for lack of growth (Barkham et al., 1996; Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001). 
Others examined barriers to forecast the characteristics of small businesses with growth 
tendencies (Dodge and Robbins, 1992; Orser et al., 2000; Pissarides et al., 2003). Tentatively, 
barriers to growth must have predictive qualities (Doern, 2009) though previous studies have 
seemingly interpreted the unconditional biases in the forecast for business growth with only a 
few exceptions (Dovern and Jannsen, 2017).  
So many recommendations for policies (Ojukwu, 2006; Bunyasi et al., 2014; 
Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014; Neneh and Vanzyl, 2014) have been put forward by 
previous studies on African countries but the respective policymakers in each country seem 
to ignore which could also be traced to corruption. Recommendations such as re-designing of 
lending schemes offered by the government or banks to help small businesses (Mashenene 
and Rumanyika, 2014), support that would encourage growth culture amongst small business 
owners (Neneh and Vanzyl, 2014), or perhaps the need for policies that would enhance the 
facilitation of information flow to small business owners by the government (Bunyasi et al., 
2014). Overly bureaucratic measures by government agencies and parastatal often put 
business growth at risk (Mambula, 2002). So many other policies are vital and pivotal to 
rapid change in growth for small businesses but the government simply ignores or executes 
such policies poorly. While growth is important, not all business owners desire growth or 
consider it as an organisational objective although this is subjective as the interpretation of 
growth defers for different business owners. This simply affirms that lack of growth doesnt 
necessarily point to underpinning barriers inhibiting growth as there are even certain 
entrepreneurs that consider their venture as an alternate source of income while still attending 
their monthly salary jobs. Such categories of small business owners do not necessarily desire 
growth as part of their venture objectives. While it is imperative that, all business owners do 
not desire growth, having basic entrepreneurial skills are essential to achieve a minimum 
operational and sustainable business. Certain authors have categorised entrepreneurship skills 
into four dimensions, namely- technical skills, managerial skills, personal (soft skills), and 
entrepreneurship (Cooney and Bygrave, 1997; Kutzhanova et al, 2009; Hamburg, 2015).  
According to Hamburg et al. (2019), entrepreneurship encompasses the serviceability of 
innovative opportunities. Technical skills refer to the skill set required for the design and 
development of goods and services. Managerial skills refer to people management, financial 
management, critical decision-making, and maximising resources. Personal or soft skills refer 
to being self-aware and emotionally intelligent enough to assess business risk and take 
advantage of opportunities. The acquisition and development of these entrepreneurial skills 
remain an emphatic question in literature (Hamburg et al., 2019). 
According to Ojukwu (2006), the emergence of information and communication 
technologies in Nigeria has enhanced economic growth and reduction in poverty supporting 
the notion that there is a channelled link between the reduction in the poverty rate and access 
to information (Khalil, 2003).  Foreman-Peck et al. (2006), support this presumption as 
networking gives way for effective communication and acquisition of vital information  
information which allows small businesses to have access to the large businesses to foster 
inter-firm partnerships. While pertinent studies on networking see the subject in broader 
terms, Foreman-Peck et al. (2006), emphasise the subject in the premise refers to precise and 
relevant information that enhances growth for small businesses. In other to gain a competitive 
advantage, firms must increase productivity, streamline new ways of management and 
develop new ideas into businesses, and commit immensely to technological investments 
(Earl, 1988; Ojukwu, 2006). Ojukwu (2006) further affirms the evident shift in information 
solutions research from technological to managerial and organisational issues (Ojukwu, 
2006, p. 51).  
2.6.1 Internal Factors 
2.6.1a Firms characteristics 
Certain firm characteristics are associated with small business growth such as firm 
age, size, and networks (Abor and Quartey, 2010; Goedhuys and Sleuwaegen, 2010; Nichter 
and Goldmark, 2009). According to Nichter and Goldmark (2009), the relationship between 
small firm growth and firm age is quite strong. This perspective agrees with Jovanovics 
model (1982), which depicts that the firms productivity is expected to increase as the firm 
grows older in operation. Small businesses, especially start-ups rely solely on their abilities to 
secure financial capital (Federico et al., 2012). 
The size of a firm is impertinent to the rate of business growth according to Gibrats 
law but an alternate study gives evidence that small businesses grow rapidly than large 
businesses (Barkham et al., 1996) although other studies agree with Gibrats law (Audretsch 
et al., 2002; Piergiovanni et al., 2002) and they backed it up with evidence from studies on 
service and manufacturing sectors.  Based on the findings of Shin et al. (2017), firm size and 
age are important factors for survival. While this is the case, Ahiawodzi and Adade (2012) 
argue that firms tend to expand their operations when the observation of estimated 
managerial efficiency is below the actual levels of efficiency as envisaged by their business 
managers. This reflects the notion that the business owners efficiency estimation becomes 
more accurate, decreasing probability as the firm ages. According to Queiros et al. (2019), 
studies have explored the impact of firm age on business growth for small businesses 
considering the relation between the size of the firm and how long it has been in operation. 
As identified by Shin et al. (2017), bigger and older firms have a high possibility of survival 
than smaller start-ups. In the same way, Robson and Bennett (2000), explained that the higher 
the firm age, the less likely it is to experience employment and turnover growth, and this is 
statistically proven. In addition, Wang (2016) outlined that the probability that a firm 
perceives access to finance as its greatest obstacle decreases when the firm size measured by 
employee number increases. It simply means small firms experience more financial 
constraints than larger firms. Similarly, Ullah (2019), stated that firm size is a huge predictor 
of financial constraints for firms in middle or low-income countries and Queiros et al. (2019) 
agree to this notion, stating that firm size does influence their growth rates. In addition, 
Queiros et al. (2019), explained that high-growth firms seem to thrive better in geographic 
locations where there are low masculinity levels, lower levels of uncertainty avoidance, and 
high levels of power distance using Hofstedes dimensions. Bartlett and Bukvic (2001, 
p.181), hold the view that the strength and salience of internal barriers are likely to vary with 
the size of the firm. They further explained that small business owners can multi-task at the 
early stages of business development and growth but once the firm attains a certain level/size 
where they have attained the minimum efficient scale of growth, they need to adopt 
professional business management to keep growth sustained (Jovanovic, 1982; Bartlett and 
Bukvic, 2001).  
Serrasqueiro et al. (2010) hold the view that businesses grow to attain an optimum 
level of efficiency in their first year to survive and then diminishing sets in at later years after 
they must have achieved the minimum efficiency scale that translates to survival. This view 
correlates in part with Jovanovics model. According to Yang and Meyer (2019), local 
private firms experience stronger relation between growth and action aggressiveness than 
state-owned enterprises. This simply reflects the influence of competitive aggressiveness on 
business growth in firms with different ownership types. The key aspect of the findings 
shows that action aggressiveness has a huge positive influence on revenue growth 
corroborating the fact that firms in private ownership can use aggressive actions to enhance 
financial performance than joint ventures or firms with partial ownership (Yang and Meyer, 
2019).   
Other studies examined the relationship between firm growth and age emphasising 
that new entry businesses record rapid growth rates in the first few years of operation 
(Farinas and Moreno, 1997). This is quite subjective as firm growth interpretation defers with 
each business owner. There are small businesses that dont classify growth as part of their 
enterprise objectives and this does not negate their stance of achieving minimum efficiency 
scale to survive. Yeboah (2015) concluded in a study in Ghana on determinants of growth 
that small businesses record progressive sale growth for up to 10years after which a gradual 
decline sets in. Two groups of researchers conclude that new entry businesses tend to be more 
proactive and well informed about the level of risk involved with investing in new ventures 
with higher effectiveness in exploring new ideas and opportunities for profitmaking 
compared to older businesses (Lumpkin, 1998; Shane and Venkataraman, 2000). While this 
is correct in part, there is a drawback in the midst and that is access to vital information about 
investments. Especially in developing countries plagued by poor and ineffective transfer of 
information, this notion will not be entirely true.  
2.6.1b Entrepreneurs characteristics 
Entrepreneurs characteristics pose a huge influence on business growth. Previous 
studies ratify the claim that entrepreneurs educational background, motivation (Adesua-
Lincoln, 2011), gender (Hazudin et al., 2015), ethnicity (Ekwulugo, 2006), experience 
(Quartey et al., 2017), and even achievement needs (Kozan et al., 2012) do have a huge 
influence on business growth.   
Barkham et al. (1996) suggest that there are mainly two notions concerning the 
motivation for business growth held by both small and large businesses  firstly, that small 
businesses aspire for growth because of the inherent need for the minimum scale of efficiency 
to survive and secondly, that large businesses tend to grow in line with strategic alterations 
which emerge because of the changing markets. Further studies reaffirm this idea by 
concluding that the main drive behind the motivation for small businesses is the aspiration to 
achieve a minimum scale of efficiency that connotes business survival (Audretsch et al., 
2004).  They further explained that small businesses can display potentials for rapid growth 
as they randomly operate at an optimum level which translates to the use of internal capacity 
(resource-based theory) and exploitation of the market in which they operate in part 
(Jovanovics model) (Audretsch et al., 2004).   
For small business owners in developed and developing countries, evidence from the 
literature suggests that theres a concession on the importance of human capital in enabling 
business growth (Krasniqi and Mustafa, 2016). As suggested by Krasniqi and Mustafa 
(2016), human capital encompasses acquired knowledge and experience and the skill sets that 
enhance business growth. In literature, little attention has been drawn to explore the impact of 
human capital on variables such as owners performance or perhaps motivation in the context 
of transition economies (Aidis and Van Praag, 2007). Haber and Reichel (2007) also argue 
that business owners' managerial capabilities are the major contributing driver to business 
performance.  Evidence from previous studies argues that there is a significant positive 
relationship between business owners experience and firm growth (Lee and Tsang, 2001; 
Capelleras and Rabetino, 2008). Clarity is needed on factors that interact and determine the 
development of a business owners experience in the literature (Macpherson and Holt, 2007). 
Considering the facts from previous studies that, all businesses are not growth-driven, clarity 
is needed on business owners growth intention especially for small businesses (Morrison et 
al., 2003; Doern, 2009).   
Some small business owners tend to be growth driven while some tend to remain 
small and this is intentional (Krasniqi and Mustafa, 2016). Some small business owners see 
their businesses as an alternate source of income while holding on to their white-collar jobs 
and this justifies the narrative behind opting to remain small intentionally. There are other 
reasons why some small business owners hold this stance. Yang and Meyer (2019) hold the 
view that the influence of ownership coupled with governance motivates business 
owners/managers to get involved more in competitive action.  Some researchers have 
considered this to be a crucial notion that needs to be explored especially in transitioning 
economies context where a huge share of small business owners appear to be driven by 
necessity while concurrently pursuing an entrepreneurial career as a backup plan to avoid 
being unemployed (Earle and Sakova, 2000; Krasniqi, 2014). 
According to Adesua-Lincoln (2011), her findings reveal female entrepreneurs are 
more likely to start businesses in their mid-working years with ages ranging from 41 to 50 
years old thereby arriving late into business as they finish late in education. She reiterated 
that this comes about due to the socio-cultural setting in the Nigerian context  that is women 
are viewed as more as mothers and wives than businesswomen (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011, 
p.5351). Zapalska et al. (2015), argues that biases in female entrepreneurs tend to be more 
transformational than transactional when dealing with their employees through interpersonal 
relationships. Adesua-Lincoln (2011), suggests that the majority of women in Nigeria are 
effectively educating themselves by enrolling in short-term courses in satellite institutions. 
Her sample population reveals that most female business owners have prior managerial or 
relative professional experience.  In addition, Yeboah (2015), suggests that male-
owned/managed small businesses experience an increase in growth than female-
owned/managed small businesses.  Evidence from the literature reveals that small business 
owners do not get support and guidance from the government (Yukhanaev et al. (2015). 
While the motivation for start-ups seems not to attract huge attention in previous studies 
focusing on business growth, it does have a direct impact on the growth of small businesses. 
Findings put forward by Adesua-Lincoln (2011), reveal that motivation for start-ups stems 
from the desire to be independent, financially stable, or perhaps a backup plan for rises in 
unemployment. Complementary to this, Yeboah (2015) reaffirms that owners/managers with 
self-fulfilling motivation have the most increase in sales growth while those with job creation 
record the least increase in sales growth. Aside from motivation, the owners orientation is a 
key determinant of business growth and performance. Based on the findings of Reijonen et al. 
(2015), the orientation of entrepreneurs has a positive impact on branding and market 
performance. According to Macpherson and Holt (2007), an entrepreneurs influence isnt 
limited to organisational structures only but also the organisational culture. Churchill and 
Lewiss model depicts growth in five stages of development (Churchill and Lewis, 1983). At 
each stage of development while the firm ages, determining factors are put into consideration. 
Factors such as Entrepreneurs objectives, business, and managerial skills, access to capital, 
and networks are put into consideration. This also brings into perspective the categories of 
entrepreneurs classified into typologies for Dunkelberg and Coopers classification.  
2.6.1c Business and Management Skills 
Previous studies show that one of the serious challenges to growth for small 
businesses is the lack of management skills and training (Bouazza et al., 2015).  Managerial 
competencies are vital to business growth and the survival of firms especially start-ups 
(Olawale and Garwe, 2010). Ejemobi (2013), reiterates the importance of financial record-
keeping and proper managerial practices to achieve success in business operations for small 
businesses. Few studies on factors affecting SME survival in Africa have drawn attention to 
management problems as major causes of business failure (Tushabomwe-Kazooba, 2006; 
Okpara, 2011). Tushabomwe-Kazooba (2006) describes how poor bookkeeping skills and 
lack of basic management skills have led to major business failures of small businesses in 
Africa and Okpara (2011) supports this notion as it is backed up by data from other related 
studies (Lussier, 1996; Murphy, 1996). Poor bookkeeping skills make it difficult to separate 
profit from operational costs (Onaolapo et al., 2011; Olatunji, 2013). Okpara (2011) also 
reaffirms in his findings on the factors constraining the growth of small business 
development in Nigeria that lack of basic management skills such as inventory management 
and bookkeeping has led to many small business failures in Nigeria. 
According to Mambula (2002), one of the reasons small business owners in Nigeria 
are deprived of accessing bank loans is their unwillingness to obtain essential training to 
equip them with expertise and core competencies to excel effectively in their various 
businesses and improve their chances of securing loan facilities. This is synonymous with the 
illusion attributed to the capital shortage as described by Schatz (1963). The illusion is 
evident when there is a huge provision of funding and different access to finance either from 
development or commercial banks but small business owners still experience a lack of access 
to finance because financial institutions would classify them as high-risk enterprises and 
prefer to lend to the large organisations instead (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011). Managerial skills 
play a vital role in distinguishing and assessing business performance (Xheneti and Barlett, 
2012).  
The notion that the majority of business owners are unwilling to obtain vital training 
needed to acquire expertise for effective business management might be partly true as 
findings from previous studies reveal that majority of new jobs created by small businesses in 
Africa are heavily concentrated within the informal sector (Chen et al., 2002; Adesua-
Lincoln, 2011). While this might be partly true, there is a flip side to reasons why, which 
could either be unavailability of funds to pay for the training or perhaps poor dissemination 
of information (Mambula, 2002) from the governing bodies overseeing such training made 
available either from the government or private parastatal. This serves as one of the key 
internal barriers to the majority of small businesses  the unwillingness to delegate workload 
to capable employees (Storey, 1994; Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001) leading to the excessive 
workload for business owners and eventually stunting the growth of the business. 
The rationale for considering the relationship between firms characteristics, 
entrepreneurs characteristics, and business and management skills are drawn from the gap in 
the literature to fill the contribution to the body of literature on barriers and drivers to growth 
for MSEs especially for studies done in Africa and specifically Nigeria. 
2.6.2 External Factors 
2.6.2a Access to Finance 
Contributing immensely to economic growth and the creation of jobs in other to aid 
the building of competitive sectors of economies in developing countries, it is evident that 
small businesses still face more barriers compared to large businesses nonetheless (Moses 
and Adebisi, 2013; Bouazza et al., 2015).  Access to finance is a vital catalyst for rapid 
growth for small businesses (Dobbs and Hamilton, 2007) allowing business owners to invest 
in their workforce, and new products to gain access to new markets (Brown and Lee, 2019). 
Pertinent literature has extensively examined the correlation between access to finance as a 
constraint to the growth of small businesses and entrepreneurship (Brixiova et al., 2020). 
According to Ullah (2009) and Adisa et al., (2014), financial barriers are considered as the 
most detrimental among all barriers inhibiting business growth within the business 
environment. Access to finance is majorly influenced by the size of the firm, type of 
ownership, orientation of the firm about exports, and managerial skills (Quartey et al., 2017). 
Previous literature reveals that most small business owners usually start their business 
with personal savings or loans from family and friends (Brush, 1990; Klein, 2014) which in 
some cases, supplemented with the short-termed credit facilities by wholesalers or customers 
who decide to pre-order goods (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011). Small business employment growth 
is grossly affected by the lack of finance. In line with Dao and Liu (2017), the need for 
working capital is directly proportional to the labour/production processes of small 
businesses. Fraser et al. (2015) argue that research centred on finance for entrepreneurs ought 
to go further than supply chain bottlenecks synonymous with small businesses and evaluate 
the function of entrepreneurs motivation, cognitive behaviour, the life cycle of the firm, and 
its correlation to performance and access to finance. The financial constraints faced by small 
businesses are usually the high cost of credit relative to high-interest rates, huge collateral 
requirements, and unavailability of venture capital (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001).  
According to Mambula (2002) and Ishak et al., (2012), managers of financial 
institutions interviewed agreed that the process of obtaining loans for small businesses was 
onerous and overly bureaucratic with overbearing requirements such as collaterals. Larger 
businesses are favoured for access to loans at the expense of small businesses. Development 
banks demand outrageous collaterals from small businesses to secure loan repayment or 
perhaps completely reject credit applications from small business owners. Nonetheless, they 
also stress the inability of small business owners to present concise feasibility studies and 
business plans when applying for bank loans and as such, they are regarded as a high-risk 
enterprise (Mambula, 2002; Okpara, 2011). Financial institutions in Nigeria view lending as 
directly applicable to individuals (business owners) rather than lending to their businesses 
(Adesua- Lincoln, 2011) which is due diligence. In most south-eastern European countries, 
small business owners have been forced to rely on personal savings or loans from family and 
friends due to capital market forces that are underdeveloped (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001). This 
string is quite similar to the cases in most African countries as well (Mambula, 2002; Adesua-
Lincoln, 2011). Motta and Sharma (2019, p.2) suggest that the greater effectiveness of fixed 
asset and collateral-based lending could reinforce the inaccessibility of financing for certain 
business segments. Pissarides (1998) and Afolabi (2013) argue that the unavailability of 
venture capital and long-term competitive interest loans for small businesses have forced 
business owners to rely on high-interest short-term finance alternatives. While this barrier 
seems to be lingering for years, recent alternatives such as micro-financing (Malhotra et al., 
2002) put forward by the government to help small businesses are still inadequate to the 
demand in the economy. 
2.6.2b Funding 
In a perfect capital market, all businesses should have access to adequate funding 
(Serrasqueiro et al., 2015) but this isnt always the case and small businesses tend to be at the 
bottom of the chain most times as finances with life security hold a vital role in conducting 
businesses (Hazudin et al., 2015). Fowowe (2017), ascertain that funding is essential to the 
growth of small businesses while evaluating firm-level data across 30 African countries using 
subjective measures to funding access. According to a study done in Nigeria by Mambula 
(2002), respondents reaffirmed that business and entrepreneurial development funds never 
get to most small businesses as they arent disbursed on merit but favouritism and nepotism 
and several initiatives by the government or financial institutions never yield positive 
outcomes (Balogun, 2004). Memba et al. (2012) argue that the issues and problems limiting 
SMEs acquisition of financial services include lack of tangible security coupled with an 
inappropriate legal and regulatory framework that does not recognise innovative strategies for 
lending to SMEs. Small businesses are more likely to be susceptible to prevalent changes in 
the macroeconomic environment because of the lack of adequate funding (Christopherson, 
2015; Lai et al., 2016). Suggestions from previous studies state that small business financing 
contract terms rely more on determinants (legal and institutional) specific to each country 
compared to large businesses (Hernandez-Canovas and Koeter-Kant, 2011). One of the 
previous studies holds the view that the capital structure of a firm is believed to be intrinsic 
not only during the start-up phase but also, to the day-to-day operations of the firm (Adesua-
Lincoln, 2011, p.5351). Because of this, insufficient internal finance and external finance are 
pivotal to company investment and business growth (Meyer, 1998). Since funding isnt 
readily available for small businesses in developing countries, studies reveal that new entry 
businesses rely more on informal financing than bank loan facilities (Wang, 2016).  
 It is imperative to note that; debt could be a growth driver for large businesses (Lang 
et al., 1996) as this could aid in securing more credit facilities while this isnt the same for 
small businesses. There is a constant deliberation between business owners and their 
managers more like conflict (Jensen et al., 1992) especially when it is related to debt. Studies 
have shown that the more access to funding that is available to small businesses, the more 
likely the chances to grow rapidly and validate the direct positive relationship between 
funding and business success (Levratto, 1996; Wiklund, 1999; Eisenmann, 2006). 
2.6.2c Infrastructure and Facilities 
Adisa et al. (2014), describe the effect of poor infrastructure such as bad roads, 
shortage of water supply, unstable power supply, and substandard telecommunication 
systems in Nigeria and how they result in huge overhead costs for small businesses as they 
strive to find alternate substitutes at an extra cost. Tushabomwe-Kazooba (2006) and Okpara 
(2011) support this notion with findings from their studies that lack of infrastructure and 
basic facilities are one of the major causes of business failure for small businesses in Africa. 
Okpara (2011) explains that a lack of key infrastructures such as bridges, good roads, regular 
supply of water, and electricity are the prominent causes of business failure for small 
businesses in Nigeria.  Olawale and Garwe (2010) and Oraka (2013) argue that the quality of 
infrastructure in developing countries does affect the growth tendencies of businesses 
especially start-ups. Many developing countries especially in Africa lack basic infrastructure 
such as good roads to aid easy transportation, electricity, or perhaps good telecommunication 
systems.  Another type of barrier that poses a great threat to growth but yet under-researched 
is formal institutional barriers (Holmes et al., 2013). Institutional barriers create the 
deficiency of infrastructure and facilities needed by small businesses to thrive. Few authors 
have reasoned to interpret the changes in institutional conditions that influence the business 
environment for small business owners in other to promote expansion for small businesses 
especially in developing and transition economies (Smallbone and Welter, 2001; Heliste et 
al., 2008). Keefer and Knack (1997) hold the view that stability in the business environment 
in any nation relies on the quality of stability engineered by the institutions to promote 
drivers for growth or generate barriers for business owners (Hwang and Powell, 2005). In 
most cases, the most susceptible to instability in the business environment are small 
businesses (Batra et al, 2003). Though it looks abstract considering institutional barriers, they 
are indirectly from the government as they oversee the majority of the institutions that deal 
with policymaking over the macro-economic environment. Infrastructure, taxation, 
corruption all stem out of institutions overseen by the government and they all serve as 
barriers to business growth in their own right. 
2.6.2d Performance 
Previous studies account for researches that examined and measured performance in 
terms of profitability and small business growth (Foreman-Peck et al., 2006) while others 
simply explore composite measures of different variables through cluster analysis (Smith, 
1999; Reid and Smith, 2000). Anggadwita and Mustafid (2014, p.417) defined organisational 
performance as the measure of a companys success in achieving its goals. Foreman-Peck 
et al. (2006, p. 309) argue that profit performance must be standardised against the size of 
the operation or the resources employed.  The level of education of the business owners and 
staff has a huge impact on the performance rate of small businesses and this is evident in the 
literature (Kangasharju and Pekkala, 2002; Macpherson and Holt, 2007). (Bartlett and Bukvic 
(2001, p. 180) hold the view that the institutional framework within which firms interact 
with customers, government and each other can have a profound influence on firms 
economic performance. While the imports are good especially for small businesses to have 
access to graded quality of products particularly for service-driven small businesses, it is 
imperative to highlight that exports give access to global markets thereby improving firm 
performance (Ipinnaiye et al., 2017). According to Eggers et al. (2013, p.536), 
understanding the effects of decisions made by management in selecting business 
orientations for their firms is crucial and highly relevant to management theory and practice 
because such strategic decisions have the potential to influence the performance frontier of 
the firm. 
 Few researchers hold a joint view that training serves as an effective alternate 
instrument to improve the skill sets of employees and managers (Kirby, 1990; Cosh et al., 
2000).  They further affirm the positive synergy between staff growth and training focused 
particularly on human relations and overall management in the business (Cosh et al., 2000). 
As put forward by Ipinnaiye et al. (2017), training reflects the businesss commitment to 
investment in human capital which serves as one of the vital elements in the productive 
resources of a business.  Training is a by-product of firm strategy. Ipinnaiye et al. (2017, p. 
887), argues that micro-level performance is governed by macroeconomic conditions, which 
in turn impact aggregate economic performance to some extent. For innovative small 
businesses that pride their enterprises solely on product or service quality rather than pricing 
strategy, staff training is essential for the growth and performance of the business (Bryan, 
2006; Krasniqi and Mustafa, 2016). Employees with the required skillset and expertise tend 
to be better at problem-solving and this enhances the performance of the business (Krasniqi 
and Mustafa, 2016).  Ipinnaiye et al. (2017) emphasised the importance of considering the 
relationship between the internal factors that determines growth and the macro environment 
as this relationship does have a direct impact on the performance of the firm. Literature 
reaffirms that highly motivated growth-driven businesses tend to train their staff to enhance 
business performance (Hallier and Butts, 1999).   
As suggested by Bartlett and Bukvic (2001, p. 181), where there are limitations of 
the use of fixed-term labour, where long advance notification of layoff is required, where 
there are high mandatory severance payments which increase the cost of dismissal, and 
where taxes and contributions on labour are excessive, then entrepreneurs may be reluctant 
to expand their activities if this would require that they take on new permanent employees. 
Another study explored the relationship between the growth of firms and the 
macroeconomic environment to examine the impact of firm strategy, the characteristics of the 
firm, and factors prevalent in the macroeconomic environment on small business 
performance (Ipinnaiye et al., 2017). The differences in firm performance are linked to 
fluctuations in the available resources, workforce capabilities, and strategic choices in 
utilising the resources and capabilities coupled with the responses to changes within the 
business environment  all modelled on the resource-based view of the firm (Nelson and 
Winter, 1982; Lockett et al., 2009; Ipinnaiye et al., 2017).   
There is a synergy between performance and growth in literature as both constructs 
are intertwined. As suggested by Foreman-Peck et al. (2006), the small business management 
may decide not to include growth in their organisational objective but profitability is essential 
for the survival of the business. They further explain the technicalities with profitability to 
growth. Low-profit businesses would lack the financial capacity to expand while on the 
contrary high-profit businesses might assess the risk of expansion and find it unsatisfactory 
though they have the financial capacity needed for expansion (Foreman-Peck et al., 2006). 
According to Asenge et al., (2018), innovativeness, creativity, business alertness, and risk-
taking equally have a significant effect on the performance of small businesses and business 
owners with high levels of either of these variables were found to perform better in business 
than those with low levels. Policymakers ought to create platforms and support to encourage 
innovativeness among small business owners. 
2.6.2e Other External Factors 
Other factors as emphasised in previous literature include corruption, market 
competition, Technology, Innovativeness, economic conditions, multiple taxations, formal 
institution knowledge, investments, social support, difficulty in acquiring machines and raw 
materials. For most developing countries especially in sub-Saharan Africa, it is quite 
important to understand the operations of high-growth firms within the regions (Goedhuys & 
Sleuwaegen, 2010) as they are pivotal to industrialisation. Innovation is quite important to 
drive sustainable growth. Innovation adds a competitive advantage to products or services 
either through the use of technology or pricing (Castano et al., 2016).  Macpherson and Holt 
(2007) argue that managerial resources are essential for the provision of systems and 
processes that aid businesses in exploring opportunities. They further suggest that 
entrepreneurial resources are equally necessary for recognising opportunities as well as 
fostering innovativeness.  Though entrepreneurial approaches might be advantageous to 
business practice especially for businesses operating in emerging markets, developing and 
implementing them might be a little challenging (Reijonen et al., 2015).  
As described by Mambula (2002), small business owners recap ordeals of habitual 
harassment from government officials who have normalised extortion from small business 
owners. Multiple taxations and partisan government policies pose severe challenges for small 
businesses in many countries (Bouazza et al., 2015). Bartlett and Bukvic (2001, p.180) 
present the argument that complicated laws, rules, and regulations concerning companies 
can be especially tough on small and growing companies  that is, over-regulation of the 
company sector in market economies provide an incentive for entrepreneurs to seek ways to 
evade regulations leading to the growth of the grey economy. Most small business owners 
tend to evade taxes because of over-regulation of the company sector in the economy. The 
value of the naira keeps depreciating because of consistent inflation and most small 
businesses cant afford to train their employees and small business owners who import their 
goods for sale cant get the central bank rate for foreign exchange to complete their 
transactions with foreign suppliers either for goods or machinery for local production of 
goods (Afolabi, 2013).  
Recent studies on information systems point to the significance of digitisation for the 
use of technology to small business performance (Sambamurthy et al., 2003; Rai et al., 2006). 
Small businesses have sort to the use of technology in recent years to mitigate overhead 
transactional costs, enhance communication and transaction channels, and achieve their 
marketing goals in an evolving global market environment. According to Bi et al. (2017, 
p.559) E-business constitutes an integral component of most firms business strategies, 
helping companies to grow, identify new markets, and outperform their competitors. As 
described by Rai et al. (2006), information technology infrastructure promotes good 
relationships between local businesses and their partners through trade by enhancing effective 
information sharing and exploring business-to-business opportunities which in the long run 
ease business adaptation to economic changes. Since the emergence of social media 
platforms, small businesses have taken advantage of them as a cheap yet effective platform to 
communicate efficiently with customers and suppliers thereby increasing growth and 
business performance. Technology, innovation, investments, and social support are all drivers 
for growth for small businesses. Information technology has helped small businesses 
immensely especially acting as a platform for effective business partnerships. It has promoted 
a substantial level of interdependence between small businesses to achieve mutual goals and 
reap business benefits (Lee and Lim, 2005). Technology has promoted closeness between 
independent firms and also served as a platform to execute operations effectively (Choe, 
2008). Bi et al. (2017) concluded from their findings that IT expertise and Infrastructure 
promote e-business capabilities through efficient IT applications in the value chain for rapid 
growth firms.  
Being proactive can also aid growth for small businesses by anticipating the 
requirements, issues, and likely changes in the business environment (Eggers et al., 2013). 
Small businesses can achieve competitive advantages by envisaging customers requirements 
(Lumpkin and Dess, 1996), rather than waiting to be tossed around by the changes in the 
market (Buss, 1987). Small business owners could take initiatives and forge new 
opportunities within their niche markets to drive the narratives and shape the market 
(Entrialgo et al., 2000). Being proactive promotes a firms readiness to actively engage in 
available business networks to source ideas and resources as well (Eggers et al., 2013).  It has 
been stated that in the presence of economic instability, market imperfections and weak 
government-provided legal institutions, the power of the African business network rests 
partly on the exchange of information through it and on group enforcement, and partly on the 
ready ability of the group to support transactions that benefit from relation-based governance 
such as financing, sales, and distribution to customers outside the immediate 
neighbourhood.(Biggs and Shah, 2006, p.3049). The orientation of small business owners 
about enterprise matters a lot as it drives the businesss networking capabilities (Walter et al., 
2006).  On the contrary, findings from the study done by Eggers et al. (2013) reveal that 
small businesses often respond to the orientations of customers or the popular opinion in the 
market rather than the orientation of business owners about enterprise and this continually 
leads to business failure eventually. So, in other, for small businesses to achieve business 
growth, more entrepreneurial orientation on the part of the business owners and fewer 
customer orientations in making business decisions and reacting to scarcity in financial 
resources must be encouraged (Eggers et al., 2013).  
In conclusion, it is impossible to achieve sustainable business growth without 
entrepreneurial orientations which in return needs the backing of adequate funding as well 
(Eggers et al., 2013). Concerning market competition, bigger businesses try to dominate 
every market and most suppliers favour big firms with huge buying capacity at the expense of 
small businesses (Mambula, 2002). Big businesses frustrate the efforts of small businesses by 
enticing employees with higher wages and benefits and also wining most government 
contracts (Brink et al., 2003). Influential big businesses with political connections or 
affiliations sort to implore a wide range of unscrupulous measures to thwart the growth of 
small businesses. Such nefarious measures could range from strategic pricing policies to 
outright threats verging on criminal behaviour (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001, p. 181). Another 
barrier to growth for small businesses in Nigeria is the inability to benefit from economies of 
scale in buying raw materials as suppliers cost per unit only favours bulk buyers which are 
mostly large firms (Afolabi, 2013). Most small businesses are cut in this spiral web as 
suppliers prefer to sell to larger businesses who buy in wholesale only to hoard (Mambula, 
2002) and resell to small businesses at exorbitant unit prices.  
For social support and networking, previous studies accentuate the importance of 
social network ties between business owners to enhance the development of the small 
business sector (Grabher and Stark, 1997). Such network ties would foster business-to-
business (B2B) partnerships and build trustworthiness. Networking aids small business 
owners in acquiring knowledge, essential skills, and vital resources required to achieve the 
minimum efficiency scale needed for survival (Schoonjans et al., 2013). Trust between 
entrepreneurs supports easy and fair transactions. In situations where there is no platform for 
trustworthiness to thrive between anonymous trading business partners, sole reliance is 
directed to personal networks which replaces a potential wider network that involves a 
market transaction in anonymity as the norm for doing business. Clientelism which is strictly 
partisan, paternalism, and corruption will replace the norm in such an economy (Bartlett & 
Bukvic, 2001). 
Ethnicity does play a vital role in building ties in social networks (Bartlett and 
Bukvic, 2001) especially in African countries where tribalism still has limited breeding 
grounds. Other subtle issues that plague small business owners are social issues. Brink et al. 
(2003) describe social issues as problems experienced by predominantly married 
entrepreneurs. The stress that stems from attempting to balance the commitment between 
work and home is usually draining. This affects the mental stability of entrepreneurs which in 
turn impacts business growth.    
Taxation tends to have a diverse impact on business growth in different countries as 
taxes, legislation that governs employment and other business regulations vary in different 
countries (Ihua, 2009). The regulation that determines the category of businesses in each 
country will determine the firm size of businesses. Any changes in legislation will have a 
huge impact on small businesses and stimulate adjustments in mean business dimensions 
(Foreman-Peck et al., 2006).  
2.7 Gap in literature 
The majority of the previous studies done in Nigeria have focused primarily on the 
deduction of key barriers to sustainable business growth for small businesses (Ihua, 2009; 
Okpara, 2011; Adisa et al., 2014; Ebitu et al., 2016; Igwe et al., 2018). Little attention is 
drawn to micro-sized enterprises compared to small and medium-sized enterprises in the 
literature (Perren, 1999). Studies done in Nigeria have mainly focused on SMEs though 
micro-sized enterprises account for 99.8% of the registered small businesses in Nigeria while 
small-sized enterprises account for 0.17% and medium-sized enterprises account for 0.004% 
(SMEDAN/NBS National Survey Report, 2017).  A lot of emphasis has been drawn to access 
to finance (Ihua, 2009; Adesua-Lincoln, 2011; Afolabi, 2013) as a key inhibitor to business 
growth in Nigeria. Little or no concern has been drawn to other determining factors such as 
business and management skills (Cant and Wiid, 2013; Olawale and Garwe, 2010; 
Tushabomwe-Kazooba, 2006) which equally has a vital impact on business growth. 
 Most studies on small businesses focus more on external factors that influence 
growth particularly access to finance (Adisa, 2008) and government policies (Akande and 
Ojokuku, 2008). According to Krasniqi and Mustafa (2016), the number of previous studies 
on small business growth is vast but heavily concentrated on institutional determinants and 
only a little attention is drawn to internal factors such as business owners growth aspirations 
and management capabilities.  Majority of the barriers that inhibit growth for small 
businesses are external as reflected in previous studies with little attention drawn to internal 
factors and how to mitigate them to enhance sustainable growth as an alternate pathway. 
While the list of barriers to sustainable business growth seems to be endless and numerous 
recommendations for policy change to enhance growth have either been ignored or poorly 
executed in Nigeria, there is little or no practical recommendation or framework tailored to 
business owners on their part to aid sustainable growth in business. There is a huge gap in 
literature particularly on barriers and drivers to sustainable business growth for micro-sized 
and small-sized enterprises with a keen focus on internal factors. This study aims to fill this 
gap in the literature for studies done in Nigeria. 
2.8 Focus for Research 
Mazzucato and Parris (2015), examined the size and age of firms in line with 
innovation (internal factors) and Ipinnaiye et al. (2017) explored the macroeconomic 
environment while considering the internal determinants of firm growth. The focus of this 
study points to the transition period from micro-sized enterprises to small-sized enterprises to 
capture the barriers and drivers (particularly internal factors) to sustainable business growth. 
Attention is also drawn to internal factors that influence business growth in Nigeria such as 
entrepreneurs characteristics and their managerial capabilities which is the gap in the 
literature that this study intends to fill.  
2.10 Summary 
This chapter gives an overview of previous literature on business growth. The 
definition of small businesses as categorised by NBS and SMEDAN is highlighted. The 
various theories synonymous with business growth deduced from pertinent literature are 
enumerated and a systematic review of previous literature is discussed. The gap in the 
literature is identified and highlighted to validate the rationale behind the focus of the study. 
3.0 METHODOLOGY 
3.1 Overview 
This chapter enumerates the widely accepted research methodologies and how they 
differ in application. Firstly, observation is drawn to the chosen methodology and the 
justification for the methodology to other examined methodologies synonymous with the 
growth of small businesses. Secondly, an examination of the research approach adopted 
would precede the rationale for the choice of approach. Discussions on the deduction of 
participants of the sample population, population size, and data collection would follow. 
Lastly, the justification for the data collection method and analysis is emphasised. 
3.2 Research Philosophy 
There are different philosophies of undertaking research studies. According to 
Saunders et al. (2016, p.4), the methodology could simply be defined as the theory of how 
research should be undertaken. Table 3a explores the different definitions of different types 
of research philosophies and how they might be relevant to this research. The pointers from 
the table refer to the relevance of ontology, epistemology, and axiology in the process of 
research and how they influence the outcomes of this research.  
Assumptions act as the tool for distinguishing different research philosophies. 
Classifications of assumptions form the defining standards for research philosophies. There 
are three major types of research assumptions namely, ontology, epistemology, and axiology 
(Saunders et al., 2016). Below are the philosophical position taken by the researcher for this 
study. 
According to Saunders et al. (2016), ontology applies to assumptions that reflect the 
nature of reality. This depicts the way we perceive and understand research objects. Ontology 
is about the nature of reality where the reality is understood as subjective solely depending on 
the perspectives of the participants and researcher (Punch, 1998; Creswell, 2007). For this 
research, such objects include firms and small business owners (entrepreneurs). The firm and 
the individual are the units of analysis for this research. Previous literature has examined the 
key factors (firms characteristics and entrepreneurs characteristics) that either influence 
business growth positively or negatively (Dobbs and Hamilton, 2007). Evidence from the 
literature has helped channelled the cause to distinguish between drivers and barriers to 
sustainable business growth for small businesses rather than simply deducing these 
determining factors.  
Table 3a: Definitions of Research Philosophies and Relevance to Research projects 
Philosophy Definition Researchers 
viewpoint 
Relevance to 
Research 
Ontology This can be defined as 
the assumptions about 
the nature of reality 
(Saunders et al., 2016, 
p.127). 
This refers to the 
assumptions that 
illustrate the facts the 
researcher discovers 
during the research 
This applies to this 
research project as it 
points to key variables 
that solve the research 
problem. 
Epistemology This can be defined as 
the assumptions that 
govern what a 
researcher considers 
legitimate in a research 
project (Saunders et 
al., 2016, p.127). 
This refers to the 
assumptions about 
human knowledge- the 
existing literature 
pertinent to the focus 
of the research. 
This applies to this 
research as it points to 
the relevant literature 
which enables a clear 
understanding of the 
variables. 
Axiology This can be defined as 
the role of values and 
ethics within the 
research process 
(Saunders et al., 2016, 
p. 128). 
This refers to 
assumptions that 
connote the extent to 
which the  values of 
the researcher 
influences the entire 
research process 
This applies to this 
research as it identifies 
the influence of the 
researcher as a social 
entrepreneur 
researching to help 
mitigate the factors that 
inhibit the sustainable 
growth of small 
businesses in Nigeria. 
Paradigms This refers to a set of 
basic assumptions 
which underwrites the 
frame of reference, 
mode of theorising and 
ways of working in 
which a group 
operates (Saunders et 
al., 2016, p.132). 
This refers to the 
objectivist and 
subjectivist 
dimensions. 
Only the Subjectivist 
technique applies to 
this research as it 
solely revolves around 
the interpretivist 
philosophy- focuses 
more on perspectives 
of participants and 
interpretations of data 
collected.  
Epistemology applies to assumptions that reflect the different types of knowledge 
ranging from numerical data to textual or visual data, facts to interpretations that embody 
narratives, stories, and fictional literature (Saunders et al., 2016).  Epistemology gives a wider 
range of choices of methods as it concerns assumptions about how knowledge is 
communicated (Burrell and Morgan, 1979; Saunders et al., 2016). Epistemological 
assumptions depict what is considered the norm in each research work. According to Dobbs 
and Hamiltons (2007) literature review of 34 articles, researchers have taken a subjectivist 
standpoint in examining factors that influence growth through evaluation of the 
entrepreneurs perspectives/lived experience or interaction between firm and individual 
(Davidsson and Wiklund, 2001). This correlates with more recent studies (Ahiawodzi and 
Adade, 2012; Adisa et al., 2014; Bouazza et al., 2015; Nikolic et al., 2019). Having deduced 
from the literature the synonymous constructs associated with business growth, this study 
adopted an interpretivist disposition of epistemology to examine the factors that influence 
growth and also proffer a framework (constructivist) grounded in data to enhance growth for 
small businesses (see table 3a). 
Axiology applies to assumptions that reflect the roles of values and ethics. According 
to Saunders et al. (2016), the choice of research philosophy and the data collection method is 
a vivid depiction of the values of the researcher (see table 3a). A typical example would be 
the choice of depth interviews as the data collection technique for this research. It presumes 
that the researcher values interaction with participants than perspectives deduced 
anonymously through questionnaires. 
According to Gupta and Awasthy (2015), research begins with philosophical 
assumptions about the nature of reality (ontology) and the relationship that occurs between 
the researcher and the subject of the research (epistemology). Two extreme points help 
distinguish between the three classifications of assumptions (ontology, epistemology, and 
axiology). These two points are objectivism and subjectivism. According to Saunders et al. 
(2016), objectivism refers to assumptions related to natural sciences depicting that physical 
and social occurrences independently exist. It asserts the concept of realism which argues that 
social reality is a physical entity occurring independently without being subjected to 
perceptions in terms of awareness and identification. Subjectivism, on the other hand, is 
subjected to the perceptions and consequent actions of individuals. This study takes a 
subjectivist standpoint as it is subjected to the lived experience of the small business owners 
to examine the factors that influence sustainable growth for small businesses. Interpretivism 
and positivism aid the differentiation between subjective and objective approaches to 
research. According to Neuman (1991), positivism is synonymous with an objective approach 
that involves understanding how the world works so that human behaviour, causes, or 
implications can be envisaged and controlled or mitigated.  
Further explanation is given that interpretivism, views the world from a subjective 
perspective where people can forge and own their reality through interactions with one 
another in different contexts (Neuman, 1991). This is the philosophy that informs this 
research. This study relies on the views/lived experience of small business owners to achieve 
the objectives of this research through the interpretation of data collected via semi-structured 
interviews. The generalisations deduced from the views/lived experiences of the small 
business owners are dependent on the interactions with the researcher and the methods 
adopted to analyse data (Mora et al., 2012). The validity of the findings relies on the 
consistency, logical reasoning, and credibility of the researcher (Myers, 2009). 
3.3 Research Approach 
Deductive, inductive and abductive approaches are the three main approaches to the 
development of theories for research in business and management. 
If research starts with a theory, often deduced from reading academic literature and 
designing a research strategy to test the theory, it is a deductive approach (Saunders et al., 
2016). It further argues that premises are true as well as the conclusion in deductive 
inference. The deductive approach reiterates that the objective conclusion deduced from 
evaluating a set of variables should be true when all the variables are evaluated to be true 
(Ketokivi & Mantere, 2010). The approach involves the verification or falsification of 
theories. Data collection in a deductive approach is mainly used to test hypotheses relating to 
existing theories. This approach follows a linear process that involves the review of existing 
literature to deduce propositions from identified constraints within a theory or set of theories 
(see table 3b). This approach isnt suitable as the aim of this study is not to test or validate a 
theory. 
If the research starts with a collection of data to examine a phenomenon and generate 
or build a theory perhaps in form of a conceptual framework, then it is an inductive approach 
(Saunders et al., 2016). In this approach, the known premises of the subject are used to 
generate untested conclusions about the phenomenon. The gap in a rational argument 
between selected constructs and the logical conclusion is reviewed by derived observations 
(Ketokivi and Mantere, 2010). It helps the researcher to exhibit an investigative, ethical, and 
showcase the views of the participants in the sample population (Miles and Huberman, 1984). 
The inductive approach has been selected as the most suitable approach for this research. 
Table 3b: Definition and Characteristics of Research Methodology, Research Method, 
Research Approach, and Research Design 
Term Definition Characteristics Relevance to the Research 
project 
Methodology This can be defined as 
the procedural 
framework within 
which the research is 
conducted (Remenyi et 
al., 1998; Amaratunga 
et al., 2002, p.18). 
Quantitative methodology is based 
primarily on the measurement of 
quantities while Qualitative 
methodology is based on phenomena 
relating to the quality of kind 
(Kothari,2004, p.3) 
The qualitative methodology 
applies to this research 
project as it aims to explore 
the variables and suggest a 
framework.  
Approach This can be defined as 
plans and the 
procedures for 
research that span the 
steps from broad 
assumptions to 
detailed methods of 
data collection, 
analysis, and 
interpretation 
(Cresswell, 2007, p.3). 
The deductive approach involves the 
testing of theories while the inductive 
approach explores a phenomenon, 
identifying themes, and explaining 
patterns to generate a new or modify 
an existing theory. The Abductive 
approach leans on the inductive 
approach by subsequently testing the 
outcomes through additional data 
collection (Saunders et al., 2016, 
p.145) 
The inductive approach 
applies to this research as it 
aims to explore the barriers 
and drivers to business 
growth and generate a 
framework based on existing 
models to enhance 
sustainability in business 
Method This can be defined as 
the process adopted 
in research to increase 
knowledge 
(Amaratunga et al., 
2002, p.18) 
This includes interviews, 
questionnaires, surveys, and 
observations 
Interviews are relevant to 
this research as I intend to 
use qualitative methodology 
as a subjective technique to 
explore the variables in my 
research. 
Research 
Design 
This can be defined 
as the general plan of 
how a researcher 
intends to answer the 
research questions 
(Saunders et al., 2016, 
p.163) 
This could either be qualitative, 
quantitative, or mixed methods 
research designs which should be 
based on the nature of the research 
questions and objectives 
The qualitative research 
design would be adopted for 
this research as it helps to 
identify the elements that 
answer the research 
questions. 
The abductive approach involves a collection of data to explore a phenomenon, 
identifying themes and explaining patterns in other to generate a new theory or modification 
of an existing theory which is then subsequently tested through additional data collection 
(Saunders et al., 2016). The Abductive approach is centred on the observation of evasive 
facts about a particular premise (Ketokivi and Mantere, 2010), to either modify a theory or 
develop a new one (Saunders et al., 2016). This approach is quite similar to the inductive 
approach as they both generate new theories except that, the abductive approach provides 
conclusions that can be tested subsequently. This approach wasnt chosen as it appears 
unsuitable after careful consideration of the research objectives.  
3.4 Research Strategy 
A research methodology is a way of systematically solving the research problem 
(Kothari, 2004, p.8). There are three major methodologies used by researchers to conduct 
research, namely, qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods. 
Quantitative methodology is synonymous with the deductive approach, where the 
main focus is using data to test a theory. According to Saunders et al. (2016), quantitative 
methodology evaluates the relationship between variables measured numerically and 
analysed with a range of statistical or graphical techniques. This methodology could adopt the 
use of a single (mono method quantitative study) or multiple (multi-method quantitative 
study) quantitative data collection techniques. Quantitative methods use objective 
measurements such as normalised questionnaires to appropriate individuals identified through 
varied sampling methods (Choy, 2014).  Quantitative methods are usually used by large 
corporations or governmental organisations that can fund the instruments to execute 
quantitative researches on a large scale. With quantitative results that are purely statistical, 
nuances are lost in the data collection. According to Choy (2014), quantitative methods are 
usually short-framed premised on distributed surveys to expedite numerical data that 
represent the responses from research participants on the probability of agreeing or not 
agreeing to a hypothesis proposed for a study. Choy (2014) further explains that the 
drawbacks to the quantitative methodology are the lack of description of depth experience 
and the resources for big-scale researches. It does not necessarily give room for human 
perceptions and opinions to be reflected in their own words.  
There are previous studies on the business growth of small businesses that adopted 
quantitative methodology but recorded certain drawbacks that make this methodology 
unsuitable. The use of quantitative methodology could either limit the inclusion of variables 
thereby limiting the potential findings of the study (Afolabi, 2013) or results could be 
unsuitable for generalisation (Ahiawodzi and Adade, 2012) or perhaps the use of cross-
sectional research designs and analysis of static parameters would limit the interferences 
between variables (Bi et al., 2017). This methodology has been considered not to be the best 
suitable for this research after considering the recommendations from previous studies 
(Okpara, 2011).  Okpara (2011) conducted a study on the barriers to micro-sized enterprises 
in Nigeria using quantitative methodology. Okpara (2011) suggested in his published article 
as recommendations for further research that future studies should consider a more rigorous 
methodology that would capture views and opinions of small business owners in Nigeria. In 
other to achieve a depth understanding of human interaction, an appropriate research 
approach that captures participants perspectives in a natural environment should be adopted 
hence why this methodology is rejected for this study (questionnaires limit the options to 
capture opinions as closed-ended questions are usually adopted and participants cant respond 
in their own words to reflect their views). 
Mixed methods are considered as the branch of multiple methods as illustrated in the 
research onion put forward by Saunders et al. (2015), which combines the use of quantitative 
and qualitative data collection techniques and analytical procedures. This methodology may 
adopt a deductive, inductive, or abductive approach to conduct research. This could involve 
testing a theory, then using a quantitative or qualitative methodology to develop a new theory 
or perhaps a modification of the existing theory. A mixed-methods could either adopt a 
concurrent (side by side) mixed methods research design or sequential exploratory 
(qualitative, then quantitative), sequential explanatory (quantitative, then qualitative), or even 
sequential multi-phase (qualitative, then quantitative, then qualitative) mixed methods 
research design (Saunders et al., 2016). This methodology is not suitable after considering the 
objectives of this research and also the time specified to complete research within the DBA 
programme. 
Qualitative methodology is mainly characterised by an inductive research approach. 
According to Saunders et al. (2016), qualitative research uses a variety of data collection 
techniques and analytical procedures to focus on participants perspectives and the 
relationship between them to develop a conceptual framework and theoretical contribution to 
literature. Khan (2014, p.225) defined qualitative research as an inquiry process of 
understanding based on distinct methodological traditions on inquiry that explore a social or 
human problem.  One of the major advantages of the qualitative methodology involves the 
capacity to investigate the underpinning views, opinions, and values of a sample population.  
Figure 3a: Graphical representation of Research Strategy. 
Qualitative methodology is premised on the observations and interpretations of 
individual views in different contexts and capturing peoples opinions in a natural 
environment (Guba and Lincoln, 1994; Newman, 1994; Khan, 2014).  As explained by 
Newman and Benz (1998), a qualitative or naturalistic approach is used when examining and 
illustrating reality to propound a theory or an assertion about a set of constructs to illustrate 
the experience of the research participants. Qualitative methodology is ideal for raising depth 
issues to comprehend behavioural patterns of perceptions, assumptions, or values through 
Defined Research Objectives 
Inductive/Qualitative methodology 
Selected mode of data 
collection (Semi-structured 
Interviews) 
Prepare Interview Guide 
Selected sample frame 
Design and schedule 
interviews 
Implement schedule and book interviews 
Conduct Interviews 
Transcribing recorded interviews. 
Thematic data analysis 
extensive open-ended inquiry (Choy, 2014). The qualitative methodology gives prerogatives 
to the views of the participants in other to interpret the subjective opinions and actions of the 
research participants in different contexts in research (Popay et al., 1998).  
This methodology has been considered to be the best suitable for this research after 
considering the objectives, data collection method, and the time frame to complete research 
within the DBA programme (see figure 3a). Attention was also drawn to recommendations 
from previous studies done on growth for micro and small-sized businesses (Robson and 
Bennett, 2000; Mambula, 2002; Morrison et al., 2003; Okpara 2011; Gherhes et al., 2016). 
There are different qualitative methodologies in conducting research, namely, 
grounded theory, case studies, ethnography, narrative research, and phenomenology. 
According to Khan (2014), studies that adopted the use of the grounded theory approach are 
usually a few steps away from the conceptual and development of new theories. The 
approach relies on inductive approaches tailored towards the systematic development of 
theories (Glaser and Strauss, 1967) rather than testing theories in empirical studies (Khan, 
2014). This qualitative approach does not seek to validate or contradict pre-existing theories 
but simply to follow the steps of theory building through the creation of stable outlined 
collated data (Gray, 2000). Grounded theory is described as a general research approach 
designed to support the inductive development of theory about a phenomenon through a set 
of systematic procedures for the collection and analysis of qualitative data (Locke, 2002, 
p.17). Grounded theory is usually synonymous with studies that are a few strides away from 
the development of theories which is closer to the aim (introducing a framework) and 
objectives of this research hence why it is selected for this study. 
According to Bryant and Charmaz (2007), grounded theory depicts the method of 
inquiry and the derivative of the same inquiry. It is a methodology of qualitative research that 
centres on building theories or frameworks using inductive analysis grounded in data 
(Charmaz, 2006; Birks and Mills, 2015) (see table 3c). Another indication for grounded 
theory is the generation of a framework, or theory grounded and deduced from data collected 
in a study (Birks and Mills, 2015). This study aims to proffer a practical solution by 
introducing a framework based on existing models in literature from grounded data. This 
study is using Braun and Clarke's (2006) six phases of thematic analysis which is similar to 
the analytical processes in the grounded theory based-approach of qualitative research. Braun 
and Clarke (2006) support the notion that themes developed in research should be grounded 
in data (respondents experience and views {see table 3g}). Complementary to this, Birks and 
Mills (2015), emphasises that methodological conformance is validated when the 
philosophical deposition of the researcher is coherent with the research questions and the 
adopted methodological approach. This study is using the grounded theory approach and 
thematic analysis to understand the factors influencing growth and deduce from data, the 
barriers and drivers to sustainable growth for small businesses. 
Narrative research approaches are usually synonymous with storytelling. According to 
Gudmundsdottir (2001), narrative research is described as the study that tells humans 
experience of the world and researchers collate the details of these experiences to pen a 
detailed narration.  Although there is an argument by Creswell (2007) that there is a narrative 
side to all other types of qualitative studies, be it ethnography, case studies, or perhaps a 
phenomenological study but choice of a qualitative approach to research depends on the aim 
and objectives proposed. The aim and objectives of this study are not to tell a story hence 
why this approach is rejected. 
Ethnography as described by Jones and Smith (2017) is one of the earliest qualitative 
approaches synonymous with studying and understanding the way people live through 
raptness in the culture of native people. They further explained that it is defined through 
observation of a group of persons being meaningful of the essence of history and cultural 
heritage (Jones and Smith, 2017). The aim and objectives of this study are not in line with the 
characteristics of ethnography hence why it is rejected for this study. 
As described by Lester (1999), the Phenomenological approach in qualitative studies 
is used to distinguish phenomena and how they are viewed through human perceptions. 
Phenomenology depicts the description of the meaning for several individuals or a sample 
population of their lived experiences of a given phenomenon (Gupta and Awasthy, 2015). 
This is usually done by collating data through inductive qualitative methodologies with 
qualitative instruments such as observations, depth interviews, or focus groups. This 
qualitative method is efficient at effectuating the experiences and perspectives of people. 
Based on the paradigm of individualised subjectivity and knowledge, the phenomenological 
approach stresses the significance of individual perceptions and interpretations (Lester, 
1999). 
Table 3c: Compare and Contrasts of Qualitative Approaches [Source: Creswell, 2007, p.78-
Suitable 
research  
Predicating a 
theory in the 
participants 
Illustrating and 
interpreting the 
shared practice 
of a particular 
culture. 
To narrate the 
stories of an 
individuals 
experience or a 
biography 
To interpret the 
substance of 
lived  
experience or 
phenomenon 
Creating a depth 
understanding of 
a specific case of 
study or perhaps 
multiple cases. 
Aim Building a 
theory/framewor
k grounded in 
collated data 
Illustrating and 
interpreting 
about a group 
of people that 
share the same 
culture 
Narrating the life of 
a person 
Interpreting the 
substance of the 
lived 
experience of a 
person or group 
Developing depth 
illustration and 
evaluation of a 
case or multiple 
cases of study 
Unit of 
analysis 
Researching 
processes, 
activities or 
perhaps 
relationships 
between  many 
participants 
Researching a 
group of 
people from 
the same 
cultural 
background 
Researching one or 
more persons 
Researching a 
group of people 
with a shared 
experience  
Researching 
action, 
occurrences, or 
perhaps a group 
of individuals 
Informed 
study 
background  
Sociology  Anthropology 
and sociology  
Humanities 
(anthropology, 
history, literature, 
performing arts,  
psychology, 
sociology 
Education, 
philosophy, 
psychology  
Social science, 
law, political 
science, medicine, 
psychology  
collection 
design 
Interviews  Observations 
and interviews 
and perhaps 
other sources 
for lengthy 
studies. 
Documents and 
interviews 
Interviews with 
participants, 
documents, 
observations. 
Multiple sources 
(Artefacts, 
documents, 
interviews, 
observations)  
The strategy 
of data 
analysis 
Open coding, 
Axial coding, 
Selective 
Coding 
Creating 
themes to 
interpret the 
data collection 
Chronology, 
creating themes to 
describe stories 
Taking notes of 
key statements, 
textural, and 
structural 
illustration. 
Themes, Cross-
case themes 
Typed 
report 
Building a 
theory is usually 
supported with a 
diagrammatical 
representation. 
Illustrating 
how shared 
culture is 
represented 
Writing a biography 
or detailed narration 
about stories of 
persons. 
Interpreting the 
substance of the 
phenomenon 
A detailed 
evaluation of one 
or more cases 
According to Van Manen (2017), there are certain strings and pitfalls when qualitative 
researchers use phenomenological concepts and thematic analysis to examine problems in 
qualitative research because not all studies stirred by phenomenology should be considered as 
a phenomenological study. This study intends to examine the factors that influence business 
growth (interpretivist) by depending on the experience and views of the participants (Gupta 
and Awasthy, 2015) and also introduce a framework (constructivist) to enhance sustainable 
business growth which makes this approach less suitable. 
The case study approach in a qualitative study is used to unclog the investigation of a 
phenomenon within a particular context through the use of varied sources of data (Baxter and 
Jack, 2008).  This approach allows close interaction between the researcher and the research 
participants to capture the experience and interpret it effectively (Crabtree and Miller, 1999). 
The case study approach is based on the constructivism paradigm which agrees with the 
subjective notion that human perception is significant without out-rightly negating the idea of 
objectivity (Baxter and Jack, 2008). According to Searle (1995), the paradigm used by the 
constructivist is based on the construction of reality. Using a broad case study approach 
requires identifying the bounded case within the study and the unit of analysis of the research. 
This approach was found to be less suitable for this study considering the aim and objectives 
of the study. 
3.4.1 Selection of Qualitative Methodology 
The systematic literature review informs this study about the derivation of theory 
grounded in data in qualitative studies (Corbin and Strauss, 1990; Glaser and Strauss, 2017) 
and structured methodology appropriate for building frameworks (Jabareen, 2009). The 
grounded theory-based approach to qualitative research conforms to interpretivism and 
constructivism philosophical dispositions being the most appropriate for synthesis of 
grounded data in building conceptual frameworks (Durant-Law, 2005). Even though, the 
research topic connotes a case study on small businesses in Nigeria, careful and critical 
consideration has been given to the research aim and objectives to choose an appropriate 
qualitative methodology for the research.  
There are previous studies that used the same approach to examine a phenomenon 
while considering a case study (Roberts, 2009; Marshall et al., 2012; West, 2013) but did not 
introduce a framework hence rationale for choosing the grounded theory-based approach. 
The grounded theory methodology was adopted to develop the framework using the 
six phases of Braun and Clarke's (2006) thematic analysis. The six phases include 
familiarising with the data collected during the interviews, generating initial codes, searching 
for themes, reviewing the themes, redefining and naming the themes, and producing the 
report.  
The systematic literature review served as the foundation for the development of the 
conceptual framework by informing the research about the existing theories/models 
(Jovanovics theory, Gibrats law, Resource-based view theory, and Churchill and Lewiss 
model) synonymous with business growth for small businesses.  
Theoretical sampling was adopted for the data analysis in this study. This was 
important to ensure the final developed framework was grounded in data. The intent of using 
theoretical sampling was to refer back to relevant literature on the study in correlation to the 
qualitative observations throughout the process of collecting and analysing data. More so, it 
was vital to ascertain the subsequent respondents would be providing the apposite 
information required to develop the proposed framework for the research. 
Using thematic analysis steered by a grounded theory-based approach is essentially 
instructive for a study focusing on sustainable growth for small businesses especially for 
micro-sized enterprises transitioning to small-sized enterprises. The grounded theory 
approach to thematic analysis allowed the researcher to examine the nuances of how 
successful micro-sized enterprises expand into small-sized enterprises. The six phases of 
thematic analysis were the next stage of development after the transcription of data collected 
in the interviews. The six phases involved the familiarisation of data, generating codes, 
identifying and redefining the themes to produce the thematic map of the data analysis. 
Theoretical sensitivity was implored in the thematic analysis to identify segments important 
to the proposed framework. Data triangulation was used in the data analysis process to 
conduct member checking after transcripts were developed and also to compare the data with 
existing relevant literature to mark the validity and transferability of the data collected.  
The next stage of development involved synthesising the study findings grounded in 
data into the first iteration of the framework through the use of the thematic map while 
constantly checking the framework against data to spot negative cases. Evaluation and 
reviews are done to mark the final development and validation of the framework which is 
ready to be used by MSE owners to evaluate their businesses. 
Following a grounded theory-based approach, the use of semi-structured interviews 
creates a platform where the researcher and participants become co-constructors of lived 
experiences and interpretation of data (Hatch, 2002). This also helps to capture the barriers 
and drivers to business growth in the transition period through experience (Husserl, 1970) 
either for business owners that have evolved from a micro-sized to small-sized business or 
have remained micro-sized through interaction with their environment while running and 
maintaining a sustainable business (Purcell-Gates, 2004). To present a detailed and credible 
interpretation of data, participants responses were compared with theories and study results 
from pertinent literature on business growth (Manen, 1990; Moustakas, 1994; Magrini, 
2012). 
This research also implores respondent validation (member checking) which is known 
as the most critical technique to establish the credibility, consistency, and accuracy of data 
(Lincoln & Guba, 1985) by getting feedback from participants after reading the transcripts of 
their respective interviews to confirm if their experiences and perspectives have been 
accurately captured (Golafshani, 2003; Creswell, 2007). This technique helps to enhance the 
credibility, consistency/dependability, accuracy, and transferability of the results of the 
research (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Patton, 2002). 
3.5 Research Participants/Sample Population 
The sample population is drawn from a random pool of small businesses registered 
with the corporate affairs commission (CAC) in Nigeria.  
According to the statistics published by the NBS and SMEDAN in the 2017 report, 
the states with small businesses with success in business rates were highlighted. The sample 
population was drawn from this data considering the six geopolitical zones in Nigeria and 
specifically, locations where the top small businesses are operating according to the 
SMEDAN 2017 report (table 3d). 
Table 3d: Source; SMEDAN/NBS -Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
National Survey 2017 Report. 
OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS- National Survey 2017 Report  
Total Number of Enterprises 41,543,028 
Micro: 41,469,947 (99.8%) 
Small: 71,288 (0.17%) 
Medium: 1,793 (0.004%) 
Top SME States Lagos: 8,395 (11.5%) 
Oyo: 6,131 (8.4%) 
Osun: 3,007 (4.1%) 
Fewest SME States Yobe: 102 (0.1%) 
Bayelsa: 300 (0.4%) 
Borno: 538 (0.7%) 
Table 3e: Source; SMEDAN/NBS -Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
National Survey 2017 Report. 
OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE  
Micro Enterprises Small & Medium Enterprises 
Age bracket (years) 
Below 20 (10%) 
20-25 (7%) 
26-35 (30%) 
36-50 (40%) 
51 Above (13%) 
Age bracket (years) 
Below 20 (0.3%) 
20-25 (0.6%) 
26-35 (10.9%) 
36-50 (40.1%) 
51 Above (48.1%) 
Sole Proprietorship (97%) 
Partnership (2%) 
Others (1%) 
Sole Proprietorship (65%) 
Private Limited Liability Company (21%) 
Faith-Based Organisation (6%) 
Partnership (5%) 
Others (2%) 
Cooperative (1%) 
Table 3f: Source; SMEDAN/NBS -Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
National Survey 2017 Report. 
COMPOSITION OF MSMEs  
BY BUSINESS TYPE 
Micro Enterprises Small Enterprises Medium Enterprises 
Wholesale/Retail trade (42.3%) 
Agriculture (20.9%) 
Others Services Activities (13.1%)  
Manufacturing (9.0%) 
Accommodation & Food services 
(5.7%) 
Transport & Storage (3.1%) 
Construction (2.2%) 
Professional, Scientific & 
Technical Services (1.8%) 
Human health & Social works 
(0.6%) 
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation 
(0.5%) 
Information & Communication 
(0.3%) 
Water Supply, Sewerage, Waste 
management (0.2%) 
Mining & Quarrying (0.2%) 
Education (0.1%) 
Administrative and Support 
Services (0.1%) 
Real Estate Activities (0.1%) 
Education (27%) 
Manufacturing (23%) 
Wholesale/Retail trade (18%) 
Human health & Social works 
(10%) 
Accommodation & Food services 
Professional, Scientific & Technical 
Services (4%) 
Others Services Activities (3%)  
Real Estate Activities (2%) 
Administrative and Support 
Services (1%) 
Transport & Storage (1%) 
Information & Communication 
Construction (1%) 
Agriculture (1%) 
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation 
Mining & Quarrying (0%) 
Water Supply, Sewerage, Waste 
management (0%) 
Manufacturing (43%) 
Wholesale/Retail trade (13%) 
Human health & Social works 
(12%) 
Accommodation & Food services 
Education (7%) 
Construction (5%) 
Transport & Storage (3%) 
Information & Communication 
Others Services Activities (2%)  
Mining & Quarrying (2%) 
Administrative and Support 
Services (1%) 
Professional, Scientific & 
Technical Services (0%) 
Arts, Entertainment and 
Recreation (0%) 
Real Estate Activities (0%) 
Water Supply, Sewerage, Waste 
management (0%) 
Agriculture (0%) 
Purposive sampling was adopted for this study as certain pointers were considered to 
affirm the validity and transferability of the data collected. Customarily, researchers use 
purposive sampling to choose data sources and participants that would give the required 
answers to the research questions (Bryant and Charmaz, 2007; Charmaz and Bryant 2011).  
Observations from the SMEDAN/NBS 2017 survey report show that agriculture, 
wholesale/retail trade, and other services activities account for 76.3% of micro-sized 
enterprises registered with the corporate affairs commission. Businesses requiring a high 
number of employees or skilled labour (Education, Information and communication) have a 
low percentage under the micro-sized category. Furthermore, a large majority of registered 
micro-sized enterprises are sole proprietorships (see table 3e). Micro-sized enterprises are 
mostly owned by young people (26-50year olds) while 88% of small and medium-sized 
enterprises are owned by 36year olds or older. On the contrary, small and medium-sized 
enterprises are more distributed with sole proprietorships accounting for 65%, private limited 
liability companies for 21%, 6% for faith-based organisations, and 5% for partnership 
businesses.  
Attention was drawn to the locations (Lagos, Oyo, Osun) with the highest successful 
small businesses (see table 3d) to collect data that would be suitable for transferability and 
the purpose of this research. Table 3d shows the states with the highest successful small 
businesses registered with the corporate affairs commission according to the national survey 
carried out on small businesses in 2017. 
Attention was almost drawn to the ownership structure (table 3e) and business type as 
depicted in Table 3f. These are the key points that were considered in the purposive sampling 
of the small businesses considered for this study. 
A total of 80 research invitation letters were sent out to prospective small business 
owners in Nigeria. 52 (34 micro-sized and 18 small-sized) business owners responded 
confirming their interest to participate in the research (see appendix 7.10). 80 small 
businesses representing the six geopolitical zones in Nigeria and the locations with the top 
successful small businesses are considered for this study. Consideration of the time frame 
allotted to research work within the DBA programme was also a factor that influenced the 
proposed sample size. Out of the 52 small businesses who responded, 40 confirmed their 
availability for interviews. 
3.6 Sources of Data 
Primary data would be the main source of data for this research. Primary data are 
collected first hand through a keen evaluation of the constructs chosen for the research with 
the appropriate methodology. Primary data are obtained through direct observation either 
with surveys or experimentation (Saunders et al., 2016). They are more credible with higher 
validity than secondary data as proven by literature.  
Other sources of data would be relevant literature, articles, and reports on business 
growth for small businesses. The primary data source would be a random selection of small 
businesses registered with the corporate affairs commission (CAC) in Nigeria ranging across 
the different sectors in the country. 
3.7 Data Collection Method 
An inductive research approach is mainly associated with the use of qualitative 
research methodology. It involves the understanding of variations of intercultural 
relationships, perspectives, and emotions of participants as they work with individuals of 
other cultures to understand their thoughts and how they define certain constructs (Gupta and 
Awasthy, 2015). Doern (2009) suggests two main approaches to examining barriers to small 
business development. The first approach uses comparison to deduce the indicators of macro-
level development in one setting to another which gives way to the conclusion that macro-
level development prospects are proportional to the number of barriers. The second approach 
as described by Doern (2009), involves direct conversations with participants to give 
opinions on their views of different barriers to development and sustainable business growth.  
This study intends to use the second approach as suggested by Doern. While Doern 
(2009) used an example that adopted the second approach, she was keen to highlight the 
pitfalls and how researchers should be aware of them when conducting interviews. She 
highlighted that, in investigating barriers, some business owners tend to give popular 
opinions about barriers rather than unique perspectives/personal opinions, and researchers 
should take note of this.  She emphasised the need for researchers to thoroughly evaluate 
relevant literature before investigating barriers to business growth and the development of 
small businesses. Doern (2009) put forward a few implications for future research which 
were taken into consideration for data collection in this research. The first assumption by 
Doern is to substantiate whether the small business owner is motivated to grow the business 
or not. The second assumption is to take note of perceived barriers (popular opinions) and 
actual barriers that affect the small business owner. The chosen qualitative research method is 
narrowed down to the use of depth interviews with semi-structured questions as the data 
collection method. This method is quite synonymous with previous grounded theory studies 
(Chen et al., 2008; Zhang and Gao, 2012; Ciasullo and Troisi, 2013; Seyedjavadin et al., 
2015; Seyyedamiri and Faghih, 2015; Van der Merwe et al., 2020).  
3.7.1 Interviews 
The rationale behind the choice of method is reflected in the use of depth interviews 
as it provides information that might not be possible to capture even with the use of 
dependable and valid scales of measurement (Gupta and Awasthy, 2015). Interviews could 
either be personal interviews which follows a rigid procedure to seek answers to a set of pre-
conceived questions or through telephone interview which involves contacting the 
respondents on the telephone (Kothari, 2004). Telephone interviews are usually adopted 
when theres a limited time to conduct research. The use of voice over IP (VoIP) such as 
Skype, Face-time, or Zoom has also been used in recent times to conduct personal interviews 
to mitigate the cost of transportation and convenience for both researcher and respondents. 
There are three major types of interviews namely; unstructured (narrative interview), 
semi-structured and structured interviews (Heather, 2013). While unstructured interviews are 
not suitable for this study as it is synonymous with ethnography, semi-structured interviews 
have been chosen over structured interviews for two reasons. Firstly, it allows the use of 
open-ended questions and probing questions to give participants the flexibility to use their 
own words rather than fixed responses (Heather, 2013). Secondly, it helps guide the process 
of the conversation by preventing the participants from deviating from the objectives of the 
research while enabling the researcher to create a free and conducive platform for the course 
of the interview. 
The interview process is depicted diagrammatically in figure 3b. The process shows 
the objectives of the study were considered to compose the interview guide which mirrors the 
research questions. The interview guide categorised the interview questions under the 
relevant research question to achieve the corresponding research objectives  firms 
characteristics, entrepreneurs characteristics, experience, and other determining factors. 
After interviews are scheduled and completed with the participants, recorded data were 
passed on for transcription before thematic data analysis. 
Figure 3b.  Diagrammatical Representation of Interview Process 
Objectives 
Proposed 
Interview Guide 
Select Sample 
Population (40 MSEs) 
Schedule Interviews 
with Participants 
Data Collection 
(Recording audio data) 
Thematic Data Analysis 
Braun and Clarke 6 Steps 
Approach 
(Coding and Analysis) 
Transcribing Audio Data 
INTERVIEW SCHEDULE GUIDE 
The use of semi-structured interviews has been adopted for this research. This 
interview guide would help streamline the opening, body, and closing of the interview to 
avoid digression from the focus of this research. 
The opening 
Establish rapport with the respondent to create a conducive atmosphere. Brief of the 
questions and likely key areas of concern for the research -these would include respondents 
educational background, gender, ethnicity, and work experiences before starting their 
business - the firms age, size, and growth business and management capabilities. 
Motivation- a brief explanation of the rationale behind this research  to deduce the barriers 
and drivers of sustainable business growth. 
Timeframe  state the timeframe for the interview which should be between 25  40 minutes. 
The body 
Entrepreneurs characteristics - questions are expected to focus on the educational 
background, gender, work experience, and motivation of the respondent (Dunkelberg & 
Coopers theory of Classification {Typologies}). 
Firms characteristics  questions are expected to focus on the age, size, sector, and 
growth of the business. (Jovanovics theory and Gibrats law). 
Experience and determining factors  questions are expected to focus on business and 
management capabilities (Churchill & Lewiss model and Resource-based view theory). 
They are also expected to capture the barriers and drivers of sustainable business growth 
during the transition period from small-sized enterprises to medium-sized enterprises. 
The Closing 
Summary of the interview - give a summary of the discussion to the respondent 
Maintain rapport  bridge the gap in case you might need to do another interview with the 
same respondent. Maintain a link for further interviews should there be a need for it. 
Appreciation  say thank you for their voluntary participation in the research. 
Interview Questions. 
Firms characteristics 
1a. How long has your business been in operation? 
1b. What is your firms size regarding no of employees? 
1c. Which sector does your business belong to according to the CAC classification and 
standards? 
Entrepreneurs characteristics 
2a. What is your highest educational qualification? 
2b. Please give a brief description of your work experience before starting your business. 
2c. What inspired you to start your business? 
Experience & other determining factors 
3. What are the key barriers to the growth of your business? 
4. What are the factors that propelled the business forward to achieve sustainable 
business growth? 
5a. How would you describe your management capabilities? 
5b. Are there any other comments you did like to add concerning the objectives of this 
research? 
Because of the coronavirus pandemic, the use of voice over IP (VoIP) such as Skype, 
WhatsApp, and Zoom was adopted to conduct the depth interviews for this study using semi-
structured questions to adhere to the recommendations and guidelines put forward by the 
world health organisation (WHO). With the stress to stay afloat in business amidst the 
lockdown restrictions, consideration was given to flexibility of interview schedule time 
mostly chosen by the respondents to allow a feeling of comfort and reduced tension during 
the interview (McDowell, 2001). Ethical standards (anonymity, informed consent, 
confidentiality, voluntary participation) were being read out to each participant before the 
start of each interview. Theoretical sampling was adopted during data collection to check 
with pertinent literature and ascertain that the interview guide was suitable to probe and get 
the right responses required for the research from participants.  
3.8 Transcription  
 Naturalised transcription and denaturalised transcription are two widely accepted 
methods of transcription (Davidson, 2009). According to Mero-Jaffe (2011), the naturalised 
method of transcription is usually thorough focusing on the details of the interviews such as 
laughter, occasional pause, gestures, involuntary mumbles as well as the content while 
denaturalised transcription filters the extras (accent, body language, involuntary mumbles, 
etc.) and still presents an accurate description of the interview reflecting the essence of the 
discourse.  
Even though the two methods have advantages and disadvantages, the denaturalised 
method was selected for this study. The rationale behind the choice, being the production of a 
transcript that is scrutable and coherent (Oliver et al., 2005) without the socio-cultural 
attributes (Mero-Jaffe, 2011). The disadvantage to the chosen method limited to the wrong 
interpretation of voices in the recordings was mitigated through member checking.  
As suggested by Mero-Jaffe (2011), five factors impact the quality of transcript 
namely: researcher, interviewer, respondent, transcriber, and instrument of transcription. 
These five factors were considered for this study. While it is inevitable to separate the 
interference of the researchers values (axiology) in an interpretivist approach to research 
(Davidson, 2009), consistency has been maintained as the researcher is also the interviewer 
and transcriber for this study. The quality of the data and in extension the research can be 
influenced by the interviewers and transcribers knowledge of the entire research or the 
interaction between the interviewer and the transcriber (Mero-Jaffe, 2011). This influence 
was avoided as the researcher conducted and transcribed all the interviews for this study. In 
some studies, the interviewer and transcriber are usually not the same but part of the research 
team (Davidson, 2009) which gives room for misinterpretation of information  either an 
omission or addition of the guidelines provided by the researcher to the team. An effective 
recorder with noise-cancelling functionality was used to ensure the quality of the recording, 
avoiding errors in the transcripts (MacLean et al., 2004).   
 This method of transcription was more suitable because of the method of data analysis 
adopted for this study. Socio-cultural attributes are less important in thematic analysis 
especially when the focus is on the main content of the discourse. Transcription is a vital part 
of qualitative research (Lapadat and Lindsay, 1999; Oliver et al., 2005) even though fewer 
studies have focused on it (Lapadat, 2000; Forbat and Henderson, 2005). It helps to ensure 
the credibility and consistency of data and in extension, the quality of the research.  
3.9 Reliability and Validity 
  Reliability as argued by certain researchers (Stenbacka, 2001; Davies and Dodd, 
2002; Golafshani, 2003) is a concept synonymous with testing/evaluating in quantitative 
research. While reliability and validity point to the quality of a quantitative study, other terms 
equally point to quality in qualitative studies. Such interpretivism conceptions are credibility, 
consistency, trustworthiness, and transferability (Lincoln and Guba, 1985; Seale, 1999). The 
notion of consistency in qualitative studies is similar to the notion of reliability in quantitative 
studies (Hoepfl, 1997; Seale, 1999). The use of data triangulation was adopted to ensure 
credibility, consistency, trustworthiness, and transferability to enhance the quality of this 
research by combining methods (literature, member checking, and findings) (Patton, 2001; 
Golafshani, 2003). 
3.10 Triangulation, Member checking and Peer Review 
 According to Lincoln and Guba (1986) and Cresswell (2014), multiple data sources 
are recommended in qualitative research to depict triangulation. The findings of this study 
were checked against the literature underpinning this research by using data triangulation.  
 Member checking was also used to check the credibility, consistency, and 
trustworthiness of the data collected. Checking the credibility of responses from participants 
(member checking), vivid enumeration of adopted data collection methods, and data analysis 
are essential to improve the quality of findings and relevance of the study (Hammersley, 
1990; Mays and Pope, 2000). Participants were sent copies of individual transcripts generated 
for the interviews to ascertain that their opinions and perspectives were captured correctly 
(Cresswell, 2014). This is quite important as the objectives of the research solely depend on 
the experience and views of the research participants. Respondents were asked to give 
feedback on the accuracy of the transcripts (member checking). This is vital to the 
understanding of research as reviews of participants contribute to the quality of the transcripts 
generated from the interviews which in turn contributes to achieving the aim of the research 
(Lapadat and Lindsay, 1999). According to Mero-Jaffe (2011), it is important to send the 
transcripts to participants for validation to maintain research ethics and empower respondents 
by giving them control of the content of the transcripts to reflect their views. Polit and Beck 
(2007) agree with this notion as it helps to avoid errors and ensures the validity and 
trustworthiness (Davidson, 2009) of the transcripts. 
 Lastly, a peer review of the research was done by a fellow doctoral candidate to check 
the instruments; adopted research methodology, data collection method and techniques, and 
choice of qualitative data analysis used for this research.  
3.11 Ethical considerations 
 The major ethical considerations for this research would be narrowed to informed 
consent, beneficence, respect for anonymity and confidentiality, respect for privacy, and 
vulnerability. 
Informed consent 
 This simply connotes that all participants right to free will is protected. Informed 
consent should entail an abstract of the study and its aim as well as the selection of samples 
and the procedures adopted to carry out the sampling (Ford and Reutter, 1990). This would 
enable participants to make informed decisions to either participate voluntarily or not in the 
research as they would have a brief on the likely risks and key benefits of the research 
(Clarke, 1991). A brief of alternatives that would be available after the cause of this research 
would also be disclosed to participants especially small business owners with bad business 
practices. In the exceptional cases where the participant does not speak fluent English, an 
interpreter would be used to communicate effectively all the details of the research to the 
participant before data collection commences should they agree voluntarily to take part in the 
research. A non-coercive disclaimer would be included in the brief to show participation in 
the research is entirely voluntary. This disclaimer would stress the alternative to opt-out 
freely should the participant decide not to take part in the research anymore. In such a 
scenario, any collected data would be deleted.  
Beneficence  
 This simply refers to the benefits of the research. Most African cultures treat 
businesses as part of their lives and as such this research would have access to the 
psychological and emotional side of some participants, particularly the small business owners 
that are dealing with strings of challenges in business. 
Data Security 
 All electronic copies of formal responses (responses to the invitation to participate in 
research and consent forms) including research participants details would be stored on a 
password-encrypted computer. Personal information of the participants such as names, 
business names, and business telephone numbers will not be included in the transcripts 
generated from the interviews. Participants will only be identified as a participant with a 
certain number (i.e. participant 1, 2etc.). Participants would be informed during the 
interviews that no personal identifying information would be included in the interview 
transcripts.  
All data would be stored on a password-encrypted computer and uploaded to the 
UWS One Drive for easy sharing between the university research supervisory team. When 
data is no longer in use for university-related work for research, they would be disposed of 
appropriately by deleting all information stored on the researchers UWS One Drive. 
Respect for Anonymity and Confidentiality  
 The ethical issue of anonymity and confidentiality are closely related as it depicts the 
protection of all participants identities being linked to any of the responses recorded during 
the cause of data collection. This gives room to participants right to withhold or freely give 
all information as they deem fit during the cause of the research. 
Respect for Privacy 
 Considering the demographics of the data samples to be collected for this research, 
respect for privacy should be paramount. The demographics considered comprise individuals 
from different tribes and ethnic backgrounds with varying beliefs, cultural standards, marital 
status, age, or level of income. This is a sensitive issue and as such should be handled with 
due diligence.     
Vulnerability 
 This refers to the category of participants that do not speak English fluently as all the 
interviews would be done in the English language for easy analysis by the researcher. In 
cases where the participant does not speak fluent English, an interpreter would be used to 
communicate effectively, all the ethical considerations relevant to this research to the 
participant. In other cases where participants do have disabilities, interpreters would be used 
to communicate to such individuals, so they could give informed consent before data 
collection. In cases where interpreters cant communicate effectively, such individuals would 
not be allowed to participate in the research as this undermines the validity of the sample data 
and negatives the ethical considerations such as informed consent or right to anonymity and 
confidentiality.    
3.12 Data Analysis 
As this study is exploratory research, and an inductive approach has been adopted to 
use qualitative methodological techniques to acquire data. The primary data collected through 
the use of depth interviews will be transcribed manually into transcripts and then analysed. 
The NVIVO software specifically designed to analyse the unstructured text, audio/videos 
(interviews), and image dataset is made available by QSR International and has been 
recommended by the University of West of Scotland for doctoral students researching with 
the use of the qualitative methodology.  
The researchers knowledge of the software package (NVIVO), the time required to 
acquire the skills to use the software, and the suitability of the software have been put into 
consideration for this study. The researcher opted for manual data analysis to avoid the 
pitfalls synonymous with using analytic software for qualitative studies  qualitative 
researchers focusing more on quantitative analytic results rather than the constructs 
embedded within the data. Complementary to this, the use of analytical software pressures 
researchers to concentrate on the volume and breadth of data rather than depth and 
interpretation which could be a deviation from the real work of data analysis (St John and 
Johnson, 2000). The manual analysis helps the researcher to familiarise more with data and 
effective interpretation is more affirmative compared to the use of software that is prone to 
predetermine and rigorous processes. The researcher opted for manual analysis because 
Braun and Clarke's (2006)s step-by-step thematic analysis approach has been chosen for data 
analysis. Following the six steps approach makes it easy to analyse data manually especially 
when you are dealing with a small data size. There are other types of data analysis 
synonymous with qualitative studies namely: discourse and content analysis. 
Content analysis 
Content analysis as described by Luo (2019) is used to pinpoint patterns in recorded 
communication in other to examine the content and purposes of the data. According to 
(Stemler, 2000), the most prevalent perception about content analysis of qualitative data is 
doing a word count and the notion that the words with the highest frequency depict the 
greatest concerns in the data. However, the content analysis goes beyond basic word count as 
it involves thorough coding and classification of qualitative data (Stemler, 2000). Content 
analysis is best suitable for pinpointing biases or agendas in communication and deducing the 
differences in the recorded data in different contexts (Luo, 2019). Considering the aim and 
objectives of this study, content analysis was found less suitable for data analysis. 
Discourse analysis 
According to Lupton (1992), discourse analysis implores the use of linguistics to 
comprehend the relationship existing between ideology and language. Discourse analysis 
involves reviewing how language is interpreted and it requires technical expertise and 
theoretical details (Javadi and Zarea, 2016). It involves revealing the antecedent and politics 
implored in arguments either for or against a definite statement, assumption, or research 
method (Locke, 2004). Considering the objectives and the research questions for this study, 
discourse analysis was found less suitable. 
Thematic analysis 
 As described by Caulfield (2019), thematic analysis is a great approach when the 
researcher intends to examine peoples views, knowledge, values, and experience from a set 
of data collected in a qualitative study. There are different approaches to thematic analysis 
namely: inductive, deductive, semantic, and latent approaches. As simply explained by 
Caulfield (2019), the inductive approach in thematic analysis simply entails the process of 
letting the data decide the themes while the deductive approach in thematic analysis entails 
the process of approaching the data with envisaged themes based on the underpinning 
theories informing the research. In the inductive approach, the themes are emphatically 
related to the data collected (Boyatzis, 1998; Corbin and Strauss, 2014). The semantic 
approach in the thematic analysis involves evaluating the unequivocal content of the data 
while a latent approach in thematic analysis requires the researchers to interpret the 
presumptions and subtexts underlying the data.  
In the semantic approach to thematic analysis, the themes are found in the semantic 
representation of data and the researcher doesnt need to look beyond the perspectives and 
views of the participants written in the transcripts (Javadi and Zarea, 2016). The semantic 
approach depicts what is in the qualitative data. The latent approach involves going beyond 
what is developed in the semantic method (Javadi and Zarea, 2016). Caulfield (2019) puts 
forward the notion that the deductive approach to thematic analysis relies solely on the 
adopted theoretical framework to decide the sort of themes to find in the qualitative data. In 
the inductive approach in thematic analysis, the researcher is expected to develop their 
framework based on the themes found in the data. The semantic approach is usually 
synonymous with an inductive approach to thematic analysis as it relies on participants 
views, knowledge, or experience without preconceived assumptions. The latent approach 
similarly goes with a deductive approach as it views the data to see the reflections of the 
assumptions of theories informing the study. While most studies would adopt a deductive and 
latent approach as it simply allows the themes to mirror the essence of the theories informing 
the research, it also opens the research to the risk of omitting nuances that might re-inform 
the narratives of previous studies or perhaps add new directions to the body of literature. 
However, there are some drawbacks to this approach. The simplicity of thematic analysis is 
often seen as a disadvantage thereby negating the values and validity of the approach (Javadi 
and Zarea, 2016). There are risks of omitting the nuances in the qualitative data as thematic 
analysis relies on the researchers judgment (Caulfield, 2019). Researchers are also likely to 
pay attention to repetitive terms in the data rather than creating a set of patterns to depict 
what the data is saying (Gibson and Brown, 2009). There are different approaches to thematic 
analysis but Braun and Clarkes (2006) approach has been chosen for this study. The 
rationale behind this choice is that Braun and Clarkes approach uses an inductive and 
semantic approach which fits with the aim and objectives of this study. It supports the content 
of the data to solely moderate the themes that answer the research questions.  
Careful consideration has been taken to duly inform this study about the underlying 
literature pertinent to business growth for micro and small-sized enterprises to address the 
drawbacks of using inductive and semantic approaches to thematic analysis. There are 
common narratives that thematic analysis is not as good as other data analysis synonymous 
with qualitative researches. Choosing an applicable data analysis should solely rely on the 
objectives of the research and the adopted research design. Careful consideration was taken to 
choose the most appropriate data analysis and the core reasons match the list in table 3g to 
address effectively, the questions posed by the study and achieve all the objectives of the 
research.  
It is imperative to note at this point at this study didnt rely on the 2006 version of the 
paper but also put into consideration the updates put forward by Prof Braun and Dr. Clarke in 
more recent times. The YouTube video referenced above was uploaded by Dr. Clarke in 
2018. Thematic analysis is defined as a method for identifying, analysing, and reporting 
patterns (themes) within data (Braun and Clarke, 2006, p6). According to Braun and Clarke 
(2006), thematic analysis is different from other analytic methods that seek to represent 
patterns across qualitative data. They further explained that researchers dont need to 
subscribe to the theoretical firmness of a comprehensive grounded theory which necessitates 
analysis to be directed toward the development of the theory (Holloway and Todres, 2003; 
Braun and Clarke, 2006). This applies for consideration in this study as the aim is to 
introduce a framework based on existing models adopted for the research and not to develop 
a new theory. The most important thing to consider in qualitative data analysis is the 
benchmark for identifying a theme/pattern as this ought to reflect the issues which the 
research questions are meant to address for this study. Braun and Clarke (2006) argue that a 
theme should capture something significant about the data to the corresponding research 
question. 
Table 3g: Showing the rationale for choosing Thematic Analysis 
The rationale for choosing Braun & Clarke Thematic Analysis 
1. It is widely used for qualitative research analysis (was cited 87,900 times on Google 
Scholar) (was most cited academic paper in 2006). 
2. It is compatible with all types of research philosophy. It isnt tied to just one 
theoretical framework. 
3. According to Prof Braun, it is suitable for the inductive approach when the objective 
is to work from a bottom-top pattern, i.e. relying entirely on what unfolds from the data 
collected which mirrors the nuances of a grounded theory approach. 
4. Its flexibility allows the researcher to capture peoples reality or opinions which 
mirrors the objectives of this research, i.e. producing interpretation that is grounded in 
the reality and opinions of the research participants. It allows the researcher to choose 
where it fits in the process of data analysis, unlike other approaches that are inclined to 
certain theoretical underpinnings. 
5. It allows the researcher to be actively engaged in the process of data analysis. It 
allows data analysis to be done experientially reading, familiarising and analysing 
data. It allows cognitive participation in data analysis and makes it easier to 
communicate the interpretation of data to either the reader or marker as the case may be. 
6. It fits in with an interrogatory approach to research hence the rationale for choosing 
the Braun and Clarke 6 steps thematic analysis approach. 
Source: Extracts from YouTube: Thematic Analysis  An Introduction by Prof Virginia 
Braun and Dr. Victoria Clarke. 
Considering the objectives of the study which include deducing the barriers and 
drivers to business growth (deducing the unfolding patterns in the data and identifying the 
themes), this forms the rationale behind the choice of data analysis. Braun and Clarke's 
(2006), six-phase description, thematic analysis is best suitable for this study to ensure the 
validity and reliability of data and also to avoid intermittent errors by qualitative researchers 
in focusing on quantitative outputs from data analysis software rather than the 
patterns/themes in the data. Braun and Clarke (2006) suggest a comprehensive six-phase step 
to an effective thematic analysis which has been adopted for this study (see table 3h). 
Table 3h: Source; Extract from Using thematic analysis in psychology, Braun and 
Clarke, 2006 
Phase No Phase Name Description  
1 Familiarising yourself with 
your data 
Doing manual transcribing of data, reading the data 
repetitively to familiarise and note down initial analytic 
interests and thoughts. 
2 Generating initial codes Involves the initial production of initial codes (features of data 
that appears interesting to the researcher) from the data. 
3 Searching for themes This involves merging codes (collated data) into potential 
themes. 
4 Reviewing themes Involves filtering the set of selected themes. Reviewing and 
refining themes that have fewer data to support them. This 
involves two levels. Level 1 for coded data extracts that form 
list of themes and level 2 for themes that appear to form 
coherent patterns. This process forms the thematic map for the 
analysis. 
5 Redefining  and naming 
themes 
Involves generating vivid definitions and names for each 
theme i.e. conducting and writing a detailed analysis for each 
theme. 
6 Producing the report Involves final review and write-up of the report. This phase 
involves representing the data in a way that ascertains the 
merit and validity of the analysis and convinces any reader. 
This should produce a detailed report that would relate the 
analysis to the research questions and literature pertinent to 
the research. 
Thematic analysis for this study involved transcribing data, reading, and familiarising 
with initial notions. Secondly, coding interesting points of the data across the entire data set 
in other collate the data relevant to each code. Then, searching for potential themes and 
checking if themes correlate to the extracted codes to generate the thematic map of the 
analysis for the study. Lastly, refining the specifics of each theme and giving clear definitions 
with relevant examples relating to the research questions and literature to produce the final 
report of the study. Results from the thematic analysis formulate the findings of the research 
and are included in the final thesis submitted for examination to the University. 
3.13 Summary 
This chapter gives an overview of the widely accepted philosophies in researching 
business and management. The various research approaches are enumerated and the rationale 
for the chosen approach is highlighted. No approach is ranked as more effective than the 
other as the choice of approach is solely dependent on the aim and objectives of the research.  
The emphasis is drawn to different methodologies and the justification for the adopted 
methodology is stated. The sources of data (sample population) and research participants are 
discussed. The rationale for the adopted data collection technique is also emphasised as well 
as the qualitative analytical procedure chosen for the data analysis. 
4.0 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 
4.1 Overview 
This chapter shows the details of the research findings and the presentation of the 
collected data. An outline of the participants details and sampling procedures is explained. 
Secondly, the research questions are revisited.  Analysis of collected data through thematic 
analysis is presented with the definitions and themes of the codes developed from the data. 
Triangulation is discussed to show the measures adopted for validity and transferability of 
findings and results to precede the summary of the chapter. 
4.2 Data Presentation 
4.2.1 Revisit of Research Questions 
 There were five questions (see table 4a) proposed to achieve the objectives of this 
study. The first question (Q1) was informed by Gibrats law (1931) and Jovanovics theory 
(1982) which addresses the premises surrounding the firms growth to its size and the period 
of growth till optimum scale is attained to compete in the market (Goedhuys and Sleuwaegen, 
2010). The second question (Q2) was informed by Dunkelberg and Coopers classification of 
entrepreneurs to classify small business owners to their level of education, what motivates 
them, and their future orientation (Ensari and Karabay, 2014). The third and fourth question 
(Q3 & Q4) was informed by Churchill and Lewiss model that divides the process of growth 
into stages of development (Adesua-Lincoln, 2011) to examine each participants process of 
growth to determine the barriers and drivers to business growth. The last question (Q5) was 
informed by the resource-based view theory that defines the capabilities of businesses to use 
their resources to achieve competitive advantage and improve business performance (Nasir et 
al., 2017). 
The questions are: 
1. What are the firm characteristics of small businesses in Nigeria? 
2. What are the characteristics of small business owners in Nigeria?  
3. What are the barriers to sustainable business growth and development of small 
businesses? 
4. What are the drivers of business growth and development for small businesses in 
Nigeria?  
5. How can small business owners enhance sustainable business growth and 
development?  
Table4a: Showing the relationship between the research objectives, research questions, and 
the interview questions.  
Aim Research 
Objectives 
Research Questions Interview Guide 
{open ended questions} 
Reasons Data type 
To develop a 
framework 
based on 
existing 
models to 
enhance 
sustainable 
business 
growth for 
Small 
Businesses in 
Nigeria. 
1. To examine 
the factors that 
influence the 
business growth 
development of 
small 
businesses. 
2. To examine 
the barriers to 
sustainable 
business growth 
development. 
3. To introduce 
a framework 
based on 
existing models 
to improve 
business growth 
development. 
1.  What are the firm 
characteristics of 
small businesses in 
Nigeria? 
2.  What are the 
characteristics of 
Small business 
owners in Nigeria? 
3.   What are the 
barriers to 
sustainable business 
growth and 
development of small 
businesses? 
(1a). How long has your 
business been in operation? 
(1b). What is your firms size 
regarding no of employees? 
(1c). Which sector does your 
business belong to according 
to the CAC classification and 
standards? 
 (2a). What is your highest 
educational qualification? 
(2b). Please give a brief 
description of your work 
experience before starting 
your business. 
(2c). What inspired you to 
start your business? 
(3). What are the key barriers 
to the growth of your 
business? 
Q1. To deduce 
the firms 
characteristics. 
Q2. To deduce 
the characteristics 
of the small 
business owner. 
Q3. To deduce 
the barriers to 
sustainable 
growth and 
development. 
Interviews 
Interviews 
Interviews 
  4.   What are the 
drivers of business 
growth and 
development for 
small businesses in 
Nigeria? 
5.   How can Small 
business owners 
enhance sustainable 
business growth and 
development? 
(4). What are the factors that 
propelled the business 
forward to achieve 
sustainable business growth? 
(5a). How would you 
describe your management 
capabilities? 
(5b). Are there any other 
comments you did like to add 
concerning the objectives of 
this research? 
Q4. To deduce 
the indicators that 
drive sustainable 
business growth. 
Q5. To give 
recommendations 
that can be used 
in enhancing 
business growth 
and development. 
Interviews 
Interviews 
4.2.2 Participants 
 This study used purposive sampling based on the criteria for selection to represent the 
six geopolitical zones and states with the highest frequency of successful MSMEs in Nigeria. 
An initial number of 80 invitations were sent out to prospective participants and 52 responses 
were received confirming their interest to participate in the research. 34 out of 43 micro-sized 
businesses and 18 out of 37 small-sized businesses responded and confirmed their interest to 
participate.  
A follow-up message was sent to prospective participants before ethical consent from 
the university was received and only 40 out of the 52 responded with their consent forms. 
Follow-up calls were made to confirm interview dates and 20 micro-sized businesses and 13 
small-sized businesses to make a total of 33small businesses participated in the interviews. 
The remaining 7 prospective participants gave some form of excuse or were simply busy. 
This makes up a response rate of 82.7%. This sample size falls within the commended frame 
limit permitted for qualitative researches (Cresswell, 2014; Walker, 2012; Saunders et al., 
2017) and likewise in the same proportion as other qualitative inquiries on the experiences of 
small business owners (Mambula, 2002; Okpara, 2011; Alimo, 2015). 
4.2.3 Description of Participants 
Table 4b: Showing the details of the research participants. 
Business 
Category/N
Employees 
Industry/Sector 
Depth Interview 
time stamp 
Participant 1 Diplom
Micro/4 Entertainment Lagos 30th Oct./9.35am Yes  
Participant 2 Diplom
Micro/4 Fashion/Boutique Lagos 30th Oct./10.20am Yes  
Participant 3 Bachel
Micro/3 Medical Lagos 30th Oct./10.53am Yes  
Participant 4 Bachel
Small /11 Manufacturing Lagos 30th Oct./2.05pm Yes  
Participant 5 Bachel
Micro/8 Auto care/Repairs Lagos 30th Oct./4.40pm Yes  
Participant 6 Bachel
Micro/3 Fashion/Retail Lagos 1st Nov./1.56pm Yes  
Participant 7 Second
school 
Micro/3 Event 
Planning/Modelling/Make
up Artistry 
Lagos 1st Nov./2.39pm Yes  
Participant 8 Masters Micro/7 Logistics and Supply 
Chain 
Lagos 1st Nov./3.11pm Yes  
Participant 9 Masters Micro/4 Fashion/Retail Lagos 3rd Nov./11.40am Yes  
Participant 10 Bachel
Micro/4 Fashion Lagos 3rd Nov./12.12pm Yes  
Participant 11 Second
School 
Small /13 Fashion Lagos 3rd Nov./12.50pm Yes  
Participant 12 Diplom
Small /10 Fashion/Textile Retail Lagos
/Ogun 
3rd Nov./1.33pm Yes  
Participant 13 Diplom
Micro/6 Fashion/Beauty Shop Lagos 3rd Nov./2.21pm Yes  
Participant 14 Bachel
Small /40 Marketing/Communication Lagos 3rd Nov./2.58pm Yes  
Participant 15 Diplom
Small /20 Events/Catering Services Lagos
/Abuj
3rd Nov./3.23pm Yes  
Participant 16 Masters Small /10 Health Care Lagos 3rd Nov./3.55pm Yes  
Participant 17 Masters Micro/6 Events/Catering Services Lagos 8th Nov./10.10am Yes  
Participant 18 Bachel
Micro/4 Foods Lagos 8th Nov./11.11am Yes  
Participant 19 Second
School 
Small /30 Events/Entertainment Abuja 8th Nov./11.43am Yes  
Participant 20 Masters Micro/2 Fashion Lagos 8th Nov./1.40pm Yes  
Participant 21 Bachel
Micro/3 Hospitality Lagos 8th Nov./3.05pm Yes  
Participant 22 Bachel
Small /13 Fashion Lagos
/Abuj
8th Nov./8.23pm Yes 
Participant 23 Bachel
Small /10 Agriculture Lagos
/Ogun 
16th Nov./10.20am Yes  
Participant 24 Masters Small 10 Facility 
Management/Maintenance 
Support Services 
Lagos  16th Nov./10.20am Yes  
Participant 25 Bachel
Micro/2 Foods Ondo 18th Nov./8.38am Yes  
Participant 26 Bachel
Small /13 ICT Lagos 18th Nov./9.34am Yes  
Participant 27 Bachel
Micro/2 Foods/Grocery Retail Lagos  18th Nov./12.02pm Yes  
Participant 28 Bachel
Micro/4 Finance Platea
18th Nov./1.12pm Yes  
Participant 29 Second
School 
Micro/1 Fashion Lagos  18th Nov./3.05pm Yes  
Participant 30 Bachel
Micro/2 Fashion Lagos  18th Nov./3.32pm Yes  
Participant 31 Bachel
Small /10 Fashion Lagos  19th Nov. 11.26am Yes  
Participant 32 Bachel
Small /12 Events 
Planning/Management 
Lagos
/Ogun 
23rd Nov./4.04pm Yes  
Participant 33 Bachel
Micro/6 Fashion/Beauty Shop Lagos  24th Nov./10.25pm Yes  
As shown in table 4b, 91% of the participants have their small businesses domiciled 
in Lagos which reflects the suitability for transferability of data as Lagos is the state with the 
most successful small businesses in Nigeria (SMEDAN and NBS, 2017)  
4.2.4 Sampling Procedures/Sample Size 
 The initial research invitation letter (Appendix 7.4) was sent out to a large pool of 80 
prospective small businesses giving an overview of the study and the criteria for the selection 
of small businesses that could be considered for the research.  Out of 80, 40 participants 
confirmed their interest by completing the consent form. However, 33 participants 
participated in this research. Research participants were sampled until the saturation point 
was reached and no new themes were developing from the collected data (Saunders et al., 
2017). All 33 research participants were business owners of registered micro-sized (20) and 
small-sized (13) businesses in Nigeria representing the states with the highest success rate of 
MSMEs according to the SMEDAN 2017 report. Businesses that were not duly registered 
with the corporate affairs commission (CAC) in Nigeria were not considered for this study.  
4.3 Data Collection 
 Follow-up messages were sent to confirm the date and time of interviews after the 
consent forms were received from all research participants. Semi-structured interviews with 
open-ended questions were conducted via zoom, Skype, and whats app, and the audio was 
recorded. The duration of the interviews was an average of 35minutes long. The use of VoIP 
was adopted according to the health recommendations from the World Health Organisation 
because of the Covid19 pandemic lockdown. The calls were initiated with an ice breaker 
conversation to create a relaxed and conducive platform before the recordings were started as 
proposed in the interview guide. The participants responded to two direct questions and three 
probing questions to capture their experience of running their day-to-day business operations. 
The recorded audio files were transcribed manually into transcripts and Braun and Clarkes 
(2006) six-phase steps to thematic analysis were used to analyse the transcribed data using 
the grounded theory-based approach.  
4.4 Analysis and Results 
 The number of small-sized business owners that participated was 13 while the micro-
sized business owners were 20. Out of 33 research participants, 13 were in the fashion 
industry, 6 were in the events and entertainment industry, 4 were in the hospitality and foods 
processing industry, 2 were from the medical and health care sector, and 1 each from 
agricultural, auto care repair, manufacturing, logistics, marketing, and facility management, 
ICT and finance. Out of 33 respondents, 6 were masters degree holders, 18 held bachelors, 
5 had a diploma and 4 had secondary school certificates before them starting their businesses 
(see table 4b). 
Figure 4a: Showing research participants by their business type. 
18.18
12.12
3.03 3.03
Research Participants by Business type
Fashion Events and Entertainment Hospitality and Food Processing
Health Care Agriculture Auto Care Repair
Manufacturing Logistics Marketing
Facility Management ICT Finance
As shown in figure 4a, the majority of the participants were in fashion, accounting for 
39.4% followed by events and entertainment (18.18%), Hospitality and Food processing 
(12.12%), Health care (6.06%), and others. Checking with the composition of MSMEs by 
business type in the SMEDAN/NBS 2017 report (see table 3f), fashion, hospitality, and food 
processing (classified under others services activities), events and entertainment and health 
care reflects the businesses with the highest percentage across the upper half of the table for 
micro-enterprises and small enterprises. Other business types such as ICT, finance, and 
facility management (classified under administrative and support services) were across the 
lower half of the table for micro-enterprises and small enterprises. In comparison, this 
validates data collected for this study is suitable for generalisability. 
4.4.1 Thematic Analysis 
4.4.2 Code Definitions 
Table 4c: Showing definitions of micro-sized enterprises (MSEs) and small-sized enterprises 
(SSEs).  
Codes Definitions  
FSu Start-ups Firms 0-3yrs 20 
FM Mature Firms 4yrs and above. 13 
This definition for start-ups was adopted from Kollmann et al. (2016) which proposes 
an average of 2.4yrs for start-ups hence the approximate value to a whole number of 3years. 
The first phase of analysis was the transcription phase. Reading the data over and over 
to familiarise with the data to note down initial analytic interests and thoughts. The next 
phase involved the generation of codes from initial notes. The third phase involved the 
merging of the extracted codes into subthemes. The subthemes were then reviewed and 
refined to deduce coded data that formed coherent patterns to form the final themes (see 
Table 4d). As transcription was done after each interview, it was easy to adopt the use of 
theoretical sampling to identify the segments in data that were important to the development 
of the framework before the coding phase. Initial codes were generated from segments in data 
with coherent patterns.  
Table 4d: Showing the subthemes and themes developed from data. 
Themes   
Barriers  Drivers  
Access to finance, Stereotypes, Recruitment, 
Infrastructure and Facilities, Government 
policies 
Business and management skills, Work 
experience, Leadership, Character, Customer 
service, Staff retention, Innovation, Social 
media 
Sub-themes Sub-themes 
Access to finance, Gender-based/Work 
stereotypes, Lack of Skilled workers, 
Difficult to get loyal staff, Good roads, 
Electricity, Clarity of Information, Custom 
duties, FX (Foreign exchange rates), Multiple 
taxes, Bad policies, Favouritism. 
Bookkeeping skills, Business Knowledge, 
Operational skills, Work experience, 
Customer service relationship, Quality, 
Referrals, Leadership, Empathy, 
Consistency, Patience, Willing to try, 
Motivation, Attitude, Staff turnover, 
Incentives, bonuses, Innovation, Creativity, 
Social media 
 As shown the table 4d, it is evident that access to finance still accounts for one of the 
major barriers to business growth for small businesses (Dobbs and Hamilton, 2007; Ullah, 
2009; Bouazza et al., 2015; Motta and Sharma, 2019). Infrastructure and facilities were other 
barriers synonymous with small business growth in literature (Tushabomwe-kazooba, 2006; 
Olawale and Garwe, 2010; Okpara, 2011). Furthermore, business and management skills 
(Bouazza et al., 2015), motivation (Anggadwita and Mustafid, 2013), and leadership 
(Olushina, 2017) are highlighted drivers of growth in literature as well. 
4.4.3 Discussion of Themes 
The developed themes from the thematic data analysis are business and management 
skills, customer service, staff retention, character, leadership, social media, and innovation. 
Business and management skills 
Business and management skills are the first themes developed from the thematic 
analysis with sub-themes business knowledge, bookkeeping, and operational skills. Few of 
the respondents that had the necessary management skills required to run a business venture 
reiterated the significance of having basic business and management skills to achieve a 
minimum efficiency scale needed to achieve sustainable growth as a small business owner in 
Nigeria. One of the participants (13) stressed the need to have a mission statement and vision 
for small businesses to direct the business during crisis and times of exploring opportunities 
as well. 
Participant 13 said, when you set your mission statement and vision for the business, 
what comes next to play is your management skills. So when you are recruiting, the people 
(potential employees) must align with your vision and mission statement. In that way, when 
you talk, they say the same thing and do the same thing. 
Participant 10 overly highlighted the importance of acquiring the necessary business 
knowledge in other to stay relevant in the marketplace. She said, Over the years, I felt if I 
held on only to the knowledge (of sewing) I had I might be stagnant at some point.  So I have 
had to grow myself and learn from other people (tailors) that were good at tailoring. I have 
had to gain more knowledge by reading books and watching videos on YouTube to grow and 
keep myself in business. You shouldnt expect the knowledge of the past three years to be 
relevant in the present day. I always try to source for knowledge. Participant 21 stated in the 
interview that for every business, there is a skill that is required which is aside from having a 
gift or talent for something. You need to acquire skills which are very important to the 
growth of the business. She emphasised the importance to get the business knowledge 
required to run a business efficiently and effectively. According to Kangasharju and Pekkala 
(2002) and Macpherson and Holt (2007), education is beneficial to the performance of the 
business and it supports the human capital theory. She said going to a culinary school to get 
the education required to run her hospitality business was vital to the growth of the business 
as it gave her an idea of what the business entails.  
Participant 19 said, A lot of business in Nigeria, even the big ones dont have a proper 
structure and it messes up a lot of things. So I would advise all small businesses, there is a 
need for you to have structure, and again there is a need for you to have proper bookkeeping.  
I made a lot of mistakes because I didnt start with that, I used to think a business plan is only 
for when you want to apply for a loan but if I had a business plan earlier, it would actually be 
a guideline to achieving what I am supposed to at this point in time, it would be a pointer, it 
would be a guide. If Im not mistaken, I know about 60% of small businesses in Nigeria that 
do not operate with their business plans, they just write it because they need it for this and 
that. There is a need to have a proper structure, if you have a business plan, you would know 
that your bookkeeping game has to be very high, you need to put down every single thing, 
expenses, fixed costs, you would even know if youre making profits or youre making a loss 
and how long it would take for you to get out of the loss in business and break-even and start 
making a proper profit. 
Having a company structure and a written functional business plan is vital to achieving 
sustainable growth for small businesses (Rauch, 2000; Brink, 2005; Brem, 2008). The 
statement from participants 19 recaps the findings of the study done by Adisa et al. (2014) 
that there is a pronounced poor practice of record-keeping and information management 
among Nigerian small businesses. Adisa et al. (2014) further reiterate the need for proper 
business and management skills stressing that most small business owners in Nigeria have 
formal education required for skills acquisition, but below first degree which isnt entirely 
true. Only 4 respondents out of 33 that participated in this research had a secondary school 
certificate before they started their businesses with the remaining 29 holding bachelors, 
diplomas, and masters degrees. This is equally subjective as it depends solely on the sample 
population considered for each study. This does not negate the importance of basic business 
and management skills for all small business owners who aspire to thrive and have successful 
businesses. Bookkeeping, inventory management, operational skills are vital to small 
business growth. Prior experience is highly advantageous especially if it is within the industry 
the business owner is planning to go into (Rauch, 2000).   
Customer Service 
Another theme that unfolded from the data is customer service having sub-themes of 
customer service relationship, quality service, and referrals. Its often challenging sometimes 
to get new customers which are needed for business growth (Muller et al., 2017). Over 50% 
of the respondents revealed that their main driver for growth is excellent customer service. 
Participant 11 said, Customer service is one of my key things. Its one of the areas I put in 
more effort. If a customer is happy, he would probably refer you to his network. Whenever 
anybody talks about something that you doI think customer service to me is just the key. Its 
one of the things Ive used in the business that has really worked for me because all my 
customers are referrals. 90% of my customers are referrals. My customer service is on 
point. 
Rhee and Bell (2002) described customer service as a set of satisfaction-driven 
activities to enhance the provision of goods or services to meet the expectations of customers. 
Participant 13 said, Before the pandemic, our business relied majorly on referrals  word of 
mouth. (Areni, 2003). When it comes to fashion and beauty, people (customers) rely more on 
word of mouth mostly because of past experiences. If truth be told, there are lots of scams in 
the digital space, and people (customers) are scared of being scammed. The pandemic has 
changed the way things are entirely now. I use Google my business a lot. Customers trust 
Google and I make sure we remind customers to drop online reviews for the business. I am 
learning right now how to use digital marketing properly. Small business owners should 
strive to meet customers requirements and expectations to drive sustainability in business. 
According to Osalor (2016), business growth for small and medium-sized firms 
requires business management skills, creativity, and teamwork with effective customer 
service relations which can be acquired through training. Participant 27 shared an encounter 
with one of her customers during the interview. She said .then, why are you so nice? I 
told her that Im not being nice; Im only providing you with customer service. Youre a 
paying customer so Im respecting that and she was just shocked. I offer a lot of refunds like 
if youre scared about your goods, I tend to offer people refund which a lot of people dont do 
but for me, it builds trust and long term value and that is a lot. This is evident that a lot of 
small business owners dont take customer service seriously but it is at the centre of business 
growth. Ensuring customer satisfaction should be paramount in any small business mission 
statement. As described by Thompson (1985), pleasing customers should be the major goal of 
any enterprise, and gratifying them with sudden quality service should be a delightful gesture 
to every business owner. 
While some business owners are not driven by growth (Bartlett and Bukvic, 2001) as 
they prefer to stay small, they still require management skills to get the business to a 
sustainable level. Some businesses are driven by necessity. Such business owners only 
operate their businesses on a part-time basis as they still have salary jobs and the reason for 
running a business is to have a backup plan in case of an unemployment crisis (Earle and 
Sakova, 2000; Krasniqi, 2014). 
Staff retention 
 Staff retention is another prevalent theme that developed from the data. The majority 
of small business owners in Nigeria seem to be having the same problems of finding loyal 
staff. It seems it is so hard to come by as depicted in the interviews. The resource-based view 
theory puts the role of the firms workforce at the centre of organisational performance.   
Participant 21 said, I have changed my staff a couple of times. There is this culture - once 
you are working for someone, you are just working to get paid. There is no ownership 
culture and that was a bit difficult. I tried to sell my dream to other people (staff). 
Participant 13said, I put myself in their shoes, reason along their lines, and see things from 
their perspectives. I make them understand that we are in it together and if I succeed, they 
succeed too. I try to come to their level. 
There are quite several small business owners that highlighted their concerns about 
staff turnover and how this affects their customer base and business growth. They explained 
how customers feel remorseful whenever they see new faces serving them every time they 
come to their outlets.  This reflects in the findings from Walker et al., (2007) that shine a light 
on the concerns of staff retention by small businesses. The lack of skilled staff is a major 
barrier for small businesses (Muller et al., 2017) and this leads to high staff turnover (Long et 
al., 2014). The findings of this study reveal that staff retention is a driver for growth and 
businesses struggling with frequent staff turnover are bound to notice a drop in their customer 
base. The lack of skilled staff also proliferates small businesses vulnerabilities to external 
changes (Field and Franklin, 2013). There are some suggestions from some of the 
participants that other small business owners could adopt to mitigate the problem. Participant 
19 said, Im not just an employer to them, I try to be more, I give them incentives when we 
celebrate a milestone - maybe some of them that do extremely well get called more for an 
event, sometimes I just distribute things to give them. I give out recharge cards or some of 
them that have other businesses they are doing, I try to support them. It isnt about work all 
the time as I try to be more than an employer to them. I try to be a friend to them. She also 
suggested adding value to the workforce by organising training workshops to increase their 
skills and employability. 
 Participant 22 said, Ive adopted an effective way and structure into my business so 
it has helped me to grow with the business and more so while growing with that business 
because Ive put a very good structure in place and Ive been able to understand a lot of 
things. Understanding how to set goals, how to be empathic because you have staff and you 
need to be able to drive the best from your staff. You need to be a team player. You need to 
oaky your team well because if youre not a team player, youll just find out that staff are 
coming and going and you wont be able to keep them. Im very self-willed and that has also 
helped me to bring out the best in the people I manage and even my business. My self-
willingness has been a key thing in the growth of the business. According to Eweje and 
Bentley (2006), some internal drivers enhance staff retention, some of which are 
compensations, work-life balance, diversity, team building, appreciation, organisational 
culture, development, and career growth. Participant 26 explained in the interview how he 
takes the entire workforce out to socialise for team bonding once a month to rid-out office 
politics within the organisation. This approach correlates with Eweje and Bentleys (2006) 
view to enhancing staff retention. In addition, staff should take initiatives by identifying the 
burden of workload needed to achieve sustainable growth by adopting new techniques or 
using new ideas (OBrien and Carrroll, 2015) to ease the burden on small business owners. 
Character  
Character is another theme developed from the data. This might look out of place in 
the business environment but appears to be quite prevalent in the data. The respondents 
signified the need for consistency, self-motivation, willingness to try (taking risks), patience, 
tolerance, being focused, and having the right attitude that fosters team bonding in the 
workplace.  
Participant 10 stressed the need for consistency and integrity in business. She said, I 
have tried to be consistent. I have tried to get better at what I do and I have tried to give 
better services. There is a narrative that tailors disappoint and dont keep to deadlines. 
Participant 23 also agrees with the notion that you have to be self-driven, to be self-
motivated; you have to let your passion drive you. She also gave an instance, Like in my 
farm - my employees, I call them and I want to know what they think about new things. I want 
to make you feel important because youre important.  Im paying you doesnt make you my 
slave but most people here think that once they are paying you, they own you. If my 
employees call me and tell me they are missing their families and would like to take a day off, 
I would tell them to take a week off. One should have time for their family as we are 
humans. The respondents emphasised the need to be patient with staff and customers and 
even more to tolerate exceptional customers that intentionally want to be troublesome by 
responding with unwarranted excellent customer service. They also accentuate the 
significance of treating staff with mutual respect and appreciation to enhance team bonding, 
production, and organisational performance. 
Leadership 
Another theme that was drawn from the data analysis is leadership. Previous literature 
has established a strong correlation between leadership and business growth over the years.  
Participant 3 shared his view on the importance of being a good leader in the 
workplace.  He said, I think discipline and the grace of God, and also responsibility when it 
comes to starting a business is important as well as leadership. A business owner should be 
in his/her place of business at the right time, doing the right thing.  As a leader when you 
make promises, remember to always fulfil them. I also make sure they receive their salaries 
at the end of each month unfailingly as most organisations dont do that. At times, managers 
dont know everything  even some staffs correct me when we have meetings on how to 
achieve progress. When I say something wrong during my calculations, they even put me 
right. Small business owners ought to build capacity and acquire leadership skills to be able 
to stir their workforce by appreciating their constructive opinions and ensuring adequate 
communication as well. 
According to Olushina (2017), the words and actions of a leader are meant to 
motivate the employees as it has a huge impact on the commitment of employees. Gwavuya 
(2011) holds the view that leadership and management are closely related as one cant lead 
without managing nor can one manage without being a good leader. According to Coric et al. 
(2011), small business owners need to be creative with good leadership skills and operational 
skills in managing conflicts to achieve sustainable business growth. Participant 11 also added 
that empathy towards staff shows signs of good leadership especially when they are going 
through crises. He said, When they share their problem with me, I tell them, ok, is that the 
problem? This is what I can do for you. I can give you a loan, but you have to pay it back. Ill 
give you a structure on how to pay back. I cover up for them when they are in financial crisis 
because they usually run into financial crisis. He asserted that most staff will emulate the 
managers behaviour and in turn, this improves the organisational performance. This mirrors 
the view put forward by Mat (2008) that followers would usually imitate the acts of the 
leader.  
Social media 
With the emergence of different social media platforms (Ojukwu, 2006), it is no 
surprise that social media has emerged as a useful effective marketing tool for small 
businesses in Nigeria and the rest of Africa. In recent times, social media as part of digital 
technology has proven to be a cost-effective tool for small businesses to grow their customer 
base. It allows small businesses to access prospective international clients without having a 
physical unit in different countries (Hamburg et al., 2019). Participant 1 explained how the 
Instagram social media app has been pivotal in her business operations. She said, To keep 
the business afloat, we use social media. We try to create content. We try to get businesses 
from our online activities. Basically, most of the businesses I have gotten are via my online 
activities. This is quite evident in literature that social media platforms have revolutionised 
the way the business environment is being operated (Jagongo and Kinyua, 2013). About 95% 
of the respondents said they have access to wider audiences and new markets on a global 
scale via social media marketing. While this is a good report, it is important to distinguish 
between using social media for generic purposes and seeking business opportunities with the 
use of social media to aid the effective adoption of digital technology into the business 
growth process (Hamburg et al., 2019). 
Participant 21 said her business thrives on feedback recommendations from 
customers. She said, So I having been riding on (relying on for marketing) friends, 
families, word of mouth, and social media marketing. I am putting myself out there  
marketing and taking feedbacks and then using the feedback to work on. So feedback is very 
important for me because it helps me know what the customer is thinking (expectations) or 
what they want (requirements) and then also how much feedback I am getting from a certain 
number of people. This helps to drive what new thing (product) I am coming up with or what 
direction the business is going  supposed to go at a certain point in time (Schoonjans et al., 
2013). This correlates with Zontanos and Andersons (2004) perspective that social media 
help develop the worthiness of small businesses by increasing their customer contacts and 
supplier networks, merging resources and funding thereby promoting innovation and strategic 
business to business partnerships.  
Participant 22 explained how social media has helped change the face value of her 
business, given it an active online presence, and opened opportunities to do business with 
other businesses (Grabher and Stark, 1997; Foreman-Peck et al., 2006). She said, When we 
started the online portal, I used to have retail outlets but I found out that a lot of people use 
phones now. Because of the advent of social media on phones, I saw that business was 
thriving more for the online thing. I close up the retail outlet and we started the online 
business. I do a lot of advertorials, we have a social media presence, we get a lot of referrals 
because when people patronise us because its an online business. We get a lot of referrals 
because of the kind of consistency in quality, goods, and services that we offer. This affirms 
the notion of Mangold and Faulds (2009) that social media aid businesses in connecting and 
engaging with their customers and potential clients to create a virtual community that is 
unique to them. 
Innovation 
Innovation has always been synonymous with growth but not exactly prevalent with 
micro-sized businesses are they are usually marginalised in the economy (Okpara, 2011) but 
the emergence of the pandemic has made it necessary for all small business owners to be 
innovative. According to Chege and Wang (2020), innovation and sustainable management 
practices in small businesses are now more apropos in the recent context of a competitive 
business environment that is progressive towards sustainable global development. The need 
to bring out their creativity and innovative ideas to combat the changes in the marketplace are 
now more than ever very necessary for the survival of most micro-sized and small-sized 
enterprises. Below is a response from one of the respondents that took part in the research to 
a question: factors and challenges inhibiting business growth. 
Participant 21 said, right now, I am trying to find what is working for the business at 
the moment. I cant exactly say this is the model I have for my business. Right now, I am just 
going through the motions and finding what works at every particular time, and then finally I 
find a niche and stick with it. But right now, I am still at the stage where I am trying to find 
what works and who my market audience is because covid19 has thrown up a lot. When this 
started, it was supposed to cater to a particular set of people, but now those people are no 
longer where they should be. Everybody is working from home and so the business is trying 
to find how to be relevant at this time. 
And here is another response from another respondent to the same question: 
Participant 13said, so because of our new normal (pandemic), people want to learn 
more rather than paying for the service to be done. So looking at the future right now, I need 
to change the direction of the business. So I have to organise training for people who want to 
learn which is very important. So rather than make it a full salon, I would have a salon that is 
on the side and do more of the training  that way, I can expand better. 
The two responses above depict two types of growth intentions and prompt responses 
to market changes. One has put their business on hold to evaluate the market situation and 
probably wait out the duration period of the pandemic while another business owner has risen 
to the challenge with innovation to twitch his business delivery to the present customers 
expectations.  According to Song et al. (2008), innovation should be market-focused while 
keeping in mind the requirements and expectations of your customers.  
Participant 10 shares the view of why small business owners should be creative and 
innovative to stay relevant in business. She said, I try to be innovative as well. At times, I 
can work on a collection and it goes boom with clients loving it. I try not to remain in that 
box; I try to be innovative and try new things and get creative. I try to study my audience to 
know what they might like. Participant 2 also supported this opinion which mirrors the 
proposition by Eggers et al., (2013). He said, Hence why I said you have to stay with the 
trends. Sometimes, you need to even go further to find things that would be in trend much 
later (Brink, 2005)  giving you an edge to be ahead. Bringing in products ahead of other 
competitors gives you the advantage to make more profits. Authors in previous studies hold 
this view as well affirming the use of innovation to create ideas to enhance business growth 
(Brem, 2008, Rauch, 2000). 
Other themes 
 Few participants raise the concerns of stereotypes within the workplace and the 
business environment. Gender-based stereotypes and workplace stereotypes. Participants 1 
and 19 highlighted the issues of gender-based stereotypes directly - especially to women 
within the events and entertainment industry. Women are tagged as corporate escorts and few 
prospective clients tend to include the clauses as terms of agreement for awarding contracts. 
Another theme that unfolded was mental barriers. 
Participant 1 said, Ok. Stereotypes affecting the organisers are stories or major perceptions 
of organisers not empowering the pageant models through pageantry. Originally the pageant 
industry is an empowerment sector, but as it is the stereotype that is trending says that the 
industry no longer empowers the participants but rather exploits them.  So that also breeds 
another stereotype which says that the participants are being seen as executive prostitutes, 
something like that. So majorly, beauty queens are supposed to be adored and respected in 
society but there is this stereotype that goes around that beauty queens are involved in some 
of this stuff (executive prostitutes or escorts) that I just mentioned. So a lot of people have 
these negative thoughts about the industry and then it has stopped a couple of people from 
participating or being part of the industry.  So these are some of the challenges we are facing 
and we are trying to change the perceptions and see how the pageant industry can be 
respected and appreciated here in our country.   
Participant 19 said, That misconception is one thing Im still battling with right now that 
even when they understand what you are trying to say, they are like okay we understand. 
People tend to because I deal mainly with females, the people that work for me, my staff are 
mostly girls, and we have a lot of sexual advances that are sometimes tied to me getting some 
jobs. Your client sometimes would require that you promise you are going to give them a 
certain number of girls to sleep with before you get the job and again even when they dont 
come out openly to request for such they imply it in some way. Sometimes they make moves 
on the girls even while they are working. It discourages me a lot. When I started the branch 
in Abuja here, the more you go into the places that are not developed, the more this 
particular challenge is. So when I got here, some persons told me outrightly that if you are 
not going to provide this kind of services like escort or leaving your girls after work for or 
permitting them to sleep with men - then I would not survive here in this place. 
Both participants affirm that the narrative is quite prevalent in the events and 
entertainment industry in Nigeria and this affects business growth as well. Workplace 
stereotypes intertwined with ethnicity profiling also unfolded from the data. 
Participant 7 said, Yes, they say they do not appreciate your tribe and as such cant work 
with you next time. Another one is gender bias. Some set of people would actually prefer the 
opposite sex to work on them than same-sex. They believe the opposite sex would do a better 
job than the same sex. Most female clients actually believe - especially for makeup artistry 
and hairstyling  they believe males would do a better job than females. They did say, I like 
your work, but I would prefer a male colleague of yours to come to wear makeup for me. I 
did ask why and they simply reply that it is their preference. 
 The mental barrier was also another theme that unfolded from the data. It is quite 
unprecedented for Africans to own up to mental health as the cultural norm somewhat 
negates the concept of mental health hence why the discussion isnt prevalent in studies done 
in African countries.  
Participant 7 said, Mental barrier is a big issue. It happens along the line when you suddenly 
break down and nothing interests you anymore. It is like you just dont know what you are 
doing.  Whatever profession you are into, you just have this block from inside. For example, 
if I were to talk about myself. There was a time I just didnt know what I was doing anymore. 
I wasnt enjoying what I was doing. I just simply find my products or equipment irritating. It 
is just crazy because at that time, even if you get a job, you just dont want to go and get the 
job done or have anything to do with your business. 
She further explains, At first, I thought it was laziness but over time, I have realised it was 
meant to happen. So I take a break from going to the studio or wherever I have my equipment 
because I just dont want to see them. I avoid going anywhere there is anything related to the 
profession. I simply do other things I find interesting. I go out, eat, or hang out with friends. 
In such instances, I wont be well because I am quite active normally  I go to the studio 
Mondays to Fridays. I also log out of social media (business Instagram account). I simply do 
other fun things.  
 This reiterates that small business owners should be mindful of their mental health 
and state of well-being. Efficient business practice and management require business owners 
with sound and healthy mental capacity. 
4.4.4 Summary of themes 
 Concluding the themes that unfolded from the data, it is imperative to state that, 
business and management skills are the most important driver for growth for small businesses 
in Nigeria particularly micro and small-sized enterprises (MSEs). Other themes that unfolded 
such as customer service, character, leadership, social media, and innovation are equally 
important to achieving sustainable business growth as well. 
 Revisiting the objectives of the research, it is important to pinpoint the interpretation 
of the underlying factors in the data. The objectives of this research were to examine the 
factors that influence business growth and development for small businesses in one part and 
also to examine the barriers to sustainable business growth and development in another part, 
and lastly, to introduce a framework based on existing models to improve business growth 
and development. 
 From the findings of this study, it is evident that FSu (Start-ups) micro-sized 
businesses had more recorded barriers (access to finance, difficulty in getting loyal staffs, 
lack of funding for equipment procurement, electricity, taxation, unfavourable government 
policies, lack of business support from the government, marketing, staff retention, lack of 
infrastructures and basic amenities, etc.) to growth that they were facing in their respective 
businesses. FM (Mature firms) small-sized businesses had more recorded drivers (business 
knowledge, business structure, business plan, bookkeeping, inventory management, 
operational skills, customer service relationship, quality service, and products, consistency, 
willingness to take risk, self-motivation, knowledge about taxation, empathy towards staffs, 
leadership, social media, referrals, expansion, investments, business to business partnerships, 
etc.) to growth for the success in their respective businesses and FSu (Start-ups) small-sized 
businesses grew rapidly than other small businesses. 
 In other to achieve the objectives of this study, attention is drawn to the transition 
period for FM (Mature firms) small-sized businesses, from when they started as micro-sized 
businesses. Findings from this study show that FM small businesses have been able to 
mitigate some of the prevalent barriers to growth plaguing micro-sized businesses. 
 For lack of business support from the government in form of training, workshops, or 
bad policies, small-sized businesses have acquired the necessary industry-specific business 
knowledge to stay afloat and relevant within their industry. They also have proper structure 
(mission statement, vision, business plan, and operations) in business to guide them when 
considering business opportunities or mitigation during crises. 
 For lack of stable electricity, small-sized businesses have sorted to the use of alternate 
power generation and blended it into their cost management to keep the business growing. 
 For taxation, a lot of micro-sized businesses do not know about taxation  what to pay 
and when to pay. Small-sized businesses have been able to reduce overhead costs stemming 
from tax payment by educating themselves and seeking correct information on the 
enumeration of taxation in Nigeria either at the federal level, state, or local government level. 
 For marketing, the majority of micro-sized businesses rely on word-of-mouth referrals 
with little or no online presence but small-sized businesses have been able to invest in digital 
marketing by using social media platforms and doing frequent ads/promos to reach wider 
audiences to increase their customer base and access new markets. 
 Especially with the emergence of the covid19, the market space has become highly 
competitive and most micro-sized businesses without the essential drivers for growth are 
struggling. Findings of this study reveal that most FM small-sized businesses and FSu small-
sized businesses have resorted to innovative measures to stride through the new normal and 
re-emerge post-pandemic as stronger and efficient goods/service providers. 
 The growth drivers deduced from the transition period of growth for the FM and FSu 
small-sized businesses are synthesised in the framework introduced in this study.  
4.4.5 Interview Questions 
Question 1 
Firms characteristics 
Interview question 1a addressed the inquiry of firm age for the small businesses that 
were considered for this study. There were two categories identified from the study; start-ups 
who had been operating between 0-3years and mature firms who had been in business for 
over 4years. 
Table 4e: Showing the aggregate of Start-up firms (FSu) to Mature firms (FM) 
Micro-sized businesses Small-sized businesses 
Participant 1- FSu1 Participant 5  FM2  Participant 14  FSu7 Participant 4  FM1  
Participant 2- FSu2 Participant 6  FM3 Participant 16  FSu8 Participant 11  FM5  
Participant 3  FSu3 Participant 9  FM4  Participant 12  FM6 
Participant 7  FSu4 Participant 13  FM7  Participant 15  FM8 
Participant 8  FSu5 Participant 33  
 Participant 19  FM9 
Participant 10  FSu6   Participant 22  FM10 
Participant 17  FSu9   Participant 23  FM11 
Participant 18  FSu10   Participant 24  FM12 
Participant 20  FSu11   Participant 26  FM13 
Participant 21  FSu12   Participant 29  FM14 
Participant 25  FSu13   Participant 30  FM15 
Participant 27  FSu14   Participant 31  FM16 
Participant 28  FSu15   Participant 32  FM17 
 From table 4e, two start-up firms (participants 14 & 16) have grown rapidly to the 
size of a small-sized enterprise within the span of 0-3years. Complementary to the rapid 
growth of the two start-ups in the healthcare and Marketing/communication sector, 
participant 14 explained during the interview that he had worked for over five years in the 
same industry before starting the business. From the findings of this study, there is something 
synonymous with both start-ups (participants 14 &16) who have grown rapidly. They both 
run a partnership business. This depicts that partnership in business influences rapid growth 
for small businesses.  
 From the findings of this research, two start-ups grew rapidly within the span of 
3years from micro-sized to small-sized businesses. Gibrats law suggests that the size of a 
firm is not relevant to the rate of business growth but another study (Barkham et al., 1996) 
argues and gives evidence that some small businesses grow rapidly than large businesses, 
especially start-ups (Farinas and Moreno, 1997) which reflects the findings of this study. 
Figure 4b: Chart showing the business categories of research participants. 
PARTICIPANT 1
PARTICIPANT 2
PARTICIPANT 3
PARTICIPANT 4
PARTICIPANT 5
PARTICIPANT 6
PARTICIPANT 7
PARTICIPANT 8
PARTICIPANT 9
PARTICIPANT 10
PARTICIPANT 11
PARTICIPANT 12
PARTICIPANT 13
PARTICIPANT 14
PARTICIPANT 15
PARTICIPANT 16
PARTICIPANT 17
PARTICIPANT 18
PATICIPANT 19
PARTICIPANT 20
PARTICIPANT 21
PARTICIPANT 22
PARTICIPANT 23
PARTICIPANT 24
PARTICIPANT 25
PARTICIPANT 26
PARTICIPANT 27
PARTICIPANT 28
PARTICIPANT 29
PARTICIPANT 30
PARTICIPANT 31
PARTICIPANT 32
PARTICIPANT 33
Participants business categories
Micro-sized businesses Small-sized businesses Start-ups Mature firms
We also notice four mature firms (participants 5, 6, 9 & 13) that have stayed within 
the level of a micro-sized enterprise for more than 4years. Participant 5 is in the auto care 
repair industry and he explained during the interview the limitations within his industry in 
Nigeria. The auto care industry isnt standardised and staff turnover is high as the employee 
orientation is premised on apprenticeships and most employees tend to leave to start their 
businesses before or at the turn of five years in employment. Another factor inhibiting 
expansion for his firm is the lack of funds to acquire equipment as most mechanical types of 
equipment are capital intensive.  
Participants 6 and 9 are both in the fashion industry. Similarities between both 
business owners point to divided attention. Both entrepreneurs have delved into other 
businesses and the time and revenue generated from the first businesses are being used to 
establish other businesses hence the lean growth for both businesses. Both businesses have 
adopted a no-loan policy and opted to grow organically. They both have issues of difficulty 
in getting loyal staff. They both have management work experience which interprets that they 
have the tendencies to grow but the aforementioned factors are inhibiting their business 
growth.  
Participant 4 also adopted a no-loan policy but for different reasons. He emphasised 
the importance for small business owners to operate within their capabilities and a financial 
reserve. He said, Our policy has been to stay lean and grow organically. Taking a bank loan 
hasnt been in my thoughts or in the works. We have the access and weve been invited to 
take the loans. But it is not part of our model. That is one, and then secondly, there is also a 
policy more like a standard within me. I would say, it is something not good for business- 
expanding too rapidly is not good for business and my abilities also count, especially my skill 
setI am not considering a loan yet, but I think my capacity to manage where we are  just 
match each other.  While it is evident from the literature that some businesses dont aspire 
to grow to pass the success phase as depicted in Churchill and Lewiss model stage III-
success disengagement (see table 2d). Participant 4 reiterated that the no-loan policy fits 
into his business model of growing organically and also the desire to leave expansion out of 
the equation as he is comfortable with the business's stable customer base, and its 
achievements. He said, I would say that right now where we are  I am not bothered about 
competition  not that it doesnt exist. It seems ok where we are. We seem to have created a 
niche. We have our clients coming in and we deal with them based on that. There are two 
clauses to draw from this perspective. Firstly, a no-loan policy could either be a barrier or a 
driver to business growth, and secondly, the owners orientation does have a significant effect 
on business growth (Eggers et al., 2013). To elaborate, a no-loan policy could be a driver to 
business growth relative to the reason given by the participant. It aids organic growth and 
helps the business stay debt-free but on the contrary, it could also be a barrier to growth. 
Avoiding business loans would disrupt expansion in the situation where the business does not 
have the financial capacity to do so but possess the required credit profile to access a business 
loan. This decision as seen in this instance is solely dependent on the orientation of the owner 
and what he deemed necessary for the business irrespective of business performance or other 
determining factors. 
According to the findings of the study done by Brixiova et al. (2020), the paucity of 
liquidity isnt the major inhibitor to accessing finance for small businesses in Africa but 
rather the unavailability of required collaterals and the challenges that arises in the process of 
recovery when there is a default. This poses a great concern as most small business owners 
are discouraged from considering bank loans though the banks have sufficient liquidity to 
corroborate the statements from policymakers and government parastatals regarding the 
availability of funding for small businesses in Africa.  
The table (see table 4e) reveals that most of the start-up firms considered in this study 
are micro-sized businesses and mature firms are small-sized businesses. This agrees with 
Jovanovics model (1982) that connotes progressive growth. Interview question 1b addressed 
the inquiry of the firms size to the employee workforce. Out of 33 participants, 13 were 
small-sized businesses with a workforce of 10 employees, and above and 20 were micro-
sized businesses with a workforce of 0-9 employees. The findings of this study reveal that 4 
out of the 13 small-sized businesses were in the fashion industry (see table 4b). 
According to Bartlett and Bukvic (2001, p.181), the striking points of internal barriers 
are likely to vary with the size of the firm. This suggestion though tagged as likely is 
subjective. Findings in this study reveal that internal barriers do not vary with the size of the 
firm. Participants 6 and 9 are micro-sized mature businesses and they both have an internal 
barrier of difficulty in finding loyal staff but so does participant 11 which is a small-sized 
business. 
Interview question 1c addressed the inquiry of the sector to which the businesses 
belonged according to the CAC classification of businesses in Nigeria. 13 were in the fashion 
industry, 6 were in the events and entertainment industry, 4 were in the hospitality and foods 
processing industry, 2 were from the medical and health care sector and 1 each from 
agricultural, auto care repair, manufacturing, logistics, marketing, and facility management, 
ICT and finance. 
Interview questions 1a, 1b, and 1c were implored to inquire about the characteristics 
of the firms that participated in this research to answer the first research question. 
Question 2 
Entrepreneurs characteristics 
Interview question 2a addressed the inquiry of the level of education of the participants 
that participated in this research. Out of 33 respondents, 6 were masters degree holders, 18 
held bachelors, 5 had a diploma and 4 had secondary school certificates before they started 
their businesses.  
Findings reflect that level of education of the business owner does not have a significant 
impact on the rate of business growth of small businesses. Participants 11 and 19 had 
secondary school certificates before starting their businesses while participant 24 had a 
masters degree before starting his business and they have all grown progressively from 
micro-sized to small-sized businesses. This notion might be subjective as the rate of growth 
could defer to the sector or industry to which the business belongs. Contrary to the 
suggestions of the studies put forward by Adesua-Lincoln (2011) that the entrepreneurs 
educational background poses a huge influence on business growth. This finding correlates 
with the assertion of Didonet et al., (2012), that educated entrepreneurs with the required 
skills and technical knowledge of their business sector achieve a high growth rate. 
Interview question 2b addressed the inquiry of the brief work experience of owners 
before starting their businesses. The majority of the respondents had work experience related 
to the business venture they were operating. Some had previous human resource (HR) and 
customer service experience which was pivotal in running their day-to-day business 
operations while few had no prior work experience at all. This agrees with the suggestions 
put forward by Xheneti and Bartlett (2012), that business performance is influenced by 
managerial skills particularly human resource skills.  Some of the few respondents enrolled 
for short courses to learn the craft or trade before venturing into the business. All the business 
owners in the events and catering services explained that they had to go to culinary schools to 
learn before starting the business. The same option goes for all the business owners in the 
fashion industry as well. 
Out of the 33 small business owners that participated in this study, findings from this 
research reveal that 15 business owners had work experience that wasnt related to their line 
of business, 11 business owners had work experience related to their line of business, 4 
business owners had previous work experience from family-owned businesses and 3 business 
owners had no prior work experience at all. Out of 18 mature small businesses owned by 
business owners that participated in this research, 17 of them either had work experience 
related to their businesses or work experience in management that was essential to their 
business growth which correlates with the findings of the study conducted by Lee and Tsang 
(2001) and Capelleras and Rabetino (2008) that business owners experience and business 
growth have a significant positive relationship. 
Interview questions 2c addressed the inquiry about what motivated the business owners to 
start their businesses. The responses revealed that self-motivation to be independent and 
motivated by passion for the business had the highest frequencies. Others were either 
motivated by friends or parents or perhaps through experience. 
Table 4f: Showing what inspired the entrepreneurs to start their businesses. 
Source of Inspiration /Motivation Frequency  
Selfmotivated to be independent 9 
Selfmotivated to meet a personal need 2 
Motivated by Passion 10 
Motivated by Parents 3 
Motivated by Friends 2 
Motivated through Experience 3 
Motivated through concern for the profession  1 
Finding a niche in the market 3 
Findings from this study reveal that 10 business owners were motivated by their 
passion for the business. 9 business owners were selfmotivated by their desire and aspiration 
to be independent while 2 others were selfmotivated to fix and meet a personal need. 3 
business owners were motivated by their parents and 3other business owners were also 
motivated by their friends. 3 business owners were motivated through experience while one 
business was motivated through her concern for the stereotype and biases targeted at the 
profession of tailors. 3 other business owners simply found a niche in the market and 
capitalised on it to establish a lucrative business. 
Table 4g: Showing the entrepreneurs typologies according to Dunkelberg and Cooper. 
Dunkelberg and Coopers Classification Small business owners (MSEs)/Participants No 
Craftsman oriented 1, 2, 5, 7, 15, 17, 20, 31 
Independence oriented 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12,13, 18, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 30, 32 
Growth oriented  8, 11, 14, 16, 19, 23, 25, 26, 27, 33 
Interview questions 2a, 2b, and 2c were implored to deduce the characteristics of the 
small business owners and answer the second research question. From the findings of this 
study, it is evident that small business owners are more independent oriented and this is 
relative to the sample population. 
Figure 4c: Pie chart showing the aggregate of entrepreneurs classification.  
Dunkelberg and Cooper's Classification
Craftsman Oriented Independence Oriented Growth Oriented
Question 3 
Experience & other determining factors 
Interview question 3 addressed the prevalent barriers to sustaining growth for micro 
and small-sized businesses in Nigeria. The majority of the respondents have reasserted that 
access to finance remains the greatest barrier to sustainable growth for micro and small-sized 
businesses in Nigeria. These findings confirm that financial barriers are the most detrimental 
to business growth for micro-sized and small-sized businesses in Nigeria as seen in the 
literature (Moses and Adebisi, 2013). About 90% of the respondents said they started their 
businesses either with personal savings, money given to them by their parents, or loans from 
family and friends which correlates with previous studies (Klein, 2014; Brush, 1990).  
Participant 7 explained in her interview that microfinance banks were demanding 
outrageous collateral from her to secure a business loan of #1,000,000 naira. She was 
expected to provide two guarantors earning about #500,000 naira monthly and her school 
certificate. Upon approval, she was expected to start repayment just three months into the 
loan and if she doesnt keep up with the repayments, the direct debits will be charged to her 
guarantors accounts. This experience confirms the findings of Adesua-Lincoln (2011) and 
Mambula (2002) that development banks consider small businesses as high risk and they 
demand outrageous collaterals to secure business loans. The majority of new entry small 
businesses do not have access to start-up loans as banks only borrow money to mature 
businesses with good credit profiles. Start-ups are seen as high risks and as such not 
creditworthy. Entrepreneurs with no credit-worthy profile or savings tend to abandon their 
lucrative ideas (Moses and Adebisi, 2013) rather than face the stringent lending policies from 
financial institutions (Ishak et al., 2012).  
The majority of the respondents have reservations about bank loans and they tend not 
to consider it at all. About 40% of the respondent have a no-loan policy in their 
organisational business model and they prefer to grow lean and organically by making 
profits and re-investing back into the business. There are no business support services from 
the government to help small businesses thrive in the country. Unfavourable and bad 
government policies are one of the major barriers plaguing small businesses in Nigeria 
especially businesses that provide services. Participants 4, 6, and 8 explained the drastic 
effects of inconsistent policies of the federal government on micro and small-sized businesses 
in Nigeria. There is no clarity in the enumeration of tax payments either at the state or local 
level. The majority of small businesses dont know what is being taxed and how much is 
being taxed nor do they know if they are meant to be paying taxes as small businesses or not 
depending on their annual revenue. There is constant harassment from the officials of the 
local and state government on small businesses day-to-day operations. Local government 
introduces incessantly, different levies to small businesses, and refusal to pay would either 
lead to violence or complete shutdown of business outlets.  
There is no effective means of communication of policies from the government to 
small businesses in Nigeria. There is a governing body called SMEDAN (small and medium-
sized enterprises development agency of Nigeria) overseeing the affairs of micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises in Nigeria and a quarter of the respondents are not even aware of 
such organisation and another half believe they are just figureheads doing absolutely 
nothing for the majority of small businesses in Nigeria. The government agencies overseeing 
credit channels created to cater to small businesses are being overrun by bureaucracy, 
partisan, and paternalism ridden in chronic corruption. Participant 22 said, Policies are 
formed by the government but theres no consistency in the policy. It affects a whole lot of the 
businesses as well because small businesses especially are closing down because all these 
things just throw instability to our structure as well. Once their (government) policies are not 
consistent and not well formulated, its going to affect our structure of business. About 10% 
of the respondents who are aware of the organisation believe they are somewhat partisan in 
their role executions and their operations are more or less limited to the federal capital 
territory. Most of the small businesses domiciled in other states of the country arent aware of 
the organisation or they do, but believe they are political instruments serving the will of 
politicians.  
Small businesses in the fashion and beauty industry (participants 2, 6, 7, and 9) 
complain of fluctuating foreign exchange of dollar rate and inaccessibility to official central 
bank rates for business purposes as most of their goods are imported into the country and they 
are forced to resort to using the black market to source for dollars which are way higher than 
the central bank official rate. The fluctuations lead to huge overhead costs which they 
eventually transfer to their respective customers nationwide. Aside from the fluctuations of 
foreign exchange, there are also the issues of outrageous custom duties on imported goods in 
which there are no local substitutes.  
Participant 6 in her interview points to the lack of fabric manufacturing factories in 
Nigeria. This necessitates the need to import fabrics because Nigerians are highly social-able 
people and they love to party. She further explained how she has pitched the idea of 
opening a local factory in Nigeria to her foreign suppliers and how theyve shrugged it off by 
saying the cost of production in Nigeria is extremely high.  
Over 80% of the respondents mentioned that the lack of stable electricity is a huge 
barrier to the productivity and growth of small businesses in Nigeria. Lack of stable 
electricity supply has resulted in a deficiency in production and an increase in the market 
price of goods and services across the nation. There are no basic amenities and infrastructures 
in the country. The roads are bad and logistics charge high rates for their services to other 
businesses as they have to navigate their way around the rugged terrains to get goods 
delivered.  
Other prevalent barriers were internal factors such as difficulty in finding loyal staff 
or finding skilled workers. Participants 25 and 26 emphasised that most graduates lack 
practical skills and expertise with only theoretical knowledge to showcase with their 
certificates. And more so, they demand high salaries even after it is evident they would need 
essential training in other to function properly in the role they are applying for. 
 Participants 8, 11, 13, 16, 19, 21, 22, 26, and 27 expressly stress the significance of 
business structure and understanding the business and the marketplace as this is vital to 
business growth. This reflects the nuances of Churchill and Lewiss model (1983) to aid 
business owners in having a clear understanding of the business structure and evaluating the 
challenges that prompt up in business management.  
Participant 6 explained in the interview that one of her challenges is being unable to 
delegate certain roles to her employees. Gray (1990) suggested that the stout intent of some 
business owners to keep personal control and business self-sufficiency has been deduced to 
be one of the main inhibiting elements to their rate of business growth. Participant 7 talked 
about mental barriers or mental health and their role as a barrier in business management. 
She said it triggers a mental shutdown and the zeal to continue running the business is 
momentarily lost. While some small business owners can recover fully back from a mental 
breakdown, some dont recover and it leads to business failure and the entire closure of such 
businesses.  
Question 4 
Interview question 4 is implored to deduce the drivers for growth for small businesses in 
Nigeria. The majority of the respondents have firmly asserted the need to be consistent, 
focused, and have the right attitude either to employees or customers.  
The majority of the mature small businesses that participated in this study reiterated the 
significance of business and management skills to the growth of their businesses. 
Bookkeeping, stock taking, inventory management, and operational skills are vital skills set 
needed by every small business owner to achieve sustainable business growth. This reflects 
the findings of previous studies (Ejemobi, 2013; Adisa et al., 2014) that most small business 
owners in Nigeria dont prioritise keeping records of their business operations. It makes it 
difficult to separate capital, operational cost, and profit (Onaolapo et al., 2011; Olatunji 
2013).  
Over 95% of the respondents emphasised the use of social media as an effective 
marketing tool that is essential to access new markets and increase customer base. 
Participants 10 and 25 emphasised the importance of quality products and services to 
enhance customer retention. Participant 10 stated that she has prided herself on the quality of 
her brand to increase her customer base. She also keeps a keen interest in meeting up with 
timeframes given to clients to correct the negative narrative peculiar to her business sector. 
Participant 25 said he ensures the quality of every pizza, roll, or sandwich sold in his outlet as 
his brand is based on quality and all his customers know this. This reflects the assertion by 
Ojukwu (2006) that quality products and services are essential for customer retention and 
achieving sustainable business growth.  Participants 11, 19, and 26 explained that appropriate 
training of employees has been one of the major drivers of growth for their businesses.  
Participant 11 said it helps deliver good customer relations that enhance the growth of his 
customer base. Participant 19 said it helped in delivering quality and professional customer 
service to her clients. This agrees with the suggestion of Foreman-Peck et al. (2006) and 
Cosh et al. (2000) that fostering skills set and knowledge specific to each business and 
investing in the appropriate training of staff (Kirby, 1990; Ipinnaiye et al., 2017) enables 
business growth. Participant 32 explained that one of her growth drivers is using networks at 
parties to increase her access to prospective clients and networks to enhance referrals for her 
business. This perspective correlates with the notion of Greenberg et al. (2018) that 
communication networks integrate people and businesses to gain access to essential contacts 
in other to achieve competitive advantage.  
Participant 26 highlights the need to eliminate workplace politics as this has been a driver 
for growth in his business. It has encouraged staff bonding and enhanced job execution and 
maximise delivery. This reflects the resource-based view theory that supports the harnessing 
of organisational capabilities to achieve competitive advantage. He breaks the fuss and sells 
the vision of the company to the entire team by encouraging time-outs once a month when all 
members of the workforce go out together to socialise. This standard mirrors the suggestion 
by Trau (1996) that businesses tend to grow in line with management objectives and 
organisational behaviour.  
Participant 23 emphasised the importance of product value creation in her business. She 
explained that product value creation has been a growth driver to mitigate wastage, increase 
productivity, and capacity building for her business. This replicates value creations for firms 
as put forward by Makadok (2001), derived from two complementary mechanisms which are 
resource picking and capacity building.  
Question 5 
Interview question 5 was implored to evaluate the managerial capabilities of the small 
business owners and capture the likely recommendations for small businesses struggling with 
their business operations to achieve sustainable business growth. 
 Findings show that only a few of the respondents have the expected business and 
management skills required to efficiently run a business and achieve sustainable growth. The 
majority of the respondents lack the business knowledge needed to run their businesses. 
Some owned up to the drawbacks and reiterate their intentions to enrol on courses to educate 
their personnel and make them better managers while some were completely oblivious to the 
fact that they lack the necessary business skills for growth. 
 The few respondents who had the necessary skills, the majority of who transited from 
HR or customer service relations roles within financial institutions gave quite stringent 
insights on the essentials to sustainable business growth in Nigeria. They emphasised the 
need for structure in business and management operational skills to handle day-to-day 
transactions. They also highlighted the need for soft skills  patience, and empathy towards 
staff to build a workforce that is efficient to improve business performance. They stressed the 
need to encourage a good owner-employee relationship to enhance productivity and quality 
of goods and services.    
 Respondents also emphasised the need for the government to get rid of partisan 
normalities and corrupt measures within private parastatal or public services catering to micro 
and small-sized businesses in Nigeria. This is participant 22 response to a question of how 
easy and accessible it is to secure a government loan for small businesses in Nigeria, Well, 
there are, but its difficult to get one, honestly. They would rather give it to people they know 
than the common person who is going to do something genuine. Its unlikely you get one 
honestly; Ill be very truthful with you. A lot of people make applications, maybe you can say 
the applications are like a hundred people make an application, maybe ten are getting it. So, 
you see that theres not much use with goingso a lot of peopleit's very difficult to get a 
start-up loan in Nigeria. They stressed the urgency to regulate the inconsistency in 
policymaking either by the state or local government. Changes in policies or legislation 
influence the market dimensions with a huge impact on small businesses (Foreman-peck et al, 
2006). 
One of the respondents stated, It would be more helpful if banks can set up a 
management structure for small businesses to help them buy organising training and 
workshops to prepare young entrepreneurs better for business. They should also offer 
feasible repayment plans, perhaps repayments should commence after 6 months of securing 
business loans with an overall repayment of up to three years with a single-digit interest rate. 
This would allow businesses to thrive and a lot of things would normalise. But the former is 
the case. The government should endear to change the legislation to effect reforms that 
would change the business environment and earn the trust of micro-sized and small-sized 
enterprises. The majority of small businesses have lost the trust and confidence in the 
government and this ought not to be. 
 It is imperative to note that the themes developed in this study were grounded in data 
to conform to the processes and guidelines for conducting thematic analysis using a grounded 
theory-based approach in qualitative studies. Table 4d was used in the last phase of analysis 
to develop the thematic map as seen below.  
Thematic Map of Data Analysis. 
            The first two objectives of this study were to examine the factors that influence 
(firms characteristics, owners characteristics) business growth and the barriers to 
sustainable business growth and development for small businesses. The third objective was to 
Growth 
MSEs Owner 
Drivers  
Character 
Innovation 
Staff 
Retention 
Customer 
Service 
Expansion 
Government policies 
Stereotypes 
Experience 
Leadership 
Recruitment 
Gender based/Work 
Business & 
Management 
skills 
Creativity 
Incentives 
Staff Turnover 
Multiple taxes 
Bad policies 
Access to Finance 
Barriers Infrastructure 
and Facilities 
Custom duties 
Organically 
Empathy 
Lack of Skilled 
Workers 
Clarity of 
Information 
Electricity 
Difficult to get loyal 
staffs 
Good roads 
Quality  
Favouritism 
Patience 
Referrals 
Book keeping 
Operational 
Skills 
Attitude 
Motivation 
Consistency 
Willing 
to try 
Bonuses 
Social Media 
Business 
Knowledge 
introduce a framework based on existing models to improve business growth and 
development. 
4.5 Conceptual MSEs Growth Framework  
           The conceptual framework below is introduced to enhance business growth for small 
businesses in Nigeria based on the theories underpinning this study. 
Figure 4d: MSEs Growth Framework 
The findings of this study show the rationale to incorporate each of the themes 
developed from the thematic analysis into the MSE growth framework. This framework as 
 Inception Stable Expansion 
Communication 
Time management 
Critical thinking 
Cultural Understanding 
Leadership 
Focus  
Self-motivation 
Consistency 
Willingness to try 
Attitude  
Teamwork 
Flexibility/Adaptability 
Interpersonal skills 
Creativity 
Leadership 
Focus  
Self-motivation 
Consistency 
Willingness to try 
Attitude 
Teamwork 
Work Ethic 
Problem-solving 
Collaboration 
Emotional Intelligence 
Consistency 
Leadership 
Focus 
Business & 
Management  
business knowledge 
-bookkeeping 
- business plan 
Staff Retention 
-empathy 
-tolerance 
-patience 
-appreciation 
Business & 
Management  
business knowledge 
-bookkeeping 
- business plan 
-operational skills 
Staff Retention 
-empathy 
-tolerance 
-bonuses 
-incentives 
Business & Management  
business knowledge 
-bookkeeping 
- business plan 
operational skills 
Staff Retention 
-empathy and tolerance 
-bonuses 
-incentives 
-training and workshops 
Use professional services. 
Customer Service 
Referrals 
Social Media 
-sponsored ads 
-promotions 
Customer Service 
Relationship 
Referrals 
Social Media 
-sponsored ads 
-promotions 
Innovation 
-digital marketing 
Customer Service 
Relationship 
Referrals 
Innovation 
Use professional services 
seen in figure 4d enumerates the details of the major factors that drive sustainable growth and 
has been introduced to help small businesses in achieving sustainable business growth.  
MSEs Framework Evaluation 
In developing the framework, the literature and theories underpinning this study have 
been put into consideration. Evidence from pertinent literature shows that studies on small 
business growth have focused on firm and individual (owner/entrepreneur) as both factors 
have a significant influence on sustainable growth for small businesses (Biggs and Shah, 
2006; Nichter and Goldmark, 2009; Goedhuys and Sleuwaegen, 2010; Kozan et al., 2012; 
Yeboah, 2015; Quartey et al., 2017). Likewise, this study considered both firm and individual 
as the unit of analysis and the findings reaffirm their significant influence on business 
growth. The concept of the framework is based majorly on Churchill and Lewiss model 
while taking into consideration the resource-based theory and the themes from the findings of 
this study. Revisiting the theories underpinning this study, Gibrats law, Jovanovics theory, 
and RBV focus majorly on the firm. Churchill and Lewiss model focuses on the firm as well 
but includes the role of the individual in the stages of development. The results from the 
analysis of this study were synthesised together mirroring Churchill and Lewiss model and 
the concept of RBV.  
Concept of the MSEs Growth Framework 
A firm needs to realise its capability to compete (Jovanovics theory) within its niche 
market before aspiring to gain competitive advantage (RBV) to either grow to achieve 
stability or expand its size through the stages of business development (Churchill and Lewiss 
model).  
There are three phases of the growth process depicted in the framework namely: 
inception, stable, and expansion. The phases are representing the stages of growth capturing 
the transition period for a micro-sized business (MSEs) to a small-sized business (SSEs). 
Each phase of growth depicts what small business owners should take into consideration to 
achieve sustainable growth for the individual on one part and the firm on the other part. Three 
categories (Soft/personal skills, management, and marketing) of essential requirements to 
growth were linked to the three phases. The first category concentrates on the individual 
(Owner/entrepreneur) while the other two categories concentrate on the firm. 
Inception  
The stage marks the inception of the business and the focus is solely on building and 
survival of the business. According to the findings of this study, soft and personal skills are 
quite vital for entrepreneurs aspiring to start a small business in Nigeria. Being focused and 
self-motivated is highly important. Results from the data analysis show that critical thinking 
and effective communication as a leader is required to build lucrative business ideas into 
viable businesses.  The findings also reveal that willingness to try out ideas, consistency, 
managing your time efficiently, being aware, and understanding the cultural differences in the 
business environment with the right attitude are vital for start-up businesses. While soft and 
personal skills are important, business and management skills are pivotal in achieving 
sustainable growth. The findings of this study reveal that basic business and management 
skills are required for all small business owners to gain the minimum efficiency scale needed 
to achieve stable business growth.  
Application to practice 
At this phase, the owner is solely focused on the survival of the business. The need for 
structure in business was highly recommended by successful small-sized business owners. An 
entrepreneur/Owner should have basic bookkeeping skills and a functional business plan in 
other to manage their business effectively either when considering business opportunities or 
dealing with a crisis. Small business owners should get the required industry-specific 
business knowledge to thrive and stay relevant in their respective industries. Ability to 
manage your staff is quite important too as staff retention aids growth. Having exceptional 
customer service would enhance referrals and the use of social media gives access to a wider 
audience creating a link to get feedback from customers. These key factors are essential for 
any entrepreneur aspiring to start and grow a small business. 
Stable 
This phase marks the stage where the business has achieved a minimum efficiency 
scale for stability and growth.  Small business owners should encourage teamwork within 
their workforce to ensure stability. Being creative, flexible, and adaptable would aid resource 
and capacity building in the business. The findings of this study necessitate the need for 
operational skills to keep the business running and stable for the workforce and also to keep 
serving customers. Owners should ensure a structured and effective workforce is in check to 
keep stability. Owners reward employees with bonuses and incentives to enhance employee 
commitment. Technology and innovation should be adopted for marketing campaigns to 
maintain the customer base. Sponsored Ads, and promotions should be added to marketing 
campaigns via social media and other digital platforms. 
Application to practice 
At this phase, the owner is focused on stability. Being tolerant and showing empathy 
to staff is quite important. Paying bonuses or incentives to reward and appreciate exceptional 
fit in workloads would enhance staff retention and organisational performance. Maintaining 
an effective customer service relationship at this phase is vital to retaining or increasing the 
customer base of the business. It is imperative to note that at this point, micro-sized business 
owners who intentionally decide to remain micro-sized can maintain this phase as long as 
they keep the minimum efficiency scale for stable business growth. Some entrepreneurs 
choose to remain as micro-sized enterprises because they arent interested in expansion yet or 
they are still keeping their salary jobs and running the businesses part-time. 
Expansion 
At this phase, micro-sized businesses have capitalised on their resources to gain a 
competitive advantage and consider expansion to build on organisational achievements. The 
findings of this study reveal that business owners should improve their soft and personal 
skills. They should have emotional intelligence, portray effective leadership within the 
workforce, encourage good work ethics and consider collaborations with other businesses. 
These findings also reiterate the need for innovation either in business delivery methodology 
or in branding products and services.  The training of staff and organising workshops to add 
value and improve their employability will enhance staff retention also. The results from this 
study also emphasised the importance of maintaining effective customer service to increase 
the customer base and ease the transition from a micro-sized to a small-sized enterprise. The 
findings of this study also suggest the use of professional services such as accounting practice 
services, business development support services, etc. these pointers are meant to ease the 
transition from micro-sized to small-sized enterprises for small business owners in Nigeria. 
Application to practice 
At this phase, the owner is focused on expansion. Small business owners should work 
on their skills before the business expansion as operating on a larger scale requires tactical 
skills rather than prowess to get work done. Owners/entrepreneurs should work on their 
leadership skills and be emotionally intelligent. They should be focused, consistent, support 
teamwork, and encourage collaborations while adhering to workplace ethics. Business 
knowledge is vital irrespective of the size of the firm as it gives an insight into the dynamics 
of the business environment, customer expectations, experiences, and opportunities driving 
business direction. Owners/entrepreneurs should pay bonuses, incentives and organise 
training workshops for their staff to enhance staff retention. Delegation is quite important 
during expansion and the use of professional services would ease the transition period. 
Innovation and good customer service would enhance referrals, and promote good customer 
service relationships with customers. 
The three phases of the MSEs growth framework, all stem out of the Churchill and 
Lewiss model while exerting the tenets of the resource-based view theory and considering 
the results of this study. 
4.6 Summary 
 The chapter presents the analysis and findings of the thematic qualitative analysis for 
this research. A discussion on the interview questions follows after the thematic analysis to 
assert the purpose of answering the research questions and achieving the objectives of the 
study. The MSEs Growth framework is introduced to help small business owners in 
achieving sustainable growth. 
5.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.1 Overview 
This chapter concludes the thesis by reassessing the interpretation of the study 
findings in achieving the aim and objectives of the research.  Firstly, the application of the 
research findings to professional practice is discussed. A concise evaluation to pinpoint the 
essential notions that address the proposed questions is put forward for this study. The 
limitations of the study are followed by recommendations for action and further studies. 
Lastly, a personal reflection on the entire study process and the summary of the research ends 
the thesis.  
5.2 Conclusions 
Pertinent literature on small business growth has either focused on the firm (Robson 
and Bennett, 2000; Serrasqueiro et al., 2010; Federico et al., 2012; Wang, 2016; Yang and 
Meyer, 2019) or individual (Eggers et al., 2013; Zapalska et al., 2015; Gherhes et al., 2016; 
Agyapong et al., 2018) considering external factors. A few studies have considered both firm 
and individual (Biggs and Shah, 2006; Nichter and Goldmark, 2009; Quartey et al., 2017) but 
majorly considered external factors. This study focused on the firm and individual as the unit 
of analysis. Consideration is given to micro-sized enterprises which have received less 
attention in recent studies done in Africa (Gherhes et al., 2016). The results of this study 
reaffirm that firms characteristics and owner (entrepreneur)s characteristics have a 
significant influence on small business growth as seen in evidence from past literature 
(Quartey et al., 2017).  
While a few of respondents do not assert their managerial competency or even have a 
vivid understanding of competencies and their importance to business growth, findings from 
this study reveal that majority of small business owners especially micro-sized enterprises 
lack basic management skills such as bookkeeping and operational skills (Gill and Biger, 
2012). This is one of the reasons put forward by financial institutions that lead to the inability 
of business owners to qualify for business loans (Afolabi, 2013).  Findings from some authors 
(Adisa et al., 2014) depict that majority of small business owners in Nigeria have an average 
educational qualification lower than a degree but this isnt so with the sample population 
considered for this research. However, the required instruments and procedures were 
considered in choosing the sample population for this study. 
The prevalent growth inhibitors for small businesses are access to finance, lack of 
infrastructure and facilities, government policies, difficulty in getting loyal staff, and lack of 
skilled workers. Results show that access to finance remains the top barrier to growth for 
small businesses across Africa in literature due to reoccurring demand of unreasonable 
collateral and high-interest rates (Shah et al., 2013). Respondents give an account of how 
discouraging and exacting the loan application process could be and few businesses have 
adopted a no-loan policy to adapt or minimise the impact of lack of funding on business 
operations. Findings show that a majority of respondents expressed their frustration on lack 
of good roads and electricity.  
Most of the respondents operating within the logistics and manufacturing sectors 
complained how bad roads and erratic electricity supply give rise to huge overhead costs 
which in turn dwindles profit and stunt firm growth. Africa is the only continent where 
electricity remains a major inhibitor to business growth (Fjose et al., 2010). Inadequate 
electricity supply is one of the major setbacks of industrialisation on the continent of Africa. 
It prevents small businesses from operating at their full capacity (Hatega, 2007) and 
discourages foreign investors because of the excessive cost of production.  
Ineffective communication of business support and services provided by the 
government is another barrier to growth. There are various initiatives developed by the 
government to support small businesses but an average number of small business owners are 
not aware of such support or services. This could be as a result of poor and effective 
communication systems used in disseminating information to the business sector (Kamunge 
et al., 2014) or a system ridden with corruption that enables presiding administrators of such 
initiatives to meddle with the disbursement of funds allotted to help small businesses as 
explained by the respondents. Respondents who are aware of the governments 
support/initiatives for small businesses indicated that the process to secure such support is 
exacting and hard-wired with bribery and political associations. One respondent said, It is 
who you know and not what you qualify for. Regulatory bodies such as the corporate affairs 
commission (CAC) and economic for financial crimes commissions (EFCC) put small 
businesses through rigorous processes and clearances to obtain certificates required by law to 
operate business operations within the country. Bad government policies and multiple taxes 
are major constraints to the sustainable growth of small businesses (Gumede, 2000; Krasniqi, 
2007). Respondents explain how tax administrators in the local offices create different names 
for the same levies to extort small businesses.  
Based on the results of this study, the key drivers to sustainable business growth are 
innovation, staff retention, use of social media, and the owner (entrepreneur) with soft skills 
and managerial competencies. Business owners (entrepreneurs) need to be creative to stay 
relevant within their niche markets. Paying bonuses and incentives to reward committed 
employees would enhance staff turnover. Organising training workshops for employees to 
increase their skillset and boost their employability profiles also enhances staff retention. 
According to the respondents, the use of social media is adopted widely amongst small 
businesses as it is a cost-effective marketing tool that gives access to a wider customer base. 
The majority of the respondents said they get most of their clients via their social media and 
good customer service gets them good referrals to increase their customer base. Having basic 
business and management skills is one of the key drivers of business growth for small 
businesses.  
Examining the growth transition period in this study reveals that successful small-
sized enterprise owners who have transitioned from micro-sized enterprises all attest to the 
importance of having business and management skills to thrive and achieve sustainable 
growth. Having the essential business knowledge of the sector and basic bookkeeping skills is 
vital to growth for small businesses. Findings from this study show that previous work 
experience is always an advantage to growth. Some of the respondents without previous work 
experience, relevant to their businesses had to take short courses/certifications to learn and 
acquire the expertise needed for their businesses. According to the study by Okpara (2011), 
the majority of small business owners have little or no prior work experience or basic 
management skills before starting their business. While the management skills are vital, more 
importantly, owners should have softs skills as well. Leading with empathy, being consistent, 
having the right attitude, and being patient with staff and customers, and being motivated to 
always try new things are essential soft skills needed to achieve business growth. 
This study is contributing to the sparse literature on the relationship between internal 
factors and business growth in Africa and also introducing a framework based on existing 
models to enhance sustainable growth for small businesses. Such an instrument would be 
well received by owners of small businesses and aspiring entrepreneurs who are looking to 
kick off with their start-up ideas in a post-pandemic economy in developing countries.  With 
the increase in globalisation, trade serves as a vital instrument for improving the growth of 
small businesses (Ipinnaiye et al., 2017). Previous studies reveal a plethora of barriers to 
growth mostly external (access to finance, funding, infrastructure and facilities, high taxes, 
corruption, market competition, unfavourable government policies) to the business with 
minimum focus on internal (business and management skills) barriers and how to mitigate 
them to enhance sustainable growth. This study introduces a framework that focuses on 
internal factors and could be used as a foundational guide to achieving sustainable growth for 
small businesses. The use of the MSEs Growth model would aid the crucial role of learning 
in the idiosyncratic growth process (from micro to small size) of small businesses in other to 
achieve sustainable business growth. 
5.3 Application to Professional Practice. 
This research is significant to achieving sustainable growth for small businesses in 
Nigeria, especially micro and small-sized enterprises. The objectives of this research were to 
examine the drivers and barriers to business growth for small businesses and also to introduce 
a framework based on existing models in the literature to enhance growth for small 
businesses. The findings of the research could serve as a foundational guide for start-ups 
kicking off with new business ideas in Nigeria to ensure sustainable business growth and also 
to small business owners struggling to achieve an efficient scale in business needed for 
sustainability. The framework introduced in this study would aid and serve as a practical 
instrument for both literate business owners and those with little or no educational 
qualifications because of its simplicity. 
There are key pointers every small business owner should be mindful of in other to 
achieve sustainable business growth. The framework was premised on the theories 
underpinning this research. The resource-based view theory necessitates the importance of a 
firms resources to achieve competitive advantages. The importance of business and 
management skills is a pivot for business growth for small businesses in Nigeria as reiterated 
by the findings of this study. The findings of this study would benefit small business owners 
(entrepreneurs), business managers of SMEs, investors, and policymakers. 
Small business owners (entrepreneurs)/Business managers 
Small business owners should have a proper structure and acquire the essential 
business knowledge specific to their industry in other to achieve sustainable business growth. 
A written functional business plan is vital to achieving sustainable growth (Brem, 2008). 
Owners/business managers should have basic business and management skills to handle day-
to-day business operations effectively.  
Owners/business managers should also focus on the development of their firm 
resources and capacity building of their workforce to enhance growth and maximise 
organisational performance. The findings of this study show the importance of having 
industry-specific business knowledge. Learning about the business sector before inception is 
quite important and business owners should endeavour to take short courses or certifications 
when they do not have prior experience relevant to their intended business sector. Small 
business owners should adopt the use of technology and digital platforms to aid marketing 
campaigns. Findings from this study reveal that one of the ways mature firms are mitigating 
disruptions caused by the global pandemic is the use of digital technology for marketing 
campaigns. Mature firms use Google my Business to earn customers trust and get good 
feedback for their excellent customer service. They also use social media platforms such as 
Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook. Micro-sized enterprises owners should familiarise 
themselves with the use of social media as a cost-effective marketing tool. 
In a post-pandemic world, small business owners need to follow the market trends and 
be creative to meet customers expectations. Owners need to lead their employees with 
patience and empathy to enhance staff retention. Employees tend to mirror the owners 
behaviour (Mat, 2008) and as such, owners should be intentional about their attitude and 
leadership style. Small business owners should have positive growth intentions and responses 
to market changes. The intentions of the owner of the business usually drive the growth of the 
business. This is more important than ever in a post-pandemic world where market trends are 
easing back to normal gradually.  
Lastly, small business owners should consider their mental health as it is paramount. 
A successful small business would require an owner with a balance mental capacity to 
operate the business effectively. 
Small business owners should use the MSEs growth model introduced in this study as 
a foundational guide to achieving sustainable growth. The framework is embedded with the 
main drivers to growth for small businesses deduced from the findings of this research.  
Investors 
The findings of this study would inform investors both local and foreign on the 
challenges facing micro and small businesses in Nigeria. It would aid the formation of 
business strategies and business planning to combat/mitigate the prevalent inhibitors to 
growth to achieve business success. The findings of this study would be useful to investors in 
risk assessment and identifying market trends. Investors can use the MSEs growth framework 
introduced in this study for training workshops to educate their business partners or managers 
of the barriers and drivers to sustainable growth for small businesses.   
Other Social Fields and Sectors 
The findings of this study would benefit researchers and studies in other social fields 
and sectors by informing and adding to literature about the key barriers and drivers to growth 
for micro-enterprises and small enterprises. More importantly, this study is introducing a 
framework to mitigate the effects of the barriers and achieve sustainable growth. For 
researchers interested in micro, small, and medium enterprises, the findings of this study 
would be essential for literature review especially if the unit of observation is Nigeria or the 
continent of Africa. Results from this study also shed light on the grey areas of mental health, 
gender-based stereotypes in the workplace, and the impact of business location on small 
business growth. The reflections of the researcher in this study shed light on the importance 
of having a support system as a research student. Many researchers struggle through their 
doctorate studies without having any support system outside the university.   
The systematic literature review of this study sheds light on the pitfalls of conducting 
qualitative research and the recommendations to avoid such pitfalls. This study informs other 
future studies on the current views of small business owners regarding barriers and drivers to 
sustainable growth for micro-sized and small-sized enterprises. The findings of this study 
expand the current knowledge of small businesses and sustainable growth in the literature.  
5.4 Limitations 
 One of the limitations of this study was the homogeneity of the research participants 
regarding the criteria (pool from the registered businesses located in the most successful 
states in Nigeria in the SMEDAN/NBS report) considered for the purposive sampling. The 
sample population only admitted small businesses that were registered with the corporate 
affairs commission leaving out businesses that are operating without proper registration and 
their perspectives might have been incremental to the findings of this study. Participants may 
also give certain opinions or responses during the interviews because they are aware they are 
participating in research which could be another limitation.  
Another limitation would be the inability to capture the perspectives of non-
respondents, that couldnt take part in the research due to personal reasons, Covid19, or 
perhaps timing/busy schedules. According to Fagbemi (2020), the emergence of Covid19 has 
disrupted the status quo and had a blistering impact on the global economy. Depken and 
Zeman (2018) argue that they are the silent majority and its always challenging to identify 
their needs. Even though few of the respondents did not highlight Covid19 as a major 
disruptor of their business, the pandemic was the major limitation of this study. Amidst the 
global lockdown and travel restrictions, it was difficult to secure interviews with small 
business owners as many of them were trying to stay afloat in business either through seeking 
emergency business loans, keeping their customer base, or considering the staff reductions to 
manage business expenses and avoid business failures.  
5.5 Recommendations for Action 
Most of the owners of micro and small-sized businesses seem to be quite resilient in 
operating their ventures but there are obvious setbacks aside from the prevalent factor (access 
to finance) that is inhibiting sustainable growth for small business owners. According to 
Brixiova et al. (2020), genuine and intentional support for small businesses must imbibe 
policies that mitigate and combat structural constraints such as bottlenecks to access business 
loans. This could be achieved by holding governing organisations responsible for disbursing 
business funding, accountable to due diligence through the effective valuation of assets, and 
accentuating property rights to encourage entrepreneurs to make use of business loans.  
Small business owners (entrepreneurs)/Business managers 
Previous studies have enumerated the challenges facing small businesses across 
Africa (Tushabomwe-kazooba, 2006; Olawale and Garwe, 2010; Mbonyane and Ladzani, 
2011; Memba et al., 2012; Ebitu et al., 2016; Quartey et al., 2017; Igwe et al., 2018) which 
are mostly external factors. The findings of this study reveal the need for small business 
owners to examine their soft/personal skills and concentrate on factors that are non-
managerial to achieve sustainable growth. In agreement, results from the study by Benzing 
and Chu (2012) reiterated that vital drivers for SMEs' success were non-managerial factors 
such as business reputation, integrity, and good quality products. While it is ok to aspire to 
grow and expand businesses, the role of soft/personal skills cant be neglected. Small 
business owners/managers should educate themselves on the dynamics of the business sector 
in which they are operating and also on the business support and services offered by the 
government. There are various loan schemes (Funds for small scale industries {FUSI}, 
Family economic advancement programme {FEAP}, National economic reconstruction fund 
{NERFUND}, Agriculture credit scheme, etc.) put forward by the government (Ebitu et al., 
2016) but the findings of this study show many of small business owners arent aware of such 
loan schemes. There are international organisations that offer funds for small businesses 
across Africa such as United Nations, UNESCO, Common Wealth, World Bank, and African 
development bank but many of the respondents werent aware of this support for small 
businesses. There are funds toward business support from developed countries across the 
world as well and small business owners/ business managers should source information about 
this business support and services to enable the utilisation of such funds for business 
opportunities. 
Basic business and management skills are essential to growth and all owners 
(entrepreneurs) and business managers should avail themselves of the required skills to 
achieve business success. Lack of basic managerial competencies and business information 
are some of the main inhibitors to access to finance for small business owners (Fatoki and 
Asah, 2011). Having managerial competencies and business knowledge reduces the chances 
of being considered as a high-risk borrower. Owners (entrepreneurs) should consider and join 
support network groups of other entrepreneurs where they can take advantage of learning 
with peers as suggested by Blumenfeld et al., (1996). Entrepreneurs without the basic 
management skills can learn from those with the required skills within the support network 
groups.  
Small business owners should focus on resource picking and capacity building 
(Makadok, 2001) on their workforce to enhance business growth. Small business owners 
should endeavour to acquire the necessary business knowledge specific to their venture and 
have a proper business structure. Small businesses should have a mission statement, vision, 
and business plan to guide the business when considering opportunities and also during a 
crisis.  Small business owners should acquire basic business and management skills such as 
bookkeeping, inventory management, and operational skills to manage their business dealings 
efficiently. This study also recommends routine business evaluation and assessment to 
monitor the growth rate of small businesses in other to provide information for mitigation 
should there be signs of business failure developing. Most importantly, owners 
(entrepreneurs) and business managers of small businesses can make use of the MSEs growth 
framework introduced in this study as a foundational model to achieve sustainable business 
growth. 
Financial institutions 
Financial institutions in this context comprise commercial banks and microfinance 
banks. It is evident from the findings of this study that collateral requirements and the 
processes for loan applications for small businesses are laborious. While microfinance banks 
offer flexibility with the credit assessment and application process, the interest rates are 
ridiculously high with shorter repayment plans. Commercial banks should deter from 
segregating small businesses by classifying them as high-risk borrowers and demanding 
collaterals within their capabilities. Microfinance banks should seek more support from the 
central bank of Nigeria (CBN) to offer lower interest rates on business loans and flexible 
repayment plans for small businesses. Financial institutions should develop initiatives to offer 
free business management training workshops for small business owners/business managers 
to enhance business growth for small businesses.    
Policymakers 
Some of the respondents suggested that the government should order a total reform of 
the organisation/parastatal overseeing federal loans/grants or official financial institutions 
handling the credit provision channels for small businesses. This is in line with the 
recommendation put forward by Mambula (Okpara, 2011). Respondents suggest the need for 
prompt reforms of financial institutions that oversee credit provision channels for small 
businesses so that owners with good credit ratings can access finance on merit by following 
an easy procedure based on reformed policies. While so many previous studies have put 
forward recommendations channelled towards the government (Ojukwu, 2006; Bunyasi et al., 
2014; Mashenene and Rumanyika, 2014; Neneh and Vanzyl, 2014), this study gives 
recommendations channelled towards good and effective business practice for small 
businesses. Small businesses dealing with imported goods or raw materials have expressed 
their frustration on the fluctuating foreign exchange rate and the central bank of Nigeria 
hasnt made the situation any better. A flexible concession should be offered to such small 
businesses to reduce their overhead cost and avoid business failure. 
Policymakers should provide effective communication channels to disseminate 
information to small businesses as many business owners/business managers are unaware of 
the business support and services available to small businesses. There should be independent 
regulatory bodies that would offer support to small businesses particularly on managerial 
competencies required for the efficient day-to-day operation of businesses. Such support 
could range from writing business plans, calculating and filing taxes to the appropriate tax 
offices, to adopting and implementing new market strategies. Tax regulations should be 
simplified for small businesses both at the state and federal levels. This study shows that 
majority of small business owners arent clear about the tax regulations for small businesses. 
It is either small are paying too much, not paying enough, or not paying at all. One of the 
barriers to sustainable growth deduced from this study is multiple taxations. Corrupt tax 
administrators take advantage of the present system to extort businesses at the local, state, 
and federal levels. Policymakers should provide a tax filing process that isnt exacting and 
tax administrators should be cautioned to adhere to ethical standards to make the filing 
process seamless. Routine workshops to educate small business owners on taxation would be 
welcomed and effective. Tax regulatory bodies should adopt the use of technology to aid 
effective communication between small businesses and the tax offices. 
International organisations offering business grants for small businesses should 
organise workshops to create awareness about entrepreneurship and its benefits at the local 
level so that existing micro-sized business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs can benefit 
from it. Effective communication methods such as social media should be employed to 
achieve successful campaigns. Such campaigns would help produce refined entrepreneurs 
with core competencies and ethical standards to achieve business success.  
5.6 Recommendations for Further study 
 This study focused on the drivers and barriers to business growth for micro and small-
sized enterprises. Based on the findings of this study, other areas of interest would be gender-
based stereotypes, ethnic biases, mental health, business location, COVID-19, and climate 
change and how it affects sustain growth for small businesses.  
Gender/Ethnicity 
Adesua-Lincoln (2011) and Carter et al., (2007) argued that female entrepreneurs 
have attracted considerable attention in studies across the literature to ratify that they are seen 
as formidable contributors to economic development (Verheul et al., 2006). More attention 
should be directed toward the challenges facing female entrepreneurs in Africa, particularly 
in Nigeria. The findings of this study reveal that there are gender-based stereotypes and 
workplace stereotypes within the events and entertainment industry in Nigeria. Future studies 
can explore this narrative as it affects the rate of growth of small businesses within the events 
and entertainment industry. Another subtle area to investigate for further research would be 
the effect of tribal profiling on business growth in African countries. One of the respondents 
in the other services sector explained how customers would prefer to give jobs to only 
people of certain tribes. Further studies can investigate the impact of ethnic biases on 
business growth for small businesses in African countries. 
Mental health  
According to Martin and LaMontagne (2018), interventions within the SME network are 
needed to review the best framework that can be integrated into practice within the workplace 
to address the issues of mental health. One of the respondents mentioned the issue of mental 
health for small business owners. She recalled having mental breakdowns a few times over 
the years of business operation. Further studies should examine the issue of mental health for 
owners (entrepreneurs) of small businesses and how it affects business growth. Another area 
is the impact of the leadership style of the owner/manager on staff mental health. Researchers 
can also examine how mental health affects the growth intentions of small business owners. 
Business Location  
This study examined the barriers and drivers to sustainable growth for small 
businesses using a sample population from the location with the highest successful businesses 
in Nigeria with Lagos state topping the list. According to Sleuwaegen and Goedhuys (2002), 
and Krasniqi and Mustafa (2016), location does influence business growth. One of the 
respondents operating his business outside Lagos highlighted the advantages of the location 
to his business. The results of this study cant be generalised to cover small businesses that 
werent part of this study especially businesses in the rural areas. The location could be a 
barrier (inaccessibility to a wider customer base/potential clients) or a driver (enjoying the 
monopoly of the market) to growth for small businesses. Further research should examine the 
barriers and drivers for small businesses in rural areas to compare and contrast with small 
businesses in cities in Nigeria. Researchers should focus on micro-sized enterprises as they 
receive less attention across the literature. 
COVID-19 
Covid19 was one of the major limitations of this study. Many respondents were trying 
to stay afloat in business during the lockdowns. Some expressed their frustration of building 
their business model around certain demographics in a particular location but the pandemic 
changed everything and most customers now work from home. Some others explained how 
they adjusted to the new normal by switching from offering products to delivering services to 
avoid business failures. Some micro-sized enterprises are considering putting their businesses 
on hold as there are lots of uncertainties linked to the disruptions of the pandemic. Evidence 
from recent literature (Wenzel et al., 2020; Amankwah-Amoah et al., 2021) shows that 
scholars are yet to decipher how the impacts of Covid19 influence the processes that lead to 
business failures. The discourse around the impacts of Covid19 on business growth is still 
ongoing with a focus on strategy and knowledge resources (Amankwah-Amoah, 2020; 
Pereira et al., 2020). According to Fagbemi (2020) in her recent study, she gives a holistic 
insight into the effects of Covid19 and the sustainable development goals as put forward by 
the United Nations. Based on the study in Pakistan by Shafi et al. (2020), MSMEs have 
experienced disruptions in the supply chain, sales and profit reductions, financial losses, and 
a decrease in demand for goods and services. Further studies should examine how African 
small businesses especially micro-sized and small-sized enterprises can achieve sustainable 
growth in a post-pandemic world.    
Climate change 
Saving the planet and the ongoing discussions at COP26 and previous conferences, it 
is imperative for firms around the world to imbibe in their businesses, strategies, ideologies, 
and practices that support the sustainable goals and targets put forward by the United 
Nations. The past decade has seen the creation of green businesses (Pernick and Wilder, 
2012) and diverse methods to merge social agitations with ecological and economic concerns 
coherently in a strategy is referred to as corporate sustainability (Schneider and Meins, 2012). 
There are huge roles for corporate social responsibilities (CSR) and corporate environmental 
responsibilities (CER) for all firm sizes especially for small businesses as they account for the 
largest pool in job creation across the globe. There are a few studies that have evaluated 
corporate social responsibilities in smaller firms (Nybakk and Panwar, 2014). While evidence 
from the literature shows that studies have examined the relationship between CSR and 
firms stakeholders (Iturrioz et al., 2009), CSR and shareholders value creation (Wagner and 
Schaltegger, 2004), CSR and companys strategic orientation (Tantalo et al., 2012), CSR and 
financial performance (Magrizos et al., 2021) or perhaps imbibing CSR into companys 
mission statement (Chen et al., 2018), its important to know if it has any possible influence 
on sustainable business growth. Further studies should examine the role of CSR and CER in 
achieving sustainable business growth for small businesses. Further studies can also focus on 
the correlations between corporate values, market demand, government regulations, alliances, 
and how it contributes to climate change.  
5.7 Reflections  
I had the privilege of working with the best research team in the university which 
made the initial doctoral journey less stressful. My lead supervisor was exceptionally helpful 
with narrowing down the focus of my research. I have the opportunity to present my abstract 
at the CAREED conference and I received feedback from speakers at the conference. Mr. 
Stephen Hunt of Challenges Group, UK who was particularly interested in research on SMEs 
emphasised the need to look into networks that deal with the segmentation of SMEs to 
deduce the characteristics of Small businesses especially start-ups. Prof Jacinta Nwachukwu 
reiterated the excessive focus on capital/access to finance in most pertinent literature on small 
business growth. She suggested I focus on managerial and ethical practices that enhance 
sustainable growth rather than access to finance. These two pieces of feedback were quite 
pivotal to my research and the choice of my unit of analysis.  
I was meant to travel to Nigeria to collect my qualitative data using interviews with 
semi-structured questions and the pandemic started. Lockdown and travel restrictions were 
announced by the government. I had to use VoIP (Zoom, Skype, Whats app, Facebook) to 
conduct my interviews. Most research students had to work on their thesis at home as 
universities and libraries were shut throughout 2020. I struggled as I was used to working 
among peers in the library or the DBA office at the university. The motivation and morale to 
work on my thesis were low. I had to find an online support system for doctoral students 
during the pandemic. I joined the academic charter on Twitter where doctoral students like 
me put up posts regularly to support one another. I was able to get recommendations on 
articles and journals to use for my research on the Twitter group. One Ph.D. student in 
Australia recommended checking YouTube videos of authors that have written renowned 
methodologies. This was quite helpful as I was able to find video uploads of Prof Braun and 
Dr. Clarkes six-phase thematic analysis which I used for my data analysis. I would 
recommend doctoral students to listen to YouTube videos of lectures after reviewing articles 
as videos are more explanatory. I had the opportunity to interview small business owners who 
have been operating their businesses before the emergence of the pandemic ranging from 
1year to over 4years. They were able to share vital insights about their business operations 
which were pivotal to my research. I concluded my analysis and developed a conceptual 
growth framework to help small business owners in achieving sustainable growth. 
 In conclusion, I hope small businesses (especially micro-sized businesses) in Nigeria 
and around the world facing challenges to sustainable growth in business management find 
the framework in the study, an effective guide, and an entirely useful instrument to enhance 
growth in their respective business ventures. 
5.7.1 Timeline of Research 
                                                  Timeline of Research  First Year 
Work done 
CV and Proposal Submitted                
Feasibility Study Completed                
Initial  Proposed Interview Guide                
Research Questions                
Research Aim and Objectives                
Problem Statement/Presentation                
Rationale                
Theoretical Framework                
Conceptual Framework                
Research Philosophy and Design                
12 Weeks Assessment                
Chapter One  
Introduction/Presentation 
Systematic Literature Review                
6 months Assessment Review                
Updated Chapter One                
Annual Review Assessment                
UWS CAREED Conference 
Presentation of Abstract 
                                                    Timeline of Research  Second Year 
Work done  
Pilot study                 
Review of Theoretical Framework/ 
Methodology/ Sample Size 
Chapter Two  Literature Review                 
Chapter Three  Methodology                 
Research Dissemination Workshop                 
CAREED Workshop/Update 
Interview Guide 
Vitae Research Development 
Framework Workshop/ Updating 
Chapters Two and Three  
Writing for Publications Workshop/ 
Update for Chapters Two and Three 
Submitted Final Interview Guide 
and Chapters Two and Three for 
Review 
Draft Participants Information 
booklet (PID) and Consent form/ 
Updating Chapters Two and Three 
Distributed PIDs and Consent 
Forms/ Submitted Ethics 
Application 
Resubmission of Ethics 
Application/ Received Consent 
forms from participants 
Ethics Approval/ Conduct Initial 
Interviews 
Conduct Final 
Interviews/Transcribe/Analysis/Fin
al Write-up 
Thesis Submission/Viva                 
5.8 Summary 
 Small businesses account for 85% of the registered companies in Nigeria (Ihugba et 
al., 2014) and out of the 85%, 99.8% are micro-sized businesses with small-sized businesses 
and medium-sized businesses accounting for 0.17% and 0.004% respectively 
(SMEDAN/NBS 2017 Report). Small businesses collectively produce approximately 55% of 
Nigerias gross domestic product (GDP) (Ihugba et al., 2014) but studies reveal that small 
businesses in Nigeria still lack the basic requirements needed to drive business growth. The 
purpose of this study was to examine the barriers and drivers to sustainable growth while 
using small businesses particularly micro-sized and small-sized businesses as the case study 
in other to introduce a framework premised on existing models to enhance business growth 
for small businesses in Nigeria. In other to achieve the objectives of the study, attention was 
drawn to the transition period of growth for the small-sized businesses in the sample 
population considered for this study. 
 The conceptual framework for the phenomenological case study was informed by 
resource-based view theory, Jovanovics model, Churchill and Lewiss model, and 
Dunkelberg and Coopers classification. 
 After the thematic data analysis, seven main categories of themes unfolded from the 
data: business and management skills, customer service, staff retention, character, leadership, 
social media, and innovation. Other themes unfolded such as stereotypes and mental barriers. 
The participants expressly contributed to the framework introduced in this study as the 
findings show that the themes are the key drivers to sustainable growth tailored to an 
emerging market and developing country like Nigeria.  
6.0 References 
Abend, G. (2008). The Meaning of Theory. Sociological Theory. American Sociological 
Association. Vol. 26(2), pp. 177. [Online/Accessed 06/10/2018] Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9558.2008.00324.x  
Abisuga-Oyekunle, O. A., Patra, S. K. & Muchie, M. (2020). SMEs in Sustainable 
Development: Their Role in Poverty Reduction and Employment Generation in Sub-
Saharan Africa. African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation, and 
Development. Vol. 12(4). pp. 405-419. [Online/Accessed 27/08/2021] Available at: 
DOI: 10.1080/20421338.2019.1656428 
Abor, J. & Quartey, P. (2010). Issues in SME Development in Ghana and South Africa. 
International Research Journal of Finance and Economics. Vol. 39(6), pp. 218-228. 
Adesua-Lincoln, A. (2011). Assessing Nigerian Female Entrepreneurs Access to Finance 
for Business Start-up and Growth. African Journal of Business Management. Vol. 
5(13). pp. 5348-5355. 
Adisa, T. A., Abdulraheem, I. & Mordi, C. (2014). The Characteristics and Challenges of 
Small Business in Africa: An Exploratory Study of Nigerian Small Business Owners. 
Economic Insights- Trends and Challenges. Vol. 3(4). pp. 1-14. 
Adisa, T. A. (2008). The Failure of Small Businesses in Nigeria. Dissertation submitted in 
part fulfilment for the Degree of BA (Hons) Business Management. London South 
Bank University. (Unpublished). 
Afolabi, M. O. (2013). Growth Effect of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) Financing 
in Nigeria. Journal of African Macroeconomic Review. Vol. 3(1). pp. 193-205. 
Agee, J. (2009). Developing Qualitative Research Questions: A Reflective Process. 
International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education. Vol. 22(4), pp. 431-447. 
[Online/Accessed 20/11/2019] Available at: doi.org/10.1080/09518390902736512 
Ager, A. & Strang, A. (2008). Understanding Integration: A Conceptual Framework. Journal 
of Refugee Studies. Vol. 21(2), pp.166. [Online/Accessed 11/10/2018] Available at: 
doi:10.1093/jrs/fen016 
Agyapong, G. T., Mmieh, F. & Mordi, C. (2018). Factors Influencing the Growth of SMEs: 
The Case of Ghana. Thunderbird International Business Review. Vol. 60(4). pp. 549-
Ahiawodzi, A. K. & Adade, T. C. (2012). Access to Credit and Growth of Small and 
Medium Scale Enterprises in the Ho Municipality of Ghana. British Journal of 
Economics, Finance and Management Sciences. Vol. 6(2), pp. 34-51. 
Akanbi, O. B. (2015). An Economic Approach to Short and Long Run Analysis of the 
Nigerian Economy  Capital Flight in Nigeria. International Journal of Research in 
Humanities and Social Studies, Vol. 2(12), pp. 83-89. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9558.2008.00324.x
Akande, O. O. & Ojokuku, R. M. (2008). The Impact of Entrepreneurial Skill on Small 
Business Performance in Lagos, South-Western Nigeria. Paper presented at the 
International Council for Small Business World Conference. Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
June 2008, pp. 22-25. 
Aladejebi, O. (2019). The Impact of Microfinance Banks on the Growth of Small and 
Medium Enterprises in Lagos Metropolis. European Journal of Sustainable 
Development. Vol. 8(3). pp. 261-274. [Online/Accessed 30/09/2021] Available at: 
Doi: 10.14207/ejsd.2019.v8n3p261 
Aldrich, H. & Auster, E. (1986).  Even Dwarfs started small: Liabilities of Size and Age and 
their Strategic Implication. Research in Organisational Behaviour. Vol. 8, pp. 65-
Alimo, M. T. (2015). The Experience of Successful Small Business Owners in Ghana.    
DBA Diss., Walden Dissertations and Doctoral Studies. Walden University.  
Alvarez, S. A. & Busenitz, L. W. (2001).  The Entrepreneurship of Resource Based 
Theory. Journal of Management. Vol. 27(6). pp. 755-775. [Online/Accessed 
25/10/2019] Available at: doi: 10.1177/014920630102700609. 
Aidis, R. & Van Praag, M. (2007).  Illegal Entrepreneurship Experience: Does it make a 
Difference for Business Performance and Motivation? Journal of Business 
Venturing. Vol. 22(2), pp. 283-310. 
Amankwah-Amoah, J. (2020). Stepping up and stepping out of COVID-19: New Challenges 
for Environmental Sustainability Policies in the Global Airline Industry. Journal of 
Cleaner Production. Article 123000. 
Amankwah-Amoah, J., Khan, Z. & Wood, G. (2021). COVID-19 and Business Failures: 
The Paradoxes of Experience, Scale, and Scope for Theory and Practice. European 
Management Journal. Vol. 39.  Pp. 179-184. 
Amit, R. & Zott, C. (2001). Value Creation in E-business. Strategic Management Journal. 
Vol. 22, pp. 511 
Anggadwita, G. & Mustafid, Q. Y. (2013). Identification of Factors Influencing the 
Performance of Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs). Procedia  Social and 
Behavioural Sciences. Vol. 115. pp. 415-423. 
Areni, C. S. (2003).  Examining Managers theories of how Atmospheric Music affects 
Perception, Behaviour and Financial Performance. Journal of Retailing and 
Consumer Services. Vol. 10(1), pp. 263-274. 
Arogundade, K. K. (2010). Effective Microfinance and SME: The True Story. Journal of 
Management and Society. Vol. 1(2). pp. 51-54. 
Asenge, E. L., Diaka, H. S. & Soom, A. T. (2018). Entrepreneurial Mindset and 
Performance of Small and Medium Scale Enterprises in Makurdi Metropolis, Benue 
State, Nigeria. International Journal of Innovation. Vol. 6(2). pp. 124-146. 
Audretsch, D., Klomp, L., Santarelli, E. & Thurik, A. (2002). Gibrats Law: Discussion 
Paper No. 150. Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM). Erasmus 
University, Rotterdam.  
Audretsch, D., Klomp, L., Santarelli, E. & Thurik, A. (2004). Gibrats Law: Are the 
Services Different? Review of Industrial Organisation. Vol. 24, pp. 301-342. 
Ayompe, L. M., Davis, S. J. & Egoh, B. N. (2017). Trends and Drivers of African Fossil 
Fuel CO2 Emissions 1990-2017. Environmental Research Letters. 15 124039. 
Babajide, A. (2012).  Effects of Microfinance on Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) 
Growth in Nigeria. Asian Economic and Financial. Vol. 2(3), pp. 463-477. 
Bacigalupo, M., Kampylis, P., Punie, Y. & Van den Brande, G. (2016). ENTRECOMP: The 
Entrepreneurship Competence Framework. Luxembourg: Publication Office of the 
European Union; EUR 27939 EN; doi: 10.2791/593884. 
Balogun, M. O. (2004). Paper presented at 2004 Annual Management Conference of Nigerian 
Institute of Management at International Conference Centre, Abuja. 
Barkham, R., Gudgin, G., Hart, M. & Harvey, E. (1996). The Determinants of Small Firm 
Growth: As Inter-Regional Study in the United Kingdom. pp. 1986-1990. Routledge: 
London.  
Barney, J. B. (1991). Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage. Journal of 
Management. Vol. 17(1), pp. 99-120. 
Barnham, C. (2012). Separating Methodologies? International Journal of Market Research. 
Vol. 54(6), pp.736 [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-54-6-736-738. 
Barringer, B. R., Jones, F. F. & Neubaum, D. O. (2005). A Quantitative Content Analysis of 
the Characteristics of Rapid-Growth Firms and their Founders. Journal of Business 
Venturing. Vol. 20(5), pp. 663-664. 
Baron, R. A. (2007). Opportunity Recognition as Pattern Recognition: Hoe Entrepreneurs 
connects the dots to identify New Opportunities. Academy of Management 
Perspectives. Vol. 2.  pp. 104-119. 
Bartlett, W. & Bukvic, V. (2001). Barriers to SME Growth in Slovenia. MOCT-MOST 
Academic paper  school of Policy Studies, University of Bristol GEA College, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia. Vol. 11. pp. 177-195. 
Batra, G., Kaufmann, D. & Stone, A. H. W. (2003).  Investment Climate around the World: 
Voices of the Firms from the World Business Environment Survey. Washington, 
DC: The International Bank of Reconstruction and Development. The World Bank. 
Baxter, P. & Jack, S. (2008).  Qualitative Case Study Methodology: Study Design and 
Implementation for Novice Researchers. The Qualitative Report. Vol. 13(4), pp. 
544-559. 
https://doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-54-6-736-738
Beaudry, C. & Swann, G. M. P. (2009).  Firm Growth in Industrial Clusters of the United 
Kingdom. Small Business Economics. Vol. 34(2), pp. 409-424. 
Beck, T. & Demirgue-Kunt, A. (2006). Small and Medium-sized Enterprises: Access to 
Finance as a Growth Constraint. Journal of Banking & Finance. Vol. 30. pp. 2931-
2943. 
Beegle, K. & Christiansen, L. (2019). Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Africa. The 
World Bank Group, Washington, D.C. 
Benzing, C. & Chu, H. M. (2012). The Perceived Success Factors and Problems of Small 
Business Owners in Africa. Journal of African Development. Vol. 14(1). pp. 63-94. 
Beverland, M., Napoli, J. & Lindgreen, A. (2007). Industrial Global Brand Leadership: A 
Capabilities View. Industrial Marketing Management. Vol. 36(8), pp. 1082-1093. 
Bi, R., Davison, R. M. & Smyrnios, K. X. (2017). E-Business and Fast Growth SMEs. 
Small Business Economics. Vol. 48. pp. 559-576. 
Bicaba, Z., Brixiova, Z. & Ncube, M. (2017).  Can extreme Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa 
be eliminated by 2030?  Journal of African Development. Vol. 19(2), pp. 93-110.  
Biggs, T. & Shah, M. K. (2006). African SMEs, Networks and Manufacturing 
Performance. Journal of Banking & Finance. Vol. 30. pp. 303-3066. 
Birks, M. & Mills, J.  (2015). Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide. 2nd Edition. London: 
SAGE. 2015. 
Blackburn, R. & Kovalainen, A. (2009).  Researching Small Firms and Entrepreneurship: 
Past, Present and Future. International Journal of Management Reviews. Vol. 11(2), 
pp. 127-148.  
Blancher, N. (2019). Financial Inclusion of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in the 
Middle East and Central Asia. IMF Middle East and Central Asia Department, 
Washington, D.C. Adapted from SLATE Starter Sheet, NCTE. April 1994.pp 1-4. 
Blum, K. D. & Muirhead, B. (2005). Conquering the Mountain: Framework for Successful 
Chair advising of Online Dissertation Students. Available online at: http:// 
www.itdl.org/DISSERTATION%20PROCESS%20 Kim+Don%2010-17- 05.pdf. 
Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., Soloway, E. & Krajcik, J. (1996). Learning With Peers: 
From Small Group Cooperation to Collaborative Communities. Educational 
Researcher. Vol. 25(8), pp. 37-40. 
Bouazz, A. B., Ardjouman, D. & Abada, O. (2015). Establishing the Factors Affecting the 
Growth of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in Algeria. American International 
Journal of Social Science. Vol. 4(2). pp. 101-115. 
Boubakary (2015). The Influence of the Personal Values of the Leader on the Growth of 
SMEs in Cameroun. International Strategic Management Review. Vol. 3(1-2). pp. 
15-23. [Online/Accessed 13/10/2019] Available at: doi.org/10.1016/j.ism.2015.09.002 
https://doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-54-6-736-738
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998).  Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code 
Development. SAGE Publications. 
Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006).  Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology. Vol. 3(2), pp. 77-101. [Online/Accessed 13/07/2020] 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 
Brink, A., Cant, M. & Ligthelm, A. (2003). Problems Experienced by Small Businesses in 
South Africa. A paper for the Small Enterprise Association of Australia and New 
Zealand 16th Annual Conference, Ballarat (28 Sept.  1 Oct. 2003). Pp. 1-20.  
Brown, R. & Lee, N. (2019). Strapped for Cash? Funding for UK High Growth SMEs since 
the Global Financial Crisis. Journal of Business Research. Vol. 99. pp. 37-45. 
Brush, C. (1990). Local Initiatives for Job Creation: Enterprising Women. Paris: OECD. 
Bryan, J. (2006).  Training and Performance in Small Firms. International Small Business 
Journal. Vol. 24(6), pp. 635-658. 
Bryant, A. & Charmaz, K.  (2007). Grounded Theory Research: Methods and Practices. In: 
Bryant, A. & Charmaz, K. (Eds.). The Sage Handbook of Grounded Theory. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Pp. 1-28. 
Bunyasi, G. N. W., Bwisa, H. & Namusonge, G. (2014). Effect of Access to Business 
Information on the Growth of Small and Medium Enterprises in Kenya. International 
Journal of Business and Social Science. Vol. 5, 10(1). pp. 121-128. 
Burrell, G. & Morgan, G. (1979) Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis 
Aldershot UK: Gower; In: Saunders, M., Lewis, P. & Thornhill, A. (2016). Research 
Methods for Business Students. 7th Edition. Pearson Education Limited, England. 
pp.127 
Brem, A. (2008). The Boundaries of Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Conceptual 
Background and Essays on Selected Theoretical and Empirical Aspects. Springer 
Fachmedien. Wiesbaden: Erlangen-Nurnberg.  
Brink, P. V. D. (2005). Organisational Competencies for Radical Innovation. Semantic 
Scholar. Engineering: University of Twente, Faculty of EEMCS. uss, D. M. (1987).  
Selection, Evocation and Manipulation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. Vol. 53(6), pp. 1214-1221. 
Brixiova, Z., Kangoya, T. & Yogo, T. U. (2020). Access to Finance among Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises and Job Creation in Africa. Structural Change and 
Economic Dynamics. Vol. 55, pp.177-189. 
Broman, G. I. & Robert, K. (2017). A Framework for Strategic Sustainable Development. 
Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 140, pp. 17-31. [Online/Accessed 11/10/2018] 
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.10.121 
Brown, J. E. (1994). How to Write a Rationale. Adapted from SLATE Starter Sheet, 
NCTE. April 1994.pp 1-4. 
Buss, D. M. (1987).  Selection, Evocation and Manipulation. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology. Vol. 53(6), pp. 1214-1221. 
Cant, M. C. & Wiid, J. A. (2013). Establishing the Challenges Affecting South African 
SMEs. International Business & Economics Research Journal. Vol. 12(6). pp. 707-
Carter, S., Shaw, E., Lam, W. & Wilson, F. (2007).  Gender, Entrepreneurship and Bank 
Lending: The Criteria and Processes used by Bank Loan Officers in Assessing 
Applications. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 
Carton, R. B. & Hofer, C. W. (2006).  Measuring Organisational Performance  Metrics for 
Entrepreneurship and Strategic Management Research. Edward Elgar. Cheltenham.  
Capelleras, J. & Rabetino, R. (2008).  Individual, Organisational and Environmental 
Determinants of New Firm Employment Growth: Evidence from Latin America. The 
International Entrepreneurship Management Journal. Vol. 4(1), pp. 79-99. 
Castano, M., Mendez, M. & Galindo, M. (2016). Innovation, Internationalization and 
Business-Growth Expectations among Entrepreneurs in the Services Sector. Journal 
of Business Research. Vol. 69. pp. 1690-1695. 
Caulfield, J. (2019).  How to do Thematic Analysis. Scribbr. September 2019. 
Chaganti, R., Cook, R. G. & Smeltz, W. J. (2002).  Effects of Styles, Strategies, and 
Systems on the Growth of Small Businesses. Journal of Developmental 
Entrepreneurship. Vol. 7(2), pp. 175-193. 
Charmaz, K. (2006).  Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative 
Analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2006. 
Charmaz, K. & Bryant, A. (2011).  Grounded Theory and Credibility. In: Silverman, D. 
(Eds.). Qualitative Research. 3rd Edition. London: SAGE, 2011. Pp. 291-309.  
Chege, S. M. & Wang, D.  (2020). The Influence of Technology Innovation on SME 
Performance through Environmental Sustainability Practices in Kenya. Technology 
in Society. Vol. 60.  101210. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2019.101210  
Chen, R., Sun, C., Helms, M. M. & Jih, W.  (2008). Role Negotiation and Interaction: An 
Exploratory Case Study of the Impact of Management Consultants on ERP System 
Implementation in SMEs in Taiwan. Information Systems Management. Vol. 25(2), 
pp. 159-173. 
Chen, X., Huang, R., Yang, Z. & Dube, L. (2018). CSR Types and the Moderating Role of 
Corporate Competence. European Journal of Marketing. Vol. 52(7/8), pp. 1358-
1386. 
Chen, M. A., Jhabvala, R. & Lund, F. (2002). Supporting Workers in the Informal 
Economy: A Policy Framework. ILO Employment Sector. Working Paper on the 
Informal Economy. No. 2002/2. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2019.101210
Chinn, C. A. & Brewer, W. F. (2010). A Theory of How People Evaluate Data. Cognition 
and Instruction. Vol. 19(3), pp. 323-393. [Online/Accessed 06/10/2018] Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532690XCI1903_3 
Chinn, C. A. & Malthotra, B. A. (2001). Epistemologically Authentic Inquiry in Schools: A 
Theoretical Framework for Evaluating Inquiry Tasks. National Science Foundation. 
Dept. of Educational Psychology, Rutgers, NJ. Wiley Periodicals, Inc. pp. 1-44. 
[Online/Accessed 08/10/2018] Available at: https://DOI 10.1002/sce.10001 
Choe, J. M. (2008).  Inter-Organisational Relationships and the Flow of Information through 
Value Chains. Information & Management. Vol. 45(7). pp. 444-450. 
[Online/Accessed 22/12/2019] Available at: doi:10.1016/j/im/2008.06.006. 
Choy, L. T. (2014).  The Strengths and Weaknesses of Research Methodology: Comparison 
and Complimentary between Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. IOSR Journal 
of Humanities and Social Science. Vol. 19(4). pp. 99-104. 
Christopherson, S. (2015).  How Does Financialisation Affect Manufacturing Investment? 
Preliminary Evidence from the US and UK. In: Bryson, J. R., Clark, J. & Vanchan, V. 
(Eds.). Handbook of Manufacturing Industries in the World Economy. pp. 42-57. 
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
Ciasullo, M. V. & Troisi, O. (2013).  Sustainable Value Creation in SMEs: A Case Study. 
The TQM Journal. Vol. 25(1), pp. 1754-2731. 
Clarke, J. (1991). Moral Dilemmas in Nursing Research: Nursing Practice. Vol. 4(4), pp. 
22-25.  
Clarke, V. (2018). Thematic Analysis: An Introduction [Online/Accessed 22/11/2020] 
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5zFcC10vOVY&t=1075s 
Clough, P. & Nutbrown, C. (2012). A Students Guide to Methodology: Justifying 
Enquiry. 3rd ed. SAGE Publications. pp. 39- 41. 
Coad, A.  (2009). The Growth of Firms: A Survey of Theories and Empirical Evidence. 
Edward Elgar Publishing.  
Cooney, T. M. & Bygrave, W. D. (1997). The Evolution of Structure and Strategy in Fast-
growth Firms founded by Entrepreneurial Teams. In Working Paper presented at the 
Babson Entrepreneurship Conference. 
Corbin, J. M. & Strauss, A. (1990).  A Grounded Theory Research: Procedures, Canons, and 
Evaluative Criteria. Qualitative Sociology. Vol. 13. Pp. 3-21. 
Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (2014).  Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures 
for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications. 
Coric, G., Katavic, I. & Kopecki, D. (2011).  Sustainable Growth of SMEs in Croatia 
through Development of Entrepreneurial Skills.  Challenges of Europe: Growth and 
Competitiveness  Reversing the Trends. 9th International Conference Proceedings. 
University of Split, Faculty of Economics, Split. pp. 207-242. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S1532690XCI1903_3
Cosh, A. D., Hughes, A. & Weeks, M. (2000).  The Relationship between Training and 
Employment Growth in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises. Centre for Business 
Research. Working Paper No. 1888. Cambridge, UK: University of Cambridge.  
Crabtree, B. F. & Miller, W. L. (1999).  Doing Qualitative Research. 2nd Edition. SAGE 
Publications. Thousand Oaks. London. New Delhi. pp. 10-50. 
Crittenden, V. L., Crittenden, W. F., Ferrell, L. K., Ferrell, O. C. & Pinney, C. C. (2010). 
Market-oriented Sustainability: A Conceptual Framework and Propositions. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science. Vol. 39, pp. 71-85. [Online/Accessed 
11/10/2018] Available at: DOI 10.1007/s11747-010-0217-2 
Cresswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five 
Approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications. pp. 70-80. 
Cresswell, J. W. (2014). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods 
Approaches. 4th Edition. SAGE Publications. London. Chapter One: The Selection 
of Research Approach. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
https://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-
binaries/55588_Chapter_1_Sample_Creswell_Research_Design_4e.pdf 
Cressy, R. (2006).  Why do most Firms Die Young? Small Business Economics. Vol. 
18(3). pp. 36-50. 
Curran, J. (2000).  What is Small Business Policy in the UK for? Evaluation and Assessing 
Small Business Policies. International Small Business Journal. Vol. 14, pp. 165-182. 
Dao, M. & Liu, Q. L. (2017). Finance and Employment in Developing Countries. The 
Working Capital Channel, Washington, D.C. USA. IMF Working Paper No. 17/189.  
Davidson, C. (2009). Transcription: Imperatives for Qualitative Research. International 
Journal of Qualitative Methods. Vol. 8(2). pp. 35-52. 
Davidsson, P. & Wiklund, J. (2001). Levels of Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research: 
Current Research Practice and Suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory 
and Practice. European Business Review. Vol. 25(4). pp. 81-100. 
Davies, D. & Dodd, J. (2002). Qualitative Research and the Question of Rigor. Qualitative 
Health Research. Vol. 12(2). pp. 279-289. 
Deakins, D. (1999).  Entrepreneurship and Small Firms. 2nd Edition. London: McGraw-
Hill.   
Del-Monte, A. & Papagni, E. (2003).  R and D and the Growth of Firms: Empirical Analysis 
of a Panel of Italian Firms. Research Policy. Vol. 32(6), pp. 1003-1014. 
Delmar, F. (1999).  Entrepreneurial Growth Motivation and Actual Growth: A Longitudinal 
Study.  In RENT XIII  Research on Entrepreneurship. London. 
https://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/55588_Chapter_1_Sample_Creswell_Research_Design_4e.pdf
https://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/55588_Chapter_1_Sample_Creswell_Research_Design_4e.pdf
Depken, D. & Zeman, C. (2018). Small Business Challenges and the Triple Bottom Line, 
TBL: Needs Assessment in a Midwest State, U.S.A. Technological Forecasting & 
Social Change. Vol. 135, pp. 44-50. 
Didonet, S., Simmons, G., Diaz-Villavicencio, G & Palmer, M. (2012). The Relationship 
between Small Business Market Orientation and Environmental Uncertainty. 
Marketing Intelligence and Planning. Vol. 30(7). pp. 757-779. 
Dim, C. & Ezenekwe, U. (2014). Capital Flight to Savings Gap in Nigeria: An Assessment 
of the Socioeconomic Determinants. International Journal of Economics and 
Finance. Vol. 6(2) pp.75-85.  
Dobbs, M. & Hamilton, R. T. (2007). Small business growth: recent evidence and new 
Directions. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research. Vol. 
13(5) pp.296-322. [Online/Accessed 12/12/2018] Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1108/13552550710780885 
Dodge, R. H. & Robbins, J. E. (1992).  An Empirical Investigation of the Organisation Life 
cycle.  Journal of Small Business Management. Vol. 30(1). pp. 27-37. 
Doern, R. (2009). Investigating Barriers to SME Growth and Development in Transition 
Environments: A Critique and Suggestions for Developing the Methodology. 
International Small Business Journal. Vol. 27(3). pp. 275-305. 
Dovern, J. & Jannsen, N. (2017). Systematic Errors in Growth Expectations over the 
Business Cycle. International Journal of Forecasting. Vol. 33. pp. 760-769. 
Dunkelberg, W. & Cooper, A.  (1982). Entrepreneurial Typologies: An Empirical Study. In: 
Vesper, K. (Ed.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, Wellesley, 
MA. Centre for Entrepreneurial Studies. Pp. 1-15. 
Dunkelberg, W., Moore, C., Scott, J. & Stull, W. (2013).  Do Entrepreneurial Goals Matter? 
Resource Allocation in New Owner-managed Firms. Journal of Business Venturing. 
Vol. 28, pp. 225-240. 
Durant-Law, G. (2005). Soft Systems Methodology and Grounded Theory combined - A 
Knowledge Management Research Approach? Journal of Knowledge Management. 
Vol. 2. pp. 14-23. 
Earl, M. H. (1988). Information Management. Clarendon Press.  
Earle, J. & Sakova, Z. (2000).  Business Start-ups or Disguised Unemployment? Evidence 
on the character of Self-Employment from Transition Economies. Labour Economics. 
Vol. 7, pp. 575-601. 
Ebitu, E. T., Basil, G. & Ufot, J. A. (2016). An Appraisal of Nigerias Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs): Growth, Challenges and Prospects. British Journal 
of Marketing Studies. Vol. 4(5). pp. 21-36. 
Eggers, F., Kraus, S. & Hughes, M. (2013). Implications of Customer and Entrepreneurial 
Orientations for SME Growth. Management Decision. Vol. 51(3). pp. 524-546. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/13552550710780885
Eigbiremolen, G. O. & Anaduaka, U. S. (2014).  The Place of Microfinance in Todays 
Economy: Further Evidence from Nigeria. International Journal of Academic 
Research in Economics and Management Science. Vol. 3. pp. 12-21. 
Eikebrokk, T. R. & Olsen, D. H. (2007).  An Empirical Investigation of Competency Factors 
Affecting E-Business Success in European SMEs. Information and Management. 
Vol. 44(4), pp. 364-383. 
Eisenmann, T. R. (2006).  Internet Companies Growth Strategies: Determinants of 
Investment Intensity and Long-term Performance. Strategic Management Journal. 
Vol. 27(12), pp. 1183-1204. 
Ejemobi, S. (2013). Reasons Why Small Businesses Fail. Punch Newspaper, Nigeria. 
Available at: http://www.punchng.com/business/am-business/reasons-why-small-
businesses-fail/  
Ekwulugo, F. (2006). Entrepreneurship and SMEs in London (UK): Evaluating the Role of 
Black Africans in the Emergent Sector. Journal of Management Development. Vol. 
25(1). pp. 65-79. 
Ensari, M. S. & Karabay, M. E. (2014). What Helps to Make SMEs Successful in Global 
Markets? Procedia- Social and Behavioural Sciences. Vol.150. pp.192-201 
[Online/Accessed 31/01/2019] Available at: doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.09.030 
Entrialgo, M., Fernandez, E. & Vazquez, C. J. (2000).  Linking Entrepreneurship and 
Strategic Management: Evidence from Spanish SMEs. Technovation. Vol. 20(8), pp. 
427-436. 
European Commission. (2020). Unleashing the Full Potential of European SMEs. EU 
Industrial Strategy. Factsheet. March 2020. Brussels. 
Eweje, G. & Bentley, T. (2006).  CSR and Staff Retention in New Zealand Companies: A 
Literature Review. Department of Management and International Business Research 
Working Paper Series 2006 No 6. Auckland, NZ: Massey University. pp. 1-18. 
Fagbemi, F. (2021).  COVID-19 and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): An Appraisal 
of the Emanating Effects in Nigeria. Research in Globalisation. Vol. 3(2021), 
100047. pp. 2-9. 
Farinas, J. & Moreno, L. (1997). Size, Age and Growth: An Application to Spanish 
manufacturing Firms. Working Paper 9705. Fundacion Empresa Publica. 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid: Madrid. 
Fatoki, O. & Asah, F. (2011). The Impact of Firm and Entrepreneurial Characteristics on 
Access to Debt Finance by SMEs in King Williams Town, South Africa. 
International Journal of Business and Management. Vol. 6(8), pp. 170-179. 
Federico, J., Rabetino, R. & Kantis, H. (2012). Comparing Young SMEs Growth 
Determinants across Regions. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise 
Development. Vol. 19(4). pp. 575-588. 
http://www.punchng.com/business/am-business/reasons-why-small-businesses-fail/
http://www.punchng.com/business/am-business/reasons-why-small-businesses-fail/
Feindt, S., Jeffcoate, J. & Chappell, C. (2002). Identifying Success Factors for Rapid 
Growth in SME E-commerce. Small Business Economics. Vol. 19. pp. 51-62. 
Field, S. & Franklin, M. (2013).  Micro-data Perspectives on the UK Productivity 
Conundrum. Office for National Statistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171766_295470.pdf 
Fjose, S., Grunfeld, L. A. & Green, C. (2010).  SMEs and Growth in Sub-Sahara Africa: 
Identifying SME Role and Obstacles to SME Growth. MENON- Pubication. Vol. 14, 
pp. 1-28. 
Forbat, L. & Henderson, J.  (2005). Theoretical and Practical Reflections on Sharing 
Transcripts with Transcripts. Qualitative Health Research. Vol. 15. pp. 1114-1128. 
Ford, L. & Reutter, L. (1990). Ethical Dilemmas associated with Small Samples. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing. Vol. 15, pp. 187-191. 
Foreman-Peck, J., Makepeace, G. & Morgan, B. (2006). Growth and Profitability of Small 
and Medium-sized Enterprises: Some Welsh Evidence. Regional Studies. Vol. 40(4). 
pp. 307-319. 
Fowowe, B. (2017). Access to Finance and Firm Performance: Evidence from African 
Countries. Review of Development Finance. Vol. 7(1), pp. 6-17. [Online/Accessed 
06/10/2020] Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdf.2017.01.006 
Fraser, S., Bhaumik, S. & Wright, M. (2015). What Do We Know About the Relationship 
Between Entrepreneurial Finance and Growth? International Small Business Journal. 
Vol. 33(1), pp. 70-88. 
Garcia-Morales, V. J., Verdu-Jover, A. J., & Llorens, F. J. (2009). The Influence of CEO 
Perceptions on the Level of Organisational Learning. International Journal of 
Manpower. Vol. 30 (6), pp 567-590. 
Geindre, S. & Dussuc, B. (2012). Social Capital, Social Network Theory and Research in 
SMEs: A Review of the Literature. 11th CIFEPME Conference. Brest: France. 
Gelso, C. (2006). Applying Theories to Research: The Interplay of Theory and Research in 
Science. In: Leong, F. T.., & Austin, J. T. (Eds.). The Psychology Research Handbook 
2. Pp. 456-465. Thousand Oaks, CA. SAGE Publications. [Online/Accessed 
25/05/2020] Available at: doi: 10.4135/978-1-41297 
Ghassibe, M., Appendino, M. & Mahmoudi, S. E. (2019). SME Financial Inclusion for 
Sustained Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia. IMF Working Paper No. 
19/209. 
Gherhes, C., Williams, N., Vorley, T. & Vasconcelos, A. C. (2016). Distinguishing Micro-
businesses from SMEs: A Systematic Review of Growth Constraints. Journal of 
Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 23(4). pp. 939-963. 
Gibson, W. & Brown, A. (2009).  Working with Qualitative Data SAGE Publications. 
London. pp. 127-130. 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171766_295470.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdf.2017.01.006
Gill, A. & Biger, N. (2012). Barriers to Small Business Growth in Canada. Journal of 
Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 19(4). pp. 656-668. 
Glaser, B. G. & Strauss, A. (1967).  The Discovery Grounded Theory: Strategies for 
Qualitative Inquiry. Aldin, Chicago.  
Glaser, B. G. & Strauss, A. L. (2017).  The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for 
Qualitative Research. Routledge: New York, NY, USA.  
Grabher, G. & Stark, D. (1997). Restructuring Networks in Post-Socialism: Legacies, 
Linkages and Localities. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Grant, C. & Osanloo, A.  (2014). Understanding, Selecting and Integrating a Theoretical 
Framework in Dissertation Research: Creating the Blueprint for your House. 
Administrative Issues Journal. Vol. 4(2), Article 4, pp.13-18 [Online/Accessed 
06/10/2018] Available at: https://dc.swosu.edu/aij/vol4/iss2/4 
Goedhuys, M. & Sleuwaegen, L. (2010). High-growth Entrepreneurial Firms in Africa: A 
Quantile Regression Approach. Small Business Economics. Vol. 34. pp. 31-51. 
Golafshani, N. (2003). Understanding Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. The 
Qualitative Report. Vol. 8(4). pp. 597-607. 
Gray, D. E. (2009).  Doing Research in the Real World. 2nd Edition. SAGE Publications.  
Greenberg, Z., Farja, Y. & Gimmon, E. (2018). Embeddedness and Growth of Small 
Businesses in Rural Regions. Journal of Rural Studies. Vol. 62. pp. 174-182. 
Guba, E. G. & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994).  Competing Paradigms in Qualitative Research. In: 
Lincoln, N. K. D. Y. S. (Ed.). Handbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, 
CA. SAGE. pp. 105-117. 
Gudmundsdottir, S. (2001). Narrative Research on School Practice. In Richardson, V. (Eds.) 
Fourth handbook for Research on Teaching. New York: MacMillan. pp. 226-240. 
Gumede, V. (2000). Growth and Exporting of Small and Medium Enterprises in South 
Africa: Some thoughts on Policy and Scope for Further Research. TIPS (Trade and 
Industrial Policy Secretariat). 2000 Annual Forum at Muldersdrift. 18-20 September, 
2000.  
Guo, H., Tang, J., Su, Z., & Katz, J. A. (2017). Opportunity Recognition and SME 
Performance: The Mediating Effect of Business Model Innovation. R & D 
Management. Vol. 47(3), pp. 431-442. 
Gwavuya, F. (2011).  Leadership Influences on Turnover Intentions of Academic Staff in 
Institutions in Zimbabwe. Academic Leadership Journal. Vol. 9(1). pp. 1-15. 
Haber, S. & Reichel, A. (2007).  The Cumulative Nature of the Entrepreneurial process: The 
Contribution of Human Capital, Planning and Environment Resources to Small 
venture Performance. Journal of Business Venturing. Vol. 22(1), pp. 119-145. 
https://dc.swosu.edu/aij/vol4/iss2/4
Hallier, J. & Butts, S. (1999). Employers Discovery of Training: Self Development, 
Employability and the Rhetoric of Partnership. Employee Relations. Vol. 21(1), pp. 
80-94. 
Hakin, C. (1989).  Identifying Fast Growth Small Firms. Employment Gazette (January). 
pp. 29-41. 
Hamburg, I. (2015).  Learning Approaches for Entrepreneurship Education. Archives of 
Business Research. Vol. 3(1). Available at: doi: https://doi.org/10.14738/abr.31.910 
Hamburg, I., OBrien, E. & Vladut, G. (2019).  Entrepreneurship Business Research Skills. 
PICBE 100. Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Business Excellence 
2019. Pp. 100-111. Available at: DOI: 10.2478/picbe-2019-0010.  
Hammersley, M. (1990).  Reading Ethnographic Research. New York; Longman. 
Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing Qualitative Research in Education Settings.                          
Albany, New York. University of New York Press.  
Hatega, G. (2007).  SME Development in Uganda. Paper presented to the Private Sector 
Foundation Uganda, Kampala. 14 march.  
Hay, D. G. & Wood, C. (2011). Infusing Qualitative Traditions in Counselling Research 
Designs. Journal of Counselling and Development. Vol. 89. pp. 288-295. 
[Online/Accessed 02/06/2021] Available at: doi: 10.1002/j/1556-
6678.2011.tb00091.x 
Hazudin, S. F., Kader, M. A. R. A., Tarmuji, N. H., Ishak, M. & Ali, R. (2015). Discovering 
Small Business Start-up Motives, Success Factors and Barriers: A Gender Analysis.  
Procedia Economics and Finance International Accounting and Business Conference 
2015, IABC 2015. Vol. 31. pp. 436-443. Heather, S. (2013).  Three Types of 
Interviews: Qualitative Research Methods in Social Health. Journal of Social Health 
and Diabetes.  Vol. 1(2), pp. 56.  
Heather, S. (2013).  Three Types of Interviews: Qualitative Research Methods in Social 
Health. Journal of Social Health and Diabetes.  Vol. 1(2), pp. 56.  
Heliste, P., Karhunen, P. & Kosonen, R. (2008).  Managing Foreign Business Operations 
through Institutional Change from Transition to Post-Transition: Finnish Firms in 
Russia and Estonia. Journal of East-West Business. Vol. 14(1). pp. 65-99. 
[Online/Accessed 22/12/2019] Available at: doi: 10.1300/j097v14n01_04.  
Hernandez-Canovas, G. & Koeter-Kant, J. (2011). SME Financing in Europe: Cross-country 
Determinant of Bank Loan Maturity. International Small Business Journal. Vol. 
29(5). pp. 489-507 
Hirvonen, S., Laukkanen, T. & Salo, J. (2016). Does Brand Orientation help B2B SMEs in 
Gaining Business Growth?  Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing. Vol. 31(4) 
pp. 472-487. 
https://doi.org/10.14738/abr.31.910
Hoepfl, M. C. (1997). Choosing Qualitative Research: A Primer for Technology Education 
Researchers. Journal of Technology Education. Vol. 9(1). pp. 47-63. 
Holloway, I., & Todres, L. (2003). The Status of Method: Flexibility, Consistency and 
Coherence. Qualitative Research. Vol. 3(3), pp. 345-357. 
Holmes, R. M., Miller, T. J., Hitt, M. A. & Salmador, M. P. (2013).  The Interrelationships 
among Informal Institutions, Formal Institutions and Inward Foreign Direct 
Investment. Journal of Management. Vol. 39(2). pp. 531-566. [Online/Accessed 
22/12/2019] Available at: doi: 10.1177/0149206310393503.   
Horan, G., ODwyer, M. & Tiernan, S. (2011). Exploring Management Perspectives of 
Branding in Service SMEs. Journal of Services Marketing. Vol. 25(2).  pp. 114-121. 
Husserl, E. (1970). The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. 
Evanston. North-western University Press.  
Hwang, H. & Powell, W. (2005).  Institutions and Entrepreneurship. In: Handbooks of 
Entrepreneurship Research: Disciplinary Perspectives. (Eds). Alvarez, S. A., Agarwal, 
R. & Sorenson, O.  pp. 201-232.  New York, NY: Springer.  
Ibidunni, A.S., Kehinde, O. J., Ibidunni, O. M., Olubusayo, F. H., Salau, O. P., Borisade, T. 
T. & Fred, P. (2018). Data on the Relationship between Financing Strategies, 
Entrepreneurial Competencies and Business Growth of Technology-based SMEs in 
Nigeria.  Data in Brief. Vol. 18 pp. 988-991. 
Igwe, P. A., Amaugo, A. N., Ogundana, O. M., Egere, O. M. & Anigbo, J. A. (2018). 
Factors Affecting the Investment Climate, SMEs Productivity and Entrepreneurship 
in Nigeria. European Journal of Sustainable Development. Vol. 7(1) pp. 182-200. 
Ihua, U. B. (2009). SMEs Key Failure-Factors: A Comparison between the United Kingdom 
and Nigeria. Journal of Social Science. Vol. 18(3). pp. 199-207. 
Ihugba, O. A., Odii, A., & Njoku, A. O. (2014). Theoretical Analysis of Entrepreneurship 
Challenges and Prospects in Nigeria. International Letters of Social and Humanistic 
Sciences. Vol.16 (21), pp.21-34 
Ishak, S., Omar, A. R. C. & Ahmad, A. (2012). Business Venture of the Poor: Performance 
and Problems. International Journal of Business and Social Science. Vol. 3(16). pp. 
165-177. 
Ipinnaiye, O. & Dineen, D. (2017). Drivers of SME Performance: A Holistic and 
Multivariate Approach. Small Business Economics. Vol. 48 pp. 883-911. 
Iturrioz, C., Aragon, C., Narbaiza, L. & Ibanez, A. (2009). Social Responsibility in SMEs: A 
Source of Business Value. Social Responsibility Journal. Vol. 5(3), pp. 423-434. 
Jabareen, Y. (2009). Building a Conceptual Framework: Philosophy, Definitions, and 
Procedure. International Journal of Qualitative Methods. Vol. 8(4), pp. 49-62 
Jagongo, A. & Kinyua, C. (2013). The Social Media and Entrepreneurship Growth: A New 
Business Communication Paradigm among SMEs in Nairobi. International Journal 
of Humanities and Social Science. Vol. 3(10). pp. 213-227. 
Janesick, V. (2000). The Choreography of Qualitative Design: Minuets, Improvisations and 
Crystallization. In: Handbook of Qualitative Research edited by Denzin, N. K. and 
Lincoln, Y. S. pp. 379-399. Thousand Oaks, CA. SAGE. [Online/Accessed 
27/12/2019] Available at: 
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2000&pages=37
9-99&author=V.+Janesick&title=+Handbook+of+qualitative+research+  
Jansen, F. (2009). The Conceptualisation of Growth: Are Employment and Turnover 
Interchangeable Criteria? Journal of Entrepreneurship. Vol. 18(1), pp. 21-45. 
Janssen, F. (2004). The Interchangeability of Criteria for Conceptualising Growth: An 
Empirical Study IAG Working papers. Catholic University of Louvain; 118/04. 
Jansen, G., Solberg, D. & Zorn, T. (1992).  Simultaneous Determination of Insider 
Ownership, Debt and Dividend Policies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative 
Analysis. Vol. 27, pp. 247-263. 
Javadi, M. & Zarea, K. (2016).  Understanding Thematic Analysis and its Pitfall. Journal of 
Client Care. Vol. 1(1), pp. 34-40. 
Javidan, M. (1998).  Core Competence: What does it mean in Practice? Long Range 
Planning. Vol. 31(1). pp. 60-71. [Online/Accessed 22/12/2019] Available at: doi: 
10.1016/S0024-6301(97)00091-5. 
Jere, M., Jere, A. & Aspeling, J. (2015). A Study of Small, Medium and Micro-sized 
Enterprise Business Owner and Stakeholders Perceptions of Barriers and Enablers in 
the South African Retail Sector. Journal of Governance and Regulation. Vol. 4(4).  
Pp. 620-630. Available at: doi: 10.22495/jgr_v4_i4_c5_p7 
Johnson, R. B. & Christensen, L. B. (2004). Educational Research: Quantitative, Qualitative 
and Mixed Approaches. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. Available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033007014 
Jones, J. & Smith, J. (2017).  Ethnography: Challenges and Opportunities. BMJ Journals.  
Evidence-Based Nursing. Vol. 20. pp. 98-100. 
Jovanovic, B. (1982). Selection and Evolution of Industry Econometrica. Vol. 50(3). pp. 
649-670. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2020] Available at: doi: 10.2307/1912606. 
Kalleberg, A. L. & Leicht, K. T. (1991).  Gender and Organisational Performance: 
Determinants of Small Business Survival and Success. Academy of Management 
Journal.  Vol. 34(1). pp. 136-161. 
Kamunge, M. S., Njeru, A. & Tirimba, O. I. (2014).  Factors Affecting the Performance of 
Small and Macro Enterprises in Limuru Town Market of Kiambu County. 
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications. Vol. 4(12), pp. 1-20. 
Kangasharju, A. & Pekkala, S. (2002). The Role of Education in Self-employment Success 
in Finland. Growth and Change. Vol. 33(2), pp. 216-237. 
Kay, J. (1993).  Foundations of Corporate Success: How Business Strategies Add Value. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033007014
Keefer, P. & Knack, S. (1997).  Why dont Poor Countries Catch Up? A Cross-National 
Test of an Institutional Explanation. Economic Inquiry. Vol. 35. pp. 590-602. 
[Online/Accessed 22/12/2019] Available at: doi:10.1111/j.1465-7295.1997.tb02035.x.     
Kemayel, L. (2015). Success Factors of Lebanese SMEs: An Empirical Study. Procedia-
Social and Behavioural Sciences. Vol. 195 pp. 1123-1128. 
Kerr, I. R. (2006). Leadership Strategies for Sustainable SME Operation. Business Strategy 
and the Environment. Vol. 15(1), pp. 30-39. 
Khan, K. U., Farooq, S. U. & Ullah, M. I. (2010).  The Relationship between Rewards and 
Employee Motivation in Commercial Banks of Pakistan. Journal of International 
Studies.  Vol. 5, pp. 37-54.  
Khan, S. N. (2014).  Qualitative Research Method: Grounded Theory. International Journal 
of Business and Management. Vol. 9(11), pp. 29-41.  
Khalil, M. (2003). The Wireless Internet Opportunity for Developing Countries. The 
Wireless Institute. pp. 1-4 
Kilbourn, B. (2006). The Qualitative Doctoral Dissertation Proposal. Teachers College 
Record. Vol. 108(4), pp.538 
Kim, D., Cavusgil, S. T. & Calantone, R. J. (2006).  Information System Innovations and 
Supply Chain Management: Chanel Relationships and Firm Performance. Journal of 
Academy of Marketing Science. Vol. 34(1), pp. 40-54. 
Kirby, D. (1990).  Management Education and Small Business Development: An 
Explanatory Study of Small Firms in the UK. Journal of Small Business 
Management. Vol. 28(4), pp. 78-87. 
Kirchoff, B. A. (1994).  Entrepreneurship and Dynamic Capitalism: The Economics of 
Business Firm Formation and Growth.  Westport, CT: Praeger.   
Klein, K. E.  (2014). Funding a New Small Business? Dont bother with Banks. Business 
Week [Feb10-Feb16, 2014] Business Week, Brunel University.  
Kollmann, T., Stockmann, C., Hensellek, S. & Kensbock, J. (2016). European Start-up 
Monitor.  Department of Economics and Business Administration, University of 
Duisburg-Essen. E-Business and E-Entrepreneurship Research Group.  
Kothari, C. R. (2004). Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques. 2nd revised 
edition. New Age Intl Publishers. pp.25. 
Kozan, M. K., Oksoy, D. & Ozsoy, O. (2012). Owner Sacrifice and Small Business 
Growth. Journal of World Business. Vol. 47 pp. 409-419. 
Krake, F. B. G. F. M. (2005). Successful Brand Management in SMEs: A New Theory and 
Practical Hints. Journal of Product and Brand Management. Vol. 14(4).  pp. 228-238. 
Krasniqi, B. (2007). Barriers to Entrepreneurship and SME Growth in Transition: The Case 
of Kosova. Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship. Vol. 12(1), pp. 71-94. 
Krasniqi, B. (2014).  Characteristics of Self-Employment: A Refuge from Unemployment or 
Road to Entrepreneurship. Small Enterprise Research. Vol. 21(1), pp. 33-53. 
Krasniqi, B. A. & Mustafa, M. (2016). Small Firm Growth in a Post-Conflict Environment: 
The Role of Human Capital, Institutional Quality and Managerial Capacities. 
International Entrepreneur Management Journal. Vol. 12. pp. 1165-1207. 
Kutzhanova, N., Lyons, T. S. & Lichtenstein, G. A. (2009).  Skill-based Development of 
Entrepreneurs and the Role of Personal and Peer Group Coaching in Enterprise 
Development. Economic Development Quarterly.  Vol. 23(3), pp. 193-210.  
Labuschagne, C., Alan, C., Brent and Ron, P. G. & Van, E. (2004). Assessing the 
Sustainability Performances of Industries. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Lai, Y. G., Saridakis, G., Blackburn, R. & Johnstone, S. (2016). Are the HR Responses of 
Small Firms Different from Large Firms in times of Recession? Journal of Business 
Venturing. Vol. 31(1). pp. 113-131. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2020] Available at 
Doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2015.04.005. 
Lakoff, S. (2008).  Upstart Start-Up: Constructed Advantages and the Example of 
Qualcomm. Tecnovation.  Vol. 12, pp. 831-837..  
Lang, L., Ofek, E. & Stulz, R.  (1996). Leverage, Investment and Firm Growth. Journal of 
Financial Economics. Vol. 40, pp. 3-29. 
Lapadat, J. (2000). Problematizing Transcription: Purpose, Paradigm and Quality. 
International Journal of Social Research Methodology. Vol. 3. pp. 203-219. 
Lapadat, J. C. & Lindsay, A. C. (1999). Transcription in Research and Practice: Form 
Standardization of Technique to Interpretive Positioning. Qualitative Inquiry. Vol. 5. 
pp. 64-86. 
Lee, S. & Lim, G. G. (2005).  The Impact of Partnership Attributes on EDI Implementation 
Success. Information & Management. Vol. 42(4). pp. 503-516. [Online/Accessed 
22/12/2019] Available at: doi:10.1016/j/im/2003.03.001. 
Lee, H. L., So, K. C. & Tang, C. S. (2000).  The Value of Information Sharing in a Two-
Level Supply Chain. Management Science. Vol. 46(5), pp. 626-643. 
Lee, D. Y. & Tsang, E. W. (2001).  The Effects of Entrepreneurial Personality, background 
and Network Activities on Venture Growth. Journal of Management Studies. Vol. 
38(4), pp. 583-602. 
Lee, S. M. & Peterson, S. J. (2000). Culture, Entrepreneurial Orientation, and Global 
Competiveness. Journal of World Business. Vol. 35(4), pp. 401- 416. 
Leek, S. & Christodoulides, G. (2011).  A Literature Review and Future Agenda for B2B 
Branding: Challenges of Branding in a B2B Context. Industrial Marketing 
Management. Vol. 40(6).  pp. 830-837. 
Lester, S. (1999).  An Introduction to Phenomenological Research. Stan Lester 
Developments. Taunton. pp. 1-4. 
Levratto, N. (1996).  Small Firms Finance in France. Small Business Economics. Vol. 8(4), 
pp. 279-295. 
Liamputtong, P. and Ezzy, D. (2005). Qualitative Research Methods 2nd edition. Chapter 
One. Pp. 12-31. Oxford University Press: Victoria, Australia. 
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry.                                             
Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.  
Locke, K. (2002).  The Grounded Theory Approach to Qualitative Research. In: Drasgow, 
F. & Schmitt, N. (Eds.). The Jossey-Bass Business & Management Series. Measuring 
and Analysing Behaviour in Organisations: Advances in Measurement and Data 
Analysis. pp. 17-43.  
Locke, T. (2004).  Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Cromwell Press. 
Lockett, A., Thompson, S. & Morgenstern, U. (2009).  The Development of the Resource 
Based View of the Firm: A Critical Appraisal. International Journal of Management 
Reviews.  Vol. 11(1), pp.9-28. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2020] Available at: 
doi:10.111/j.1468-2370.2008.00252.x. 
Long, C. S., Ajagbe, M. A. & Kowang, T. O. (2014).  Addressing the Issues on Employees 
Turnover Intention in the Perspective of HRM Practices in SME. Procedia-Social 
and Behavioural Sciences.  Vol. 129, pp. 99-104.  
Loveman, G. W. & Sengenberger, W. (1990).  Introduction: Economic and Social Re-
organisation in the Small and Medium-sized Enterprise Sector.  In: Sengenberger, 
W., Loveman, G. W. & Piore, M. J. (Eds). The Re-emergence of Small Enterprise: 
Industrial Re-structuring in Industrialised Countries. pp. 1-61. Geneva: International 
Labour Office, International Institute for Labour Studies. 
Lumpkin, G. T. & Dess, G. G. (1996).  Clarifying the Entrepreneurial Orientation Construct 
and linking it to Performance. Academy of Management Review. Vol. 21(1), pp.135-
Luo, A. (2019). What is Content Analysis and how can you use it in your Research? 
Scribbr. July 2019.  
Lupton, D. (1992).  Discourse Analysis: A New Methodology for Understanding the 
Ideologies of Health and Illness. Australian Journal of Public Health. Vol. 16(2), pp. 
145-150. 
Lussier, R. N. (196).  Reasons Why Small Businesses Fail: An How to avoid Failure. The 
Entrepreneur Executive. Vol. 1(2), pp. 10-17. 
MacLean, L. M., Meyer, M. & Estable, A. (2004). Improving Accuracy of Transcripts in 
Qualitative Research. Qualitative Health Research. Vol. 14. pp. 113-123. 
Macpherson, A. & Holt, R. (2007). Knowledge, Learning and Small Firm Growth: A 
Systematic Review of the Evidence. Research Policy. Vol. 36 pp. 172-192. 
Magrini, J. M. (2012). Phenomenology for Educators: Max van Manen and Human 
Science Research Philosophy Scholarship. Paper 32. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2020] 
Available at https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/10676894.pdf 
Magrizos, S., Apospori, E., Carrigan, M. & Jones, R. (2021). Is CSR the panacea for SMEs? 
A Study of Socially Responsible SMEs during Economic Crisis. European 
Management Journal. Vol. 39 pp. 291-303. 
Maine, M. E., Shapiro, M. D. & Vining, R. A.  (2010). The Role of Clustering in the Growth 
of New Technology-Based Firms. Research Policy. Vol. 34(2), pp. 127-146. 
Makadok, R. (2001).  Toward a Synthesis of the Resource based and Dynamic Capacity 
Views of Rent Creation. Strategic Management Journal. Vol. 22(5). pp. 387-401. 
[Online/Accessed 22/02/2020] Available at: doi:10.1002/smj.158. 
Malhotra, A., Sidney, S. & Carol, B. (2002). Measuring Womens Empowerment as a 
Variable in International Development. Paper commissioned by the Gender and 
Development Group of the World Bank. Washington, DC. 
Malle, B. (1999). How People Explain Behaviour: A New Theoretical Framework. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Vol. 
3(1), pp.23-48. 
Malterud, k. (2001).  Qualitative Research: Standards, Challenges, and Guidelines. 
Qualitative Research Series. The Lancet. Vol. 358, pp. 483-488.  
Mambula, C. (2002). Perceptions of SME Growth Constraints in Nigeria. Journal of Small 
Business Management. Vol. 40(1). pp. 58-65. 
Mangold, W. G. & Faulds, D. J. (2009).  Social Media: The New Hybrid Element of the 
Promotion Mix. Business Horizons. Vol. 52, pp. 357-365. 
Marlow, S. (2002).  Women in Self Employment: A part of, or apart from, theoretical 
Construct. International Journal of Entrepreneurship Innovation. Vol. 3(2), pp. 83-
Marlow, S., Patton, D & Ram, M.  (2005). Labour Management in Small Firms. 
Introduction. London: Routledge. 
Marrewjik, M. (2003). Concepts and Definitions of CSR and Corporate Sustainability: 
Between Agency and Communion. Journal of Business Ethics. Vol. 44, pp. 95-105. 
Marshall, A., Kitson, A. & Zeitz, K. (2012).  Patients views of Patient-Centred Care: A 
Phenomenological Case Study in One Surgical Unit. Journal of Clinical Nursing. 
Vol. 68(12). pp. 2664-2673. 
Marshall, C. & Rossman, G. (2006). Designing Qualitative Research. 2nd edition. Thousand 
Oaks, CA. SAGE. [Online/Accessed 08/10/2018] Available at: 
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/10676894.pdf
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2006&author=C
.+Marshall&author=G.+Rossman&title=+Designing+qualitative+research++  
Martin, A. J. & LaMontagne, A. D. (2018).  Applying an Integrated Approach to Workplace 
Mental Health in SMEs: A Case of the too hard basket or picking some easy wins? 
Organisational Interventions for Health and Well-being. 1st Edition. Routledge. 
Mashenene, R. G. & Rumanyika, J. (2014). Business Constraints and Potential Growth of 
Small and Medium Enterprises in Tanzania: A Review. European Journal of 
Business and Management. Vol. 6(3). pp. 72-79. 
Mat, J. (2008).  The Influence of Leadership Style on Internal Marketing in Retailing. PhD 
Thesis. University of Stirling.  
Mather, C. (2005). The Growth Challenges of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in 
South Africas Food Processing Complex. Development Southern Africa. Vol. 22(5). 
pp. 607-622. 
Maxwell, J. (2005). Qualitative Research: An Interactive Design. 2nd edition. Thousand 
Oaks, CA. SAGE [Online/Accessed 27/12/2019] Available at: 
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2005&author=J.
+Maxwell&title=+Qualitative+research%3A+An+interactive+design++  
Mayo, N. E., Asano, M., & Barbic, S. P. (2013). When is a Research Question not a 
Research Question? Journal Compilation. Foundation of Rehabilitation Information. 
J Rehabil Med 2013; 45, pp. 513-518. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at doi: 
10.2340/16501977-1150. 
Mays, N. & Pope, C. (2000).  Quality in Qualitative Health Research. In: Pope C. P., Mays, 
N. eds. Qualitative Research in Health Care. 2nd Edition. London: BMJ Books, pp. 
89-101.  
Mazzucato, M. & Parris, S. (2015).  High-growth Firms in changing Competitive 
Environments: The US Pharmaceutical Industry (1963 to 2002). Small Business 
Economics. Vol. 44(1), pp. 145-170. [Online/Accessed 27/12/2019] Available at: doi: 
10.1007/s11187-014-9583-3. 
Mbonyane, B. & Ladzani, W. (2011). Factors that hinder the Growth of Small Businesses in 
South African Townships. European Business Review. Vol. 23(6). pp. 550-560. 
McCaslin, M. L. & Scott, K. W. (2003). The Five-Question Method for framing a 
Qualitative Research Study. The Qualitative Report. CAHSS Journals. Vol. 8(3), pp. 
McDowell, L. (2001). Its that Linda Again: Ethical, Practical and Political Issues involved 
in Longitudinal Research with Young Men. Ethics, Place and Environment.. Vol. 4. 
pp. 87-100. 
McKinsey and Company. (2012). Africa at Work: Job Creation and Inclusive Growth.                                     
McKinsey Global Institute, Washington, DC. 
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2006&author=C.+Marshall&author=G.+Rossman&title=+Designing+qualitative+research
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2006&author=C.+Marshall&author=G.+Rossman&title=+Designing+qualitative+research
McNabb, D. E. (2010). Research Methods for Political Science: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Approaches. 2nd Edition. Sharpe, Inc. New York. pp. 125. 
Memba, S. F., Gakure, W. R. & Karanja, K. (2012). Venture Capital: Its Impact on Growth 
of Small and Medium Enterprises in Kenya. International Journal of Business and 
Social Science. Vol. 3(6). pp. 32-38. 
Mero-Jaffe, I. (2011). Is that What I said? Interview Transcript Approval by Participants: 
An Aspect of Ethics in Qualitative Research. International Journal of Qualitative 
Methods. Vol. 10(3). Pp. 231-247.  
Merrilees, B.  (2007). A Theory of Brand-led SME New Venture Development. An 
International Journal. Vol. 10(4), pp. 403-415. 
Meyer, L.  (1998). The Present and Future Roles of Banks in Small Business Finance. 
Journal of Banking and Finance. Vol. 22, pp. 1109-1116. 
Missimer, M., Robert, K. & Broman, G. (2016). A Strategic Approach to Social 
Sustainability- Part 1: Exploring the Social System. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Vol. 140 (2017), pp.32-41. [Online/Accessed 08/10/2018] Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.170 
Mora, M., Gelman, O., Steenkamp, A. & Raisinghani, M. S. (2012). Research 
Methodologies, Innovations and Philosophies in Software Systems Engineering and 
Information Systems. IGI Global. Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication 
Data.  pp. 43-62. 
Moreira, D. F. (2016). The Microeconomic Impact on Growth of SMEs when the Access to 
Finance widens: Evidence from Internet & High-tech Industry. Procedia-Social and 
Behavioural Sciences. Vol. 220. pp. 278-287. 
Morrison, A., Breen, J. & Ali, S. (2003). Small Business Growth: Intention, Ability and 
Opportunity. Small Business Management. Vol. 41(4). pp. 417-423. 
Moses, O. & Adebisi, J. F. (2013).  Small Business Financing in Nigeria: An Investigation 
of Angel Option. Canadian Social Science. Vol. 9(2). pp. 93-98. 
Motta, V. & Sharma, A. (2019). Lending Technologies and Access to Finance for SMEs in 
the Hospitality Industry. International Journal of Hospitality Management Article 
No. 102371 (Article in press). pp. 1-9. 
Moustakas, C. (1994). Phenomenological Research Methods.                                     
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.  
Muller, P., Julius, J., Herr, D., Koch, L., Peycheva, V. & McKiernan, S. (2017).  SME 
Performance Review 2016/2017: Annual Report on European SMEs 2016/2017. 
Focus on Self-employment. European Commission, Directorate-General for Internal 
Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.170
Murphy, M. (1996).  Small Business Management. Financial Times and Pitman Publishing. 
London.  
Musa, H. & Chinniah, M. (2016).  Malaysian SMEs Development: Future and Challenges 
on Going Green. Social and Behavioural Sciences. Vol. 224. pp. 254-262. 
Myers, M. D. (2009). Qualitative Research in Business and Management. Los Angeles, 
CA: SAGE. 
Nasir, W. M. N. B. W. M., Mamun, A. A., & Breen, J. (2017). Strategic Orientation and 
Performance of SMEs in Malaysia. SAGE Journals. Vol. 1(13), pp. 1-13. 
National Federation of Self-Employed & Small Businesses Limited. (2021). UK Small 
Business Statistics. Business Population Estimates for the UK and Regions in 2021. 
Available at: https://www.fsb.org.uk/uk-small-business-statistics.html 
Ndubisi, N. O. & Ndubisi, G. C. (2017). Sustainable Internal Marketing and Internal 
Customer Motivation Model: An African Small and Medium Sized Enterprise 
Perspective. Journal of Asian and African Studies. Vol. 48(4), pp. 521-538. 
[Online/Accessed 11/10/2018] Available at: DOI: 10.1177/0021909613493608 
Nelson, R. R. & Winter, S. G. (1982).  An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  
Neneh, B. N. & Vanzyl, J. (2014). Growth Intention and its Impact on Business Growth 
amongst SMEs in South Africa. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences. Vol. 
5(20). pp. 172-183. 
Neuman, W. L. (1991).  Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative 
Approaches. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Neuman, W. L. (1994).  Social Research Methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Neuman, I, & Benz, C. R. (1998).  Qualitative-Quantitative Research Methodology: 
Exploring the Interactive Continuum. Southern Illinois University Press. Carbondale 
and Edwardsville. pp. 1-3. 
Nichter, S. & Goldmark, L. (2009). Small Firm Growth in Developing Countries. World 
Development. Vol. 37(9).  pp. 1453- 1464. [Online/Accessed 31/01/2019] Available at: 
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2009.01.013 
Nikolic, N., Jovanovic, I., Nikolic, D., Mihajlovic, I. & Schulte, P. (2019). Investigation of 
the Factors Influencing SME Failure as a Function of Its Prevention and Fast 
Recovery after Failure. Entrepreneurship Research Journal. DE GRUYTER. pp. 1-
21. Available at: DOI: 10.1515/erj-2017-0030 
North, D. & Smallbone, D. (1996). Small Business Development in Remote Rural Areas: 
The Example of Mature Manufacturing Firms in Northern England. Journal of Rural 
Studies. Vol. 12(2). pp. 151-167. 
Nybakk, E. 7 Panwar, R. (2014). Understanding Instrument Motivations for Social 
Responsibility Engagement in Micro-Firm Context. Business Ethics. A European 
Review. Vol. 24(1). [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: DOI: 
10.1111/beer.12064. In press 
Obi, J., Ibidunni, A. S., Tolulope, A., Olokundun, M. A., Amaihian, A. B., Borishade, T. T. 
& Fred, P. (2018).  Contribution of Small and Medium Enterprises to Economic 
Development: Evidence from a Transiting Economy. Data Brief. Vol. 18. Pp. 835-
839. Available at: doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2018.03.126 
OBrien, E. & Carroll, L. (2015).  A Report on How Problem-based Learning and ICT can 
Support SMEs in Europe. Retrieved from 
http://www.archimeded2014.eu/doc/reports/European%20report%20on%20SMEs.pdf  
OFarrell, P. N. & Hitchens, D. M. W. N (1988).  Alternative Theories of Small Firm 
Growth: A Critical Review. Environment and Planning. Vol. 20(10), pp. 1365-1383. 
ODPM (2005). Small Business Friendly Concordat: Good Practice Guidance. A Joint 
Document produced by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, Department of Trade 
and Industry and Local Government Association. UK: ODPM Publications.  
Ojukwu, D. (2006). Achieving Sustainable Growth through the Adoption of Integrated 
Business and Information Solutions: A Case Study of Nigerian Small and Medium-
Sized Enterprises. Journal of Information Technology Impact. Vol. 6(1). pp. 47-60. 
Okpara, J. O. (2011). Factors Constraining the Growth and Survival of SMEs in Nigeria: 
Implications for Poverty Alleviation. Management Research Review. Vol. 34(2). pp. 
156-171. 
Olatunji, T. E. (2013).  The Impact of Accounting System on the Performance of Small and 
Medium Scale Enterprises in Nigeria: A Survey of SMEs in Oyo state, Nigeria. 
International Journal of Business and Management Invention. Vol. 2(9).  pp. 13-17. 
Olawale, f. & Garwe, D. (2010). Obstacles to the Growth of New SMEs in South Africa: A 
Principal Component Analysis Approach. African Journal of Business Management. 
Vol. 4(5). pp. 729-738. 
Oliver, D. G., Serovich, J. M. & Mason, T. L. (2005). Constraints and Opportunities with 
Interview Transcription: Towards reflection in Qualitative Research. Social Forces. 
Vol. 84. Pp. 1273-1289.   
Olushina, A. D. (2017).  The Impact of Leadership Styles on Employees Commitment in 
the Private-sector Banks in Nigeria. (Eds.) Dissertation: The University of the West 
of Scotland. UK. pp. 1-53. 
Onaolapo, A. A., Fasina, H, T., Opoola, N. A. & Olatunji, A. (2011).  Basic Accounting. 
One Ogbomosho; Johnny Printing Works. 
Onwuegbuzie, A. J. & Leech, N. L. (2006). Linking Research Questions to Mixed Methods 
Data Analysis Procedures 1. The Qualitative Report, Vol. 11(3), pp. 474-498. 
[Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Involved/Action/Rationale_HowtoWrite.pdf 
http://www.archimeded2014.eu/doc/reports/European%20report%20on%20SMEs.pdf
http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Involved/Action/Rationale_HowtoWrite.pdf
Oraka, C.  (2013). Why Nigerian Family Businesses Fail. Punch Newspaper. Nigeria. 
Available at: http://www.punchng.com/opinion/re-why-nigerian-family-businesses-
fail/  
Ornek, F. (2008). An Overview of a Theoretical Framework of Phenomenography in 
Qualitative Education Research: An Example from Physics Education Research. 
Marton, F. (1986). Phenomenography  A Research Approach Investigating Different 
Understandings of Reality. Journal of Thought. Vol. 21, pp. 28-49 IN: Asia-Pacific 
Forum on Science Learning and Teaching. Vol. 9(2), Article 11, pp.1-14.  
Orser, B., Hogarth-Scott, S. & Wright, P. (1996).  Enterprising Intention and Likelihood of 
Growth: A Predictive Model of Firm Performance. In Proceedings of 19th ISBA 
Conference Enterprising Futures. Birmingham. pp. 728-747.  
Osalor, P. (2016).  Entrepreneurial Revolution: The Way forward Nigeria.  In: Finance: 
Vanguard Newspaper Online. April 25, 2016. 12. 05 Am. [Online/Accessed 
30/11/2020] Available at: vanguardngr.com/2016/04/entrepreneurial-revolution-way-
forward-nigeria/ 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods. 3rd Edition. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. pp. 37-41. 
Penrose, E. (1959). Theory of the Growth of Firm. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Basil 
Blackwell. Revised Edition.  
Pereira, V., Temouri, Y., Patnaik, S. & Mellahi, K. (2020). Managing and Preparing for 
Emerging Infectious Disease: Avoiding a Catastrophe. Academy of Management 
Perspectives. In Press. 
Perren, L. (1999).  Factors in the Growth of Micro-Enterprises (Part 1): Developing a 
Framework. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 6(4), pp. 
366-385. 
Perren, L. (2000).  Factors in the Growth of Micro-Enterprises (Part 2): Developing a 
Framework. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 6(4), pp. 
363-389. 
Pernick, R. & Wilder, C. (2012). Clean Tech Nation: How the U.S Can Lead in the New 
Global Economy. HarperBuisness, Illustrated edition 2012. 
Pettus, M. L. (2001).  The Resource-Based View as a Developmental Growth Process: 
Evidence from the Deregulated Trucking Industry. The Academy of Management 
Journal. Vol. 44(4). pp. 878-896. 
Phiri, T.  (2003). Exporting Competitiveness from Use of Networks as Source of Market 
Information among Small Hi-Tech Firm Exporters: A Conceptual Framework In: 
Bell, J., Morrow, T & Crossan, D (eds). 6th Edition. McGill Conference on 
International Entrepreneurship: Crossing Boundaries and Researching New Frontiers. 
http://www.punchng.com/opinion/re-why-nigerian-family-businesses-fail/
http://www.punchng.com/opinion/re-why-nigerian-family-businesses-fail/
Piergiovanni, R., Santarelli, E., Klomp, L. & Thurik, A. R. (2002).  Gibrats Law and the 
Firm Size/Firm Growth Relationship in Italian Services. Discussion Paper No. 02-
080/3. Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam and Rotterdam. 
Pissarides, F. (1998). Is Lack of Funds the Main Obstacle to Growth? The EBRDs 
experience with small and medium-sized businesses in central and eastern Europe. 
EBRD Working Paper 33. London: European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. [Online/Accessed 30/01/2020] Available at: 
www.ebrd.org/english/regin/workingp/index.htm 
Pissarides, F., Singer, M. & Svenjnar, J. (2003).  Objectives and Constraints of 
Entrepreneurs: Evidence from Small and Medium Size Enterprises in Russia and 
Bulgaria. Journal of Comparative Economics. Vol. 31(3). pp. 503-531. 
Pletnev, D. & Barkhatov, V. (2016). Business Success of Small and Medium Sized 
Enterprises in Russia and Social Responsibility of Managers. Procedia-Social and 
Behavioural Sciences. Vol. 221. pp. 185-193. 
Polit, D. F. & Beck, C. T. (2007). Nursing Research: Generating and Assessing Evidence for 
Nursing Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.  
Popay, J., Rogers, A. & Williams, G. (1998).  Rationale and Standards for the Systematic 
Review of Qualitative Literature in Health Services Research. Qualitative Health 
Services. Vol. 8. pp. 341-351. 
Powe, N. A. (2018). Non-amenity Business Growth and Small Town Revival. Journal of 
Rural Studies. Vol. 62. pp. 125-133. 
Punch, K. F. (1998).  Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Approaches. 1st Edition. London. Thousand Oaks, CA. New Delhi. SAGE 
Publications.  
Purcell-Gates, V. (2004). Ethnographic Research. In N. K. Duke & M. H. Mallette, (Eds.), 
Literacy Research Methodologies. Pp. 92-113. New York: The Guilford Press.  
Quartey, P., Turkson, E., Abor, J.Y., & Iddrisu, A. M. (2017). Financing the growth of 
SMEs in Africa: What are the constraints to SME financing within ECOWAS? 
Review of Development Finance. Vol. 7.  pp. 18-28 [Online/Accessed 30/01/2019] 
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rdf.2017.03.001 
Queiros, M., Braga, V. & Correia, A. (2019). Cross-country Analysis to High-Growth 
Business: Unveiling its Determinant. Journal of Innovation & Knowledge. Vol. 4. 
pp. 146-153. 
Rai, A., Patnayakuni, R. & Seth, N. (2006).  Firm Performance Impacts of Digitally Enabled 
Supply Chain Integration Capabilities. MIS Quarterly. Vol. 30(2). pp. 225-246. 
Raimi, L., Patel, A., Yekini, K. & Fadipe, A. O. (2014). Spatio-Temporal Audit of Nigerias 
Industrial Policies and Entrepreneurship Development Interventions from 1946 to 
2013. International Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences. Vol. 4(1). pp. 294-
http://www.ebrd.org/english/regin/workingp/index.htm
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rdf.2017.03.001
Rajaram, R. (2008).  A Needs Analysis of Financial Management and Accounting Skills in 
the SME Sector in KwaZulu-Natal. Thesis submitted to University of KwaZulu-
Natal, Pietermaritzburg. Unpublished. 
Rasdi, R. M., Ismail, M., Uli, J. & Noah, S. M. (2009). Towards Developing a Theoretical 
Framework for Measuring Public Sector Managers Career Success. Journal of 
European Industrial Training. Vol. 33(3), pp. 232-254. [Online/Accessed 08/10/2018] 
Available at: DOI 10.1108/03090590910950596 
Raymond, L. & Bergeron, F. (2008).  Enabling the Business Strategy of SMEs through E-
Business Capabilities: A Strategic Alignment Perspective. Industrial Management & 
Data. Vol. 108(5), pp. 577-595. 
Rauch, A. J. (2000). Success Factors of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises. University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam. PhD Thesis. pp. 1-135. 
Reid, G. C. & Smith, J. A. (2000).  What Makes a New Business Start-up Successful? 
Small Business Economics. Vol. 14, pp. 165-182. 
Reijonen, H., Hirvonen, S., Nagy, G., Laukkanen, T. & Gabrielsson, M. (2015).  The Impact 
of Entrepreneurial Orientation on B2B Branding and Business Growth in Emerging 
Markets. Industrial Marketing Management. Vol. 51, pp. 35-46. 
Remenyi, D., Williams, B., Money, A & Swartz, E. (1998). Doing Business and 
Management. Sage Publications London IN: Amaratunga, D., Baldry, D. Sarshar, M 
& Newton, R. (2002). Quantitative and Qualitative Research in the Built 
Environment: Application of Mixed Research Approach. Work Study, Emerald 
Insights. Vol.51 (1), pp. 17-31 [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: DOI 
10.1108/00438020210415488 
Rhee, H. & Bell, D. R. (2002).  The Inter-store Mobility of Supermarket Shoppers. Journal 
of Retailing. Vol. 78(4), pp. 225-237. 
Richards, L. (2005). Handling Qualitative Data: A Practical Guide. SAGE Publications. 
London. [Online/Accessed 21/12/2019] Available at: 
http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2005&author=L.
+Richards&title=+Handling+qualitative+data%3A+A+practical+guide  
Roberts, M. L. (2009). Signposts on the Path to Teacher Learning: A Phenomenological 
Case Study. PhD diss., University of Tennessee, Knoxville. [Online/Accessed 
08/10/2020] Available at: https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_graddiss/633 
Robson, P. J. A. & Bennett, R. J. (2000). SME Growth: The Relationship with Business 
Advice and External Collaboration. Small Business Economics. Vol. 15. pp. 193-
Rojon, C. & Saunders, M. N. K. (2012). Formulating a Convincing Rationale for a Research 
Study. International Journal of Theory, Research and Practice. Vol. 5(1), pp. 55. 
[Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17521882.2011.648335 
https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_graddiss/633
https://doi.org/10.1080/17521882.2011.648335
Romar, E. J. (2009).  Strategic Intent, Confucian Harmony and Firm Success. Acta 
Polytechnica Hungarica. Vol. 6(3). pp. 57-67. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. & Grover, V. (2003).  Shaping Agility through Digital 
Options: Reconceptualising the Role of Information Technology in Contemporary 
Firms. MIS Quarterly. Vol. 27(2). pp. 237-263.   
Sandberg, J. & Alvesson, M. (2011). Ways of Constructing Research Questions: Gap-
spotting or Problematisation? Organisation. 2011. Vol. 18(1). Pp. 23-44. 
[Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: doi.org/10.1177/1350508410372151 
Saunders, M., Lewis, P. & Thornhill, A. (2016). Research Methods for Business Students. 
Chapter 4: Understanding Research Philosophy and Theory Development, pp. 120-
137. 7th Edition. Pearson Education Limited, England. 
Saunders, B., Sim, J., Kingstone, T., Baker, S., Waterfield, J., Bartlam, B., Burroughs, H. 
&Jinks, C. (2017).  Saturation in Qualitative Research: Exploring its 
Conceptualisation and Operationalisation. Qual Quant. Cross Mark. Institute for 
Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire. pp. 1-15. 
Schoonjans, B., Cauwenberge, P. V. & Bauwhede, H. V. (2011). Formal Business 
Networking and SME Growth. Small Business Economics. Vol. 41. pp. 169-181. 
Schatz, S. (1963). Development Bank Lending in Nigeria: Economic Environment and 
Private Enterprises in West Africa. Economic Bulletin. Ghana. Vol. 7(4). pp. 42-56. 
Schneider, A. & Meins, E. (2012). Two Dimensions of Corporate Sustainability 
Assessment: Towards a Comprehensive Framework. Business Strategy 
Environment. Vol. 21(4). pp. 211-222. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2019] Available at:   
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.726 
Seale, C. (1999). Quality in Qualitative Research. Qualitative Inquiry. Vol. 5(4). pp. 465-
Searle, J. R. (1995).  The Construction of Social Reality. The Free Press. Library of 
Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data. pp. 3-10. 
Serrasqueiro, Z., Nunes, P. M., Leitao, J. & Armada, M. (2010). Are there Non-Linearities 
between SME Growth and Its Determinant? A Quantile Approach. Industrial and 
Corporate Change. Vol. 19(4). pp. 1071-1108. 
Seyedjavadin, S. R., Moghimi, S. M. & Amiri, N. S. (2015).  Entrepreneurial marketing 
Model for SMEs based on Classic Grounded Theory.  Journal of Business 
Management. Vol. 7(1), pp. 101-125. 
Seyyedamiri, N. & Faghih, N. (2015).  Studying Entrepreneurial marketing for Information 
Technology SMEs based on the Classic Grounded Theory. QScience Connect. Vol. 
2015(1). Available at: DOI: https://doi.org/10.5339/connect.2015.9 
Shafi, M., Liu, J, & Ren, W. (2020).  Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on Micro, Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises operating in Pakistan. Research in Globalisation. Vol. 
2(2020), 100018. pp. 1-14. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.726
https://doi.org/10.5339/connect.2015.9
Shah, S., Nazir, T., Zaman, K. & Shabir, M. (2013). Factors Affecting the Growth of 
Enterprises: A Survey of the Literature from the Perspective of Small and Medium-
Sized Enterprise. Journal of Enterprise Transformation. Vol. 3(2), pp. 53-75. 
Sharma, N. (2013). Theoretical Framework for Corporate Disclosure Research. Asian 
Journal of Finance & Accounting. Vol. 5(1). Pp. 1-14. [Online/Accessed 25/05/2020] 
Available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.5296/ajfa.v5i1.3210 
Shepherd, D. & Wiklund, J. (2009). Are We Comparing Apples with Apples or Apples with 
Oranges? Appropriateness of Knowledge Accumulation across Growth Studies. 
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice. Vol. 33(1), pp. 105-123. 
Shin, K., Park, G., Choi, J. Y. & Choi, M. (2017). Factors Affecting the Survival of SMEs: 
A Study of Biotechnology Firms in South Korea. Sustainability MPDI. Article 108 
Vol. 9(1). pp. 1-18. 
Shugert, D. (1968). A Rationale for Curriculum Decisions: In The Growing Edges of 
Secondary English; Essays by the Experienced Teacher Fellows at the University of 
Illinois 1966  1967. Edited by Suhor, C., Mayher, J. S. & DAngelo, F. J. (NCTE, 
1968), pp. 2-3. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED027294.pdf 
Sieger, P. (2011).  Long-term Success of Family Firms: Investigating Specific Aspects of 
Firm-Level Entrepreneurship and Individual-level Antecedents. Dissertation No. 
3934of the University of St. Gallen, School of Management, Economics, Law, Social 
Sciences and International Affairs. NiedermannDruck AG, St. Gallen. 
Simmons, J. (2007). Small Business: A Phenomenological Study of Small Business Failure 
in Maryland. DBA Diss., University of Phoenix. Phoenix, Arizona. 
[Online/Accessed 08/10/2020] 
Sirec, K. & Mocnik, D. (2010). How Entrepreneurs Personal Characteristics Affect SMEs 
Growth. Our Economy/Nase Gospodarstvo. Vol. 56(1/2), pp. 3-12. 
Sleuwaegen, L. & Goedhuys, M. (2002). Growth of Firms in Developing Countries: 
Evidence form Cote dIvoire. Journal of Development Economics. Vol. 68(1), pp. 
117-135. 
Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy Funded Report. (2000). 
[Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/stateofsb99_00.pdf 
Small Business & Entrepreneurship Council. (2019). Facts and Data on Small Business and 
Entrepreneurship. Vienna, VA. Available at:  https://sbecouncil.org/about-us/facts-
and-data/ 
Smallbone, D. & Welter, F. (2001).  The Distinctiveness of Entrepreneurship in Transition 
Economies. Small Business Economics. Vol. 16(4), pp.249-262.  
https://dx.doi.org/10.5296/ajfa.v5i1.3210
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED027294.pdf
https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/stateofsb99_00.pdf
Smallbone, D. & Wyer, P. (2000).  Growth and Development in the Small Firm. In: Carter, 
S. & James-Evans, D. (Eds.). Enterprise and Small Business. Prentice Hall, Harlow.  
Smith, J. A. (1999).  The Behaviour and Performance of Young Micro Firms: Evidence 
from Businesses in Scotland. Small Business Economics. Vol. 13, pp. 185-200. 
Song, M., Podoynitsyna, K., Bij, H. V. D. & Halman, J. I. M. (2008).  Success Factors in 
New Ventures: A Meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management. Vol. 
25, pp. 7-27. 
St John, W. & Johnson, P. (2000). The Pros and Cons of Data Analysis Software for 
Qualitative Research. J Nurs Scholarsh. Vol. 32(4).  pp. 393-397. Available at: doi: 
10.1111/j.1547-5069.2000.00393.x. PMID: 11140204. 
Storey, D. (1994).  Understanding the Small Business Sector. London: Routledge. 
Storey, D., Keasey, K., Watson, R. & Wynarczyk, P. (1987).  The Performance of Small 
Firms: Profits, Jobs, and Failures. London: Croom Helm.  
Stemler, S. (2000).  An Overview of Content Analysis. Practical Assessment, Research and 
Evaluation. Vol. 7(17), pp. 1-6. [Online/Accessed 25/05/2020] Available at: 
http://scholarworks.umass.edu/pare/vol7/iss1/17  
Stenbacka, C. (2001). Qualitative Research requires Quality Concepts of its Own. 
Management Decision. Vol. 39(7). pp. 551-555. 
Stuermer, M. (2009). Basics of Scientific Work  Slide two (Find the Gap). Power point 
Slides. [Online/Accessed 25/05/2020] Available at: 
http://www.smi.ethz.ch/educatiom/courses/lectureslides/BOSW_2_ResearchQuestion.
Syed, H. H., Muzaffar, A. & Mina, F. (2018).  Microfinance and Performance of Micro and 
Small Enterprises: Does training has an impact? International Journal of Small 
Business and Entrepreneurship Research. Vol. 6(4), pp. 40-49. 
Taiwo, J. N., Onasanya, A. Y., Agwu, M. E. & Benson, K. N. (2016).  The Role of 
Microfinance Institutions in Financing Small Business. Journal of Internet Banking 
and Commerce. Vol. 21, pp. 2-20. 
Tantalo, C., Caroli, M. G. & Vanevenhoven, J. (2012). Corporate Social Responsibility and 
SMEs Competitiveness. International Journal of Technology Management. Vol. 
58(1/2), pp. 129-151. 
Thompson, P. (1985).  Contracting Strategies for the Project Environment  A Programme 
for Change. European Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management. Vol. 4(1). 
Trau, F. (1996).  Why Do Firms Grow?  ESRC Centre for Business Research. University of 
Cambridge Working Paper no. 26.   
Troudi, S. (2010). Paradigmatic Nature and Theoretical Framework in Educational 
Research. In: English in Learning: Learning in English, Ed. M. Al-Hamly et al. 
http://www.smi.ethz.ch/educatiom/courses/lectureslides/BOSW_2_ResearchQuestion.pdf
http://www.smi.ethz.ch/educatiom/courses/lectureslides/BOSW_2_ResearchQuestion.pdf
Dubai: TESOL Arabia Publications. Pp. 315-323. [Online/Accessed 25/05/2020] 
Available at: education.exeter.ac.uk/ojs/index.php/inspire/article/view/25/16 
Turan, M. & Kara, A. (2007).  An Exploratory Study of Characteristics and Attributes of 
Turkish Entrepreneurs: A Cross-country Comparison to Irish Entrepreneurs. Journal 
of International Entrepreneurship. Vol. 1, pp. 25-46. 
Tushabomwe-Kazooba, C. (2006). Causes of Small Business Failure in Uganda: A Case 
Study from Bushenyi and Mbarara Towns. African Studies Quarterly.  Vol.  8(4). pp. 
27-35. 
Twist, K. (2000). Small Business Slowly Adjusts to an Expensive and Complex New 
Economy. Benton Foundation. [Online/Accessed 25/10/2018] Available at: 
www.digitaldividentwork.org/cpmtent/stories/index 
Ullah, B. (2019). Financial Constraints, Corruption and SME Growth in Transition 
Economies. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance. Article in Press. 
QUAECO  1269. pp. 1-13. 
Vanguard Newspaper Nigeria. (2019). [Online/Accessed 30/10/2019] Available at: 
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/07/micro-small-businesses-grew-by-12-in-4-
years-smedan-nbs-survey/ 
Van Manen, M. (2017).  But is it Phenomenology? Qualitative Health Research. Vol. 
27(6), pp. 775-779. 
Van der Merwe, M. D., Grobbelaar, S. S., Meyer, I. A., Schutte, C. S. L. & Von Leipzig, K. 
H. (2020). A Framework of Key Growth Factors for Small Enterprises Operating at 
the Base of the Pyramid. Sustainability. MPDI. 12, 9327. Pp.1-33. Available at: doi: 
10.3390/su12229327 
Verheul, I., Van, S. & Thurik, R. (2006).  Explaining Female and Male Entrepreneurship at 
the Country Level. Entrepreneurship Region Development. Vol. 18, pp. 151-183. 
Wagner, M. & Schaltegger, S. (2004). The Effect of Corporate Environmental Strategy 
Choice and Environmental Performance on Competitiveness and Economic 
Performance: An Empirical Study of EU Manufacturing. European Management 
Journal. Vol. 22(5), pp. 557-572. 
Walker, J. L. (2012). The Use of Saturation in Qualitative Research. Canadian Journal of 
Cardiovascular Nursing. Vol. 22(2), pp. 37-41. 
Walker, E., Radmond, J., Webster, B. & Le Clus, B.  (2007). Small Business Owners: Too 
busy to train? Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 14(2).  
pp. 294-306. 
Walter, A., Auer, M. & Ritter, T. (2006).  The Impact of Network Capabilities and 
Entrepreneurial Orientation on University Spin-off Performance. Journal of Business 
Venturing. Vol. 21(4), pp. 541-567. 
http://www.digitaldividentwork.org/cpmtent/stories/index
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/07/micro-small-businesses-grew-by-12-in-4-years-smedan-nbs-survey/
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/07/micro-small-businesses-grew-by-12-in-4-years-smedan-nbs-survey/
Wang, Y. (2016). What are the Biggest Obstacles to Growth of SMEs in Developing 
Countries? An Empirical Evidence from an Enterprise Survey. Borsa Istanbul 
review. Vol. 16(3). pp. 167-176. 
West, E. T. (2013). A Phenomenological Case Study of the Experiences of African 
American High School Students. Journal Indexing & Metrics. Vol. 3(2). SAGE 
Open. April 2013.  [Online/Accessed 25/05/2020] Available at: doi: 
10.1177/2158244013486788 
Wiklund, J. (1999).  The Sustainability of the Entrepreneurial Orientation-Performance 
Relationship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. Vol. 22, pp. 511 
Williams, J. M. & Colomb, G. (2008). The Cain Project in Engineering and Professional 
Communication. Writing Module two: problem statements, introductions, and issues 
of audience. pp.2-4. 
World Bank. 2000. The World Bank Annual Report 2000: Volume 1.  Annual Review and 
Summary Financial Information. Washington, DC. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/13935 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. 
Xheneti, M. & Bartlett, W. (2012).  Institutional Constraints and SME Growth in Post-
Communist Albania. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development. Vol. 
19(4).  pp. 607-626. 
Xie, H. Y. & Boggs, D. J.  (2006). Corporate Branding Versus Product Branding in 
Emerging Markets: A Conceptual Framework. Marketing Intelligence & Planning. 
Vol. 24(4), pp. 347-364. 
Yang, W. & Meyer, K. E. (2019). How does Ownership Influence Business Growth? A 
Competitive Dynamics Perspective. International Business Review. Vol. 28. pp. 101-
Yasuda, T.  (2005). Firm Growth, Size, Age and Behaviour in Japanese Manufacturing. 
Small Business Economics. Vol. 24(1), pp. 1-2. 
Yeboah, M. A. (2015). Determinants of SME Growth: An Empirical Perspective of SMEs in 
the Cape Coast Metropolis, Ghana. The Journal of Business in Developing Nations. 
Vol. 14. pp. 2-30. 
Yu, T. (2001).  Toward a Capabilities Perspective of the Small Firm. International Journal 
of Management Reviews. Vol. 3(3), pp. 185-197. 
Yukhanaev, A., Fallon, G., Baranchenko, Y. & Anisimova, A. (2015). An Investigation into 
the Formal Institutional Constraints that restrict Entrepreneurship and SME Growth in 
Russia. Journal of East-West Business. Vol. 21. pp. 313-341. 
Zapalska, A. M., Brozik, D. & Zieser, N. (2015). Factors Affecting Success of Small 
Business Enterprises in the Polish Tourism Industry. TOURISM: Original Scientific 
Paper. Vol. 63(3). pp. 365-381. 
Zhang, J. & Gao, S.  (2001). How Do SMEs build Internal Audit Capabilities? A Grounded 
Theory Approach. World Review of Business Research. Vol. 2(1), pp.98-108.  
Zontanos, G. & Anderson, A. R. (2004).  Relationships, Marketing and Small Business: An 
Exploration of Links in Theory and Practice. Qualitative Market Research. Vol. 7(3), 
pp. 228-236. 
Zott, C. & Amit, R. (2007). Business Model Design and the Performance of Entrepreneurial 
Firms. Organisation Science. Vol. 18, pp. 184. 
7.0 Appendices 
Appendix 7.1: Systematic literature review table of studies done in Nigeria.  
Author/Ye
ar/Journal 
Study title Purpose/Theories/Proposition
Constructs
/Variables 
Key findings Research 
Contributions/Implications  
Adesua-
Lincoln, A. 
(2011) 
Journal 
Name: 
African 
Journal of 
Business 
Manageme
Vol. 5(13), 
pp. 5348-
Assessing 
Nigerian 
Female 
Entrepreneur
s Access to 
Finance for 
Business 
Start-up and 
Growth. 
The purpose of this study is to 
construct a typology relative to 
female entrepreneurs 
demographics and motivation 
concerning accessing finance 
for start-ups or expansion. 
Churchill & Lewis theory. 
This theory divides the process 
of growth into stages of 
development 
Female 
entrepreneu
rs (age, 
level of 
education, 
experience, 
motivation)
. Access to 
Finance, 
Start-up, 
Growth. 
Female entrepreneurs are as 
educated as their male 
counterparts. 
Huge percentages of female 
entrepreneurs are married. 
Female entrepreneurs 
demonstrate liberty and 
flexibility in business with an 
emphasis on firm control of 
their time in other to make 
additional revenue and support 
for their respective families. 
Results from this study do 
not support the notion: 
(1). that female 
entrepreneurs have few 
challenges securing finance 
once the business has passed 
the start-up stage. 
(2). That female 
entrepreneurs resort to 
traditional banking 
alternatives to mitigate 
capital requirements.   
This study reveals that most 
female entrepreneurs in 
Nigeria operate their 
businesses in an 
unpropitious business 
environment coupled with 
low access to finance. 
Most start-up firms owned 
by female entrepreneurs are 
entirely dependent on 
internal sources such as own 
savings, or loans from 
families and friends. 
Adisa, T. 
Abdulrahe
em, I. & 
Mordi, C. 
(2014) 
Journal 
Name: 
Economic 
Insights- 
Trends and 
Challenges 
Vol. 3(4), 
pp. 1-14 
Characteristic
s and 
Challenges of 
Small 
Business in 
Africa: An 
Exploratory 
Study of 
Nigerian 
Small 
Business 
Owners. 
The purpose of this study is to 
investigate the characteristics 
and challenges of small 
businesses in Nigeria. 
Van Praags theory (2003). 
This theory suggests that only 
half of start-up firms survive 
the first three years of business 
operation. 
Funding, 
Recordkeep
Infrastructu
res and 
facilities, 
Business 
managemen
t skills. 
The issue of funding for small 
businesses in Nigeria is in two 
folds- funds to start-up and 
funds to sustain or upgrade the 
business. 
The majority of small business 
owners do not subscribe to 
record keeping. 
There is a vast inability of 
distinguishing business capital 
from disposable income. 
This study highlights the 
urgent need for the 
government to provide 
mitigating measures such as 
community banks, educating 
seminars, and workshops to 
help business owners. 
This study was able to 
highlight the core challenges 
of SMEs in Nigeria and the 
characteristics attributed to 
small businesses across the 
main geographical zones in 
Nigeria. 
Afolabi, 
M. O. 
(2013) 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
African 
Macroecon
Review 
Vol. 3(1), 
pp. 193-
Growth effect 
of Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises 
(SMEs) 
Financing in 
Nigeria 
The purpose of this study is to 
examine the impact of finance 
on SME development in 
Nigeria. 
Osobas theory argues that the 
main determinant of SME 
growth in developing countries 
is finance. 
Ogunsiji & Ladamus 
proposition. This states that 
entrepreneurial orientation is 
the panacea to ebbing 
productivity.  
SMEs, 
Economic 
Developme
nt, Bank 
credits, 
Gross 
domestic 
product 
(GDP). 
There is a long-run relationship 
between GDP, SME output, 
commercial credit to SMEs, 
exchange rate and lending rate 
in Nigeria between 1980 and 
2010. 
The changes in SME output 
and SME financing by 
commercial banks have a 
positive significant effect on 
economic growth in Nigeria. 
The two hypotheses proposed 
for this study were rejected. 
This study suggests that only 
SME output proxy by 
wholesale or retail trade and 
commercial bank credit to 
SMEs have a significant 
impact on economic growth. 
This finding agrees with 
previous studies. 
Choice of research 
methodology (quantitative) 
limits the potential 
findings of this study. 
The study only focused 
mainly on one key barrier 
to SME development. 
The study doesnt explore 
current changes 
concerning access to 
finance in Nigeria for 
SMEs. 
It also suggests that theres a 
significant relationship 
between SME financing and 
economic growth in Nigeria. 
It also recommends the 
reduction in credit allocation 
requirements by commercial 
banks to SMEs to enhance 
economic growth in Nigeria. 
Other recommendations 
include clear tenure rules, 
seamless business registration 
and export procedures, and 
accessible financial and tax 
incentives schemes. 
Asenge, E. 
L., Diaka, 
H. S. & 
Soom, A. 
T. (2018) 
Journal 
Name: 
Internation
al Journal 
Innovation 
Vol.6(2), 
pp.124-146 
Entrepreneuri
al mindset 
performance 
of small and 
medium scale 
enterprises in 
Makurdi 
Metropolis, 
Benue state, 
Nigeria 
The purpose of the study is to 
examine the effect of 
entrepreneurial mindset on the 
performance of small and 
medium scale enterprises in 
Benue state, Nigeria. 
Self-theories of Intelligence 
(Dweck, 1999; 2000). These 
theories give insight into the 
psychological processes 
essential for achievement. 
Business 
performanc
innovativen
ess, risk-
taking, 
creativity, 
business 
alertness 
This study revealed that 
innovativeness, creativity, 
business alertness, and risk-
taking do have a significant 
effect on the business 
performance of SMEs in Benue 
state, Nigeria 
Entrepreneurs with high levels 
of each variable considered 
performed better than those 
with low levels  
entrepreneurial mind-set has a 
significant effect on a firms 
performance. 
This study suggests that 
policymakers and the 
stakeholders re-strategize 
and create forums that 
enhance innovativeness 
among entrepreneurs.  
It also suggests that the 
government should 
recognize and reward any 
creativity displayed by 
entrepreneurs. 
Ibidunni, 
A. S., 
Kehinde, 
O. J., 
Ibidunni, 
O. M., 
Olokundun
, M. A., 
Olubusayo, 
F. H., 
Salau, O. 
Borisade, 
T. T. & 
Fred, P.  
(2018) 
Journal 
Name: 
Data in 
Brief  
Vol. 18, 
pp. 988-
Data on the 
relationship 
between 
financing 
strategies, 
entrepreneuri
competencies, 
and business 
growth of 
technology-
based SMEs 
in Nigeria. 
The purpose of this study is to 
examine the relationship 
between financing strategies, 
entrepreneurial competencies, 
and business growth of 
technology-based SMEs in 
Nigeria. 
Entreprene
urial 
competenci
Technology 
managemen
t, SMEs, 
Personal 
savings, 
bank loan, 
venture 
capital, 
business 
donations, 
skills, 
attitude, 
knowledge 
The financial strategy has the 
highest contribution to the 
growth of technology-based 
SMEs. 
Venture capital and business 
donations influence profit 
growth. 
Skills influence bank loans, 
venture capital, and business 
donations. 
Attitude influences venture 
capital and business donations 
The details of the study in the 
article are quite limited. 
Review of pertinent literature 
and conclusion on study results 
were omitted from the article. 
This study provided 
evidence on the relationship 
between financing strategies, 
entrepreneurial 
competencies, and the 
growth of technology-based 
SMEs. 
Igwe, P. 
Amaugo, 
A. N., 
Ogundana, 
O. M., 
Egere, O. 
Anigbo, J. 
A. (2018) 
Journal 
Name: 
European 
Journal of 
Sustainable 
Developme
Vol.7(1), 
pp.182-200 
Factors 
affecting the 
investment 
climate, 
productivity, 
entrepreneurs
hip in 
Nigeria. 
The purpose of this study is to 
employ current perspectives to 
examine the factors affecting 
investments, productivity, and 
growth of SMEs by employing 
the World Bank Enterprise 
Survey in Nigeria. 
Learning -by-models (Arrow, 
1962; Change et al., 2002). 
This suggests that older firms 
may benefit from their greater 
business experience, thereby 
having more growth persistence 
than younger firms 
Productivit
sustainabilit
Lack of access to finance and 
credit opportunities make it 
difficult to meet short-term 
payments and long-term 
investments. 
Excessive demand for high 
collateral is likely to constrain 
investment opportunities. 
Service delays impose 
additional costs on firms and 
may act as barriers to entry and 
investment. 
Corruption in public service 
creates an unfavourable 
business environment by 
undermining the operational 
efficiency of firms. 
The determinants of firms 
productivity through modelling 
of firm growth. 
This study suggests that: 
The high rate of population 
growth requires investment 
to increase economic 
activities to address the 
problem of the high rate of 
unemployment.  
Increasing economic 
activities through promoting 
entrepreneurship increase 
income-earning 
opportunities that offer the 
long-term path to poverty 
reduction. 
Ihua, U. B. 
(2009) 
Journal 
SMEs key 
Failure-
Factors: A 
The purpose of this study is to 
compare and contrasts the 
impact of ten factors 
SMEs, 
Business 
failures, 
There is no significant 
difference in the impact of the 
key factors influencing SMEs 
This study was able to 
contribute towards the gap in 
researches that focuses on 
Name: 
Journal of 
Social 
Science 
Vol. 18(3), 
pp. 199-
Comparison 
between the 
United 
Kingdom and 
Nigeria. 
influencing business failures 
for SMEs in Nigeria and the 
United Kingdom. 
Dun & Bradstreets theory 
(1969). This theory connotes 
business failure as the ceasing 
of business operations due to 
bankruptcy. 
Economic 
conditions, 
Social 
Support 
(Disasters 
and crises, 
fierce 
market 
competition
infrastructu
inadequacy 
and lack of 
social 
support, 
multiple 
and high 
taxes, poor 
accounting 
and book-
keeping 
practices, 
managemen
t inability, 
marketing 
and sales 
efforts, 
financial 
problems, 
economic 
conditions, 
improper 
and poor 
planning). 
failure in the United Kingdom 
as compared to those 
influencing SMEs failure in 
Nigeria. 
Respondents in Nigeria 
suggested poor economic 
conditions and inadequate 
infrastructure as the most 
crucial factors responsible for 
business failure. 
Respondents in the United 
Kingdom suggested poor 
management and financial 
problems as the most crucial 
factors responsible for business 
failure 
the comparison of factors 
influencing SMEs failure 
between developed and 
developing countries.   
The sample size is small 
and as such, the findings 
of this study cant be used 
to generalise the core 
factors of business failure 
in Nigeria and the United 
Kingdom.  
The research failed to 
consider governing bodies 
that regulate SMEs or 
focus on a specific sector 
as that could influence the 
outcome of the research as 
well. 
Mambula, 
C. (2002) 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Small 
Business 
Manageme
ntVol.40(1
pp.58-65 
Perceptions 
of SME 
Growth 
Constraints in 
Nigeria. 
The purpose of this study is to 
investigate the factors that 
influence the growth, 
performance, and development 
of SMEs in Nigeria. 
Schatzs theory. This theory 
suggests that there shouldnt be 
a shortage of capital in Nigeria 
considering the various sources 
of capital including the 
development and commercial 
banks. He termed this as the 
illusion of capital (Schatz, 
1963; Mambula, 2002, p.60). 
Lack of 
financing, 
infrastructu
Difficulty 
getting 
machines 
and spare 
parts, 
Difficulty 
getting raw 
materials. 
Entrepreneurs often lack the 
formal training required to 
show competencies in 
servicing loans and they dont 
present convincing business 
plans too. 
The cost per unit for raw 
materials is higher than bulk 
purchasing and this affects 
most SMEs due to lack of 
funds. 
Cultural diversity and religion 
across the country pose a threat 
to key policies initiated by the 
government. 
Lack of manpower with the 
necessary expertise hinders the 
ability of most SMEs to 
produce quality products; 
Lack of funding and 
knowledge about business has 
reduced the number of 
potential SME owners to 
distribution personnel. 
Frequent harassment of 
Government officials resorting 
to extortion;  
Lack of good roads, inadequate 
supply of water, poor 
telecommunication systems 
and electric supply leads to 
huge expenses; 
Lack of funding. Frequent 
harassment of Government 
This study suggests; 
The government should 
initiate reforms to provide 
infrastructure and qualified 
personnel to implement and 
monitor policies to help 
SMEs. 
That SMEs should form 
associations to help one 
another; 
There should be an alliance 
of government, financial, 
and research institutions to 
provide relevant training for 
SMEs. 
Research intuitions should 
provide up-to-date 
information on market 
trends, products, and 
equipment to help SMEs.    
officials resorting to extortion;  
Lack of good roads, inadequate 
supply of water, poor 
telecommunication systems 
and electric supply leads to 
huge expenses; 
Lack of funding 
Ojukwu, 
D. (2006) 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Informatio
Technolog
y Impact 
Vol. 6(1), 
pp. 47-60 
Achieving 
Sustainable 
Growth 
through the 
Adoption of 
Integrated 
Business and 
Information 
Solutions: A 
Case Study of 
Nigerian 
Small and 
Medium-
Sized 
Enterprises 
The purpose of this study is to 
examine how SMEs can 
achieve growth through the 
adoption of integrated business 
and information solutions 
(IBIS) in developing economies 
like Nigeria. 
Determinist model (Ojukwu, 
2006; Preece et al., 1994). This 
suggests that technology (ICT) 
is the most important factor that 
determines the success of an 
organisation. 
Social Action Model (Ojukwu, 
2006; Preece et al., 1994). This 
suggests that technology is an 
enabling factor rather than a 
sole determinant of the success 
rate of an organisation. 
Integrationist Impact Model 
(Ojukwu, 2006; Kimble & 
McLoughlin, 1995, p.5). This 
suggests the importance of 
human interaction with ICT in 
context and process as an 
enabling process that enhances 
the success rate of an 
organisation. 
Investments 
(IBIS), 
Growth 
(Achieved 
benefits, 
Achieved 
targets, 
Effects of 
encountere
d problems, 
Achieved 
performanc
e from staff 
developme
Findings affirm a vivid 
relationship between the levels 
of investments made on IBIS 
and the levels of growth 
attained by the organisation. 
The period examined in this 
study is limited to five (5) 
financial years.  
Only five sectors were 
considered for this study. 
Since IBIS is relative to 
growth, SMEs should 
inculcate this into their 
business practices and 
operations.  
This study reveals that the 
increase in investment in 
business and information 
solutions is directly 
proportional to the increase 
in the level of growth 
attainable. 
The damaging effects of 
encountered operational 
problems must be mitigated 
to a manageable scale to 
enhance growth. 
Investing in good managers 
is one way of enhancing the 
increase in performance of 
business operations. 
Okpara, J. 
O. (2011) 
Journal 
Name: 
Manageme
Research 
Review 
Vol. 34(2), 
pp. 156-
Factors 
constraining 
the Growth 
and Survival 
of SMEs in 
Nigeria: 
Implications 
for poverty 
alleviation. 
The purpose of this study is to 
investigate the barriers to the 
growth and survival of Small 
businesses in Nigeria. 
Ansoffs framework (1965). 
Small 
business 
failure, 
financial 
resources, 
corruption, 
lack of 
managemen
experience, 
infrastructu
Financial constraints such as 
the inability to source capital to 
support the business activities 
constitute the major issues 
facing SMEs. 
Lack of collateral poses a 
major barrier in securing loans 
from banks.  
Lack of management 
experience is also a major 
driver of small business failure. 
Poor infrastructure also forms 
one of the key barriers to SME 
development and growth. 
Infrastructure such as good 
road networks or stable 
electricity cripples product 
production and limits the 
ability to expand and profit 
generation for SMEs. 
The findings of this study are 
not necessarily a current 
representation of economies 
in other African countries as 
these results might be 
specific to Nigeria alone. 
Moreover, the sample used 
for this study does not cover 
the entire geopolitical zones 
in Nigeria and as such not 
suitable for generalisation. 
This study highlighted the 
major barriers to the growth 
of small businesses in 
Nigeria. Financial 
constraints, management 
problems, corruption, and 
lack of infrastructure were 
the major barriers 
highlighted. 
Suggestions for future 
studies would be a 
replication of this study with 
larger sample data or 
perhaps conduct a 
longitudinal nationwide 
study that covers the main 
geopolitical zones of 
Nigeria. 
Appendix 7.2: Systematic literature review table of studies done in other countries in Africa. 
Author/
Year/Co
untry/Jo
urnal 
Study title Purpose/Theories/P
ropositions 
Constructs/Var
iables 
Key findings Research 
Contributions/Implications  
Abor, J. 
Quartey, 
(2010). 
Ghana & 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Research 
Journal 
Finance 
Economi
Vol. 39, 
pp. 218-
Issues in 
Development 
in Ghana and 
South Africa. 
The purpose of this 
study is to discuss 
the characteristics 
and contributions of 
SMEs to economic 
development and 
highlight the 
constraints to 
growth. 
(1). Storeys theory. 
This theory suggests 
that the relationship 
existing between 
performance and 
firm size should be 
considered when 
measuring the 
impact of a credit 
programme on a 
target sector (Storey, 
1994; Abor & 
Quartey, 2010, 
p220) 
(2). Fisher & 
Reubers 
enumeration. This 
characterised SMEs 
in developing 
countries concerning 
labour, sectors of 
activity, the gender 
of the owner, and 
efficiency (Fisher & 
Reuber, 2000; Abor 
& Quartey, 2010, p. 
222). 
SMEs, SME 
Development, 
Access to 
Credit, 
Enterprise Size, 
No of 
Employees, 
Annual 
Turnover, Gross 
Assets. 
The definitions of enterprise 
categories are depicted as 
survivalist, micro, very small, 
small, and medium enterprise. 
The size classification as put 
forward by the European 
Commission isnt homogenous. 
This is relative to the fact that 
researchers are expected to 
tailor their definitions of small 
enterprises in line with their 
target group. 
The value of fixed assets can 
also be used as an alternate 
criterion in defining SMEs. 
Most African countries use the 
number of employees 
combined with the annual 
turnover to categorise SMEs. 
It is a general assumption that 
the performances of SMEs are 
vital to the economic and social 
development of developing 
countries. 
SMEs adaptive factor serves as 
an advantage over large scale 
enterprises. 
SMEs contribute immensely to 
a countrys national product 
either through the provision of 
services or the manufacture of 
products. 
SMEs represent the highest 
percentage of businesses 
contributing to national GDP in 
African Countries (92% in 
Ghana and 91% in South Africa 
approx.)  
This literature review reflects 
the constraints to SME 
development. A few of such 
constraints are regulatory 
issues, lack of managerial 
skills, equipment, and 
technology, access to finance, 
and international markets. 
This review also concluded 
that there is no universally 
accepted definition of SMEs 
as many factors determine the 
definition for each country. 
This review suggests the 
formation of cooperatives by 
SMEs to improve access to 
credit. 
It also suggests tax incentives 
from governments to 
encourage training institutions 
and NGOs to offer workshops 
on managerial skills. 
National legislation to define 
SMEs would encourage 
informal businesses to 
integrate into the formal 
network. 
This review only focused on 
two African countries. 
There isnt much literature 
that explores the depth of 
some of the constraints 
highlighted in this review 
hence the limitations of the 
conclusion. 
Agyapon
g, G. T., 
Mmieh, 
Mordi, 
(2018). 
Ghana. 
Journal 
Name: 
Thunder
Internati
Business 
Review 
Vol.60(4
pp.549-
Factors 
influencing 
the growth of 
SMEs: The 
case of 
Ghana. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the factors affecting 
the growth of small 
and medium-sized 
enterprises in Ghana 
while using 
entrepreneurs 
(Owners) of SMEs 
as the unit of 
analysis. 
(1.) The Resource-
based view theory 
(This theory 
emphasizes that the 
growth of a business 
could be determined 
by the capabilities 
and resources of the 
business). 
(2.) Storeys 
analytical 
framework (1994). 
This suggests 
several influential 
Business 
growth, level of 
education, 
funding, 
performance, 
internet/web 
technology. 
This study revealed that several 
factors including level of 
education, poor energy supply, 
access to external finance, 
competition, inflation, and 
government policies influence 
the growth of SMEs in Ghana. 
Given the sample size of 
each SME sector considered 
in this study, any 
generalisation of the findings 
of this study outside Ghana 
should be made with caution- 
better be viewed as a case 
study. 
This study suggested that the 
government should focus 
more on sustained energy 
supply, review of lending and 
borrowing regulations, 
favourable fiscal policies, 
measures to combat unhealthy 
competition, provision of 
adequate training centres to 
equip entrepreneurs, and 
regulations on land acquisition 
to ensure consistent growth of 
SMEs in Ghana. 
factors that are 
identified as 
constraints to the 
growth of SMEs. 
Ahiawod
zi, A. K. 
Adade, 
T. C. 
(2012). 
Ghana. 
Journal 
Name: 
British 
Journal 
Economi
Finance 
Manage
Sciences 
6(2), pp. 
34-51 
Access to 
Credit and 
Growth of 
Small and 
Medium 
Scale 
Enterprises in 
the Ho 
Municipality 
of Ghana 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the effect of access 
to credit on the 
growth of SMEs in 
the Ho Municipality 
of the Volta Region 
of Ghana. 
Jovanovics model  
the passive learning 
model (1982). This 
model explains why 
small firms grow 
faster as soon as 
they discover they 
can stand up to the 
competition in their 
niche markets. 
Total current 
investment, 
Access to 
credit, Age of 
firm, Start-up 
Capital, The 
level of 
education of the 
entrepreneur, 
Annual 
Turnover. 
Both surveys and econometric 
results reveal that access to 
credit has a significant positive 
impact on the growth of SMEs 
in the Ho municipality of 
Ghana. 
Multiple regression analysis 
affirms that access to credit, 
start-up capital, total current 
investment, and annual 
turnover all have a significant 
impact on the growth of SMEs 
in the manufacturing sector in 
Ghana. 
Easy access to credit at a 
reduced interest rate should be 
encouraged through 
development-driven 
banking/financial services. 
The clarity in national 
development objectives to aid 
the growth of SMEs through 
policies and regulations that 
enhance business growth. 
The study was limited to the 
manufacturing sector only 
in Ho municipality which 
makes it unsuitable for 
generalisation.  
Suggestion for further 
studies on the evaluation 
and funding arrangement for 
SMEs in Ghana.  
Other areas could examine 
the challenges and prospects 
of SMEs operations in 
Ghana. 
Biggs, T. 
& Shah, 
M. K. 
(2006). 
Saharan 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal 
Banking 
Finance 
Vol. 30, 
3043-
African 
SMEs, 
Networks, 
Manufacturin
Performance. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the role of private 
support institutions 
in determining SME 
growth and 
performance in Sub-
Saharan Africa. 
Gibrats Law and 
Jovanovics learning 
model. Both theories 
suggest that firm 
size and age are 
negatively related to 
growth (Biggs & 
Shah, 2006, p.3055). 
SMEs, 
Ethnicity, 
Financial 
characteristics 
of SMEs, 
Entrepreneurs 
characteristics 
(Level of 
Education, 
Age), Firm 
Growth, 
Productivity, 
Start-up Size. 
SMEs in Sub-Saharan Africa 
manage to mitigate market 
failure and the absence of 
formal institutions that protect 
property rights and contracts 
through the creation of private 
governance systems. The 
systems work in form of long-
term business relationships and 
networks similar to strategies 
adopted around the globe. 
Economic instability 
undermines and weakens the 
incentives for these adopted 
systems. 
Findings reveal the vital 
relation between private 
governance institutions and 
SME performance. 
There is a coordination failure 
in most indigenous African 
manufacturing business 
community that prevents firms 
from using an efficient 
multilateral reputation system 
analogous to counterparts used 
with ethnic minority networks. 
Probabilities of receiving 
credits reflect that the length of 
the relationship is a key 
determinant of credit access for 
indigenous African SMEs. 
The influence of size on the 
probability of receiving credit 
is greater for most indigenous 
African firms compared to 
networked SMEs. 
The probabilities of receiving 
supplier credit for a specific 
firm size are higher for SMEs 
in ethnic networks. 
Indigenous African SMEs are 
treated as outsiders and are left 
to establish long-term 
relationships with each supplier 
to get access to supplier credit 
as a mitigation plan. 
This study suggests an interim 
two-fold mitigation strategy. 
This involves a strategy for 
institutional development to 
support flexible market 
exchange. Firstly, making the 
environment conducive for 
relation-based governance and 
secondly, working to build on 
those private institutional 
systems to enhance their 
performance when possible.  
It also suggests that policy 
reforms are paramount to 
create a better environment 
for relation-based governance. 
Closely related ethnic-based 
networks deduced as part of 
the system can create an 
exclusionary impact on 
indigenous African SMEs 
thereby needing interventions 
in such cases. 
Self-help substitutions as 
mitigation for lack of market 
supporting institutions arent 
self-sustaining without the 
inclusion of formal 
institutions for progression in 
the long run. 
Bouazza, 
A. B., 
Ardjoum
an, D. & 
Abada, 
(2015). 
Algeria. 
Journal 
Name: 
America
Internati
Journal 
of Social 
Science 
4(2), pp. 
101-115 
Establishing 
the Factors 
Affecting the 
Growth of 
Small and 
Medium-
sized 
Enterprises in 
Algeria. 
The purpose of this 
study is to analyse 
the factors 
influencing the 
growth rate of SMEs 
in Algeria. 
Law of 
Proportionate Effect 
(Gibrats Law). This 
law states that firm 
growth is 
independent on the 
initial size (Gibrat, 
1931; Bouazza et 
al., 2015, p.103). 
Theory of the 
Growth of the Firm 
(Penrose, 1959).  
This theory suggests 
that the growth of an 
organisation is 
determined by the 
efficient and 
innovative 
managerial 
resources with such 
organisation. Both 
internal and external 
resources enable 
growth and aid an 
organisation to 
achieve a 
competitive 
advantage.  
External 
Factors: Legal 
and regulatory 
framework, 
Access to 
finance, Human 
resources 
capacities. 
Internal Factors: 
Entrepreneurs 
characteristics, 
Managerial 
capacities, 
Marketing 
skills, 
Technological 
capacities.   
SMEs in Algeria face more 
institutional challenges and 
policies than MNEs. 
SMEs in Algeria face more 
challenges in developing 
adaptable and operational 
measures to measure up with 
the requirements of the 
government (licenses, permits, 
etc.). 
The reduction of a firms 
internal resources is relative to 
high tax rates. 
Unfavourable loan rate with 
high collateral ratios makes 
SME owners rely on personal 
savings or informal financing 
for capital.  
The critical factors affecting 
Algerian SMEs are 
bureaucratic procedures, 
policies, inefficient tax 
system, access to finance, 
access to industrial real 
estate, and low human 
resources capacities. 
Algerian government should 
consider initiating policies 
that foster development and 
promotes SMEs. 
Algerian government should 
improve SMEs access to 
financing through reforms of 
the banking system to review 
interest rates and collateral 
requirements. 
Bilateral cooperation between 
SMEs and the government 
should be encouraged. 
Boubaka
(2015). 
Cameroo
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Strategic 
Manage
Review. 
Vol. 3(1-
2). pp. 
15-23. 
The influence 
of the 
personal 
values of the 
leader on the 
growth of 
SMEs in 
Cameroon. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the influence of a 
leader on the growth 
of SMEs in 
Cameroun. 
External model (the 
influence of the 
environment on 
organisations), 
Internal model 
(focuses on the 
internal 
characteristics of the 
organisation and 
how it adapts to its 
environment and 
shapes it). 
Ethics, 
Altruism, Self-
esteem, The 
feeling of 
achievement 
and the desire 
for autonomy. 
Leaders tend to act according to 
their initiatives to define tasks 
and business planning to 
achieve desired results. 
Self-esteem has a positive 
influence on the growth of the 
enterprise. 
The altruism of a leader does 
not negatively influence the 
growth of the enterprise. 
Ethics help to aid leaders with a 
perpetual dynamism that 
enhances business productivity 
and growth. 
Questionnaires do not 
capture the vivid difference 
between the personal values 
of respondents, perhaps a 
different method of research 
shouldve been adopted. 
This study was able to 
establish that the self-esteem 
and ethics of a leader has a 
positive impact on the growth 
of SMEs in Cameroun. 
The findings also point out the 
need for SME managers to 
consider the personal values 
of leaders as it may influence 
growth either positively or 
negatively. 
Physiological factors are key 
factors to consider in boosting 
the entrepreneurial drive of 
SMEs. 
Brink, 
A., Cant, 
Ligthelm
(2003). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: A 
paper for 
Small 
Enterpris
Associati
on of 
Australia 
and New 
Problems 
experienced 
by Small 
businesses in 
South Africa. 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
investigate the 
selected problems 
facing SME 
owners/managers in 
South Africa and 
how these problems 
influence business 
success. 
Sunters proposition. 
This suggests that 
the SME sector is 
generally regarded 
as the driving force 
for economic growth 
and job creation in 
developed and 
developing countries 
(Sunter, 2000; Brink 
et al., 2003, p.2). 
Macro-
environment 
(Inflation, 
Unemployment, 
Crime, 
HIV/AIDS, 
Interest rates, 
Exchange rates, 
Government 
legislation, 
Changing 
techniques)Inter
nal market, 
Marketing 
factors, Human 
resources 
issues, 
Production and 
operational 
issues, Financial 
issues 
Increased market competitors 
are the major issue as perceived 
by the respondents. 
Respondents with management 
qualifications suggest the lack 
of management skills has a 
negative impact on business 
success. 
Respondents affirm that the 
implementation of effective 
management functions will 
enhance business success. 
The introduction of new labour 
laws and the inability to attract 
and find suitable staff are the 
most common human resource 
issues. 
There is a coherent trend in 
all the zones concerning the 
problems facing SMEs- 
predominantly, the six 
Training workshops in 
business management and 
entrepreneurship should 
inculcate the highlighted 
issues from this research. 
The contents of such 
workshops or training should 
specifically address the 
problems facing SMEs. 
Zealand 
Annual 
Conferen
Ballarat 
(28 Sept. 
 1 Oct. 
2003) 
), pp. 1-
factors highlighted in this 
research. 
Bunyasi, 
G. N. 
Bwisa, 
Namuso
nge, G. 
(2014). 
Kenya. 
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Journal 
Business 
Social 
Science 
Vol. 5, 
10(1), 
pp. 121-
Effect of 
Access to 
Business 
Information 
on the 
Growth of 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises in 
Kenya. 
The purpose of this 
study is to assess the 
effect of access to 
business information 
on the growth of 
SMEs in Kenya. 
Optimal Size Theory 
(Bunyasi et al., 
2014; Coad, 2009). 
This theory suggests 
that firms 
continually grow 
until they get to an 
optimal size and 
cease to grow 
afterward.  
Profitability, 
Growth, 
Business 
information. 
The results from this study 
reveal that access to 
information on business risks, 
distribution channels, and 
competitor strategy affects 
business growth. 
Access to information on new 
markets and pricing strategies 
also affects business growth. 
Other factors with relatively 
low effect on business growth 
include access to information 
on affordability and quality 
suppliers and new sources of 
finances. 
This study affirms that access 
to business information has a 
significant effect on the 
business growth of SMEs in 
Kenya.  
Owners and managers should 
consider the need to access 
vital business information in 
other to ensure growth and 
expansion. 
This study affirms the need 
for policymakers to offer a 
legal framework that would 
enhance information 
transfer between SMEs, 
research institutions, and 
government centres for 
growth support. 
Recommendations on 
further research to examine 
the role of government and 
research institutions in the 
transfer of business 
information to SMEs in 
Kenya. 
Cant, M. 
Wiid, J. 
(2013). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Business 
Economi
Research 
Journal 
12(6), 
pp. 707-
Establishing 
Challenges 
Affecting 
South African 
SMEs. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the challenges 
perceived to have a 
negative influence 
on SMEs in South 
Africa. 
Brink & Cants 
theory. This theory 
argues that 
insufficient 
management skills, 
expertise in 
functional areas 
such as marketing 
and human 
resources, and 
financial knowledge 
are the major causes 
of SME failures 
(Brink & Cant, 
2003; Cant & Wiid, 
2013, p. 709). 
Macro-
environment 
(Government 
legislation, 
technological 
advancements, 
HIV/Aids, 
Crime, 
Unemployment, 
Inflation, 
Exchanges 
rates, Interest 
rates). 
Microenvironm
ent (Level of 
education, 
Race, Age). 
Marketing and 
Management 
problems. 
The results of this study reveal 
that crime, government 
legislation, unemployment, 
inflation, and interest rates have 
a huge impact on SMEs in 
South Africa. 
Inflation affects SMEs as well 
as their customers through 
increased costs of goods and 
services. 
The lack of marketing 
knowledge negatively affects 
the success of SMEs. 
The sample size adopted for 
this study is quite small 
which negatives its 
suitability for generalisation. 
Training programmes and 
workshops should consider all 
the key variables enumerated 
in this research in other to 
achieve a mitigating 
application that would 
enhance business success. 
The support for SMEs should 
be increased and the 
endorsement of local brands 
should be encouraged. 
Gumede, 
(2000). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
(Trade 
Growth and 
Exporting of 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises in 
South Africa: 
thoughts on 
policy and 
scope for 
further 
research. 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
enumerate critical 
policy and research 
questions to 
enterprise size, 
enterprise growth, 
and the propensity 
to export. 
Philips theory. This 
theory argues that 
the evidence relating 
Exchange rates, 
Inflation, 
Interest rates, 
Lack of 
demand, lack of 
skills, lack of 
finance, Lack of 
planning, lack 
of markets, 
Lack of 
government 
incentives, Lack 
Small businesses believe that 
demand for their products is 
vital to business growth. 
Demand for products, access to 
markets, and infrastructure are 
the major factors that influence 
small business growth. 
High prices, inflation, and 
interest rates are some of the 
barriers to business growth. 
The rigidity of trade 
instruments, lack of finance, 
This study suggests that the 
provision of information and 
training, finance, and enabling 
environment are vital parts of 
the support framework for 
SME growth. 
It also argues for a depth 
investigation of export 
processes concerning export 
failure/success of SMEs.   
Future research suggestion 
includes comprehensive case 
Industria
l Policy 
Secretari
at). 2000 
Annual 
Forum at 
Mulders
drift. 18-
Septemb
er 2000. 
to firm size, growth, 
and exporting 
reflects ambiguities 
that have plagued 
general research to 
date (Philip, 1998, 
p.81; Gumede, 
2000, p.10). 
Reids theory. This 
theory argues that 
systematic factors 
such as firm size 
influence the growth 
of the firm (Reid, 
1993, p.206; 
Gumede, 2000, 
p.10). 
Gibrats Law. 
Keats & Brackers 
theoretical model. 
of information, 
Competition, 
Taxation, Poor 
quality of 
products/service
s, Problems 
with employees, 
Trade 
instruments. 
and information are the major 
factors affecting firms export. 
Poor quality of products, 
shortage of skills, lack of 
finance, and planning are the 
major internal barriers to SME 
growth. 
SME research in South 
Africa has been constrained 
by insufficient statistical 
information and resources 
channelled to research 
surveys. 
studies, longitudinal studies, 
and surveys on SME policy 
issues. 
Jagongo, 
Kinyua, 
(2013). 
Kenya. 
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Journal 
Humanit
ies and 
Social 
Science. 
Vol. 3 
(10), pp. 
213-227 
The Social 
Media and 
Entrepreneurs
hip Growth: 
A New 
Business 
Communicati
on Paradigm 
among SMEs 
in Nairobi). 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
investigate the effect 
of social media on 
the growth of SMEs 
in Nairobi. 
Zontanos & 
Andersons 
proposition. They 
suggested that social 
networking aids the 
development of the 
worthiness of a firm, 
by increasing the 
customer and 
supplier contacts 
and highlighting 
available resources 
and funding to 
promote innovation 
and cultivation of 
strategic 
partnerships 
(Zontanos & 
Anderson, 2004; 
Jagongo & Kinyua, 
2013, p.214). 
SME growth, 
Social media, 
Innovation, 
Pricing, Market 
Access, and 
Customer 
relationship 
management. 
Facebook, Twitter, and other 
social media networks 
(dealfish, rupu, and zetu) were 
the most preferred social 
networks used by SMEs. 
The participants preferred 
social media because of its 
ability to reach a wide range of 
audiences. It is also cheaper 
and user friendly compared to 
other traditional modes of 
marketing and advertising. 
Social media makes referrals 
by customers seamless and 
recommendations and feedback 
are easily received as well.  
Market access and customer 
relationship management have 
a positive effect on sales.  
Customer relationship 
management has a positive 
effect on an increase in profit. 
The findings of this study 
reflect that SMEs in Nairobi 
had not fully maximised the 
potential of social media. 
This study reflects that SMEs 
have achieved greater market 
accessibility through social 
media. Social media has 
eliminated geographical 
barriers and provide SMEs 
with access to new markets. 
Innovation in social media 
does not necessarily translate 
into business growth. Social 
media does help with the 
gathering of intelligence for 
new product innovation, new 
packaging, and delivery of 
products and payment 
methods tailored to 
customers specifications. 
Social media does affect the 
pricing of products. 
Future studies could 
examine the barriers to the 
adoption of social media by 
SMEs or comprehensive 
examination of the effects 
on social media concerning 
other variables across 
different business sectors. 
Mashene
ne, R. G. 
Rumanyi
ka, J. 
(2014). 
Tanzania
Journal 
Name: 
Europea
n Journal 
Business 
Manage
6(32), 
pp. 72-
Business 
Constraints 
and Potential 
Growth of 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises in 
Tanzania: A 
Review. 
The purpose of this 
study is to assess the 
business constraints 
that affect the 
growth of SMEs in 
Tanzania. 
Majengas theory. 
This theory argues 
that family roles, 
immobility of 
women for business 
opportunities, lack 
of education, 
business information 
and training, 
ethnicity, and poor 
support from 
spouses are the 
major socio-cultural 
barriers to the 
performance of 
women-owned 
SMEs in Tanzania 
(Majenga, 2013; 
Mashenene & 
Rumanyika, 2014, 
p.73). 
Potential 
growth, 
Inadequate 
business 
training, 
insufficient 
capital, 
competition, 
anti-
entrepreneurial 
culture, 
bureaucratic 
procedures in 
business 
registration, 
high taxes, 
technological 
backwardness, 
theft, lack of 
trust, poor 
infrastructures, 
and corruption. 
Critical constraints affecting 
the growth of SMEs in 
Tanzania are inadequate 
business training, insufficient 
capital, and anti-entrepreneurial 
culture. 
Another constraint with relative 
impact is high taxes. 
Competition, bureaucratic 
procedures in business 
registration, technological 
backwardness, and theft/lack of 
trust, corruption, and poor 
infrastructure has an 
insignificant effect on the 
potential growth of SMEs. 
  Inadequate business training, 
insufficient capital, and anti-
entrepreneurial culture are key 
constraints hindering the 
potential business growth of 
SMEs in Tanzania. 
Anti-entrepreneurial culture, 
fear of competition, corruption, 
technological backwardness, 
poor access to credits exists 
because of inadequate business 
training. 
Critical measures should be 
considered by policymakers 
and business owners to 
mitigate the constraints 
hindering growth through 
prioritisation. 
Suggestions on further 
research suggest the use of 
primary data in the same area 
to test the hypotheses.  
The same suggestion goes for 
the same area of research 
while considering gender 
differences. 
Mather, 
(2005). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Develop
Southern 
Africa 
22(5), 
pp. 607-
The Growth 
Challenges of 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises 
(SMEs) in 
South 
Africas food 
processing 
complex. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the growth 
challenges and 
opportunities for 
SMEs in South 
Africa. 
Reardon & Farinas 
proposition. This 
argues that the 
market liberalisation 
and structural 
adjustment 
programmes in 
emerging markets 
have resulted in the 
weakening of the 
regulations for 
health and quality of 
food products where 
they existed 
(Reardon & Farina, 
2002; Mather, 2005, 
p.609). 
Growth 
challenges, 
Growth 
opportunities, 
Business 
growth. 
A third of the sample supplied 
only local markets. 
SMEs are competitive for price 
and quality. They are barely 
engaged in promotional deals 
and a majority of their 
marketing channels were done 
through word of mouth or 
active efforts of company 
owners. 
The majority of SMEs dont 
supply supermarkets. 
SMEs who aspire to reach new 
markets and institutions such as 
supermarkets, banks, 
restaurants, and others are 
required to adhere to stringent 
requirements that require 
resources and new business 
strategies. The samples were 
not selected randomly. 
The challenges and 
opportunities of SMEs are 
limited to only supermarket 
chains and also not clearly 
articulated. 
The growth challenges facing 
SMEs in South Africa is 
reflected in the transition 
process required to meet up 
with the standards of 
supermarket chains in the 
country. This is represented in 
the step-up of any SME to 
become a supermarket 
supplier. 
This study suggests the 
initiative of a support 
mechanism for SMEs to 
become supermarket 
suppliers. 
Mbonya
ne, B. & 
Ladzani, 
(2011). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Europea
Business 
Review 
23(6), 
pp. 550-
Factors that 
hinder the 
Growth of 
Small 
businesses in 
South African 
Townships. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the barriers to the 
growth of small 
businesses in South 
Africa. 
Grounded theory. 
Survivalists, 
Micro-
enterprises, 
Small 
businesses. 
Factors that contribute to the 
poor growth of small 
businesses are: 
Legal requirements not met. 
Poor financial management. 
Poor stock control.  
Poor crime prevention. 
Poor access to credit. 
Poor staff relations. 
Poor infrastructure. 
Poor technological skills. 
The government is not actively 
providing support mechanisms 
for business registrations.  
Small businesses are unable to 
secure loans due to unreliable 
business track records or 
correct budgeting.  
The study suggests 
bookkeeping that could be 
evaluated weekly or monthly. 
The government doesnt seem 
to help businesses with support 
such as training to educate 
owners on business ethics. 
Businesses are plagued by 
crime  staff disloyalty and 
prevention of theft by 
employees. 
Lack of technology available to 
survivalists is caused by a lack 
of funds to invest in technology 
and training. 
This study only focused on 
micro, very small, and small 
businesses. Medium-sized 
enterprises were exempted 
which gives room for further 
study. 
Memba, 
S. F., 
Gakure, 
W. R. & 
Karanja, 
(2012). 
Kenya. 
Journal 
Name: 
Internati
Journal 
Venture 
Capital (VC): 
Its Impact on 
Growth of 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises in 
Kenya. 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
investigate the 
impact of venture 
capital on SME 
growth. 
Freear explains that 
informal investors 
which could also be 
family or friends 
provide early-stage 
funding for most 
SMEs (Freear, 2003; 
Memba et al., 2012, 
p.33). 
Use of venture 
capital, Annual 
sales, 
Profitability, 
Values of 
assets, Number 
of workers. 
Findings reveal that the use of 
venture capital translates to the 
growth of sales for SMEs. 
The increase in profitability has 
a significant effect on business 
growth. SMEs that use venture 
capital also record an increase 
in profit. 
All SMEs that use venture 
capital experience growth in 
business irrespective of the 
sector to which they belong. 
Venture capitalists usually 
focus on scale or potential for 
scale rather than profitability. 
The use of venture capital has a 
This study proves that the 
impact of venture capital on 
SME growth is significant. 
The findings also reflect the 
correlation between SME 
growth and poverty 
alleviation. The impact of 
venture capital is evident on 
economic or social-economic 
factors. 
The study only focused on 
venture capital. Perhaps 
future studies could focus 
on other variables that could 
have a significant impact on 
business growth such as 
Business 
Social 
Science 
3(6), pp. 
32-38. 
huge effect on the creation of 
employment opportunities. 
The impact of venture capital is 
reflected in sales growth, profit, 
asset, and improvement of the 
management of a firms 
finances and resources. 
innovation or the use of new 
technology in Kenya. 
Neneh, 
B. N. & 
Vanzyl, 
(2014). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Mediterr
anean 
Journal 
of Social 
Sciences 
5(20), 
pp. 172-
Growth 
Intention and 
its Impact on 
Business 
Growth 
amongst 
SMEs in 
South Africa. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the factors that 
determine the 
growth intention 
amongst existing 
business owners and 
the impact posed on 
the actual growth of 
their SMEs. 
Expectancy Value 
Theory of Attitudes 
(Fishbein & Ajzen, 
1975, p.30). This 
theory according to 
Fishbein and Ajzen 
argues that certain 
attributes or 
consequences are 
vital in determining 
a persons overall 
attitude. 
Vrooms expectancy 
theory (Vroom, 
1964, cited in Studer 
& Knecht, in 
Progress in Brain 
Research, 2016). 
This theory argues 
that expectancy and 
value are the two 
factors that drive the 
motivation of a 
given behaviour. 
Internal factors 
(Gender, Prior 
experience, 
Prior family 
business 
exposure, Level 
of education, 
Entrepreneurshi
p education, 
Start-up motive, 
Need for 
achievement, 
Locus of 
control, Risk-
taking 
propensity, 
Tolerance of 
ambiguity and 
uncertainty, 
Self-efficacy). 
External factors 
(Access to 
finance, 
Procedural 
requirements 
for registration, 
Taxes). 
Growth 
intention, SME 
growth 
(Employment, 
Growth, Sales 
Growth, and 
Asset growth). 
The most critical factor as 
perceived by entrepreneurs was 
self-efficacy and the least 
critical factor was risk-taking 
propensity. 
Access to finance and Taxes 
are the most critical factors that 
affect business operations. 
Internal and External factors 
determine the level of growth 
intentions among SME owners. 
Growth intentions have no 
significant impact on 
employment in South Africa. 
This study identified the 
internal and external 
environmental factors that 
affect the growth intentions of 
entrepreneurs in South Africa. 
This study reveals that growth 
intentions are related to the 
actual firm growth with 
regards to sales growth and 
asset growth.     
This study reveals that there 
were positive relationships 
between level of education 
and growth intention but not 
concerning gender as argued 
by previous studies. 
Nichter, 
Goldmar
k, L. 
(2009). 
Africa & 
Latin 
America. 
Journal 
Name: 
World 
Develop
Vol.37(9
pp.1453-
Small Firm 
Growth in 
Developing 
Countries. 
The purpose of this 
study is to explore 
the factors 
associated with 
small firm growth. 
Churchill & Lewiss 
Model (1983). This 
model divides the 
growth continuum 
into stages of 
development. 
Mitra & Pingalis 
theory of typologies 
(1999). This theory 
highlights the issues 
specific to family or 
women-owned 
firms. 
Individual 
Entrepreneurial 
characteristics 
(education, 
experience, 
gender, and 
household), 
Characteristics 
(firm age, 
formality or 
informality, 
access to 
finance), 
Relational 
factors (social 
networks, value 
Chains, Inter-
Cooperation 
(vertical 
linkages, 
horizontal 
linkages, 
supporting 
markets), 
Contextual 
Factors 
(business 
environment). 
This study was able to identify 
potential segmentation 
variables linked to MSE 
growth; Create an MSE 
segmentation frame; Define 
homogenous segments- 
examining the characteristics 
such as growth, opportunities, 
and capabilities of firms in 
segmentation frame; MSE 
programs who aim to stabilize 
the income of the poor might 
choose to focus on segments 
such as Survivalist MSEs. 
This study was able to 
critically explore the 
numerous factors associated 
with the growth of MSEs and 
small firm growth. 
This study suggests new 
approaches to designs, 
intervention, and evaluation 
cycles to achieve enhanced 
development outcomes. 
This study reveals that 
needs-based assessments 
have been conducted to 
identify constraints 
affecting small firms in 
different/specific regions. 
Olawale. 
Garwe, 
Obstacles to 
the Growth of 
New SMEs in 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
investigate the 
Internal 
(Financial)  
Access to 
The financial and management 
factors are largely the internal 
obstacles to business growth in 
This study suggests that new 
SMEs should commit to 
producing business plans that 
(2010). 
South 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
African 
Journal 
Business 
Manage
4(5), pp. 
729-738 
South Africa: 
A Principal 
Component 
Analysis 
Approach. 
growth of new 
SMEs in South 
Africa using the 
principal component 
approach. 
Churchill & Lewiss 
Model (1983). This 
model divides the 
growth continuum 
into stages of 
development  
Existence, Survival, 
Disengagement, 
Growth, Take-off, 
and Maturity.  
finance, 
management 
skills, location, 
and networking, 
investment in IT 
and cost of 
production, 
External 
(Economic, 
Markets, 
Management, 
Infrastructure)  
economic 
variables and 
markets, crime 
and corruption, 
labour, 
infrastructure, 
and regulations. 
South Africa. 
The negative effects (increased 
cost of security, repair, and 
replacement costs) related to 
crime has an internal effect on 
the finances of the business. 
The least important obstacle to 
business growth in South 
Africa is infrastructure 
(external factor). 
Economic and Market are 
largely the external obstacles to 
business growth in South 
Africa. 
forecast cash flow 
requirements, and operational 
plan for management and that 
reflect viability and 
sustainability measures for the 
business to secure debt 
finance. 
It also suggests thorough 
market research to ensure 
theres a need for the 
envisaged products or 
services. 
Managerial capabilities are 
key drivers to the 
sustainability and growth of 
SMEs. 
Sustainable business growth 
depends on SMEs access to 
suitably skills and labour 
force. 
Quartey, 
Turkson, 
E., Abor, 
J. Y. & 
Iddrisu, 
A. M. 
(2017). 
Saharan 
Africa. 
Journal 
Name: 
Review 
Develop
Finance 
Vol. 7, 
pp. 18-
Financing the 
Growth of 
SMEs in 
Africa: What 
are the 
constraints to 
financing 
within 
ECOWAS. 
The purpose of this 
study is to provide 
insights into SMEs 
access to finance 
within the West 
African Sub-region. 
Schiffer & Weders 
Theory (2001). This 
states that the size of 
a firm is negatively 
related to the risk it 
poses to a lender. 
Firm age, Firm 
size, Gender of 
management, 
Foreign 
Ownership, 
Experience of 
Top manager, 
Formality 
status, Exporter, 
Strength of 
legal rights 
index, depth of 
credit info 
index, Firm 
performance, 
Sector. 
At the sub-regional level, 
access to finance is strongly 
determined by factors such as 
ownership, firm size, the 
strength of legal rights, depth 
of credit information, 
experience of top managers, 
and firms export orientation. 
This on the contrary isnt the 
same at the country level. 
This study was able to 
contribute to the growing 
literature regarding what 
influences SMEs' access to 
finance in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
 This study suggests a further 
study to investigate why 
SMEs within the Sub Sahara 
African region are considered 
as high risk by lenders. 
The findings of this study 
have important policy 
implications- Formalisation 
to enhance potentials for 
accessing formal credits, 
joining the business 
association, and seeking 
group credit schemes. 
Tushabo
Kazooba
(2006). 
Uganda. 
Journal 
Name: 
African 
Studies 
Quarterl
8(4), pp. 
27-35 
Causes of 
Small 
business 
failure in 
Uganda: A 
Case Study 
Bushenyi and 
Mbarara 
Towns 
The purpose of this 
study is to 
investigate the 
reasons for small 
business enterprise 
failure and the 
financial impact of 
load shedding on the 
businesses that use 
electricity as a 
source of energy. 
SMEs, Internal 
factors, External 
factors, 
Business failure 
A higher percentage of the 
respondents didnt receive any 
business management training 
before the start of their 
businesses.  
Power shortages have led to 
load shedding among small 
businesses in Uganda. 
Lack of capital and proper 
pricing strategy is also a key 
factor to business failure. 
Poor record-keeping, lack of 
effective management and 
planning, high rental charges, 
and transportation costs are 
also key factors to business 
failure in Uganda. 
This study was able to give 
insights into the key factors 
for business failure in Uganda.  
The imposition of other forms 
of taxes on goods has also 
proven to be a corresponding 
factor for business failure. 
The weight of tax imposed 
by local authorities on 
SMEs which is solely borne 
by consumers has lead 
consumers to patronise 
illicit or illegal traders as 
they sell goods at lower 
prices. 
Yeboah, 
M. A. 
(2015) 
Ghana. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal 
Business 
Developi
Determinants 
of SME 
Growth: An 
Empirical 
Perspective of 
SMEs in the 
Cape Coast 
Metropolis, 
Ghana. 
The purpose of this 
study is to examine 
the effects of an 
entrepreneurs 
characteristics and 
firm characteristics 
on SME growth. 
Churchill & Lewiss 
Model (1983). This 
model divides the 
growth continuum 
into stages of 
development  
Existence, Survival, 
Disengagement, 
Entrepreneurs 
characteristics- 
(gender, age, 
level of 
education, and 
motivation), 
characteristics- 
(firm age, firm 
legal status, and 
industry sector). 
The results reveal that there are 
more micro-enterprises in the 
Cape Coast Metropolis. 
The male-owned/managed 
SMEs experience increase in 
growth than female-
owned/managed SMEs. 
Owner/managers of SMEs aged 
30  39 experience a significant 
increase in sales growth. 
Owner/managers with 
university education experience 
less decrease in sales growth. 
Owners/managers with self-
fulfilling motivation have the 
Male and Female 
entrepreneurs have 
relatively equal business 
opportunities to increase 
sales growth. 
Formal education, seminars, 
and workshops can help 
boost business performance. 
Self-fulfilling motivation 
can increase sales growth. 
Nations. 
Vol. 14, 
pp. 2-30 
Growth, Take-off, 
and Maturity.  
Storeys theory 
(1994). This theory 
suggests three 
components that 
influence SME 
growth namely; 
Entrepreneur, Firm, 
and Strategy. 
most increase in sales growth 
while those with job creation 
record the least increase in 
sales growth. 
SMEs record increase in sales 
growth from 2years of 
operation to 10years after 
which sales begin to decline. 
Small enterprises grow faster 
than micro-enterprises. 
Limited liability firms had the 
least decrease in sales growth. 
Owners/managers of SMEs 
who operated as wholesalers 
and retailers had the highest 
record of sales growth. 
The influence of the 
entrepreneurs characteristics 
particularly level of education 
has a significant effect on SME 
growth. 
The influence of the firms 
characteristics especially firm 
size and legal status has a 
significant effect on SME 
growth. 
Appendix 7.3: Systematic literature review table of studies done in other countries of the 
World. 
Author/Year
/Country/Jo
urnal 
Study title Purpose/Theories/Propos
itions 
Constructs/V
ariables 
Key findings Research 
Contributions/Implications  
Bartlett, W. 
& Bukvic, V. 
(2001). 
Slovenia. 
Journal 
Name: 
MOCT-
Academic 
paper- 
School of 
Policy 
Studies, 
University of 
Bristol 
College, 
Ljubljana, 
Slovenia. 
Vol. 11, pp. 
177-195 
Barriers to 
Growth in 
Slovenia. 
The purpose of this study 
is to deduce the critical 
barriers to small business 
growth and development in 
Slovenia. 
Jovanovics model  the 
passive learning model 
(1982). This model 
explains why small firms 
grow faster as soon as they 
discover they can stand up 
to the competition in their 
niche markets. 
Blanchards theory. This 
theory suggests that the 
essence of transition is a 
reallocation of resources 
from the state sector to the 
private sector (Blanchard, 
1997; Bartlett & Bukvic, 
2001, p.177). 
SME growth, 
Employment 
growth, size, 
and sector. 
Institutional 
barriers, 
Barriers 
internal to the 
firm, External 
barriers, 
Financial 
barriers, 
Social 
barriers. 
Financial and institutional 
problems such as bureaucracy 
seem to be the most critical 
barrier to SME growth in 
Slovenia. 
The study indicates that the first 
point of focus is on finance as a 
barrier. The second point of focus 
is on the institutional 
environment. The third point is 
on social support for SMEs. 
This study is only applicable to 
firms undergoing growth 
exempting non-growth or 
shrinking firms. Further research 
could examine different sectors of 
the economy. 
Bi, R., 
Davison, R. 
Smyrnios, K. 
X. (2017). 
Australia.  
Journal 
Name: Small 
Business 
Economics 
E-business 
and fast-
growth 
SMEs. 
The purpose of this study 
is to test a theoretical 
model in evaluating e-
business capability and 
value in the fast growth 
SME context. 
Resource-based theory. 
This theory reflects how 
enterprises acquire 
competitive advantage 
through the use of 
resources and capabilities 
infrastructure, 
IT expertise, 
Strategic IT 
alignment, 
Market 
orientation, 
Business 
process 
competence, 
performance, 
IT infrastructure has a positive 
effect on e-business capability. 
Strategic IT alignment positively 
facilitates e-business capability. 
Market orientation significantly 
enhances e-business capability. 
Business partnerships have a 
positive impact on e-business 
capability. 
E-business capability does have a 
significant impact on business 
process competence. 
This study introduces a 
theoretical framework that 
managers can use to comprehend 
how IT investments can aid firms 
to create competitive advantage 
and gain financial performance 
within a digital business 
environment.   
It suggests that IT strategy 
alignment is one of the key 
drivers to gain a competitive 
advantage. 
Vol. 48, pp. 
559-576 
as central considerations in 
strategy formulation 
(Barney, 1991; Bi et al., 
2017, p.560). 
Business 
partnerships, 
E-business 
capability. 
Business process competence has 
a positive impact on e-business 
value.  
IT can be used to aid business 
value for fast-growth SMEs. 
It argues that market orientation 
in conjunction with organisational 
resources would help firms 
achieve dynamic business 
competencies that aid superior 
competitive advantage. 
This study only puts forward a 
piece of initial evidence that 
can be used to comprehend how  
Cross-sectional research designs 
and analysis of static parameters 
would limit the interferences 
between constructs or variables. 
The use of single informants as 
samples gives data that is limited 
to perception. 
The focus on only one type of 
SME also limits the general 
application of the findings to 
SMEs. 
Dobbs, M. & 
Hamilton, R. 
T. (2007). 
Literature 
Review. 
Journal 
Name: 
International 
Journal of 
Entrepreneuri
al Behaviour 
& Research 
Vol. 13(5), 
pp. 296-322 
Small 
Business 
Growth: 
Recent 
Evidence 
and New 
Directions. 
The purpose of this study 
is to review empirical 
contributions to literature 
pertinent to small business 
growth since the mid-
1990s. 
Gibrats Law of 
Proportionate Effect, 
Churchill & Lewiss 
model, Resource-based 
View theory. 
Small 
enterprises, 
Business 
development, 
Sector, 
Growth 
measure, 
Time period 
Knowledge development deduced 
from previous literature remains 
fragmented due to the absence of 
any unifying theory that truly 
depicts the totality of the small 
business growth process. 
New theoretical perspectives are 
needed to increase the 
understanding of the small 
business growth process. 
There are various conceptual 
frameworks proposed to capture 
small business growth namely: 
stochastic, descriptive, 
evolutionary, resource-based, 
learning, and deterministic. 
This paper suggests the adoption 
of multiple measures of growth in 
future research while putting into 
consideration theories 
longitudinal in scope but 
idiosyncratic in its focus. 
Other key areas would be an 
explicit explanation of the 
periodicity of growth and the role 
that learning plays in the 
idiosyncratic growth process of 
small businesses. 
The review reflects different 
types of research focusing on 
small business growth as a 
process rather than an episode. 
Doern, R. 
(2009). 
Literature 
Review. 
Journal 
Name: 
International 
Small 
Business 
Journal 
Vol. 27(3), 
pp. 275-305 
Investigatin
g Barriers 
to SME 
Growth and 
Developme
nt in 
Transition 
Environme
nts: A 
Critique 
Suggestions 
Developing 
Methodolo
The purpose of this study 
is to explore the limitations 
of previous studies 
investigating barriers, 
examining research 
assumptions, definitional 
issues, conceptualisations, 
methodological 
limitations, and challenges 
found in previous studies. 
Storeys theory, The 
theory of the growth of 
firm (Penroses theory), 
Deakinss theory 
Growth 
intentions, 
perceived 
barriers, SME 
growth, 
SMEs, 
Transition 
economies. 
There are two approaches to 
examining the barriers to SME 
development. The first approach 
does the comparison of macro-
level development indicators in 
one context to another. The 
second approach involves 
individuals directly reporting 
their perceptions about barriers to 
business growth and 
development. 
The empirical evidence from 
previous literature does not 
adequately provide the if, 
why and how particular 
barriers/factors enumerated in 
literature affect behaviour that 
influences the growth and 
development of small businesses. 
This paper was able to identify 
barriers hindering SMEs in a 
transition context. 
This paper was also able to 
critique previous assumptions. 
This includes highlighting that 
most results deduced from 
literature passes on the effects of 
barriers as negative. Barriers 
could also be perceived as 
positive concerning their impact 
on the behaviour of individuals.  
This paper highlighted that 
barriers perceived to be 
important to prevent people 
from forming and growing 
businesses. 
It also asserts the direct link 
between perceived and actual 
barriers. 
The limitations of this paper 
are two folds.  
The first fold is reflected in the 
selection criteria for exploring 
literature and for the critique. 
The second fold is reflected in 
the criticism enumerated in the 
paper specifically the 
recommendations for future 
research. Its conclusions limit 
the potential contributions of 
previous literature on the 
barriers to business growth. 
Ensari, M. S. 
& Karabay, 
M. E. (2014). 
Turkey. 
What helps 
to make 
Successful 
in Global 
The purpose of this study 
is to identify and associate 
the main factors that affect 
the success of globally 
successful Turkish SMEs. 
SMEs, 
Entrepreneur, 
Typologies, 
Critical 
Success 
External factors should be 
recognised as significant for 
international firms. 
It is important to understand the 
strategic orientation of SMEs. 
This study was able to give 
insights on the link between 
external, internal, and 
entrepreneurial success factors 
within the dynamic process of 
Journal 
Name:  
Procedia- 
Social and 
Behavioural 
Sciences 
Vol. 150, pp. 
192-201 
Markets? Miles & Snows Model 
(1984). This connotes that, 
SMEs who follow 
prospector strategy, lay 
higher emphasis on 
research and development 
by developing their 
systems of human resource 
management. 
Dunkelberg & Coopers 
Classification (1982). This 
classifies entrepreneur 
typologies into three- 
craftsman oriented, 
independence oriented, and 
growth-oriented. 
Factor, 
competitive 
strategy, R & 
D, Global 
competitive 
pressure, 
Industry. 
From a managers perspective, 
SMEs aiming for global success 
should focus on global 
competitive pressure /industry 
characteristics before improving 
competitive capabilities and 
strategy. 
Turkish SMEs with a superior 
position in the global market. 
This study suggests further 
research on the same variables 
but a wider range in terms of 
sample size and the number of 
countries. 
This study has numerous 
methodological weaknesses. 
The sample size is too small 
and data from only 
successful Turkish SMEs limit 
the results concerning other 
countries. 
Federico, J., 
Rabetino, R. 
& Kantis, H. 
(2012). 
America, 
South-East 
Asia, and 
Mediterranea
n Europe. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Small 
Business and 
Enterprise 
Development 
Vol. 19(4), 
pp. 575-588. 
Comparing 
Young 
SMEs 
Growth 
Determinan
ts across 
Regions. 
The purpose of this study 
is to evaluate the 
understanding of firm 
growth determinants 
through the comparison of 
factors that influence 
young firms growth in 13 
countries in 3 contrasting 
regions. 
The integrated model of 
venture growth (Federico 
et al., 2012). This model 
incorporates three 
theoretical perspectives 
namely: entrepreneurs 
profile, firm resources, and 
market characteristics.   
Human 
capital, Team, 
Finance, 
Networks, 
Intensity of 
competition, 
and External 
orientation. 
 Business 
growth, 
Firms 
characteristics
, and Country. 
Firms initiated by graduates from 
universities with previous 
entrepreneurial experience have a 
better performance in 
employment growth. 
The size of start-ups has a 
positive impact on the growth of 
the firms in Latin America and 
Mediterranean Europe. 
Venture capital-backed firms and 
firms financed by public 
institutions have higher 
performance for employment 
growth in South-East Asia. 
This study collected empirical 
evidence about young firm 
growth in less studied regions. 
Through a comparison of results 
from the different regions, this 
study enumerates the different 
effects of determinants of firm 
growth in contrasting 
environments. 
Growing firms are associated 
with well-educated entrepreneurs 
having previous entrepreneurial 
experience. 
Feindt, S., 
Jeffcoate, J. 
& Chappell, 
C. (2002). 
Worldwide. 
Journal 
Name: 
Small 
Business 
Economics 
Vol. 19, pp. 
51-62 
Identifying 
Success 
Factors for 
Rapid 
Growth in 
SME E-
commerce. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the critical 
success factor that ought to 
be considered by fast-
growing e-commerce firms 
in their start-up phases. 
Porters Generic theory 
(1984). This theory 
classifies firms into two 
namely, cost leaders and 
differentiators. 
Greiners Model (1972). 
This model classifies 
growth into six stages: 
Creativity, Direction, 
Delegation, Coordination, 
Collaboration, and 
Alliances. 
Churchill & Lewiss 
Model (1983). This model 
divides the growth 
continuum into stages of 
development  Existence, 
Survival, Disengagement, 
Growth, Take-off, and 
Maturity.  
E-commerce 
Entrepreneur, 
Critical 
success 
factors- 
Content, 
Convenience, 
Control, 
Interaction, 
Community, 
Price 
Sensitivity, 
Brand image, 
Commitment, 
Partnership, 
Process 
improvement, 
Integration. 
A start-up venture classified as a 
cost leader would need to 
consider all the seven CSFs 
enumerated in this study to be 
able to compete effectively in the 
market. 
E-commerce SMEs need to 
ascertain that their site is set up 
bearing in mind the importance of 
convenience at start-up to 
maximise business. 
Convenience is closely related to 
interaction as key CSFs for 
building relationships with 
customers. 
Loyalty is closely knitted to 
control and convenience to build 
last relationships with customers. 
The integration of all KITE CSFs 
enumerated in this study will 
enable an E-commerce venture at 
a start-up phase to have a vivid 
vision, target, and strategy.  
It will also enhance the building 
of strong customer loyalty with 
good content, convenience, 
pricing, and customer support. 
This study does not cover the 
level of technical skills 
required by the E-commerce 
entrepreneur. 
Foreman-
Peck, J., 
Makepeace, 
Morgan, B.  
(2006). 
Wales. 
Journal 
Name: 
Regional 
Studies Vol. 
Growth and 
profitability 
of small 
medium-
sized 
enterprises: 
Welsh 
evidence. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the 
effectiveness of grants, 
encouraging trade 
associations, pursuing 
current initiatives in 
training, and stimulating 
innovation in the 
development of small and 
medium-sized enterprises. 
Gibrats law/ law of 
proportionate effect. 
characteristics 
(Clusters, 
Size), SME 
Performance 
(Growth, 
Profitability), 
Strategy 
(Customer 
orientation, 
Information 
networking, 
Innovation, 
A marketing plan is relative to 
profits. 
A marketing plan is a common 
element for growth and 
profitability. 
Focus on finance and professions 
remove the negative effect of the 
trade association on profit 
turnover ratio. 
There isnt a significant 
difference in generating higher 
profits or turnover between firms 
that believe IT, innovation, and 
This study suggests that 
marketing plans are key 
contributors to profits, as it 
encourages SMEs to consider 
their customers (current and 
prospective). 
This study also suggests that IT 
investment by SMEs would 
improve their performance. 
Older management has little 
concern for profits as they may 
not be around to enjoy it or could 
be subjected to future taxation. 
40(4), pp. 
307-319. 
ICT adoption, 
Skills and 
training, 
Legal form), 
Business 
Environment, 
Management 
characteristics
networking are important for 
profits and firms that dont follow 
such an ideology. 
The use of computerised accounts 
increases the chances for a firm to 
have a higher growth rate. 
Promoting information 
networking through trade 
associations is bad for Welsh 
SMEs. 
The ineffectiveness of 
networking as measured by this 
research should not be 
generalised as results could 
vary/differ in another instance. 
A more specific type of 
networking could yield 
different results. 
This could be the sole 
limitation of the results put 
forward by this study. 
Gherhes, C., 
Williams, N., 
Vorley, T. & 
Vasconcelos, 
A. C. (2016). 
The United 
Kingdom. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Small 
Business and 
Enterprise 
Development 
Vol. 23(4), 
pp. 939-963 
Distinguish
ing micro-
businesses 
SMEs: a 
systematic 
review of 
growth 
constraints. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine pertinent 
literature on growth 
challenges and distinguish 
the constraints facing 
micro businesses against 
those facing larger SMEs. 
Gibbs theory. 
Owner-
Manager 
Entrepreneur 
(OME), 
Entrepreneurs
hip, policy, 
SMEs, growth 
constraints, 
micro-
businesses. 
The emphasis laid on the specific 
need to focus on the 
characteristics and policy 
development of micro-businesses. 
Micro-businesses distinguish 
themselves from larger SMEs in 
four key areas- business 
capabilities and practices, owner-
manager entrepreneurs (OME) 
characteristics, growth & 
ambition, and growth and 
business environment. 
This study used the OECD (2005) 
definitions of micro-businesses  
0 to 9 employees. 
OMEs dont engage in active 
networking. 
Micro-businesses dont engage in 
marketing practices on the same 
level as larger SMEs. 
Business planning is a relatively 
underdeveloped capability among 
micro-businesses. 
Entrepreneurial and managerial 
experience gained over time 
through several 
ownerships/directorships is 
largely evident in larger SMEs. 
Most micro-businesses dont seek 
external business advice. 
This study puts forward several 
questions for policy to respond to 
challenges facing growth for 
micro-businesses. 
This study suggests the necessity 
for tailored business support for 
micro-businesses to develop core 
business skills. 
It also suggests the provision of 
tailored finance options to 
mitigate financial barriers. 
This study argues that more 
attention should be given to 
understanding the needs of micro-
businesses as a distinct category 
of SMEs. 
More research centred on 
micro-businesses should be 
encouraged as SME findings 
from pertinent research do not 
necessarily apply to micro-
businesses. 
Focus on the determinants of 
motivation and ambition for 
micro-businesses could be 
addressed in future research. 
Other key areas could be the 
level of appropriateness of 
certain business practices in 
micro-businesses. 
Gill, A. & 
Biger, N. 
(2012). 
Canada. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Small 
Business and 
Enterprise 
Development 
Vol. 19(4), 
pp. 656-668 
Barriers to 
Small 
Business 
Growth in 
Canada. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the barriers 
to small business growth in 
Canada. 
Kazanjians four stages of 
business growth 
(Kazanjian, 1988 cited in 
Gill & Biger, 2012, p.658). 
This theory divides 
business growth into stages 
namely: conception and 
growth, 
commercialization, 
growth, and stability. 
Small 
business 
growth plan, 
Lack of 
financing, 
Lack of 
management 
skills, Market 
challenges, 
Regulatory 
issues. 
Lack of financing, market 
challenges, and regulatory issues 
are key barriers to business 
growth in Canada. 
Sales level is a driver to business 
growth in Canada. 
This study points to the factors 
essential for the Canadian 
government to consider to aid 
business growth such as market 
challenges, lack of financing, and 
regulatory issues. 
This study suggests a broader 
geographic sampling for future 
research to give a better reflection 
of the national profile. 
This study was limited to seven 
cities. The relation may be 
subjected to common bias as it 
is limited to perceptions and 
intentions. 
Goedhuys, 
Sleuwaegen, 
L. (2010). 
Worldwide. 
Journal 
Name: Small 
Business 
Economics 
Vol. 34, 
pp.31-51 
High-
growth 
entrepreneu
rial firms in 
Africa: A 
Quantile 
Regression 
Approach. 
The purpose of this study 
is to analyse the growth 
performance of large 
entrepreneurial firms in the 
manufacturing sectors of 
11 sub-Saharan African 
countries. 
Jovanovics model  the 
passive learning model 
(Jovanovic, 1982; cited in 
Goedhuys & Sleuwaegen, 
2010, p. 32). This model 
explains why small firms 
grow faster as soon as they 
discover they can stand up 
to the competition in their 
niche markets. 
Firm growth, 
High-growth 
firms, Firm 
size, Firm 
Innovation, 
Capabilities, 
Entrepreneur 
characteristics
, Resources 
The Least-squares suggest that 
firm growth is negatively related 
to firm age, affirming that 
learning effects work for young 
firms. 
The relationship between growth 
and firm size is equally negative, 
affirming that small firms grow 
faster than large firms. 
Educated entrepreneurs with a 
graduate or postgraduate 
qualification raise the 
employment growth levels by 2% 
compared to pairs with lower 
qualifications. 
Taking a different viewpoint 
while focusing on country, 
industry, firm, and factors 
influencing the mean levels and 
the dispersion of firm growth 
rate, the following observations 
were noted: 
(1). The key factor in expanding 
in niche markets points to the 
provision of a good transportation 
network. 
(2). Few firm-specific human 
capital variables such as 
educational qualification of 
managers and training of the 
workforce do have a compressing 
Koenker & Hallocks 
classical regression 
approach. This approach 
mirrors a location shift 
model presuming that the 
co-variations only affect 
the location of the 
conditional distribution of 
growth rate. 
effect on distribution rather than a 
stretching effect. 
The period of analysing the 
growth rate is relatively short. 
There is a bias while 
considering labor-intensive 
activities which fail to observe 
most of the dynamics of growth 
in value creation. 
Ipinnaiye, O. 
& Dineen, D.  
(2017). 
Ireland. 
Journal 
Name: Small 
Business 
Economics 
Vol. 48, pp. 
883-911 
Drivers of 
performanc
e: a holistic 
multivariate 
approach. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the drivers of 
SME growth. 
Gibrats law or Law of 
proportionate effect. 
Resource-based view 
theory. 
Jovanovics model of 
passive learning. 
SMEs, 
Turnover 
growth, 
Employment 
growth, Firm 
growth, 
Productivity 
growth, Firm 
characteristics
, Firm 
strategy, 
Macroeconom
environment. 
Smaller firms experience higher 
employment and turnover growth. 
Firms entering the industry with 
low productivity levels have to 
increase output immediately to 
attain the industry MES to 
prevent failure. 
Firms gain knowledge of their 
true efficiency after they gain 
market entry into a particular 
industry thereby adjusting their 
firm size accordingly. 
Trade drives the manufacturing 
turnover growth for firms. 
Firms engaged in importation and 
two-way trade recorded declined 
employment growth. 
Industry growth has a positive 
influence on employment growth 
in the first phase of growth only 
and a smaller effect on turnover 
growth in the second phase of 
growth. 
Macroeconomic variables reflect 
different determining effects 
across the two phases of growth 
on the performance of the firm. 
The use of an extended set of 
variables produced results that 
addressed the gap in pertinent 
literature to firm growth 
concerning external growth 
factors. 
The study provides empirical 
evidence on the interactions 
between macroeconomic 
conditions and SME growth. 
The study also provides evidence 
on factors influencing SME 
performance by examining the 
integrated effect of internal and 
external factors on SME growth 
within a holistic model.  
The use of secondary data 
limits results to reflect other 
measures of performance such 
as total factor productivity and 
profitability. 
Lack of data on the age of a 
firm also limits the reflection 
of macroeconomic effects on 
SME growth concerning firm 
Krasniqi, B. 
Mustafa, M.  
(2016) 
Kosovo. 
Journal 
Name: 
International 
Entrepreneur 
Management 
Journal 
Vol. 12, pp. 
1165  1207 
Small firm 
growth in a 
post-
conflict 
environmen
t: the role 
of human 
capital, 
institutional 
quality, and 
managerial 
capacities. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the 
predictors of small firm 
growth in a post-conflict 
environment while 
considering the earlier 
theories of firm growth. 
(1). Gibrats Law (Gibrat, 
1931; cited in Krasniqi & 
Mustafa, 2016, p.1168). 
Gibrats law or the law of 
proportionate effect argues 
that a firms growth is 
independent of its size. 
(2). Jovanovics learning 
theory (Jovanovic, 1982; 
cited in Krasniqi & 
Mustafa, 2016, p.1168). 
The theory suggests that 
small firms learn about 
their efficiency over some 
time and grow faster than 
larger firms. 
(3). Resource-Based View 
(Penrose, 1959; cited in 
Krasniqi & Mustafa, 2016, 
p.1169). This theory states 
that firm growth 
postulates that the 
availability of firm 
resources and knowledge 
determines the expansion 
of the firm. 
(4). Institutional Theory 
(Krasniqi & Mustafa, 
2016, p.1169). This theory 
argues that earlier theories 
have tumbledown the role 
SMEs, Firm 
related 
factors- 
Entrepreneurs 
employees 
training, 
Human 
capital, 
Institutional 
quality, 
Managerial 
capacities. 
The association of sizes of 
variables and age concerning 
growth is sensitive depending on 
whether a relative of the absolute 
definition of growth is adopted. 
Firms in developed and dynamic 
areas enjoying positive 
externalities have the benefits to 
grow faster. 
The education of employees has a 
significant negative influence on 
firm growth  over the 
qualification of employees 
generating dissatisfaction and 
leading to negativity on growth. 
Corruption also has a negative 
relationship with firm growth but 
only for samples of growing 
firms. 
Firms that employ professional 
managers have higher tendencies 
to experience growth. 
There is a diminishing return as a 
result of learning and experience 
for firms as they get older. 
This study provides a vivid 
understanding of drivers of small 
firm growth, particularly to 
growth-oriented SMEs. 
The study gives evidence on key 
factors of small firm growth  
firm-related factors, human 
capital factors, growth aspiration, 
strategy, and institutional quality. 
Entrepreneurs' and employees 
training are the most significant 
human capital factors. 
The most significant variable 
barrier to growth is corruption. 
This study brings a large number 
of variables, models, and 
measures to give evidence on 
their relationship with a firm data 
The exemption of variables 
such as management-related 
factors limits the results of this 
study. 
Focus on different stages of 
firm growth and perhaps 
separation of ownership or 
control with giving a better 
understanding of the process of 
growth for firms. 
of market failures 
concerning institutional 
quality and imperfect 
information. 
Macpherson, 
A. & Holt, R.  
(2007). 
Literature 
Review. 
Journal 
Name: 
Research 
Policy 
Vol. 36, pp. 
172-192. 
Knowledge
, Learning, 
and Small 
Growth: A 
Systematic 
Review of 
Evidence. 
The purpose of this study 
is to carry out a systematic 
review of empirical 
research on knowledge and 
growth in small firms. 
Penroses theory of the 
growth of the firm, 
Schumpeters theory, 
Churchill & Lewis model. 
Landscape of 
field, Human 
and social 
capital, 
Organisationa
l systems and 
structures, 
Networks, 
and Holistic 
themes. 
Growth cant be achieved without 
managerial capabilities in other to 
provide specialist functions and 
processes tailored to support and 
explore entrepreneurial actions. 
Entrepreneurs influence isnt 
limited to organisational 
structures but also the culture of 
the organisation. 
The logic of organising creates 
path dependencies tailored to 
organisational structures and 
cultures. 
An entrepreneurs social capital 
could be a vital resource to 
organisational growth. Networks 
are vital for small firm growth. 
The growth process for small 
firms is quite challenging 
compared to how stage models 
proposed by previous studies 
portray them. Implementation is 
quite different from the proposed 
models. 
This study was able to give 
evidence on the role of 
entrepreneurs and management 
teams in human capital, social 
capital, and developing systems 
of management. It also 
investigates systems and their 
function in providing absorptive 
capacity. 
This study also addressed 
networks, collaborative learning, 
and the nature of knowledge with 
growth in a holistic view. 
There is an emerging fact that 
entrepreneurship is an activity of 
knowledge acquisition through 
the search of opportunities rather 
than possession of resources. 
This study reflects that the 
competing themes and 
directions in researches 
pertinent to entrepreneurship 
are emerging. 
 Future research could focus on 
the evolution of these emerging 
themes. 
Other theories such as activity 
or practice theories are also 
suggested for further studies 
while adopting different 
research methodologies. 
Moreira, D. 
F. (2016). 
The Czech 
Republic. 
Journal 
Name: 
Procedia- 
Social and 
Behavioural 
Sciences 
Vol. 220, pp. 
278-287. 
Microecono
mic impact 
on the 
growth of 
when the 
access to 
finance 
widens: 
Evidence 
internet 
&High-tech 
industry. 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the impact 
on the growth of SMEs in 
Europe with regards to an 
increase in access to 
finance and the 
corresponding correlation 
between credit evaluation 
and accounting ratios. 
SMEs, 
Internet, and 
High-tech 
companies, 
Annual 
turnover, 
Liquidity 
ratio, 
Solvency 
ratio, Error 
term, Period, 
Total assets. 
Some of the independent 
variables in the model have 
jointly contributed to the growth 
of the internet and high-tech 
SMEs in Europe. 
SMEs deal with challenges of 
credit accessibility to enhance 
business growth and expansion. 
Solvency and Liquidity are not 
statistically significant in the 
econometric model as they dont 
explain the growth of SMEs. 
An increase in credit accessibility 
supported by imported 
governmental European 
legislation for SMEs may help 
promote the growth and 
employment rates across Europe. 
Even though solvency and 
liquidity ratios are not 
determinants of growth to the 
number of workers-they are 
still relevant evaluating factors. 
Morrison, A., 
Breen, J & 
Ali, S. 
(2003). 
Australia. 
Journal 
Name: Small 
Business 
Management 
Vol. 41(4), 
pp. 417-423. 
Small 
Business 
Growth: 
Intention, 
Ability, and 
Opportunit
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the factors 
and characteristics that 
contribute to pro-growth 
small business orientation. 
The intention, 
Ability, 
Opportunity. 
Pro-Growth 
Factors, 
Inhibiting 
Factors. 
Intention shaped by 
demographics were 
predominantly male (31-50) and 
they all exhibit entrepreneurial 
characteristics (vision, energy, 
opportunism). 
Intention, Ability, and 
Opportunity are interlinked and 
business growth is unlikely to be 
achieved if one is missing or 
weakened 
A key distinguishing feature of a 
pro-growth small business is a 
balanced alignment of the owner-
managers intention, abilities of 
the business, and the 
opportunities found in the 
environment.  
Policy measures could be 
employed more effectively by 
targeting the minority of small 
businesses that show evidence of 
growth. 
There is a coherent link 
between intention, ability, and 
opportunity for business 
growth. 
Motta, V. & 
Sharma, A. 
(2019) 
Brazil. 
Journal 
Name: 
Lending 
Technologi
es and 
Access to 
Finance for 
SMEs in 
Hospitality 
The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the 
comparative effect of 
lending technologies on 
access to finance for SMEs 
in the hospitality industry. 
Mottas proposition. It 
argues that financial 
Firm size, 
Collateral 
size, Access 
to finance, 
Hotel SMEs, 
Hospitality 
SMEs, Fixed 
asset lending, 
Financial statement lending 
increases the likelihood of access 
to financing for hospitality SMEs 
in Brazil. 
Collateral size does not have a 
significant effect on the 
probability of access to financing. 
Fixed asset lending increases the 
This study gave evidence on the 
impact of lending technologies on 
access to capital for hospitality 
SMEs in Brazil. 
This study reveals that the 
financial statements do not 
necessarily communicate the 
quality of a borrowers quality 
International 
Journal of 
Hospitality 
Management 
Article 
No.102371 
(Article in 
press), pp. 1-
Industry. statement technology 
decreases the chances of 
firms being credit rationed 
out the market while 
lending technologies are 
considered (Motta, 2017; 
Motta & Sharma, 2019, 
p.3). 
Financial 
statement 
lending. 
likelihood to access financing for 
hospitality SMEs. 
Hotel SMEs are more likely to 
get loans than other SMEs within 
the hospitality industry. 
Medium-sized enterprises have 
greater access to financing (loans) 
than small-sized enterprises. 
Access to loans is also influenced 
by location. Hospitality SMEs in 
the Midwestern, Northern, and 
North-eastern regions of the 
country have 30% higher loans 
than those in the Southeast.  
(hospitality SMEs). 
Fixed asset-based lending is more 
effective than collateral size. 
Access to capital is a significant 
barrier to growth for SMEs. 
This study only concentrated 
on one sector of the industry. 
Another limitation could be 
found in the data set retrieved 
from WBES database in 2009 
which could have been subject 
to change over the decade 
when the study was done. 
The results of this study may 
not reflect the current situation 
of the economy due to the data 
set used. 
Musa, H. & 
Chinniah, M. 
(2016). 
Malaysia. 
Journal 
Name:  
Procedia- 
Social and 
Behavioural 
Sciences 
Vol. 224, pp. 
254-262 
Malaysian 
Developme
nt: Future 
Challenges 
on Going 
Green. 
The purpose of this study 
was to examine the 
development of SMEs in 
Malaysia to challenges and 
opportunities for green 
practices as a vital role in 
national growth. 
SME, Green 
practice, 
challenges of 
SMEs, 
Green practices are fundamental 
for SMEs to have a more 
competitive edge domestically 
and internationally. 
The adaptation of green practices 
may promote the positive 
development of employees and 
help enhance productivity and 
profitability. 
The adoption of the 
environmental management 
system (EMS)/green practices is 
well received in Malaysia in the 
manufacturing sector. 
This study provided insights into 
the development of SMEs in 
Malaysia to green practices. 
This study suggests future 
research should be focused on the 
benefits of green practices (ISO 
14001 standards) in the 
Malaysian SMEs service sector. 
As green practices are well 
adopted in the manufacturing 
sector, all other sectors should 
adopt this framework/practice. 
North, D. & 
Smallbone, 
D.  (1996) 
The United 
Kingdom. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Rural Studies 
Vol. 12(2), 
pp. 151-167. 
Small 
Business 
Developme
nt in 
Remote 
Rural 
Areas: The 
Example of 
Mature 
Manufactur
ing Firms 
in Northern 
England. 
The purpose of this study 
is to give evidence on the 
potential contributions of 
SMEs to rural economic 
development. 
Westhead & Moyess 
proposition. This argues 
that a typical way to 
increase the new firm 
formation in a locality is to 
increase the in-migration 
pool of potential founders 
who have previous self-
employment and/or 
managerial and 
professional experience in 
smaller enterprises. 
(Westhead & Moyes, 
1992; North & Smallbone, 
1996, p.154). 
Vaessen & Keebles 
theory. This theory 
suggests that owner-
managers respond to 
threats by actively 
developing strategies to 
overcome constraints with 
the result assuming initial 
location disadvantages 
could prove to be 
beneficial to the business 
growth eventually rather 
than remain passive 
towards adverse 
environmental pressures 
and constraints (Vaessen & 
Keeble, 1995; North & 
Smallbone, 1996, p.157). 
Demand 
related 
constraints, 
Labour 
related 
constraints, 
Financial 
constraints, 
Space/site 
constraints, 
Number of 
firms, Skill 
shortages, 
Recruitment 
problems, 
Labour 
turnover, 
Motivation to 
work, 
Absenteeism, 
Ageing 
workforce, 
Rural SMEs tend to be backward 
technologically compared to their 
urban counterparts. 
SMEs with high technology are 
concentrated in the urban areas 
than the rural areas. 
In the case of a shortage of skills, 
rural SMEs make use of in-
house training which is informal. 
For recruitment, rural SMEs' 
experience seems favourably 
comparable with urban SMEs. 
The development of rural SMEs 
owes their success to the nature 
of the rural labour market. In 
cases where problems were 
encountered, mitigation plans 
were effective enough to keep job 
generation unhindered. 
This study suggested that the key 
reason why rural SME growth 
aided employment generation 
than urban SMEs was due to the 
use of internal resources and 
capacity (vertical integration).  
This study gave evidence that 
rural SMEs were able to record a 
high propensity for growth and 
create jobs in the rural 
environment. 
The results of the analysis of 
SME development during the 
1980s in the rural region of 
northern England reflect the 
success of rural SMEs 
surviving and growing with 
adaptation creating a huge job 
percentage compared to urban 
SMEs. 
More questions emerged from 
the results of this study 
particularly on how sustainable 
the strategies adopted by rural 
SMEs to achieve economic 
development and job creation 
could be for a longer term. 
Key areas could include the 
effect of low levels of labour 
productivity in SMEs in remote 
rural regions concerning long-
term competitiveness when 
they transit from national to 
global markets. 
Pletnev, D. & 
Barkhatov, 
V. (2016). 
Russia. 
Business 
Success of 
Small and 
Medium-
Sized 
Enterprises 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the 
correlation between the 
social responsibility of 
SME managers and their 
employees labour wages 
Employees 
salaries, 
managers 
income, 
Business 
success, 
(i). The majority of managers had 
the notion that employees to their 
professional and personal 
qualities were the key factor in 
business success. 
(ii). Other key factors deduced 
This study gave insights into the 
effect of managers social 
responsibility on the business 
success of SMEs. These insights 
were based on a broad 
understanding of business success 
Journal 
Name:  
Procedia- 
Social and 
Behavioural 
Sciences 
Vol. 221, pp. 
185-193 
in Russia 
and the 
Social 
Responsibil
ity of 
Managers. 
to its effect on business 
success. 
Motivation-abilities 
approach (Pletnev & 
Barkhatov, 2016, pp.186). 
This was used to estimate 
the business success of 
SME vendors in China 
dealing in electronics. 
Emotional intelligence 
(Pletnev & Barkhatov, 
2016, pp.186) - is a factor 
that impacts employees 
fidelity to their respective 
companies to their 
participation in the 
production process.   
Equity 
capital, Social 
responsibility. 
were good and confidential 
relations with customers and 
suppliers. 
(iii). There is a direct 
relationship between the labour 
wage level and business 
success. 
(iv). Salaries are mostly at a 
level that does not allow the 
employees to show their best 
qualities and be devoted to 
working. 
through economic efficiency and 
the interpretation of the social 
responsibility of managers to the 
level of employees labour wage 
and its ratio to their income. 
Queiros, M., 
Braga, V. & 
Correia, A. 
(2019). 
Countries. 
Journal 
Name: 
Journal of 
Innovation & 
Knowledge 
Vol. 4, pp. 
146-153 
Cross-
country 
analysis to 
high-
growth 
business: 
Unveiling 
determinant
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the 
determinants of high 
growth for businesses. 
Gibrats law, Hofstedes 
dimensions. 
Growth rate, 
Size, 
Innovation, 
Culture 
A power distance in society 
reflects a high growth in firms. 
Uncertainty avoidance has a 
negative influence on growth 
rates. 
Size firms do influence their 
growth rates. 
Masculinity has a negative 
influence on the firms growth 
rates. 
High-growth firms appear to 
thrive better in countries where 
there are low masculinity levels, 
lower levels of uncertainty 
avoidance, and a high level of 
power distance. 
This study was able to provide 
evidence on the relationship 
between power distance and high 
growth in firms. 
This study was able to examine 
real data of three databases to 
deduce determinants that could 
aid the government in mitigating 
poverty through financial stability 
and economic growth. 
The main limitation of this 
study is the use of two smaller 
databases instead of a single 
database with a larger number 
of observations. 
Suggestions for further 
research are expected to 
examine similar relationships 
in individual countries to verify 
if a different relation would 
emerge from the data. 
Robson, P. J. 
Bennett, R. J. 
(2000). 
The United 
Kingdom. 
Journal 
Name: Small 
Business 
Economics 
Vol. 15, pp. 
193-208. 
Growth: 
Relationshi
p with 
Business 
Advice and 
External 
Collaborati
The purpose of this study 
is to highlight the variation 
analysis of the relationship 
between SME growth and 
external business advice. 
Chandlers theory (1990). 
This theory suggests that a 
firm should either develop 
collaboration arrangements 
or be large to be successful 
in a non-domestic market. 
Colvin & Slevins theory 
(1989). This theory 
suggests that the scope and 
potentially available for 
expansion whilst 
considering competitors 
will be influenced by the 
nature of the market where 
the goods are sold. 
SME, SME 
Growth, Firm 
type (Age, 
Size, Sector), 
Measures of 
growth 
(Employment, 
Turnover, 
Profits). 
The greater the age of the firm, 
the less likely it is to experience 
employment and turnover growth 
and this is statistically 
significant (Robson & Bennett, 
2000, pp. 198). 
There is a highly statistically 
significant relationship between 
exporting and employment 
growth/turnover growth. 
The level of skills holds no 
statistically significant 
relationship with measures of 
firm performance. 
Profitability has a positive 
relationship with employment and 
turnover growth. 
The technology level is not 
related to SME performance. 
Innovation is significantly 
associated with turnover growth 
and profitability. 
The use of external advisors has 
little relationship effect on the 
measures of growth considered in 
this research  this varies with 
advisors (use of lawyers is the 
only one that has a statistically 
significant effect on the three 
measures of growth 
(employment, turnover, 
profitability). 
This study was able to produce a 
clear synergy between SME 
growth and several variables that 
influence business growth. 
The most beneficial 
partnerships for SMEs are 
suppliers. 
General market conditions are 
the key determinants of SME 
growth. 
The use of advice is only 
related to certain market 
conditions focusing on specific 
sources (lawyers and 
suppliers). 
Serrasqueiro, 
Z., Nunes, P. 
M., Leitao, J. 
& Armada, 
Are there 
Linearities 
between 
The purpose of this study 
is to examine the 
relationship between the 
growth of SMEs and its 
Growth, Firm 
Size, Firm 
Gibrats law is valid when there 
is a reduction in firm size. 
Gibrats law is invalid when 
theres an increase in firm size. 
The creation of lines of credit 
would aid firms with insufficient 
funds to benefit from growth 
opportunities without excessive 
M. (2010). 
Portugal. 
Journal 
Name: 
Industrial and 
Corporate 
Change 
Vol. 19(4), 
pp. 1071-
1108. 
growth and 
determinant
Quantile 
approach. 
determinants in Portugal. 
Gibrats Law or Law of 
Proportionate Effect 
(Gibrat, 1931; cited in 
Serrasqueiro et al, 2010). 
This law argues that 
company growth is not a 
continuous process and 
does not depend on the 
previous size. 
Research and 
development 
intensity, 
Financing 
sources. 
Age is a restrictive factor for 
Portuguese SMEs when there is 
an increase in firm size but 
doesnt influence growth when 
theres a reduction in firm size. 
R & D intensity is a restrictive 
factor for growth when there is a 
reduction in firm size but a driver 
for growth when theres an 
increase in firm size. 
Cash flow is the driver for SME 
growth, particularly when theres 
an increase in firm size. 
Debt is a restrictive factor for 
growth when theres a reduction 
in firm size and a driver for 
growth when theres an increase 
in firm size. 
Growth in the previous period 
(before 1999), firm size, firm age, 
R & D intensity, and cash flow 
are key drivers for SME growth. 
Debt doesnt contribute to the 
survival of the market exit of 
SMEs. 
financial commitments.  
It would also aid R & D 
investment which is important for 
growth and sustainability. 
Policymakers are advised to 
create different types of 
incentives for effective 
management of resources for 
SMEs attaining or attaining the 
minimum scale of efficiency.  
SME owners/managers are 
advised to adopt a flexible 
hierarchical organisational 
structure tailored to network 
operations. 
Efficient use of debt in situations 
of firm size reduction to prevent 
restrictions in the growth process.   
There could be bias in the 
results due to sample selection. 
The variables considered could 
limit the validity of the 
findings. 
Future research points to 
testing non-Linearities in the 
relationships between 
determinants and growth of 
SMEs while considering 
different types of SMEs. 
Shin, K., 
Park, G., 
Choi, J. Y. & 
Choi, M. 
(2017). 
South Korea. 
Journal 
Name: 
Sustainability 
Vol.9(1), 
Article 108  
pp.1-18. 
Factors 
affecting 
the survival 
of SMEs: A 
study of 
biotechnolo
gy firms in 
South 
Korea. 
The purpose of this study 
was to investigate internal 
and external factors 
affecting the survival of 
SMEs in the biotechnology 
industry in South Korea. 
The resource-based view 
(Barney, 1991) suggests 
that the differences in 
firms resources and 
capabilities determine their 
survival and growth.  
Strategic choice theory 
(Child, 1972; Mellahi et 
al., 2004) This suggests 
that firms actively make 
decisions against 
environmental change to 
grow and survive. 
Venture 
survival, 
alliance 
formation, 
innovation. 
Larger and older firms have a 
higher possibility of survival. 
Firm size and age are important 
factors for survival. 
R & D intensity positively affects 
firm survival. 
Founders commercial knowledge 
or parent companies resources 
and capabilities increase the 
survival probability of 
biotechnology firms. 
The change in the number of 
employees and business areas 
may be insignificant because 
South Korean firms are young on 
average. 
The effect of private investments, 
such as venture capital, has not 
been considered for the survival 
of biotechnology firms. 
This study suggests that: 
The industrial structure of a 
virtuous cycle should be formed 
for Mergers & Acquisitions (M & 
The characteristics of origins 
from other firms provide an 
opportunity to develop the 
biotechnology industry in South 
Korea. 
Platform-based firms provide 
another opportunity to develop 
the South Korean biotechnology 
industry. 
Constant R & D support from the 
government is required for the 
development of the biotechnology 
industry in South Korea. 
Strategic alliances must become 
more active to develop the 
biotechnology industry in South 
Korea. 
Ullah, B. 
(2019) 
28 Eastern 
European and 
Central Asian 
Countries. 
Journal 
Name: The 
Quarterly 
Review of 
Economics 
and Finance 
Article in 
Press. 
QUAECO  
1269, pp. 1-
Financial 
Constraints, 
Corruption, 
and SME 
Growth in 
Transition 
Economies. 
The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the impact 
of firm-level financial 
constraints on growth for 
SMEs in 28 Eastern 
European and Central 
Asian countries. 
Loves proposition. Love 
suggests that country-level 
financial development 
reduces the effect of 
financial constraints on 
investment (Love, 2003; 
Ullah, 2019, p.2). 
Characteristic
s (firm size, 
firm age), 
Corruption, 
Financing, 
Government, 
Ownership, 
Privatized, 
Manufacturin
g, Exporter, 
Foreign, and 
Services. 
Financial constraints have a 
negative significant effect on firm 
sales growth and employment 
growth. 
Corruption has a negative effect 
on firm growth.  
Financing has a negative impact 
on firm growth measures. 
Alternate measures of financial 
constraints are negative and 
significantly associated with firm 
employment growth. 
Firms financial constraint is a 
binding constraint to its growth. 
Firms are more likely to audit 
their financial statements if they 
are more financially constrained. 
Firms in the manufacturing 
industry are more financially 
constrained than service-oriented 
firms. 
Firm size is a huge predictor of 
financial constraints for firms in 
middle or low-income countries. 
This study gave evidence that 
financial constraints negatively 
affect firms sales and 
employment growth. Financially 
constrained firms have lower 
sales and employment growth. 
Higher levels of economic, 
financial, and institutional 
development are important in 
alleviating firm financial 
constraints. 
This study also gave empirical 
evidence that firm-level 
corruption hinders SME access to 
financing and business growth. 
This study highlighted the 
importance of improving a 
countrys corruption situation 
to aid SMEs in their pursuit of 
growth and development. 
This study suggests that 
government efforts should be 
channelled towards the 
improvement of the economic, 
financial, and institutional 
development of the country. 
Wang, Y. 
(2016). 
The Czech 
Republic. 
Journal 
Name: Borsa 
Istanbul 
Review  
Vol.16 (3), 
pp. 167-176. 
What are 
the biggest 
obstacles to 
the growth 
of SMEs in 
developing 
countries? : 
Empirical 
evidence 
from an 
enterprise 
survey. 
The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the 
obstacles to business 
growth for SMEs and the 
determinants that influence 
such obstacles as perceived 
by enterprise managers. 
Gree and Thurniks Theory 
of obstacles (2003). This 
theory divides obstacles 
into two groups- external 
and internal. 
Levys Theory (1993). 
This theory identified three 
major constraints- access 
to finance, access to non-
financial inputs, and high 
costs. 
Variables: 
Dependent(Fi
nance, Tax, 
Competition, 
Electricity, 
Political} 
Independent 
(High growth 
firms, SMEs, 
Ownership, 
Experience). 
SMEs are 23.1% points more 
likely to perceive access to 
finance as the biggest obstacle to 
their growth than large firms. 
High-growth firms will have a 
higher chance of perceived access 
to finance as an important 
obstacle than firms that are not 
growing at a fast rate. 
When the size of the enterprise as 
measured by the number of 
employees is getting higher, the 
probability that the firm perceives 
access to finance as the biggest 
obstacle decreases. 
Public-owned firms perceive less 
financial problems than privately 
owned firms. 
Smaller firms experience more 
severe financing problems than 
larger firms. 
Internal funds were the main 
source of financing for SMEs. 
This study suggests that high-
growth firms perceive finance to 
be the greatest obstacle to growth. 
This study also suggests the need 
for further research to investigate 
the extent to which perception of 
barriers to growth by managers of 
SMEs is the true reflection of real 
barriers. 
Considering the variables, 
experience was found to be 
insignificant with one 
exception, high growth 
enterprises, age, 
employees and ownership 
were all significantly 
correlated to access to finance.  
The effect of age was 
observed to be relatively small. 
Yang, W. & 
Meyer, K. E. 
(2019). 
China. 
Journal 
Name: 
International 
Business 
Review 
Vol. 28, pp. 
101-482. 
How does 
Ownership 
influence 
Business 
Growth? A 
competitive 
dynamics 
perspective. 
The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the firm-
level strategies as drivers 
of firm performance. 
Principal-agent 
perspectives, and 
principal-principal 
perspectives. 
Firm age, 
firm size, 
industry, 
market 
growth, 
ownership, 
action 
aggressivenes
s, public 
listing, and 
revenue 
growth. 
Action aggressiveness has a high 
and positive impact on revenue 
growth. 
Local private firms record a 
stronger relation between growth 
and action aggressiveness than 
state-owned enterprises. 
International joint ventures record 
a weaker relation between 
performance and action 
aggressiveness than local private 
firms. 
Firms in private ownership either 
local or foreign can make use of 
aggressive actions to aid financial 
performance better than state-
owned enterprises. 
Firms in full ownership either 
local or foreign can use 
aggressive actions to aid financial 
performance better than partial 
ownership international joint 
ventures. 
This study was able to provide 
further clarification on why 
foreign entrants can outperform 
some not all domestic firms. 
The study also gave insights on 
how competitive aggressiveness 
influences business growth in 
firms of different ownership 
types. 
This study argues that the 
difference of interests between 
different types of owners is 
proportional to the difference in 
competitive actions of firms. 
This study integrates internal and 
external aspects to examine the 
outcomes of competitive actions 
by using ownership as an 
explanatory variable. 
Even though the research 
designs were proposed to make 
the findings relevant to 
emerging economies, there is 
the absence of a direct 
comparison of outcomes with 
competitive dynamics studies 
of dyadic competition.  
Future studies would be 
encouraged to focus on studies 
beyond dyads to explore more 
competitive actions in diverse 
structures of the industry. 
Appendix 7.4 Research Invitation Letter. 
  The University of the West of Scotland  
                            School of Business and Creative Industries 
Dear Sir/Ma, 
Invitation to Participate in a Research 
 I am writing to invite you to participate in the research. I am a doctoral researcher at 
the University of the West of Scotland researching the drivers and barriers to business growth 
focusing on small businesses in Nigeria. 
 The purpose of this research is to examine the drivers and barriers to sustainable 
business growth for small businesses. The research aims to introduce a framework based on 
existing business models to enhance business growth for small businesses in Nigeria and 
Sub-Saharan Africa. This research forms part of the requirements for a doctorate 
research/degree at the University of the West of Scotland. 
 This study will involve primary data collection through semi-structured interviews 
with open-ended questions. Interviews are meant to capture your knowledge of business 
management and experience as a small business owner to deduce the drivers that enhance 
growth and factors that inhibit growth and how they can be mitigated. Attention is drawn to 
two categories of small businesses (Micro-sized businesses, Small-sized businesses) as 
classified by the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria 
(SMEDAN). All participants information and data would be handled with strict 
confidentiality. 
 A copy of the participant information booklet would accompany this letter to give a 
clear understanding of the research and what is required of the participants and the benefits of 
taking part. Your participation will be highly appreciated. Should you have further questions, 
please contact me via email or phone and I will be happy to answer all questions.  
 Thank you for your time. 
Yours faithfully, 
Abayomi Daniel Olushina 
Doctoral Researcher 
Gardner Building, DBA Room 
School of Business and Creative Industries 
The University of the West of Scotland 
E: a.olushina@email.com, b00300038@studentmail.uws.ac.uk 
Tel: +447943233664 
mailto:a.olushina@email.com
DRIVERS AND BARRIERS TO 
BUSINESS GROWTH: A CASE 
STUDY OF SMALL 
BUSINESSES IN NIGERIA. 
Thesis 
Appendix 7.5 Participants Consent Form. 
The University of the West of Scotland 
Gardner Building  
School of Business and Creative Industries  
Participant Identification Number: 
Researchers Contact information 
Researcher: 
Abayomi Daniel Olushina 
(B00300038@studentmail.uws.ac.uk) 
Supervisor Dr. Ahmed Beloucif 
(Ahmed.Beloucif@uws.ac.uk) 
I confirm that I have read and understood the Participant Information sheets. 
I have had the opportunity to examine the information, ask questions, and had them 
answered.  
I understand that all personal information will remain confidential and anonymous.  
I understand that the interviews will be recorded and transcribed. 
I understand that some of the comments I make during the interviews will be included in a 
report in this research but completely anonymous. 
I understand that data collected in this research may be examined by the research team at The 
University of West of Scotland and other individuals from regulatory authorities. 
I agree that data gathered in this research may be stored anonymously and securely, and may 
be used for future research. 
I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to withdraw at any time 
without giving a reason. 
I agree to take part in this research. 
Name of Business/ CAC No: 
Business Tel: 
Business Email: 
Signature: 
Preferred option for the Interview 
(Skype, Zoom, Whatsapp) 
Date: 
NB: Your contact details are only used to schedule the interviews. No personal details will be 
included in the transcripts from the collected data. 
Abayomi Olushina: a.olushina@email.com 
      | B00300038       B00300038 
Drivers and 
Barriers to 
Business 
Growth: A case 
study of Small 
Businesses in 
Nigeria. 
Appendix 7.6 Participants Information Booklet. 
 You are invited to participate in research. The information below is set out to give you 
a vivid understanding of the rationale behind the research and what you would be asked to do 
should you decide to participate in the study. Please take your time to read through it 
carefully. The researcher will contact you if you have any questions regarding the aim and 
objectives of the research as well as your role as a participant. 
Purpose of the research 
 This research has a keen interest in sustainable business growth for small businesses 
in Nigeria. The research objectives include a critical evaluation of the drivers and barriers to 
growth for small businesses. Previous literature enumerates key internal and external factors 
that hinder business growth. Such factors include access to finance, lack of infrastructure, 
management skills, inflation, corruption, high taxes, or competition as the list goes on. This 
study aims to introduce a framework that mitigates barriers and examines drivers that 
enhance growth during the transition period from one level of business classification to 
another (micro to small-sized businesses). 
 Small business owners will be invited to take part in in-depth interviews to capture 
their experience and knowledge of handling their respective businesses. Two categories of 
small businesses (micro and small) are considered for this research regarding the Small and 
Medium Enterprise Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN)s classification. 
SMEDANs Classification of Small Businesses 
S/N Size Category Employment Assets (Naira (Million){excluding 
land and buildings 
1. Micro Enterprises Less than 10 Less than 5 
2. Small Enterprises 10 to 49 5 to less than 50 
3. Medium Enterprises 50 to 199 50 to less than 500 
What you are to do 
 After you have read this information booklet and taken a few days to examine the 
content, the researcher will contact you via phone or email to confirm whether you did like to 
take part in the research. Should you decide to take part, you would be asked to complete a 
consent form that highlights the ethics considered for this research and your details (business 
name/CAC registration, telephone, email, and signature).  
As a business owner in Nigeria, you will be asked to participate in an interview and 
talk about your experience and knowledge of small business management. The interview 
would be conducted via skype, zoom, or WhatsApp to your preference. This option is 
considered in line with the scientific recommendation of social distancing because of the 
ongoing pandemic (COVID 19). The duration of the interview would normally be between 
25mins to 40mins. 
Why you have been selected 
 This research focus on micro and small businesses in Nigeria registered with the 
Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC) operating within any of the geopolitical zones across 
the country. You have been selected for this study out of a random pool of prospective 
participants because youre a small business owner in Nigeria registered with the corporate 
affairs commission. 
Do you have to take part? 
 It is entirely up to you to decide whether to take part or not.  It is not mandatory to 
participate. Your voluntary participation isnt subjective to any condition. Youre entitled to 
access the information you have provided at any time and youre free to withdraw your 
participation at any time and any information you provided without giving any reason for 
doing so. A signed consent form will be needed should you decide to participate in this 
research. 
Benefits of taking part 
 This research aims to develop a framework based on existing business models to 
enhance sustainable growth for small businesses in Nigeria. The findings of this study will 
facilitate sustainable business growth for small business owners/managers as it captures the 
transition from micro-sized businesses to small-sized businesses. 
Confidentiality  
 All information collected during this research will be handled with strict 
confidentiality and access will only be restricted to the research team at the University of the 
West of Scotland and other individuals from regulatory authorities. The interview will be 
recorded with your permission and transcribed for data analysis. The transcripts from the 
interview will not contain your details (business name, telephone, and email) or any 
information that could be used to identify you. Some of your comments during the interview 
may be included in the report for this research, but are completely anonymous. 
Findings of the Research 
 The findings of this research would be included in the final thesis as a requirement for 
doctorate research at the University of the West of Scotland. Some of the findings may also 
be published in scientific journals as contributions to the body of literature. Should you prefer 
to receive a copy of the overall findings, please specify and a summary would be forwarded 
to you. 
Design and Reviews 
 This study was designed by the doctoral researcher with the supervision of his lead 
supervisor, second supervisor, and assessor at the School of Business and Creative Industries, 
the University of the West of Scotland. The proposal for this research has been examined and 
reviewed by the supervisory panel at the university to ratify the rationale behind this study. 
The copy of the proposal has also been examined by the Research Ethics Committee at the 
University of the West of Scotland to verify that the research adheres to proper conduct and 
the interests of participants are protected. 
Concerns/Questions 
 Should you have any questions or concerns about any aspect of the research, please 
speak to the researcher who will be happy to discuss and answer any of your questions. 
Thanks for considering taking part in this research and taking the time to read this 
information booklet. 
Appendix 7.7 Prospective Participants Database. 
 Name of Business Category Invited Responded 
1 Ichukzy Clothing Micro Yes Yes 
2 Beautiful Kre8tnz & Designs by MBS  Micro Yes Yes 
3 Tumi Dynasty Micro Yes Yes 
4 Furtherhill Global Resources Small Yes Yes 
5 Macfford Technologies Ltd Small Yes Yes 
6 Rantexson Autocare Micro Yes Yes 
7 Rutthees Hub Solutions Micro Yes Yes 
8 Simarc Ventures Micro Yes Yes 
9 Machel Health Food Store Micro Yes Yes 
10 Candidpearls Small Yes Yes 
11 Vamos Logistics Ltd Small Yes  Yes 
12 Inocul8 Micro Yes Yes 
13 Beeelinks limited Small Yes Yes 
14 Onyxs Catering Services Small Yes Yes 
15 1617 Media Micro Yes Yes 
16 Orange Makeovers Micro Yes Yes 
17 Fit Fam Foodie Small Yes Yes 
18 Tamaras Delight Micro Yes Yes 
19 Accurate Diagnostics Ltd Micro Yes Yes 
20 St Charmyn Clothing Micro Yes Yes 
21 Perview Paycom Small Yes Yes 
22 Atokeatelier  Micro Yes Yes 
23 Lovestruck Cakes Micro Yes Yes 
24 Jabelle Fabrics Micro Yes Yes 
25 Obedclothiers Clothing Micro Yes Yes 
26 BQ Foods Micro  Yes Yes 
27 Shopwithdeda Micro Yes Yes 
28 Highland & Chieff Micro Yes Yes 
29 Estelle Micro Yes Yes 
30 Bakeron Tasties Micro Yes Yes 
31 Venti30 Fashion Micro Yes Yes 
32 Pageant Studio Africa Small Yes Yes 
33 Mylah Stitches Small Yes Yes 
34 Jamit Media Micro Yes Yes 
35 Reesasnibbles Micro Yes Yes 
36 Giovannah Experiential Hub Small Yes Yes 
37 Margaritas Farm Small Yes Yes 
38 Gilcraft Services Small Yes Yes 
39 B thrift Clothing Small Yes Yes 
40 Oltof Global Services Micro Yes Yes 
41 Laundry Managers Company Micro Yes Yes 
41 Pholas Place Micro Yes Yes 
43 Weasel Energy Limited Small Yes Yes 
44 Holaks Shipping Company Small Yes Yes 
45 Daniels Global Network Solution Micro Yes Yes 
46 Trillions Fashion  Micro Yes Yes 
47 The Maker Limited Small Yes Yes 
48 Fortune Equere Clothing Micro Yes Yes 
49 Clove Kids Company Small Yes Yes 
50 Omot Enterprise Micro  Yes Yes 
51 Aquilas Kollections Micro Yes Yes 
52 The Cute Mansion Company Micro Yes Yes 
53 Yhutee Footwear Company Small Yes No 
54 Modune Cakes Micro Yes No 
55 House of Emerald Company Micro Yes No 
56 Isle of Fate Fashion Company Micro Yes No 
57 Deew Event Services Small Yes No 
58 Bush House Music Small Yes No 
59 Tracy Daniels Fitness Gym Small Yes No 
60 Modacasa Clothing Micro Yes No 
61 Wahehe Services Ltd Small Yes No 
62 Springfield Fashion Academy Small Yes No 
63 Habil caf Micro Yes No 
64 Lavister Logistics Company Small Yes No 
65 Horus IT Company Small Yes No 
66 Mosaic Ltd Small Yes No 
67 Delflak Holdings Ltd Small Yes No 
68 Conlotech Consult Ltd Small Yes No 
69 Ahai Farms Small Yes No 
70 Momena Clothing Micro Yes No 
71 Woffyshine Consult Small Yes No 
72 Esemjo Foods Small Yes No 
73 Debby Wales Shoes Small Yes No 
74 OLS Laundry Services Small Yes No 
75 Diamante Co. Delivery Services Small Yes No 
76 Twinkle Hygiene Cleaning Services Micro Yes No 
77 ENK Global Solutions Small Yes No 
78 Totbox Solutions Nigeria Small Yes No 
79 Crystaltee Cakes Micro Yes No 
80 Rubiesandyellow Interiors Micro Yes No 
 A total of 80 research invitation letters were sent to prospective small business owners in 
Nigeria. 52 business owners have responded confirming their interest to participate in the research. 
34 out of 43 micro-sized businesses responded and confirmed their interest to participate, 18 out of 
37 small-sized businesses responded and confirmed their interest to participate. 
Appendix 7.8 Participants Final Database. 
 Name of Business 
(Participants) 
Categ
Participated 
1 Pageant Studio Africa Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
2 Ichukzy Clothing  Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
3 Accurate Diagnostics Ltd Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
4 Lovestruck Cakes Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
5 Rantexson Autocare Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
6 Jabelle Fabrics Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
7 Orange Makeovers Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
8 Rutthees Hub Solutions Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
9 Sheyshey Fashion Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
10 Katineo By Liza Fashion Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
11 DM Wardrobe Fashion Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
12 Simarc Ventures Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
13 Pholas Place  Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
14 Giovannah Experiential Hub Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
15 Onyxs Catering Services Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
16 Inocul8 Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
17 Shilz Kitchen Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
18 Bakeron Tasties Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
19 Gilcraft Services Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
20 Atokeatelier  Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
21 Tamaras Delight Micro Yes Yes  Yes  
22 Candidpearls Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
23 Margaritas Farm Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
24 Furtherhill Global Resources Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
25 BQ Foods Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
26 Perview Paycom Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
27 Machel Foods Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
28 Highland & Chieff Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
29 Shopwithdeda Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
30 Tumi Dynasty Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
31 Obedclothiers Clothing Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
32 Beeelinks limited Small  Yes  Yes  Yes  
33 Beautiful Kre8tnz & Designs by 
Micro Yes  Yes  Yes  
34 B thrift Clothing Small Yes  Yes  No (we couldnt find 
convenient time as owner 
finishes quite late almost every 
day). 
35 Estelle Micro Yes  Yes  No (Busy schedules). 
36 St Charmyn Clothing Micro Yes  Yes  No (Busy Schedules) 
37 Macfford Technologies Small Yes  Yes  No (Business owner was quite 
busy and kept rescheduling 
interview) 
38 Laundry Managers Company Micro Yes  Yes  No (Business owner was quite 
busy and she kept rescheduling 
interview appointments). 
39 Mylah Stitches Micro Yes  Yes  No (decided not to participate 
again). 
40 Daniels Global Network 
Solution 
Micro Yes  Yes  No (business owner was badly 
affected by the lockdown and 
decided not to participate 
again). 
41 Oltof Global Services Micro Yes  Yes  No (Business owner was quite 
busy and she kept rescheduling 
interview appointments). 
42 Bush House Music Micro Yes Yes  No (No further response). 
43 Trillions Fashion Micro Yes  Yes  No  
44 Weasel Energy Limited Small Yes  Yes  No ( 
45 Clove Kids Company Micro Yes  Yes  No (business owner wasnt 
responding to messages to 
schedule an interview). 
46 1617 Media Micro Yes  Yes  No (Business owner was quite 
busy and kept rescheduling 
interview). 
47 Vamos Logistics Ltd Small Yes  Yes  No (No further response). 
48 Fit Fam Foodie Small Yes  Yes  No (opted out). 
49 Venti30 Fashion Micro Yes  Yes  No (Responded to invite and 
returned consent form but later 
ignored further corresponding 
messages). 
50 Jamit Media  Yes  Yes  No (Responded and indicated 
that the company is an African 
podcast network and as such do 
not take part in research any 
longer. 
Appendix 7.9 Participants Details. 
No Participants Business 
Category/
No of 
Employee
Industry/Sector Depth Interview 
time stamp 
Participate
1 Pageant Studio Africa Micro/4 Entertainment 30th Oct./9.35am Yes  
2 Ichukzy Clothing  Micro/4 Fashion/Boutique 30th Oct./10.20am Yes  
3 Accurate Diagnostics Ltd Micro/3 Medical 30th Oct./10.53am Yes  
4 Lovestruck Cakes Small /11 Manufacturing 30th Oct./2.05pm Yes  
5 Rantexson Autocare Micro/8 Autocare/Repairs 30th Oct./4.40pm Yes  
6 Jabelle Fabrics Micro/3 Fashion/Retail 1st Nov./1.56pm Yes  
7 Orange Makeovers Micro/3 Event 
Planning/Modelling/
Makeup Artistry 
1st Nov./2.39pm Yes  
8 Rutthees Hub Solutions Micro/7 Logistics and Supply 
Chain 
1st Nov./3.11pm Yes  
9 Sheyshey Fashion Micro/4 Fashion/Retail 3rd Nov./11.40am Yes  
10 Katineo By Liza Fashion Micro/4 Fashion 3rd Nov./12.12pm Yes  
11 DM Wardrobe Fashion Small /13 Fashion 3rd Nov./12.50pm Yes  
12 Simarc Ventures Small /10 Fashion/Textile 
Retail 
3rd Nov./1.33pm Yes  
13 Pholas Place  Micro/6 Fashion/Beauty 
3rd Nov./2.21pm Yes  
14 Giovannah Experiential 
Small /40 Marketing/Commun
ication 
3rd Nov./2.58pm Yes  
15 Onyxs Catering Services Small /20 Events/Catering 
Services 
3rd Nov./3.23pm Yes  
16 Inocul8 Small /10 Health Care 3rd Nov./3.55pm Yes  
17 Shilz Kitchen Micro/6 Events/Catering 
Services 
8th Nov./10.10am Yes  
18 Bakeron Tasties Micro/4 Foods 8th Nov./11.11am Yes  
19 Gilcraft Services Small /30 Events/Entertainme
8th Nov./11.43am Yes  
20 Atokeatelier  Micro/2 Fashion 8th Nov./1.40pm Yes  
21 Tamaras Delight Micro/3 Hospitality 8th Nov./3.05pm Yes  
22 Candidpearls Small /13 Fashion 8th Nov./8.23pm Yes 
23 Margaritas Farm Small /10 Agriculture 16th 
Nov./10.20am 
24 Furtherhill Global 
Resources 
Small 10 Facility 
Management/Maint
enance Support 
Services 
Nov./10.20am 
25 BQ Foods Micro/2 Foods 18th Nov./8.38am Yes  
26 Perview Paycom Small /13 ICT 18th Nov./9.34am Yes  
27 Machel Foods Micro/2 Foods/Grocery 
Retail 
Nov./12.02pm 
28 Highland & Chieff Micro/4 Finance 18th Nov./1.12pm Yes  
29 Shopwithdeda Micro/1 Fashion 18th Nov./3.05pm Yes  
30 Tumi Dynasty Micro/2 Fashion 18th Nov./3.32pm Yes  
31 Obedclothiers Clothing Small /10 Fashion 19th Nov. 11.26am Yes  
32 Beeelinks limited Small /12 Events 
Planning/Manageme
23rd Nov./4.04pm Yes  
33 Beautiful Kre8tnz & 
Designs by MBS 
Micro/6 Fashion/Beauty 
Nov./10.25pm 
