AUniversityofSussexPhDthesis
AvailableonlineviaSussexResearchOnline:
http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/ 
Thisthesisisprotectedbycopyrightwhichbelongstotheauthor. 
Thisthesiscannotbereproducedorquotedextensivelyfromwithoutfirst
obtainingpermissioninwritingfromtheAuthor 
Thecontentmustnotbechangedinanywayorsoldcommerciallyinany
formatormediumwithouttheformalpermissionoftheAuthor 
Whenreferringtothiswork,fullbibliographicdetailsincludingthe
author,title,awardinginstitutionanddateofthethesismustbegiven
PleasevisitSussexResearchOnlineformoreinformationandfurtherdetails 
Search for Electroweak Supersymmetry in
final states with three electrons or muons
plus missing transverse momentum in
13TeV proton-proton collisions at the Large
Hadron Collider with the ATLAS Detector
A thesis submitted to The University of Sussex
for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
(PhD)
Nicola Louise Abraham
Submitted: June 2018
Declaration
I hereby declare that this thesis has not been and will not be submitted in whole or
in part to another University for the award of any other degree.
Nicola Louise Abraham
Abstract
Name of the university The University of Sussex
Candidate name Nicola Louise Abraham
Degree title Doctor of Philosophy
Thesis title Search for Electroweak Supersymmetry in final states
with three electrons or muons plus missing transverse
momentum in 13TeV proton-proton collisions at the
Large Hadron Collider with the ATLAS Detector.
Submission date June 2018
A search for the electroweak production of charginos and neutralinos decaying into
final states involving three electrons or muons is presented. The analysis is based on
36.1 fb
1 of
s = 13TeV protonproton collisions recorded by the ATLAS detector
at the Large Hadron Collider. Scenarios considered are based on simplified models
with the associated production of the next-to-lightest neutralino and the lightest
chargino, followed by their decays into final states with leptons and the lightest
neutralino via either sleptons or Standard Model gauge bosons. No significant
deviations from Standard Model expectations are observed and stringent limits at
95% confidence level are placed on the masses of relevant supersymmetric particles.
For a massless lightest neutralino, masses up to 1.13TeV are excluded for the
associated production of the next-to-lightest neutralino and the lightest chargino,
assuming slepton mediated decays, whereas for gauge-boson-mediated decays, masses
up to 380GeV are excluded.
Acknowledgements
Over the course of my PhD, countless people have done so much for me, and their
support really made this thesis into what it is. Therefore, my deepest gratitude to
all of you.
Foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Antonella De Santo, for
without your initial and continuing belief in me, I would not be here writing this.
You have always supported me throughout my studies, giving both constructive
criticism and valuable encouragement and guidance, which has all led me to where I
am today. You are an incredibly inspirational person, in more ways than one. And I
look forward to continuing to work with you in our quest to find SUSY I would also
like to thank my second supervisor, Fabrizio Salvatore, for always being a constant
positive presence and coordinator within the EPP group.
A big thanks to Yusufu Shehu for being my mentor during the first few years (Im
sure I still owe you a beer for that), Nicky Santoyo who supported and guided me
in the latter few years, and Fabrizio Trovato, who always managed to be available
to work (even from your phone while on a night out in Geneva) As for Kerim
Suruliz, Giuseppe Lerner and Carlos Chavez Barajas, I thank you for always being
so approachable, and providing constant computing assistance, no matter what
unreasonable hour of the day.
I am also thankful for the influence of fellow peers, Zara Grout who was a library of
information when I first started, Tina Potter for always emanating supportiveness,
Sarah Williams for your ongoing support throughout the (still ongoing) publication
of our analysis, and Batool Safarzadeh, who I am looking forward to working with
in the future. Emma, Fabio, Tom, Giovannis, Mario and Mario, you made being at
Sussex a pleasure.
Additionally, a big thank you to Fabrizio Miano for providing lots of office laughs
(and teaching me many Italian swear words), Sam and Anne Jones for sharing many
a beer in OBrassuer, and Olly Winston for always offering a cup of tea, chat, and
a well-deserved break. And, not least, Mark Sutton, who not only supported me
in a big way academically throughout my qualification task, but was always there
for a much needed drink in R1, and on a number of occasions to give me a (rather
wobbly) lift home on the back of your bike
I would also like to thank everyone who I shared my undergraduate years at the
University of Kent with: Jamie Ryan, Danny Smith, Kieran Selvon, Martin Anslow,
David Disco Poole, and Physics Phil Whittlesea, because, you have all simply
been an integral part of my physics journey. Rory and Ryan, you may be gone, but
you will never be forgotten.
And to Dominik. Your determination and patience in trying to convince and teach
me about the joys of coding has certainly not gone unnoticed. I appreciate all the
effort you have put in, more than you realise. I thank you for supporting me in
every sense of the way and every step of the PhD path, not only computational, but
emotionally too, no matter how dark or frustrating that path got. I simply could
not have done it without you.
In addition to academic support, there are two very important people who have got
me to where I am today. My Mum Joyce, and my brother Steven.
I would not be the person I am today without my Mums guidance and introduction
into the world, and I thank you for that from everything that I am. You have not
only provided me with the skills needed to recognise, and then follow my dreams, but
you also always managed to provide practical financial support, when, as a student,
I needed, even though at times it put you out. You truly do sacrifice yourself for
others.
As for my brother Steven, you are no doubt the reason why I developed an interest
in physics. You have wisdom beyond your years, and I am happy that you may have
passed some of that insight down to me during our many conversations, starting
from when we ate dinner and watched Star Trek together back in the early 90s Also,
during the moments when I have questioned what the hell I am doing, you have been
there to remind me (whether you knew it or not).
Whatever the future holds, thank you all.
Science cannot solve the ultimate mystery of nature. And that is because, in the last
analysis, we ourselves are a part of the mystery that we are trying to solve.
- Max Planck
Preface
All the work in this thesis was performed during the four years of my PhD at
the University of Sussex as a member of the ATLAS Collaboration. The ATLAS
Collaboration comprises over 3,000 scientific authors from 182 institutions around
the world, many of whom have implicitly contributed to this thesis, in some ways
shaping the contents presented in it.
My main contributions to the advancement of science within the ATLAS Collabo-
ration have been to search for evidence of new supersymmetric particles, known as
charginos and neutralinos. I have worked as part of a team of around 20 analysts,
with the bulk of this thesis being based on searches using 36.1 fb1 of data recorded
by ATLAS in 2015 and 2016. In these searches, I played a pivotal role in defining
new kinematic signal regions that enhanced the discovery power, as well as having
involvement in defining kinematic regions to validate Standard Model background
modelling. Furthermore, I took a lead role in utilising the statistical analysis software
framework to interpret results. I made similar earlier contributions to results based
on the first 13.3 fb1 of new data. The full analysis strategy and outcomes are
presented in Chapters 5 and 6, respectively.
As an ATLAS author, I also have performed a technical task designed to maintain
an aspect of the ATLAS detector, and the work is presented in Appendix A.
My early physics-analysis contribution to the collaboration, presented in Appendix B,
was a study on the re-optimisation of new kinematic signal regions targeting the
standard model ttV process, with the objective of constraining its production cross-
section using increased collision energies at the Large Hadron Collider.
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Theory and Experimental Landscape 3
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Standard Model Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3 Supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3 Experimental Setup 29
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2 The ATLAS Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4 Simulation and Reconstruction 47
4.1 Event Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.2 Detector Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.3 Object Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches 64
5.1 Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2 Event Pre-selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.4 Background Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
5.6 Statistical Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
6 Results for 
2 with Three-Lepton Final States 90
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
7 Conclusion and Outlook 136
A Inner Detector Trigger 137
A.1 ID Trigger Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
A.2 Migration to New Offline Data Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
B Early Run II ttV Studies 142
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
B.2 Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
References 151
1. Introduction
Particle physics has come a long way since particles were considered to be solid,
indivisible and indestructible spheres; particles are now seen as a constant flow
of transformation and change. It is arguably the most abstract field in modern
physics focusing on phenomena at imperceptible small scales only accessible by the
most intricate and evermore complex devices known to humankind. With the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN providing a unique insight into this sub-atomic
world of dynamical processes and interactions, experimental particle physics is at
the forefront of modern physics and is a very exciting area of study. It is key to our
endless curiosity of understanding the most fundamental questions, and is essential
for our comprehension of the very early universe.
The Standard Model (SM) of elementary particle physics is one of the most successful
theories in physics, providing a framework that describes known elementary particles
and their interactions. Its establishment has been an ongoing development of
work performed over the past half century, continually improving and extending by
collaboratively standing on the shoulders of giants. The work presented in this thesis
aims to contribute to the search for supersymmetry, an extension of the SM. It does
this by building on previous results obtained using data from earlier data-taking
periods at the LHC.
The most recent data-taking period at the LHC, known as LHC Run-II, began in
2015, delivering proton-proton collisions at a centre-of-mass energy of
s = 13TeV,
almost twice the maximum energy of 8TeV that had been achieved in the previous
data-taking period, known as LHC Run-I (2010-2012). This is the highest energy
ever reached in human-made collisions of particles. At this increased collision energy,
thanks to increased production cross-sections, supersymmetric particles, if they exist,
are expected to be more accessible than ever.
This thesis presents searches for supersymmetry focusing on a range of supersym-
metric scenarios, each producing exactly three electrons or muons plus high missing
transverse momentum in the final state. Data recorded by ATLAS during 2015
and 2016 is used. The structure of this thesis is as follows. Chapter 2 begins by
introducing the theoretical concepts, including a description of the SM of particle
physics, as well as its shortcomings, in turn motivating the need for its extension,
such as Supersymmetry, which is also discussed. It also provides a summary of the
current experimental status of relevant theoretical scenarios. The experimental setup,
namely the LHC and the ATLAS detector, are the topic of Chapter 3. Chapter 4
2 1 Introduction
describes the event generation, detector simulation and physics object reconstruction
methods used in this analysis of ATLAS data. The three-lepton final state search
strategy that was performed is the subject of Chapter 5, including the choice of event
samples, physics object definitions and preselections, an overview of signal region
optimisation techniques, and the estimation of SM background processes and associ-
ated uncertainties. It also provides a discussion on the conventional methods used
by the ATLAS Collaboration for the statistical interpretation of results. Chapter 6
gives details of the implementation of the analysis strategy and presents results and
their interpretation. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in Chapter 7.
Natural units ~ = c = 1 are used throughout this thesis.
2. Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.1 Elementary Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.2 Fundamental Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.3 Higgs Boson Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2 Standard Model Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.1 The Hierarchy Problem and Naturalness . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.2 Gauge Coupling Unification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.3 Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2.4 Other Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3 Supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3.1 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model . . . . . 18
2.3.2 R-Parity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.3.3 Sparticle Decays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.3.4 SUSY Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.3.5 Simplified Models for Electroweak SUSY . . . . . . . . 23
2.3.6 Current Status of SUSY Searches at the LHC . . . . . . 26
This chapter gives a brief overview of the theoretical framework required, in the
context of this thesis, to describe elementary particles and the way they interact
with matter via forces, where the forces are themselves described by the exchange
of elementary particles. This includes a summary of the most successful theory
in particle physics, the SM. The SM, developed in the 1960s and 1970s, predicts
measurable quantities that have been verified experimentally to very high precision.
However, the SM is not a complete theory and cannot account for certain known
phenomena occurring at high energies, such as the unnaturalness of quantum cor-
rections to the Higgs mass. Also, it only incorporates three of the fundamental
forces, electromagnetic, weak and strong, while omitting the gravitational force.
Consequently, a wide range of theories have been developed as extensions to the SM
with the intention to resolve its shortcomings. One of the most accredited of these
theories, Supersymmetry (SUSY), is the topic of this thesis.
Described in Section 2.3, SUSY postulates an additional symmetry between fermions
and bosons that forecasts the existence of a set of heavier particles, giving rise to
new physics phenomena at high energies. In addition to the theoretical background,
an overview of recent experimental results relevant to provide a theoretical landscape
for this thesis are provided.
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 4 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics
The SM of particle physics [1] provides a unified picture to describe an array of
distinct elementary particles and their interactions. It comprises three generations of
fermions, four force-mediating gauge bosons, and the Higgs boson, all of which are
distinguishable by intrinsic physical properties, such as mass, and other quantum
numbers, which will be described in Section 2.1.1. SM particles are treated as point-
like (i.e. without internal structure), arising from excitations in their corresponding
quantum fields. A description of the three fundamental forces included in the SM
is given in Section 2.1.2, with Section 2.1.2.4 dedicated to introducing the Higgs
Mechanism.
2.1.1 Elementary Particles
The intrinsic quantum property that distinguishes fermions from bosons is known
as spin. Spin is measured in units of ~, where fermions take half-integer values and
bosons take integer values. The gauge and Higgs bosons can be further categorised
as either vector bosons (with spin equal to one), or scalar bosons (with spin equal to
zero). A depiction of the SM particles is presented in Figure 2.1.
Fig. 2.1: An
overview of ele-
mentary particles
described by the SM,
with twelve fermions
arranged into three
generations of
matter particles,
gauge bosons in the
fourth column, and
the Higgs boson
in the fifth. The
masses given are
approximate only [2].
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 5 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
The concept of spin also introduces two further particle properties: helicity and
chirality. Helicity is defined as the projection of spin on the particles momentum,
which is denoted right-handed if in the same direction of momentum, or left-
handed if in the opposite direction. The helicity of a massive particle can change
depending on the inertial reference frame of the observer. Chirality is closely related
to helicity, but is somewhat more of an abstract concept, being an intrinsic quantum
property that describes the phase of a particles wavefunction, which influences the
particles behaviour when it undergoes a complex rotation.
The four gauge bosons mediate three of the fundamental forces; the gluon and photon
mediate the strong and electromagnetic forces, respectively, while the weak force is
mediated by the W and Z bosons. All particles that experience the strong force have
a physical property known as colour charge, which is discussed in Section 2.1.2,
while particles that experience the electromagnetic force carry the electric charge Q,
measured in units of elementary charge e = 1.602 1019 coulombs. Analogously,
weak isospin T is the charge of the weak force. Table 2.1 summarises the properties
of all bosons described by the SM.
Fermions are also subdivided into either quarks or leptons, depending on their
couplings with gauge bosons, and subsequent interactions with the fundamental
forces. Quarks, which can couple with all gauge bosons, experience all three forces,
and possess colour, weak isospin and electric charge. They are the fundamental
building blocks of all hadronic matter. Quarks also carry a quantum number known as
a baryon number equal to +1/3. The generations of quarks are ordered in ascending
values of mass, with the first generation consisting of the up and down quarks,
the second generation consisting of strange and charm, and the third generation
being the bottom and top quarks. An alternative mode of categorising quarks is
by charge, denoting those with Q = +2/3 e as up-type, and those with Q = 1/3 e
as down-type. Both baryon number and total electric charge of bound physical
states must be integers, thus, imposing limitations on quark combinations. Table 2.2
summarises the properties of all quarks described by the SM.
Leptons have electric charge and weak isospin, but not colour, meaning that they
cannot couple with gluons or experience the strong force. They are also ordered into
three generations based on ascending mass: the electron e, muon , and tau  . Each
of the fore-mentioned has an associated lepton neutrino, which, due to having zero
electric charge, only interact via the weak force. Leptons carry quantum numbers,
designated the electron (Le), muon (L) and tau (L ) lepton numbers. Table 2.3
summarises the properties of all leptons described by the SM.
All particles have an associated antiparticle with the same mass but opposite electric
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 6 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Type Spin Particle Symbol Mass Electric
[GeV] Charge [e]
Vector Bosons 1
Gluon g 0 0
Photon  0 0
W boson W 80.385 0.015 1
Z boson Z 91.1876 0.0021 0
Scalar Bosons 0 Higgs H 125.09 0.24 0
Tab. 2.1: A summary of all elementary bosons described by the SM. All mass measurements
have been taken from the Particle Data Group [3] and are in units of GeV unless stated otherwise.
Fermion Symbol Mass Electric Baryon
[GeV] Charge [e] Number
Up u 0.0022+0.00060.0004 +2/3 1/3
Down d 0.0047+0.00050.0004 1/3 1/3
Charm c 1.28 0.03 +2/3 1/3
Strange s 0.096+0.0080.004 1/3 1/3
Top t 173.1 0.6 +2/3 1/3
Bottom b 4.8+0.040.03 1/3 1/3
Tab. 2.2: A summary of all quarks described by the SM. All mass measurements have been
taken from the Particle Data Group [3] and are in units of GeV unless stated otherwise.
Fermion Symbol Mass Electric Le L L
[GeV] Charge [e]
Electron e 0.000511 1 1 0 0
Electron Neutrino e < 2 eV 0 1 0 0
Muon  0.106 1 0 1 0
Muon Neutrino  < 0.00019 0 0 1 0
Tau  1.777 1 0 0 1
Tau Neutrino  < 0.0182 0 0 0 1
Tab. 2.3: A summary of all leptons described by the SM. All mass measurements have been
taken from the Particle Data Group [3] and are in units of GeV unless stated otherwise.
charge, and baryon and lepton numbers. Typically, quantum numbers and physical
properties must be conserved during particle interactions and decays, however there
are known instances, discussed later, where this is violated.
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 7 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.1.2 Fundamental Interactions
The mathematical basis of the SM uses Quantum Field Theory [4], in which particles
represent the excitations of fields, the dynamics of which are described by Lagrangian
field densities L. The general form of L is
L = L(, ), (2.1)
where  is a fermion field and  is the partial derivative four-vector of all generalised
spatial coordinates. Where symmetries in nature exist, the Lagrangian density of a
system is symmetrically invariant under certain phase transformations  of , such
  ei. (2.2)
A global symmetry is defined if the phase transformation has no dependence on
the systems spatial coordinates. However, the SM requires symmetries to be local
gauge symmetries, requiring that they remain invariant even when there is phase
dependence on spatial coordinates, such that
(x)  ei(x)(x). (2.3)
In this instance, it is clear that the partial derivative in Equation 2.1 will also act on
the local dependence of the transformation, introducing extra terms. To counteract
this variance, and to restore gauge invariance, the partial derivative can be replaced
with a covariant derivative D,
  D =  + iA, (2.4)
where A is an additional vector field that transforms and absorbs these extra terms
in such away that L remains invariant:
A  A
 = A  . (2.5)
The result of introducing A is that the gauge-invariant L contains an additional term
that describes the interaction of particles (represented by ) with the excitations in
the vector field (the force carrying bosons). An element of this description are the
coupling constants , which determine the strength at which fermions can couple
with bosons. Coupling constants are in fact dependent on the given energy scale,
which is known as the running of the coupling, or simply running coupling.
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 8 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
The full gauge symmetry group of the SM is given as
SU(3)C  SU(2)L  U(1)Y , (2.6)
where each term represents a symmetry group that comprises unitary base matrices,
known as generators. These generators are subsets which can be combined to express
many more elements of the groups local phase transitions. Each term will be
discussed in the following.
2.1.2.1 Quantum Electrodynamics
The electromagnetic force is described in the SM by the relativistic quantum field
theory Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), and is perhaps the best understood of the
three forces described by the SM. QED is an abelian gauge theory with symmetry
group U(1)Q, meaning that the 11 generator commutes (albeit just with itself),
resulting in electrical neutrality of the photon, and an inability to self-interact. U(1)Q
describes the interactions of massless photons originating from the A vector field,
which govern all charged particles and can act over an infinite range. The coupling
constant in an electromagnetic interaction at zero momentum transfer is given by
EM =
, (2.7)
where e is the electric elementary charge.
2.1.2.2 Weak Interaction
The SU(2)L symmetry group consists of three 22 generators of a non-abelian gauge
theory which describe the weak force. The non-abelian nature means the generators
do not commute, corresponding to interactions between the bosons. Responsible for
radioactive -decay, weak interactions couple to weak isospin T , and are mediated
by the exchange of massive W and Z bosons, corresponding to either charged or
neutral currents. These arise from the W and Z vector fields, respectively. The
projection of weak isospin along the z-axis, TZ , is conserved in weak interactions.
TZ is related to chirality, where left-handed chiral-fermions have TZ = 1/2 and can
be grouped into the following isospin doublets:
, (2.8)
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 9 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
e,L
,L
 ,L
, (2.9)
where the subscript L refers to the left-handedness of the fermions. The W boson
has TZ = 1, which results in particles transforming weakly from TZ = +1/2 to
TZ = 1/2, and vice versa. Conversely, right-handed fermions have TZ = 0, and
remain as the following singlets:
uR, dR, cR, sR, tR, bR, eR, e,R, R, ,R, R,  ,R, (2.10)
where the subscript R refers to the right-handedness of the fermion. These right-
handed fermions do not couple with the W boson, meaning that they do not undergo
weak transformations. However, the Z boson, with TZ = 0, couples to both left- and
right-handed fermions. The consequence of the W bosons coupling selectiveness
generates two unique features of the SM: it is the only interaction which can change
the flavour of quarks; and, it violates parity conservation. Although right-handed
neutrinos have been listed amongst the singlets in Equation 2.10, they are not
known to couple to any interactions, and so neutrinos are only present in the SM as
left-handed chiral fermions (or right-handed chiral fermions for anti-neutrinos).
The relatively large mass of the mediating W and Z bosons, as previously detailed
in Table 2.1, means that they are short-lived with a mean lifetime of O(1025 s).
Consequently, they act over a relatively short range of O(1018m). The coupling
constant of weak interactions at zero momentum transfer is found to be
weak 
 (2.11)
2.1.2.3 Electroweak Unification
The fundamental interactions detailed above are very good at describing the universe
at energies below O(1010GeV), however, in the early universe they were merged
together as one unified electroweak force [57], with electroweak symmetry group
SU(2)L U(1)Y . Of note, the single QED symmetry group U(1)Q amends to U(1)Y ,
introducing the quantum number Y , the weak hypercharge, a combination of the
projection of isospin on the z-axis and electric charge, given as
Y = 2(Q TZ). (2.12)
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 10 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
To remain invariant, in a similar way that A was introduced in Equation 2.4, the
Lagrangian of the unified electroweak force introduces: a triplet gauge field with
three component gauge bosons, W i=1,2,3 , associated with weak isospin which mediate
the weak force; and, a single gauge field with a corresponding gauge boson B, which
couples to weak hypercharge, mediating the electromagnetic force. All four gauge
bosons are massless. The linear combination of the W 1 and W
 forms the W
 boson,
while the Z and photon vector fields are mixings of B and W
 , all given by the
following:
), (2.13)
Z = W
cosW BsinW , (2.14)
A = BcosW +W
sinW , (2.15)
where sinW is the experimentally determined Weinberg, or weak mixing angle [8].
The spontaneous symmetry breaking of this unified theory introduces an additional
complex scalar field, the Higgs field, which couples to fermions and bosons giving
them their mass. The mechanism for this follows.
2.1.2.4 The Higgs Mechanism
The Higgs mechanism [9, 10] describes the spontaneous symmetry breaking of
SU(2)L U(1)Y by the introduction of the complex scalar Higgs field , given in its
simplest form as
(1 + i2), (2.16)
where 1 and 2 are the real and imaginary parameterisations, respectively, of the
Higgs potential V (1, 2), depicted in Figure 2.2. The Higgs potential can be seen
to be comparable to a Mexican hat, and would have taken the central vacuum
expected value (VEV) while the symmetry remained unbroken, corresponding to
V (0, 0). The spontaneous breaking of the symmetry occurs when the field minimises
and selects a random non-zero VEV corresponding to v, shown as the trough of the
Mexican hat. This non-zero vaccum state can be chosen to be in the real direction so
that V (1, 2) = V (v, 0). The Higgs field can be further parameterised by expanding
about v with additional scalar fields  and , modifying Equation 2.16 to:
(( + v) + i), (2.17)
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 11 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.2: Visualisation of
the Higgs potential in the
complex imaginary plane.
The lowest-energy state corre-
sponds to a randomly chosen
non-zero point in the trough
of the Mexican hat. The
movement from the centre of
the potential to this trough
corresponds to the massive
Higgs boson [11].
where  + v describes excitations (bosons) in the  field, and  describes excitations
(bosons) in the direction where the potential does not change, as indicated in
Figure 2.3.
The inclusion of this parameterisation in the Higgs Lagrangian produces kinematic
energy terms and interactions of the ,  and gauge fields, a coupling term between a
gauge field and , along with a mass term of , and the introduction of a mass term
that makes the W i=1,2,3 and B gauge bosons from the electroweak force massive. In
this scenario,  represents the Higgs field, and its excitations correspond to a massive
Higgs boson, a particle that was recently discovered in 2012 at the LHC (detailed
in Section 2.1.3). The  term corresponds to massless Goldstone scalar bosons.
Goldstone bosons, which cannot exist in nature due to the inability of a gauge boson
to transform to a scalar boson, can be eliminated by making an appropriate gauge
transformation.
The mass of W, given in Equation 2.13 as the linear combination of W 1 and W
is determined by the coupling constant of the SU(2)L gauge interaction and the
VEV of the Higgs field. Additionally, Equations 2.14 and 2.15, which show that
Fig. 2.3: The directions of
the  and  fields which ex-
pand about the non-zero VEV
of the Higgs potential where
 = (1, 2) = (v , 0). The
dotted circle corresponds to
the trough of the Mexican hat
in Figure 2.2 [1].
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 12 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
 and B mix, results in the masses of the Z boson and photon being described
by matrices; the Z boson receives net mass, while the photon remains massless.
Meanwhile, fermions are expected to gain mass from the Higgs field VEV interacting
with Yukawa couplings of the particles.
2.1.2.5 Quantum Chromodynamics
Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) describes the final symmetry group incorporated
in the SM, SU(3)C . The group comprises eight 33 generators that describe the
interactions of eight gluon gauge fields. Quarks possess a quantum property known
as colour (red, blue, or green) that allows quarks to be described as colour triplets:

. (2.18)
Differing colour charge allows two quarks of the same flavour to exist in the same
bound state without violating the Pauli exclusion principle, for example the two
up quarks in a proton. Colour confinement is the requirement that all quarks are
bound in colourless hadrons, because states with a net colour charge are not invariant
under SU(3)C transformations. This can be achieved with: the combination of three
quarks |qqq with all three colours or anticolours, known as baryons, with a net
baryon number of 1; or, by quark-antiquark pairs |qq, where the colour and baryon
number cancel, known as mesons. Subsequently, the net spin of a meson becomes an
integer, making it a boson.
Although gluons are massless, the range of the strong force is only O(1015m). This
is because gluons are non-abelian, meaning they can self-interact and generate virtual
gluons in quantities proportional to the distance between two interacting quarks.
The result is that the strong force becomes increasingly stronger with increasing
distances. As increasingly higher energies are introduced to separate two quarks,
there comes a point where it is energetically more favourable to produce an additional
quark-antiquark pair instead of increasing the distance any further. This will continue
until the energy is low enough to form bound hadron states (baryons or mesons).
This entire process is known as hadronisation, forming cones of hadrons, known as
jets. Due to the short timescale of hadronisation, only bound state hadrons can be
observed experimentally.
The strong force, as its name suggests, is the strongest of all forces with a coupling
constant at zero momentum transfer of S = 1. At such low energies, unlike QED
2.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics 13 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
and the weak force, QCD processes cannot be described using perturbation theory.
However, the strong forces running coupling is highly sensitive to energy scale,
meaning that S has the largest variation when compared to EM and weak. At
high energies, S becomes sufficiently small that perturbation theory can be applied.
A more detailed description of how the strong interaction is simulated is given in
Chapter 4. At very high energies, S becomes negligible, enabling quarks to behave
as free particles, known as asymptotic freedom.
2.1.3 Higgs Boson Discovery
The following is included to give an overview of the Higgs boson discovery at
the LHC, the experimental setup of which is detailed in-depth in Chapter 3. On
the 4th July 2012, two collaborations from the LHC, ATLAS and CMS, together
announced the independent discoveries of a new SM particle consistent with the
Higgs boson [12, 13], the elusive particle that had been postulated approximately 50
years previously. The detection of the Higgs boson meant it was the first elementary
scalar particle discovered in nature. Figure 2.4 shows the results presented by
ATLAS and CMS, displaying observed p0 values as a function of Higgs mass mH ,
whereby p0 is indicative of the likeliness of observed deviations being random, and
is detailed further in Section 5.6. Both results indicate that the mass of the Higgs
boson agreed with expectation, 125GeV. The mass has since been measured with
greater precision and is now known within 0.2% uncertainty [14, 15]. The discovery
of the Higgs is of particular relevance to this thesis because it is a significant SM
background process that can replicate a three-lepton signature in the final state,
detailed in Section 5.1. A preliminary first-look at searches with intermediate decays
which include a Higgs boson is also presented in Section 6.3.
Fig. 2.4: Observed local p0 as a function of mH for ATLAS (left) [12] and CMS (right) [13].
2.2 Standard Model Shortcomings 14 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.2 Standard Model Shortcomings
Despite the experimental success of the SM, there still remain several fundamental
deficiencies which suggest that it is incomplete. Sections 2.2.1 to 2.2.3 describe
three main issues that could be solved with the theoretical extension known as
supersymmetry.
2.2.1 The Hierarchy Problem and Naturalness
The experimentally observed Higgs mass m2H consists of both a bare, or inherent,
mass term m20, and a m
H term describing the quantum loop corrections from the
coupling of every particle to the Higgs field, an example is shown in Figure 2.5. The
full expression of the quantum loop contributions from a fermion field takes the form
H = 
UV + ..., (2.19)
where f is the Yukawa coupling of the fermion field, and 
UV is the highest mass
scale at which the theory is valid. This in itself is not a problem, however if 2UV is
of the order of the Planck scale O(1019GeV), its quadratic nature would cause it to
be drastically larger than the observed Higgs mass (125GeV). The SM solution
would be to fine-tune m20 so that large corrections are cancelled out. However this
goes against naturalness, a property that states ratios between free parameters must
not be more than one or two orders of magnitude, and that the fine-tuning of free
parameters is indicative of some missing ingredient in the theory [16].
Fig. 2.5: An example of a one-loop
quantum correction described by m2H .
2.2.2 Gauge Coupling Unification
The SM predicts that gauge running coupling constants, as mentioned in Section 2.1.2,
are dependent on the energy scale Q, as shown in Figure 2.6. In the SM, the
electromagnetic couplings increase with energy while the weak and strong forces
decrease. Although the electromagnetic and weak force unify into the electroweak
force, no mechanism to unify the strong force exists within the SM. This goes against
the idea of a Grand Unified Theory (GUT) [17] and would require new physics in
order for all of the interactions to converge at one singular point.
2.2 Standard Model Shortcomings 15 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.6: Running coupling constants
for the three fundamental interactions
of the SM, electromagnetic (blue),
weak (red) and strong (green) [18].
2.2.3 Dark Matter
The rotational curves of galaxies in our universe, which are functions of the rotational
velocity and radial distance of the galaxy spiral arms, are observed to be considerably
higher than what would be expected from visible matter alone. Figure 2.7 shows that
with the addition of extra dark matter found in halos around galaxies, the theory
will fit observations. Gravitational lensing [20] and measurements of the cosmic
microwave background [21] are also consistent with the dark matter hypothesis, the
alternative being a modified theory of general relativity on galactic scales. Dark
matter, which has been calculated to make up 27% of the universe and 85%
of matter, can be hypothesised as Weakly-Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs),
that interact with gravity and the weak force, but not with the electromagnetic
force, and thus are extremely difficult to detect. Although the SM neutrino fulfills
some of the WIMP criteria, they are not massive and can not solely account for the
galaxy rotational curve observations. No other SM particle is a suitable dark matter
candidate.
Fig. 2.7: Fit of expected disk (visible
matter) and halo (dark matter) to the
observed rotation curve (dots with error
bars) [19].
2.3 Supersymmetry 16 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.2.4 Other Issues
Gravity: the SM of particle physics does not currently incorporate quantum gravity,
which is hypothesised to be mediated by the graviton elementary particle and could
dominate at the Planck energy scale [22].
CP-Violation: charge-parity violation is one of the three Sakharov conditions [23]
postulated as the origin of the net content of baryonic matter in our universe, which
would have otherwise annihilated with antiparticles in the very early universe. The
only measured source of CP-violation in the SM occurs in the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-
Maskawa (CKM) matrix that describes the mixing of quark generations [24]. However,
this measurement does not account for the total amount of baryons in the universe
today, implying new physics beyond the SM is required for CP-violation to be
explained.
Neutrino Oscillations: the SM predicts three massless neutrino generations, how-
ever, experimental observations show that neutrinos oscillate between flavours, im-
plying that they have mass. This oscillation between flavours violates lepton number
conservation [25]. An extension to the SM is required to account for this.
2.3 Supersymmetry
Supersymmetry (SUSY) [2628] introduces a new space-time symmetry that trans-
forms a particles spin by s = 1/2 via a quantum operator Q. All SM fermions will
have a bosonic superpartner and vice versa such that:
Q|Boson = |Fermion
Q|Fermion = |Boson.
(2.20)
The supersymmetric superpartners are referred to as sparticles, aquiring the suffix
ino for boson naming conventions, and prefix s for scalar fermions. Their symbols
are the same as their SM counterparts, only with a tilde on top.
Each particle-sparticle pair is arranged as a supermultiplet. Left- and right-handed
chiral spin-1/2 fermions (fL, fR) and their equivalent spin-0 sfermions (fL, fR) are
known as chiral supermultiplets. The Higgs boson and superpartner higgsino are also
a chiral supermultiplet, and are the only particles to require two supermultiplets,
each coupling to either up- or down-type fermions (Hu-Hu, Hd-Hd). Spin-1 gauge
bosons and their corresponding spin-1/2 gauginos (all assumed to be massless) are
known as gauge supermultiplets. The relationships between the supermultiplets and
the operator Q, should mean that particles and sparticles have identical mass and
2.3 Supersymmetry 17 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
quantum numbers, with the exception of spin. However, no sparticles have been
discovered at the mass scale of their SM partners, indicating their mass is of much
larger scale and that SUSY must be a broken symmetry [29]. SUSY breaking can
occur in many ways, the standard mechanism being gauge-mediated breaking. This
mechanism introduces a separate hidden sector of SUSY where the breaking occurs,
and uses gauge, or messenger, fields to mediate the breaking to the visible sector. The
breaking of the symmetry is spontaneous, in the same way as electroweak breaking,
whereby the scalar fields gain a non-zero VEV.
SUSY also offers a solution to the gauge coupling unification problem introduced
in Section 2.2.2. By introducing new particle content into the theory, the scale
dependence of the running couplings will be modified in a way that all three can
approximately converge, shown in Figure 2.8. However, this could be accidental, and
unification is predicted at energies currently unaccessable to probe experimentally,
yet it can also be considered a strong indication that SUSY can provide the basis of
a GUT.
Fig. 2.8: Running coupling constants for
the three fundamental interactions of the
SM when SUSY is included, electromagnetic
(blue), weak (red) and strong (green) [18].
2.3.0.1 The SUSY Higgs Sector
As mentioned above, the Higgs boson has two supermultiplets, denoted either up- or
down-type Higgs bosons. Each type has a separate VEV, vu and vd, where, in order
to reproduce the known masses of the W and Z bosons, mW and mZ , respectively,
the following must apply:
u + v
d. (2.21)
where v is the VEV of the SM Higgs. The ratio of the VEV can be expressed
as vu/vd = tan, and is important in calculating the squark and slepton masses,
described in the next section.
2.3 Supersymmetry 18 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.3.1 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM) [30] is the extension to the
SM requiring the minimal amount of supersymmetric partners to solve the hierarchy
problem. The MSSM particle content is listed in Table 2.4. The gauge supermultiplets
are the gluino (g), wino (Wi) and bino (B) for the SU(3)CSU(2)LU(1)Y symmetry
groups, respectively.
2.3.1.1 MSSM Masses
As previously discussed, the Higgs mechanism, that occurs during electroweak
symmetry breaking, is responsible for giving SM particles mass, something that is
forbidden otherwise. However sparticles are allowed to have mass before this breaking
occurs. The total Lagrangian describing SUSY is defined as
L = LSUSY + Lbreaking, (2.22)
where LSUSY contains the invariant interactions that preserve SUSY, and Lbreaking
contains new mass terms that are present due to the symmetry breaking. These new
mass terms give additional quantum loop corrections to the Higgs mass in the form
UV + ..., (2.23)
Supermultiplet Name Spin-0 Spin-1/2 Spin-1
Chiral Squarks-Quarks
Qi (uL, dL) (uL, dL) 
ui uR uR 
di dR dR 
Chiral Sleptons-Leptons
Li (, eL) (, eL) 
ei eR eR 
Chiral Higgs-Higgsino
Hu (H
u , H
u ) (H
u , H
u ) 
Hd (H
d , H
d ) (H
d , H
d ) 
Gauge Gluino-Gluon  g g
Gauge
Winos-W bosons  W, W 0 W, W 0
Bino- B bosons  B0 B0
Tab. 2.4: Supermultiplet particle content of the MSSM. Here, i = 1, 2, 3, and indicates the
generation index with all generations following the same convention. The bars indicate that
the sparticle is the superpartner of a right-handed chiral particle.
2.3 Supersymmetry 19 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.9: Combination of a one-loop fermion field quantum correction (top quark) and equivalent
scalar field quantum correction (stop squark) introduced by SUSY.
where S is the Yukawa coupling of the new scalar field. The mass terms have
opposite sign to their fermionic counterparts, resulting in the cancellation of the
quadratic divergencies when a fermion is accompanied by two scalars, solving the
hierarchy problem that was introduced in Section 2.2.1. A depiction of the modified
H term, previously shown in Figure 2.5, is presented in Figure 2.9.
The breaking is soft, meaning that SUSY remains a natural theory. It does this by
requiring sparticle masses to not be much more than 1TeV, therefore preserving it
as a solution to the hierarchy problem. The additional mass terms introduced by
the breaking include [31]:
 Three gaugino masses of the bino, wino and gluino: M1, M2, M3;
 Five scalar masses for squarks and sleptons: MqL , MuR , MdR , MLL , MeR ;
 Higgsino mass parameters squared: m2Hu , m
The new mass terms can mix to form the eigenstates of sparticles, detailed in the
following. Table 2.5 summarises the gauge and mass eignestates of SUSY.
Name Spin Gauge Eigenstates Mass Eigenstates
Squarks (q) 0
uL, uR, dL, dR (same)
sL, sR, cL, cR (same)
tL, tR, bL, bR t1, t2, b1, b2
Sleptons () 0
eL, eR, e (same)
L, R,  (same)
L, R,  1, 2, 
Higgs Bosons 0 H0u, H
d , H
u , H
Neutralinos (0j ) 1
u, H
1, 
2, 
3, 
Charginos (j ) W
u , H
1 , 
Gluino 1/2 g (same)
Tab. 2.5: Gauge and mass eigenstates of supersymmetric particles in the MSSM.
2.3 Supersymmetry 20 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Higgs Bosons: the two Higgs supermultiplets introduced earlier, generate eight
degrees of freedom: two charged Higgs states H, three neutral Higgs bosons, A0, h0
and H0 (where one of the latter two must be the SM Higgs), and three giving rise to
the masses of the W and Z bosons of the SM, as discussed in Section 2.1.2.4.
Gauginos: higgsinos and electroweak gauginos mix with each other. Neutralinos
are combinations of the neutral higgsinos (H0u and H
d) and neutral gauginos (B
and W 0), while charginos are mixtures of the charged higgsinos (H+u and H
d ) and
winos (W). The neutralino and chargino mass eigenstates are denoted as 0i=1,2,3,4
and i=1,2, respectively, where i indicates the masses in ascending order. The mass
mixings can be represented by the following matrices:



M1 0 cmZsW smZsW
0 M2 cmZcW smZcW
cmZsW cmZcW 0 
smZsW smZcW  0



, (2.24)
1
 M2
2mW s
2MW c 
W
, (2.25)
where c = cos, s = sin, cW = cosW , sW = sinW , and mW and mZ are the W
and Z boson mass, respectively. Gluons and gluinos do not mix due to carrying the
colour charge.
Squarks and Sleptons: although squarks and sleptons are labeled left- or right-
handed, they do not carry chirality, and the label instead refers to the chirality of
their supermultiplet partner. Without chirality, squarks and sleptons are able to
mix. However, first and second generations have relatively low Yukawa couplings
resulting in very small mixing angles and mass eigenstates the same as their gauge
eigenstates. Conversely, the larger Yukawa effects cause the third generation to have
much larger masses, resulting in significant mixings and altered mass eigenstates.
2.3.2 R-Parity
SUSY introduces many new interactions not found in the SM, some of which directly
violate total baryon and lepton numbers. To remove these violations, a new symmetry,
known as R-parity is often introduced, giving a multiplicative conserved quantum
2.3 Supersymmetry 21 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
number for each particle, given as
PR = (1)
3(BL)+2S
. (2.26)
PR will have a value of +1 for SM particles and 1 for their SUSY partners, and is
conserved when the product of PR is of the same-sign before and after the interaction.
Although there are scenarios in SUSY where R-Parity is violated, this thesis focuses
on scenarios were it is conserved. This means that the production of SUSY particles
must occur in pairs from a SM particle, while SUSY particles themselves will continue
to decay to both a SM and SUSY particle until the Lightest Supersymmetric Particle
(LSP) is reached. This LSP is stable and would be a weakly-interacting massive
particle, making it a suitable candidate for dark matter, introduced in Section 2.2.3.
The detailed decays of sparticles is presented in the next section.
2.3.3 Sparticle Decays
The following gives a brief overview of the R-parity conserving decay patterns of
the MSSM electroweak sparticles relevant to this thesis: charginos, neutralinos and
sleptons.
2.3.3.1 Chargino and Neutralino Decays
Winos are able to couple to left-handed fermions and sfermions along with the up- and
down-Higgs and higgsino doublets, while binos can also couple to the right-handed
particles. Decays to lepton-slepton pairs are favoured due to their expected light
masses, however decays are also expected to be to quark-squark pairs, as well as
lighter charginos or neutralinos with a Higgs scalar or electroweak gauge boson,
displayed in Figure 2.10. Possible two-body decays are:
i  Z
j , W
j , h
j , `
, , [A
j , H
j , H
j , qq], (2.27)
i  W
j , Z
1 , h
1 , `, 
, [A
1 , H
1 , H
j , qq
], (2.28)
where the final states in brackets are energetically less favourable. Charginos and
neutralinos have higher branching fractions to tau leptons in the final state, however
this thesis only targets final states with light leptons (electrons and muons).
2.3 Supersymmetry 22 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.10: Feynman diagrams of possible electroweak decays of the neutralino Ni (top) and
chargino Ci (bottom) with the lightest neutralino N1 in the final state [27].
2.3.3.2 Slepton Decays
Sleptons are able to decay to the following two-body states:
 `0i , 
i , (2.29)
  0i , `
i . (2.30)
Right-handed sleptons will favour decays to the bino-like lightest neutralino, while
left-handed sleptons prefer decays to wino-like charginos and neutralinos due to the
higher weak interaction couplings (mediated by winos), compared to the smaller
electromagnetic coupling (mediated by binos).
2.3.4 SUSY Production
SUSY particles can be produced in different modes which can be explored experimen-
tally. Strong production refers to the direct production of the gluinos and first and
second generation squarks, while the production of stop and sbottom squarks are
referred to separately as third generation production. Examples of each production
are shown in Figure 2.11. This thesis considers electroweak production, referring
to the direct production of sleptons, charginos and neutralinos, all of which are
displayed in Figure 2.12, with a focus on the direct production of a lightest chargino
with a next-to-lightest neutralino.
Each production mode has different cross-sections, as seen in Figure 2.13, with the
strong production having the highest, and electroweak the lowest. The motivation for
searching for the lower cross-section electroweak SUSY is presented in Section 2.3.6.2.
2.3 Supersymmetry 23 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.11: Example schematic diagrams for: strong SUSY production of a gluino and squark
(left); and, third generation SUSY production of two stops (right).
Fig. 2.12: Schematic diagrams for electroweak SUSY production: two sleptons (top left);
opposite-sign lightest chargino pair (top middle); lightest chargino and neutralino (top right);
the focus of this thesis, a lightest chargino and next-to-lightest neutralino (bottom left);
a lightest neutralino pair (bottom middle); and, next-to-lightest and next-to-next-lightest
neutralino (bottom right).
2.3.5 Simplified Models for Electroweak SUSY
Experimentally, SUSY can be simplified by reducing the particle content of decay
chains to focus on only two or three particle masses and branching ratios. Such
models cannot be exactly realised, however due to fewer assumptions on the nature
of new physics, they prove sufficient in experimental searches.
The direct pair production of the lightest chargino 
1 , and next-to-lightest neutralino
2, are considered in this thesis, producing three electrons or muons and the lightest
neutralino 
1, in the final state. Both 
1 and 
2 are mass degenerate consisting of
wino and higgsino eigenstates, while the 
1 consists of binos and higgsinos. The first
two simplified electroweak scenarios detailed in the following are the primary topic
of this thesis, while the third scenario is the focus of a preliminary look into future
2.3 Supersymmetry 24 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
Fig. 2.13: Cross-sections for the different SUSY production modes with a centre-of-mass
energy
s = 8TeV (solid lines) and the increased 13-14GeV (dashed lines) [32].
electroweak SUSY searches. Each are classified according to their intermediate decay
chains.
2 via Sleptons
The intermediate decay of 
2 via sleptons or sneutrinos has the highest branching
ratio of the three considered, and is presented in Figure 2.14. In this scenario,
left-handed sleptons or sneutrinos are assumed to be light, while their right-handed
counterparts are assumed to have masses at the TeV scale. This results in the 
decaying dominantly via the left-handed sparticle. All slepton flavours are considered,
however only electrons or muons are searched for in the final state. The branching
ratio to either sleptons or sneutrinos is taken to be 50%.
2 via W and Z Bosons
Figure 2.15 displays the scenario whereby all slepton and sneutrino masses are
assumed to be at the TeV scale, resulting in the dominant 
1 and 
2 decay with a
100% branching ratio to W and Z bosons, respectively. Three leptons, a neutrino
and 
1 are in the final state.
2.3 Supersymmetry 25 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2 via W and Higgs Bosons
The final scenario considered is a preliminary look at the lowest branching ratio
process with intermediate decays via W and SM Higgs bosons, shown in Figure 2.16.1
The masses of the slepton and sneutrino are also assumed to be at the TeV scale.
Fig. 2.14: A schematic diagram for
2 simplified models with interme-
diate sleptons decays producing three
leptons in the final state.
Fig. 2.15: A schematic diagram for
2 simplified models with intermedi-
ate W and Z boson decays producing
three leptons in the final state.
Fig. 2.16: A schematic diagram for
2 simplified models with interme-
diate W and Higgs boson decays pro-
ducing three leptons in the final state.
1 In SM physics, the capital letter H is used to denote the light Higgs boson, while in supersym-
metry a lowercase h is used.
2.3 Supersymmetry 26 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
2.3.6 Current Status of SUSY Searches at the LHC
The following is included to give an overview of relevant experimental SUSY results
achieved by the LHC. The status of SUSY searches prior to the commencement of
this thesis is presented in Section 2.3.6.1, followed by an overview of the motivations
of this thesis to search for electroweak supersymmetry at the LHC in Section 2.3.6.2.
2.3.6.1 SUSY Mass Limits at the end of Run-I
To date, no evidence of SUSY particles has been detected. In the absence of a
signal, upper limits (detailed in Section 5.6) on the masses of the 
2 and 
1 can
be set. Figure 2.17 shows the limits obtained in Run-I using 20.3 fb1 of data at
s = 8TeV by the ATLAS experiment [33, 34], for scenarios with the intermediate
decays detailed in Section 2.3.5. Although W and Z boson models with exactly
two-leptons in the final state are not considered in this thesis, they can be combined
with the three-lepton channel to generate a combined limit including both models.
The W and Higgs boson limits also consider reconstructed taus in the final state,
which means the limits will not be directly comparable to this thesis.
These results show that mass limits for slepton scenarios have been excluded up to
720GeV for 
2 and up to 380GeV for 
1. The 
2 and 
1 masses have been
excluded up to 350GeV and 130GeV, respectively, for intermediate decays via
W and Z bosons with exactly three leptons in the final state. When this is combined
with the results from the two lepton search, the upper limits increase to 430GeV
and 160GeV, respectively. Masses for the 
2 and 
1 would be excluded up to
150GeV and 18GeV, respectively, for the W and Higgs boson scenario.
Figure 2.18 presents Run-I limits using 19.5 fb1 of data at
s = 8TeV from
CMS [35]. The limits are directly comparable to analyses in this thesis for scenarios
with intermediate decays via sleptons and W and Z bosons. The W and Higgs boson
limits include a combination of the three lepton final state model, with two further
separate models, meaning that it is also not directly comparable.
The CMS results for the slepton channel excluded 
2 masses up to 720GeV and
1 masses up to 350GeV, almost identical to results obtained by ATLAS. The W
and Z boson channel was able to excluded 
2 masses up to 220GeV and 
masses up to 60GeV. The combined W and Higgs boson channel excluded 
and 
1 masses up to 220GeV and 60GeV, respectively.
2.3 Supersymmetry 27 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
 [GeV]
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
 = m
 + m0
m = (
) l (
 ), l  l(
)   l l (
  l 
ATLAS
=8 TeVs, 
 L dt = 20.3 fb =8 TeVs, -1 L dt = 20.3 fb
theory
1 Observed limit (
)exp1 Expected limit (
 = 7 TeVs, 
ATLAS 4.7 fb
All limits at 95% CL
 [GeV]
100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200
 = m
  W 
ATLAS
=8 TeVs, 
 L dt = 20.3 fb =8 TeVs, -1 L dt = 20.3 fb
theory
1 Observed limit (
1 Expected limit (
All limits at 95% CL
 [GeV]
100 150 200 250 300 350 400
ATLAS
=8 TeVs, 
 L dt = 20.3 fb =8 TeVs, -1 L dt = 20.3 fb
theory
1 Observed limit (
)exp1 Expected limit (
 = 7 TeVs, 
ATLAS 4.7 fb
All limits at 95% CL
 [GeV]
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
3L+2L combined
ATLAS
=8 TeVs, 
 L dt = 20.3 fb =8 TeVs, -1 L dt = 20.3 fb
theory
1 Observed limit (
)exp1 Expected limit (
 = 7 TeVs, 
ATLAS 4.7 fb
All limits at 95% CL
Fig. 2.17: Observed and expected exclusion limits on the 
2 and 
1 masses in the context
of SUSY scenarios with simplified mass spectra [33, 34]. Scenarios include intermediate decays
via sleptons (top left), W and Higgs bosons (top right), W and Z bosons with exactly three
leptons in the final state (bottom left) and a combination of this result with requiring two
leptons in the final state (bottom right). The yellow band corresponds to the 1 variations
in the expected limit, including all uncertainties except theoretical uncertainties in the signal
cross-section. The dotted lines around the observed limit illustrate the change in the observed
limit as the nominal signal cross-section is scaled up and down by the theoretical uncertainty.
All limits are computed at 95% confidence level. The observed limits that were obtained from
ATLAS using 4.7 fb1 of data at
s =7TeV are also shown as blue or green lines [36].
2.3.6.2 Electroweak SUSY Search Motivation
Due to higher data statistics in Run-II, there is still clear motivation to continue
the search. The increased centre-of-mass energy at the LHC ensures increased
production cross-sections of all sparticles, previously shown in Figure 2.13, giving
access to previously inaccessible masses, especially in the electroweak sector. The
exclusion of squark and gluino masses well beyond the TeV scale [37] could also mean
that they are too massive to be found at the LHC, meaning the direct production
2.3 Supersymmetry 28 2 Theory and Experimental Landscape
  [GeV]0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
0 1
-1 = 8 TeV  L = 19.5 fbsCMS          
 95% CL CLs NLO+NLL Exclusions
theory
1 lObserved 3
experiment
1 lExpected 3
  pp
, 
, ee~  
, , ee~ 0
) = 0.5
(Br
 + 0.5m
 = 0.5m
  [GeV]0
150 200 250 300 350 400
0 1
-1 = 8 TeV  L = 19.5 fbsCMS          
 95% CL CLs NLO+NLL Exclusions
theory
1Observed 
experiment
1Expected 
H = m0
  pp
 H 0
 W  
Fig. 2.18: Observed exclusion limits on the 
1 and 
1 masses in the context of SUSY
scenarios with simplified mass spectra. Scenarios include intermediate decays via sleptons (top
left), W and Z bosons (top right), and W and Higgs bosons (bottom). All limits are computed
at 95% confidence level [35].
of electroweak gauginos and sleptons could dominate SUSY production, driving
searches in this area. The electroweak signature with three leptons in the final state
is also experimentally clean with little hadronic activity.
3. Experimental Setup
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.1.1 Acceleration and Injection Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.1.2 Collider Magnet System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.1.3 Collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.2 The ATLAS Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.2.1 Detector Geometry and Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . 33
3.2.2 Detector Magnet System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2.3 Inner Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2.4 Calorimeters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.2.5 Muon Spectrometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.2.6 Trigger, Data Acquisition and Computing Grid . . . . . 42
This chapter details the experimental setup of the acceleration process and the
detector technologies used for identifying, measuring and selecting particles with the
ATLAS experiment at the LHC.
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider
The LHC [38] is the worlds largest and most powerful particle accelerator. Based at
the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN), it is located in a 27 km
circular tunnel at varying depths between 45-170m below the Franco-Swiss border.
The LHC was initially turned on in September 2008 with the first full data-taking
period, known as Run-I, beginning in 2010 [39]. Although the LHC was originally
designed to accelerate protons to a beam energy of 7TeV, Run-I mainly operated
with beam energies of 4TeV and a centre-of-mass energy of
s = 8TeV. In early
2013, a little later than originally planned due to the discovery of the Higgs Boson
in 2012, the LHC went into a 2 year shutdown so that essential upgrades could be
undertaken. In 2015, the upgraded LHC was restarted, now operating with beam
energies of 6.5TeV and a centre-of-mass energy of
s = 13TeV. This new period of
data-taking is known as Run-II and is due to continue until late 2018 [40].
3.1.1 Acceleration and Injection Chains
Protons that have been extracted from an ionised hydrogen source are gradually
accelerated through a chain of smaller accelerators before reaching the energies
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider 30 3 Experimental Setup
required to enter the LHC. The protons begin their acceleration journey in the linear
accelerator, LINAC 2, where they are accelerated to energies of 50MeV. They are
then passed into the Proton Synchrotron Booster (SPB), taking them up to 1.4GeV,
followed by the Proton Synchrotron (PS), increasing them further to 25GeV. The
final accelerator before reaching the LHC is the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS).
The SPS accelerates the protons from 25 to 450GeV before injecting two oppositely
travelling beams into ultra-high vacuum pipes around the LHCs 27 km circumference.
The typical time it takes from entering LINAC 2 to reaching the LHC is around 16
minutes. Once the beams enter the LHC it takes an additional 20 minutes for them
to reach their nominal energy of 6.5TeV.
The LHC also operates heavy ion runs, beginning the acceleration process in
LINAC 3 and the Low Energy Ion Ring (LEIR), before following the same cy-
cles for the proton run by entering the PS, SPS and LHC. Figure 3.1 depicts the full
injection chain.
A time-oscillating electromagnetic field is employed at various points around the
LHC which acts on both oppositely travelling beams. The beams are supplied in
bunches of 1011 particles, which are synchronised to pass the electromagnetic fields
during stages of maximum induced acceleration, which makes reaching energies of
Fig. 3.1: Overview of the layout of the different accelerators and detectors at the CERN
complex [41].
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider 31 3 Experimental Setup
6.5TeV possible. Once at the nominal energy, the beams can be stored and are able
to travel around the LHC for several hours during data taking before needing to be
replenished.
3.1.2 Collider Magnet System
The LHC uses superconducting magnets to keep the proton beams on a circular
trajectory. There are 1,232 dipole magnets, each approximately 15m long, which are
responsible for bending the beams around the circular complex. The magnets are
cooled by superfluid helium to temperatures as low as 2K, giving rise to magnetic
fields as large as 8T which act perpendicularly to the direction of the beams.
During this process the beams can diverge. To remedy this a total of 392 super-
conducting quadrupole magnets, each 5-7 metres long, and 688 smaller sextupole
magnets are employed to refocus the beam. The quadrupole magnets act like a lens
to refocus the beams width and height, while the sextupole magnets refocus the
beam chromaticity caused by momentum changes in the bunches [42].
Finally, eight inner triplet magnet systems, each containing three quadrupole magnets,
are located 23m from the interaction point in both directions. They are used to
squeeze the beams, making them 12.5 times narrower, focusing them to the collision
point.
3.1.3 Collisions
Collisions in the LHC occur at four interaction points located within the main
detectors, ALICE (A Large Ion Collider Experiment) [43], ATLAS (Section 3.2),
CMS (Compact Muon Solenoid) [44] and LHCb [45], a specialised flavour physics
experiment. During Run-I and very early Run-II, bunches were brought to collision
within these detectors every 50 ns, however this later increased to every 25 ns, resulting
in over forty million collisions per second. The instantaneous luminosity, which refers
to the number of particles per centimetre squared with the potential of colliding per
second, can be defined as:
L = f
4xy
, (3.1)
where N1 and N2 refer to the number of particles in each beam, f is the frequency
of bunch crossings and x and y are the horizontal and vertical widths of the beam.
This instantaneous luminosity can relate the event rate dN/dt to the cross section 
3.1 The Large Hadron Collider 32 3 Experimental Setup
of a specific process via:
= L. (3.2)
For pp collisions during Run-II, the LHC operated with a peak instantaneous luminos-
ity of 2 1034 cm2 s1, an increase from the Run-I maximum of 7.7 1033 cm2 s1.
Figure 3.2 displays the total cumulative, or integrated, luminosity delivered by the
LHC in 2015 and 2016, as well as the total recorded by the ATLAS experiment.
Although data-taking will continue until late 2018, the results presented in this thesis
only use data from 2015 and 2016.
The number of interactions per bunch crossing , known as pile-up [48], can be
expressed as
Linel.
nbunchfr
, (3.3)
where inel. is the total inelastic cross-section, nbunch is the number of circulating
bunches, and fr is the bunch frequency. The mean number of interactions per
bunch crossing  is averaged over a specific luminosity block. Figure 3.3 shows the
luminosity-weighted mean number of interactions per bunch crossing in the ATLAS
detector during 2015 and 2016, and during Run-I for comparison.
Day in 2015
23/05 20/06 18/07 15/08 12/09 10/10 07/11
 = 13 TeVs     ATLAS Online Luminosity
LHC Delivered
ATLAS Recorded
-1Total Delivered: 4.2 fb
-1Total Recorded: 3.9 fb
(a) Data-taking during 2015 [46]
Day in 2016
18/04 16/05 13/06 11/07 08/08 05/09 03/10 31/10
50  = 13 TeVs     ATLAS Online Luminosity
LHC Delivered
ATLAS Recorded
-1Total Delivered: 38.5 fb
-1Total Recorded: 35.6 fb
(b) Data-taking during 2016 [47]
Fig. 3.2: Total integrated luminosity as a function of time delivered by the LHC and recorded
by the ATLAS experiment during stable beams for pp collisions with a centre-of-mass energy
s = 13 TeV during (a) 2015 and (b) 2016. The differences between LHC delivered and
ATLAS recorded luminosity results from inefficiencies of the detector trigger system, as well as
the inefficiency of ramping up the tracking detectors when stable beams are declared by the
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 33 3 Experimental Setup
Mean Number of Interactions per Crossing
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
180 Online LuminosityATLAS
> = 20.7, <-1Ldt = 21.7 fb = 8 TeV, s
> =  9.1, <-1Ldt = 5.2 fb = 7 TeV, s
(a) Run-I (2011-2012) Luminosity [49]
Mean Number of Interactions per Crossing
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
=13 TeVsOnline, ATLAS -1Ldt=42.7 fb
> = 13.72015: <
> = 24.92016: <
> = 23.7Total: <
(b) Run-II (2015-2016) Luminosity [50]
Fig. 3.3: Luminosity-weighted mean number of interactions per bunch crossing in the ATLAS
detector during stable beams for pp collisions during (a) 2015 and 2016 and (b) 2011 and
2012.
3.2 The ATLAS Detector
The ATLAS detector [51] is a 44m long and 25m wide cylindrical arrangement
of layered sub-detectors located approximately 100m below ground at one of the
LHCs four interaction points. With CMS, it is one of the two general purpose LHC
detectors, being able to measure different properties of particles that are produced
during high energy collisions with the aim to both prove the validity of the SM, such
as the discovery of the Higgs boson, as well as searching for new physics beyond the
SM, such as supersymmetry.
Figure 3.4 displays the ATLAS detector layout. Section 3.2.1 details the ATLAS
detector geometry and nomenclature used to measure particle properties, while
Sections 3.2.2 to 3.2.6 detail each sub-system separately.
3.2.1 Detector Geometry and Nomenclature
The origin of the ATLAS right-handed coordinate system is defined as the nominal
particle-interaction point. The z-axis runs along the beam line, with positive z being
termed the A-Side, and negative z the C-Side. The x-y plane is perpendicular to
the z-axis with positive x pointing directly from the origin towards the centre of the
LHC ring and positive y pointing directly up to the surface of the Earth.
Spherical coordinates are also adopted, with the azimuthal angle  being measured
around the beam axis, and the polar angle  measured from the positive z-axis.
The angle  is invariant under a boost in the beam direction, however, additional
coordinates known as rapidity y and pseudorapidity  are used instead of . Rapidity,
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 34 3 Experimental Setup
Fig. 3.4: Overview of the layout of the different subsystems of the ATLAS detector [51].
which can be used for massive objects, such as jets, is defined as
E + pz
E  pz
, (3.4)
where E and pz are the particles energy and z-component of momentum, respectively.
The sum and difference in rapidities is invariant under beam line boosts. However,
particles in LHC collisions are assumed to be highly relativistic and therefore their
masses are assumed to be negligible. For massless particles, rapidity can be reduced
to pseudorapidity, defined as
 = ln
. (3.5)
The distance between two objects in psuedorapidity-azimuthal angle space is then
defined as
, (3.6)
where  and  are the distances in  and .
Another widely used kinematic variable is the transverse momentum, pT, measured
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 35 3 Experimental Setup
in the x-y plane and defined as
x + p
y, (3.7)
where px and py refer to the x and y components of momentum. The use of this
transverse component leads to the definition of missing transverse energy. Unlike
the z-plane whereby initial momentum can not be known, the initial transverse
momentum is known to be zero, and due to conservation of momentum, its final
momentum must also be zero. A measured non-zero visible momentum ~p visT
indicates that the event must have an equivalent missing transverse momenta ~p missT
with magnitude EmissT , caused by an unknown momentum component such that
T = |~p
T | = |~p
T | = |
vis,i
T |, (3.8)
where
~pT is the measured sum of all visible particles transverse momenta compo-
nents.
Other important kinematic variables used in the analysis are defined in Section 5.3.1.
3.2.2 Detector Magnet System
The ATLAS magnet system [51] is responsible for bending the trajectories of charged
particles so that their charge and momentum can be determined by measuring
their direction and curvature. Three separate magnets are employed at different
stages throughout the detector. In-between the inner detector and the calorimeter
(detailed in Sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.4), is the central solenoid, a 5.3m long, 4.5 cm
thick superconducting magnet wrapped around the beam pipe at a radius of 1.4m.
Its 2T magnetic field acts parallel to the beam pipe and is the first to deflect the
charged particles within the inner detector after the collision. On the outer edge of
the detector, with an inner and outer diameter of 9.4m and 20.1m respectively, is
the 25.3m long barrel toroid, consisting of eight separate superconducting coils. It
provides a 4T magnetic field to the muon spectrometer, detailed in Section 3.2.5,
acting perpendicularly to the beam-pipe. Also providing a 4T magnetic field are
the two 5m long end-cap toroids, each 10.7m in diameter and holding eight coils
in a common cryostat. They are positioned at either end of the detector to take
measurements of highly energetic muons travelling close to the beam pipe.
As with the LHC magnet system, the ATLAS superconducting magnets are also
cooled by liquid helium. They reach temperatures of 4.7K, which in necessary to
achieve the required magnetic fields. Figure 3.5 displays the magnetic setup.
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 36 3 Experimental Setup
Fig. 3.5: Overview of the layout of the magnet system in the ATLAS detector [52].
3.2.3 Inner Detector
The Inner Detector (ID) is the closest sub-detector to the beam pipe and first to
measure the products of collisions, including decays of short-lived particles. It is
immersed in the 2T magnetic field produced by the central solenoid magnet. There
are three separate elements of the ID, as displayed in Figure 3.6, consisting of: a
main barrel part, with concentric cylindrical layers; and, two disk end-caps, to ensure
that all particles within a range of || < 2.5 and pT > 0.5GeV can be measured.
Primary- and secondary-particle vertices are first measured accurately in the Silicon
Pixel Detector and Insertable B-Layer (IBL) before reaching the Semiconductor
Tracker (SCT). The final layer is the Transition Radiation Tracker (TRT), which, in
addition to tracking, can be used for particle identification.
Fig. 3.6: A cross-section of the centre of the Inner Detector [53].
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 37 3 Experimental Setup
3.2.3.1 Silicon Pixel Detector
Both the Silicon Pixel Detectors barrel and end-caps have three layers of silicon pixels
which are formed into 1,456 and 288 modules, respectively. Each module contains
46,080 readout channels, or pixels, each with a surface area of 50 400 m2. Having
pixels of this size allows the ID to make very high-resolution spatial measurements
in high particle-multiplicity environments. Each pixel has separate circuits and
electronics that record a current, or hit, when highly energetic charged particles
knock out electron-hole pairs from the silicon. Three layers are needed to gain
three space-points for each particle traversing the detector, which are then used to
reconstruct the particle tracks and vertices.
For Run-II, the IBL [54], a fourth layer of pixels, was added to the outside of the beam
pipe at a radius of 3.3 cm to improve tracking precision by supplying an additional
space-point and also to prevent damage to the inner layers due to higher radiation
levels.
3.2.3.2 Semiconductor Tracker
The Semiconductor Tracker (SCT) barrel consists of four concentric layers of silicon
detectors with 2,112 modules, while the end-caps have nine layers each and a total
of 1,976 modules. Each module comprises two-sides of 768 silicon-strip detectors at
a stereo angle of 40mrad to each other. For each traversing charged particle, both
sides of the module will record a hit, and both hits are combined together to build a
single space-point. The SCT layers are positioned so that a total of four space-points
will always be recorded within the || < 2.5 range.
3.2.3.3 Transition Radiation Tracker
The Transition Radiation Tracker (TRT) barrel has three rings, each comprising 32
modules, while the end-caps each have 18 units, called wheels, with 224 layers. There
are a total of 370,000 cylindrical drift tubes, or straws, that are 4mm in diameter
and 1.44m in length, and are positioned parallel to the beam pipe in the barrel
and radial in the end-caps. The straws are filled with gas made from Xenon (70%),
for good X-ray absorption, and CO2 (27%) and O2 (3%), to increase the electron
drift velocity and photon quenching. The straws are coated in aluminium to form
a cathode, with a 30m gold-plated tungsten wire anode through the centre. As
charged particles traverse the TRT, the electrons from the ionised gas atoms drift
towards the anode and register a hit. Polypropylene fibres (foils) interleave the
straws in the barrel (end-caps), enabling the production of transition radiation in
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 38 3 Experimental Setup
the form of X-rays. The X-rays are then recorded by the straws as high-threshold
hits and can thus identify electrons which have pT between 1-150GeV.
3.2.4 Calorimeters
The ATLAS calorimeter system [51] is designed to fully absorb particles and translate
their energies into measurable quantities. The system is displayed in Figure 3.7
and consists of an inner electromagnetic calorimeter (ECal) with fine granularity,
which absorbs photons and electrons, plus an outer hadronic calorimeter (HCal) with
coarser granularity, to absorb particles that interact via the strong force. Finally,
one encounters the forward calorimeter (FCal), which absorbs both electromagnetic
and hadronic particles that are traversing the detector close to the beam pipe. The
combined coverage of the calorimeters is || < 4.9. The only known particles that do
not interact with the calorimeter system are neutrinos.
The first layer of both calorimeters is a high-density absorbing material that produces
a shower of lower energy secondary particles. These secondary particles continue on
to the second active material layer that measures the progressively degraded energy,
either through ionisation or scintillation.
The radiation length of the material, X0, which corresponds to the length (in cm) to
reduce the energy of an electron by the factor 1/e, is used to define the thickness of
the ECal. The equivalent for the HCal is the nuclear interaction length, I .
Fig. 3.7: An overview of the calorimeter system consisting of the ECal (LAr electromagnetic
barrel and end-cap), HCal (tile barrels and LAr hadronic end-cap) and the FCAL [51].
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 39 3 Experimental Setup
The ECal and HCal are both able to contain the developing showers, which im-
proves energy measurements and prevents particles punching-through to the muon
spectrometer.
3.2.4.1 Electromagnetic Calorimeter
The ECal is divided into a barrel region (with range || < 1.475) and two end-caps,
each in their own cryostat (with || range between 1.375 and 3.2). They all use lead
and liquid argon (LAr) as their absorbing and active materials, respectively. The
LAr is cooled to 90K and is ionised by the particle showers, allowing the liberated
electrons to be collected and recorded by 101,760 copper electrode readout channels
in the barrel, and 62,208 in either end-cap. The lead and LAr are structured in an
accordion-shape, as shown in Figure 3.8, to provide complete  coverage.
The barrel is 6.4m in length, has an outer radius of 2.25m and is 53 cm thick,
corresponding to > 22 X0, while the end-caps are each 63 cm in length along the
beam pipe, have an outer radius of 2.10m and are 1.77m thick, equivalent to > 24X0.
To reduce the amount of energy loss from particles going through matter before
reaching the ECal, the ECal and the solenoid magnet share a common vacuum vessel.
An additional thin active LAr presampler layer, with 10,880 readout channels in the
|| < 1.8 region, is included in front of the ECal, to correct for the energy that has
been lost in the ID, solenoid and cryostat walls.
Fig. 3.8: Systematic view of the ECal accordion-structure [55].
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 40 3 Experimental Setup
3.2.4.2 Hadronic Calorimeter
The HCal is divided into a central barrel (with range || < 1.0), two moveable
extended barrels either side (which, when fixed in place have an 0.8 > || > 1.7
range), and two end-caps located directly behind the ECal end-caps sharing the same
LAr cryostat (with 1.5 < || < 3.2). The end-caps are positioned to overlap with
the extended barrels, to account for the drop in material density at these locations.
The barrels use steel as the absorber, interleaved with plastic scintillating tiles as
the active medium. The scintillating tiles use photomultiplier tubes at either side
as readout channels. Of these, 5,760 are located in the main barrel and 4,092 in
each extended barrel. The end-caps use copper plates and LAr as their respective
absorbing and active materials, connected to 5,632 readout channels each.
The central barrel is 5.8m in length, while the two extended barrels are 2.6m each.
They all have an outer radius of 4.25m and are 1.97m thick. The end-caps are both
1.78m in length along the beam pipe, are 2.03m in radius and 1.70m thick.
3.2.4.3 Forward Calorimeter
The two FCals are divided into an electromagnetic module and two hadronic modules,
each 45 cm in length along the beam pipe, with a combined coverage of 3.1 < || < 4.9.
They are located in the same cryostats as the end-caps at a distance of 4.7m from
the interaction point. All modules use LAr as the active material, with copper
plates and tungsten as the absorber for the electromagnetic and hadronic modules,
respectively. Electrodes consisting of concentric rods and tubes parallel to the beam
axis can readout 1,008 channels within the electromagnetic module, and 754 channels
in the hadronic modules. The modules are 27.6 X0 and 7.28 I deep, respectively.
To avoid problems with ion buildup caused by higher particle fluxes, the LAr gaps
in the FCals are made substantially smaller than in other parts of the calorimeter
(0.25mm compared to 8.5mm in the end-caps).
3.2.5 Muon Spectrometer
The outermost layer of the ATLAS detector is the Muon Spectrometer (MS) [51],
designed to measure the tracks of penetrating muons. The MS is located within
the 4T magnetic field generated by the long barrel toroid, described previously in
Section 3.2.2. As with the ID, the muons trajectories are bent so that their charge
and momenta can be determined. The large barrel toroid magnet deflects the tracks
where || < 1.4, the two magnet end-caps deflect the tracks between 1.6 < || < 2.7,
and a combination of both magnets in the transition region between 1.4 < || < 1.6.
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 41 3 Experimental Setup
Fig. 3.9: An overview of the MS [51].
Tracks are measured by three layers of concentric chambers in the barrel region with
an outer radius of 10 m, and three layers of chamber planes perpendicular to the beam
pipe in the end-caps, at a maximum distance of 21.5m from the interaction point,
as shown in Figure 3.9. There are two types of chambers in the barrel, Monitored
Drift Tubes (MDTs) and Resistive Plate Chambers (RPCs). The MDTs are also
located in the end-caps, along with Cathode Strip Chambers (CSCs) and Thin Gap
Chambers (TGCs).
3.2.5.1 Monitored Drift Tubes
The MDTs are pressurised drift tubes with a 29.97mm diameter, filled with Argon
(93%) and CO2 (7%) gas. Once the gas is ionised by the muons, the free electrons
drift towards and are collected by a central tungsten-rhenium anode wire which is
kept at a potential to register a hit which provides precision measurements of the
track coordinates for || < 2.7. There are three to eight layers of drift tubes which
are able to take a total of twenty measurements for each track in both the barrel
and end-caps.
3.2.5.2 Cathode Strip Chambers
Due to higher rates of particles in the end-cap regions, precision measurements are
also performed by the higher granularity CSCs for 2.0 < || < 2.7. The CSCs consist
of two disks, each with eight multi-wire proportional chambers that have four CSC
plates giving four measurements for an individual track. The chambers are filled
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 42 3 Experimental Setup
with Argon (80%) and CO2 (20%) gas, with cathode strips aligned both parallel and
perpendicularly to the anode wires, so that particle hit positions can be measured.
3.2.5.3 Resistive Plate Chambers
Muon triggering and secondary complementary coordinates, orthogonal to the pre-
cision measurements, are performed in the RPCs in the barrel for || < 1.05 and
by the TGCs in the end-caps for 1.05 < || < 2.7. The RPCs are gaseous paral-
lel electrode-plate detectors filled with C2H2F4 (94.7%), IsoC4H10 (5%) and SF6
(0.3%). The plates are made of a plastic laminate and are a distance of 2mm apart.
An electric field between the plates allows avalanches to form along the ionised tracks
towards the anode, which is read out by capacitive coupling to metallic strips. A
maximum of six space-points are recorded for every track.
3.2.5.4 Thin Gap Chambers
Like the CSCs, the TGCs are also multi-wire proportional chambers. They are filled
with CO2 (55%) and n-pentane (45%) gas, with the cathode plates 2.8mm apart.
The anode wires are only 1.8mm apart, which, along with a high electric field, leads
to very good time resolution, which is essential for the triggering. The TGC provides
nine space-points for each track.
3.2.6 Trigger, Data Acquisition and Computing Grid
The purpose of the Trigger and Data Acquisition (TDAQ) system [51, 56] is to reduce
the rate of data stored from 40MHz down to a manageable 1 kHz by only storing
data for very high energy events that may contain potentially interesting physics.
Implemented for Run-II, events pass through an online two-tiered trigger system
consisting of the Level 1 (L1) trigger and the High Level Trigger (HLT), with each tier
requiring events to meet increasingly demanding criteria. The flow of data through
these online tiers is managed by the data acquisition system, which eventually passes
all accepted events into data streams for offline physics analysis, trigger level analysis
and monitoring or detector calibration. Objects that do not meet the requirements
are permanently discarded. An offline four-tiered computing infrastructure (Tier-
0,1,2,3, described in Section 3.2.6.4) is then employed to reconstruct the data from
the streams into meaningful information.
The rest of this section will describe both trigger tiers, trigger software algorithms
as well as the computing grid. A schematic representation of the TDAQ system and
the first tier of the computing infrastructure is displayed in Figure 3.10.
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 43 3 Experimental Setup
Fig. 3.10: A schematic of the ATLAS TDAQ system along with Tier-0 of the LHC computing
infrastructure. All relevant acronyms are described in this section, all others are described in
Ref. [57].
3.2.6.1 Level 1 Trigger
The L1 trigger is hardware based and relies on the calorimeters (L1Calo) and muon
spectrometer (L1Muon) triggers to determine whether particles come from interesting
high energy collisions. L1Calo can do this within low granularity trigger towers by
directly measuring electron, photon and jet energies, or by inferring a weak interaction
has occurred by identifying hadronically decaying taus using the distribution of their
showers in core and isolated cones. L1Muon also infers an electroweak interaction
when triggering on muons within its RPCs and TGCs. When the L1Calo or L1Muon
trigger, data from the entire detector is readout by fast electronics and stored in
front-end pipelines on or near to the detector to await further processing.
For Run-II, new topological trigger modules (L1Topo) were introduced to reduce
the event rate before reaching a Central Trigger Processor (CTP), a necessity at
increased luminosities. The CTP can only make selections based on the multiplicity
and thresholds of candidate objects identified by the L1Calo and L1Muon triggers,
whereas the new L1Topo can select events based on topological relationships, such as
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 44 3 Experimental Setup
angular variables and invariant masses. The L1Topo processes data using algorithmic
firmware which is loaded onto integrated circuits (FPGAs) before being passed to
the CTP. As a result, the L1Muon required a firmware upgrade to send coarse , 
and pT information to the L1Topo modules. The L1Calo also received an upgraded
processing module for Run-II to deal with the higher occupancies in the calorimater
system which causes an increase in pile-up events [58].
Once data from all L1 components reach the CTP, a trigger menu made up of
512 distinct items (increased from 256 during Run-1) is implemented, each item
being logical combinations of requirements for accepting events based on thresholds,
multiplicities and L1Topo flags. Regions-of-Interest (RoIs) using  and  coordinates
obtained by the L1Calo and L1Muon are coupled with the passing events, which will
later be used for reconstruction and tracking within the HLT. When an object meets
all criteria, an accept signal is sent and event information is buffered in the Read-Out
System (ROS) and sent along with the RoI information to the second-tier HLT. The
total latency from the time of bunch crossing until the signal being sent is 2.5s.
To prevent an overwhelming rate of data flow and to avoid overlapping readout
windows, the CTP enforces two types of dead-time: simple and complex. The simple
dead-time limits the minimum time between two consecutive accepts which is set
to 4 bunch-crossings (100 ns), while the complex dead-time restricts the number of
signals within a given period. The full outcome is that the L1 trigger is able to
reduce the rate of data storage from 40MHz to 100 kHz.
3.2.6.2 High Level Trigger
To reduce the complexity and allow for dynamic resource-sharing between algorithms,
Run-II amalgamated the Level 2 trigger and Event Filter farms from Run-I [59] into
a single HLT stage which runs on several thousand CPUs. It has two subdivisions:
fast tracking and precision tracking. During the 2015 and 2016 data taking periods,
fast tracking was performed by the software based Fast Track Finder (FTF). The
FTF provided approximately 2,500 independent trigger chains, each chain a sequence
of offline-like pattern recognition algorithms executed within the RoIs which was
good at reconstructing well-separated object tracks (e.g. electron, photon, muon,
tau) and match them with their finer granularity calorimeter information. The muon
spectrometer information was used in the FTF to to find MS-only muon candidates
and back-extrapolate to the ID tracks within the RoI.
In 2017, a new hardware Fast TracKer (FTK) system [60] was installed to assist
with the CPU challenges presented with increased luminosities. The aim of the
FTK was to provide track reconstruction using particle look-up tables stored in
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 45 3 Experimental Setup
hardware memory chips for pattern recognition for || < 2.4. This allowed the rate
of reconstruction of charged particles to be on par with L1 trigger rates. However as
this thesis only presents results using data from 2015 and 2016, only trigger processes
associated with the FTF are described within the following.
Following on from fast tracking is the slower precision tracking software which uses
track (instead of pattern recognition) algorithms. Refined tracks and space-points are
seeded from the FTF to reduce the CPU usage. Full access to object reconstruction
information is available so that precision tracking is not limited by RoIs. This
means that full calorimeter information can be used to fully reconstruct jets and
global quantities such as EmissT . The identification of secondary vertices that can
be indicative of a b-quark decay (Section 4.3.4), are also very well refined at this
stage. As with the fast tracking stage, muons are again reconstructed as MS-only
candidates but then combined with the refined RoIs identified by the FTF. The
HLT has a latency of 300ms and can reduce the rate of data stored from 100 kHz to
1 kHz.
Once the event is accepted by the HLT, it is written into different data streams
to be used for physics analysis (which is subdivided into muon, electron/photon,
jet/tau/EmissT , and minimum bias streams), trigger level analysis and monitoring,
or detector calibration. Streams are inclusive, meaning an event can feature in
more than one, although the overlap between streams is kept to a minimum, with
approximately only 10-15% of events being duplicated. To reduce bandwidth further,
only the full event information for physics analysis is written to the streams, and
only partially written for non-physics analysis.
3.2.6.3 Trigger Menus and Chains
The trigger menu [56] comprises a full list of all combined L1 and HLT trigger chains,
which, as previously mentioned, are sequences of algorithms. These algorithms target
a multitude of important physics signatures, reflecting the physics goals of the many
ATLAS working groups.
The menu consists of primary trigger chains which are used for physics analysis;
support trigger chains, used for efficiency and performance measurements, background
estimation and monitoring; alternative trigger chains which run alternative online
reconstruction algorithms for both the primary and support chains; and backup
trigger chains that apply tighter selection requirements to reduce the rate of the
primary chains if they become too high.
HLT chains consist of two types of algorithms, feature extracting (FEX) and hypothesis
3.2 The ATLAS Detector 46 3 Experimental Setup
testing (HYPO). FEX algorithms are used to reconstruct objects such as tracks
or calorimetry clusters, while HYPO algorithms apply selection criteria to the
reconstructed object. To reduce the processing time of the trigger system, features
extracted from one chain can be reused in additional chains due to caching.
3.2.6.4 Computing Grid
Raw data from the online DAQ system is passed to Tier-0 [61], the first stage of
the offline LHC computing grid, where it undergoes a first-pass reconstruction of
raw data before being saved into numerous different file formats (raw and derived)
and registered with the ATLAS Distributed Data Management (DDM) system. The
data is then passed from Tier-0 onto 13 major Tier-1 computing centres around the
world, which, not only store a large portion of raw data, but also perform and store
final-pass event reconstruction. The data is then distributed to 155 Tier-2 centres,
typically universities and scientific institutes that can provide sufficient storage and
computing power to perform specific analysis tasks. The final tier, Tier-3, consists of
local computing clusters used by individual scientists to access the grid and perform
physics analysis.
4. Simulation and Reconstruction
4.1 Event Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.1.1 Parton Distribution Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.1.2 Phased Simulation of pp Collisions . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.1.3 SUSY Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.1.4 Monte Carlo Generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.2 Detector Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.2.1 Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.2.2 Digitisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.2.3 Fast Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3 Object Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3.1 Tracks and Primary Vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3.2 Electrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.3.3 Muons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.3.4 Hadronic Jets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.3.5 Taus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.3.6 Missing Transverse Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.3.7 Overlap Removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
The ATLAS software framework Athena [62], which is based on the Gaudi [63]
framework developed by LHCb [45], is used for all aspects of the ATLAS software,
including both the triggering of data in the HLT, as previously detailed in Section 3.2.6,
and for producing Monte Carlo (MC) simulated data. Due to the complex nature of
physics processes, detailed simulations of all processes involved have become crucial
tools to understand particle interactions and decays, referred to as an event in
what follows. These MC simulations can be used to model both background and
signal processes, possibly in conjunction with other methods, such as data-driven
methods of certain SM background estimation.
The production of simulated events is typically performed in three steps: event
generation, which simulates events based on physics models as implemented in
so-called event generators, described in Section 4.1; detector simulation, which
propagates generated events through a detector simulation to mimic the response
of the real detector, described in Section 4.2; and, physics object reconstruction,
involving algorithms that are run on both real and simulated data, described in
Section 4.3. A detailed schematic of the flow of MC generation is depicted in
Figure 4.1, with each part being discussed in more detail in the following sections.
4.1 Event Generation 48 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
Event Generation
HepMC
Detector Propagation
Detector Digitisation
Event Reconstruction
Analysis
Real Data
AtlFast II
Fig. 4.1: A schematic of the full data production, showing processes in green, orange and pink
and output-file-formats in blue.
4.1 Event Generation
Multiple event generators [64], each adopting varying theoretical approaches, can
be used to simulate the many physics processes that are expected to be important
during proton-proton collisions at the LHC. However, instead of the laborious task of
simulating typical events and waiting for the production of one required type based
on their cross-sections, simulations are built around a target process.
Processes result from the interactions between the partons in each of the protons.
Partons include: the valence quarks, which give rise to the colliding particles
quantum numbers; gluons, which mediate the strong interactions between the valence
quarks; and, virtual quark-antiquark pairs, known as sea quarks, which originate
from fluctuations in the strong field within the hadron. The initial state of the
hadron, whereby the momentum is shared amongst the partons, can be described
mathematically by parton distribution functions (PDFs), which are briefly discussed
in Section 4.1.1.
Target processes typically originate from central hard scattering events between
4.1 Event Generation 49 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
the colliding protons, defined by having either a large momentum transfer Q2 (as
defined in Section 4.1.1), large pT, or a large mass scale. Particles involved in the
hard scattering can emit Initial State Radiation (ISR) pre-scattering, or Final State
Radiation (FSR) post-scattering. ISR and FSR are described as soft scattering
processes. Another type of soft scattering includes beam-beam remnants produced
from the breakup of the protons. All processes that are not directly involved in the
primary hard scattering, such as ISR, FSR and beam-beam remnants, are described
collectively as part of the underlying event.
The term pile-up, which was introduced in Section 3.1.3, is used to describe all
non-primary interactions, including: additional pp collisions coming from the same
bunch-crossing as the collision of interest (in-time pile-up); pp collisions from bunches
before or after the collision of interest (out-of-time pile-up); random hits in the muon
spectrometer from free neutrons and photons in the cavern during a typical run of
the LHC (cavern background); muon sprays from protons scraping against the FCal
(beam halo events); and, protons colliding with residual gas inside the beam-pipe
(beam gas events).
Section 4.1.2 gives a brief overview of how general-purpose generators treat the
different phases of SM event generation, while Section 4.1.3 looks at the generation
of SUSY samples. Finally, Section 4.1.4 details the different generators used for the
samples in this thesis.
4.1.1 Parton Distribution Functions
In high energy collisions, a protons substructure is probed via Deep Inelastic
Scattering (DIS) when an exchange boson transfers a four momentum of modulus q
between two interacting partons. PDFs, denoted fi(xi,Q
), describe the probability
of finding a constituent parton i, carrying a fraction of the protons total longitudinal
momentum x. Additionally, PDFs depend on the transfer momentum, or energy
scale, Q2, which is equal and opposite to that of the exchanged boson (q2).
As constituent partons are dominated by low energy, soft QCD effects, perturbative
theory cannot be applied to determine the PDFs shape. Instead, PDF shapes are
obtained by fitting observables to hard scattering data from the HERA, Tevatron-
collisions and fixed target experiments. Dokshitzer-Gribov-Lipatov-Altarelli-Parisi
(DGLAP) differential equations [6567] are then used to compute the evolution of
the PDF in Q2, allowing the measured PDF to be transferred to experiments, such
as the LHC, with much higher Q2 regions. Currently, several theoretical groups work
on determining PDFs, such as CTEQ [68] and NNPDF [69], both contribute to the
4.1 Event Generation 50 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
datasets presented in this thesis.
The total cross-section for a given process can then be defined as a combination of
all allowed parton combinations, such that:
xixjs
|Mij|
fi(xi,Q
)fj(xj,Q
)dxidxjdn, (4.1)
where i and j are the indices of the interacting partons with momentum fractions
xi and xj, s is the centre-of-mass energy, Mij is the matrix element (discussed in
Section 4.1.2.1) for the given process, and n is a point in phase-space of the process.
4.1.2 Phased Simulation of pp Collisions
The generation of events can be described as an energy scale evolution and is split
into a multi-phase process. The phases coincide with the transition from very high
energies, where perturbation theory can be used as a good approximation, down to
lower energies, which rely on phenomenological modelling, as depicted in Figure 4.2.
Fig. 4.2: A depiction of MC event generation, showing the colliding protons (purple), hard
scattering processes (dark blue), parton showering (red), hadronisation (light green), hadronic
or leptonic decays (dark green) and beam remnants (light blue).
4.1 Event Generation 51 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.1.2.1 Matrix Element
At high energy scales where Q2 > O(1GeV), the QCD running coupling reduces
to the order of 0.1 and can be described, as with all other interactions, from
first principles using matrix elements involving quantum field perturbation theory.
Equation 4.1 provides the input to the matrix element. All hard processes are
considered, including hard emissions where a quark radiates a gluon (q  gq), and
when a gluon decays into two gluons (g  gg) or a quark-antiquark pair (g  qq).
All multi-purpose event generators provide an extensive list of leading-order (LO)
matrix elements in the framework of the SM and some BSM extensions. For higher-
order final states, dedicated generators are employed. However due to their complexity,
calculations are usually only carried out to next-to-leading order (NLO), and can
be normalised to next-to-next-to-leading order (NNLO) if required. Next-to-leading
logarithms (NLL) and next-to-next-to-leading logarithms (NNLL) can be used to
increase accuracy [70]. For illustration, the Feynman diagrams in Figure 4.3 give an
example of two production channels of a top quark pair from two interacting quarks
via LO and NLO processes.
q t
Fig. 4.3: Feynman diagrams showing the production of a top quark pair from two interacting
quarks via (a) a LO channel, and (b) a NLO channel with a loop correction.
4.1.2.2 Parton Showers
As the energy scale softens, QCD processes become non-perturbative and can no
longer be approximated by matrix elements. At this stage, phenomenological models
are employed to simulate processes using algorithms based on step-wise Markov
chains [71]. These algorithms probabilistically decide whether a gluon is radiated,
or a quark-antiquark pair is produced, in what is termed parton showering. At
intermediate Q2, where emissions could be calculated via both perturbative and non-
perturbative methods, Catani-Krauss-Kuhn-Webber (CKKW) [72] and Michelangelo
L. Mangano (MLM) [73] algorithms are used to identify any double-counting, and
assign emissions to either the matrix element, or parton shower.
4.1 Event Generation 52 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.1.2.3 Hadronisation
At very low energy scales, QCD colour confinement comes into effect, causing all
evolved soft partons to hadronise (with the exception of the t-quark which decays
too fast). As with parton showers, hadronisation is non-perturbative, requiring
separate, independent phenomenological modelling. The two most common are the
cluster model [74] and the Lund string model [75]. These models contain many more
parameters than the parton showers, and thus are tuned using experimental data.
This phase of the generation also considers the decay of any unstable hadrons using
phenomenological models based on information from the Particle Data Groups (PDG)
Review of Particle Physics [3]. However, as this information is often incomplete
(e.g. in the case of B-mesons), additional non-trivial parameterisation decisions are
required to simulate decay chains.
The final state of the hadronisation phase consists of objects that are stable on
collider timescales and can be propagated through a detector simulation.
4.1.2.4 Underlying Events and Pile-up
As already mentioned, underlying events collectively describe processes that were
not directly involved in the hard scattering, while pile-up describes all non-primary
interactions. The hadronisation of these processes are simulated using similar
phenomenological models. As with the case of evolved, hard scatter, primary
interactions, both models include a multitude of parameterisations, and thus are also
tuned using experimental data [48, 76].
The modelling of underlying events is performed in the event generators and included
within the MC samples. Only in-time and out-of-time pile-up is modelled in the
event generators and later overlaid, while cavern background is reconstructed during
the detector simulation, described in Section 4.2.
4.1.3 SUSY Generation
SUSY contains a large number of heavy new particles which give way to a multitude
of different decay channels. The approach used to simulate the samples in this
thesis starts by simulating the production of these new particles, usually only to a
leading-order 2  2 scattering process. This is followed by the simulated decay using
theoretical predictions based on the R-parity conserving simplified models described
in Section 2.3.5.
4.2 Detector Simulation 53 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.1.4 Monte Carlo Generators
ATLAS simulated events are generated by a number of well known MC generators.
The following gives a brief description of the relevant generators used to simulate
all the processes within this thesis. An overview of which generators were used for
specific background and signal processes be found in Section 5.1.
Pythia [77], Herwig [78] and Sherpa [64, 79] are all general-purpose generators
that evolve a hard scattering process through the full energy scale. Pythia and
Herwig use matrix element calculations at LO, while Sherpa calculates at both
LO and NLO. Both Herwig and Sherpa use the cluster model for hadronisation,
while Pythia uses the Lund string model, both of which were introduced in Sec-
tion 4.1.2.3. All of the generators include parton showers, underlying events and
can produce complex multi-particle final states. In addition, Pythia is responsible
for generating in-time and out-of-time pile-up events that are later overlaid during
detector simulation (see Section 4.2).
The MadGraph [80] and Powheg [81] generators are exclusively for simulating the
hard scatter process using perturbative matrix element calculations, MadGraph
at both LO and NLO (with version aMC@NLO [82]), and Powheg at NLO. Both
generators require interfacing with either Pythia or Herwig for the ensuing soft
scattering phenomenological modelling.
The EvtGen package [83] interfaces with Pythia or Herwig and is designed to
simulate the more complex b-meson decays in the final state. As a result of this
increased accuracy, all target processes in this thesis containing b-tagged jets (see
Section 4.3.4) in the final state, employ EvtGen.
The output-format for event generators is a HepMC file [84], which is passed on for
detector simulation.
4.2 Detector Simulation
Geant4 [85] is a toolkit, integrated within the ATLAS Athena framework, offering
a two stage detector simulation. The first stage simulates the propagation of
MC generated particles through a detector, described in Section 4.2.1, while the
second stage simulates the detectors electrical response, or digitisation, described in
Section 4.2.2. Geant4 also offers a fast simulation method, described in Section 4.2.3.
A recap of the schematic focusing on the detector simulation flow is presented in
Figure 4.4.
4.2 Detector Simulation 54 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
Fig. 4.4: A schematic of MC simulated data through detector simulation. Each stage is
described in the following section.
4.2.1 Propagation
As MC generated particles propagate through a detector simulation, they are sub-
jected to equivalent conditions as real particles within ATLAS. The simulated particles
can undergo, for example, scattering, and intermediate particle decays, while the
detector will react accordingly by simulating ionisation and radiation, etc. These
detector interactions are recorded by Geant4 as hits, in the form of track positions
and energy depositions in the sub-detectors. Generated HIT files containing all
simulated data, are passed on to be digitised.
4.2.2 Digitisation
Digitisation subjects hits to a simulation of the detectors electrical response, pro-
ducing digitised values for associated times, currents, voltages, etc. At this stage,
to avoid unnecessary CPU usage caused by re-simulating independent events, the
pre-generated pile-up interaction, and a model of the detector noise is overlaid.
Cavern background, which includes low energy neutron physics too slow for standard
MC simulation, is at this point simulated using high-precision phenomenological
models. Data is saved into Raw Data Object (RDO) files, the default format used
by the ATLAS TDAQ system, so that MC samples and real data can be processed
by the same trigger and reconstruction software.
Generated in parallel to RDOs, are Simulated Data Object (SDO) files. These
contain the true identity of particles at each vertex and all corresponding track
and decay information. Truth objects can later be matched to reconstructed events
to determine the efficiencies of algorithms to accurately reconstruct objects.
4.3 Object Reconstruction 55 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.2.3 Fast Simulation
ATLAS uses the fast simulation software AltFastII [86] to reduce the full simulation
time by one order of magnitude. The simulation of particle interactions with the
detector has a CPU requirement of several minutes for every event, of which more
than 90% is inside the calorimeters. To reduce this, AltFastII uses the FastCaloSim
package [87] to provide a parametrised simulation of a particles energy response
and distribution in the ATLAS calorimeter, reducing CPU time to a few seconds for
every event. This is particularly useful when large numbers of events are required,
such as signal requests.
4.3 Object Reconstruction
Physics objects (electrons, muons, taus, jets and EmissT ) are reconstructed from the
digitised RDO files using reconstruction algorithms in exactly the same way for real
data and MC simulated events. Initially, reconstruction is loose enough that the
resulting objects can be used for many analyses. Additional selection criteria, or
object definitions, based on performance study guidelines provided by ATLAS, can
then be introduced by individual analysis groups to increase object purity for specific
analysis needs. The object definitions used throughout this thesis are presented
in the Analysis Strategy, Chapter 5. The output format, as previously shown in
Figure 4.1 is an Analysis Object Data (AOD) file, ready for physics analysis.
In the following, Sections 4.3.1 to 4.3.6 present the reconstruction methods for each
physics object relevant to this thesis. Figure 4.5 shows a pictorial representation of
each of these physics object signatures in the different ATLAS sub-detectors. Details
of the specific object definitions used in this thesis, are presented in Section 5.2.3.
4.3.1 Tracks and Primary Vertices
In this thesis, tracks are the reconstructed charged-particle trajectories within the
ID, while vertices are the points at which two particles interact (e.g. pile-up) or
where a single particle decays. A primary vertex is the vertex of the hardest event
interaction. Tracks and vertices are reconstructed and combined first, before being
matched to physics objects.
Three different algorithms are employed to reconstruct tracks [89]. Primary particles,
defined as those from the initial pp interaction, or from short-lived particles that
decay prior to the ID, use an inside-out approach. This involves identifying three
consistent hits with pT > 1GeV within the silicon pixel detector and/or SCT, and
4.3 Object Reconstruction 56 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
Fig. 4.5: A pictorial representation of each physics objects signatures in the different ATLAS
sub-detectors [88].
using a combinatorial Kalman filter [90] to propagate towards, and extend into,
the TRT, if compatible hits are present. A back-tracking algorithm, targeting late
decays of neutral particles and photon conversions to e+e pairs, operates in reverse,
starting from the TRT and extrapolating back towards the pixel detector. Finally,
TRT-only tracks are formed entirely from hits in the TRT.
The tracks, following a helicoid trajectory within the magnetic field, can be parame-
terised using a set of five track parameters relative to an origin. They include:
 Space co-ordinates:  and  (see Section 3.2.1).
 Impact parameters: d0 [mm], z0 [mm], where d0 is the distance of closest
approach of the track to the origin, and z0 is the component of d0 on the
z-plane.
 Transverse momentum: pT [GeV], which equals 0.3  BR, where B is the
magnitude of the magnetic field in Tesla, and R is the bending radius in
metres.
Vertices can be reconstructed by extrapolating at least two tracks back to a common
interaction point. In order to suppress background events, such as particle decays
not from a pp collision, primary vertices can be required to have more emanating
tracks. Pile-up interactions can also lead to multiple vertices meeting the chosen
criteria, in which case, the primary vertex is distinguished as having the largest
4.3 Object Reconstruction 57 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
from all associated tracks. Tracks emanating from a measurably displaced secondary
vertex, infers that a decay of a short-lived particle has taken place. These secondary
vertices are important for physics object identification purposes.
4.3.2 Electrons
Electron reconstruction [9193] begins by identifying energy deposits, or seed-clusters,
within the central ECal region (|| < 2.47) using a sliding-window algorithm [94].
This involves defining a fixed longitudinal ECal tower as a window corresponding
to the granularity of the middle layer of the ECal (35 cells of size 0.0250.025 in
  ), and moving this tower throughout the entire ECal, one step at a time. A
seed-cluster is identified when the window contains a local energy maxima above
2.5GeV. After an energy comparison of nearby seeds, any duplicates will be removed.
Seed clusters are then geometrically matched to reconstructed tracks (see Sec-
tion 4.3.1) by extrapolation from the middle ECal layer to the last track measure-
ment in the silicon pixel detector. To form an electron candidate, tracks must have
|| < 0.05 from the reconstructed seed cluster, and meet  requirements to
account for bremsstrahlung losses. If more than one track meets these criteria, the
track with the smallest R is chosen. Clusters with no associated tracks, or with
TRT-only tracks, can be identified or reconstructed as photon candidates.
The full electron cluster is then recomputed using larger 37 (55) towers in the
barrel region (end-caps) around the original seed cluster centre. The total energy of
the cluster is determined using four contributions: the estimated energy deposit in
the material in front of the ECal; the measured energy deposit in the cluster; the
estimated energy deposit inside the ECal, but outside the cluster (lateral leakage);
and, the estimated energy deposit beyond the ECal (longitudinal leakage).
Electron Identification
Electron candidates can be separated into two categories: real electrons; or falsely re-
constructed fake electrons, such as muons, photons (both converted and unconverted),
pion decays, and other hadrons. The reliability of reconstructing real electrons can
be increased by applying additional cut-based selection criteria, designed to provide
good separation between isolated or non-isolated real and fake electrons.
Three sets of identification selection criteria have been defined, Loose++, Medium++,
and Tight++, each with increasing background rejection power. Loose++ focuses on
shower shape variables of the middle ECalo layer and hadronic leakage. Medium++
adds to these with track quality, and track-cluster matching requirements. Finally,
4.3 Object Reconstruction 58 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
(a) 2015 [95]
ATLAS Preliminary
 = 13 TeV, 33.9 fbs
<2.47-2.47<
Data: full, MC: open
Loose 
Medium 
Tight 
 [GeV]
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
(b) 2016 [96]
Fig. 4.6: Electron reconstruction and identification efficiencies as a function of ET. Efficiencies
have been measured in 3.2 fb1 from 2015 (left) and 33.9 fb1 from 2016 (right) of data
recorded by the ATLAS experiment in 2016 at a centre-of-mass energy of
s = 13TeV and
compared to MC simulation. The reduction in efficiency seen in data is due to the MC
simulations not properly representing the TRT conditions and mis-modelling of calorimeter
shower shapes in the detector simulation.
Tight++ uses particle identification using the TRT, and discriminates against photon
conversions via a IBL hit requirement. In the forward (and backward) regions (defined
as 2.5 < || < 4.9), where there are no tracking detectors, electron identification
relies on cluster shapes, which give sufficient discrimination against hadrons, and
have their own forward loose and forward tight selections. Figure 4.6 displays the
electron reconstruction and identification efficiency using 2015 and 2016 data.
4.3.3 Muons
Muon reconstruction [9799] begins by identifying tracks in the ID and MS indepen-
dently. In the MS, muon track candidates are built by seeding segments in the middle
layers where more trigger hits are available, and then combining with matching hits
in segments from the inner and outer layers. All tubes crossed by a segment must
contain a hit for the segment to be considered, and at least two segments are required
to build a track (three in the transition region between the barrel and end-cap).
Track quality is increased by performing a global 2 fit of hits. Hits contributing
significantly to the 2 are removed and the fit is performed again.
Four different algorithms can then be employed to reconstruct the full muon in-
formation. A combined approach performs a global fit using hits from both the
ID and MS within the tracking range || < 2.5. An outside-in pattern recognition
4.3 Object Reconstruction 59 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
algorithm is preferred, starting from the MS and extrapolating back to the ID to
match tracks that are also compatible in pT. A stand-alone approach can be
used for the 2.5 < || < 2.7 range where ID tracks are not present. MS-only tracks
are loosely extrapolated back to an interaction point on the beam-line, taking into
account the estimated energy loss of the muon in the calorimeters. Segment-tagged
muon reconstruction involves matching an ID track with a singular MS segment track,
which can occur when the muons have low pT, or in regions where the MS acceptance
is reduced. Finally, to recover acceptance for muons in the || < 1.0 region, where the
MS is only partially instrumented due to a crack, a calorimeter-tagged approach
can be implemented. This involves matching an ID track to an energy deposit in the
calorimeter that is compatible with a minimum-ionising particle.
Muon Identification
Muon candidates can also be non-prompt, originating from charged pion and kaon
decays instead of from the primary vertex. As with electrons, a set of three iden-
tification criteria, loose, medium and tight are defined with increasing background
rejection power. In the case of muons, medium muons define the default selection,
minimising systematic uncertainties associated with reconstruction and calibration.
The next selection are loose muons, with the aim of maximising reconstruction
efficiency. Finally, tight muons are selected to maximise the purity of muons. A
detailed description of each set of criteria is presented in Ref. [97]. Figure 4.7 displays
the muon reconstruction efficiency using 2015 and 2016 data.
(a) 2015 [97]
2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
 PreliminaryATLAS
 = 13 TeV, 33.3 fbs
 muonsTight
 muonsMedium
 muonsLoose
Data MC
No TRT selection applied
(b) 2016 [100]
Fig. 4.7: Muon reconstruction efficiencies for loose/medium/tight identification algorithms
measured in Z   as a function of  for muons with pT > 10GeV. Efficiencies have been
measured in 3.2 fb1 from 2015 (left) and 33.3 fb1 from 2016 (right) of data recorded by the
ATLAS experiment in 2016 at a centre-of-mass energy of
s =13TeV and compared to MC
simulation. The bottom panel shows the ratio between expected and observed efficiencies.
4.3 Object Reconstruction 60 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.3.4 Hadronic Jets
Jets, formed during the hadronisation stage (Section 4.1.2.3), can traverse the
detector and leave tracks in the ID and energy deposits in both the ECal and HCal.
Jet reconstruction [94, 101] begins by using a topological clustering approach to
form topo-clusters. Cells that are identified as having energy exceeding pile-up and
electronic noise by 4, are seeded, and neighbouring cells that have energy above 2
are iteratively added to the topo-cluster. Unlike the sliding-window approach, which
was used for the reconstruction of electrons and was limited in size, topo-clusters can
grow accordingly, however, to avoid overlapping showers, any cell with energy above
500MeV is used as a trial seed for a new topo-cluster and the cluster is split. The
mass of all resulting topo-clusters is taken to be zero, and the energy is a summed
total of all constituent cells. Topo-clusters are then calibrated using a local cluster
weighting (LCW) based on whether they originated from either electromagnetic or
hadronic showers.
The final stage of jet reconstruction is performed by the standard ATLAS anti-kt
algorithm [102]. LCW calibrated topo-clusters are inputted, and the two with a
minimum distance parameter are iteratively combined. The distance parameter is
defined as:
dij =
, (4.2)
where i and j are the topo-cluster indices, kt is the transverse momentum of each
topo-cluster, Rij is the angular distance between the two clusters (see Section 3.2.1),
and R is a free parameter determining the angular width of the, commonly cone-
shaped, reconstructed jets. In this thesis, jets are reconstructed with R = 0.4. The
iterative combination continues until all topo-cluster pairs satisfy Rij > R.
Jet Identification
Jets originating from the initial pp collision must be identified from fake backgrounds,
such as pile-up. Discriminatory selection criteria designed to suppress pile-up, can
be made on energy and momentum fractions in the calorimeters and ID, respectively.
Additional methods can be used to specifically associate jets with the primary vertex.
A newly developed multivariate discriminant, the Jet Vertex Tagger (JVT) [103]
has been built using two older jet variables that provide information on how much
jet energy is associated with the primary vertex, making it a good discriminator.
Tagging heavy flavour jets, such as those originating from b- and c-hadrons, can also
4.3 Object Reconstruction 61 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
be used to identify jets from the initial primary interaction.
b-tagged Jets
Fig. 4.8: Representation of a b-jet, show-
ing a secondary decay vertex of a b-hadron
within the jet cone, resulting in increased
impact parameters. Two jets originating
from light hadrons are also displayed [104].
Due to the longer lifetime of b-quarks
(1.5 ps), b-hadrons are able to travel a mea-
surable distance from the primary vertex be-
fore decaying in cascades to lighter hadrons
or leptons. The presence of a secondary ver-
tex within the jet cone is significant in iden-
tifying b-tagged jets, or b-jets, where the
impact parameters d0 and R, can be used
as discriminants (these differ from secondary
vertices caused by c-hadron decays due to the
shorter lifetime of c-quarks). If a secondary
jet vertex is identified, reconstructed tracks
within the jet cone can be examined for com-
patibility with b-hadron decays. Figure 4.8
shows a representation of a b-jet.
The identification of b-jets used in this thesis is based on three distinct tagging
algorithms, which use the secondary vertices and track reconstructions as input.
These include an impact parameter-based algorithm (IP2D and IP3D), a secondary
vertex reconstruction algorithm (SV), and a decay chain multi-vertex reconstruction
(JetFitter). The outputs of these three algorithms are combined into a multivariate
discriminant (MV2), with the MV2c20 variant being used within this thesis. A
detailed description of each set of criteria is presented in Refs. [105, 106].
4.3.5 Taus
Tau reconstruction [107, 108] is a more challenging task due to the leptons heavy
mass, shown previously in Table 2.3, and shorter lifetime (0.29 ps), resulting in taus
decaying in the beam-pipe before reaching the detector. Decays are either leptonic
with a 35.2% probability, or hadronic 64.7% of the time. In ATLAS, leptonic tau
decays are indistinguishable from light leptons originating promptly from the event,
while the presence of hadronic taus must be inferred through the reconstruction of
their decay products. As the searches in this thesis do not consider hardonic taus,
their reconstruction is not discussed.
4.3 Object Reconstruction 62 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.3.6 Missing Transverse Energy
Missing transverse energy EmissT , is defined as the imbalance of momentum in the x-y
plane after calibration and resolution effects have been considered, where conservation
is expected (see Section 3.2.1). The detection of EmissT infers the presence of weakly-
interacting particles, such as the SM neutrino or stable supersymmetric particles.
T reconstruction [109111] involves summing the energy deposits in the calorime-
ters and reconstructed muons from the MS, calculated in the x (and y) axis as:
x(y) = E
miss, calo
miss, 
. (4.3)
The calorimeter term is defined as:
miss, calo
miss, e
miss, 
miss, 
miss, jets
miss, soft jets
miss, (calo)
miss, CellOut
(4.4)
where:
 Emiss, e
miss, 
and Emiss, 
terms are calculated energy deposits in the calorime-
ter cells associated with the electrons, photons and hadronic taus, respectively;
 Emiss, jets
and Emiss, soft jets
terms are calculated energy deposits from jets with
pT >20GeV and 7GeV< pT <20GeV, respectively;
 Emiss, (calo)
is calculated from the energy lost by muons in the calorimeters;
 Emiss, CellOut
is all energy clusters not associated with reconstructed objects
listed above.
The muon term is calculated as the sum of muon track momenta (within  < 2.7),
and is defined as:
miss,
muons
. (4.5)
Finally, the values of EmissT and its azimuthal co-ordinate miss can be defined as
, (4.6)
miss = arctan(E
x ) (4.7)
4.3 Object Reconstruction 63 4 Simulation and Reconstruction
4.3.7 Overlap Removal
One of the final stages of object reconstruction involves an overlap removal proce-
dure [112] designed to discard objects that may have been reconstructed by several
algorithms due to close spatial proximities in the detector. Like object definitions,
the overlap removal procedure is defined independently by physics working groups to
best suit specific analyses requirements. It is implemented at the same time as object
definitions. Sections 5.2.3 details the criteria used for objects within this thesis.
5. Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
5.1 Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.1.1 Recorded Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.1.2 Monte Carlo Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2 Event Pre-selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.2.1 Trigger Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.2.2 Event Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.2.3 Object Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.3.1 Discriminant Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
5.4 Background Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5.4.1 Background Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
5.4.2 Background Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
5.5.1 Experimental Systematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
5.5.2 Theory Systematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
5.6 Statistical Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
5.6.1 Treatment of Systematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
5.6.2 Background-only Fits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
5.6.3 Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
5.6.4 Profile Likelihood Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
5.6.5 Exclusion Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
5.6.6 Discovery Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
The analyses presented in this thesis focus on the search for electroweak pair produc-
tion of the SUSY particles 
1 and 
2, as detailed in Section 2.3.4, with exactly three
electrons or muons, two 
1 particles and a neutrino in the final state. The motivation
for this search is discussed in Section 2.3.6.2. Three intermediate decay channels are
considered: via sleptons (Figure 2.14); SM W and Z bosons (Figure 2.15); and, SM
W and Higgs bosons (Figure 2.16). These channels will be referred to as , W/Z
and W/h, respectively.
This chapter details the general search strategy adopted for all three channels. Sec-
tions 5.1 and 5.2 introduce the datasets used and common pre-selection requirements
of events, respectively. Section 5.3 explains the different approaches used to define
kinematic regions high in SUSY signals and low in SM background processes, termed
signal regions (SRs). Section 5.4 details the methods used to estimate and validate
5.1 Datasets 65 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
background processes, while Section 5.5 discusses associated uncertainties. Finally,
Section 5.6 gives an overview of the statistical procedures used to interpret the
results.
5.1 Datasets
The data recorded by the ATLAS detector, along with the Monte Carlo samples
used for the SM backgrounds that can replicate the three-lepton signature final state,
as well as the samples used for the SUSY signals, are presented. A discussion on the
corrections applied to Monte Carlo samples is also given.
5.1.1 Recorded Data
The data used was recorded during 2015 and 2016 with a centre-of-mass energy
s = 13TeV. Data Quality flags are issued by each sub-detector for events
recorded in luminosity blocks. Luminosity blocks are rejected if they have not
been recorded during nominal detector conditions (i.e. stable beams, voltages,
temperature, humidity), or are from inactive regions of the detector. Conversely,
events that pass the flags join a Good Runs List (GRL), which is provided to analysts
by the ATLAS Data Preparation Group [113]. This thesis presents main results for
the - and W/Z-mediated searches using the full integrated luminosity of 3.2 fb1 of
data on the GRL from 2015, as well as the full 32.9 fb1 from 2016, giving a total
integrated luminosity of 36.1 fb1. An early Run-II -mediated search also using the
full integrated luminosity from 2015, and only 10.1 fb1 from 2016, giving a subset
total of 13.3 fb1, is also presented.
5.1.2 Monte Carlo Samples
5.1.2.1 SM Backgrounds
Background processes with exactly three reconstructed leptons in the final state can
be categorised as either irreducible or reducible. Irreducible backgrounds are those
that have three real leptons from the primary vertex, termed prompt. Reducible
backgrounds are those that have at least one fake lepton, typically a misidentified
jet of hadronising quarks. The jets can themselves be misidentified as leptons,
or the hadrons within the jet cone can decay to leptons that are detected, but
not from the primary vertex, termed non-prompt. All irreducible backgrounds are
modelled using event generated simulations, previously described in Chapter 4. All
reducible background processes, use simulations to extract the efficiencies of real
5.1 Datasets 66 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Category Background
Irreducible WZ, ZZ, Top+Boson, Higgs, Triboson
Reducible Boson+Jets, Boson+, Top Pair, Single Top
Tab. 5.1: Dominant backgrounds that can produce exactly three reconstructed leptons in the
final state, categorised as either irreducible or reducible. Backgrounds are listed in ascending
order of expected contributions.
and fake leptons which can be applied to modelling using data-driven techniques,
described later in this Chapter, in Section 5.4.1. Table 5.1 displays the non-negligible
backgrounds that can produce exactly three reconstructed leptons in the final state.
A description of each process follows, with all branching ratios, B, taken from the
Particle Data Groups (PDG) Review of Particle Physics [3].
Dibosons: the most dominant background is the irreducible WZ  ``` process,
followed by the ZZ  ```` (where the fourth lepton is either missed or misidentified).
The W boson decays to an electron or muon 21.3% of the time, while the Z boson
has a 6.7% branching ratio to electrons or muons. Feynman diagrams for both these
processes are presented in Figure 5.1.
Fig. 5.1: Feynman diagrams for the two most dominant SM background processes: W Z (left)
and ZZ (right).
Top + Boson: t-quarks originate predominantly in tt pairs produced in association
with gauge bosons, such as the irreducible ttZ, ttW and ttWW processes. When
a Z  `` process is involved, as displayed in Figure 5.2 (left), only one t-quark
is required to decay leptonically. In the absence of a Z boson, both t-quarks are
required to produce leptons in order to give three real leptons in the final state.
A single t-quark in association with a Z boson can also replicate the three-lepton
signature.
Higgs: the SM Higgs boson can have three real leptons in the final state when
produced as ttH, ZH or WH. Along with a leptonic decay of at least one of the
associated t-quarks or gauge bosons, the Higgs is required to decay di-leptonically,
5.1 Datasets 67 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Fig. 5.2: Feynman diagrams for the two t-quark pairs in association with bosons: ttZ (left)
and ttH (right).
either directly or via intermediate decay channels: H  WW (B = 21.4%); H  
(B = 6.27%); H  ZZ (B = 2.62%); H  Z (B = 0.15%); and H  
(B = 0.02%). A diagram of the ttH process is presented in Figure 5.2.
Tribosons: the remaining processes that contribute to the irreducible background
are the multiple combinations of three gauge bosons, where up to six charged leptons
can be in the final state (where extra leptons are missed or misidentified). Two
examples are shown in Figure 5.3.
Fig. 5.3: Feynman diagrams for two examples of triboson processes producing at least three
real leptons: W W W (left) and ZW W (right).
Boson + Jets: the dominant reducible background is Z+jets, displayed in Figure 5.4
(left), whereby the Z boson decays leptonically and a jet is misidentified as a lepton.
The W+jets scenario can also reconstruct three leptons if two jets are misidentified,
however this contribution is negligible.
Boson + : photon conversions decaying to non-prompt electron pairs, which,
when in association with a Z boson, can give a significant contribution to reducible
backgrounds, shown in Figure 5.4 (right).
Top Pair: t-quark pairs that are not produced in association with bosons, contribute
5.1 Datasets 68 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
q2 q2
Fig. 5.4: Feynman diagrams for two dominant reducible backgrounds: Z+jets (left) and Z + 
(right).
significantly to the reducible backgrounds. Decays can be: fully hadronic, tt 
Wb Wb qqb qqb, with a branching ratio of 45.7%; via lepton+jets, tt Wb Wb
`b qqb, which occurs 43.8% of the time; or di-leptonically, tt Wb Wb `b `b,
which accounts for a 10.5% branching ratio. In all instances jets are required to be
misidentified as leptons.
Single Top: the last reducible background to be considered is the production of a
single t-quark, either via: the exchange of a time-like W boson (s-channel), qq  tb;
an exchange of a space-like W boson (t-channel), qb  tq; or in association with
a W boson emission (tW -channel), gb tW . Feynman diagrams are presented in
Figure 5.5. In all cases, jets must be misidentified as leptons.
Table 5.2 gives a breakdown of the generators (described in Section 4.1.4) used to
simulate non-negligible background processes.
Fig. 5.5: Feynman diagrams showing the different channels of single t-quark production:
t-channel (top left), s-channel (top right) and tW -channel (bottom).
5.1 Datasets 69 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Process Generators PDF set Cross-section
WZ( lllv) Sherpa 2.2 NNPDF3.0 NLO*
ZZ( llll)
WWW , WWZ
WZZ, ZZZ
V +Jets NNLO*
WZ( lllvjj) Sherpa 2.1 CT10 LO
ZZ( ggllll)
ttV MadGraph5_aMC@NLO NNPDF2.3 NLO*
tZ + Pythia LO
ttH MadGraph5_aMC@NLO CTEQ6 (CT10ME) NLO
+ Herwig++
V H Pythia 8 NNPDF2.3 NLO
tt Powheg + Pythia 8 CT10 NNLO+NNLL*
Single Top NLO+NLL
Pile-up Pythia MSTW2008
Tab. 5.2: Different generators and PDF sets used to simulate the dominant background
processes with three reconstructed leptons in the final state, where V can be with a W or Z
boson. All b- and c-hadron events are modelled using the EvtGen package. The order of the
calculations are also given. Starred terms indicate that the cross-sections were first calculated
to LO and have been normalised to the final order displayed [114, 115].
5.1.2.2 SUSY Signals
In this thesis, simplified SUSY models (explained in Section 2.3.5) are considered,
where mass ranges of the 
1 , 
2 and 
1 sparticles that have not previously been
accessible or excluded (see Section 2.3.6.1) are targeted. The difference in mass
between the 
1 , 
2 (where m
) and the 
1, is termed the mass-splitting
m. Intermediate mass-splittings range from 50-200GeV, while high mass-splittings
are above 300GeV. Table 5.3 details the various combinations that have been used
Decay Channel m
1 ,
[GeV] m
[GeV] m [GeV]
 150-1200 0-1000 50-1200
W/Z 150-700 0-400 50-700
W/h 150-575 0-110 130-550
Tab. 5.3: Masses of signal samples considered in each of the three analyses. Intermediate
mass-splittings range from 50-200GeV, while high mass-splittings are above 300GeV.
5.2 Event Pre-selection 70 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Group Channel Generator PDF set Cross-section
2 , W/Z, W/h MadGraph +Pythia NNPDF2.3 NLO+NLL
Tab. 5.4: Generators used to simulate the three intermediate decay channels presented in this
thesis. The order of the cross-section calculations are also given [70].
for the , W/Z and W/h channels. The generators and PDF sets employed for SUSY
signals are presented in Table 5.4. To increase data statistics, events are required to
have at least two light letpons, resulting in hadronic events from the W boson in the
latter W/Z and W/h channels being suppressed.
5.1.2.3 MC Event Weight Corrections
Scale factors (SFs) are applied to MC samples to account for discrepancies that can
arise between simulated events and real data. Pile-up distributions are matched to
those observed in data. Lepton reconstruction and flavour-tagging efficiencies are
provided by ATLAS performance groups [116, 117]. The uncertainties that arise
from applying these SFs are described in Section 5.5.
5.2 Event Pre-selection
This section gives a description of the analysis preselection requirements, such as
analysis-based object definitions, the trigger strategy and event cleaning.
5.2.1 Trigger Strategy
As discussed in Section 3.2.6, all events used for physics analyses must pass trigger
chains. Chains are chosen by individual analysis groups in accordance to analysis
specific requirements. The triggers used for all analyses are listed in Table 5.5, and
consist of a variety of single and di-lepton triggers, which ensures that all events have
leptons above a given pT threshold. Additional offline pT thresholds are chosen to
provide assurance that the particle pT is above the trigger turn-on-curve (i.e. within
the plateau of efficiency for the trigger it has fired). Multiple trigger chains are
selected to target the various possible lepton flavour combinations; all events are
required to pass at least one of these chains.
The trigger chains, presented in Table 5.5, are predominantly defined by the HLT
triggers, which can apply loose, medium and tight selection criteria, similar to
the identification requirements used for object reconstruction in Section 4.3. The
inclusion of nod indicates that no transverse impact parameter cuts are required.
5.2 Event Pre-selection 71 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Tab. 5.5: A list of trig-
ger chains. The 2015
chains were used for
both the 13.3 fb1 and
36.1 fb
1 searches, while
the 2016 chains for
13.3 fb
1 are given in
brackets. The offline
pT thresholds for each
analysis are presented in
Section 5.3.1.1 (Analysis
Preselection).
Year Flavour Trigger Chain
ee HLT_2e12_lhloose_L12EM10VH
 HLT_mu18_mu8noL1
e HLT_e17_lhloose_mu14
HLT_2e17_lhloose_nod0
(HLT_2e15_lhloose_nod0)
HLT_mu22_mu8noL1
(HLT_mu20_mu8noL1)
e HLT_e17_lhloose_nod0_mu14
The di-electron triggers also have L1 requirements whereby VH specifies that
electrons are vetoed if they have left significant deposits within the HCal.
5.2.2 Event Cleaning
Having passed the trigger chains, events are subjected to further event quality
requirements involving the removal of events that could still be considered invalid
for physics analysis. Data is already required to pass the GRL, as mentioned
in Section 5.1, however additional requirements are imposed to both data and
simulated events. Reasons for removal could be: low quality muon events from
cavern background; fake muons caused by energetic jets punching through into the
MS; or, badly measured ID tracks wrongly matched to the MS. More explicitly,
any events with a muon that does not satisfy the impact parameters zPV0 < 1mm,
0 < 0.2mm and q/p/|q/p| < 0.2 are removed (where PV refers to the primary
vertex). Real and fake jets can also be reconstructed from non-collision background
processes leaving energy deposits in the calorimeters. These can be removed by
making requirements on known jet properties.
5.2.3 Object Definitions
The final stage of preselection is the assignment of analysis-based object definitions.
This section is dedicated to defining the main physics objects, as outlined in Sec-
tions 4.3.2 to 4.3.6. They are included as a separate section because they are unique
to the analyses presented in this thesis. Loose criteria, provided by ATLAS, are first
implemented to define baseline objects, which undergo the overlap removal procedure
introduced in Section 4.3.7. These baseline objects can be used for data-driven
5.2 Event Pre-selection 72 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
background estimation and validation purposes (discussed in Section 5.4.1). Once
passed overlap removal, events are subjected to more stringent criteria to define
signal objects, a subset of baseline objects with higher purity and better isolation.
Signal object definitions are typically provided by ATLAS working groups so that
harmonised physics analyses can be performed.
Overlap Removal
The following overlap removal conditions are applied to all baseline events in the
order presented:
1. Electrons sharing an ID track with muons are discarded;
2. Electrons within R < 0.2 of a b-jet are discarded, as it is likely to be from a
semi-leptonic b-hadron decay;
3. Light jets (non-b-jets) within R < 0.2 of an electron candidate are discarded,
as they most likely originate from electron showers depositing energy in the
calorimeters;
4. Electrons within R < 0.4 of a jet candidate are discarded to suppress electrons
from the semi-leptonic decays of b- and c-hadrons;
5. Jets with fewer than three associated tracks are discarded to suppress non-
prompt events;
6. Jets are discarded if they are within R < 0.2 of a muon, or if the muon is
matched to a track associated with the jet, and the muon carries 70% of the
total traverse momenta of all the jet tracks;
7. Muons within R < 0.4 of a jet candidate are discarded to suppress muons
from the semi-leptonic decays of b- and c-hadrons.
Light Leptons
Baseline electrons and muons are required to have pT > 10GeV, with electrons within
|| < 2.47, and muons within || < 2.7. Both need to pass loose likelihood based
identification criteria. Signal electrons and muons add to the baseline selections by
requiring a total pT efficiency of 95% at 25GeV, and up to 99% at 60GeV, termed
GradientLoose Isolation [118], while also having impact parameters in the range of
|z0sin| <0.5mm and |d0/d0 | < 5 (3) for electrons (muons). Signal electrons also
tighten the identification criteria by requiring a medium likelihood, while signal
muons decrease the || range to < 2.4.
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation 73 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Hadronic Jets
Baseline jets use the anti-kt 4EMTopo algorithm, with a radius parameter R = 0.4,
and are required to have pT > 20GeV, with || < 4.5. Signal jets reduce the || range
to < 2.4 and also implement a |JVT| > 0.59 requirement for jets with pT < 60GeV
in order to suppress pile-up events. Signal b-jets use the MV2c10 tagger algorithm,
detailed in Section 4.3.4, with a 77% average efficiency.
Missing Transverse Energy
The missing transverse momentum vector ~p missT , with magnitude E
T , is the negative
vector sum of all identified physics objects (electrons, photons, muons and jets)
transverse momenta, and an additional soft term (see Section 4.3.6). All physics
objects are required to satisfy the baseline criteria defined above. In addition, jets
are also required to originate from the hard scatter using the JVT.
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation
All events that pass the preselection criteria are ready for physics analysis. Multiple
signal regions (SRs) can be defined, designed to be high in SUSY signal contributions
and low in background processes. Each SR is optimised to target different areas of
parameter-space, typically with either high (> 300GeV) or intermediate (50-200GeV)
mass splittings between the 
2 and 
1. A set of selections, or cuts, can be made
on kinematic variables to isolate the signal by only discriminating against and
suppressing background processes. Variables used within this thesis are described in
Section 5.3.1.
The amount of signal isolation within a SR can be numerically measured as a
significance value Z, which indicates the likelihood that an excess is from a real
signal, rather than background fluctuations. In its simplest form, significance can be
expressed as:
Nsig
Nbkg + (bkgNbkg + 1)
, (5.1)
where Nsig is the number of expected signal events, Nbkg is the number of expected
background events, and bkg is the relative systematic uncertainty on the background,
which is conservatively assumed to be 30% for optimisation. This thesis uses a data
analysis framework called ROOT [119], which can implement a variety of possible
significance calculations, as described in Ref. [120]. To optimise a SR, Z must be
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation 74 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
maximised to the extent that an excess in data should be observed if a SUSY signal
is present. To avoid statistical fluctuations dominating the background yield, at
least one background event is required in each SR. A discussion on the statistical
interpretation of the significance is presented in Section 5.6.
Two different approaches can be adopted to define SRs. The early Run-II  analysis,
which had lower luminosities, used an inclusive approach, which allowed events to
feature in more than one SR. Later analyses, also presented in this thesis, use an
exclusive approach, whereby several SRs are designed to be orthogonal to each other,
resulting in events being univocally separated into exclusive SRs. This exclusive
approach has the benefit of allowing the significances of the individual SRs to be
easily statistically combined for greater sensitivities.
The specific SR definitions for the  and W/Z analyses are presented in their
corresponding chapters.
5.3.1 Discriminant Variables
The following section details the common discriminant variables that can be used for
general three-lepton signature searches.
Flavour and Charge
Events can be described by the flavour and charge of the three final state leptons.
For both the  and W/Z channels, the lepton pair originating from the 
2 will be
of same-flavour and opposite-charge-sign, and are known as SFOS pairs, (e, e)
or (,) and can be generalised as ```. The third lepton, which can be any
flavour, is a product of the 
1 decay.
Invariant and Transverse Mass
The invariant mass of the SFOS lepton pair originating from the 
2 or  is used,
along with the transverse mass, which is constructed with the remaining lepton,
expected to originate from the 
1 . Transverse mass is given by
T  2~p
T .~p
T [1 cos(`  miss)]. (5.2)
As mT is correlated to lepton pT and E
T , it can be used as a good discriminator
against lower energy events.
If all three leptons have the same flavour, two SFOS pairs can be formed. In this
5.3 Signal Region Optimisation 75 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
scenario, the searches in this thesis employ two approaches to assign the leptons.
The first approach, which was used for the early  analysis, was to take the SFOS
pair as the pair having an invariant mass closest to the Z-boson mass, termed mSFOS.
The second approach, which is utilised for all searches using 36.1 fb1 of data, is to
take the SFOS pair as the pair which minimises the transverse mass, named mminT ,
having associated invariant mass mminSFOS.
In both cases, requiring events to have mSFOS or m
SFOS within a close range of the
Z-boson mass ( 10GeV), termed on-Z, would target the W/Z channel, where, the
2 decays intermediately via the Z boson. In the  channel, the 
2 decays directly
to a SFOS lepton-slepton pair, with the slepton decaying further to a corresponding
SM lepton. In this instance, the range of mSFOS or m
SFOS has no consequence to
the signal, and so requiring it to be away from the Z-boson mass, termed off-Z, is a
good discriminator against the dominant SM WZ background.
The invariant mass of all three leptons, m```, is also used to remove residual low-mass
resonances, and to avoid the use of low-mass Drell-Yan MC samples.
Missing Transverse Energy
The presence of high EmissT is of utmost importance in SUSY searches. Events that
do not contain this signature will be removed. This is a particular good discriminator
against boson+jet background events.
b-tagged Jet Multiplicity
Since signal events are not expected to have significant hadronic activity, the vetoing
of b-jets is a simple method to remove dominant background processes which contain
the top quark that will decay via b-hadrons.
Light Flavour Jet Multiplicity
Defining SRs that either veto or require jets, is used for the W/Z analysis. It was
found that vetoing jets made looser EmissT cuts more optimal, which allowed SRs to
target lower mass signals.
Transverse Momenta
Both lepton and jet transverse momenta, p`(n)T and p
T , respectively, where n refers
to the nth leading lepton or jet, are used within this thesis.
5.4 Background Modelling 76 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
The p`(n)T can be used as a good discriminator to optimise sensitivity to higher and
intermediate mass splittings.
The pjet(n)T has been found to be correlated to the transverse momenta of the vector
sum of leptons p```T , which is also considered.
5.3.1.1 Analysis Preselection
The discriminant variables described above can be used to remove undesirable events
prior to SR optimisation. The preselections for each analysis are listed in Table 5.6.
Due to kinematic limitations in the earlier  analysis, a requirement of 40GeV was
imposed on mSFOS, however this was reduced to 20GeV for the higher luminosity
 and W/Z analyses, and a first glance optimisation of W/h. The increase in p`2T
requirement for these searches is a consequence of the higher trigger pT thresholds,
previously presented in Table 5.5.
Tab. 5.6: Preselections for each
analysis using the discriminant
variables described above. Units
are in GeV.
Variable 13.3 fb1 36.1 fb1
 , W/Z & W/h
Leptons ``` ```
T > 25 > 25
T > 20 > 25
T > 20 > 20
m``` > 20 > 20
mSFOS > 40 -
SFOS - > 20
b-jets Veto Veto
T > 20 > 20
5.4 Background Modelling
The notion of irreducible and reducible backgrounds was introduced in Section 5.1,
with consequent descriptions on how each background process can be observed as
one or the other. The aim of this section is to outline the various methods involved
in estimating and validating the different backgrounds. The associated uncertainties
will be discussed in the next section.
5.4 Background Modelling 77 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
5.4.1 Background Estimation
The two categories of background, irreducible and reducible, are estimated separately.
Simulations are predominantly used for irreducible, where the reconstruction of events
has lower rates of misidentification, while data-driven techniques are preferred for
reducible backgrounds where misidentification rates are higher. An additional semi
data-driven approach is also typically employed for the estimation of the primary
irreducible background, which uses data to tune simulations to correct for potential
mismodelling. However it is not limited to irreducible backgrounds, and can be used
to estimate reducible backgrounds as well. The following section will first detail the
semi data-driven method that was used to estimate the SM WZ background in the
later analyses, followed by an overview of two fully data-driven techniques that were
used by different channels to estimate the reducible backgrounds.
5.4.1.1 Semi Data-Driven Methods
Semi data-driven methods use kinematically defined control regions (CRs) designed
to be enriched with the dominant background process, in this case, SM WZ, while
minimising SUSY signal contamination. The dominant background is fitted, so that
the CR distribution matches observed data, and then extrapolated to SRs via derived
scale factors. In the most simplified case, considering one background process, in
one SR and one CR, the scale factor MC is given by:
MC 
, (5.3)
This type of fit is known as a background-only fit, an overview for the specific
application used in this thesis is given in Section 5.6.2. CRs are designed to be
similar to SRs so that the fitting of distributions to data can be performed reliably,
yet, they must remain orthogonal to avoid any bias in unintentionally unblinding
partial results. All the later analyses in this thesis use this method, with specific
definitions for the  and W/Z channels presented in Chapter 6.
5.4.1.2 Data-Driven Methods
Two different data-driven approaches have been used to estimate the reducible
backgrounds. The main  and W/Z analyses use a Fake-Factor approach, while
the early Run-II low luminosity  analysis used the Matrix Method.
5.4 Background Modelling 78 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Fake Factor Method
A fully data-driven control sample of events enriched in the reducible backgrounds
being estimated, is used to derive an extrapolation factor, or Fake Factor that will
be extrapolated to estimate the background events in each SR. The control sample
is measured in a kinematic region designed to consist of fake leptons with a similar
composition as the reducible background in the SRs. The fake factor is a ratio of
two sets of lepton identification criterion found within the control sample: tight ID
criteria, corresponding to the standard identification used for signal leptons in the
analysis; and, an orthogonal, loose anti-ID criterion, designed to increase the rate
of misidentification and be enriched with fake and non-prompt leptons. Fake factors
(F ), which have dependences on kinematics such as pT and , can be binned and
measured in these kinematic variables, taking the form
F (i) =
data,i
data,i
antiID
, (5.4)
where N is the number of events, and i refers to the ith bin in a given kinematic
distribution. The control sample is contaminated with irreducible backgrounds,
contributing primarily to the ID selection. These are removed using MC estimations,
modifying Equation 5.4 to
F (i) =
data,i
ID N
MC irred.,i
data,i
anti-ID N
MC irred.,i
anti-ID
 (5.5)
Once the Fake Factors have been measured in the control sample, they can be used
to obtain the reducible background estimations in the SRs. To do so, each SR has
corresponding CRs, which, in this analysis are designed to be identical except that
one of the ID leptons is replaced with an anti-ID lepton. The number of events in
the CRs is multiplied by the Fake Factor to find the total reducible background in
the SR, given as
red. =
data,i
CR N
other,i
CR )  F (i), (5.6)
where i is again referring to the ith kinematic bin, and Nother,iCR is an optional term
referring to any reducible backgrounds that may have been estimated separately
using alternative techniques.
5.4 Background Modelling 79 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Matrix Method
Similar to the Fake Factor, the Matrix Method also uses two lepton identification
criteria as its basis: a tight criterion (T), which is the standard identification of the
signal leptons in the analysis; and, loose (L), which follows the exact criteria used
for baseline leptons. In addition, two probabilities are defined:
 real efficiency r, which gives the probability that a real lepton will pass both
the loose and tight criteria;
 fake rate f , which is the probability that a fake lepton will pass both tight and
loose criteria.
The methods used to obtain these efficiencies are briefly discussed at the end of this
section. Using these efficiencies, the sample compositions can be expressed as a linear
combination of samples with real (R) and fake (F) leptons, for example, the total
number of events where all three leptons pass the tight criteria can be expressed as:
NTTT = r
NRRR + r
fNRRF + rf
NRFF + f
NFFF, (5.7)
where the subscripts indicate whether each lepton is real or fake, and are in order
of pT based on the highest first. In this instance, it is assumed that each of the
three leptons have the same associated r and f , however, in reality each lepton has
an individual probability denoted r1, r2, r3, f1,f2 and f3. Eight compositions are
possible in various combinations (NTLL, NTLT etc) that can be described by matrix
equations. In three-lepton events, where the highest-pT lepton has been found to be
real for the majority of time (> 95% of events [33]), a simplified 44 matrix equation
can be used to describe the remaining two leptons:


= M(r1, r2, f1, f2)


, (5.8)
5.4 Background Modelling 80 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
where

r1r2 r1f2 f1r2 f1f2
r1(1 r2) r1(1 f2) f1(1 r2) f1(1 f2)
(1 r1)r2 (1 r1)f2 (1 f1)r2 (1 f1)f2
(1 r1)(1 r2) (1 r1)(1 f2) (1 f1)(1 r2) (1 f1)(1 f2)

(5.9)
The number of events with varying combinations of real and fake leptons can be
found by inverting Equation 5.8, giving:
NRR = (1 f1)(1 f2)NTT  [f2(1 f1)]NTL  [f1(1 f2)]NLT + f1f2NLL,
NRF = (1 f1)(1 r2)NTT + [r2(1 f1)]NTL + [f1(1 r2)]NLT + f1r2NLL,
NRF = (1 f2)(1 r1)NTT + [f2(1 r1)]NTL + [r1(1 f2)]NLT + f2r1NLL,
NFF = (1 r1)(1 r2)NTT  [r2(1 r1)]NTL  [r1(1 r2)]NLT + r1r2NLL.
(5.10)
The final total number of tight events with at least one fake lepton NFake|TT, can be
computed by:
NFake|TT = r1f2NRF + f1r2NFR + f1f2NFF . (5.11)
Efficiencies: the real-efficiencies that have been used throughout this section, are
obtained using the Z tag-and-probe method from a Z  ll enriched control region.
This method requires a tag lepton to pass tight identification criterion, and a probe
lepton to pass loose criterion. An invariant mass of the leptons within 10GeV of
the Z boson mass indicates that the tag lepton is real. The efficiency is defined as
the ratio between the number of probe leptons passing the tight requirements, and
the number of probe leptons passing the loose requirements.
Measuring the fake-rates is more complex and requires separate consideration for
the different types of fake lepton: heavy-flavour fakes from the semi-leptonic decays
of b and c hadrons in jets; light-flavour fakes from misidentified jets or semi-leptonic
decays of light-quark hadrons in jets; and, the pair production of electrons from
photon conversions. The relative contribution of each type of fake lepton is measured
in simulation in dedicated control regions, with the MC truth information being used
for classification. The efficiency is defined as the ratio between the number of fakes
based on the MC truth information, and the number of fakes in the simulation.
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties 81 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
5.4.2 Background Validation
To avoid any mis-modelling, background estimates and normalisations require validat-
ing before the analyses are unblinded and expected yields are compared to observable
data in the SRs. This is performed in dedicated validation regions (VRs), which
are designed to lie within an orthogonal extrapolation region between CRs and
SRs, depicted in Figure 5.6. In this way, VRs serve as a mid-point to validate the
extrapolation. Only once agreement within uncertainty is observed within the VRs
between background and data, can the analyses be unblinded.
Fig. 5.6: A qualitative depiction of
the orthogonal nature of the extrapola-
tion of background from CRs, through
VRs, to the SRs [121].
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties
Further to statistical uncertainties, additional systematic uncertainties are considered.
Systematic uncertainties play a key role in the measurement of physical quantities, and
are often more sizeable than their statistical counterparts. They can be categorised
as either originating from experimental effects (i.e. detector calibration or physics
object reconstruction etc), or they can be due to imperfect theoretical predictions
(i.e. resulting from PDF and QCD scale uncertainties, and theoretical calculations
etc). An overview of each will be given in the following.
5.5.1 Experimental Systematics
Experimental systematic uncertainties are assumed to be fully correlated across
all backgrounds, and are implemented within the MC by calculating the disparity
between the nominal yield and expected variations caused by the following given
sources. Breakdown estimates of systematic uncertainties for each SR are presented
in Chapter 6.
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties 82 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Due to the important role of jet multiplicities and EmissT calculations in the analyses
presented in this thesis, uncertainties stemming from the measurements of jet energy,
give one of the most dominant contribution of systematic uncertainties. The precision
and scale calibration of a jets energy measurement are referred to as the Jet Energy
Resolution (JER) and Jet Energy Scale (JES), respectively. A jets pT distribution
in MC tends to be more precise than in the real detector. As a result, the MC pT
distribution is smeared by a Gaussian JER function for improved agreement with
data. The uncertainty on this smearing is the JER uncertainty and can be calculated
as a variation in the mean and width of the Gaussian [122]. JES calibration involves
the use of test-beams and MC simulations to extrapolate particles actual energy
from the measured energy, and the uncertainty on these procedures is the JES
uncertainty [123].
b-tagging Efficiency
b-jets are tagged using the algorithm detailed in Section 4.3.4. The tagging efficiency
measurements are provided by the ATLAS flavour-tagging performance group [124]
in the form of jet pT dependent scale factors extracted in dileptonic tt events, which
match the b-tagging performance in simulation to that observed in data [125].
Jet Vertex Tagger
This multivariate variable, described in Section 4.3.4, has uncertainties assigned to
account for any potential mis-modelling of the hard-scatter jets, based on distribution
shapes and generator comparisons [126].
Pile-up
As discussed in Section 5.1.2.3, a pile-up reweighting scale factor is applied to MC
simulations to match distributions with those observed in data. The uncertainty on
this scale factor is taken by varying the distribution of the number of interactions
per bunch crossing overlaid in the MC samples by 10%.
Missing Transverse Energy
The energy measurement uncertainties described above all contribute to an overall
uncertainty in the EmissT calculation given in Equations 4.3. These uncertainties are
propagated to EmissT , while the uncertainty on the E
CellOut
x(y) term, which describes all
5.5 Systematic Uncertainties 83 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
energy clusters not associated with reconstructed objects, is taken from comparisons
of 2015 data to MC simulations [127].
Leptons
Electrons have two uncertainties originating from the energy: the electron scale which
arises from any miscalibration of the electron energy using MC; and, the electron
energy resolution, which considers the resolution of the ECal subdetector. Both
are calculated using an ET and  dependent function with Z  ee and W  e
events in data, and J/  ee events to estimate these uncertainties for low-pT
electrons [128].
Muons have two uncertainties originating from the muon energy scale with contri-
butions from the ID track and the MS track. They are both calculated using data
events for J/  , Z   and    compared to MC [129].
Reducible Background
The Fake Factor method, which is discussed in Section 5.4.1.2, has several sources
of systematic uncertainty. One of the main sources originates from the subtraction
of irreducible processes using MC simulation (Equation 5.5). To evaluate this, the
irreducible processes are scaled by 15% and the Fake Factor is recalculated. The
largest difference with respect to the nominal Fake Factor is taken as the uncertainty.
The kinematic and composition differences between the Fake Factor region and
the signal regions must also be considered. To do so, MC simulations are used to
compute the Fake Factor in both kinematic regions and the difference between these
two MC-based Fake Factors is used as the uncertainty. All uncertainties are then
statistically combined to determine a total Fake Factor systematic uncertainty.
The uncertainty on the Matrix Method, which is also discussed in Section 5.4.1.2, is
determined by varying the fake rate, real efficiencies and weight component of each
reducible processes by 1 around nominal in the control regions. An additional
uncertainty on the number of tight and loose events in Equation 5.10, is calculated by
taking the sum of the square of the weights in each region. All uncertainties are then
statistically combined to determine a total Matrix Method systematic uncertainty.
5.5.2 Theory Systematics
Theoretical uncertainties in QCD energy scales, arise from the different choice
of parameter values for the calculations. The renormalisation scale  gives the
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 84 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
dependence for the running strong coupling constant s, and is normally set to equal
the momentum transfer Q of the scattering. The factorisation scale refers to the
separation of the hard scattering QCD effects from the PDF, and is often set to
. The choice of scales also affects the cross-section calculation of the processes.
Additionally, PDFs have an associated theoretical uncertainty due to the choice of
2, a measured value provided by the different experiments, as previously discussed
in Section 4.1.1.
For diboson backgrounds in this thesis, the QCD scale, s and PDF contributions
are calculated for each VR and SR independently. The MC simulated datasets used
for this process contain generator-level weights that allow for the reweighting of the
samples to different renormalisation and factorization scales. These weight variations
can be used to calculate the theory uncertainties on transfer factors for the SM WZ
background using the dedicated CRs.
The uncertainty on the signal cross-section is assigned by using cross-section predic-
tions from different PDF sets. These uncertainties are added to the signal samples,
and applied as weights.
5.6 Statistical Interpretation
The statistical analysis of results presented in this thesis has been performed using
HistFitter [121, 130], a widely used software framework in ATLAS. Having estimated
and validated the background modelling using a background-only fit with control
regions, described in Sections 5.4.1 and 5.4.2, and having observed agreement within
uncertainty between background and data in the validation regions, the analysis can
be unblinded by comparing background to data in the signal regions. Two outcomes
are possible: an excess in data is observed, which would suggest the presence of new
physics beyond the SM; or, agreement within uncertainty is observed, and SUSY
mass models can be excluded. In both cases, limits on the models can be set. In this
section, the idea of hypothesis testing is introduced, followed by a discussion on the
techniques adopted by HistFitter to set discovery and exclusion limits.
5.6.1 Treatment of Systematics
As discussed in Section 5.5, systematic uncertainties are calculated by MC simulations
as the disparity between the nominal yield and expected variations caused by a
given source. The variation range, which extends both positively and negatively
relative to nominal, can be rescaled to have a typical mean value of zero, and
expected 1 spread corresponding to one. The rescaled variation is treated as an
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 85 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
independent nuisance parameter i, where i indicates the systematic source, and
is used during the statistical interpretation of results, to unify the magnitudes of
systematic uncertainties.
5.6.2 Background-only Fits
As previously discussed in Section 5.4.1, background-only fits are employed in semi
data-driven background estimations using CRs, to normalise MC simulations to
observed data. HistFitter uses a likelihood fit to achieve this by varying a scale factor
for the dominant process being fitted in both the CRs and VRs simultaneously. The
nuisance parameters, introduced in Section 5.5, for all backgrounds are also used to
constrain the fit.
5.6.3 Hypothesis Testing
Each SUSY model, based on the different mass-splittings listed in Table 5.3, is a
hypothesis that requires testing for validity. Hypothesis testing [132] is a statistical
procedure to test which hypothesis best describes observed data. P-values are used
to define the probability that an experimental outcome, which can be referred to as
a test statistic q, agrees with a given hypothesis. Two hypotheses are considered: a
null hypothesis H0, which is considered true by default, and in the case of particle
physics, is the SM, or the background-only hypothesis; or, an alternative hypothesis
Hi, which describes signal-plus-background hypotheses, where in this thesis, i denotes
the different SUSY models. P -values for H0 and Hi are calculated as integrals of the
test statistic probability density functions, f(q|b) and f(q|s+ b), respectively, from
an observed test statistic qobs. A one-sided representation is shown in Figure 5.7.
Fig. 5.7: A distribution of a test statistic q
under the null hypothesis f (q|b), and alter-
native hypothesis f (q|s + b) [131].
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 86 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
The p-values can be defined as:
pb = P (q  qobs|H0) =
 qobs
f(q|b)dq, (5.12)
ps+b = P (q  qobs|Hi) =
f(q|s+ b)dq, (5.13)
where pb is a measure of the compatibility between the data and background-only
hypthosis, and ps+b is the measure between signal hypothesis and observed data and
is often referred to as the discovery p-value.
5.6.3.1 Statistical Optimisation
Another way to express a p-value is to redefine it as a significance level Z, which
was discussed in Section 5.3 and used to optimise signal regions. This Z value is
defined as the number of standard deviations  the observed test statistic is above
the mean of a Gaussian distribution [131]. The relationship between the p-value and
Z is shown in Figure 5.8. Signal regions are optimised by maximising Z. The aim is
to define regions, where, if the SUSY model is present, its test statistic would be
observed as far from the mean as possible to avoid statistical background fluctuations
interfering with the results. To avoid falsely claiming discovery of new physics, it is
convention that discoveries can only be claimed if qobs is beyond Z = 5, corresponding
to a p-value < 2.87 107, while significant evidence for new physics can be claimed
when qobs is beyond Z = 3 (p-value < 1.3 10
3). A signal model that is expected
to have Z > 1.64, corresponding to a p-value < 0.05, is excluded if no excess in data
is observed to fulfill these requirements. P -values can also be expressed as confidence
levels, which is discussed in Section 5.6.5.
Fig. 5.8: A Gaussian distribution showing
the relationship between the significance Z
and the p-value [131].
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 87 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
5.6.4 Profile Likelihood Ratio
The analyses in this thesis define a test statistic based on a maximum profile likelihood
ratio [131, 132], with a likelihood function in its simplest form given as
L(nobs|sS,B, ) = P(nobs|sS +B)
G(i,i = 0, i = 1), (5.14)
where
 nobs is the number of observed data events;
 sS is the expected number of signal events, with signal strength s (explained
in the following);
 B is the expected number of background events;
 P(nobs|sS +B) is a Poisson distribution;
  is an associated nuisance parameter, introduced in Section 5.6.1;
 G(i,i = 0,i = 1) is a Gaussian distribution of each individual nuisance
parameter i, with a mean i of zero, and standard deviation i of one.
With the inclusion of multiple orthogonal regions, such as control and signal regions,
the combined likelihood can be expressed as
L(nobs|sS,B, ) =
P(nobs|sS +B)
G(i,i = 0, i = 1)
(5.15)
where N represents the regions being simultaneously fitted. The notation can be
condensed by referring to the signal and background model (and associated nuisance
parameters) as , and the likelihood as L(s,). In turn, this causes the profile
likelihood ratio to become
p(s) =
L(s,
L(s, )
, (5.16)
where the denominator is maximised over all parameters and is absolute, and the
numerator is maximised for a given value of the parameter, which, in the case above
is s. A signal strength s = 0 corresponds to the SM without SUSY (background-
only hypothesis), while a signal strength s = 1 corresponds to the presence of the
SUSY model being tested (signal-plus-background hypothesis). As maximising the
likelihood is equivalent to minimising the negative log likelihood, we can redefine
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 88 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
Equation 5.16 and assign it as our test statistic:
q = ln(p(s)). (5.17)
For the calculation of the p-value, and in order to generate a distribution of test
statistics, the HistFitter software randomly generates thousands of pseudo-data from
a Poisson distribution. It does this for all models of s that are being tested, resulting
in independent p-values for every hypothesis, including background-only. At this
point, the compatibility of qobs can be evaluated.
5.6.5 Exclusion Limits
A p-value can also be defined as a confidence level (CL), and as discussed earlier, a
signal model is excluded if its p-value ps+b is < 0.05; this corresponds to a 95% CL.
However, this approach, which is sufficient for the optimisation of signal regions, can
lead to falsely excluding models which the analysis has little or no sensitivity to. To
avoid this, interpretation of results is performed using the CLs method [133], which,
in addition to ps+b, incorporates the p-value of the background-only hypothesis pb,
and is given as
CLs =
CLs+b
1 pb
. (5.18)
Figure 5.9 illustrates the relationship between the confidence levels and the test
statistic probability distribution. It is comparable to the p-value relationship, shown
previously in Figure 5.7. While the CLs is technically not a CL, it has been
conventionally adopted by the ATLAS Collaboration to exclude models if CLs < 0.05.
So far, the statistical techniques discussed have used the signal strength s as the
Fig. 5.9: A distribution of a test statistic
q, illustrating the confidence levels used to
quantify the compatibility of qs to either
hypothesis. Image based on [131].
15 10 5 0 5 10 15
t =2ln(Q)
1CLb CLs+b
Signal+Background
Background only
5.6 Statistical Interpretation 89 5 Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
function of the test statistic, inferring that s is the parameter being excluded. To
translate this to mass-splitting models, only ps+b corresponding to s = 1 is used to
calculate the CLs values for all possible signal samples. The outcome is Exclusion
Limits on the masses of the 
2 and 
1 sparticles.
5.6.6 Discovery Limits
Discovery Limits, or more concisely, model-independent limits, are used to consider
how compatible the observed data is with the background-only hypothesis (s = 0),
and is particularly significant when estimating the sensitivity to new physics scenarios
if an excess in data is observed. Limits include: an upper limit on how many events
can be observed before compatibility with the SM breaks down; along with an upper
limit on the visible signal cross-section, which is defined as the product of the signal
cross-section (given by sS/L, where L is the luminosity), the detector acceptance and
the analysis efficiency. The visible signal cross-section limit is obtained by performing
a scan of s in each signal region independently, starting at large, excluded values,
and reducing until the p-value equals 0.05. In this way, s acts as a dummy signal
to test scenarios not considered in this thesis.
6. Results for 
2 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
6.1.1 Early Run-II Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.1.2 Signal Region Definition for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . . 96
6.1.3 Background Validation for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . . 102
6.1.4 Systematic Uncertainties for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . 108
6.1.5 Results for 
2 via Sleptons . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons . . . . . . . . . 113
6.2.1 Signal Region Definition for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 113
6.2.2 Background Validation for 
2 via W and Z Bosons . . 121
6.2.3 Systematic Uncertainties for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 125
6.2.4 Results for 
2 via W and Z Bosons . . . . . . . . . . 126
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY . . . . . . . . . . 131
6.3.1 Preliminary Glance at 
2 via W and Higgs Bosons . . 131
6.3.2 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
In Chapter 5, the general search strategy for all three analysis channels was detailed.
In this chapter, the unique prescriptions adopted, along with the final results, are
presented for the and W/Z channels in Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively. All results
are public, with the early Run-II  analysis in an ATLAS conference paper [114],
while the higher luminosity  and W/Z analyses have been submitted to European
Physicals Journal C [115].
In addition to the public analyses, a preliminary first look optimisation for the W/h
scenario, previously detailed in Section 2.3.5, is presented in Section 6.3
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons
The early Run-II analysis is featured in Section 6.1.1. As this uses only a subset
of data and the results are vastly improved in the later higher luminosity analysis,
only a brief overview is given. The main  analysis follows, with the SR optimisation
and definition in Section 6.1.2, the definition of CRs and VRs, along with data to
background comparisons in Section 6.1.3, and the results in Section 6.1.5.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 91 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.1.1 Early Run-II Search
This early Run-II analysis, which used 13.3 fb1, focused solely on the  channel due
to the higher associated branching ratios compared to alternative three-lepton models.
The following section gives an overview of the optimisation of signal regions, which
was my primary contribution, along with the unblinded results. The background
modelling follows the standard procedure detailed in the analysis strategy, with the
use of the Matrix Method to estimate the reducible background.
Signal Regions
Eight benchmark signal points were used during the early Run-II search, to construct
two inclusive signal regions, defined in Table 6.1. An intermediate region was
designed to target the parameter space where slepton masses are similar to that
of the Z boson, labelled SR3`-I, and a high region to target the mass spectrum
beyond that of the Z boson, labelled SR3`-H. Both regions were constructed to
be off-Z. Further requirements were made on lepton pT, E
T and mT using N-1
distributions with one-dimensional ZN curves, whereby all kinematic requirements
have been implemented, with the exception of the variable being plotted. These
distributions are presented in Figures 6.1 to 6.5. High mT requirements were applied
to target heavy 
2 and discriminate against diboson backgrounds. SR3`-I kept a
soft lepton pT requirement to retain signal events with softer leptons, while conversely
implementing a high EmissT requirement to target heavy 
1. SR3`-H targeted both
harder leptons and heavy 
1, by imposing high cuts on both lepton pT and E
The full yield breakdown for both SRs is presented in Table 6.2.
Tab. 6.1: Signal Region defini-
tions for the early Run-II search
using 13.3 fb1 of data.
Variable mT mSFOS p
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
SR3`-I > 110 /[81.2-101.2] > 30 > 120
SR3`-H > 110 > 101.2 > 80 > 60
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 92 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
210 Total SM
Fakes
(900,700) GeV
(600,400) GeV
(500,400) GeV
(500,450) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-I
 [GeV]SFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
210 Total SM
Fakes
(900,700) GeV
(600,400) GeV
(500,400) GeV
(500,450) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-I
 [GeV]SFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.1: Early Run-II N-1 distributions for variables used in SR3`-I signal region. Arrows
indicate SR cut. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for four benchmark signal
points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating optimal lower cuts, and right to left
for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Fakes
(900,700) GeV
(600,400) GeV
(500,400) GeV
(500,450) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-I
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Fakes
(900,700) GeV
(600,400) GeV
(500,400) GeV
(500,450) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-I
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.2: Early Run-II N-1 distributions for variables used in SR3`-I signal region. Arrows
indicate SR cut. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for four benchmark signal
points.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Total SM
Fakes
(900,700) GeV
(600,400) GeV
(500,400) GeV
(500,450) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-I
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.3: Early Run-II N-1 distributions for variables used in SR3`-I signal region. Arrows
indicate SR cut. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for four benchmark signal
points.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 93 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Fakes
(1000,0) GeV
(900,300) GeV
(800,200) GeV
(800,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-H
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Fakes
(1000,0) GeV
(900,300) GeV
(800,200) GeV
(800,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-H
 [GeV]SFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.4: Early Run-II N-1 distributions used in SR3`-H signal region. Arrows indicate SR cut.
The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for four benchmark signal points.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Fakes
(1000,0) GeV
(900,300) GeV
(800,200) GeV
(800,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-H
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
4 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Total SM
Fakes
(1000,0) GeV
(900,300) GeV
(800,200) GeV
(800,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 10 fbs
SR3-slep-H
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.5: Early Run-II N-1 distributions used in SR3`-H signal region. Arrows indicate SR cut.
The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for four mass benchmark signal points.
Process SR3`-I SR3`-H
VV 2.52 0.16 0.91 0.09
VVV 0.43 0.03 0.14 0.02
ttV 0.26 0.02 0.05 0.01
Higgs 0.02 0.01 0.0 0.0
Reducible 0.31 0.12 0.05 0.01
Total background 3.53 0.21 1.14 0.1
via Slep (1000,0) 1.92 0.05 1.78 0.04
via Slep (900,300) 3.2 0.06 2.82 0.05
via Slep (800,200) 5.96 0.11 5.33 0.1
via Slep (800,0) 6.24 0.35 5.65 0.33
Tab. 6.2: Early Run-II optimisation yields for the SM background processes and four benchmark
signal points in the four SFOS SRs. Reducible is MC only. The uncertainties are statistical
only.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 94 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Results
Unblinded results for the early Run-II SRs are presented in Table 6.3, with the
kinematic distributions shown in Figures 6.6 and 6.7. No excess in the number of
data events was observed, and there was good agreement between data and the
SM background within uncertainties. In the absence of an excess, model-dependent
exclusion limits were set, and are shown in Figure 6.8. As signal regions were
inclusive, the combination was performed by selecting the most sensitive SR per
SUSY mass point. The exclusion of 
2 masses was increased to 1TeV, an
improvement of 300GeV from Run-I, while the mass of the 
1 could be excluded
up to 580GeV, an increase of 200GeV [134]. Table 6.4 presents the upper limits
on BSM events (NBSM) and the visible signal cross-section (
obs). These results
are improved upon in the following section using increased luminosity.
SR3`-I SR3`-H
Observed events 2 0
Total SM 4.41 1.14 0.98 0.50
VV 1.49 0.45 0.69 0.47
VVV 0.68 0.36 0.20 0.11
ttV 0.34 0.11 0.09 0.03
Higgs 0.03 0.01 0.00 0.00
Reducible 1.87 0.72 0.00 0.21
Tab. 6.3: Breakdown of SM background and data yields in the three lepton signal regions.
The reducible component refers to the data-drive estimates coming from the Matrix Method.
Errors are statistical and systematic [114].
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 95 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Reducible
Bkg. Uncert.
) = (800,600) GeV
Preliminary ATLAS
 = 13 TeV, 13.3 fbs
e++eeeee+
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Reducible
Bkg. Uncert.
) = (800,600) GeV
Preliminary ATLAS
 = 13 TeV, 13.3 fbs
e++eeeee+
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.6: Early Run-II distributions for EmissT (left) and mSFOS (right) in SR3`-I. Reducible
backgrounds have been taken from the Matrix Method. The arrows indicate the cut value
defining the SRs. Both statistical and systematic uncertainties are included [114]. These results
have been improved using an increased luminosity, presented in the following section.
Reducible
Bkg. Uncert.
) = (800,0) GeV
Preliminary ATLAS
 = 13 TeV, 13.3 fbs
e++eeeee+
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Reducible
Bkg. Uncert.
) = (800,0) GeV
Preliminary ATLAS
 = 13 TeV, 13.3 fbs
e++eeeee+
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.7: Early Run-II distributions for mT (left) and p
T (right) in SR3`-H. Reducible back-
grounds from the Matrix Method. The arrows indicate the cut value defining the SRs. Both
statistical and systematic uncertainties are included [114]. These results have been improved
using an increased luminosity, presented in the following section.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 96 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Fig. 6.8: Early Run-II observed and ex-
pected exclusion limits on the 
1 and
1 masses in the context of SUSY scenar-
ios with simplified mass spectra [114]. The
contours of the band around the expected
limit are the 1 results, including all un-
certainties except theoretical uncertainties
on the signal cross-section. The dotted
lines around the observed limit illustrate the
change in the observed limit as the nominal
signal cross-section is scaled up and down
by the theoretical uncertainty. All limits are
computed at 95% CL. The observed lim-
its obtained from ATLAS during LHC Run
I are also shown [134]. These results have
been improved using an increased luminosity,
presented in the following section.
 [GeV]
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
) l (Ll
 ), l  l(
)   l l (
  l 
 + m0
m = (
 = m
=13 TeVs,  
 L dt  = 13.3 fb
ATLAS Preliminary
theory
1 Observed limit (
1 Expected limit (
3l ATLAS 8 TeV
Signal Region Nobs Nexp 
obs[fb] S
obs S
SR3`-I 2 4.41 1.14 0.28 3.7 5.5+3.01.8
SR3`-H 0 0.98 0.50 0.18 3.0 3.4+2.20.4
Tab. 6.4: Early Run-II signal model-independent upper limits on the number of beyond-the-SM
events (NBSM) and the visible signal cross-section (
obs). Also shown are the observed and
expected upper limits at 95% CL on the number of beyond-the-SM events (S95exp and S
obs) for
each signal region calculated using pseudo-experiments. The 1 variations on the expected
limit are due to the statistical and systematic uncertainties in the background prediction are
also shown [114]. These results have been improved using an increased luminosity, presented in
the following section.
6.1.2 Signal Region Definition for 
2 via Sleptons
For this analysis, using the full 36.1 fb1 from 2015 and 2016, my primary contribution
was to define signal regions that offer optimal sensitivity to 
2 decays via slepton-
mediated channels. Cases where the mass difference between the 
2 and the 
are close to and larger than the Z boson mass are considered. The optimisation
studies are presented in the following.
6.1.2.1 Optimisation of Signal Regions
The following section motivates the SR definitions, presented in Table 6.5. A selection
of benchmark signal points that each reside in different areas of parameter space
outside of previously excluded ranges are utilised. As with the earlier Run-II analysis,
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 97 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Tab. 6.5: Full 2015 and 2016
Run-II summary of the exclusive
signal regions targeting both in-
termediate and high mass spec-
trum.
Region mminSFOS m
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
SR-slep-a
<81.2 >110 >130
20-30
SR-slep-b >30
SR-slep-c
>101.2 >110 >130
20-50
SR-slep-d 50-80
SR-slep-e >80
an off-Z requirement is applied for the mminSFOS variable in order to veto the peak
in the distribution caused by background events comprised of Z bosons, shown in
Figure 6.9. Two exclusive regions with mminSFOS either above of below the off-Z window
are defined to target either heavy or light 
2, respectively.
High EmissT and m
T are also good discriminators to target 
2 and 
1. As these
two variables are highly correlated, the choice of cuts was initially considered by using
two-dimensional correlation plots. As the SR with mminSFOS < 81.2GeV is sensitive to
lower SUSY masses with intermediate mass-splittings (50 200GeV), correlation
plots for benchmark signal points with m(
2, 
1) = (600,500) GeV and (800,600)
GeV are shown in Figure 6.10. Kinematic N-1 distributions with one-dimensional
ZN curves, which were introduced in the early Run-II search, are utilised to further
tune the choice of EmissT and mT , and are shown in Figure 6.11. The arrows at
T > 130GeV and mT > 110GeV indicate the position of the cuts, which were
chosen to coincide with an observable increase in sensitivity while retaining high
signal yields for all benchmark signal points.
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
710 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-offZ
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0.1 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
710 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-offZ
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.9: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for mminSFOS after baseline and E
T and
mminT cuts. The arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN
curves for three benchmark signal points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating
optimal lower cuts, and right to left for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 98 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.5  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2
 0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.4  1.3  1.1  0.9  0.7  0.6  0.4  0.3  0.3
 0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.3
 0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3
 0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.5  1.5  1.6  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3
 0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3
 0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.1  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4
 0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.3  1.3  1.1  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4
 0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.2  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4
 0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.3  1.3  1.1  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4
 0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.1  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4
 0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.0  0.8  0.7
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.4
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.10: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
the mminSFOS < 81.2GeV bin for m(
1) = (600,500) GeV (left) and m(
(800,600) GeV (right). MC simulations have been used for both irreducible and reducible
backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than
one background event.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
(600,500) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-low
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
(600,500) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-low
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.11: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for EmissT (left) and m
T (right)
in the mminSFOS <81.2GeV SR. The arrows indicates the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the
one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark signal points.
The SR with mminSFOS > 101.2GeV targets both intermediate and high mass-splittings
(> 300GeV), with higher SUSY masses. Correlation plots for benchmark signal points
with m(
2, 
1) = (800,600) GeV and (1000,600) GeV are shown in Figure 6.12,
with corresponding N-1 distributions with the additional m(
2, 
1) = (1100,0)
GeV benchmark point included in Figure 6.13. The cuts were again chosen to coincide
with an observable increase in sensitivity while retaining high signal yields for all
benchmark signal points, and also remaining harmonised with the mminSFOS <81.2GeV
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 99 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.1
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2
 0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.3  1.2
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.3  1.2
 0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2
 0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.1
 0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0  1.0  0.9
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3
 0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3
 0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4
 0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.12: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
the mminSFOS > 101.2GeV bin for m(
1) = (800,600) GeV (left) and m(
(1000,600) GeV (right). MC simulations have been used for both irreducible and reducible
backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than
one background event.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-high
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
3 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-high
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.13: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for EmissT (left) and m
T (right)
in the mminSFOS > 81.2GeV SR. The arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the
one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark signal points.
Kinematic N-1 distributions with one-dimensional ZN curves were utilised to further
improve sensitivity with additional requirements on p`3T . The lower m
SFOS region
is divided into two p`3T SRs: 20-30GeV, to retain signal events with soft leptons;
and > 30GeV, to target harder leptons, shown in Figure 6.14. The higher mminSFOS
region is divided into three p`3T bins: 20-50GeV; 50-80GeV; and, > 80GeV, shown
in Figure 6.15. Each targeting the different regions of lepton pT parameter space.
The full yield breakdown for all SRs is presented in Table 6.6.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 100 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-pT-a-b
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
2 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-pT-a-b
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.14: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for p`3T in the low off-Z region. The
arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three
benchmark signal points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating optimal lower cuts,
and right to left for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-pT-c-e
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
4 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(1100,0) GeV
(1000,600) GeV
(800,600) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-pT-c-e
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.15: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for p`3T in the high off-Z region. The
arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three
benchmark signal points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating optimal lower cuts,
and right to left for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 101 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Process SR3-slep-a SR3-slep-b SR3-slep-c SR3-slep-d SR3-slep-e
WZ 1.09 0.17 2.02 0.24 3.93 0.52 0.94 0.36 0.78 0.17
ZZ 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.13 0.03 0.06 0.02 0.03 0.01
VVV 0.25 0.05 0.33 0.05 0.7 0.08 0.36 0.06 0.25 0.05
ttV 0.14 0.03 0.17 0.03 0.48 0.05 0.22 0.04 0.09 0.02
Higgs 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 
Reducible 0.80 0.46 0.36 0.18 0.48 0.25  0.08 0.04
Total SM 2.31 0.49 2.90 0.31 5.76 0.59 1.6 0.36 1.22 0.18
via 
(1100,0)  0.02 0.01 0.1 0.01 0.2 0.02 3.27 0.08
(1000,600) 0.01 0.01 0.26 0.03 0.39 0.04 0.89 0.06 3.53 0.11
(800,600) 0.11 0.03 1.99 0.11 2.53 0.13 3.01 0.14 1.25 0.09
(600,500) 2.09 0.17 3.28 0.22 0.26 0.07 0.06 0.03 0.0 0.0
(600,400) 0.52 0.08 7.07 0.31 10.31 0.38 11.87 0.4 5.3 0.27
(400,300) 9.36 0.87 16.94 1.19 1.69 0.37 0.26 0.15 0.11 0.11
(1100,0) 0 0 0 0 2.00
(1000,600) 0 0 0 0.34 2.13
(800,600) 0 0.72 0.61 1.57 0.75
(600,500) 0.89 1.07 0 0 0
(600,400) 0.02 2.44 2.63 4.91 3.04
(400,300) 3.43 4.59 0.41 0 0
Tab. 6.6: Yields for the SM background processes and six benchmark signal points for the five
SFOS SRs targeting models with intermediate decays via the slepton. ZN values are included
for the signal points. The uncertainties are statistical only.
6.1.2.2 Sensitivity
Figure 6.16 shows the expected significance ZN values for the 
2 decays via
sleptons when statistically combining all five SRs. For this scenario the masses
of the 
2 are expected to be excluded up to 1.1TeV, an increase of 400GeV
from Run-I and 100GeV from the early Run-II analysis presented in Section 6.1.1.
The mass of the 
1 is expected to be excluded up to 600GeV, an increase of
250GeV from Run-I and 50GeV from early Run-II. All benchmark signal points
are expected to be excluded if no excess in data is observed.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 102 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
22.73 15.83 16.38 7.49 4.93 3.27 2.00
16.96 34.72 29.82 22.15 15.64 8.34 3.21 2.04
10.71 20.28 18.68 14.41 10.43 7.19 4.88 3.24 2.01 1.18
5.75 11.33 11.38 9.11 4.61 3.05 2.02
2.82 6.80 7.09 5.87 4.26 2.85 1.95 1.10
1.39 3.66 2.70 1.78
0.66 1.98 2.50 2.16 1.59 0.95
0.12 0.87 1.35
0.37 1.58 0.63
) [GeV]
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
 = 13 TeVs    
L dt = 36.1fb
Fig. 6.16: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II two-dimensional sensitivity plot showing the expected
combined significances ZN for the SR binned selection in the C1N2 via sleptons simplified model.
MC simulation is used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is
included in the ZN calculations.
6.1.3 Background Validation for 
2 via Sleptons
This section is devoted to validating the SM background processes that have already
been described in the general strategy in Chapter 5. My contribution was to assist in
defining CRs and VRs, to provide support in running the background-only fits and
generating the tables presented, and also producing all of the distributions for visual
interpretation. The data-driven Fake Factor method is used to model the reducible
Z+jets and Z +  processes, while the top-like reducible backgrounds use the semi
data-driven methods with dedicated CRs to derive scale factors. Both have been
estimated together and are combined into one total reducible sample. The most
dominant SM background, WZ, also uses the semi data-driven method with CRs,
and is described and validated in the following.
6.1.3.1 Control Regions
One CR is defined, which is orthogonal to the SR by inverting the mminSFOS requirement
to be on-Z. As cutting on high values of mminT reduces the contribution of the WZ
background, a mminT < 110GeV requirement is applied to ensure the CR is enriched
with the target background. Preserving the high EmissT selection ensures that the CR
is kinematically close to the SRs and limits the contamination of fake backgrounds,
therefore improving the WZ purity. Table 6.7 gives a summary of the CR definition.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 103 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Tab. 6.7: Full 2015 and 2016
Run-II CR definition, in addition
to the preselection requirements.
Units are in GeV.
Region mSFOS E
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
CR3`-slep [81.2,101.2] >120 <110
As described in Section 5.6, observed data is used to tune the SM WZ background
so that the total estimated background matches. The scale factor for the WZ
background in CR3`-slep was calculated to be 0.924  0.060. Section 6.1.3.3 presents
an extrapolated background-only fit, using both CR3`-slep and the VRs, defined in
the following section.
6.1.3.2 Validation Regions
To validate the background models, four VRs are designed to target different dominant
processes. A low-EmissT , on-Z region, labelled VR3-Za, is defined to be rich in WZ
and/or Z bosons in order to validate the bulk of their distributions. A high-EmissT
on-Z, and low-EmissT off-Z region, labelled VR3-Zb and VR3-offZa, respectively,
are designed to target the distribution tails of the WZ process, with VR3-Zb also
requiring at least one b-tagged jet to include the tt background. A final region,
VR3-offZb, which is off-Z, EmissT -inclusive and requires b-tagged jets, predominantly
targets the fake tt background process that was modelled using data-driven techniques.
The definitions of the VRs are shown in Table 6.8. Distributions in EmissT , m
SFOS and lepton pT are presented in Figures 6.17 to 6.28, with the derived scale
factor applied. All data to background comparisons show good agreement within
uncertainty.
Region p`3T m``` m
SFOS E
T N(b-jets)
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
VR3-Za > 30
/ [81.2, 101.2] [81.2,101.2]
4060 
VR3-Zb > 30 >60 > 0
VR3-offZa > 30
/ [81.2, 101.2] / [81.2, 101.2]
4060 
VR3-offZb > 20 > 40 > 0
Tab. 6.8: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II selection requirements for four VRs targeting different
background processes.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 104 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za
 [GeV]
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(450,150) GeV0
)=(1000,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
VR3-Za
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.17: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) and m
T (right) [115] distributions in VR3-Za
with scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical
and systematic.
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za
 [GeV]minSFOSm
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.18: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za with scale factor applied to W Z
background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.19: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za with scale factor applied to W Z
background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 105 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
100 150 200 250 300
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(450,150) GeV0
)=(1000,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]
100 150 200 250 300
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.20: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) [115] and m
T (right) distributions in VR3-Zb
with scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical
and systematic.
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]minSFOSm
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.21: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Zb with scale factor applied to W Z
background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Zb
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.22: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Zb with scale factor applied to W Z
background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 106 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.23: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-offZa with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.24: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-offZa with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(450,150) GeV0
)=(1000,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
VR3-offZa
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.25: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II sub-leading lepton pT (left) and third-leading lepton
pT (right) [115] distributions in VR3-offZa with scale factor applied to W Z background. The
uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 107 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.26: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-offZb with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.27: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-offZb with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(450,150) GeV0
)=(1000,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
VR3-offZb
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.28: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II sub-leading lepton pT (left) and third-leading lepton pT
(right) [115] distributions in VR3-offZb with scale factor applied to W Z background. The
uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 108 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.1.3.3 Background-only Fit
The CR defined in Table 6.7 and VRs defined in Table 6.8 have been used for the
extrapolation of the fit results as detailed in Section 5.6, shown in Table 6.9. Both
statistical and systematic uncertainties are included. The total expected SM yields
are in good agreement with the number of observed events in each region.
CR3`-slep VR3-Za VR3-Zb VR3-offZa VR3-offZb
Observed events 324 829 148 404 342
Total SM 324 18 790 90 140 70 370 40 280 100
WZ 298 25 640 80 45 10 290 40 42 10
ZZ 7 6 38 32 2.0 1.7 18 15 2.7 2.3
VVV 2.0 1.7 1.3 1.1 0.32 0.28 3.5 3.0 0.9 0.8
ttV 7 6 33 28 80 70 15 13 60 50
Higgs 3.5 3.0 4 4 1.2 1.0 5 5 5 4
Reducible 6.4 3.2 81 40 11 6 44 22 170 80
Tab. 6.9: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II background-only fit for the slepton-mediated CR and VRs.
All systematic and statistical uncertainties are included [115].
6.1.4 Systematic Uncertainties for 
2 via Sleptons
A summary of the dominant sources of systematic uncertainties in the background
and signal estimates for each SR are listed in Table 6.10. Systematic uncertainties on
the reducible background estimations are consistently the most significant, followed
by the theoretically modelling of the WZ background.
Uncertainty SR3-slep-a SR3-slep-b SR3-slep-c SR3-slep-d SR3-slep-e
Reducible 17.9% 6.45% 4.44% 16.9% 3.51%
WZ Modelling 4.13% 4.66% 5.23% 4.28% 5.62%
Jets 7.64% 2.32% 2.82% 2.54% 3.04%
T 2.33% 2.82% 1.38% 4.28% 4.47%
Leptons 0.78% 1.64% 1.36% 2.34% 5.82%
b-tagging Eff. 0.45% 1.48% 0.55% 1.00% 
Tab. 6.10: Breakdown of the dominant systematic uncertainties on background estimates.
Percentages are quoted relative to the total background estimates for each SR defined in
Section 6.1.2 and assume no correlation between the combined sub-categories to give an
approximate idea of magnitudes for illustrative purposes.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 109 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.1.5 Results for 
2 via Sleptons
This section is dedicated to presenting and interpreting the results for the 36.1 fb1
-mediated channel at a centre-of-mass energy of
s =13TeV. All the statistical
strategies adopted have previously been discussed in the general analysis strategy,
in Section 5.6. In addition to generating distributions for visual interpretation, and
providing support for the background-only fits, I was responsible for running the
discovery-fit to set the model-independent upper limits.
6.1.5.1 Observations in Signal Regions
The observed number of events in all signal regions, along with the total background
expectations and uncertainties are shown in Table 6.11. The uncertainties include
both statistical and systematic components. It is also interesting to compare the
shape of the important kinematic distributions for variables that were used for
optimisation. The EmissT and m
T distributions are presented in Figures 6.29 to
6.33 for each of the five independent SRs, while Figure 6.34 presents orthogonal p`3T
distributions. Two 
2 via benchmark points with m(
2, 
1) = (1000,600) and
(800,600) GeV are also included as they are within an area of parameter space that
is expected to be excluded by the analysis.
In general, the statistics are low as expected, and the agreement between data events
and background is good within systematic uncertainties. There are some upward
fluctuations, as in the case of SR3-slep-a and SR3-slep-c, which expected 2.20.8
and 5.40.9 events and observed 4 and 9 events, respectively. While there were also
SR3- slep-a slep-b slep-c slep-d slep-e
Observed 4 3 9 0 0
Total SM 2.2 0.8 2.8 0.4 5.4 0.9 1.4 0.4 1.14 0.23
WZ 1.1 0.4 1.98 0.31 3.9 0.7 0.91 0.26 0.76 0.17
ZZ 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.13 0.03 0.06 0.02 0.03 0.01
V V V 0.26 0.08 0.34 0.05 0.72 0.12 0.36 0.10 0.25 0.05
ttV 0.07 0.03 0.09 0.02 0.20 0.04 0.07 0.02 0.02 0.01
Higgs 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.00 
Reducible 0.80 0.46 0.36 0.18 0.48 0.25  0.08 0.04
Tab. 6.11: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II background-only fit results for SR3-slep-a to SR3-slep-e
in the 3` channel. All systematic and statistical uncertainties are included in the fit [115].
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 110 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-slep-a
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-a
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.29: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) [115] and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in
SR3-slep-a with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of
both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-slep-b
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-b
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.30: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) [115] and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in
SR3-slep-b with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of
both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-c
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-c
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.31: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in SR3-slep-
c with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both
statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 111 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-d
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-d
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.32: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in SR3-slep-
d with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both
statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-e
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-e
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.33: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in SR3-slep-
e with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both
statistical and systematic.
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-slep-a,b
 [GeV]3
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-slep-c,d,e
 [GeV]3
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Fig. 6.34: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II p`3T distributions in SR3-slep-a and SR3-slep-b (left) and
SR3-slep-c to SR3-slep-e (right) [115] with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The
uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.1 Searches for 
2 via Sleptons 112 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
downward fluctuations in SR3-slep-d and SR3-slep-e, which expected 1.40.4 and
1.140.23 events, respectively, and both observed zero events. However no significant
excess can be claimed. The quantified statistical interpretation of these results
follows.
6.1.5.2 Statistical Interpretation
In the absence of any significant excess, exclusion limits on the masses of the charginos
and neutralinos are set, and are presented in Figure 6.35. The observed limit, which
is indicated by the solid red line, exceeded the expected limit indicated by the
dashed blue line, and gives exclusion of 
2 masses up to 1.13TeV. This is an
improvement of 400GeV from Run-I and 100GeV from the early Run-II lower
luminosity analysis. The exclusion of 
1 masses up to 700GeV has been achieved,
which is an improvement of 350GeV from Run-I and 150GeV from the early
Run-II analysis. The model-independent upper limits on the number of beyond-the-
SM events and the visible signal cross-section are also presented in Table 6.12. The
p-value and the corresponding significance for the background-only hypothesis are
also evaluated.
) [GeV]
)/m(
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
=13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
 ATLAS
)   l l (
  l )  l (Ll
 ), l  l(
All limits at 95% CL
Theory
1 Observed limit  (
)exp1 Expected limit (
ATLAS 8 TeV arXiv:1402.7029
Fig. 6.35: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II observed and expected exclusion limits on the 
1 and
1 masses in the context of SUSY scenarios with simplified mass spectra. The observed (solid
thick red line) and expected (thin dashed blue line) exclusion contours are indicated [115]. The
shaded band corresponds to the 1 variations in the expected limit, including all uncertainties
except theoretical uncertainties in the signal cross-section. The dotted lines around the observed
limit illustrate the change in the observed limit as the nominal signal cross-section is scaled up
and down by the theoretical uncertainty. All limits are computed at 95% confidence level. The
observed limits that were obtained from ATLAS during Run-I are also shown [134].
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 113 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Region Nobs Nexp 
obs[fb] S
obs S
exp p(s=0) Z
slep-a 4 2.2 0.8 0.19 6.8 4.7+2.30.5 0.23 0.72
slep-b 3 2.8 0.4 0.14 5.2 5.1+1.91.2 0.47 0.08
slep-c 9 5.4 0.9 0.29 10.5 6.8+2.91.3 0.09 1.4
slep-d 0 1.4 0.4 0.08 3.0 3.6+1.20.6 0.5 0
slep-e 0 1.1 0.2 0.09 3.3 3.6+1.30.5 0.5 0
Tab. 6.12: Summary of results and model-independent limits for the -mediated channel. The
observed (Nobs) and expected background (Nexp) yields in the signal regions are indicated.
Signal model-independent upper limits at 95% confidence level on the the visible signal cross-
section (95obs), and the observed and expected upper limit on the number of BSM events
(S95obs and S
exp, respectively) are also shown. The 1 variations of the expected limit originate
from the statistical and systematic uncertainties in the background prediction. The last two
columns show the p-value and the corresponding significance for the background-only hypothesis.
For SRs where the data yield is smaller than expected, the p-value is truncated at 0.5 and the
significance is set to 0 [115].
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons
The 
2 via the W/Z-mediated channel is presented in this section and follows the
same structure as the channel. The SR optimisation and definition is in Section 6.2.1,
the definition of CRs and VRs, along with data to background comparisons are in
Section 6.2.2, and the results are in Section 6.2.4. The data-driven Fake Factor has
been used to estimate the reducible backgrounds.
6.2.1 Signal Region Definition for 
2 via W and Z Bosons
As with the  analysis, my primary contribution was to define SRs that offer optimal
sensitivity to 
2 decays via the W/Z-mediated channels. Cases where the mass
difference between the 
2 and the 
1 are close to and larger than the Z boson
mass are again considered, with integrated luminosity of 36.1 fb1 used throughout.
I worked along side another analyst from a different institute, performing numerous
iterations until we converged on the final signal region definitions presented here.
6.2.1.1 Optimisation of Signal Regions
The SR definitions are presented in Table 6.13. A selection of benchmark signal
points that each reside in different areas of parameter space outside of previously
excluded ranges are utilised for the different SRs. Contrary to the  analysis, mminSFOS
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 114 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Bin mminSFOS nJets m
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
SR3-WZ-0Ja
[81.2,101.2] 0 >110
60-120
SR3-WZ-0Jb 120-170
SR3-WZ-0Jc >170
SR3-WZ-1Ja
[81.2,101.2] > 0
>110 120-200 <120 > 70
SR3-WZ-1Jb 110-160
SR3-WZ-1Jc >160 >35
Tab. 6.13: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II summary of the exclusive signal regions targeting both
intermediate and high mass spectrum.
is required to be on-Z in order to target the intermediate decay via the Z boson. To
optimise for lower EmissT values and to access the intermediate mass-splittings, this
region is divided into orthogonal jet multiplicities, requiring either no jets, or at least
one jet.
The EmissT and m
T variables are again utilised, and two-dimensional correlation
plots are used to initially consider the choice of cuts. Figures 6.36 to 6.38 present
six correlation plots requiring nJets = 0 for benchmark signal points m(
2, 
= (200,100), (300,150), (400,200), (450,150), (500,0) and (500,100) GeV. These
figures show the significance maximas are fixed around mT > 110GeV while shifting
to increasing EmissT values as the mass-splittings of the signal points increase. For
this reason, three exclusive SRs are defined with the assistance of kinematic N-1
distributions with one-dimensional ZN curves, presented in Figures 6.39 to 6.41,
with EmissT of 60-120GeV, 120-170GeV and > 170GeV.
Figures 6.42 to 6.44 show correlation plots for the same six benchmark signal points
with nJets > 0. In this case, the significance maximas are seen to shift to both higher
T and mT values with increasing mass-splittings. Kinematic N-1 distributions
with one-dimensional ZN curves, presented in Figures 6.45 to 6.47, are used to
determine optimal access to the different areas of parameter space. Figure 6.45 shows
SR3-WZ-1Ja, with EmissT with 120-200GeV and m
T > 110GeV, is able to target
intermediate mass-splittings. While the N-1 distributions in Figures 6.46 and 6.47
for SR3-WZ-1Jb and SR3-WZ-1Jc, have EmissT > 200GeV and are binned in mT to
target the higher mass-splitting scenarios.
Additional variables to improve sensitivity were investigated. The p```T and p
variables were found to be highly correlated and benefical to increase sensitivity to
SUSY scenarios with intermediate mass-splittings in the SR3-WZ-1Ja region. An
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 115 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.6  0.9  1.2  1.1  0.9  0.7  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.6  0.9  1.2  1.1  0.9  0.7  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.6  0.9  1.2  1.1  0.9  0.7  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.3  0.6  1.0  1.2  1.2  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.7  1.1  1.3  1.2  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.2
 0.2  0.1  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.8  1.2  1.3  1.1  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.2  0.1
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.9  1.2  1.2  1.0  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.1  0.1
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.5  1.0  1.2  1.1  0.8  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.8  1.0  0.8  0.5  0.2  0.1
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.8  0.8  0.5  0.3  0.1  0.0
 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.4  0.2
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.3  0.0
 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.5  0.2
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.5  0.1
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.4  0.1
 0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.3  0.0
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.2
 0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.0
 0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.0  0.0  0.1
 0.2  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.0
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.2  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.2  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.2  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.2  0.5  0.9  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.2  0.6  0.9  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.1  0.3  0.7  1.0  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.2  0.5  0.9  1.2  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.7  1.1  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.9  1.3  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.7  1.1  1.4  1.6  1.6  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.1  1.1
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.6  0.9  1.4  1.7  1.8  1.7  1.7  1.6  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.2  1.1
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  1.0  1.4  1.6  1.7  1.6  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.1  1.0
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  1.0  1.4  1.5  1.6  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.1  0.9  0.9
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.3  1.2  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.8  0.8
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.9  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.6  0.6
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.4  0.4
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.6
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.7  0.9  0.8
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.36: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets = 0 for m(
1) = (200,100) GeV (left) and (300,150) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.7  0.9  0.9  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.5
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.5
 0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.9  0.9  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.7  0.8  0.9
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.8
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.7  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.8
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.9  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9
 0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.2  1.2  1.4  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  1.0  1.2  1.3
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  1.0  1.2
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.37: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets = 0 for m(
1) = (400,200) GeV (left) and (450,150) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
upper cut of 120GeV on p```T and a lower cut of 70GeV on p
T are applied, based on
the findings of the correlation plots shown in Figure 6.48. Finally, Figure 6.49 presents
a kinematic N-1 p`3T distribution with one-dimensional ZN curves for SR3-WZ-1Jc,
with a requirement of > 35GeV, designed to target very high mass points. The full
yield breakdown for both SRs is presented in Table 6.14.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 116 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.0  1.0
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.1
 0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.8  1.0
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9
 0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.9  1.0
 0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.9
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.38: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets = 0 for m(
1) = (500,0) GeV (left) and (500,100) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-0Ja,b,c
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-0Ja,b,c
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.39: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for EmissT for the nJets =0 bins. The
arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three
benchmark signal points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating optimal lower cuts,
and right to left for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-mT-0Ja
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
1 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-mT-0Jb
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.40: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for mminT for SR3-WZ-0Ja (left) and
SR3-WZ-0Jb (right). The arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional
ZN curves for three benchmark signal points.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 117 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-mT-0Jc
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.41: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 mminT distributions for SR3-WZ-0Jc. The arrows
indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark
signal points.
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.3  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.0  0.0
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.0
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.0
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.0
 0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.0
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.1
 0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.2
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.2  0.1
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.42: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets > 0 for m(
1) = (200,100) GeV (left) and (250,150) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.8
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.6  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.8
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.7  0.6
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9
 0.1  0.3  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0
 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.8  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.8  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.8  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.3
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.5  0.8  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.43: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets > 0 for m(
1) = (400,200) GeV (left) and (450,150) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 118 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.4  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.4
 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.5
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.6
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.7
 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8
 0.1  0.2  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.8
 0.0  0.1  0.3  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9
 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.5  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.3  0.6  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.0
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.6  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.7  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 0.0  0.0  0.0  0.1  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.5  0.8  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.44: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for EmissT vs. m
T with
nJets > 0 for m(
1) = (500,0) GeV (left) and (500,100) GeV (right). MC simulations
have been used for both irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included
in the ZN calculations. White indicates less than one background event.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-1Ja
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-1Ja
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.45: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 EmissT distributions for SR3-WZ-1Ja. The arrows
indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark
signal points, which read from left to right for (left), indicating optimal lower cuts, and right
to left for (right) indicating optimal upper cuts.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-mT-1Ja
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-1Jb
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.46: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for SR3-WZ-1Ja (left) and SR3-WZ-1Jb
(right). The arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves
for three benchmark signal points.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 119 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-MET-1Jc
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
210 Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(500,100) GeV
(450,150) GeV
(250,150) GeV
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-mT-1Jc
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.47: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 EmissT (left) and m
T (right) distributions for
SR3-WZ-1Jc. The arrows indicate the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN
curves for three benchmark signal points.
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0
 1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4
 1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.2
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2
 1.0  1.0  1.0  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2  0.9
 1.1  1.1  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.3  1.3  1.0
 1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.5  1.5  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.7
 1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.4  1.2  1.2  0.9  0.8  0.7
 1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.3  1.3  1.4  1.3  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.2  0.9  0.7  0.6  0.6
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 0.4  0.4  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5
 0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.7  0.7  0.7
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.1
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.3  1.2
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.2
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0
 0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0  0.9
 0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0
 0.9  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.2  1.1  1.0  1.0  1.0
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.8
 0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.7
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.9  0.7  0.6  0.5
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5
 0.7  0.7  0.7  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.9  0.9  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.0  0.9  0.8  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4  0.4
 [GeV]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.48: Two-dimensional correlation plots showing the significance for p```T vs. p
the SR3-WZ-01Ja region for the two intermediate mass splitting scenarios m(1 /
(200,100) GeV (left) and (250,150) GeV (right). MC simulations have been used for both
irreducible and reducible backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included in the ZN calculations.
White indicates less than one background event.
Fig. 6.49: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 p`3T distribution for SR3-WZ-1Jc. The arrows indicate
the SR cuts. The ratio plot shows the one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark signal
points.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 120 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Process WZ-0Ja WZ-0Jb WZ-0Jc WZ-1Ja WZ-1Jb WZ-1Jc
WZ 18.15 0.9 2.29 0.33 1.23 0.24 1.9 0.24 1.58 0.21 0.96 0.27
ZZ 0.81 0.09 0.06 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.05 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
VVV 0.31 0.05 0.13 0.03 0.13 0.03 0.12 0.03 0.12 0.03 0.23 0.04
ttV 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.18 0.03 0.13 0.02 0.09 0.02
Higgs    0.01 0.01  
ducible
1.10 0.5 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.02 0.11 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.01 0.0
Total
20.41 1.04 2.51 0.33 1.46 0.24 2.37 0.25 1.91 0.21 1.31 0.28
via W/Z
(500,100) 0.16 0.04 0.31 0.05 2.05 0.13 0.04 0.02 0.43 0.06 1.79 0.12
(500,0) 0.11 0.03 0.29 0.05 2.09 0.13 0.05 0.02 0.37 0.05 1.85 0.12
(450,150) 0.21 0.05 0.48 0.08 2.68 0.18 0.12 0.04 0.48 0.08 2.09 0.17
(400,200) 0.81 0.09 1.42 0.12 2.08 0.14 0.24 0.05 0.61 0.08 1.31 0.12
(300,150) 3.93 0.35 3.1 0.31 1.88 0.24 1.07 0.2 1.44 0.22 0.81 0.17
(250,150) 4.37 0.37 0.64 0.14 0.13 0.07 2.46 0.3 0.75 0.16 0.78 0.17
(200,100) 8.85 0.79 1.21 0.31 0.5 0.19 3.53 0.52 1.44 0.34 0.36 0.19
(500,100) 0 0 0.76 0 0.09 1.39
(500,0) 0 0 0.76 0 0.06 1.45
(450,150) 0 0 1.07 0 0.16 1.68
(400,200) 0 0.26 0.73 0 0.24 1.01
(300,150) 0.46 0.91 0.69 0.40 0.80 0.43
(250,150) 0.49 0 0 1.07 0.22 0.37
(200,100) 1.16 0 0 1.61 0.71 0
Tab. 6.14: Yields for the SM background processes and seven benchmark signal points for the
four SFOS SRs targeting models with intermediate decays via the W and Z bosons. ZN values
are included for the signal points. The uncertainties are statistical only.
6.2.1.2 Sensitivity
Figure 6.50 shows the expected significance ZN values for the 
2 decays via gauge
bosons when combining all six SRs. For this scenario the masses of the 
2 are
expected to be excluded up to 500GeV, an increase of 150GeV from Run-I. The
mass of the 
1 is expected to be excluded up to 150GeV, which is an increase of
40GeV obtained from Run-I. Three of the benchmark signal points, m(
2, 
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 121 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
3.75 2.90 1.64 1.22 0.83 0.34
3.13 4.68 3.43 2.27 1.64 1.22 0.85 0.50
2.11 3.38 3.00 2.43 1.59 0.76 0.30
1.25 1.59 1.96 1.99 1.18 0.98 0.80 0.49
0.82 1.30 1.20 1.02 0.73
0.91 0.90 0.74 0.56 0.42
0.46 0.49 0.51 0.16
0.19 0.28 0.18
0.07 0.08
) [GeV]
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
 = 13 TeVs    
L dt = 36.1fb
Fig. 6.50: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II two-dimensional sensitivity plot showing the expected
combined significances ZN for the SR binned selection in the C1N2 via gauge bosons simplified
model. MC simulation is used for all backgrounds. A 30% uncertainty is included in the ZN
calculations.
= (200,100), (450,150) and (500,0) GeV are expected to be excluded if no excess is
observed, while m(
2, 
1) = (300,150) and (500,100) GeV have the potential to
be excluded.
6.2.2 Background Validation for 
2 via W and Z Bosons
This section is devoted to validating the SM background processes that have already
been described in the general strategy in Chapter 5. Similarly to the  analysis,
I contributed towards defining CRs and VRs, I provided support in running the
background-only fits and generating the tables presented, and also producing all of
the distributions for visual interpretation. As with the  analysis, the data-driven
Fake Factor is used to model the reducible processes, while the most dominant SM
background, WZ, uses dedicated CRs to derive scale factors.
6.2.2.1 Control Regions
Although the W/Z analysis uses the same data and background samples as the 
analysis, two new CRs are required, tailored to determine separate scale factors
for events with nJets = 0 and nJets > 0, as per the W/Z SRs. To keep the CRs
orthogonal to the SRs, both require mminT < 110GeV. Conversely, to keep the
regions kinematically similar and to increase WZ purity by reducing the number of
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 122 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Tab. 6.15: Full 2015 and 2016
Run-II definitions of CRs with ei-
ther zero jets or at least one jet.
Al requirements are in addition to
the preselection. Units are in GeV.
Region nJets mSFOS m
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
CR3`-0J 0
/ [81.2, 101.2] <110
CR3`-1J > 0 >120
fake backgrounds, both maintain their corresponding EmissT cuts of > 60GeV and
> 120GeV, respectively. Table 6.15 gives a summary of the CR definitions.
As described in Section 5.6, observed data is used to tune the SM WZ background
so that the total estimated background matches. The scale factors for the WZ
background was calculated to be 1.017  0.054 for events with nJets = 0, and
0.9070.065 for events with nJets > 0.
6.2.2.2 Validation Regions
In order to validate the new CRs, two corresponding VRs with nJets = 0 and nJets > 0
are defined, presented in Table 6.16. To remain orthogonal to the CR and SRs,
a low-EmissT is enforced. Distributions in E
T , m
T , m
SFOS and lepton pT are
presented in Figures 6.51 to 6.56, with the derived scale factor applied. All data to
background comparisons show good agreement within uncertainty.
Tab. 6.16: Full 2015
and 2016 Run-II VR def-
initions. All require-
ments are in addition to
the preselection. Units
are in GeV.
Region nJets m``` mSFOS E
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
VR3-Za-0J 0
/ [81.2, 101.2] [81.2,101.2] 40-60
VR3-Za-1J > 0
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.51: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-0J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 123 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]minSFOSm
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.52: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-0J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-0J
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.53: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-0J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]
40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.54: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-1J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 124 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]minSFOSm
82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]1
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.55: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-1J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
710 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(1000,600) GeV0
)=(800,600) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
VR3-Za-1J
 [GeV]3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Fig. 6.56: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II distributions in VR3-Za-1J with scale factor applied to
W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.2.2.3 Background-only Fit
The CRs defined in Table 6.15 and VRs defined in Table 6.16 have been used for
the extrapolation of the fit results as detailed in Section 5.6. The results are shown
in Tables 6.17 and 6.18. Both statistical and systematic uncertainties are included.
The total expected SM yields are in good agreement with the number of observed
events in each region.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 125 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
CR3-WZ-0J VR3-Za-0J
Observed events 486 618
Total SM 486 22 598 61
WZ0j 453 27 520 61
ZZ 12 10 24 20
VVV 1.6 1.3 0.93 0.77
ttV 1.4 1.1 0.79 0.66
Higgs 2.5 2.1 1.21 1.01
Reducible 15 8 51 25
Tab. 6.17: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II background-only fit for the WZ-mediated CRs. All
systematic and statistical uncertainties are included.
CR3-WZ-1J VR3-Za-1J
Observed events 264 746
Total SM 264 16 809 95
WZ1j 241 22 620 84
ZZ 5 5 48 40
VVV 1.6 1.3 1.5 1.3
ttV 7 6 7.3 6.1
Higgs 2.9 2.4 5.6 4.6
Reducible 5.9 2.9 127 63
Tab. 6.18: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II background-only fit for the WZ-mediated CRs. All
systematic and statistical uncertainties are included.
6.2.3 Systematic Uncertainties for 
2 via W and Z Bosons
A summary of the dominant sources of systematic uncertainties in the background
and signal estimates for each SR are listed in Table 6.19. The systematic uncertainty
associated with jets can be seen to be a consistently significant contribution, followed
by both WZ modelling and EmissT contributions.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 126 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Uncertainty WZ-0Ja WZ-0Jb WZ-0Jc WZ-1Ja WZ-1Jb WZ-1Jc
Reducible 2.48% 0.37% 1.28% 2.26% 2.20% 
WZ Modelling 5.37% 5.20% 5.51% 8.34% 5.74% 12.8%
Jets 7.79% 7.59% 8.60% 14.0% 4.18% 6.83%
T 7.10% 3.77% 5.66% 12.6% 2.75% 5.38%
Leptons 1.06% 3.10% 3.27% 3.94% 2.33% 3.27%
b-tagging Eff.    1.28% 0.78% 0.79%
Tab. 6.19: Breakdown of the dominant systematic uncertainties on background estimates.
Percentages are quoted relative to the total background estimates for each SR defined in
Section 6.1.2 and assume no correlation between the combined sub-categories to give an
approximate idea of magnitudes for illustrative purposes.
6.2.4 Results for 
2 via W and Z Bosons
This section is dedicated to presenting and interpreting the results for the 36.1 fb1
W/Z-mediated channel at a centre-of-mass energy of
s = 13TeV. All the statistical
strategies adopted have previously been discussed in the general analysis strategy, in
Section 5.6. As with the  analysis, in addition to generating distributions for visual
interpretation, and providing support for the background-only fits, I was responsible
for running the discovery-fit to set the model-independent upper limits.
6.2.4.1 Observations in Signal Regions
The observed number of events in all signal regions, along with the total background
expectations and uncertainties are shown in Table 6.20. The uncertainties include
both statistical and systematic components. As with the  analysis, it is also
interesting to compare the shape of the important kinematic distributions for variables
that were used for optimisation. The EmissT , m
T and p
T distributions, are presented
for each of the six signal regions in Figures 6.57 to 6.60. Two 
2 via W/Z
benchmark points with m(
2, 
1) = (500,100) and (450,150) GeV are also included
as they are within an area of parameter space that is expected to be excluded by the
analysis.
In general, the agreement between data events and background is good within
systematic uncertainties. As with the  channel there are some upward fluctuations,
as in the case of SR3-WZ-1Jb and SR3-WZ-1Jc, which expected 1.820.26 and
1.260.34 events and observed 3 and 4 events, respectively. There were also downward
fluctuations in SR3-WZ-0Jb and SR3-WZ-1Ja.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 127 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
SR3- WZ-0Ja WZ-0Jb WZ-0Jc WZ-1Ja WZ-1Jb WZ-1Jc
Observed 21 1 2 1 3 4
Total SM 21.7 2.9 2.7 0.5 1.56 0.33 2.2 0.5 1.82 0.26 1.26 0.34
WZ 19.5 2.9 2.5 0.5 1.33 0.31 1.8 0.5 1.49 0.22 0.92 0.28
ZZ 0.81 0.23 0.06 0.03 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.01 
V V V 0.31 0.07 0.13 0.04 0.13 0.03 0.11 0.02 0.12 0.03 0.23 0.05
ttV 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.14 0.04 0.12 0.02 0.08 0.02
Higgs    0.01 0.00  
Reducible 1.1 0.5 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.02 0.11 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.01 0.00
Tab. 6.20: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II background-only fit results for all six W /Z signal regions.
All systematic and statistical uncertainties are included in the fit.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-0Ja
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-0Jb
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.57: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II mminT N-1 distributions in SR3-WZ-0Ja (left) and SR3-WZ-
0Jb (right) with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive of
both statistical and systematic.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-0Jc
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
100 150 200 250 300
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-WZ-0Ja,b,c
 [GeV]
100 150 200 250 300
Fig. 6.58: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II N-1 distributions for mminT in SR3-WZ-0Jc (left) and
EmissT for all nJets =0 bins (right) [115] with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The
uncertainties are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 128 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-WZ-1Ja
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
SR3-WZ-1Ja
 [GeV]min
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.59: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT (left) [115] and m
T (right) N-1 distribution in
SR3-WZ-1Ja with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties are inclusive
of both statistical and systematic.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
10 Data 
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-WZ-1Jb
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Total SM
Higgs
Reducible
)=(500,100) GeV0
)=(450,150) GeV0
= 13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
ATLAS
SR3-WZ-1Jc
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Fig. 6.60: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II EmissT N-1 distributions in SR3-WZ-1Jb (left) [115] and
SR3-WZ-1Jc (right) [115] with the scale factor applied to W Z background. The uncertainties
are inclusive of both statistical and systematic.
6.2.4.2 Statistical Interpretation
In the absence of any significant excess, exclusion limits on the masses of the
charginos and neutralinos are set. Figure 6.61 presents the exclusion contours for
SUSY scenarios with exactly three-leptons in the final state. The observed limit
excludes 
2 masses up to 380GeV, which is an increase of 30GeV compared
to Run-I. The upper limit is not as high as expected due to the number of events
observed in SR3-WZ-1Jc. The model-independent limits are presented in Table 6.21.
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 129 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
) [GeV]
)/m(
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
=13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
 ATLAS
 l Z (
)  l W ( 
Theory
1 Observed limit  (
)exp1 Expected limit (
ATLAS 3L 8 TeV arXiv:1403.5294
Fig. 6.61: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II observed and expected exclusion limits on the 
1 and
1 masses for simplified mass spectra SUSY scenarios with exactly three leptons in the final
state [115]. The observed (solid thick red line) and expected (thin dashed blue line) exclusion
contours are indicated. The shaded band corresponds to the 1 variations in the expected
limit, including all uncertainties except theoretical uncertainties in the signal cross-section.
The dotted lines around the observed limit illustrate the change in the observed limit as the
nominal signal cross-section is scaled up and down by the theoretical uncertainty. All limits
are computed at 95% confidence level. The observed limits that were obtained from ATLAS
during Run-I are also shown [134].
Region Nobs Nexp 
obs[fb] S
obs S
exp p(s=0) Z
WZ-0Ja 21 21.7 2.9 0.35 12.8 13.5+2.75.3 0.5 0
WZ-0Jb 1 2.7 0.5 0.10 3.7 4.6+2.10.9 0.5 0
WZ-0Jc 2 1.6 0.3 0.13 4.8 4.1+1.70.7 0.28 0.57
WZ-1Ja 1 2.2 0.5 0.09 3.2 4.5+1.61.3 0.5 0
WZ-1Jb 3 1.8 0.3 0.16 5.6 4.3+1.70.9 0.18 0.91
WZ-1Jc 4 1.3 0.3 0.20 7.2 4.2+1.70.4 0.03 1.8
Tab. 6.21: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II summary of results and model-independent limits for
the -mediated channel. The observed (Nobs) and expected background (Nexp) yields in the
signal regions are indicated. Signal model-independent upper limits at 95% confidence level on
the the visible signal cross-section (95obs), and the observed and expected upper limit on the
number of BSM events (S95obs and S
exp, respectively) are also shown. The 1 variations of
the expected limit originate from the statistical and systematic uncertainties in the background
prediction. The last two columns show the p-value and the corresponding significance for the
background-only hypothesis. For SRs where the data yield is smaller than expected, the p-value
is truncated at 0.5 and the significance is set to 0 [115].
6.2 Searches for 
2 via W and Z Bosons 130 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Statistical Combination with Two-Lepton Final States
As discussed in the experimental landscape, earlier in Section 2.3.6, the results from
W/Z-mediated three-lepton searches can be statistically combined with the results
from the W/Z-mediated two-lepton searches due to the orthogonality of their SRs.
Figure 2.17 shows the combined upper exclusion limits of the chargino and neutralino
masses achieved during Run-I. For Run-II the two-lepton search defined SRs that
targeted jets in the final state, and is documented in Ref. [115]. Figure 6.62 presents
the combined upper mass limits for two and three-lepton searches. The masses of the
2 are excluded up to 580GeV, a significant increase of 160GeV from Run-I.
) [GeV]
)/m(
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
=13 TeV, 36.1 fbs
 ATLAS
 W  
All limits at 95% CL
Theory
1 Observed limit  (
)exp1 Expected limit (
ATLAS 8 TeV arXiv:1403.5294
Fig. 6.62: Full 2015 and 2016 Run-II observed and expected exclusion limits on the 
and 
1 masses for simplified mass spectra SUSY scenarios with exactly two or three leptons
in the final state [115]. The observed (solid thick red line) and expected (thin dashed blue
line) exclusion contours are indicated. The shaded band corresponds to the 1 variations
in the expected limit, including all uncertainties except theoretical uncertainties in the signal
cross-section. The dotted lines around the observed limit illustrate the change in the observed
limit as the nominal signal cross-section is scaled up and down by the theoretical uncertainty.
All limits are computed at 95% confidence level. The observed limits that were obtained from
ATLAS during Run-I are also shown [134].
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY 131 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY
Complimentary searches for electroweak SUSY can be carried out to cover maximal
SUSY scenarios with three electrons or muons in the final state. As detailed in
Section 2.3.5, scenarios with intermediate decays via the W and Higgs bosons
can also produce this signature. This section introduces a preliminary first-look
optimisation of SRs targeting this scenario. Run-I results for this channel, presented
in Section 2.3.6, shows exclusion of 
2 masses up to 150GeV. The aim of this
preliminary glance is to gage how well the W/h-mediated scenario can isolate SUSY
signal from background SM processes at an increased total luminosity of 80 fb1, as
was collected during Run-II by the end of 2017.
6.3.1 Preliminary Glance at 
2 via W and Higgs Bosons
As the analyses presented in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 focus solely on SUSY scenarios that
require a SFOS lepton pair in the final state, this section follows a similar approach
by motivating a preliminary optimisation of SRs targeting only events that also
require a SFOS lepton pair. Section 6.3.1.1 details the instances when SFOS lepton
pairs can occur, while Section 6.3.1.2, presents the first-look optimisation study. The
optimisation strategy follows the same procedure as detailed in Chapter 5 with the
reducible background being MC only.
6.3.1.1 
2 via W and Higgs Bosons with SFOS Events
The Higgs boson can decay di-leptonically, either directly or via intermediate decay
channels: H  WW (B = 21.4%); H   (B = 6.27%); H  ZZ (B = 2.62%);
H  Z (B = 0.15%); and H   (B = 0.02%) [3]. When in association with a
leptonically decaying W boson, three leptons can be produced in the final state. All
these scenarios can result in a SFOS lepton pair, and so SRs to target this are an
interesting aspect of a W/h-mediated SUSY search.
The alternative to requiring a SFOS lepton pair is to request a different-flavour
opposite-charge-sign (DFOS) lepton pair. Additional SRs requiring a DFOS lepton
pair can be made orthogonal to their SFOS SR counterparts by also requiring a
same-flavour same-charge-sign (SFSS) lepton pair. Orthogonal DFOS-plus-SFSS SRs
(which will be referred to solely as DFOS from now on), would target the highest
branching ratio scenario whereby the Higgs boson decays to a W boson pair, leaving
SFOS SRs to target all others.
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY 132 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.3.1.2 SFOS Signal Region Optimisation
The SR definitions for SFOS are presented in Table 6.22 and are inspired by the
W/Z SRs presented in Table 6.13. Three benchmark signal points with m(
2, 
= (175,25), (187.5,37.5) and (200,0) GeV are utilised as they each reside in areas
of parameter space not previously excluded. Similar to the  analysis, the mminSFOS
variable is required to be off-Z in order to veto the peak in the distribution arising
from background events comprised of Z bosons. A mminSFOS distribution with only
baseline requirements applied, is shown in Figure 6.63. In order to optimise for lower
T values, which allow access to the intermediate mass splittings residing along the
horizontal of the signal grid, this region is binned in jet multiplicity, requiring either
no jets, or at least one jet. A high mminT requirement is also imposed. Finally, the
SRs are binned in EmissT to maximise the significance. Kinematic N-1 distributions
are presented in Figures 6.64 to 6.65, and the yield breakdown for each SR is given
in Table 6.23.
Region mminSFOS nJets m
[GeV] [GeV] [GeV]
SR-SFOS-0Ja
/ [81.2, 101.2] 0 >110
80-120
SR-SFOS-0Jb >120
SR-SFOS-1Ja
/ [81.2, 101.2] >0 >110
110-160
SR-SFOS-1Jb >160
Tab. 6.22: Summary table of SFOS SR selection criteria
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-mSFOS
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-mSFOS
 [GeV]minSFOSm
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Fig. 6.63: N-1 plots for the SFOS preselection criteria. The arrows indicate bin edges. The
panels below the main distributions show one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark
signal points. These curves indicate how the significance changes as a function of threshold
when either a lower or upper cut on the variable in question is applied to the SR definition.
Data-driven reducible backgrounds are being used with a flat 30% uncertainty.
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY 133 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-0Ja,b
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
2 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-0Ja,b
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.64: N-1 plots for the zero jet bin (SR3`-SFOS 0Ja,b). The arrows indicate bin edges.
The panels below the main distributions show one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark
signal points. These curves indicate how the significance changes as a function of threshold.
Data-driven reducible backgrounds are being used with a flat 30% uncertainty.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-1Ja,b
 [GeV]
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
1 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Total SM
Reducible
Higgs
(175,25) GeV
(187.5,37.5) GeV
(200,0) GeV
= 13 TeV, 80 fbs
SR3-Wh-1Ja,b
 [GeV]min
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Fig. 6.65: N-1 plots for the at least one jet bin (SR3`-SFOS 1J). The arrows indicate bin edges.
The panels below the main distributions show one-dimensional ZN curves for three benchmark
signal points. These curves indicate how the significance changes as a function of threshold
when either a lower or upper cut on the variable in question is applied to the SR definition.
Data-driven reducible backgrounds are being used with a flat 30% uncertainty.
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY 134 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
Process SFOS-0Ja SFOS-0Jb SFOS-1Ja SFOS-1Jb
WZ 5.01 0.65 4.05 0.75 7.63 0.77 6.23 1.12
ZZ 0.24 0.06 0.15 0.05 0.4 0.09 0.25 0.06
VVV 1.38 0.18 0.59 0.11 1.88 0.19 2.14 0.2
ttV 0.22 0.15 0.07 0.02 2.26 0.38 1.60 0.30
Higgs 0.62 0.62 0.0 0.0 0.06 0.04 0.12 0.08
Reducible 0.01 0.01  1.18 0.42 0.66 0.32
Total background 7.48 0.93 4.86 0.77 14.23 1.2 11.01 1.23
via Wh (175,25) 11.97 3.8 9.4 3.33 7.81 3.21 6.09 3.1
via Wh (187.5,37.5) 7.72 2.6 7.37 2.61 6.11 2.51 4.72 2.12
via Wh (200,0) 6.79 2.27 4.48 1.83 11.1 3.11 6.73 2.41
Tab. 6.23: Yields for the SM background processes and three benchmark signal points for the
four SFOS SRs targeting models with intermediate decays via the W and Higgs boson. The
uncertainties are statistical only.
6.3.1.3 Sensitivity
Figure 6.66 presents the two-dimensional sensitivity plot for the simplified model
with 
2 decaying via intermediate W and Higgs bosons, requiring only events
with a SFOS lepton pair in the final state. The significance is calculated assuming a
flat 30% systematic uncertainty on the total SM background. The backgrounds used
in the optimisation studies are based on MC with statistical uncertainties only.
1.08 0.50 0.85 0.53 0.22 0.27 0.42 0.20 0.07 0.12
0.94 0.86 0.46 0.28 0.50 0.33 0.09 0.36
0.84 0.76 0.34 0.22 0.12 0.20 0.30 0.21 0.08
0.43 0.53 0.36 0.07 0.00 0.26
0.73 0.67 0.46 0.35 0.48 0.11 0.02 0.07 0.02
0.61 0.25 0.22 0.32 0.22
0.26 0.46 0.32 0.40 0.09
0.17 0.28
0.08 0.10 0.05 0.01
) [GeV]
100 150 200 250 300 350 400
 = 13 TeVs    
L dt = 80fb
Fig. 6.66: 2D sensitivity plots showing the SFOS significance for the full five bin signal region
targeting C1N2 via Wh model.
6.3 Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY 135 6 Results for 1 02 with Three-Lepton Final States
6.3.1.4 Combined Signal Regions
As previously mentioned, this analysis could be statistically combined with orthogonal
SRs which target a DFOS lepton pair. As DFOS SRs target a higher branching
ratio decay chain than the orthogonal SFOS lepton pair, much higher sensitivities
than those shown in Figure 6.66 can be predicted, resulting in a further increase in
sensitivity when statistically combining both the SFOS and DFOS SRs.
6.3.2 Summary
Although the SFOS SRs cannot expect to exclude masses beyond Run-I limits alone,
when considered in combination with additional orthogonal DFOS SRs it is indicative
that the mass limits of exclusion will improve significantly if no evidence of SUSY is
found. Therefore, further optimisation focusing on DFOS SRs should be performed.
These regions could investigate new kinematic variables such as invariant mass of the
lepton pair originating from the Higgs boson, angular variables between the SFSS or
DFOS leptons, and distance between final state leptons.
7. Conclusion and Outlook
This thesis presents the best results to date produced by ATLAS on the search for
electroweak production of supersymmetric gauginos, in events with three electrons
or muons and missing transverse energy in the final state. Analyses were performed
using 13.3 fb1 and 36.1 fb1 of data at
s = 13TeV.
Optimised selection criteria were applied to target R-parity conserving simplified
supersymmetric scenarios with intermediate decays via either sleptons or SM W
and Z bosons. No significant excess was observed within statistical and systematic
uncertainties, when compared to SM expectations. Statistical interpretation of the
results was performed in order to set 95% CL exclusion limits on the mass parameters
of each model considered. Model-independent limits on the visible cross-section for
beyond-the-SM scenarios were also set with 95% CL.
Early results for scenarios with intermediate decays via sleptons, using a 13.3 fb1
subset of data was able to exclude 
1 masses up to 1TeV, a substantial increase
of 300GeV compared to Run-I results, providing an insight into the exclusion power
of masses at the increased 13TeV collision energy. A subsequent analysis using the full
36.1 fb
1 of data collected during 2015 and 2016 improved on this further by setting
upper limits on 
1 masses of 1.13TeV, an increase of 420GeV compared to
Run-I. The observed upper mass limit for scenarios with intermediate decays via W
and Z bosons was set at 380GeV, an increase of 30GeV compared to Run-I. The
increase from Run-I was not as large as had been expected, due to a small, but not
significant excess, in data, in regions of parameter space that were targeting heavier
1s. When these results for the W and Z mediated decay were statistically
combined with results from an orthogonal two-lepton final state scenario, upper 
1 masses were set at 580GeV, a substantial increase of 160GeV compared to
the equivalent combined Run-I results.
Even though it is disappointing not to have observed evidence of new physics at
the LHC in this first iteration at
s = 13TeV, the work presented shows clear
advancement in strategy, and an improvement of the upper mass limits compared
to Run-I, all of which will play a vital role in contributing to the evolution of the
theory of supersymmetry. Looking ahead, with the full Run-II integrated luminosity
expected to reach 150 fb1, there is still much potential to observe evidence of the
production of electroweak supersymmetric particles, and analyses with the objective
to build on the results presented in this thesis are already underway.
A. Inner Detector Trigger
A.1 ID Trigger Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
A.2 Migration to New Offline Data Formats . . . . . . . . . 138
A.2.1 Track Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
A.2.2 Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development . . . . 139
This section gives an overview of the technical work performed to obtain the ATLAS
authorship qualification. The work was within the ID Trigger group detailed in
Chapter 3, and was split into three parts. Early contributions involved the evaluation
of changes made to the trigger framework, and is discussed in Section A.1, while the
dominant contribution was to adapt the trigger software to use a new format for the
input files, discussed in Section A.2. The final contribution was the development of
an automated system to submit and process data collected from the ID in order to
monitor the performance, detailed in Section A.3.
A.1 ID Trigger Performance
The ID tracking algorithms used for the HLT trigger reconstruction are continuously
updated to optimise the performance of the experiment. Monitoring and evaluation
of this performance is a crucial part of data-taking to ensure the reliability of the
software before any updates are released for online use. This evaluation is performed
offline by emulating online conditions using benchmark runs and mimicking the
reconstruction that would occur during normal data-taking [135].
I was tasked with the first stage of this evaluation, which involved running the
updated software locally and comparing the results to those from the original setup.
Often, bugs in the software would be present that would require attention, for
example missing software libraries or undefined dataset lists. Once all software bugs
had been fixed and good agreement was observed, the updates were passed to the
ATLAS Nightly Build System [136] for further testing.
The ATLAS Nightly Build System is responsible for testing the repeatability of new
releases, accumulating results on webpage interfaces, and giving feedback to the
responsible developers if an error is detected. If no error occurs, the new release is
passed to the final stage of validation, the RunTimeTester (RTT) framework [137].
A.2 Migration to New Offline Data Formats 138 A Inner Detector Trigger
The RTT is used to run much longer tests up to approximately 24 hours. It has
the ability to submit, run and test jobs using different computing resources, and
report results to developers, similarly as the ATLAS Nightly Build System. Once an
update has been validated, the development release goes into a new patch release
that can be deployed for online use.
A.2 Migration to New Offline Data Formats
As discussed in Chapter 4, the ID Trigger software runs on the Athena computing
framework. This framework is able to read in data files and write out ntuples. In
2014 a new dataset format, known as xAODs, designed for use with a ROOT [119]
based physics analysis framework called RootCore, was introduced. However, this
new format was not fully compatible with Athena, namely a crucial function that
selected ID tracks and used all the corresponding properties for reconstruction. My
initial task was to develop this function in RootCore, which would eventually be
paired to run in parallel with the Athena framework.
A.2.1 Track Selection
The track selection within Athena was designed to first check whether a chain (see
Section 3.2.6) passes a given trigger. For each passing chain, a Trigger Decision Tool
(TDT) looped through all RoI combinations to retrieve track collections. Finally,
a function was implemented to select and retrieve all track properties from the
collections.
The development in RootCore was held up by a separate delay in developing a
compatible TDT, however an improved solution was realised. Instead of running
RootCore in parallel, a stripped down version of Athena was provided with the
necessary functionality to run RootCore and the newly developed track selection
function within the Athena framework itself.
A.2.2 Outcomes
The result of integrating RootCore into Athena was that the newly developed track
selecting function could run much faster than if it required two separate frameworks
running in parallel, and much faster than running standalone in Athena due to the
time it would take to setup the full Athena framework.
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development 139 A Inner Detector Trigger
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development
The ID Trigger group carries out analyses on the tracking performance of the ID.
This involves sending the entire list of Run-II collected data to the computing grid
(see Section 3.2.6), process it and produce performance plots, each stage of which
was performed and checked manually, making it a very time-consuming endeavour.
I was given the task of developing an automated system that would perform the
following:
 Send dataset jobs to the grid;
 Check whether the jobs had completed successfully;
 Re-submit if jobs had failed;
 Download all successfully completed jobs;
 Process all new jobs daily.
The electron chain performance plots generated by this automated system are
displayed in Figures A.1 and A.2. This system was later developed by the ID Trigger
group for muon and tau chains.
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development 140 A Inner Detector Trigger
Offline track 
3 2 1 0 1 2 3
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:02 2017 (private private) [GeV]
Offline track p
4 5 6 7 8 10 20 30 40
210 2102
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:02 2017 (private private)
Offline track z
200 100 0 100 200
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:03 2017 (private private) ><
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:03 2017 (private private)
Fig. A.1: The ID tracking efficiency for electrons selected by the 24GeV and 26GeV electron
support triggers, with respect to offline electron candidates with pT > 0GeV. The efficiency
is shown as a function of: (a) the offline reconstructed muon , (b) the offline reconstructed
muon pT , (c) the offline reconstructed muon z0 , and (d) the mean number of pile-up vertices,
<  >. Efficiencies are shown for both the fast tracking and precision tracking algorithms.
Bayesian uncertainties are shown.
A.3 Automated Performance Analysis Development 141 A Inner Detector Trigger
Offline 
3 2 1 0 1 2 3
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:10 2017 (private private) [GeV]
Offline p
4 5 6 7 8 10 20 30 40
210 2102
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.0006
0.0007
0.0008
0.0009
0.001
0.0011
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:10 2017 (private private)
Offline 
3 2 1 0 1 2 3
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:09 2017 (private private) [GeV]
Offline p
4 5 6 7 8 10 20 30 40
210 2102
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.0006
0.0007
0.0008
0.0009
0.001
0.0011
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_FTF
e24_lhmedium_idperf_L1EM20VH : Electron_IDTrig
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_FTF
e26_lhtight_idperf : Electron_IDTrig
built on Thu May 4 16:04:10 2017 (private private)
Fig. A.2: The differential resolution for pseudorapidity and inverse transverse momentum as a
function of offline track psuedorapidity and transverse momentum. The resolutions are shown
for electrons selected by the 24GeV and 26GeV electron support triggers for both the fast
tracking and precision tracking algorithms. Bayesian uncertainties are shown.
B. Early Run II ttV Studies
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
B.1.1 Run-I Signal Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
B.1.2 Re-optimisation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
B.2 Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
The primary neutralino and chargino producing processes detailed in Section 2.3.5
are predicted to be incredibly rare events with production cross-sections many orders
of magnitude smaller than the total produced by the LHC. Being able to separate a
SUSY signal from the SM background requires a good understanding of the most
dominant processes so that accurate estimations can be made. As mentioned in
Section 5.1, ttV is one of the most significant processes that can replicate three
leptons and high EmissT in the final state, and so it is of crucial importance for this
thesis that the cross-sections are accurate.
The production cross-section at
s = 8TeV was measured to be ttZ = 0.176
+0.058
0.052 pb
observed with a 4.5 significance [138]. This was achieved using a combination of
SRs targeting same-sign di-muons, tri-leptons or tetra-leptons in the final state. At
s = 13TeV, theoretical calculations estimated an increased production cross-section
of ttZ = 0.84 0.1 pb [139].
This section introduces an early Run-II re-optimisation study that I contributed as
part of the ttV analysis team. Using a subset of 3.2 fb1 of data recorded in 2015,
the aim was to increase sensitivity to ttZ processes in the SRs, allowing further
constraints on the ttV production cross-section. The full publication of this early
Run-II study is in Ref. [140].
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation
In Section B.1.1, a recap of the SR definitions used during Run-I is given, while
Section B.1.2 presents a re-optimisation strategy based on the Run-I definitions.
B.1.1 Run-I Signal Regions
The discriminant variables utilised for the Run-I ttZ signal regions, have all been
introduced in Section 5.3.1, and were used in the previously presented SUSY searches.
A SFOS lepton pair is required, with the invariant di-lepton mass required to be
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 143 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Tab. B.1: Summary of the
exclusive Run-I signal regions
targeting the ttZ process.
Variable 3`-Z-1b4j 3`-Z-2b3j 3`-Z-2b4j
Leptons ```
T > 25 GeV
T > 20 GeV
mSFOS  [81.2 101.2] GeV
njets  4 = 3  4
nbjets = 1  2  2
close to the Z boson mass. Additional requirements on the leading, and third-leading
lepton pT are to provide assurance that the particle pT is above the trigger turn-
on-curve. The ttZ decay channel which results in three leptons in the final state
is ttZ  Wb Wb Z  `b qqb ``, which also results in four jets, two of which are
b-jets. The 3`-Z-2b4j SR is designed to target instances where all jets have been
correctly reconstructed, while 3`-Z-1b4j and 3`-Z-2b3j target cases where jets have
been missed in reconstruction. Definitions for the three exclusive Run-I SRs are
presented in Table B.1.
B.1.2 Re-optimisation Study
A re-optimisation of the SRs defined for the Run-I analysis, was attempted to improve
sensitivity for ttV processes. A luminosity of 3.32 fb1 was used, with the significant
background arising from fake leptons, diboson production and the production of a
single top quark in association with a Z boson.
Using the 3`-Z-1b4j, 3`-Z-2b3j and 3`-Z-2b4j SR definitions as a basis, this study
introduces additional jet variables to determine whether an improvement to signifi-
cance can be achieved, when compared to the original Run-I SR definitions. The
additional variables are jet transverse momentum, pjet1T , p
T and p
T , and the sum
of all jet transverse momentum, HT . In all cases, the lepton pT is modified to achieve
optimal significance. Significance is calculated using the same method presented in
Section 5.3 with an uncertainty of 30%. New SR definitions with optimal significance
are presented in the following sections.
B.1.2.1 3`-Z-1b4j Optimisation
Requirements of HT > 250GeV and p
T > 40GeV were introduced in order to target
energetic events, while pT of the leading and third-leading leptons were adjusted
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 144 B Early Run II ttV Studies
accordingly. A summary of the optimal selections for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR are presented
in Table B.2, with the relevant kinematic distributions being displayed in Figures
B.1-B.4. The event yield breakdown for both the original Run-I and the re-optimised
SR definitions are presented in Table B.3. With this re-optimised SR defintion, a
significance of 1.223 was achieved, a slight increase from 1.222 which was obtained
for the original Run-I SR definition.
Variable Cut
HT >250 GeV
T >40 GeV
T >50 GeV
T >20 GeV
Tab. B.2: Optimal additional and modified selections for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR.
Fig. B.1: HT distributions before (left) and after (right) the optimal cuts have been applied
for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR.
Fig. B.2: pT distributions for the sub-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR.
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 145 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Fig. B.3: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR.
Fig. B.4: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading lepton before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-1b4j SR.
B.1.2.2 3`-Z-2b3j Optimisation
A larger requirement on HT of > 300GeV, along with p
T > 40GeV and p
30GeV requirements were introduced in order to target energetic events, while pT of
the sub-leading and third-leading leptons were adjusted accordingly. A summary
of the optimal selections for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR are presented in Table B.4, with
the relevant kinematic distributions being displayed in Figures B.5-B.8. The event
yield breakdown for both the original Run-I and the re-optimised SR definitions are
presented in Table B.5. With this re-optimised SR defintion, a significance of 1.223
was achieved, an increase from 1.213 which was obtained for the original Run-I SR
definition.
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 146 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Process Run-I SR Re-optimised SR
WZ 2.860.23 1.927  0.194
ZZ 0.400.18 0.383  0.063
tZ 0.3030.017 0.188  0.033
Z+jets 0.0120.005 0.257  0.186
ttW 0.0360.005 0.034  0.005
tt 0.250.07 
ttH 0.1290.009 0.129  0.040
Other 0.7430.042 0.034  0.016
Total SM 4.7330.300 2.952  0.537
ttZ 4.33  0.04 3.301  0.032
Significance 1.222 1.223
Tab. B.3: Event breakdown for Run-I SR and re-optimised SR for 3`-Z-1b4j.
Variable Cut
HT >300 GeV
T >40 GeV
T >30 GeV
T >30 GeV
T >20 GeV
Tab. B.4: Optimal additional and modified selections for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR.
Fig. B.5: HT distributions before (left) and after (right) the optimal cuts have been applied
for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR.
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 147 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Fig. B.6: pT distributions for the sub-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR.
Fig. B.7: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR.
Fig. B.8: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading lepton before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b3j SR.
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 148 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Process Run-I SR Re-optimised SR
WZ 0.220.06 0.167  0.056
ZZ 0.00220.0014 0.031  0.012
tZ 0.3480.018 0.344  0.048
Z+jets 0.0060.004 0.006  0.004
ttW 0.0830.006 0.073  0.006
tt 0.100.04 0.000  0.000
ttH 0.0550.004 0.044  0.034
Other 0.1720.018 0.008  0.007
Total SM 0.986  0.070 0.672  0.167
ttZ 1.928  0.023 1.658  0.021
Total Significance 1.213 1.223
Tab. B.5: Event breakdown for Run-I SR and re-optimised SR for 3`-Z-2b3j.
B.1.2.3 3`-Z-2b4j Optimisation
In the final SR that targets events with no missing jets, requirements ofHT > 250GeV
and pjet3T > 50GeV are applied, while pT of the sub-leading and third-leading leptons
were adjusted accordingly. A summary of the optimal selections for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR
are presented in Table B.6, with the relevant kinematic distributions being displayed
in Figures B.9-B.12. The event yield breakdown for both the original Run-I and
the re-optimised SR definitions are presented in Table B.7. With this re-optimised
SR defintion, a significance of 2.135 was achieved, a decrease from 2.577 which was
obtained for the original Run-I SR definition.
Variable Cut
HT >250 GeV
T >50 GeV
T >40 GeV
T >30 GeV
Tab. B.6: Optimal additional and modified selections for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR.
B.1 Signal Region Optimisation 149 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Fig. B.9: HT distributions before (left) and after (right) the optimal cuts have been applied
for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR.
Fig. B.10: pT distributions for the sub-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR.
Fig. B.11: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading jet before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR.
B.2 Outcome 150 B Early Run II ttV Studies
Fig. B.12: pT distributions for the 3rd-leading lepton before (left) and after (right) the optimal
cuts have been applied for the 3`-Z-2b4j SR.
Process Run-I SR Re-optimised SR
WZ 0.510.10 0.190  0.058
ZZ 0.00280.0016 0.014  0.008
tZ 0.3370.018 0.085  0.022
Z+jets  0.085  0.085
ttW 0.0650.007 0.018  0.009
tt 0.0340.011 0.000  0.000
ttH 0.1660.009 0.073  0.033
Other 0.5820.031 0.003  0.002
Total SM 1.700.11 0.468  0.218
ttZ 5.50  0.04 2.571  0.027
Total Significance 2.577 2.135
Tab. B.7: Event breakdown for Run-I SR and re-optimised SR for 3`-Z-2b4j.
B.2 Outcome
Despite re-optimisation studies of the Run-I SRs using additional jet variables, no
clear improvement was seen. In particular, the re-optimised 3`-Z-2b3j and 3`-Z-2b4j
SRs had a lack of background statistics which would have resulted in unreliable
final results. Consequently, the original Run-I ttZ SR definitions were used in the
analysis. The final ttZ cross-section calculated at
s = 13TeV using 3.2 fb1 of
recorded data, was ttZ = 0.92  0.31 pb with a 3.9 significance [140]. This was
consistent with theoretical calculations. With an increase in luminosity, the inclusion
of additional jet variables could yet prove to increase significance further.
References
[1] M. Thomson, Modern particle physics, Cambridge University Press, New York,
2013.
[2] MissMJ, Standard model of elementary particles, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Standard_Model_of_Elementary_Particles.
svg. Accessed: 17.04.2018.
[3] Particle Data Group, C. Patrignani et al., Review of Particle Physics, Chin.
Phys. C40 (2016) 100001.
[4] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to quantum field theory,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, USA, 1995.
[5] S. Weinberg, A model of leptons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967) 1264.
[6] A. Salam and J. C. Ward, Electromagnetic and weak interactions, Phys. Lett.
13 (1964) 168.
[7] S. L. Glashow, Partial-symmetries of weak interactions, Nucl. Phys. 22 (1961)
[8] L. B. Okun, Leptons and Quarks, North Holland Publishing, Amsterdam, 1985.
[9] P. W. Higgs, Broken symmetries and the masses of gauge bosons, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 13 (1964) 508.
[10] F. Englert and R. Brout, Broken symmetry and the mass of gauge vector
mesons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 321.
[11] L. Alvarez-Gaume and J. Ellis, Eyes on a prize particle, Nature Phys. 7 (2011)
[12] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Observation of a new particle in the
search for the Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the
LHC, Phys. Lett. B716 (2012) 1, arXiv:1207.7214.
[13] CMS collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Observation of a new boson at a mass
of 125 GeV with the CMS experiment at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B716 (2012)
30, arXiv:1207.7235.
[14] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the Higgs boson mass from
the H   and H  ZZ  4` channels with the ATLAS detector using 25
fb1 of pp collision data, Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 052004, arXiv:1406.3827.
[15] CMS collaboration, V. Khachatryan et al., Precise determination of the mass
of the Higgs boson and tests of compatibility of its couplings with the standard
model predictions using proton collisions at 7 and 8 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C75
(2015) 212, arXiv:1412.8662.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Standard_Model_of_Elementary_Particles.svg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Standard_Model_of_Elementary_Particles.svg
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Standard_Model_of_Elementary_Particles.svg
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1674-1137/40/10/100001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1674-1137/40/10/100001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.020
http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.7214
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.021
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.021
http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.7235
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.90.052004
http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.3827
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3351-7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3351-7
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.8662
B.2 Outcome 152 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[16] K. L. Chan, U. Chattopadhyay, and P. Nath, Naturalness, weak scale supersym-
metry and the prospect for the observation of supersymmetry at the Tevatron and
at the CERN LHC, Phys. Rev. D58 (1998) 096004, arXiv:hep-ph/9710473.
[17] G. Ross, Grand Unified Theories, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, USA,
2003.
[18] D. Gross, H. Politzer, and F. Wilczek, The nobel prize in physics 2004 - pop-
ular information, https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/
laureates/2004/popular.html. Accessed: 12-04-2018.
[19] T. S. van Albada, J. N. Bahcall, K. Begeman, and R. Sancisi, Distribution of
dark matter in the spiral galaxy NGC 3198, The Astrophysical Journal 295
(1985) 305.
[20] R. Massey, T. Kitching, and J. Richard, The dark matter of gravitational
lensing, Rept. Prog. Phys. 73 (2010) 086901, arXiv:1001.1739.
[21] Planck collaboration, R. Adam et al., Planck 2015 results. I. Overview
of products and scientific results, Astron. Astrophys. 594 (2016) A1,
arXiv:1502.01582.
[22] S. O. Bilson-Thompson, F. Markopoulou, and L. Smolin, Quantum
gravity and the standard model, Class. Quant. Grav. 24 (2007) 3975,
arXiv:hep-th/0603022.
[23] A. D. Sakharov, Violation of CP Invariance, C asymmetry, and baryon asym-
metry of the universe, Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 5 (1967) 32, [Usp. Fiz.
Nauk161,no.5,61(1991)].
[24] A. Hocker and Z. Ligeti, CP violation and the CKM matrix, Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. 56 (2006) 501, arXiv:hep-ph/0605217.
[25] W. M. Alberico and S. M. Bilenky, Neutrino oscillations, masses and mixing,
Phys. Part. Nucl. 35 (2004) 297, arXiv:hep-ph/0306239, [Fiz. Elem. Chast.
Atom. Yadra35,545(2004)].
[26] A. Signer, ABC of SUSY, J. Phys. G36 (2009) 073002, arXiv:0905.4630.
[27] S. P. Martin, A supersymmetry primer, Adv. Ser. Direct. High Energy Phys.
18 (1997) 1, arXiv:hep-ph/9709356.
[28] M. Mulders and G. Zanderighi, eds., Proceedings, 2016 European School of
High-Energy Physics (ESHEP2016), vol. 5 of CERN Yellow Reports: School
Proceedings, (Geneva), CERN, CERN, 2017. doi: 10.23730/CYRSP-2017-005.
[29] Y. Shadmi, Supersymmetry breaking, in Particle physics beyond the stan-
dard model. Proceedings, Summer School on Theoretical Physics, 84th
Session, Les Houches, France, August 1-26, 2005, pp. 147180, 2006.
arXiv:hep-th/0601076.
[30] C. Csaki, The Minimal supersymmetric standard model (MSSM), Mod. Phys.
Lett. A11 (1996) 599, arXiv:hep-ph/9606414.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.58.096004
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9710473
https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2004/popular.html
https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2004/popular.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/163375
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/163375
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/73/8/086901
http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.1739
http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201527101
http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01582
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0603022
http://dx.doi.org/10.1070/PU1991v034n05ABEH002497
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nucl.56.080805.140456
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nucl.56.080805.140456
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0605217
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0306239
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0954-3899/36/7/073002
http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.4630
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/9789812839657_0001, 10.1142/9789814307505_0001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/9789812839657_0001, 10.1142/9789814307505_0001
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9709356
http://dx.doi.org/10.23730/CYRSP-2017-005
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0601076
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S021773239600062X
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S021773239600062X
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9606414
B.2 Outcome 153 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[31] A. Djouadi, The anatomy of electroweak symmetry breaking Tome II: The Higgs
bosons in the Minimal Supersymmetric Model, Physics Reports 459 (2008) 1 .
[32] ATLAS and CMS collaborations, A. Ventura, Searches for supersymmetry, Int.
J. Mod. Phys. Conf. Ser. 46 (2018) 1860006, arXiv:1711.00152.
[33] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for direct production of charginos
and neutralinos in events with three leptons and missing transverse momentum
s = 8TeV pp collisions with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 04 (2014) 169,
arXiv:1402.7029.
[34] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for direct production of charginos,
neutralinos and sleptons in final states with two leptons and missing transverse
momentum in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP
05 (2014) 071, arXiv:1403.5294.
[35] CMS collaboration, V. Khachatryan et al., Searches for electroweak produc-
tion of charginos, neutralinos, and sleptons decaying to leptons and W, Z,
and Higgs bosons in pp collisions at 8 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C74 (2014) 3036,
arXiv:1405.7570.
[36] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for direct production of charginos
and neutralinos in events with three leptons and missing transverse momentum
s = 7 TeV pp collisions with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Lett. B718 (2013)
841, arXiv:1208.3144.
[37] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for squarks and gluinos in final states with jets
and missing transverse momentum using 36 fb1 of
s = 13 TeV pp collision
data with the ATLAS detector, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2017-022, CERN,
Geneva, Apr, 2017.
[38] L. Evans and P. Bryant, LHC Machine, JINST3 (2008) S08001.
[39] CERN, CERN timelines: The Large Hadron Collider, https://timeline.web.
cern.ch/timelines/the-large-hadron-collider. Accessed: 08.01.2018.
[40] CERN, Longer term LHC schedule, https://lhc-commissioning.web.
cern.ch/lhc-commissioning/schedule/lhc-long-term.htm. Accessed:
08.01.2018.
[41] CERN, TE-EPC-LPC in LHC, http://te-epc-lpc.web.cern.ch/
te-epc-lpc/machines/lhc/general.stm. Accessed: 10.12.2017.
[42] K. Wille, The Physics of Particle Accelerators: An Introduction, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 5, 2001.
[43] ALICE collaboration, The ALICE experiment at the CERN LHC, JINST3
(2008) S08002.
[44] CMS collaboration, The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC, JINST3 (2008)
S08004.
[45] LHCb collaboration, The lhcb detector at the LHC, JINST 3 (2008) S08005.
http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.10.005
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2010194518600066
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2010194518600066
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00152
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2014)169
http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.7029
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP05(2014)071
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP05(2014)071
http://arxiv.org/abs/1403.5294
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-3036-7
http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.7570
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.11.039
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.11.039
http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.3144
https://timeline.web.cern.ch/timelines/the-large-hadron-collider
https://timeline.web.cern.ch/timelines/the-large-hadron-collider
https://lhc-commissioning.web.cern.ch/lhc-commissioning/schedule/lhc-long-term.htm
https://lhc-commissioning.web.cern.ch/lhc-commissioning/schedule/lhc-long-term.htm
http://te-epc-lpc.web.cern.ch/te-epc-lpc/machines/lhc/general.stm
http://te-epc-lpc.web.cern.ch/te-epc-lpc/machines/lhc/general.stm
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08005
B.2 Outcome 154 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[46] ATLAS collaboration, Luminosity summary plots for 2015 pp data
taking, https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/
luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an3.
accessed: 08.01.2018.
[47] ATLAS collaboration, Luminosity summary plots for 2016 pp data
taking, https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/
luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an1.
accessed: 08.01.2018.
[48] ATLAS collaboration, Z. Marshall, Simulation of Pile-up in the ATLAS Ex-
periment, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 513 (2014) 022024.
[49] ATLAS collaboration, Luminosity Public Results, https://twiki.cern.
ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresults. accessed:
08.01.2018.
[50] ATLAS collaboration, Luminosity Public Results Run2, https://twiki.
cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#
2016_pp_collisions. accessed: 08.01.2018.
[51] ATLAS collaboration, The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large Hadron
Collider, JINST 3 (2008) S08003.
[52] J. Goodson, Magnet systems, http://www.jetgoodson.com/images/
thesisImages/magnetSystems.png. Accessed: 10-05-2018.
[53] J. J. Pea, Alignment of the ATLAS Inner Detector Upgraded for the LHC
Run II, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 664 (2015) 072025.
[54] A. La Rosa, The ATLAS Insertable B-Layer: from construction to operation,
JINST 11 (2016) C12036, arXiv:1610.01994.
[55] ATLAS collaboration, ATLAS liquid-argon calorimeter: Technical Design
Report, Technical Design Report ATLAS, CERN, Geneva, 1996.
[56] L. Heinrich, The ATLAS Trigger Core Configuration and Execution System in
Light of the ATLAS Upgrade for LHC Run 2, Tech. Rep. ATL-DAQ-PROC-
2015-016. 8, CERN, Geneva, May, 2015.
[57] ATLAS collaboration, Approved plots DAQ, https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/
bin/view/atlaspublic/approvedplotsdaq#plots_figures_pictures. Ac-
cessed: 08.01.2018.
[58] ATLAS collaboration, Performance of the atlas trigger system in 2015, The
European Physical Journal C 77 (2017) 317.
[59] ATLAS collaboration, W. Panduro Vazquez, The ATLAS Data Acquisition
System: from Run 1 to Run 2, Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc. 273-275 (2016) 939.
[60] ATLAS collaboration, N. Ilic, The ATLAS Fast Tracker and Tracking at the
High-Luminosity LHC, JINST 12 (2017) C02052.
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an3
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an3
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an1
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#luminosity_summary_plots_for_an1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/513/2/022024
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresults
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresults
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#2016_pp_collisions
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#2016_pp_collisions
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/luminositypublicresultsrun2#2016_pp_collisions
http://www.jetgoodson.com/images/thesisImages/magnetSystems.png
http://www.jetgoodson.com/images/thesisImages/magnetSystems.png
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/664/7/072025
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/11/12/C12036
http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.01994
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/approvedplotsdaq#plots_figures_pictures
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/atlaspublic/approvedplotsdaq#plots_figures_pictures
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4852-3
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4852-3
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysbps.2015.09.146
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/12/02/C02052
B.2 Outcome 155 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[61] M. Elsing, L. Goossens, A. Nairz, and G. Negri, The ATLAS Tier-0: Overview
and operational experience, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 219 (2010) 072011.
[62] M. C. Aleksa et al., ATLAS Liquid Argon Calorimeter Phase-I Upgrade Tech-
nical Design Report, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2013-017. ATLAS-TDR-022,
Sep, 2013. Final version presented to December 2013 LHCC.
[63] G. Barrand et al., GAUDI - A software architecture and framework for building
HEP data processing applications, Comput. Phys. Commun. 140 (2001) 45.
[64] A. Buckley et al., General-purpose event generators for LHC physics, Phys.
Rept. 504 (2011) 145, arXiv:1101.2599.
[65] Y. L. Dokshitzer, Calculation of the Structure Functions for Deep Inelastic
Scattering and e+e Annihilation by Perturbation Theory in Quantum Chro-
modynamics., Sov. Phys. JETP 46 (1977) 641.
[66] V. N. Gribov and L. N. Lipatov, Deep inelastic ep scattering in perturbation
theory, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 15 (1972) 438.
[67] G. Altarelli and G. Parisi, Asymptotic Freedom in Parton Language, Nucl.
Phys. B126 (1977) 298.
[68] H.-L. Lai et al., New parton distributions for collider physics, Phys. Rev. D82
(2010) 074024, arXiv:1007.2241.
[69] NNPDF, R. D. Ball et al., Parton distributions for the LHC Run II, JHEP 04
(2015) 040, arXiv:1410.8849.
[70] J. H. Kuhn, S. Moch, A. A. Penin, and V. A. Smirnov, Next-to-next-
to-leading logarithms in four fermion electroweak processes at high-energy,
Nucl. Phys. B616 (2001) 286, arXiv:hep-ph/0106298, [Erratum: Nucl.
Phys.B648,455(2003)].
[71] The cambridge dictionary of statistics (2nd ed.), Reference Reviews 17 (2003)
29, arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1108/09504120310455993.
[72] S. Catani, F. Krauss, R. Kuhn, and B. R. Webber, QCD matrix elements +
parton showers, JHEP 11 (2001) 063, arXiv:hep-ph/0109231.
[73] M. L. Mangano, M. Moretti, and R. Pittau, Multijet matrix elements and
shower evolution in hadronic collisions: Wbb + n jets as a case study, Nucl.
Phys. B632 (2002) 343, arXiv:hep-ph/0108069.
[74] A. Kupco, Cluster hadronization in HERWIG 5.9, in Monte Carlo generators
for HERA physics. Proceedings, Workshop, Hamburg, Germany, 1998-1999,
pp. 292300, 1998. arXiv:hep-ph/9906412.
[75] B. Andersson, S. Mohanty, and F. Soderberg, Recent developments in the Lund
model, in 36th Annual Winter School on Nuclear and Particle Physics (PINP
2002) and 8th St. Petersburg School on Theoretical Physics St. Petersburg,
Russia, February 25-March 3, 2002, 2002. arXiv:hep-ph/0212122.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/219/7/072011
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655(01)00254-5
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2011.03.005
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2011.03.005
http://arxiv.org/abs/1101.2599
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(77)90384-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(77)90384-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074024
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074024
http://arxiv.org/abs/1007.2241
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2015)040
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2015)040
http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.8849
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0550-3213(02)00968-9, 10.1016/S0550-3213(01)00454-0
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0106298
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09504120310455993
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09504120310455993
http://arxiv.org/abs/https://doi.org/10.1108/09504120310455993
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2001/11/063
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0109231
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0550-3213(02)00249-3
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0550-3213(02)00249-3
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0108069
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9906412
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0212122
B.2 Outcome 156 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[76] P. Z. Skands, Tuning Monte Carlo Generators: The Perugia Tunes, Phys. Rev.
D82 (2010) 074018, arXiv:1005.3457.
[77] T. Sjstrand, S. Mrenna, and P. Z. Skands, A Brief Introduction to PYTHIA
8.1, Comput. Phys. Commun. 178 (2008) 852, arXiv:0710.3820.
[78] M. Bahr et al., Herwig++ Physics and Manual, Eur. Phys. J. C 58 (2008) 639,
arXiv:0803.0883.
[79] T. Gleisberg et al., Event generation with sherpa 1.1, Journal of High Energy
Physics 2009 (2009) 007.
[80] F. Maltoni and T. Stelzer, MadEvent: Automatic event generation with Mad-
Graph, JHEP 02 (2003) 027, arXiv:hep-ph/0208156.
[81] S. Alioli, P. Nason, C. Oleari, and E. Re, A general framework for implementing
NLO calculations in shower Monte Carlo programs: the POWHEG BOX, JHEP
06 (2010) 043, arXiv:1002.2581.
[82] S. Frixione and B. R. Webber, Matching NLO QCD computations and parton
shower simulations, JHEP 06 (2002) 029, arXiv:hep-ph/0204244.
[83] D. J. Lange, The EvtGen particle decay simulation package, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A 462 (2001) 152.
[84] M. Dobbs and J. B. Hansen, The HepMC C++ Monte Carlo event record for
High Energy Physics, Comput. Phys. Commun. 134 (2001) 41.
[85] Geant4 collaboration, J. Allison et al., Geant4 developments and applications,
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 53 (2006) 270; Geant4 collaboration, S. Agostinelli
et al., Geant4: A simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A506 (2003) 250.
[86] ATLAS collaboration, W. Lukas, Fast Simulation for ATLAS: Atlfast-II and
ISF, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 396 (2012) 022031.
[87] ATLAS, T. Yamanaka, The ATLAS calorimeter simulation FastCaloSim, J.
Phys. Conf. Ser. 331 (2011) 032053.
[88] L. R. F. Castillo, The ATLAS and CMS detectors, in The Search and Discovery
of the Higgs Boson, 2053-2571, pp. 41 to 48. Morgan and Claypool Publishers,
2015. doi: 10.1088/978-1-6817-4078-2ch4.
[89] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Reconstruction of primary vertices
at the ATLAS experiment in Run 1 protonproton collisions at the LHC, Eur.
Phys. J. C77 (2017), no. 5 332, arXiv:1611.10235.
[90] R. Fruhwirth, Application of Kalman filtering to track and vertex fitting, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A262 (1987) 444.
[91] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Electron efficiency measurements with
the ATLAS detector using 2012 LHC protonproton collision data, Eur. Phys. J.
C77 (2017) 195, arXiv:1612.01456.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074018
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074018
http://arxiv.org/abs/1005.3457
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2008.01.036
http://arxiv.org/abs/0710.3820
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0798-9
http://arxiv.org/abs/0803.0883
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2003/02/027
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0208156
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2010)043
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2010)043
http://arxiv.org/abs/1002.2581
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2002/06/029
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0204244
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9002(01)00089-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9002(01)00089-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655(00)00189-2
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNS.2006.869826
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9002(03)01368-8
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/396/2/022031
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/331/3/032053
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/331/3/032053
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/978-1-6817-4078-2ch4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4887-5
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4887-5
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10235
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0168-9002(87)90887-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0168-9002(87)90887-4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4756-2
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4756-2
http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.01456
B.2 Outcome 157 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[92] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Electron performance measurements with
the ATLAS detector using the 2010 LHC proton-proton collision data, Eur.
Phys. J. C72 (2012) 1909, arXiv:1110.3174.
[93] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Expected Performance of the ATLAS
Experiment - Detector, Trigger and Physics, arXiv:0901.0512.
[94] W. Lampl et al., Calorimeter Clustering Algorithms: Description and Perfor-
mance, Tech. Rep. ATL-LARG-PUB-2008-002. ATL-COM-LARG-2008-003,
CERN, Geneva, Apr, 2008.
[95] ATLAS collaboration, Electron efficiency measurements with the atlas detector
using the 2015 lhc proton-proton collision data, https://atlas.web.cern.
ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/CONFNOTES/ATLAS-CONF-2016-024/. Accessed:
10-05-2018.
[96] ATLAS collaboration, Electron reconstruction and identification efficiency
measurements in 2016 data, https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/
PHYSICS/PLOTS/EGAM-2017-003/index.html. Accessed: 10-05-2018.
[97] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Muon reconstruction performance of the
ATLAS detector in protonproton collision data at
s =13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J.
C76 (2016) 292, arXiv:1603.05598.
[98] ATLAS collaboration, B. Resende, Muon identification algorithms in ATLAS,
PoS EPS-HEP2009 (2009) 431.
[99] R. Nicolaidou et al., Muon identification procedure for the atlas detector at the
lhc using muonboy reconstruction package and tests of its performance using
cosmic rays and single beam data, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 219
(2010) 032052.
[100] ATLAS collaboration, Atlas muon combined performance with the full
2016 dataset, https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PLOTS/
MUON-2017-001/index.html. Accessed: 10-05-2018.
[101] A. Hrynevich, Atlas jet and missing energy reconstruction, calibration and
performance in lhc run-2, Journal of Instrumentation 12 (2017) C06038.
[102] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, The Anti-k(t) jet clustering algorithm,
JHEP 04 (2008) 063, arXiv:0802.1189.
[103] ATLAS collaboration, Forward Jet Vertex Tagging: A new technique for the
identification and rejection of forward pileup jets, Tech. Rep. ATL-PHYS-
PUB-2015-034, CERN, Geneva, Aug, 2015.
[104] N. Bartosik, Diagram showing the common principle of identification of
jets initiated by b-hadron decays, http://bartosik.pp.ua/hep_sketches/
btagging. Accessed: 01.02.2018.
[105] ATLAS collaboration, A. Calandri, Flavour tagging algorithms and performance
at the ATLAS experiment, PoS LHCP2016 (2016) 180.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1909-1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1909-1
http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.3174
http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.0512
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/CONFNOTES/ATLAS-CONF-2016-024/
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/CONFNOTES/ATLAS-CONF-2016-024/
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PLOTS/EGAM-2017-003/index.html
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PLOTS/EGAM-2017-003/index.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4120-y
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4120-y
http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.05598
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PLOTS/MUON-2017-001/index.html
https://atlas.web.cern.ch/Atlas/GROUPS/PHYSICS/PLOTS/MUON-2017-001/index.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2008/04/063
http://arxiv.org/abs/0802.1189
http://bartosik.pp.ua/hep_sketches/btagging
http://bartosik.pp.ua/hep_sketches/btagging
B.2 Outcome 158 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[106] ATLAS collaboration, Optimisation of the ATLAS b-tagging performance for
the 2016 LHC Run, Tech. Rep. ATL-PHYS-PUB-2016-012, CERN, Geneva,
Jun, 2016.
[107] ATLAS collaboration, C. F. Galea, Tau Lepton Reconstruction in ATLAS,
Nucl. Part. Phys. Proc. 287-288 (2017) 111.
[108] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Reconstruction of hadronic decay products
of tau leptons with the ATLAS experiment, Eur. Phys. J. C76 (2016) 295,
arXiv:1512.05955.
[109] ATLAS collaboration, A. Hrynevich, ATLAS jet and missing energy reconstruc-
tion, calibration and performance in LHC Run-2, JINST 12 (2017) C06038.
[110] L. March, Performance of missing transverse momentum reconstruction in
ATLAS studied in proton-proton collisions in 2012 at 8 TeV, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 645 (2015) 012014.
[111] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Performance of Missing Transverse
Momentum Reconstruction in Proton-Proton Collisions at 7 TeV with ATLAS,
Eur. Phys. J. C72 (2012) 1844, arXiv:1108.5602.
[112] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Search for squarks and gluinos in
events with hadronically decaying tau leptons, jets and missing transverse
momentum in protonproton collisions at
s = 13 TeV recorded with the
ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys. J. C76 (2016) 683, arXiv:1607.05979.
[113] P. Laycock et al., Atlas data preparation in run 2, Journal of Physics: Confer-
ence Series 898 (2017), no. 4 042050.
[114] ATLAS collaboration, Search for supersymmetry with two and three leptons
and missing transverse momentum in the final state at
s=13 TeV with the
ATLAS detector, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2016-096, CERN, Geneva, 2016.
[115] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Search for electroweak production of
supersymmetric particles in final states with two or three leptons at
s = 13TeV
with the ATLAS detector, arXiv:1803.02762.
[116] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Performance of b-Jet Identification in the
ATLAS Experiment, JINST 11 (2016) P04008, arXiv:1512.01094.
[117] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Electron reconstruction and identification
efficiency measurements with the ATLAS detector using the 2011 LHC proton-
proton collision data, Eur. Phys. J. C74 (2014) 2941, arXiv:1404.2240.
[118] ATLAS collaboration, Electron efficiency measurements with the ATLAS de-
tector using the 2015 LHC proton-proton collision data, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-
CONF-2016-024, CERN, Geneva, 2016.
[119] CERN, Root data analysis framework, https://root.cern.ch. Accessed:
17-04-2018.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysbps.2017.03.056
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4110-0
http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.05955
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/12/06/C06038
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1844-6
http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.5602
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4481-2
http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.05979
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02762
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/11/04/P04008
http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.01094
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-2941-0
http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.2240
https://root.cern.ch
B.2 Outcome 159 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[120] L. Moneta, K. Cranmer, G. Schott, and W. Verkerke, The RooStats project, in
Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Advanced Computing and
Analysis Techniques in Physics Research. February 22-27, 2010, Jaipur, India,
p. 57, 2010. arXiv:1009.1003.
[121] J. M. Lorenz et al., HistFitter - A flexible framework for statistical data analysis,
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 608 (2015) 012049.
[122] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Jet energy resolution in proton-proton
collisions at
s = 7 TeV recorded in 2010 with the ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys.
J. C73 (2013) 2306, arXiv:1210.6210.
[123] ATLAS collaboration, Jet energy scale and its systematic uncertainty in proton-
proton collisions at sqrt(s)=7 TeV with ATLAS 2011 data, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-
CONF-2013-004, CERN, Geneva, Jan, 2013.
[124] ATLAS collaboration, Performance of b-jet identification in the ATLAS exper-
iment, Journal of Instrumentation 11 (2016) P04008.
[125] ATLAS collaboration, Calibration of b-tagging using dileptonic top pair events
in a combinatorial likelihood approach with the ATLAS experiment, Tech. Rep.
ATLAS-CONF-2014-004, CERN, Geneva, Feb, 2014.
[126] ATLAS collaboration, Tagging and suppression of pileup jets, Tech. Rep.
ATLAS-CONF-2014-018, CERN, Geneva, 2014.
[127] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Performance of missing transverse mo-
mentum reconstruction with the ATLAS detector using proton-proton collisions
s = 13 TeV, arXiv:1802.08168.
[128] G. Aad et al., Electron performance measurements with the atlas detector using
the 2010 lhc proton-proton collision data, The European Physical Journal C
72 (2012) 1909.
[129] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Electron and photon energy calibration
with the atlas detector using lhc run 1 data, The European Physical Journal C
74 (2014) 3071.
[130] M. Baak et al., HistFitter software framework for statistical data analysis, Eur.
Phys. J. C75 (2015) 153, arXiv:1410.1280.
[131] G. Cowan, K. Cranmer, E. Gross, and O. Vitells, Asymptotic formulae
for likelihood-based tests of new physics, Eur. Phys. J. C71 (2011) 1554,
arXiv:1007.1727, [Erratum: Eur. Phys. J.C73,2501(2013)].
[132] O. Behnke, K. Krninger, T. Schrner-Sadenius, and G. Schott, eds., Data
analysis in high energy physics, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2013.
[133] A. L. Read, Presentation of search results: the cls technique, Journal of Physics
G: Nuclear and Particle Physics 28 (2002) 2693.
[134] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad, B. Abbott, and Abdallah, Search for the
electroweak production of supersymmetric particles in
s = 8 TeV pp collisions
with the atlas detector, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 052002.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.1003
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/608/1/012049
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2306-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2306-0
http://arxiv.org/abs/1210.6210
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08168
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1909-1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1909-1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3327-7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3327-7
http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.1280
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1554-0, 10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2501-z
http://arxiv.org/abs/1007.1727
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.93.052002
B.2 Outcome 160 B Early Run II ttV Studies
[135] R. Keyes and A. Collaboration, Development, validation and integration of the
atlas trigger system software in run 2, Journal of Physics: Conference Series
898 (2017) 032008.
[136] A. Undrus, Evolution of the ATLAS Nightly Build System, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 396 (2012) 052070.
[137] ATLAS collaboration, The Run Time Tester User Guide, https://atlas-rtt.
cern.ch/prod/docs/userguide/. Accessed: 17-04-2018.
[138] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the ttW and ttZ produc-
tion cross sections in pp collisions at
s =8TeV with the ATLAS detector,
Journal of High Energy Physics 2015 (2015) 172.
[139] S. Frixione et al., Electroweak and QCD corrections to top-pair hadroproduction
in association with heavy bosons, Journal of High Energy Physics 2015 (2015)
[140] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Measurement of the ttW and ttZ
production cross sections in multiple final states using 3.2fb1 of pp collisions
s =13TeV with the ATLAS detector, Journal of High Energy Physics 77
(2017) 40.
https://atlas-rtt.cern.ch/prod/docs/userguide/
https://atlas-rtt.cern.ch/prod/docs/userguide/
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2015)172
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2015)184
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2015)184
	PhD Coversheet
	PhD Coversheet
	ABRAHAM, Nicola final thesis.pdf
	Contents
	Introduction
	Theory and Experimental Landscape
	The Standard Model of Particle Physics
	Standard Model Shortcomings
	Supersymmetry
	Experimental Setup
	The Large Hadron Collider
	The ATLAS Detector
	Simulation and Reconstruction
	Event Generation
	Detector Simulation
	Object Reconstruction
	Strategy for Three-Lepton SUSY Searches
	Datasets
	Event Pre-selection
	Signal Region Optimisation
	Background Modelling
	Systematic Uncertainties
	Statistical Interpretation
	Results for TEXT with Three-Lepton Final States
	Searches for TEXT via Sleptons
	Searches for TEXT via W and Z Bosons
	Future Outlook for Electroweak SUSY
	Conclusion and Outlook
	Inner Detector Trigger
	ID Trigger Performance
	Migration to New Offline Data Formats
	Automated Performance Analysis Development
	Early Run II TEXT Studies
	Signal Region Optimisation
	Outcome
	References
