Bangor University
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Abiotic Controls on Soil Enzyme Activity and Community Composition of Micro-
eukaryotes: A Comparison of Arctic, Temperate and Tropical Peatlands
Alajmi, Fatemah Enad M
Award date:
Awarding institution:
Bangor University
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
             Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
             You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
             You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 28. Apr. 2021
https://research.bangor.ac.uk/portal/en/theses/abiotic-controls-on-soil-enzyme-activity-and-community-composition-of-microeukaryotes-a-comparison-of-arctic-temperate-and-tropical-peatlands(7bdb84a7-58ae-4162-890b-9f369b8ab9e0).html
Bangor University
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Abiotic Controls on Soil Enzyme Activity and Community Composition of Micro-
eukaryotes: A Comparison of Arctic, Temperate and Tropical Peatlands
Alajmi, Fatemah Enad M
Award date:
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
             Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
             You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
             You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 25. Feb. 2021
https://research.bangor.ac.uk/portal/en/theses/abiotic-controls-on-soil-enzyme-activity-and-community-composition-of-microeukaryotes-a-comparison-of-arctic-temperate-and-tropical-peatlands(7bdb84a7-58ae-4162-890b-9f369b8ab9e0).html
Abiotic Controls on Soil Enzyme Activity and Community 
Composition of Micro-eukaryotes:                                       
A Comparison of Arctic, Temperate and Tropical 
Peatlands.  
A thesis submitted to Bangor University by:   
Fatemah Alajmi 
In candidature for the degree of:  
Philosophiae Doctor 
October 2020 
School of Natural Sciences 
Bangor University 
Gwynedd
 Abstract  
A knowledge of the conditions that influence the activities of enzymes that mediate the key 
processes occurring within peat soils is a prerequisite for predicting potential ecosystem 
responses to climate change, human utilization and management policies.  
In contrast to previous studies focussed on single biomes, the following study included three 
peatlands along a climatic gradient: Arctic (Svalbard, Norway), temperate (Wales, United 
Kingdom) and tropical (Andean mountains, Colombia). The study also encompasses a 
deliberately broad range of biotic and abiotic parameters, which were investigated along the 
peat profile. 
Contrasting relationships were found between measured parameters across the three 
peatlands. Generally, the highest biogeochemical processing rates occurred in the superficial 
layer indicating it to be the most biologically active layer. However, in the deeper mineral 
layer of Svalbard, phenol oxidase activity was as high as in the superficial layer, with higher 
pH and nutrient concentrations. Also, nitrous oxide flux from the deeper layers did not 
significantly differ from that of the upper layers, further highlighting the potential for the 
deeper layers of peats to be more active than is commonly assumed. The dominant 
controlling factor for phenol oxidase activity in Svalbard and Colombia was pH, while in 
Wales only hydrolases were positively correlated with pH. The response of hydrolase 
activities and gas fluxes to phenolics concentration also varied between the three regions, 
indicating that the three climatic peatlands differed in parent plant chemistry that controls 
peat chemical composition across the latitudinal transect from the Arctic to the tropics.                                     
A negative correlation was expected between enzyme activity and nutrient availability. 
However, contradictory results were found concerning this perspective, possibly because soil 
samples obtained from the three contrasting peatlands differed in nutrient concentrations, 
changing the dependency of in situ microbial communities on edaphic nutrients.  
 Significant differences in measured parameters were identified between different regions. 
Relatively high hydrolase activities were observed in Colombia, possibly due to the higher 
demand for nutrients and/or higher energy supply. Phenol oxidase was relatively higher in the 
Arctic, associated with significantly higher pH and concentrations of most inorganic 
nutrients. Conversely, the Welsh peatland exhibited the lowest phenol oxidase activity, 
consistent with lowest pH and consequently highest phenolics concentration. The higher 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration towards the tropics can be attributed to the 
higher primary productivity towards the equator where there is a warmer climate and longer 
growing season. In addition, decreased DOC concentration has been linked to increased sea 
salt, which were high in Svalbard possibly due to the proximity of the sampling sites to the 
The effect of soil variables on community composition of micro-eukaryotes in peatlands 
along a climatic gradient is useful for predicting how peatland structure and function may 
respond to future climate change. In the present study, the diversity and relative abundance of 
micro-eukaryotes were determined. Also, attempts were made to relate micro-eukaryote 
community composition to abiotic and metabolic variables. The general pattern of peat soil 
micro-eukaryote abundance was consistent with other studies of peatlands, where the 
supergroups Alveolata, Opisthokonta, Rhizaria and Stramenopiles were dominant. 
Redundancy analysis revealed that the community composition of micro-eukaryotes differed 
significantly between the three regions in response to the selected variables; high pH, 
nutrients, organic matter content and oxygen concentration, and low temperature structured 
micro-eukaryotes community. The results showed that phagotrophs, phototrophs and 
mixotrophs dominated in the Arctic, while with increasing temperature and phenolics 
concentration, community composition showed an increasing dominance of parasites in the 
temperate peatland. Micro-eukaryotic community in the tropical peatland was dominated by 
osmotrophs and distinguished by the high enzyme activities, decreased phenolics 
concentration, and with relatively high pH and DOC concentration.  
Acknowledgements 
 I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Christopher Freeman (School of Natural 
Sciences, Bangor University) for his continued advice and support during this project.  
I am also grateful for the support of Dr Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, 
Bangor University, who collected the samples, supplied the site photographs and taught me 
numerous analysis techniques. 
Thanks also to Dr Timothy Jones, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, for 
technical support in the laboratory. I would like to acknowledge the funding provided by the 
Saudi Arabian government. I also acknowledge Dr Rachel Gough for her assistance with 
proofreading. 
Special thanks to my family, for all their patience and encouragement during the past four 
years. 
Table of contents 
Enzymatic activity and soil respiration linked to physicochemical properties in Arctic peatland of 
Using environmental DNA metabarcoding to compare micro-eukaryote populations in Arctic, 
6.4.3. Comparison of micro-eukaryote taxonomic and functional groups between peatlands . 175 
7.2. Environmental controls on the biogeochemistry of peatlands: a comparison of three 
List of Figures and Tables 
Figure 1. 02. The fluorogenic assay used to determine the activity of the five hydrolytic enzymes 
based on the monitoring the fluorescence of MUF liberated by enzymatic hydrolysis of the chemical 
Figure 1.03. The colorimetric phenol oxidase assay in which the oxidation reaction of L-DOPA by 
Figure 2.02. Photographs of the study sites in Svalbard, Arctic region: (a) Solvatn (site 1 and 2), (b) 
Stuphallet (Site 3 and 4), (c) Knudsenheia (site 5) and (d) Storvatnet (site 6). Photograph of typical 
Figure 2.05. Mean water content (a) and soil organic matter (SOM) content (b) at different depths.50 
Figure 3.01. Maps showing study site and peat core sampling locations in Sumapaz National Park, 
Figure 3.02. Photographs showing six peat core  extraction locations (pictures a-f refer to sites 1-6, 
Table 3.01. Peat core locations and basic environmental characteristics of pore waters of the studied 
Table 3.02. Values for various physicochemical variables measured at each depth within the peat 
Figure 3.06. Relationship between phenol oxidase activity (POX) and phenolic compound 
Figure 3.07. Relationship between hydrolase enzyme activities and phenolic compound 
Figure 4.02. Photographs showing six peat core extraction locations (pictures a-f refer to sites 1-6, 
Table 4.01. Peat core locations and basic environmental characteristics of pore waters of the studied 
Figure 4.06. Regression analysis exhibited the positive correlation between all hydrolytic enzymes 
Table 4.02. The results of environmental variables from peatlands in Wales based on the different 
Table 4.03. Pearson correlation analysis between soil properties, enzymes activity and microbial gas 
Table 5.01 Mean values for biotic and abiotic variables in the Svalbard (S), Colombia (C) and Wales 
Figure 5.02. Phenolic compound concentration in the Svalbard, Colombian and Welsh samples. ... 142 
Figure 5.05. The relationship between pH and the activity of (a) phenol oxidase (POX), (b) -
glucosidase (B), (c) xylosidase (X), (d) chitinase (N), (e) phosphatase (P) and (f) arylsulfatase (S). ... 149 
Figure 5.06. The relationship between phenolic compounds and the activity of phenol oxidase (POX).
Figure 6.01. General relative abundance of reads associated with eukaryote groups in the different 
Figure 6.02. Venn diagram representing the number of exclusive and shared micro-eukaryote OTUs 
Figure 6.04. Stacked barplot representing the community composition of micro-eukaryote 
Figure 6.05. The relative abundance of the five functional groups of micro-eukaryotes at each site 
Figure 6.06. Stacked barplot representing the community composition of micro-eukaryote groups 
Figure 6.07.  Animal vs. parasite relative abundance in Svalbard, Colombia and 
Figure 6.08. Redundancy analysis (RDA) based on the selected soil variables with the functional 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1. Wetland ecosystems 
Wetlands are reported to occupy more than 6.4% of the earths terrestrial surface (Maltby and 
Turner 1983), and to contain the highest carbon density (Kayranli et al. 2010). They occur in 
a range of climatic zones and differ in size, dominant plant species, water table depth and 
extent of human impact. As a result, the term wetland is difficult to clearly define (Mitsch 
and Gosselink 2000). 
Amongst the many definitions of wetland that have been published, the most commonly used 
one is that proposed in 1971 at the Ramsar Convention:  Areas of marsh, fen, peatland, or 
water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or 
flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water, the depth of which at low 
tide does not exceed six meters.  (Groombridge 1992). This definition integrates all wetland 
variable aspects, but the predominant feature of all wetland ecosystems is the persistently 
high-water level and its effect on biogeochemical processes.  
Wetlands provide a range of valuable services such as climate regulation through carbon 
sequestration, water storage and consequent flood risk reduction, filtration of pollutants, food 
and freshwater supply (Parish et al. 2008). Furthermore, their unique ecological position 
straddling aquatic and terrestrial status tends to support high levels of biodiversity (Mitsch 
and Gosselink 2000). Wetlands, therefore, are an important resource for scientific research in 
a variety of fields (Moore 2002). 
1.1.1. Peatlands 
Wetlands are commonly associated with the accumulation of deep layers (at least 30 cm 
depth) of partly decomposed remains of plants known as peat. This process results from the 
suppression of decomposition rates brought about by waterlogged and anaerobic conditions 
(Mitsch and Gosselink 2000, Moore 2002, Holden 2005).  
Peatlands are freshwater wetlands occupying extensive areas in northern hemisphere, as a 
consequence of low temperatures, humidity and high precipitation rates (Figure 1.01). 
Peatlands can also be found at high latitudes in the southern hemisphere as long as low 
temperatures and anaerobic conditions exist (Hodgkins et al. 2018). Their distribution and 
growth rate (peat formation) are mainly determined by climate, hydrological conditions, 
vegetation type, and the imbalanced between rates of organic matter production (inputs) and 
decomposition (outputs) (Parish et al. 2008). Within the terrestrial biosphere, peatlands 
represent the most significant long-term reservoirs of carbon, which has accumulated over 
thousands of years (Holden 2005, Parish et al. 2008). Peatlands occur in more than 180 
countries (Parish et al. 2008). They hold over a third of all organic carbon found in soils, 
which is equivalent to around two-thirds of the atmospheric carbon pool and double the 
quantity of carbon stock in the earth's forest biomass (IPCC 2007). Peatlands are therefore 
critical for global carbon capture and long-term storage, having exceptional preservative 
properties. This is attested to by their ability to preserve ancient human remains (bog bodies) 
(Freeman et al. 2012). 
According to Holden (2005), peatland soils are usually associated with high water content, 
sometimes up to 98%, received from either precipitation or ground water influx. Long-term 
waterlogged conditions tend to result in low oxygen concentrations, creating anaerobic 
conditions where decomposition rates fail to keep up with primary productivity. Peatland 
soils accordingly are characterised by a high content of organic matter (more than 65% 
organic matter on a dry weight basis), dark colour and fibrous texture (Clymo 1983). 
Peatlands can be divided into bogs (oligotrophic rain-fed) and fens (minerotrophic flow-fed) 
(Moore 2002). Their soils may be classified as mineral or organic, all of which contain 
organic matter to some degree. However, mineral soil is considered to contain only 20% to 
35% organic matter and differ in many physicochemical properties from organic soil (Dunn 
2013).  
Figure 1.01.  The global distribution of peatlands (from  http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/peat-
distribution-in-the-world). 
http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/peat-distribution-in-the-world
http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/peat-distribution-in-the-world
1.1.1.1. Arctic peatlands 
Peat soils are mostly found in the Arctic and subarctic regions because of lower temperature 
and the permanently submerged conditions (Grnlund et al. 2008, Nakatsubo et al. 2015). 
The short growing season in the Arctic latitude limits primary production. The tendency for 
peat occurrence is enhanced by slowing decomposition processes due to cold Arctic 
temperatures and oxygen deficiency conditions which creating by the presence of permafrost, 
and melt-water in the summer season (Rozema et al. 2006, Hodgkins et al. 2018). 
 In Norway, where soil samples were collected during this project, peatlands are estimated to 
cover 24,000 km2 (7%) of the land area and release up to 2 million tons of CO2 per year 
(Grnlund et al. 2008). In Svalbard in the Norwegian high Arctic, the annual rainfall is 
400mm, with continuous permafrost and relatively short growing season (40-70 days) 
(Rozema et al. 2006). Annual mean temperature is between -4 and -7 C (Tveit 2014). 
According to Moore (2002), in very oceanic regions such as western Norway, blanket bog 
develops even at sea level. Elvebakk (1994) observed that the peat-forming moss tundra in 
the High Arctic tends to develop in wet conditions under bird nesting cliffs where bird 
manure provides a source of nutrients, stimulating primary productivity and carbon 
accumulation.  
Arctic peatlands are estimated to hold a substantial amount (approximately 50%) of the 
world's soil carbon pool and are considered important potential sources for increased 
emissions of the GHG in a warming climate (Tarnocai et al. 2009). 
Arctic regions, including permafrost peatlands have already been exposed to a substantial 
temperature increase and are expected to be exposed to a further 5.6-12.4C by the end of this 
century (IPCC 2013). Resultant prolonged frost-free periods are likely to have a significant 
impact on vegetation and an increase in the depth of active layers (the active layer is the 
brown moss and peat layers above the permafrost subjected to seasonal thawing; 0- ~65cm) 
risks exposing vast carbon reservoirs to decomposition (Tarnocai et al. 2009, Voigt et al. 
2017b). A growing number of studies have confirmed that Arctic peatlands also have 
enormous nitrogen stocks, with more than 67 billion tons accumulated over thousands of 
years, making them substantial potential sources of nitrous oxide (N2O) if the Arctic 
permafrost thaws and its nitrogen stocks are mobilised (Voigt et al. 2017a, b). 
Because of concerns about the consequences of climate change in such regions, researchers 
have carried out relatively detailed investigations regarding GHGs exchange in Arctic 
peatlands. Nevertheless, a limited number of studies consider microbial activities which 
regulate the production of GHG and are influenced by environmental factors especially in 
Norwegian peatlands.  
1.1.1.2. Temperate peatlands 
Peat-accumulating wetlands are mostly found in the temperate zone. Moore (2002) estimated 
that carbon uptake in temperate peatlands represented about 12% of anthropogenic emissions.  
In the UK, where temperate climate conditions exist, peatlands cover around 24,640 km2 of 
the land area (15%) and store 2,302 Megatons (Mt) of carbon (Billett et al. 2010), 
representing over 10% of the global peat store (IUCN 2014). In Wales, where samples were 
collected during this project, 732 km2 of land, is occupied by peatland, which are reported to 
store 119 Mt of total carbon (Table 1.01). The temperate peatland site used in this study is 
located in the Migneint Valley (Snowdonia National Park), North Wales, UK. This area is 
one of the largest areas of blanket bog in Wales. The area is 460m above sea level and the 
annual rainfall is 2,400 mm (Dunn 2013). 
Although peatlands in the UK form a relatively small portion of the peatlands of the northern 
temperate regions, they are of local and global importance (Billett et al. 2010). Besides their 
role in climate change mitigation, through holding enormous amounts of carbon that could 
otherwise be released into the atmosphere, they also provide multiple land uses, they supply 
freshwater to most major UK catchments, support livestock farming and a tourist destination 
to attract millions of visitors per year. 
Since the last ice age, UK peatlands have accumulated millions of tonnes of atmospheric 
carbon (Billett et al. 2010). However, over 80% of the UKs peatlands have been the focus of 
protection and restoration efforts, following damage resulting from drainage practices, peat 
extraction for fertilizers and fuel, intensive grazing and fires (Holden et al. 2007).               
UK peatlands have also been impacted by climate variability in the temperature and 
precipitation rates over the last years (Billett et al. 2010). According to Natural England 
(2010), damaged peatlands in the UK release 350,000 tonnes of CO2 each year, mostly due to 
burning the vegetation on upland blanket bog areas. A report by the Committee on Climate 
Change (2013) went as far as to say that only 4% of peatlands in the UK are considered in 
good conditions and actively developing peat (Committee on Climate Change 2013). Moore 
(2002) cited the future impacts of human practices and a consequent climate change on 
temperate peatlands in which more details can be found. 
A number of studies, including field observations and manipulation experiments, have been 
conducted on the UK peatlands in order to relate specific microbial processes to a narrow 
range of physicochemical variables (e.g., Freeman et al. 1992, 1994, 1995, 1996, 2004, Pind 
et al. 1994, Kang et al. 1998, Kang and Freeman 1999, 2002, Fenner and Freeman 2011). 
Table 1.01. Peatland areas and carbon stores in the UK from Billett et al. (2010).  
                          Soil depth  
Country     Area (km2) 0-100 cm 
(Mt Carbon) 
>100 cm 
(Mt Carbon) 
         Total 
   (Mt Carbon) 
Scotland 17,789 1104 516 1,620 
England 4,246 296 123 419 
Wales 732 67 52 119 
Northern 
Ireland 
1,873 90 54 144 
UK 24,640 1,557 745 2,302 
1.1.1.3. Tropical peatlands 
Peatlands are distributed along a latitudinal transect from the Arctic to the tropics as long as 
low temperatures and anaerobic conditions exist. However, the chemical composition, 
especially carbohydrates and aromatics content, of parent vegetation and peat differs between 
climatic zones, with more aromatics and less carbohydrate content toward the tropics which 
could explain the very low decomposition and GHG production rates reported in these low 
latitude peatlands (Hodgkins et al. 2018).  
It has been estimated that nearly 11% (0.44 Mkm2 (M = million)) of peatlands occur in 
tropical regions, spread across Central and South America, Africa, the Caribbean and 
Southeast Asia. Tropical peatlands are estimated to hold around 18 to 25% of the total global 
peat volume (1758 Gm3 (G = 109)) and around 15 to 19% of the global peat carbon pool. 
Southeast Asia is estimated to have the largest area of tropical peatland (247 778 km2, 56%) 
and peat volume (1359 Gm3, 77%) followed by South America (107 486 km2, 24.4% and 192 
Gm3, 11% peat volume), Africa (55 860 km2, 13% and 138 Gm3, 8% peat volume) and the 
Caribbean and Central America (23 374 km2, 5.3% and 60 Gm3, 3% peat volume) (Page et al. 
2011). There is a growing recognition of the global importance of tropical peatlands for 
carbon storage and carbon release and their critical role in climate change processes, 
especially in degraded Asian peatlands (Page et al. 2011). Interest in Southeast Asian 
peatlands has increased following extensive land use change for agricultural purposes, which 
has resulted in the degradation of soil carbon stores, and significant greenhouse gas (GHG) 
release (Page et al. 2002, Koh et al. 2009).  
Recently, Gumbricht et al. (2017) published a new estimate of peatland extent and volume in 
the tropics. They estimated that tropical peatlands cover 1.7 Mkm2 and contain 7 268 Gm3 of 
peat, of which 750 000 km2 (44%) and 3 117 Gm3 (43%) are in South America. These latest 
figures suggest that Southeast Asian peatlands are surpassed in extent and volume by South 
American peatlands and highlight the importance of focussing studies of tropical peatlands in 
this region (Gumbricht et al. 2017). Specifically, more research is required to adequately 
understand tropical peatland enzyme dynamics and the factors affecting these processes, 
which will help in developing strategies for the restoration or reconstruction of drained 
peatlands and for the maintenance of healthy peatlands (Knnen et al. 2018). Within South 
America, Colombia is estimated to have 74 950 km2 of the total tropical peatlands 
(Gumbricht et al. 2017). Like all tropical peatlands, Colombian peatlands at high elevations, 
where peat samples were collected during this project, are susceptible to the impacts of 
climate change including global warming (Benavides et al. 2013). The tropical peatland site 
used in this study is located at high altitude within the Sumapaz National Park in the Eastern 
mountain range of the Andes, Colombia. The area extension is about 154000 ha. The annual 
rainfall is between 1300 and 2400mm, with continuous and high humidity. The Park is a 
significant hydrographic center, containing river basins and lakes (Sesana 2006). 
In the Andes Mountains, temperatures have already increased over the last two decades by 
0.7C for each decade with a further temperature rise of a total of about 5C predicted over 
the next nine decades (Bradley et al. 2006, Ruiz et al. 2008). The resulting droughts and more 
oxygenated conditions pose a significant threat to the stability of peatlands, with carbon 
release also likely to cause positive climate feedbacks (Wieder 2001, Turetsky et al. 2002).  
Despite their global importance, South American peatlands have received less attention than 
other tropical peatlands. This is due partly to methodological and logistical difficulties 
(Gumbricht et al. 2017). 
1.1.1.4. Why peatlands matter 
Besides their unique biodiversity, peatlands play an important role in climatic processes and 
impact on water quality. 
As previously stated, peatland plants absorb carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere 
during photosynthesis. Much of this carbon becomes stored within peat soil as plants die back 
during the fall season, thereby locking it underground in waterlogged conditions that reduce 
decay. This combined with the decay-resistant nature of some plants forming peatlands, such 
as Sphagnum species, creating an unbalanced situation in which the production rates of 
organic matter exceed those of decomposition (Holden 2005). The process of accumulation 
of organic material over several millennia is known as carbon sequestration. In this way, 
peatlands can act as long-term atmospheric carbon sinks (Moore 2002, Kayranli et al. 2010). 
It has been estimated that, were it not for carbon storage in peat, global temperatures would 
have been 1.5-2.0 C higher during the past 10,000 years (Holden 2005). 
Comparing all oceanic and terrestrial ecosystems, peatlands have the highest carbon storage 
(Freeman et al. 2012), sequestering at least 550 Gtonnes of carbon within their peat, despite 
accounting for only 3% of the terrestrial ecosystems by area (Parish et al. 2008). Their 
existing carbon storage, combined with the potential for additional storage with certain 
management techniques, means that peatlands represent a vital resource for combating 
climate change (Holden 2005). Disturbed peatlands can, however, act as carbon sources. The 
released carbon may take different forms depending on the dominant decomposition reactions 
occurring in different layers within soil. For example, microbial respiration and methane 
oxidation primarily occur in the upper aerobic layers (acrotelm) and yield carbon mainly in 
the form of CO2. In contrast, methane production (methanogenesis) as an anaerobic process 
and thus primarily arises in deeper, more anaerobic layers (catotelm) (Moore 2002). 
Carbon is also released from peatlands in the form of dissolved organic carbon (DOC), which 
accumulates in pore waters and is leached into surface waters during rainfall events, with 
concentrations often highest following warm and dry periods, during which DOC has 
accumulated (Holden 2005, Fenner and Freeman 2011). Indeed, many UK peatlands have 
been drained over the last few decades with the consequent water table drawdown has led to 
the destabilisation of their carbon stores due to increased decomposition, resulting in 
increased DOC accumulation and export to surface waters (Holden et al. 2004). Evans et al. 
(2005) found that in the UK, DOC concentrations have increased by 91% in 22 different 
upland sites since 1988 to 2003. This is likely to be due to an enzymatic response to rising 
temperatures as well as increased frequency and severity of droughts and more aeration, 
leading to higher peat decomposition rates (Freeman et al. 2001b).  
The concentration of DOC in surface waters has important implications for drinking water 
providers since DOC reduce the aesthetic quality of the water and acts as a reaction precursor 
to potentially harmful disinfection by-products (Jones 2006). For all these reasons, peatlands 
have gained in recognition of their importance over recent decades (Dunn et al. 2014). 
1.2. The role of organic matter decomposition in peatlands 
Organic matter decomposition within peatlands is a complex process as it includes aerobic 
(respiration and methane oxidation) and anaerobic (fermentation, methanogenesis and iron, 
nitrate and sulfate reduction) processes (Kayranli et al. 2010). 
Dunn and Freeman (2011) stated that the decomposition of soil organic matter leads to the 
release of carbon in soluble form as dissolved organic carbon (DOC), solid form as 
particulate organic carbon (POC) and gaseous form as methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide 
(CO2). Along with nitrous oxide (N2O), these are known as greenhouse gases (GHGs) which 
are formed and emitted from peat soils and provide an indication of microbial respiration.  
Natural organic matter (NOM), which includes particulate organic carbon (POC) and 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), is a constituent of freshwaters and is composed of a mixture 
of microbial, animal and plant materials in different stages of disintegration. Carbon is the 
basic element of NOM and is mostly present in freshwaters in the dissolved form, passing 
through a 0.45 m filter membrane (Thurman 2012). DOC in drinking water supplies is a 
very important water quality parameter affecting colour, safety and aesthetic value (Holden, 
2005). DOC as an energy source promote microbial activities and processes, supporting the 
aquatic food chain. Within a drinking water distribution system, DOC therefore promotes 
bacterial regrowth. However, high concentrations of DOC can attenuate light penetration 
within the waterbodies (Kayranli et al. 2010) due to the presence of chromophoric functional 
groups (Leenheer and Croue 2003), reducing the growth rates of phototropic microorganisms. 
Increasing atmospheric concentrations of GHG cause global warming by increasing the 
atmospheric sorption of infrared radiation (Kayranli et al. 2010). Among all the GHGs, CO2 
is produced largely as a result of the respiration of microorganisms in the upper layers of 
peat, where the presence of oxygen and input of fresh litter allow for the continuous 
degradation of organic matter (Billett et al. 2010). CH4 is produced by methanogens, 
prokaryotic microorganisms that belong to the domain of Archaea, and occur in the deeper 
layers of soil where conditions are anoxic and they use acetate and/or hydrogen as essential 
substrates (Segers 1998). Simultaneously, methanotrophs can consume and oxidize some of 
the atmospheric CH4 to form CO2, in the presence of O2 in the uppermost layers (Freeman et 
al. 2002). Therefore, the degree of oxygenation, which is determined by the water table level, 
controls the methanogenic (methane production) and methanotrophic (methane oxidation) 
processes within wetlands (Kelley et al. 1995).  
N2O is formed in the soil by microbial communities during nitrification and denitrification 
processes (Kayranli et al. 2010), using mineral N forms, ammonium and nitrate, respectively. 
N2O is a powerful greenhouse gas, nearly 300 times stronger than CO2 in terms of resultant 
temperature increase. Therefore, nitrogen storage in peatlands and nitrogen cycling are 
receiving growing attention especially in Arctic peatlands where vast amounts of nitrogen 
(above 67 billion tons) accumulated over thousands of years (Voigt et al. 2017a, b). 
Microbial decomposition and consequently GHG production occur due to the activity of 
extracellular enzymes, especially hydrolysing enzymes (-D-xylosidase, -D-glucosidase, 
phosphatase, arylsulfatase and N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase)) and oxidizing 
enzymes (phenol oxidases) (Dunn et al. 2014). 
Hydrolase enzymes are a group of hydrolytic enzymes capable of hydrolysis of complex 
biomolecules, such as lipids, proteins, nucleic acids and starch. This process includes the 
breaking of substrate bonds with water. During the hydrolysis, the hydrogen ion (H+) from 
the water molecule combines with one fragment, and the remaining hydroxyl ion (OH-) 
combines with the other fragment (Figure 1.02) (Dunn 2013). 
Soil hydrolases, which are produced normally by soil microbes and plant cells, are the main 
agents of carbon and nutrient cycling, controlling the rate at which organic compounds are 
degraded to become readily utilizable by microbial and plant communities (Marx et al. 2001).  
Figure 1.02. The fluorogenic assay used to determine the activity of the five hydrolytic 
enzymes based on monitoring the fluorescence of the model compound methylumbelliferone 
(MUF) liberated by enzymatic hydrolysis of the chemical bond between the MUF and the 
substrate (R) (From Dunn 2013). 
Phenol oxidases are a group of oxidative enzymes responsible for promoting oxidation of 
aromatic or phenolic compounds using molecular oxygen (O2), with complete degradation 
producing non-phenolic compounds, such as CO2 (Figure 1.03) (Durn et al. 2002). Soil 
phenol oxidases originate naturally from microbial biomass and in small amounts from 
certain plant roots (Pelaez et al. 1995, Gramss et al. 1999, Hullo et al. 2001). 
Figure 1.03. The colorimetric phenol oxidase assay in which the oxidation reaction of L-
dihydroxy phenylalanine (L-DOPA) by phenol oxidase produces readily measured 
dopachrome (From Dunn 2013). 
1.3. Soil variables affecting decomposition 
As mentioned previously, peatlands sequester vast amounts of carbon, which enables them to 
play a significant role in minimizing the anthropogenic impact on the global climate 
(Freeman et al. 2012). However, human exploitation and on-going climate change induce 
decomposition processes and carbon loss, shifting the status of peatlands from an 
atmospheric carbon sink to a carbon source, thus compounding the greenhouse effect (Moore 
2002). Wild (1993) suggested that the total annual amount of CO2 produced globally from 
peatlands during the decomposition could be up to 0.5 Pg (P = 1015), which poses a threat to 
the global climate stability. In soils, the rates of decomposition and the resultant release of 
biogenic GHGs are controlled by extracellular enzyme activities (Dunn et al. 2014). 
Measurement of these enzymes in relation to the biogeochemical properties of peat soils and 
their role in the carbon cycle and hence climate change has therefore been the focus of a 
significant amount of research in recent years.  
Phenol oxidases are a suite of copper-containing enzymes with the ability to oxidise 
phenolic-based substances such as lignin, and convert them into smaller substances, in the 
presence of oxygen (Durn et al. 2002). Unlike phenol oxidases, hydrolase enzymes are not 
directly affected by the presence or absence of O2 (Freeman et al. 2004). Evidence of the lack 
of a direct link between hydrolase activities and molecular oxygen was found by Lee et al. 
(1999) in the rumen, where completely anaerobic conditions persist, and hydrolase are still 
active.  
Soil hydrolases are the proximate mediators of carbon and nutrient cycling (Marx et al. 
2001). However, phenolic compounds can suppress the activity of hydrolase enzymes, 
limiting the degradation of organic matter, a mechanism known as the enzymic latch 
(Freeman et al. 2001b). Phenolics are a group of recalcitrant organic compounds, 
characterised by the presence of phenol units, which include an aromatic ring bonded with 
one or more hydroxyl groups. Phenolics are synthesized naturally by plants to support several 
physiological functions (Zak et al. 2019). They are classified into simple phenols and 
polyphenols depending on the number of phenolic units (Dunn and Freeman 2011). They 
persist in peat soils as a result of the extreme suppression of oxygen-dependent phenol 
oxidase activity and thus influence carbon and nutrient cycling by inhibiting organic matter-
degrading enzymes (Freeman et al. 2001b). 
Researchers have studied soil enzymology for more than a hundred years, and over the 
subsequent decades, researchers have developed their understanding of the role of 
extracellular enzymes activity in soil fertility, plant growth, carbon cycling and the associated 
influence on climate change. In addition, studies have been performed to investigate the 
relationship between enzymic activities and a range of environmental variables in peatlands 
and in turn inform management strategies for protecting their globally important carbon 
stores (Dunn et al. 2014). 
Several physicochemical variables are known to influence microbial processes in peatlands 
(Kang et al. 1998). The key factors are discussed in turn below. 
1.3.1. Oxygen concentration 
 Water table decline as a consequence of climate change or human intervention is an 
important factor affecting decomposition processes by controlling oxygen availability within 
soils (Moore 2002). Oxygen-dependent phenol oxidase is the key enzyme for carbon 
sequestration, when it remains inactive (Freeman et al. 2001b, 2004). A number of 
researchers have attempted to relate phenol oxidase activity to the concentrations of O2 and 
phenolic compounds across the peat profile. For example, Pind et al. (1994) found that 
phenol oxidase activity falls gradually with depth due to decreased O2 concentration, which 
allowed phenolics to accumulate in depth. Similarly, McLatchey and Reddy (1998) observed 
that higher activity of phenol oxidase was detectable only under oxygen-saturated conditions, 
in a Florida wetland. 
 Hydrological changes are the most studied subject concerning soil enzymes, drought-
associated water level drawdown introduces O2 into the system, stimulating phenol oxidase 
activity, resulting in a reduction in phenolics concentrations. By the removal of phenolics, 
hydrolase enzymes can accordingly resume their normal activity, leading to greater peat 
decomposition rates and carbon losses to the atmosphere and waterbodies (Fenner and 
Freeman 2011). Similarly, experimental lowering of the water level in peatlands resulted in 
an increase in calcium and magnesium concentrations and a substantial fall in the dominant 
inhibitors (iron and phenolics), which enhanced -glucosidase, phosphatase and arylsulfatase 
activities (Freeman et al. 1996). 
By influencing microbial processes, warming and more oxygenated conditions mainly 
accelerate the emission of CO2 (Billett et al. 2010, Kayranli et al. 2010). By contrast, when 
the water table level is raised during flooding periods, CO2 emission is reduced and the 
methanogenesis process is triggered, resulting in the release of CH4 into the atmosphere in 
considerable amounts. Similarly, N2O emission through denitrification process is associated 
also with anaerobic conditions (Kang et al. 1998). On the other hand, with a lowering of the 
water table level, methanogenesis decreases due to increased methanotrophy (Kayranli et al. 
2010). 
1.3.2. Phenolic compound concentrations 
Phenolic compounds have inhibitory effects on hydrolase enzymes and undoubtedly on 
biodegradation and respiration rates because they can combine with the reactive sites of 
organic and inorganic substrates, making them resistant to further microbial attack. They can 
also inhibit litter decomposition by lowering pH (Min et al. 2015) and by themselves being 
strongly resistant to biodegradation (Zak et al. 2019). Generally, variations in the form, 
composition and the source of phenolic compounds, may be driving variations in enzyme 
activity and the resultant metabolic end products (Hoostal and Bouzat 2008, Min et al. 2015).  
In peat soils, phenolic compounds accumulate due to the absence of oxygen which drastically 
inhibits phenol oxidase. The low hydrolase enzyme activities can be therefore indirectly 
attributed to O2 constraints upon phenol oxidase activity. Indeed, in a series of experiments 
Freeman et al. (2004) found that the greatest impact of the addition of O2 was seen on phenol 
oxidase, causing a sharp decline in phenolics abundance (27% fall) in less than 18 hours, 
which stimulated hydrolase enzyme activities (xylosidase 16%, glucosidase 26%, 
phosphatase 18%, arylsulfatase 47% and chitinase 22%).   
So, through the reduction of the concentrations of phenolic compounds, phenol oxidase 
represents a key regulator for enzymic decomposition in peatlands (Freeman et al. 2001b, 
2004). However, the correlation between phenol oxidase activity and phenolics concentration 
is not clear as contradictory results are currently present, while some studies demonstrated a 
negative relationship (Pind et al. 1994, Waldrop and Zak 2006, Stursova and Sinsabaugh 
2008, Waldrop and Harden 2008, White et al. 2011), still others reported a positive (Freeman 
et al. 2001a, Fenner et al. 2005, Yao et al. 2009, Theuerl et al. 2010, Kang et al. 2018) or no 
relationship (Bending and Read 1997, Tian et al. 2010). Such conflicting evidence could be 
due to the dual functions of phenolic compounds that enabling them to serve as an enzyme 
substrate and/or as a product of enzyme action (Min et al. 2015). 
As explained by Fenner et al. (2005), a rise in phenol oxidase activity simultaneously with 
increased concentration of phenolic compounds, may be due to the latter being cleaved as 
product of enzymatic action from the peat matrix faster than being degraded by the microbial 
biomass. 
1.3.3. Hydrogen ions concentration (pH) 
Alongside oxygen, a variety of factors have been appeared recently to weaken the enzymic 
latch mechanism, including pH value (Kang et al. 2018, Zak et al. 2019). Indeed, a 
simulation of moisture loss (increased oxygen ingress) during drought in a peat soil by 
Williams et al. (2000) did not result in increased phenol oxidase activity as would be 
expected. They attributed this to the low pH that characterized peatland ecosystems, the 
cation exchange capacity of carpet-forming Sphagnum mosses and the partial decay of plant 
remains introduce organic acids into the soil, all of which produce the characteristic acidity of 
peatlands (Gorham et al. 1987). Acidification of peat soils will indirectly limit hydrolase 
enzyme activities by suppressing phenol oxidase activity, which allowing the accumulation of 
inhibitory phenolics (Freeman et al. 2012).  
According to Clymo (1983), low pH is an important factor in reducing decomposition rates in 
wetlands. The concentration of hydrogen ions is one of the primary factors controlling 
decomposition processes through its impact on phenol oxidase activity (Pind et al. 1994, 
Williams et al. 2000, Sinsabaugh et al. 2008). The pH value may affect the enzyme reaction 
site, as well as the interaction between immobilised enzymes and their associated matrix, 
thereby modifying enzyme activity in soil systems (Kang and Freeman 1999).  
Across a survey of a wide range of peatlands and through field and laboratory experiments, 
pH emerged as the primary agent driving phenol oxidase activity and subsequently dissolved 
organic carbon (DOC) release (Kang et al. 2018). Furthermore, Kang and Freeman (1999) 
found that pH value was the dominant controlling factor for phosphatase activities in bog, fen 
and swamp of a Welsh peatland.  
1.3.4. Organic and inorganic nutrient concentration 
Organic carbon supplies are required by heterotrophic microorganisms as energy sources 
promoting microbial processes (Kang et al. 1998). DOC is reported to have a priming effect 
on organic matter decomposition and therefore may be expected to exhibit a positive 
correlation with extracellular enzyme activities (Song et al. 2019). DOC is also thought to 
stimulate the activity of enzymes involved in the mineralisation of other nutrients (e.g., 
phosphatase and arylsulfatase) (Kim and Kang 2008). However, even under a high 
concentration of DOC, microbial processes could be limited (Kang et al. 1998) due to the 
presence of phenolic compounds which tend to constitute a large proportion (50-75%) of the 
peatland-derived DOC pool, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in aquatic environments can 
originate from internal or photosynthetic sources (autochthonous inputs) and/or from external 
or terrestrial sources (allochthonous inputs) (Hope et al. 1994). In general, DOC from 
autochthonous sources is relatively uncoloured, and has low aromaticity and molecular 
weight and is easily broken down by soil microbes and therefore exhibits high flux rates in 
waters. Allochthonous DOC on the other hand has high molecular weight and is rich in 
aromatic compounds, highly coloured and relatively recalcitrant to decomposition (Gergel et 
al. 1999).  
In addition to water table heights, inorganic nitrate supply and carbon supply have been 
reported as the main controlling factors for N2O emission (Groffman 1991). Indeed, Kang et 
al. (1998) found that the N2O emission increased with increasing both nitrate concentration 
(used as electron acceptor during denitrification) and -glucosidase activity (used as an 
indicator of labile carbon availability) in a Welsh peatland. In the same study, they found a 
significant negative relationship between inorganic sulfate and CH4 emission as sulfate 
addition decreased the production of CH4 by 91%, a finding backed up by Freeman et al. 
(1994), who attributed the inhibitory effects of sulfate ions on CH4 emission to the 
competition between methanogens and the most abundant sulfate-reducing bacteria for 
organic substrates. 
Measurement of enzymes activity can reflect microbial nutrient demand as many 
microorganisms adjust their enzyme production in response to the demand for nutrients 
(Chrst 1991). Therefore, it is believed that a negative correlation would occur between soil 
enzyme activity and nutrient availability depending on the economic model of microbial 
metabolism indicating that if nutrients are limited, enzymes production increase and vice 
versa (Sinsabaugh et al. 1993, 2008). Indeed, a statistically significant negative relationship 
was detected between phosphatase activity and phosphate concentration, indicating that 
phosphatase production was induced in response to the low phosphate availability in wetland 
soils (Kang and Freeman 1999). However, there is conflicting evidence regarding the 
relationship between inorganic nutrients content and the enzymes activity, for example 
between phosphatase activity and inorganic P availability, while some studies observed a 
negative relationship (e.g. Kang and Freeman 1999, when compared on a spatial basis, 
Treseder and Vitousek 2001), still others reported a positive relationship (e.g. Weintraub and 
Schimel 2005) or no relationship (e.g. Kang and Freeman 1999, when compared on a 
temporal basis). The latter could be due to the measurement of stabilised enzymes which are 
already present in large amounts in the soil and are independent of microbial control and thus 
do not respond to nutrient availability (Burns et al. 2013).  
Increased nitrogen deposition has been linked with increased enzymes activity and carbon 
release from peatlands due to the lower release of polyphenols by Sphagnum mosses when N 
content is high, which in turn limit enzyme inhibition and promote soil metabolism (Bragazza 
et al. 2006). 
1.4. Microbial processes along layers of peat soil 
Soil microorganisms occur throughout the soil profile and even in deeper layers, where 
during their activity and function, they contribute to the processes involving organic matter 
decomposition, nutrient cycling and GHG emissions (Jackson et al. 2009, Senga et al. 2015). 
The key processes in the anaerobic deeper layers are fermentation, methanogenesis, and iron, 
nitrate and sulfate reduction. Subsurface soil processes such as methanogenesis and 
denitrification are dependent on the oxygen status of the soil and hence the water table level 
(Kayranli et al. 2010). N2O and CH4 are potent greenhouse gases, having a much higher global 
warming potential (up to 298 and 34 times stronger, respectively) than CO2 (IPCC 2013). 
Several studies have shown that methanogenic Archaea increase as peat depth increases 
(Kotsyurbenko et al. 2004, Dedysh et al. 2006, Jackson et al. 2009). Likewise with N2O flux, 
anaerobic conditions promote denitrification which produces more N2O than during the 
nitrification process (which is more prominent under aerobic conditions). Moreover, deep soil 
layers may exhibit the same as or higher enzymes activity than surface layers (Senga et al. 
2015). 
Fenner and Freeman (2011) and Gough et al. (2016) suggest that under anoxic conditions, 
anaerobic metabolism becomes dominant, shifting metabolic end products towards CH4, 
DOC and CO2 rather than principally CO2. The concentration of DOC in surface waters has 
important implications for drinking water providers since DOC reduce the aesthetic quality of 
the water and acts as a reaction precursor to potentially harmful disinfection by-products 
(Jones 2006). 
Despite the importance of the microbial processes that occur at depth, lower layers of peat 
have received less attention than the upper layers (Senga et al. 2015). This is because the 
upper depths of the peat profile often represent the most enzymatically active layer, more 
likely due to the higher temperatures, aeration, labile organic matter content and the fact that 
this layer corresponds with the rhizosphere and hence highest density of microbes (Moore 
2002). 
1.5. Micro-eukaryotes in peatlands 
Peatlands are water-saturated environments thanks to the spongy layer of Sphagnum moss on 
their surface. These conditions allow planktonic organisms to be mobile and dynamic. These 
organisms include prokaryotes, microbial eukaryotes and small Metazoa that together form 
the microbial food web where nutrients and energy are transferred through the trophic 
interactions (Jassey et al. 2015). Unlike prokaryotes, research into eukaryotic 
microorganisms has been limited in many ecosystems including peatlands. These are globally 
significant environments since they represent huge carbon reservoirs, sequestering over one 
third of the global soil carbon in the form of peat (Kang et al. 2018) and are also 
distinguished by their rich biodiversity (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006, Mieczan 2012). The 
structure (biological communities) and function (storing carbon) of peatlands are threatened 
by ongoing global warming which has been attributed to high emissions of greenhouse gas 
into the atmosphere (IPCC 2013).  
In the microbiomes found in soils, eukaryotic microbial communities are the most species 
rich (Geisen et al. 2015a). These organisms including fungi and protists (heterotrophic 
(protozoa) and autotrophic protists), which are both functionally diverse (Araujo et al. 2018), 
allowing them to play a number of essential roles within the ecosystems food webs (Adl and 
Gupta 2006, Gilbert and Mitchell 2006), and can directly and/or indirectly affect the carbon 
balance of peatlands and hence possibly contribute to climate change (Dedysh et al. 2006, 
Jassey et al. 2015). 
 In soils, phototrophs containing photosynthetic pigments are the primary producers fixing 
carbon during photosynthesis (Seppey et al. 2017). Phagotrophs feed mainly on bacterial and 
fungal communities in addition to other eukaryotic microorganisms and thus they contribute 
to elemental cycling, nutrient release and soil fertility, which in turn stimulates plant growth 
(Geisen 2016, Geisen et al. 2018). Through predation, phagotrophs also control their 
microbial prey populations thus influencing indirectly the functioning of their prey in the 
ecosystems (Geisen et al. 2018). Indeed, Murase et al. (2006) found that without 
heterotrophic protists, total DNA increased in -radiation-sterilized soil that had been 
reinoculated with a bacterial assemblage, while in the soil that had been reinoculated with 
both bacteria and protists after sterilization, there was a decrease in bacterial biomass due to 
protistan grazing effects. This demonstrates the significant role of phagotrophic protists in the 
regulation of bacterial populations (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006). Protozoan predation may also 
help to reduce diseases through the consumption of disease agents (e.g., Cryptosporidium 
oocysts) (Stott et al. 2001). Mixotrophic organisms are those that benefit from both trophic 
behaviours (phototrophy and phagotrophy), which enable them to significant contribution to 
carbon cycling. As primary producers they directly contribute to carbon fixation through 
photosynthesis, while as heterotrophs they indirectly affect organic matter decomposition by 
feeding on the decomposers (Jassey et al. 2015). Osmotrophs absorb soluble nutrients 
through the cell membrane and are mostly found within the fungal group (Adl and Gupta 
2006). These have been identified as the main decomposers of organic substrates in soils 
(Gilbert and Mitchell 2006), converting dead organic matter into biomass and hence building 
the link between basic resources and higher trophic levels (Ferreira and Voronina 2016) 
mainly thanks to their extracellular enzymes' activities (Min et al. 2015).  
Recently, high throughput sequencing-dependent approaches revealed that parasitic protists 
are abundantly present in soils (Geisen et al. 2015b, Mah et al. 2017). Therefore, soil can be 
an important source of pathogenic infection for livestock, agricultural crops and even for 
humans. In soils, parasites are often found encysted in a cell wall (cysts, oocysts and spores). 
Prominent examples are: the cysts of Giardia duodenalis, Balantidium coli and Entamoeba 
histolytica, the oocysts of Cryptosporidium spp., Cystoisospora belli and Toxoplasma gondii 
and the spores of microsporidia. Parasites can also be found in soils as trophozoites, for 
example the facultative amoeba Acanthamoeba spp. and the excavate Naegleria fowleri. 
According to Thomas et al. (1997), parasites could act as key species in wetlands through 
their direct and indirect effects on their host species. These effects include survival, 
predation, castration, sexual selection and ecological distribution. In addition to the 
pathogenic effects, parasitic free-living dispersal stages can serve as prey for other organisms, 
contributing greatly to ecosystem biomass and energy transfer (Thieltges et al. 2013).  
By controlling host communities, parasites can alter food web structures (Geisen et al. 
2015b). Generally, micro-eukaryotes can directly and/or indirectly affect the carbon balance 
of the ecosystem through their diverse functions.  
Micro-eukaryotic organisms are known to be vulnerable to changes in environmental 
conditions including water content, oxygen availability, temperature, pH, light intensity, 
nutrient availability, vegetation type and anthropogenic perturbations (Geisen et al. 2018).  
Soil water availability is a major factor shaping the community composition of soil micro-
eukaryotes along a transect from the Arctic to the tropics (Tsyganov et al. 2013). They 
permanently need water for their mobility and functions. Consequently, their activities are 
constrained by lack of water (Geisen et al. 2014). On the other hand, growth rates of micro-
eukaryotes in anaerobic conditions created by excess water are lower than those in aerobic 
conditions (Fenchel and Finlay 1990). Temperature affects micro-eukaryotic communities 
both directly and indirectly. For example, relatively high temperature has a direct effect on 
the phototrophic ability of testate amoebae (Jassey et al. 2015) and has an indirect effect by 
regulating soil moisture content (Bamforth 1973). A wide range of tolerance to soil 
temperature is observed depending on the species present. However, eukaryotic life is 
severely limited at temperatures above 60C (Clarke 2014). Micro-eukaryotes also show a 
wide range of pH optima. Acidic soils of Sphagnum peatlands host a broad diversity of protist 
communities (Lara et al. 2011). Light intensity primarily affects autotrophic microorganisms 
and hence affects their predators by regulating food availability (Seppey et al. 2017). 
Vegetation type can also affect micro-eukaryotic communities in soil through root exudates 
and/or litter composition (Bragazza et al. 2015, Geisen et al. 2018). Therefore, lengthened 
growing seasons and changes in vegetation cover due to climate warming could result in 
substantial microbial community composition changes (Shi et al. 2015).  
Moreover, soil micro-eukaryotes have been found to be vulnerable to anthropogenic 
disturbances such as ploughing, pollution, elevated atmospheric CO2 and the application of 
fertilizers and pesticides (Geisen et al. 2018). Soil parasite abundance can be an indicator of 
hostile environments, for example where pollution and the addition of pesticides may have 
weakened soil invertebrates and created a high susceptibility of hosts to infection by 
apicomplexan parasites (Foissner 1999). Application of fertilizers to naturally nutrient-
depleted peatlands significantly increase the abundance of autotrophic microorganisms 
(Gilbert et al. 1998). Amblard (1991) reported that the development ability of many 
phototrophic diatoms has not impeded by dark conditions, possibly due to the availability of 
dissolved nutrients and their ability to switch to heterotrophic feeding. 
Given their sensitivity to environmental conditions, micro-eukaryotic organisms are 
considered to be useful bioindicators of abiotic variations in their environments (Koenig et al. 
2015, Geisen et al. 2018), and can to some extent reflect soil quality and spatial heterogeneity 
in different habitats (Mitchell et al. 2000). However, they have received little attention in 
many ecosystems including peatlands. Importantly, assessing the influence of environmental 
variables on microbial communities of peatlands using climatic gradients is needed to 
understand and predict the impacts of future climate change on the peatland structure and 
function (Davidson and Janssens 2006, Bragazza et al. 2015, Jassey et al. 2015).  
In most of the existing studies on this subject, a single region was sampled to address a 
specific group of micro-eukaryotes. The bioindicator potential of peatland testate amoebae 
(belong to protists) has been quite well researched in the last few years. For example, Koeing 
et al. (2015) found that testate amoebae were valuable as bioindicators of environmental 
gradients (temperature, altitude, water table depth, N and C content) in Sphagnum-dominated 
peatlands in Switzerland. In a detailed study, they found that only ten testate amoeba taxa 
were more powerful indicators of local conditions than the full diversity of vegetation. 
Lamentowicz et al. (2010) also found that such microorganisms were strongly correlated with 
water table depth and hydrochemistry of mosses in sub-alpine peatlands. Long-term warming 
experiments in a French peatland have shown a negative response of algal endosymbionts of 
mixotrophic testate amoebae to temperature increase, which led to decline their abundance 
and hence reduced peatland C fixation capacity (Jassey et al. 2015). The declined in the 
abundance of mixotrophic organisms due to the disruption of their phototrophic ability under 
warming is due to the fact that these organisms cannot live as pure heterotrophs without their 
algal endosymbionts which fail to transmit from mother to daughter cells during cell division 
under higher temperatures (Jassey et al. 2015). 
Papadimitriou et al. (2010) found that the abundance and diversity of ciliated protozoa 
increase with increasing dissolved oxygen concentrations and with decreasing electrical 
conductivity to less than 3.0 mS/cm in wastewater of constructed wetland. 
Gilbert et al. (1998) observed that increased supply of nutrients resulted in a substantial 
increase in the ciliates and the micro-algal Bacillariophyceae and a decrease in the abundance 
of testate amoeba and of other algae. Mieczan (2007) studied ciliate communities and their 
relationship to environmental factors in the peat-bog reservoirs of Eastern Poland. He found 
that the abundance of ciliates increased with increasing pH. He added that in the reservoirs 
with the lowest pH the lower abundance of ciliates may also result from humic substances 
that release from the peat and attenuate light penetration, reducing the abundance of 
autotrophic microorganisms that are a preferred food source for them. The same author 
(Mieczan 2012) further found that pH, water level, total organic carbon and phosphorus were 
significant factors constraining testate amoeba and ciliate communities in peatlands of 
Eastern Poland.  
Kang et al. (2018) noted that under optimal temperature conditions, increased pH can change 
fungal communities, stimulating phenol oxidase activity and result in higher dissolved 
organic carbon (DOC) production. This in turn may elevate DOC concentrations in waters 
draining peatland areas. The presence of phenolic compounds appeared to be negatively 
affected the presence of micro-eukaryotic communities possibly indirectly through effects on 
prey organisms (Fung et al. 1985, Opelt et al. 2007, Mellegrd et al. 2009, Pizzolitto et al. 
2015). Oxygen concentration is also an important factor in structuring fungal populations in 
peat soils (Lin et al. 2012, Bragazza et al. 2015).  
Mataloni (1999) studied microalgae communities (phototrophic protists) along a hydrological 
gradient from the open water to the drier surroundings of Argentine peatlands, and found that 
the species richness of phototrophic protists decreased toward terrestrial drier conditions, 
lower pH and higher conductivity, with the dominance of all green algae decreasing as a 
result of replacement by other species that were better adapted to the hostile conditions. 
Regarding parasites, water-saturated soils facilitate the transport of parasitic infective stages 
through the soil to water reservoirs leading to the contamination of water supplies and fresh 
foods by disease agents. Rainfall is an important natural factor contributing to parasitic 
infective stages movement horizontally between places and vertically through soil profile 
(Santamaria and Toranzos 2003). Harvell et al. (2002) predicted that increased global 
temperatures would result in a deterioration in health, because increased temperature and 
precipitation events resulting from climate change could facilitate disease outbreaks including 
parasitic diseases. Higher temperatures can compromise the immune system of hosts and 
increase pathogen growth and transmission rates (Harvell et al. 2009). Indeed, warming 
experiments on a host-parasite system by Studer et al. (2010) showed that with increasing 
temperature, there was an increase in productivity, output and infectivity of parasite 
transmission stages. Also, the susceptibility of hosts to infection was increased with 
increasing temperature.  
The concentration of DOC in water bodies is another environmental factor affecting parasite 
abundance. King et al. (2008) reported that the inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum 
oocysts by solar UV irradiation in surface waters decreases with increasing DOC 
concentration. This is due to the absorption of UV by DOC molecules (mainly humics), a 
consequence of the presence of chromophores on their aromatic rings (Leenheer and Croue 
2003). 
A broad diversity of micro-eukaryotes has been identified as typical inhabitants of peatlands; 
Alveolata, with sequences of Ciliophora are the most numerous (Lara et al. 2011, Geisen et 
al. 2015a), photosynthetic Bacillariophyta (Geisen et al. 2015a) and the Chrysophyceae 
within supergroup Stramenopiles (Lara et al. 2011), Arcellinida within Amoebozoa and 
Euglyphida within Rhizaria (Lara et al. 2011, Jassey et al. 2015) dominated peat soils. 
Parasitic protist taxa such as Apicomplexa, Oomycetes and Ichthyosporea were ubiquitously 
detected in soils (Geisen et al. 2015a). Up to 55% of fungal species have been identified in 
the northern peatlands. Fungi, mainly Zygomycota, Ascomycota and Basidiomycota are also 
peat-associated inhabitants (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006, Lin et al. 2012). Microalgae 
(phototrophic protists) are the most diverse group, estimated to represent 20 to 60% of the 
total diversity in peatlands (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006). 
 The spatial heterogeneity of peatland substrate conditions and the associated sampling 
challenges may in part explain why microorganisms are a relatively under-researched aspect 
of peatland environments. Few studies have examined microbial abundance and diversity in 
peat, despite the fact that microbes are recognised as playing a key role in the functioning of 
the ecosystem (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006).  
Clearly, there is still a need for much more baseline data on community composition, 
function and responses of microorganisms to ecological gradients in contrasting peatlands in 
order for microbial communities to be a useful monitoring tool in such crucial ecosystems 
(Gilbert and Mitchell 2006). 
1.6. Aims of the study 
It is important to study the conditions that influence the activities of peat soil enzymes 
responsible for organic matter decomposition as a prerequisite for predicting the ecosystem 
response to climate change, human utilization and management policies (Moore 2002). In 
addition, studying the effect of soil variables on microbial communities in peatlands along 
climatic gradient is useful to predict how peatlands structure and function may respond to 
climate-driven environmental changes (Bragazza et al. 2015). 
This study was expanded to include three contrasting peatlands, representing a gradient of 
environmental conditions, located in three climatic regions, Arctic (Svalbard, Norway), 
temperate (North Wales, UK) and tropical (Andes mountains, Colombia). Also, the range of 
metabolic and environmental parameters investigated has been extended, compared with 
previous studies, to include key hydrolytic enzymes -D-glucosidase, arylsulfatase,  -D-
xylosidase, N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase), phosphatase, oxidation enzyme phenol 
oxidase, the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), 
physicochemical variables pH, electrical conductivity, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), 
phenolic compounds, soil organic matter (SOM) and water content, cations and anions 
concentration. In a field scale study, these variables have been identified as important aspects 
of influencing different microbial processes (Groffman 1991, Pind et al. 1994, Kang et al. 
1998, Kang and Freeman 1999, Kang et al. 2018).  
In addition, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from the superficial layers of peat soil was 
extracted and Illumina MiSeq sequencing was used to identify a broader range of micro-
eukaryotes in the three peatlands. The main aims of this study are: 
1- To determine the relationship between biogeochemical processes and environmental 
factors across the peat profile in different climatic regions (chapters 2, 3 and 4). 
2- To get an indication of carbon and nutrient cycling in relation to the environmental 
factors at global scale by comparing the three climatic regions (chapter 5).  
3- To determine richness, diversity and relative abundance of micro-eukaryotes along 
the three different peatlands. Also, attempts were made to relate community 
composition of micro-eukaryotes to biotic and abiotic properties of studied peatlands 
by using redundancy analysis (RDA) (chapter 6). 
The thesis chapters have been written in the format of publishable papers. As a result, 
some repetition in the introduction and materials and methods sections was 
unavoidable. 
1.7. References 
Adl, M.S. and Gupta, V.S., 2006. Protists in soil ecology and forest nutrient cycling. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 36(7), pp. 1805-1817. 
Amblard, C., 1991. Activit htrotrophe des microalgues et des cyanobactries vis--vis du 
carbone: implications cophysiologiques [Heterotrophic activity of microalgae and 
cyanobacteria with respect to carbon: ecophysiological implications]. L'Anne 
Biologique, 30(2), pp. 73-107. 
Araujo, A.S.F.D., Mendes, L.W., Bezerra, W.M., Nunes, L.A.P.L., Lyra, M.D.C.C.P., 
Figueiredo, M.D.V.B. and Melo, V.M.M., 2018. Archaea diversity in vegetation gradients 
from the Brazilian Cerrado. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, 49(3), pp. 522-528. 
Bamforth, S. S., 1973. Population dynamics of soil and vegetation protozoa. American 
Zoologist, 13(1), pp. 171-176. 
Benavides, J.C., Vitt, D.H. and Wieder, R.K., 2013. The influence of climate change on 
recent peat accumulation patterns of Distichia muscoides cushion bogs in the highelevation 
tropical Andes of Colombia. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 118(4), pp. 
1627-1635. 
Bending, G.D. and Read, D.J., 1997. Lignin and soluble phenolic degradation by 
ectomycorrhizal and ericoid mycorrhizal fungi. Mycological Research, 101(11), pp. 1348-
1354. 
Billett, M. F., Charman, D. J., Clark, J. M., Evans, C. D., Evans, M. G., Ostle, N. J., Worrall, 
F., Burden, A., Dinsmore, K.J., Jones, T., and McNamara, N. P., 2010. Carbon balance of UK 
peatlands: current state of knowledge and future research challenges. Climate Research, 45, 
pp. 13-29.  
Bradley, R.S., Vuille, M., Diaz, H.F. and Vergara, W., 2006. Threats to water supplies in the 
tropical Andes. Science, 312(5781), pp.1755-1756. 
Bragazza, L., Freeman, C., Jones, T., Rydin, H., Limpens, J., Fenner, N., Ellis, T., Gerdol, R., 
Hjek, M., Hjek, T. and Iacumin, P., 2006. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition promotes 
carbon loss from peat bogs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103(51), pp. 19386-19389. 
Bragazza, L., Bardgett, R. D., Mitchell, E. A., and Buttler, A., 2015. Linking soil microbial 
communities to vascular plant abundance along a climate gradient. New Phytologist, 205(3), 
pp. 1175-1182.  
Burns, R. G., DeForest, J. L., Marxsen, J., Sinsabaugh, R. L., Stromberger, M. E., 
Wallenstein, M. D., Weintraub, M. N., and Zoppini, A., 2013. Soil enzymes in a changing 
environment: current knowledge and future directions. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 58, pp. 
216-234. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed.), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments, pp. 29-59. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Clarke, A., 2014. The thermal limits to life on Earth. International Journal of 
Astrobiology, 13(2), pp. 141-154. 
Clymo, R.S., 1983. Peat. In: Goodawll, D. W. (ed.) Ecosystems of the World, vol. 4A, Mires: 
Swamp, Bog, Fen and Moor. Elseview, Amsterdam, pp. 159-224. 
Committee on Climate Change, 2013. Managing the land in a changing climate. Adaptation 
Sub-Committee Progress Report, (Plus additional ASC info). 
Davidson, E. A., and Janssens, I. A., 2006. Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon 
decomposition and feedbacks to climate change. Nature, 440(7081), pp. 165-173. 
Dedysh, S.N., Pankratov, T.A., Belova, S.E., Kulichevskaya, I.S. and Liesack, W., 2006. 
Phylogenetic analysis and in situ identification of bacteria community composition in an 
acidic Sphagnum peat bog. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(3), pp. 2110-2117. 
Dunn, C. and Freeman, C., 2011. Peatlands: our greatest source of carbon credits? Carbon 
Management, 2 (3), pp. 289-301. 
Dunn, C., 2013. Generating carbon credits through application of the enzymic latch 
mechanism in peatland carbon sequestration, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Durn, N., Rosa, M. A., DAnnibale, A., and Gianfreda, L., 2002. Applications of laccases 
and tyrosinases (phenoloxidases) immobilized on different supports: a review. Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology, 31(7), pp. 907-931. 
Elvebakk, A., 1994. A survey of plant associations and alliances from Svalbard. Journal of 
Vegetation Science, 5(6), pp.791-802. 
Evans, C. D., Monteith, D. T., and Cooper, D. M., 2005. Long-term increases in surface 
water dissolved organic carbon: observations, possible causes and environmental 
impacts. Environmental Pollution, 137(1), pp. 55-71. 
Fenchel, T., and Finlay, B.J., 1990. Anaerobic free-living protozoa: growth efficiencies and 
the structure of anaerobic communities. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 74(4), pp. 269-275. 
Fenner, N., and Freeman, C., 2011. Drought-induced carbon loss in peatlands. Nature 
Geoscience, 4(12), pp. 895-900. 
Fenner, N., Freeman, C. and Reynolds, B., 2005. Observations of a seasonally shifting 
thermal optimum in peatland carbon-cycling processes; implications for the global carbon 
cycle and soil enzyme methodologies. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(10), pp. 1814-1821. 
Ferreira, V., and Voronina, E., 2016. Impact of climate change on aquatic hypho-and 
terrestrial macromycetes. In: Marxen, J. (ed.), Climate Change and Microbial Ecology: 
Current Research and Future Trends. Caister Academic Press, Norfolk, pp. 53-72. 
Foissner, W., 1999. Soil protozoa as bioindicators: pros and cons, methods, diversity, 
representative examples. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 74, pp. 95-112. 
Freeman, C., Nevison, G. B., Kang, H., Hughes, S., Reynolds, B., and Hudson, J. A., 2002. 
Contrasted effects of simulated drought on the production and oxidation of methane in a mid-
Wales wetland. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 34(1), pp. 61-67. 
Freeman, C., Fenner, N., and Shirsat, A. H., 2012. Peatland geoengineering: an alternative 
approach to terrestrial carbon sequestration. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 370(1974), pp. 4404-4421. 
Freeman, C., Hudson, J., Lock, M. A., Reynolds, B., and Swanson, C., 1994. A possible role 
of sulphate in the suppression of wetland methane fluxes following drought. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 26(10), pp. 1439-1442. 
Freeman, C., Lock, M. A., and Reynolds, B., 1992. Fluxes of CO2, CH4 and N2O from a 
Welsh peatland following simulation of water table draw-down: potential feedback to 
climatic change. Biogeochemistry, 19(1), pp. 51-60. 
Freeman, C., Evans, C. D., Monteith, D. T., Reynolds, B., and Fenner, N., 2001a. Export of 
organic carbon from peat soils. Nature, 412(6849), pp. 785-785. 
Freeman, C., Ostle, N. and Kang, H., 2001b. An enzymic 'latch' on a global carbon store - a 
shortage of oxygen locks up carbon in peatlands by restraining a single enzyme. Nature, 
409(6817), pp. 149-149.  
Freeman, C., Ostle, N.J., Fenner, N. and Kang, H., 2004. A regulatory role for phenol oxidase 
during decomposition in peatlands. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36(10), pp. 1663-1667. 
Fung, D.Y., Sheree Lin, C.C. and Gailani, M.B., 1985. Effect of phenolic antioxidants on 
microbial growth. CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 12(2), pp. 153-183.  
Geisen, S., 2016. The bacterial-fungal energy channel concept challenged by enormous 
functional versatility of soil protists. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 102, pp. 22-25. 
Geisen, S., Bandow, C., Rmbke, J., Bonkowski, M., 2014. Soil water availability strongly 
alters the community composition of soil protists. Pedobiologia, 57(4-6), pp. 205-213. 
Geisen, S., Mitchell, E.A., Adl, S., Bonkowski, M., Dunthorn, M., Ekelund, F., Fernndez, 
L.D., Jousset, A., Krashevska, V., Singer, D. and Spiegel, F.W., 2018. Soil protists: a fertile 
frontier in soil biology research. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 42(3), pp. 293-323. 
Geisen, S., Tveit, A.T., Clark, I.M., Richter, A., Svenning, M.M., Bonkowski, M. and Urich, 
T., 2015a. Metatranscriptomic census of active protists in soils. The ISME Journal, 9(10), p. 
2178. 
Geisen, S., Laros, I., Vizcano, A., Bonkowski, M., and De Groot, G. A., 2015b. Not all are 
freeliving: highthroughput DNA metabarcoding reveals a diverse community of protists 
parasitizing soil Metazoa. Molecular Ecology, 24(17), pp. 4556-4569. 
Gergel, S.E., Turner, M.G. and Kratz, T.K., 1999. Dissolved organic carbon as an indicator of 
the scale of watershed influence on lakes and rivers. Ecological Applications, 9(4), pp. 1377-
1390. 
Gilbert, D., and Mitchell, E. A., 2006. Microbial diversity in Sphagnum 
peatlands. Developments in Earth Surface Processes, 9, pp. 287-318. 
Gilbert, D., Amblard, C., Bourdier, G. and Francez, A.J., 1998. The microbial loop at the 
surface of a peatland: structure, function, and impact of nutrient input. Microbial 
Ecology, 35(1), pp. 83-93. 
Gorham, E., Janssens, J. A., Wheeler, G. A., and Glaser, P. H., 1987. The natural and 
anthropogenic acidification of peatlands. In: Hutchinson, T.C. and Meema, K. (eds.), Effects 
of Atmospheric Pollutants on Forests, Wetlands and Agricultural Ecosystems, pp. 493-512. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Gough, R., Holliman, P.J., Fenner, N., Peacock, M. and Freeman, C., 2016. Influence of 
water table depth on pore water chemistry and trihalomethane formation potential in 
peatlands. Water Environment Research, 88(2), pp. 107-117.  
Gramss, G., Voigt, K. D., and Kirsche, B., 1999. Oxidoreductase enzymes liberated by plant 
roots and their effects on soil humic material. Chemosphere, 38(7), pp. 1481-1494. 
Groffman, P. M., 1991. Ecology of nitrification and denitrification in soil evaluated at scales 
relevant to atmospheric chemistry. In: Rogers, J.E. and Whitman, W.B. (eds.), Microbial 
Production and Consumption of Greenhouse Gases: Methane, Nitrogen Oxides and 
Halomethanes, pp. 201-217. 
Grnlund, A., Hauge, A., Hovde, A., and Rasse, D. P., 2008. Carbon loss estimates from 
cultivated peat soils in Norway: a comparison of three methods. Nutrient Cycling in 
Agroecosystems, 81(2), pp. 157-167.  
Groombridge, B., 1992. Global Biodiversity- Status of the Earths Living Resources. World 
Conservation Monitoring Center. 
Gumbricht, T., RomanCuesta, R.M., Verchot, L., Herold, M., Wittmann, F., Householder, 
E., Herold, N. and Murdiyarso, D., 2017. An expert system model for mapping tropical 
wetlands and peatlands reveals South America as the largest contributor. Global Change 
Biology, 23(9), pp. 3581-3599. 
Harvell, C. D., Mitchell, C. E., Ward, J. R., Altizer, S., Dobson, A. P., Ostfeld, R. S., and 
Samuel, M. D., 2002. Climate warming and disease risks for terrestrial and marine 
biota. Science, 296(5576), pp. 2158-2162. 
Harvell, D., Altizer, S., Cattadori, I. M., Harrington, L., and Weil, E., 2009. Climate change 
and wildlife diseases: when does the host matter the most? Ecology, 90(4), pp. 912-920. 
Hodgkins, S. B., Richardson, C. J., Dommain, R., Wang, H., Glaser, P. H., Verbeke, B., and 
Flanagan, N., 2018. Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in 
peat recalcitrance. Nature Communications, 9(1), pp. 1-13. 
Holden, J., 2005. Peatland hydrology and carbon release: why small-scale process 
matters. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences, 363(1837), pp. 2891-2913. 
Holden, J., Chapman, P. J., and Labadz, J. C., 2004. Artificial drainage of peatlands: 
hydrological and hydrochemical process and wetland restoration. Progress in Physical 
Geography, 28(1), pp. 95-123. 
Holden, J., Shotbolt, L., Bonn, A., Burt, T. P., Chapman, P. J., Dougill, A. J., Fraser, E.D.G., 
Hubacek, K., Irvine, B., Kirkby, M.J., and Reed, M. S., 2007. Environmental change in 
moorland landscapes. Earth-Science Reviews, 82(1-2), pp. 75-100.  
Hoostal, M.J. and Bouzat, J.L., 2008. The modulating role of dissolved organic matter on 
spatial patterns of microbial metabolism in Lake Erie sediments. Microbial Ecology, 55(2), 
pp. 358-368. 
Hope, D., Billett, M. F., and Cresser, M. S., 1994. A review of the export of carbon in river 
water: fluxes and processes. Environmental Pollution, 84(3), pp. 301-324. 
Hullo, M. F., Moszer, I., Danchin, A., and Martin-Verstraete, I., 2001. CotA of Bacillus 
subtilis is a copper-dependent laccase. Journal of Bacteriology, 183(18), pp. 5426-5430.  
International Ramsar Convention in 1971: http://www.ramsar.org. 
IPC, 2013. Climate Change 2013. The Physical Science Basis, OMM, Geneva. 
IPCC, 2013. Climate change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(Eds. Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner G-K, Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J, Nauels A, Xia Y, 
Bex V, Midgley PM), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 2007. Climate change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
IUCN, 2014. IUCN: International Union for Conservation of Nature, UK committee. Peatland 
programme. Briefing - Peatbog ecosystems. 
Jackson, C. R., Liew, K. C., and Yule, C. M., 2009. Structural and functional changes with 
depth in microbial communities in a tropical Malaysian peat swamp forest. Microbial 
Ecology, 57(3), p. 402. 
Jassey, V.E., Signarbieux, C., Httenschwiler, S., Bragazza, L., Buttler, A., Delarue, F., 
Fournier, B., Gilbert, D., Laggoun-Dfarge, F., Lara, E. and Mills, R.T., 2015. An 
unexpected role for mixotrophs in the response of peatland carbon cycling to climate 
warming. Scientific Reports, 5, p. 16931. 
Jones, T.G., 2006. Climate change and dissolved organic carbon: impacts on drinking water 
supplies, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp. 449-454. 
Kang, H., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1998. Trace gas emissions from a north Wales fen-
role of hydrochemistry and soil enzyme activity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 105(1-2), pp. 
107-116. 
http://www.ramsar.org/
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
Kayranli, B., Scholz, M., Mustafa, A., and Hedmark, ., 2010. Carbon storage and fluxes 
within freshwater wetlands: a critical review. Wetlands, 30(1), pp. 111-124.  
Kelley, C. A., Martens, C. S., and Ussler III, W., 1995. Methane dynamics across a tidally 
flooded riverbank margin. Limnology and Oceanography, 40(6), pp. 1112-1129. 
Kim, S.Y. and Kang, H., 2008. Effects of elevated CO2 on below-ground processes in 
temperate marsh microcosms. Hydrobiologia, 605(1), pp. 123-130. 
King, B.J., Hoefel, D., Daminato, D.P., Fanok, S. and Monis, P.T., 2008. Solar UV reduces 
Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst infectivity in environmental waters. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 104(5), pp. 1311-1323. 
Koenig, I., Feldmeyer-Christe, E. and Mitchell, E.A., 2015. Comparative ecology of vascular 
plant, bryophyte and testate amoeba communities in four Sphagnum peatlands along an 
altitudinal gradient in Switzerland. Ecological Indicators, 54, pp. 48-59. 
Koh, L.P., Butler, R.A. and Bradshaw, C.J., 2009. Conversion of Indonesia's 
peatlands. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 7(5), pp. 238-238. 
Knnen, M., Jauhiainen, J., Strakov, P., Heinonsalo, J., Laiho, R., Kusin, K., Limin, S. and 
Vasander, H., 2018. Deforested and drained tropical peatland sites show poorer peat substrate 
quality and lower microbial biomass and activity than unmanaged swamp forest. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry, 123, pp. 229-241. 
Kotsyurbenko, O. R., Chin, K. J., Glagolev, M. V., Stubner, S., Simankova, M. V., 
Nozhevnikova, A. N., and Conrad, R., 2004. Acetoclastic and hydrogenotrophic methane 
production and methanogenic populations in an acidic WestSiberian peat 
bog. Environmental Microbiology, 6(11), pp. 1159-1173. 
Lamentowicz, M., Lamentowicz, ., van der Knaap, W. O., Gbka, M., and Mitchell, E. A., 
2010. Contrasting speciesenvironment relationships in communities of testate amoebae, 
bryophytes and vascular plants along the fenbog gradient. Microbial Ecology, 59(3), pp. 
499-510. 
Lara, E., Mitchell, E.A., Moreira, D. and Garca, P.L., 2011. Highly diverse and seasonally 
dynamic protist community in a pristine peat bog. Protist, 162(1), pp. 14-32. 
Lee, S. S., Shin, K. J., Kim, W. Y., Ha, J. K., and Han, I. K., 1999. The rumen ecosystem: as 
a fountain source of nobel enzymes-review. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal 
Sciences, 12(6), pp. 988-1001. 
Leenheer, J. A., and Crou, J. P., 2003. Characterizing aquatic dissolved organic matter. 
Environmental Science and Technology, 37(1), pp. 18-26.  
Lin, X., Green, S., Tfaily, M. M., Prakash, O., Konstantinidis, K. T., Corbett, J. E., and 
Kostka, J. E., 2012. Microbial community structure and activity linked to contrasting 
biogeochemical gradients in bog and fen environments of the Glacial Lake Agassiz 
Peatland. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 78(19), pp. 7023-7031. 
Mah, F., De Vargas, C., Bass, D., Czech, L., Stamatakis, A. and Lara, E., 2017. Parasites 
dominate hyperdiverse soil protist communities in Neotropical rainforests. Nature Ecology 
and Evolution, 1, pp. 1-8.  
Maltby, E. and Turner, R.E., 1983. Wetlands of the world. Geographic Magazine, 55: pp. 12-
Marx, M. C., Wood, M., and Jarvis, S. C., 2001. A microplate fluorimetric assay for the study 
of enzyme diversity in soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 33(12-13), pp. 1633-1640. 
Mataloni, G., 1999. Ecological studies on algal communities from Tierra del Fuego peat 
bogs. Hydrobiologia, 391(1-3), pp. 157-171. 
McLatchey, G. P., and Reddy, K. R., 1998. Regulation of organic matter decomposition and 
nutrient release in a wetland soil. Journal of Environmental Quality, 27(5), pp. 1268-1274. 
Mellegrd, H., Stalheim, T., Hormazabal, V., Granum, P.E. and Hardy, S.P., 2009. 
Antibacterial activity of Sphagnum acid and other phenolic compounds found in Sphagnum 
papillosum against foodborne bacteria. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 49(1), pp. 85-90. 
Mieczan, T., 2007. Relationships among ciliated protozoa and water chemistry in small peat-
bog reservoirs (czna-Wodawa Lakeland, Eastern Poland). Oceanological and 
Hydrobiological Studies, 36(2), pp. 77-86. 
Mieczan, T., 2012. Distributions of testate amoebae and ciliates in different types of peatlands 
and their contributions to the nutrient supply. Zoological Studies, 51(1), pp. 18-26. 
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11.  
Mitchell, E.A., Buttler, A., Grosvernier, P., Rydin, H., Albinsson, C., Greenup, A.L., 
Heijmans, M.M., Hoosbeek, M.R. and Saarinen, T., 2000. Relationships among testate 
amoebae (Protozoa), vegetation and water chemistry in five Sphagnum-dominated peatlands 
in Europe. The New Phytologist, 145(1), pp. 95-106. 
Mitsch, W. and Gosselink, J., 2000. Wetlands. 3rd edition, New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold.   
Moore, P. D., 2002. The future of cool temperate bogs. Environmental Conservation, 29(1), 
pp. 3-20. 
Murase, J., Noll, M., and Frenzel, P., 2006. Impact of protists on the activity and structure of 
the bacterial community in a rice field soil. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(8), 
pp. 5436-5444. 
Nakatsubo, T., Uchida, M., Sasaki, A., Kondo, M., Yoshitake, S. and Kanda, H., 2015. 
Carbon accumulation rate of peatland in the High Arctic, Svalbard: implications for carbon 
sequestration. Polar Science, 9(2), pp. 267-275. 
Natural England., 2010. Englands peatlands - carbon storage and greenhouse gases. 
Opelt, K., Chobot, V., Hadacek, F., Schnmann, S., Eberl, L. and Berg, G., 2007. 
Investigations of the structure and function of bacterial communities associated with 
Sphagnum mosses. Environmental Microbiology, 9(11), pp. 2795-2809. 
Page, S.E., Rieley, J.O. and Banks, C.J., 2011. Global and regional importance of the tropical 
peatland carbon pool. Global Change Biology, 17(2), pp. 798-818. 
Page, S.E., Siegert, F., Rieley, J.O., Boehm, H.D.V., Jaya, A. and Limin, S., 2002. The amount 
of carbon released from peat and forest fires in Indonesia during 1997. Nature, 420(6911), p. 
Papadimitriou, C.A., Papatheodoulou, A., Takavakoglou, V., Zdragas, A., Samaras, P., 
Sakellaropoulos, G.P., Lazaridou, M. and Zalidis, G., 2010. Investigation of protozoa as 
indicators of wastewater treatment efficiency in constructed wetlands. Desalination, 250(1), 
pp. 378-382.  
Parish, F., Sirin, A., Charman, D., Joosten, H., Minayeva, T., Silvius, M. and Stringer, L., 
2008. Assessment on Peatlands, Biodiversity and Climate Change: Main Report. Global 
Environment Centre, Kuala Lumpur and Wetlands International, Wageningen. 
Pelaez, F., Martinez, M. J., and Martinez, A. T., 1995. Screening of 68 species of 
basidiomycetes for enzymes involved in lignin degradation. Mycological Research, 99(1), pp. 
37-42. 
Pind, A., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1994. Enzymic degradation of phenolic materials in 
peatlands measurement of phenol oxidase activity. Plant and Soil, 159(2), pp. 227-231.  
Pizzolitto, R.P., Barberis, C.L., Dambolena, J.S., Herrera, J.M., Zunino, M.P., Magnoli, C.E., 
Rubinstein, H.R., Zygadlo, J.A. and Dalcero, A.M., 2015. Inhibitory effect of natural 
phenolic compounds on Aspergillus parasiticus growth. Journal of Chemistry, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
Rozema, J., Boelen, P., Doorenbosch, M., Bohncke, S., Blokker, P., Boekel, C., and Konert, 
M., 2006. A vegetation, climate and environment reconstruction based on palynological 
analyses of high arctic tundra peat cores (50006000 years BP) from Svalbard. Plant 
Ecology, 182(1-2), pp. 155-173. 
Ruiz, D., Moreno, H.A., Gutirrez, M.E. and Zapata, P.A., 2008. Changing climate and 
endangered high mountain ecosystems in Colombia. Science of the Total 
Environment, 398(1-3), pp. 122-132. 
Santamara, J. and Toranzos, G.A., 2003. Enteric pathogens and soil: a short 
review. International Microbiology, 6(1), pp. 5-9. 
Segers, R., 1998. Methane production and methane consumption: a review of processes 
underlying wetland methane fluxes. Biogeochemistry, 41(1), pp. 23-51.  
Senga, Y., Hiroki, M., Terui, S. and Nohara, S., 2015. Variation in microbial function 
through soil depth profiles in the Kushiro wetland, north-eastern Hokkaido, Japan. Ecological 
Research, 30(4), pp. 563-572. 
Seppey, C.V., Singer, D., Dumack, K., Fournier, B., Belbahri, L., Mitchell, E.A. and Lara, E., 
2017. Distribution patterns of soil microbial eukaryotes suggests widespread algivory by 
phagotrophic protists as an alternative pathway for nutrient cycling. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 112, pp. 68-76. 
Sesana, L., 2006. Colombia Natural Parks. Bogot DC (Colombia): Villegas Asociados. 
Shi, Y., Xiang, X., Shen, C., Chu, H., Neufeld, J. D., Walker, V. K., and Grogan, P., 2015. 
Vegetation-associated impacts on arctic tundra bacterial and microeukaryotic 
communities. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 81(2), pp. 492-501. 
Sinsabaugh, R. L., Antibus, R. K., Linkins, A. E., McClaugherty, C. A., Rayburn, L., Repert, 
D., and Weiland, T., 1993. Wood decomposition: nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in 
relation to extracellular enzyme activity. Ecology, 74(5), pp. 1586-1593. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., Lauber, C.L., Weintraub, M.N., Ahmed, B., Allison, S.D., Crenshaw, C., 
Contosta, A.R., Cusack, D., Frey, S., Gallo, M.E. and Gartner, T.B., 2008. Stoichiometry of 
soil enzyme activity at global scale. Ecology Letters, 11(11), pp. 1252-1264. 
Song, Y., Song, C., Shi, F., Wang, M., Ren, J., Wang, X., and Jiang, L., 2019. Linking plant 
community composition with the soil C pool, N availability and enzyme activity in boreal 
peatlands of Northeast China. Applied Soil Ecology, 140, pp. 144-154. 
Stott, R., May, E., Matsushita, E., and Warren, A., 2001. Protozoan predation as a mechanism 
for the removal of Cryptosporidium oocysts from wastewaters in constructed wetlands. Water 
Science and Technology, 44(11-12), pp. 191-198. 
Studer, A., Thieltges, D.W. and Poulin, R., 2010. Parasites and global warming: net effects of 
temperature on an intertidal hostparasite system. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 415, pp. 
11-22.  
Stursova, M. and Sinsabaugh, R.L., 2008. Stabilization of oxidative enzymes in desert soil 
may limit organic matter accumulation. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 40(2), pp. 550-553.  
Tarnocai, C., Canadell, J. G., Schuur, E. A., Kuhry, P., Mazhitova, G., and Zimov, S., 2009. 
Soil organic carbon pools in the northern circumpolar permafrost region. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles, 23(2), pp. 1-11. 
Theuerl, S., Drr, N., Guggenberger, G., Langer, U., Kaiser, K., Lamersdorf, N. and Buscot, 
F., 2010. Response of recalcitrant soil substances to reduced N deposition in a spruce forest 
soil: integrating laccase-encoding genes and lignin decomposition. FEMS Microbiology 
Ecology, 73(1), pp. 166-177. 
Thieltges, D. W., Amundsen, P. A., Hechinger, R. F., Johnson, P. T., Lafferty, K. D., 
Mouritsen, K. N., Preston, D.L., Reise, K., Zander, C.D., and Poulin, R., 2013. Parasites as 
prey in aquatic food webs: implications for predator infection and parasite 
transmission. Oikos, 122(10), pp. 1473-1482. 
Thomas, F., Cezilly, F., De Mees, T., Crivelli, A. and Renaud, F., 1997. Parasitism and 
ecology of wetlands: A review. Estuaries, 20(3), pp. 646-654. 
Thurman, E.M., 2012. Organic geochemistry of natural waters (Vol. 2). Springer Science 
and Business Media.  
Tian, L., Dell, E. and Shi, W., 2010. Chemical composition of dissolved organic matter in 
agroecosystems: correlations with soil enzyme activity and carbon and nitrogen 
mineralization. Applied Soil Ecology, 46(3), pp. 426-435. 
Treseder, K. K., and Vitousek, P. M., 2001. Effects of soil nutrient availability on investment 
in acquisition of N and P in Hawaiian rain forests. Ecology, 82(4), pp. 946-954. 
Turetsky, M., Wieder, K., Halsey, L. and Vitt, D., 2002. Current disturbance and the 
diminishing peatland carbon sink. Geophysical Research Letters, 29(11), pp.21-1. 
Tsyganov, A.N., Keuper, F., Aerts, R. and Beyens, L., 2013. Flourish or flush: effects of 
simulated extreme rainfall events on Sphagnum-dwelling testate amoebae in a subarctic bog 
(Abisko, Sweden). Microbial Ecology, 65(1), pp. 101-110. 
Tveit, A. T., 2014. Microbial communities and metabolic networks in Arctic peatlands, PhD 
thesis, University of Troms the Arctic University of Norway. 
Voigt, C., Lamprecht, R.E., Marushchak, M.E., Lind, S.E., Novakovskiy, A., Aurela, M., 
Martikainen, P.J. and Biasi, C., 2017a. Warming of subarctic tundra increases emissions of 
all three important greenhouse gasescarbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Global 
Change Biology, 23(8), pp. 3121-3138. 
Voigt, C., Marushchak, M.E., Lamprecht, R.E., Jackowicz-Korczyski, M., Lindgren, A., 
Mastepanov, M., Granlund, L., Christensen, T.R., Tahvanainen, T., Martikainen, P.J. and 
Biasi, C., 2017b. Increased nitrous oxide emissions from Arctic peatlands after permafrost 
thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 114(24), pp. 6238-6243. 
Waldrop, M.P. and Harden, J.W., 2008. Interactive effects of wildfire and permafrost on 
microbial communities and soil processes in an Alaskan black spruce forest. Global Change 
Biology, 14(11), pp. 2591-2602.  
Waldrop, M.P. and Zak, D.R., 2006. Response of oxidative enzyme activities to nitrogen 
deposition affects soil concentrations of dissolved organic carbon. Ecosystems, 9(6), pp. 921-
Weintraub, M. N., and Schimel, J. P., 2005. The seasonal dynamics of amino acids and other 
nutrients in Alaskan Arctic tundra soils. Biogeochemistry, 73(2), pp. 359-380. 
White, R.A., Freeman, C. and Kang, H., 2011. Plant-derived phenolic compounds impair the 
remediation of acid mine drainage using treatment wetlands. Ecological Engineering, 37(2), 
pp. 172-175.  
Wieder, R.K., 2001. Past, present, and future peatland carbon balance: an empirical model 
based on 210Pbdated cores. Ecological Applications, 11(2), pp. 327-342. 
Wild, A., 1993. Soils and the Environment. Cambridge University Press. 
Williams, C. J., Shingara, E. A., and Yavitt, J. B., 2000. Phenol oxidase activity in peatlands 
in New York State: response to summer drought and peat type. Wetlands, 20(2), pp. 416-421. 
Yao, H., Bowman, D., Rufty, T. and Shi, W., 2009. Interactions between N fertilization, grass 
clipping addition and pH in turf ecosystems: implications for soil enzyme activities and 
organic matter decomposition. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(7), pp. 1425-1432. 
Zak, D., Roth, C., Unger, V., Goldhammer, T., Fenner, N., Freeman, C., and Jurasinski, G., 
2019. Unravelling the importance of polyphenols for microbial carbon mineralization in 
rewetted riparian peatlands. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 7, p. 147. 
Chapter 2 
Enzymatic activity and soil respiration linked to physicochemical 
properties in the Arctic peatland of Svalbard, Norway 
2.1. Abstract 
Environmental factors that control the functions of microbial communities at different soil 
depths in Arctic peatlands are still poorly understood. In this study, extracellular enzyme 
activities (hydrolases and phenol oxidase) and the production of greenhouse gas (carbon 
dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O)) were investigated at different depths 
in an Arctic peatland in Svalbard, Norway. In addition, the associations between these 
biogeochemical processes and pH, conductivity, nutrient concentration (cations and anions), 
phenolic compounds concentration, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, and soil 
water and soil organic matter (SOM) content were assessed.  
Soil respiration was higher on average in the uppermost layer (0-5 cm) and was associated 
with enhanced enzymes activity (except for phenol oxidase), higher water and SOM content, 
and greater labile DOC concentration, indicating that this is the most biologically active 
layer. The significant decline in hydrolase activities and the fluxes of CO2 and N2O with 
depth suggests a subsequent lack of appropriate microbial substrates and the overall favorable 
conditions required for microbial activity with increasing depth. The pH values, which ranged 
from 5.64 to 8.6, seemed unfavorable for hydrolytic enzymes activity. The significantly 
higher activity of phenol oxidase at the underlying mineral layer (> 20 cm), was attributed to 
the activating impact of the more favorable pH under anaerobic conditions, as high phenol 
oxidase activity was accompanied by a significant increase in pH value at this layer and was 
significantly related to soil pH (r = 0.431, p < 0.01). Neither extracellular enzyme activity nor 
greenhouse gas production showed significant negative correlations with phenolic 
concentrations as would be expected, suggesting that the activities of extracellular enzymes 
and hence the metabolic end products depend on the form, composition and the source of 
phenolic compounds rather than their absolute quantities. Contrary to the economic model 
of microbial enzyme production, phosphatase activity was positively associated with 
inorganic phosphate concentration, which may indicate that phosphatase production rate was 
more than microbial demand for phosphate.  
The emission of CH4 and N2O was significantly correlated with carbon supply (represented 
by -glucosidase activity) needed for the growth of heterotrophic microorganisms. 
The concentration of DOC showed a significant inverse correlation with ionic strength 
(conductivity), which is known to negatively affect the solubility of DOC and hence its 
concentration in peat solution. 
2.2. Introduction 
Moss tundra peatlands in the High Arctic, Svalbard, dominated by peat-forming bryophytes, 
are likely to be a hotspot of carbon sequestration, with peat depths of up to 1 m reported in 
some areas (Nakatsubo et al. 2015). Elvebakk (1994) mentioned that the peat-forming moss 
tundra tends to develop in moist conditions under bird-nesting cliffs where bird manure 
provides a source of nutrients and stimulating productivity and carbon accumulation. Soils of 
Arctic peatlands are also large nitrogen stocks, with an estimated of more than 67 billion 
tonnes of nitrogen accumulated over thousands of years (Harden et al. 2012). However, 
climate change is likely to result in a shift in the the carbon and nitrogen budgets of Arctic 
peatlands which could result in a shift from sink to a source status (Voigt et al. 2017a, b). 
Under modified climatic conditions, soil gas emissions could increase substantially in this 
region, though little data in this respect are available in the literature, especially from Norway 
(Grnlund et al. 2008). Furthermore, information concerning the relevant physicochemical 
parameters and enzymes activity in peatlands of the Arctic region is still limited (Szajdak et 
al. 2016). Various studies have investigated greenhouse gas emissions from Arctic peatlands 
to evaluate the magnitude of the peat-carbon (Schuur et al. 2015, Tveit et al. 2015, Schadel et 
al. 2016, Voigt et al. 2017a) and nitrogen (Martikainen et al. 1993, Marushchak et al. 2011, 
Voigt et al. 2017a, b) climate feedback loop. They suggest that enhanced GHGs flux from 
Arctic soils could represent a strong climate change feedback (Voigt et al. 2017b). However, 
such studies have often overlooked potential enzymatic activities, and the chemical and 
physical variables that affect them. Additionally and to date, knowledge about the effects of 
soil physicochemical properties on enzyme activity and soil respiration at different depths 
within Arctic peat profile is still lacking despite the importance of anaerobic SOM 
decomposition at deeper layers (Tveit et al. 2015). There is a general agreement that the 
emission of C and N from peatlands is regulating by soil microbial processes which in turn 
are affected by the surrounding physicochemical conditions such as soil temperature, oxygen 
concentration, nutrients availability, pH, water content, microbial abundance, inhibitory 
phenolics, etc. (Freeman et al. 1990, Freeman et al. 1995, Freeman et al. 2001). The present 
study aims to investigate variations in enzymic decomposition and GHG flux with depth in an 
Arctic peatland in Svalbard, Norway. Relationships between enzyme activities, soil 
respiration and abiotic soil conditions, including pH, conductivity, the concentrations of 
DOC, phenolics, anions and cations, and SOM and water content were also examined. The 
hypothesis that the changes in biogeochemical processes with depth are proportional to 
changes in physicochemical soil properties was tested.  
2.3. Materials and methods 
2.3.1. Study sites descriptions 
The annual rainfall in Svalbard is 400mm, with continuous permafrost and relatively short 
growing season (40-70 days) (Rozema et al. 2006). Annual mean temperature is between -4 
and -7 C (Tveit 2014). Samples of the present study were collected from six peat sites 
located in the northwest of Svalbard, Norway in late July 2016, two in the Solvatn (site 1 & 
site 2), two in the Stuphallet (site 3 & site 4), one in the Knudsenheia (site 5) and one in the 
Storvatnet (site 6) (Figure 2.01). More detailed maps were unavailable for peatland 
distribution in Svalbard. 
Figure 2.01. Maps showing study site and peat sampling locations in Svalbard, Norway 
(Source: Google Maps). 
The average air temperature at the time of sample collection was 5C, the water table was at 
the soil surface during sampling and the moss tundra of the study sites was dominated by the 
species Tomenthypnum nitens and Calliergon richardsonii, without vascular plants (Figure 
2.02a-d). Peat cores were collected from each of the six sites with three replicates for each 
site extracted using a Russian corer (50 cm long and 10 cm in diameter). After removing the 
vegetation layer, the cores were separated into several layers based on a visual assessment of 
colour and texture. Figures 2.02e and 2.02f show the stratigraphy of a representative core 
from the six locations. This approach yielded a total of 51 samples. After removal of stones, 
roots and macroinvertebrates, all samples were placed separately in labeled plastic bags and 
transported to the laboratory in Wales in a cooled container, where they were stored at 4C 
until further analysis. 
Figure 2.02. Photographs of the study sites in 
Svalbard, Arctic region: (a) Solvatn (site 1 & 2), 
(b) Stuphallet (Site 3 & 4), (c) Knudsenheia (site 
5) and (d) Storvatnet (site 6). Photograph of 
typical peat core (e) and illustration showing 
discrete layers (f) (photographer J Mora-Gomez).  
Soil temperature, pH, and oxygen concentration were measured in the field at the time of 
sampling using a digital thermometer, a Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a dissolved oxygen 
probe, respectively. These data are presented in Table 2.01. 
Table 2.01. Peat core locations and conditions. Values are presented as the range of the 3 
replicates.  
Location Soil 
temp. 
pH Soil O2 
Conc.  
(mg L-1) 
Coordinates Altitude 
1 6.6-7.4 6.9-7.2 3.3-3.9 7855'30.0"N, 
1156'26.1"E 
4 m a.s.l 
2 7.0-7.2 6.6-7.6 5.0-5.4 7855'34.0"N, 
1156'20"E 
3 m a.s.l 
3 5.5-5.9 7.2-7.5 5.8-6.4 7857'31.9"N, 
1141'14.2"E 
17 m a.s.l 
4 7.0-7.4 7.1-7.6 5.0-5.4 7857'34.8"N, 
1140'38.8"E 
16 m a.s.l 
5 7.6-8.4 6.2-7.0 6.7-7.3 7855'33.4"N, 
1154'54.3"E 
16 m a.s.l  
6 7.0-7.5 7.0-7.2 6.6-7.1 7855'32.5"N, 
1155'01.3"E 
21 m a.s.l 
2.3.2. Soil analyses 
In the present study, the aim was to estimate the emissions of GHG and the activities of 
extracellular enzymes that occur under natural conditions within peatlands. Therefore, field 
conditions were copied as closely as possible by matching gas production and enzyme assay 
temperature to that recorded in the field. 
Analyses were performed within two weeks of collection as previous studies have shown soil 
enzymes to be stable for this period of time (Dunn et al. 2014). Samples were transported by 
air freight to minimize the potential for changes to occur during transportation and were 
transported with icepacks to minimize temperature fluctuations during transportation. 
According to Ross (1965), although different soils can differ in their storage behaviour, 
storage in a refrigerator at 4C is generally considered the most suitable. However, while the 
activities of -glucosidase and xylosidase have been found not affected by the duration of soil 
storage, N-acetyl-glucosaminidase (chitinase), phosphatase and phenol oxidase activity are 
more susceptible to change (DeForest 2009) and so some caution must be used when 
interpreting these data. 
2.3.2.1. Enzyme activity analyses 
Before conducting any analyses, the samples were kept in the incubator at field temperature 
for around three hours. The activity of phenol oxidase (POX) in peat soil samples was 
determined using a procedure adapted from Pind et al. (1994) and Dunn et al. (2014).  Model 
compound L-DOPA (L-3,4- dihydroxy phenylalanine, Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) was 
used as a substrate for the enzymes degradation. The colour change is determined using a 
spectrophotometer measuring at 475 nm, from which the activity of phenol oxidase can be 
calculated. After homogenizing the bag containing the soil sample by hand, two separate 1 g 
soil samples were weighed and placed in two labelled stomacher bags (Seward, West Sussex, 
UK). After adding 9 mL of ultrapure water to each bag, these were then placed in a paddle 
blender (Stomacher circulator, Seward) to mix the contents for 30 s on a normal speed 
setting. A 10 mL of ultrapure water was added to one bag, used as a blank. A 10 mL of the 
substrate (L-DOPA) was added to the other, and both bags were mixed for a further 30 s. All 
bags were then incubated at field temperature for 10 min before the bags were removed and 
mixed by hand. For each bag, three 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vials (Eppendorf, Stevenage, 
UK) were labelled and filled with the bags solution. The vials were centrifuged at 10,000 
rpm for 5 min. A 300 L of supernatant from each vial was transferred to a well of a clear 96 
well microplate (Sterilin, Cambridage, UK). The microplate was then placed on the 
SpectraMax M2e plate reader spectrophotometer and absorbance values measured at = 475 
nm. To obtain the average absorbance value, the mean absorbance of the three blanks was 
subtracted from the mean absorbance of the three samples containing the substrate. The 
activity of phenol oxidase was then calculated by using Beer-Lambert Law and expressed as 
mol of formed diqc per min per g of soil (dry weight). 
Hydrolase activities were determined using the procedures of Dunn et al. (2014), based on 
the measurement of fluorescence of methylumbelliferone (MUF). In five 1L volumetric 
flasks, the relevant amount of MUF-labeled substrates (4-MUF -D-glucopyranoside for -D-
glucosidase (B), 4-MUF sulfate potassium salt for arylsulfatase (S), 4-MUF -D-
xylopyranoside for -D-xylosidase (X), 4-MUF N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide for N-acetyl--
D-glucosaminidase (N) and 4-MUF phosphate for phosphatase (P)) were dissolved in 20 mL 
of cellosolve solvent (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK), and then ultrapure water was added 
up to the 1L mark. Magnetic stirrers were used if necessary. Five 1 g subsamples (one for 
each MUF substrate) were taken from each bag containing soil samples and placed in 
separate stomacher bags with 7 mL of the relevant substrate (stored at field temperature 
before use). These were homogenized using a Seward Stomacher 80 Laboratory Blender for 
30 s. The stomacher bags were then incubated at field temperature for 45 min for the enzyme 
P and 60 min for the other enzymes (B, S, X, and N). The homogenates were then mixed by 
hand and transferred into separate 1.5 mL centrifuge vials, which were then centrifuged at 
10,000 rpm for 5 min. During this time, 50 L of ultrapure water was added to black 
microplate wells (Sterilin, Cambridge, UK). At the end of centrifugation, 250 L of the 
resulting supernatant was extracted from each sample and added to the relevant wells on the 
microplate. Fluorescence of the MUF molecule was measured using a microplate fluorometer 
(Molecular Devices SpectraMax M2e spectrophotometer) at 450 nm emission and 330 nm 
excitation. Hydrolase activities are expressed as nmol MUF g-1 of soil min-1. To prepare the 
calibration curve, 7 mL of ultrapure water was added to a stomacher bag (labelled as 
standard) containing 1 gram of soil sample and homogenized as described above. The content 
from each standard bag was used to fill two 2 mL Eppendorf tubes, which were then 
centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 mins. Different MUF-free acid (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, 
UK) concentrations (8 in total) were prepared in 2 mL Eppendorf tubes using the MUF stock 
solution (prepared by dissolving the relevant amount of 4-methylumbelliferone free acid in 
10 mL of cellosolve solvent and 500 mL of ultrapure water) and ultrapure water. A column of 
the 8 standard solutions was prepared per soil sample by pipetting 50L from each of the 
standard solution into a series of wells on a black microplate in addition to 250L from the 
supernatant of the sample two Eppendorf tubes. The microplate was then analyzed as before. 
2.3.2.2. Hydrochemistry analyses 
For measurement of pH, conductivity, DOC, phenolic compounds, cations and anions 
concentrations, a soil solution was prepared by adding 5 g of soil sample and 40 mL of 
ultrapure water to a 50 mL centrifuge tube, and shaking on a rotary shaker for 24h. This 
process is not for homogenization, but rather for allowing the listed solutes to leach from the 
soil to produce an estimate of leachable solutes. Although there is some risk that this could 
allow changes in the samples (including shifts in microbial composition, consumption of 
solutes, reproduction, metabolism of solutes to other chemical forms), allowing 24h on a 
rotary shaker is a common practice for extracting potentially leachable solutes (Dahlgren 
1993, Kowalenko 2008). 
Measurement of pH and electrical conductivity was conducted on un-filtered samples using a 
Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a Primo 5 handheld conductivity meter, respectively. 
Samples were then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 30 min. Finally, the supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.45m membrane filter (Whatman, Kent, UK) and collected in 20 mL plastic 
scintillation vials (Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd) and stored at 4C until further analysis.  
Filtered soil water samples were analyzed for their phenolics content using a version of the 
spectrophotometric procedures described by Box (1983). The analysis was run in triplicate, 1 
mL of the sample was placed in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vial with 50 L of Folins reagent 
and 0.15 mL of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3 used to rise the pH). The same reagents were 
added to 1mL of each of the chosen standards (0-10 mg L-1 phenol standard solutions were 
chosen in order to prepare a standard curve). All samples and standards were mixed a few 
times and allowed to develop a colour for 1 h 15 min at room temperature before 0.3 mL 
from both standards and samples were transferred to three wells of a clear microplate. 
Phenolic content was then estimated by measuring absorbance at a wavelength of 750 nm 
with a BMG Labtech Fluostar Galaxy microplate reader. 
The concentration of DOC was measured on filtered and acidified samples using a 
Thermalox TOC/TN analyser (Analytical Sciences Ltd) equipped with a non-dispersive 
infrared CO2 analyser. Anion (chloride, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate) and cation (sodium, 
ammonium, magnesium and calcium) concentrations were measured using a Metrohm 850 
Professional Ion Chromatograph. 
2.3.2.3. Soil water and organic matter content measurements 
The water content of the soil samples was determined by oven drying a sample of known 
weight at 105C for 24 h and then reweighing the samples to determine the mass loss. 
Organic matter content was estimated by placing soil samples in the muffle furnace at 550C 
for 200 min and reweighing the samples to calculate mass loss (Frogbrook et al. 2009). 
2.3.2.4. GHG flux measurements 
For GHG flux measurements, 5 g of soil from each distinct layer within each core was 
weighed and placed in a 50 mL centrifuge tube with a lid fitted with a rubber septum (Fisher 
Scientific UK Ltd, Loughborough, UK). Using a 10 cm3 gas syringe (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, 
Dorset, UK) with a short hypodermic needle, 10 mL of gas sample was taken from inside the 
tubes as a starting or background concentration (time 1). The tubes were then sealed and 
incubated at field temperature. Every 15 min over a 90 min period, gas samples were 
collected through the pierceable rubber septa. A10 mL of gas sample was extracted from the 
centrifuge tubes and then injected into labelled 5.9 mL glass screw-cap vials (Labco 
Exetainers Ltd, Lampeter, UK), fitted with a rubber septum in their caps. All the exetainers 
were evacuated three times before use to remove all air, using a 10 mL gas syringe. 
Calibration curves for the three GHGs (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were prepared using gas 
chromatograph (GC) standards of known concentrations. All gas samples and standards, in 
addition to three samples containing atmospheric air as blanks, were placed in the GC rack 
for analysis using a Varian model 450 GC. The instrument was fitted with two different 
detectors, an electron capture detector (ECD) to measure the concentration of N2O and a 
flame ionization detector (FID) with a methaniser to convert CO2 to CH4, for the 
measurement of CO2 and CH4. 
2.3.3. Statistical analyses 
Where conditions were met by the data, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to 
analyse potential significant differences in variables between different depths.  
Tukey HSD post-hoc test was performed to find where the significant differences among 
groups lay at a probability level of 0.05. Calculated F and degrees of freedom are provided as 
well. Significant correlations were determined using Pearson correlation analysis. Statistical 
analysis was carried out using version 22 of the SPSS statistics package. 
2.4. Results 
As can be seen in Table 2.02 and Figure 2.03, on average, a maximum -D-glucosidase (B) 
enzyme activity was observed in the soil samples of the depth of 0-5cm (15.0 nmol MUF g-1 
min-1) and the minimum in the depth of >20cm (4.16 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). Samples of the 
depth 0-5cm were significantly higher than samples of all other depths in this respect (F (2, 
48) = 7.547, p = 0.001). Lower arylsulfatase (S) enzyme activity was observed in the soil 
samples from the depth of 5-20cm (mean 0.54 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and the higher S 
enzymes activity was observed in the depth of 0-5cm (mean 1.41 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). Soil 
samples from the depth of 0-5cm were significantly higher than those from the other depths. 
Samples from the depth of >20cm were also significantly higher than those from the depth of 
5-20cm (F (2, 48) = 14.088, p = 0.00). A maximum -D-xylosidase (X) enzyme activity was 
observed in the 0-5cm soil samples (mean 2.77 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and the minimum in the 
5-20cm samples (mean 1.62 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). In this respect, the significant differences 
between the different depths were found in the first depth (0-5cm), where X enzyme activity 
of soil samples was significantly higher than all other layers (F (2, 48) = 6.511, p = 0.003).  
Soil samples from the 0-5cm depth exhibited a particularly high phosphatase (P) enzyme 
activity (mean 33.9 nmol MUF g-1 min-1), whereas samples from the 5-20cm depth showed 
the lowest activity (mean 8.01 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). The depth of 0-5cm, which had the 
highest mean P activity, was significantly higher than all other depths (F (2, 48) = 16.804, p = 
0.000). On average, soil samples of the 0-5cm depth showed higher chitinase (N) enzyme 
activity (4.06 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) compared with the other two depths, which were found to 
be significantly lower than the 0-5cm samples in this respect (F (2, 48) = 6.459, p = 0.003). 
 Mean phenol oxidase (POX) activity was ranging from 1.25 in the 5-20cm depth to 2.45 
mol dicq g-1 min-1 in the >20cm depth (Table 2.02 and Figure 2.03), which was significantly 
higher than the 5-20cm depth (F (2, 48) = 3.41, p = 0.032). 
Figure 2.03. Extracellular enzyme activities vary with depth in the soil profile. Each circle 
represents the mean of the six sampling locations. Error bars represent standard deviation. 
Abbreviations: -D-glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S), -D-xylosidase (X), phosphatase (P), 
N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase or chitinase (N) and phenol oxidase (POX). 
-4.0 -2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Enzyme activity (nmol MUF/mol dicq g-1 min-1)
-20.0 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0
Table 2.02. The results of measured variables from peatlands in Arctic. The results given as 
mean  standard deviation. Letter annotations refer to significantly different means between 
different depths (p < 0.05) identified by Tukey HSD post- hoc test. 
                    Layers 
Variables           
0-5cm (a)  5-20cm (b) >20cm (c) 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
15.014.65 
5.492.76 
4.163.39 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
1.410.38 
0.540.18 
0.990.67 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
2.771.0 
1.620.6 
1.911.1 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
33.917.1 
8.012.9 
12.8515.67 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
4.061.89 
2.571.58 
2.261.2 
mol dicq g-1 min-1 
1.71.2 
1.251.6 
2.454.16 
Phenolics 
mg L-1 
1.881.0 
2.290.8 
1.490.75 
mg L-1 
15.56.47 
11.33.5 
10.076.38 
pH 6.860.5 
6.960.49 
7.60.6 
Conductivity 
S cm-1 
154.36106.89 215.19298.8 
278.3244.9 
Water 
90.51.6 
81.89.9 
37.114.0 
78.465.59 
57.821.48 
14.416.2 
g CO2 g
-1 h-1 
41.9837.26 
31.533.2 
16.018.6 
ng CH4 g
-1 h-1 
4.0314.1 
-0.953.7 2.29.4 
ng N2O g
-1 h-1 
10.3412.8 
1.162.0 
4.812.9 
Chloride 
mg L-1 
4.33.5 
2.81.2 
1.90.77 
Nitrate 
mg L-1 
8.69.4 
9.19.5 
12.616.6 
Phosphate 
mg L-1 
0.93.5 
0.020.05 0.020.03 
Sulfate 
mg L-1 
24.030.5 
79.3142.5 54.248.4 
Sodium 
mg L-1 
6.65.2 
4.52.3 
3.32.2 
Ammonium 
mg L-1 
0.360.68 
0.040.09 0.040.08 
Calcium 
mg L-1 
46.123.3 
32.517.1 
52.120.9 
Magnesium 
mg L-1 
8.75.7 
8.49.1 
11.710.2 
Figure 2.04. Mean DOC (a) and phenolic compound concentration (b) at different depths. 
Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean. 
Soil samples of the >20 cm depth showed the lowest mean phenolics concentration (1.49 mg 
L-1) (Figure 2.04b, Table 2.02) and were significantly lower than soil samples of the 5-20 cm 
depth, which showed the highest mean phenolics concentration (2.29 mg L-1) (F (2, 48) = 
3.392, p = 0.042). Mean DOC concentration was higher in the 0-5cm samples (15.5 mg L-1) 
and lower in the depth of >20 cm (10.07 mg L-1) (Figure 2.04a, Table 2.02). The 
concentration of DOC in the soil samples of the 0-5cm depth was significantly higher than in 
the <20cm depth (F (2, 48) = 4.45, p = 0.017).  
The pH measurements (Table 2.02) were around neutral and ranging between 6.86 and 7.6. 
Samples of the >20cm depth, which had the highest mean pH value, were significantly higher 
than both the 5-20cm and the 0-5cm depths, which had the lowest mean pH (F (2, 48) = 7.65, 
p = 0.001). 
A minimum conductivity measurement (Table 2.02) was observed in samples of the 0-5 cm 
depth (mean 154.36 S/cm) and the maximum in the >20 cm (mean 278.3 S/cm). However, 
comparisons were not significant between the different layers (F (2, 48) = 1.347, p = 0.270). 
Mean soil water content ranged between 37.1% in the samples of >20 cm depth and 90.5% in 
the 0-5 cm depth samples (Figure 2.05a). A number of significant differences were identified 
in this respect (Table 2.02). The depth of 0-5 cm, which had the highest mean water content, 
was significantly higher than all other layers. The depth of >20cm had significantly lower 
water content than the other two depth samples (F (2, 48) = 146.707, p = 0.000).  
Figure 2.05. Mean water content (a) and soil organic matter (SOM) content (b) at different 
depths. 
The mean soil organic matter content (%SOM) was higher in the soil samples derived from 
the 0-5 cm depth (78.46%) and lower in the >20 cm samples (14.4%), which were 
significantly lower than all other layers (F (2, 48) = 80.220, p = 0.000) (Table 2.02 and 
Figure 2.05b). 
As can be seen in Table 2.02 and Figure 2.06, the flux of CO2 was gradually reduced with 
increased depth (ranging from 16.0 in the >20 cm samples to 41.98 g CO2 g
-1 h-1 in the 0-5 
cm samples). Significant differences were observed in the >20 cm samples which were 
significantly lower than 0-5 cm samples (F (2, 48) = 3.280, p = 0.04). 
Lower CH4 flux was observed in the 5-20cm samples (-0.95 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1) and the higher 
CH4 flux was observed in the 0-5cm samples (4.03 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1). However, comparisons 
were not significant between the different layers (F (2, 48) = 0.965, p = 0.388). 
90.5%
81.8%
37.1%
% Water content
0-5 5-20 > 20 (a)
78.5%
57.8%
14.4%
% SOM 
0-5 5-20 > 20 (b)
Figure 2.06. Changes in CO2, CH4 and N2O mean fluxes with soil depth. Error bars represent 
standard deviation. 
In terms of N2O flux, soil samples obtained from the depth of 0-5 cm had the highest mean 
(10.34 ng N2O g
-1 h-1) and were significantly higher than the 5-20 cm samples, which had the 
lowest N2O flux mean (1.16 ng N2O g
-1 h-1) (F (2, 48) = 3.991, p = 0.04). 
For anion measurements (Table 2.02), mean chloride concentrations ranged from 1.9 mg L-1 
to 4.3 mg L-1. The depth of 0-5 cm, which had the highest mean chloride concentration, was 
significantly higher than the depth of >20 cm, which had the lowest mean chloride 
concentration (F (2, 48) = 4.974, p = 0.011). The nitrate concentration minimum was spotted 
in the depth of 0-5cm samples (mean 8.6 mg L-1) and the maximum in the >20cm samples 
(mean 12.6 mg L-1). However, no statistical differences were found between the different 
layers (F (2, 48) = 0.542, p = 0.585). 
Mean phosphate concentration was ranging from 0.02 in the samples of both 5-20 cm and 
>20 cm depths to 0.9 mg L-1 in the samples of 0-5cm depth. However, no statistical 
differences were found between the different layers (F (2, 48) = 1.016, p = 0.370). 
-20.0 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0
CO2 flux (g CO2 g
-1 h-1)
-20.0 -10.0 0.0 10.0 20.0 30.0
CH4 & N2O flux (ng CH4/N2O g
-1 h-1)
A lower mean sulfate concentration was observed in 0-5 cm samples (24.0 mg L-1) and the 
higher in 5-20 cm samples (79.3 mg L-1), without any significant differences between the 
different depths (F (2, 48) = 1.793, p = 0.177). 
For cation concentrations (Table 2.02), sodium concentration was highest in the 0-5 cm 
samples (mean 6.6 mg L-1) and lowest in the >20 cm samples (mean 3.3 mg L-1). Samples of 
the depth 0-5 cm, which had the highest mean sodium concentration, were significantly 
higher than the samples of >20 cm depth, which had the lowest mean sodium concentration 
(F (2, 48) = 3.855, p = 0.028).  
The concentration of ammonium was higher in the 0-5 cm samples (mean 0.35 mg L-1) and 
lower in the other samples from 5-20 cm and >20 cm depths (mean of both 0.04 mg L-1). No 
significant differences between the different layers were observed here (F (2, 48) = 3.2, p = 
0.05). 
 Mean calcium concentration was higher in the depth of >20 cm (52.1 mg L-1) and lower in 
the depth of 5-20 cm (32.5 mg L-1), which was significantly lower than the samples of the 
depth >20 cm (F (2, 48) = 3.733, p = 0.031). Mean magnesium concentration was higher in 
the samples of depth >20 cm (11.7 mg L-1) and lower in the samples of depth 5-20 cm (8.4 
mg L-1), without any significant differences between the different depths (F (2, 48) = 0.763, p 
= 0.472).  
The significant correlations between all the peat soil analyses are shown in Table 2.03. The 
key observations are that the activities of the five hydrolase enzymes correlated positively 
with each other. The activity of POX correlated positively with the pH value, which in turn 
correlated negatively with the activities of B and N enzymes. The activity of N enzyme 
correlated positively with N2O flux and with ammonium concentration. The CH4 and N2O 
fluxes correlated positively with B enzyme activity. Phosphate ions concentration correlated 
positively with all hydrolytic enzyme activities. 
Table 2.03. Results of Pearson correlation analysis (n = 51) (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 
0.001). Abbreviations: -D-glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S),  -D-xylosidase (X), N-acetyl-
-D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX), electrical 
conductivity (EC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), 
nitrous oxide (N2O) and soil organic matter (SOM). Significant correlations are shown in 
bold. 
B S X N P POX 
S .437**      
X .711** .778**     
N .760** .522** .760**    
P .658** .651** .668** .568**   
POX -0.079 .553** 
.355* 
0.066 
0.209  
Phenolics -0.121  -.202 -.256 -.069 -.140 -0.091  
DOC .348*  .124 0.137 .332
* 0.172 -0.254  
pH -.430** .185 -.077 -.410** -.160 .431**  
EC -.125 -.049 -.254 -.320* -.026 .205 
% water .308* -.034 .113 .313* .244 -.309*  
% SOM .355* .032 .196 .364** .281* -.306*  
CO2 0.044  0.109  0.004 -0.032 .335
* .138  
CH4 .343
*  0.011  0.232 0.229 0.145 -0.043  
N2O .283
*  0.134  0.270 .408
** .494** 0.038  
Chloride .699**  0.233  .390
** .411** .469** 0.033  
Nitrate -0.168  -0.187  -0.178 -0.217 -0.153 -0.118  
Phosphate .564**  .339
* .289* .436** .337* -0.079  
Sulfate -0.146  -0.111 -.301
* -.329* -0.055 0.232  
Sodium .573**  0.240 0.213 .378
** .417** 0.156  
Ammonium 0.225  0.234 0.218 .313
* .282* -0.032  
Calcium 0.043  0.234 -0.042 -0.190 .350
* .220  
Magnesium 0.041  0.077 -0.074 -0.110 0.051 .121  
                                                                             Continued 
 Phenolic DOC pH EC % 
Water 
CO2 CH4 N2O 
DOC .551**         
pH -.171 -.197        
EC -.045 -.528** .166       
% water 0.248 .302* -.606** -.311*   
% SOM 0.152 .405** -.593** -.417** .905**  
CO2 -0.003 -0.242 0.209 .364
** 0.254 0.154 
CH4 -0.127 -0.080 0.031 
0.030 -0.046 -0.034 0.055   
N2O 0.057 0.116 -0.155 0.003 0.124 0.131 0.095 0.146  
Chloride -0.009 0.054 -.467** 0.126 .319* .313* 0.139 0.267 0.228 
Nitrate -0.038 -0.101 -0.181 -0.046 0.052 0.023 -0.230 -0.211 0.229 
Phosphate -0.139 0.004 -.346* 0.097 0.111 0.133 -0.108 -0.008 0.166 
Sulfate 0.196 -.447** 0.075 .852** -0.192 -.356* .390** 0.067 -0.082 
Sodium 0.178 0.145 -.331*  0.216 0.248 0.258 0.112 0.097 0.137 
Ammonium 0.087 0.237 -0.225 -0.039 0.221 0.258 -0.054 -0.062 0.238 
Calcium -0.242 -.461** 0.255  .661
** -.296* -.326* .349* 0.211 0.126 
Magnesium -0.148 -.458** 0.001  .791
** -0.249 -.331* 0.188 0.000 -0.009 
2.5. Discussion 
The occurrence of highest greenhouse gas (GHG) flux and hydrolytic enzymes activity in the 
superficial layer (0-5 cm) suggests that this is the most biologically active layer. The increase 
in extracellular hydrolyse activities was concurrent with decreased phenolic compounds 
concentration and with elevated water content, soil organic matter availability and DOC 
concentration, resulting in higher GHGs production rates. Soil organic matter (SOM) 
provides the substrates for the enzymes and a surface for the immobilisation of extracellular 
enzymes. Indeed, lots of studies have found a strong relationship between SOM content and 
extracellular enzyme activities (e.g., Sinsabaugh et al. 2008, Schnecker et al. 2015). The 
%SOM and % water content are strongly correlated because the fact that organic matter holds 
water (Dunn 2013). Soil pore water is another important medium for extracellular enzymes 
(Song et al. 2019). Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) supplies are required by heterotrophic 
microorganisms as energy sources promoting microbial processes (Kang et al. 1998). DOC is 
reported to have a priming effect on organic matter decomposition and therefore may be 
expected to exhibit a positive correlation with extracellular enzymes activity (Song et al. 
2019). 
Indeed, significant positive correlations were reported here between SOM and the activities 
of B, N and P, between water content and the activities of B and N, and between the B and N 
enzymes activity and DOC concentration.  
Phenolic compounds have inhibitory effects on the activities of hydrolytic enzymes (Min et 
al. 2015, Zak et al. 2019). However, in the present study, no statistically significant negative 
correlations between hydrolase activities and phenolics concentration were found that would 
have confirmed these inhibitory effects, suggesting that the inhibition of extracellular 
enzymes depends on the form, chemical composition and the source of phenolic compounds, 
rather than simply their absolute quantities (Hoostal and Bouzat 2008). In this context, Tveit 
et al. (2013) mentioned that unlike Sphagnum species that contain lignin-like polymers, 
tundra mosses have less complex phenolic compound called lignan  clearly a major 
qualitative difference. 
The significant decrease in hydrolase activities, and also the significant decrease in the 
production of CO2 and N2O with increasing depths suggests there to be a gradual decrease in 
enzyme substrate availability and the overall favourable conditions required for microbial 
activity at these depths. Conversely, a study conducted by Voigt et al. (2017a) showed that 
the production of greenhouse gas in the peat profile of a Russian Arctic peatland increased 
with depth, and they attributed this to downward leaching of DOC that fuelled microbial 
activity which would thus have stimulated GHG production at depth.  
At the same study sites as the present study (near the town Solvatn and Knudsenheia), Tveit 
et al. (2014) investigated the relative abundances of transcripts for microbial enzymes 
involved in degradation of plant polymers at different depths and they found that the relative 
abundance of transcripts for hemicellulases increased with depth, while the transcripts for 
cellulose degradation enzymes decreased with peat depth. They attributed this observations to 
changes in substrate availability across depths. 
Phosphate exhibited a significant positive correlation with all hydrolase activities. This may 
have arisen because phosphate can be a limiting nutrient for plants. Phosphorus is often 
present in soil in only small quantities and in a form that cannot be used by plants. If plant 
metabolism was stimulated by phosphate fertilisation, it would increase rhizodeposition and 
the release of plant exudates (DOC) into the soil environment (Freeman et al. 2004). Such 
labile DOC is an important resource for microbes, driving de-novo synthesis of enzymes 
(Shackle et al. 2000). However, no significant correlation between phosphate concentration 
and DOC concentration was found to confirm this, although this should not be unexpected as 
any exudates could be rapidly consumed by the local microflora (Gough 2014). 
Ionic strength (conductivity) is one of the DOC solubility controls and considered as a crucial 
determinant of peat pore water DOC concentrations (Gough et al. 2016). An inverse 
relationship is reported between DOC concentration in peat pore water and conductivity 
(Fenner et al. 2005). Similarly, in the present study, significant negative correlation was 
reported between DOC concentration and conductivity. The reason for reduced DOC 
solubility with increasing ionic strength is not fully understood but may relate to a reduction 
in the charge density of organic constituents which in turn causes coagulation (Kalbitz et al. 
2000).  
The higher average conductivity in the third mineral layer (depth of > 20 cm) may be a 
reflection of the elevated mean concentration of nitrate, calcium and magnesium ions. Soil 
calcium and magnesium originate from weathered bedrock, which explains why highest 
concentration was found in mineral layer. Significant positive correlation was found between 
conductivity/ sulfate (r = 0.852, p < 0.01), conductivity/ calcium (r = 0.661, p < 0.01) and 
conductivity/ magnesium (r = 0.791, p < 0.01).  
The significant positive relationships between hydrolase activities suggest that they act 
together in synergy (Bguin and Aubert 1994) to reduce the structurally heterogeneous 
biopolymers to constituent monomers obtainable by microbes (Sinsabaugh et al. 2008). 
A positive relationship was found between the activities of POX/S (r = 0.553, p < 0.01), and 
POX/X (r = 0.355, p < 0.05), which may indicate an indirect catalytic role of POX on 
hydrolytic enzymes (Jones 2006). 
Although there were minor differences in phenolic content, thought to inhibit hydrolase 
enzymes, between depths, all of the hydrolytic enzymes activity had large differences 
between the different depths. There was also no statistically significant correlation between 
hydrolases/phenolics. In addition, hydrolase activities seemed unaffected positively by the 
soil pH. On the contrary, pH values correlated negatively with B activity (r = -0.430, p < 
0.01), and with N activity (r = -0.410, p < 0.01), which may reflect the fact that each enzyme 
has an optimum pH range (Turner 2010, Robinson 2015) and that there are several factors 
(e.g., temperature) may affect the response of the enzyme to its optimum pH (Kang et al. 
2018). The optimum pH of the enzymes B (Robinson 2015) and N (Turner 2010) are 4.8 and 
4.2, respectively, at which the activity is maximal. Above and below this point, the enzyme 
activity decreases (Robinson 2015). In the present study, the pH values ranged from 5.64 to 
8.6, which means that they were above the optimum range for the enzymes action.   
This suggests that pH value and phenolic concentration were insufficient to explain the 
significant differences between hydrolase activities at different depths, and that extracellular 
enzyme activity can be affected by many other edaphic factors such as soil temperature, 
oxygen, nutrient availability, pH, water content, microbial abundance, inhibitory phenolics, 
etc. (Freeman et al. 1990, Freeman et al. 1995, Freeman et al. 2001). 
According to Chrst (1991), soil nutrient concentrations strongly influence measured enzyme 
activities since microbes adjust their enzyme production in response to nutrient availability. 
Therefore, it is believed that a negative correlation would occur between soil enzyme activity 
and nutrient availability, indicating that if nutrients are limited, enzymes production by 
microbes increase and vice versa (Sinsabaugh et al. 1993, 2008). On this basis and although 
there were statistically significant differences between the different layers in terms of S 
enzyme activity, there were no statistically significant differences in sulfate ions 
concentration between layers and no statistically significant relationship between S/sulfate 
was found in this study. This finding is in line with what has been observed previously by 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038071798001503#BIB2
Kang and Freeman (1999) in Welsh peatlands. Because all the studied sites were close to the 
sea, it is possible that sea-salt aerosol represented an important sulfate source in the soils, 
which could explain the lack of statistically significant negative correlation between S 
enzyme activity and sulfate concentration (Kang and Freeman 1999). 
The significant differences between soil layers in P enzyme activity may have still 
contributed to the insignificant difference of phosphate concentration. Indeed, significant 
positive association between P activity/phosphate was reported here and has been identified 
previously (Senga et al. 2015). Similarly, Weintraub and Schimel (2005) noticed a positive 
relationship between inorganic phosphate and phosphatase activity in Arctic soils. They 
concluded that this was caused by phosphatase activity that was higher than what was 
required to meet phosphate demand. This disagrees with the theory that enzymes activity 
occurs only when there is a demand for nutrients and that the production of enzymes should 
therefore stop once nutrient availability increases to fulfil demand (economic model of 
extracellular enzyme production) (Burns et al. 2013). One possible explanation is that in 
situations where enzyme turnover, sorption (to soil particles) and/or deactivation (the enzyme 
active site changes shape and can no longer bind to the substrate) rates are low, enzymes 
produced to meet a particular demand for a nutrient may remain active even after that 
demand has been fulfilled (Allison et al. 2007). 
Regarding the relationship between chloride ions concentration/enzymes activity and sulfate 
ions concentration/enzymes activity, Dinesh et al. (1995) found that enzymes activity 
decreased with increasing both ions concentration because they have an inhibitory effect on 
microbial growth and subsequent enzyme production due to decreased osmotic potential of 
the soil water leading to microbial cell destruction and/or a salting-out effect on enzyme 
protein. The positive correlation between chloride and enzymes B, X, N and P activity was 
therefore unexpected. However, it is likely that the chloride correlation is caused by an 
unrelated correlation with something else that does genuinely influence enzymes such as 
ammonium. The chloride might just be there because of dissolution of ammonium chloride. 
So, the positive correlation is really between ammonium and the enzymes, as found in this 
study. 
Unexpectedly, the activity of POX was higher at the underlying mineral layer (> 20 cm), 
indicating that the deeper layers warrant attention. The relative increase in POX activity at 
this layer was accompanied by the significant increase in pH value (mean 7.6). This was 
clarified by the activating impact of high pH under anaerobic conditions (Gough et al. 2016).  
Alongside oxygen, a variety of factors have been appeared recently to weaken the enzymic 
latch mechanism including pH value (Zak et al. 2019). Indeed, a simulation of moisture loss 
during drought in a peat soil by Williams et al. (2000) did not result in increased phenol 
oxidase activity as would be expected. They attributed this to the low pH that characterized 
peatland ecosystems. Indeed, statistically significant positive relationship between the 
activity of POX and pH was found here and has been identified previously (Pind et al. 1994, 
Sinsabaugh 2010, Kang et al. 2018). The concentration of hydrogen ions is one of the 
primary factors controlling decomposition processes through impact on phenol oxidase 
activity (Pind et al. 1994, Williams et al. 2000, Sinsabaugh et al. 2008).  
The pH value may affect the enzyme reaction site, as well as the interaction between 
immobilised enzymes and their associated matrix (Kang and Freeman 1999). The low pH of 
wetland soils is cited as one of the main reasons for low decomposition rates in these 
environments (Clymo 1983).  
Another explanation of increased POX activity at depth is that peatlands of Svalbard were 
shallow, which could create greater influences from fluctuations in water levels which would 
produce the oxygenation needed for POX activity. Similar high activity of POX at depth has 
been reported previously from two high-Arctic peatland in Svalbard (Tveit et al. 2013), 
where a genetic potential for POX (genes encoding POX enzyme) was found in all peat 
layers. This suggests that decomposition of inhibitory compounds can occur in deeper layers 
whenever the peat soils get oxygenated, such as through the drought-flooding cycles at higher 
temperatures found before in temperate peatlands (Fenner and Freeman 2011). 
Also, this higher activity of POX was accompanied by the relatively decreased phenolic 
compounds concentration, and water and SOM contents. Lower phenolics and water content 
with depth was probably relates to the low SOM content and the increasing mineral content 
with depth (Dunn 2013). 
Similar trends in enzymes activity were found in Siberian soil samples where hydrolytic 
enzyme activities decreased with depth, while phenol oxidase activity in mineral layers was 
as high as, or higher than in organic topsoil layers (Schnecker et al. 2015). 
It has been mentioned that the mineralization of N-containing compounds generating mineral 
nitrogen substrates, mainly ammonium and nitrate, needed for N2O production (Voigt et al. 
2017a). In the present study, the superficial layer exhibited the highest N2O emission, most 
likely due to the elevated N enzyme activity there. Indeed, N2O release was positively related 
to N enzyme activity (r = 0.408, p < 0.01), which in turn significantly correlated with 
ammonium concentration. Although N2O production was most pronounced in the superficial 
layer, the underlying mineral layer did not display any significant differences with the upper 
organic layer, suggesting that the leaching of mineral N supplies from the top layer enhanced 
N2O production at depth. In this context, a study of Regina et al. (1996) in boreal peatlands of 
Finland concluded that the nitrate (used as electron acceptor during denitrification) leached 
downwards in the deeper layers of peat profile, where N2O can be produced by denitrification 
processes. However, in the present study no statistically significant correlation was found 
between nitrate and N2O flux.  
It has been mentioned that soluble saccharides produced by hydrolysis of C- containing 
polymers enhance the growth of heterotrophic methanogens (Bguin and Aubert 1994) and 
denitrifying bacteria (Senga et al. 2015). On this basis, the significant positive relationships 
identified here between B enzyme activity (used as an indicator of labile carbon availability) 
and the emissions of CH4 and N2O were expected as microbial biomass need C supply for 
their growth and activity (Kang et al. 1998).  
As phenolics concentrations increase, a lower decomposition rate is expected because of the 
inhibitory effects of phenolic compounds on the main agents of decomposition (hydrolase 
enzymes) (Freeman et al. 1990, Fenner and Freeman 2011). Here, neither extracellular 
enzymes activity nor greenhouse gas productions showed significant correlations with 
phenolic concentrations, which suggesting that the activities of extracellular enzymes and 
hence the metabolic end products depend on the form, composition and the source of 
phenolic compounds, instead of the absolute quantities of them (Hoostal and Bouzat 2008). 
The lack of any statistically significant differences in CH4 flux between studied layers 
suggests that the activity/biomass of methanogens did not vary significantly with depth or 
that CH4 fluxes mitigated by CH4 oxidation by methanotrophs. In this context, it is worth 
noting that CH4 production can be balanced by methanotrophs through methane oxidation 
(Tveit et al. 2013, 2015), which could affect the results of measured CH4 emission. 
The results of significant correlations between the measured variables suggest that soil 
physicochemical properties that changed at different layers could be account for changes in 
soil enzymes activity and the potential metabolic end products. 
2.6. Conclusions 
Information concerning the relevant physicochemical parameters and biogeochemical 
processes in the peatlands of the Arctic region is still limited. This field survey provides an 
assessment of the biogeochemical processes in relation to environmental variables along the 
soil profile in Arctic peatland of Svalbard, Norway.  
The occurrence of highest GHG flux and extracellular enzymes activity (with the exception 
of phenol oxidase activity) in the superficial layer (0-5 cm) indicates that this is the most 
biologically active layer. This observation was in line with previous studies of peatlands and 
other soil ecosystems. Overall, the superficial layer was associated with higher hydrolase 
activities, higher water and SOM contents, higher DOC, nutrients concentrations, and higher 
CO2 and N2O fluxes. All of which relatively decreased with soil depth.  
Hydrolase activities were not significantly related to pH, suggesting that the pH values, 
which ranged from 5.64 to 8.6, were not optimal for hydrolytic enzymes activity. For the B 
and N enzymes activity, it looks like alkalinity may be exerting some inhibitory effect.  
The underlying mineral layer was associated with higher POX activity, indicating that the 
deeper layers warrant attention. This observation attributed to higher pH in the deeper layer, 
with a statistically significant positive correlation being found between the two factors. This 
confirms the activating impact of high pH under anaerobic conditions.  
Neither extracellular enzymes activity nor greenhouse gas production showed significant 
correlations with phenolic concentrations, suggesting that the activities of extracellular 
enzymes and hence the metabolic end products depend on the form, composition and the 
source of phenolic compounds, instead of the absolute quantities of them. 
Contrary to the economic model of microbial enzyme production, phosphatase activity was 
positively associated with inorganic phosphate concentration, which may indicate that 
phosphatase production rate exceeded phosphate demand. Regarding the lack of statistically 
negative correlation between S enzyme activity and sulfate concentration, it seemed that large 
amounts of sulfate was deposited in the soil from the sea instead of being produced by 
biodegradation of organic sulfur compounds. 
DOC concentration showed a significant inverse relationship with conductivity that known to 
negatively affect the DOC solubility and hence its concentration in peat solution. 
The emission of CH4 and N2O was significantly correlated with carbon supply (represented 
by B enzyme activity) needed for the growth of heterotrophic microorganisms. There was no 
statistically significant change in CH4 production along the soil depth, possibly due to the 
activity/biomass of methanogens did not vary significantly with depth or possibly due to the 
offset by methanotrophs, which occur throughout soil profile. Given the potency of methane 
as a greenhouse gas, an improved understanding of the biotic and abiotic factors driving its 
flux in these important carbon sink environments must be a research priority. 
Studying biogeochemical processes and the abiotic variables controlling them in peatlands 
has important implications for predicting the potential impacts of climate change, human 
intervention and management strategies on peatlands function.  
Assessing microbial community composition is recommended, since microbial communities 
are central to the degradation of SOM and are responsible for a large proportion of soil GHGs 
emissions. 
2.7. Acknowledgments  
The Saudi Arabian government financially supported this research. I am also grateful for the 
support of Dr Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, who 
collected the samples and provided details of field conditions. I am also acknowledging the 
support of my supervisor, Professor Christopher Freeman, School of Natural Sciences, 
Bangor University. 
2.8. References 
Allison, S.D., Gartner, T.B., Holland, K., Weintraub, M. and Sinsabaugh, R.L., 2007. Soil 
enzymes: linking proteomics and ecological processes. In: Christon, J.H., Ronald, L.C., Jay, 
L.G., David, A.L., Aaron, L.M., Linda, D.S. (eds.), Manual of Environmental Microbiology, 
3rd edition (pp. 704-711). American Society of Microbiology.  
Bguin, P. and Aubert, J.P., 1994. The biological degradation of cellulose. FEMS 
Microbiology Reviews, 13(1), pp.25-58. 
Box, J.D., 1983. Investigation of the Folin-Ciocalteau phenol reagent for the determination of 
polyphenolic substances in natural waters. Water Research, 17(5), pp. 249-261. 
Burns, R. G., DeForest, J. L., Marxsen, J., Sinsabaugh, R. L., Stromberger, M. E., 
Wallenstein, M. D., Weintraub, M. N., and Zoppini, A., 2013. Soil enzymes in a changing 
environment: current knowledge and future directions. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 58, pp. 
216-234. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed.), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments (pp. 29-59). 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Clymo, R.S., 1983. Peat. In: Goodawll, D. W. (ed.), Ecosystems of the World, vol. 4A, Mires: 
Swamp, Bog, Fen and Moor. Elseview, Amsterdam, pp. 159-224. 
Dahlgren, R.A., 1993. Comparison of soil solution extraction procedures: effect on solute 
chemistry. Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 24(15-16), pp.1783-1794. 
DeForest, J.L., 2009. The influence of time, storage temperature, and substrate age on 
potential soil enzyme activity in acidic forest soils using MUB-linked substrates and L-
DOPA. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(6), pp.1180-1186. 
Dinesh, R., Ramanathan, G., and Singh, H., 1995. Influence of chloride and sulphate ions on 
soil enzymes. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 175(2), pp. 129-133. 
Dunn, C., 2013. Generating carbon credits through application of the enzymic latch 
mechanism in peatland carbon sequestration, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Elvebakk, A., 1994. A survey of plant associations and alliances from Svalbard. Journal of 
Vegetation Science, 5(6), pp.791-802. 
Fenner, N. and Freeman, C., 2011. Drought-induced carbon loss in peatlands. Nature 
Geoscience, 4(12), p.895-900. 
Fenner, N., Freeman, C. and Reynolds, B., 2005. Observations of a seasonally shifting 
thermal optimum in peatland carbon-cycling processes; implications for the global carbon 
cycle and soil enzyme methodologies. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(10), pp. 1814-1821. 
Freeman, C., Evans, C.D., Monteith, D.T., Reynolds, B. and Fenner, N., 2001. Export of 
organic carbon from peat soils. Nature, 412(6849), p.785.  
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Jones, S.E. and Lock, M.A., 1995. The use of fluorogenic 
substrates for measuring enzyme activity in peatlands. Plant and Soil, 175(1), pp.147-152.  
Freeman, C., Lock, M.A., Marxsen, J. and Jones, S.E., 1990. Inhibitory effects of high 
molecular weight dissolved organic matter upon metabolic processes in biofilms from 
contrasting rivers and streams. Freshwater Biology, 24(1), pp.159-166.  
Freeman, C., Fenner, N., Ostle, N.J., Kang, H., Dowrick, D.J., Reynolds, B., Lock, M.A., 
Sleep, D., Hughes, S. and Hudson, J., 2004. Export of dissolved organic carbon from 
peatlands under elevated carbon dioxide levels. Nature, 430(6996), pp.195-198. 
Frogbrook, Z.L., Bell, J., Bradley, R.I., Evans, C., Lark, R.M., Reynolds, B., Smith, P. and 
Towers, W., 2009. Quantifying terrestrial carbon stocks: examining the spatial variation in 
two upland areas in the UK and a comparison to mapped estimates of soil carbon. Soil Use 
and Management, 25(3), pp. 320-332. 
Google Maps, 2020, accessed at https //www.google maps on 13/10/2020. 
Gough, R., 2014. Catchment influences on dissolved organic carbon concentration and 
character, implications for potable water treatment and trihalomethane control, PhD thesis, 
Bangor University. 
Gough, R., Holliman, P.J., Fenner, N., Peacock, M. and Freeman, C., 2016. Influence of 
water table depth on pore water chemistry and trihalomethane formation potential in 
peatlands. Water Environment Research, 88(2), pp.107-117.   
Grnlund, A., Hauge, A., Hovde, A. and Rasse, D.P., 2008. Carbon loss estimates from 
cultivated peat soils in Norway: a comparison of three methods. Nutrient Cycling in 
Agroecosystems, 81(2), pp.157-167. 
Harden, J.W., Koven, C.D., Ping, C.L., Hugelius, G., McGuire, A.D., Camill, P., Jorgenson, 
T., Kuhry, P., Michaelson, G.J., O'Donnell, J.A. and Schuur, E.A., 2012. Field information 
links permafrost carbon to physical vulnerabilities of thawing. Geophysical Research 
Letters, 39(15), p. L15704. 
Hoostal, M.J. and Bouzat, J.L., 2008. The modulating role of dissolved organic matter on 
spatial patterns of microbial metabolism in Lake Erie sediments. Microbial Ecology, 55(2), 
pp.358-368. 
Jones, T.G., 2006. Climate change and dissolved organic carbon: impacts on drinking water 
supplies, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Kalbitz, K., Solinger, S., Park, J.H., Michalzic, B. and Matzner, E., 2000. Controls on the 
dynamics of dissolved organic matter in soils: a review. Soil Science, 165, pp. 277-304. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp.449-454. 
Kang, H., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1998. Trace gas emissions from a north Wales fen-
role of hydrochemistry and soil enzyme activity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 105(1-2), pp. 
107-116. 
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p.3807. 
Kowalenko, C.G., 2008. Extraction times and analysis methods influence soil test 
measurements of phosphorus and sulphur. Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 88(5), pp.733-
Martikainen, P.J., Nyknen, H., Crill, P. and Silvola, J., 1993. Effect of a lowered water table 
on nitrous oxide fluxes from northern peatlands. Nature, 366(6450), pp.51-53. 
Marushchak, M.E., Pitkmki, A., Koponen, H., Biasi, C., Seppl, M. and Martikainen, P.J., 
2011. Hot spots for nitrous oxide emissions found in different types of permafrost 
peatlands. Global Change Biology, 17(8), pp.2601-2614. 
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11.  
Nakatsubo, T., Uchida, M., Sasaki, A., Kondo, M., Yoshitake, S. and Kanda, H., 2015. 
Carbon accumulation rate of peatland in the High Arctic, Svalbard: implications for carbon 
sequestration. Polar Science, 9(2), pp.267-275. 
Pind, A., Freeman, C. and Lock, M.A., 1994. Enzymic degradation of phenolic materials in 
peatlands-measurement of phenol oxidase activity. Plant and Soil, 159(2), pp.227-231.  
Regina, K., Nyknen, H., Silvola, J. and Martikainen, P.J., 1996. Fluxes of nitrous oxide from 
boreal peatlands as affected by peatland type, water table level and nitrification 
capacity. Biogeochemistry, 35(3), pp.401-418. 
Robinson, P. K., 2015. Enzymes: principles and biotechnological applications. Essays in 
Biochemistry, 59, pp. 1-41. 
Ross, D.J., 1965. Effects of airdry, refrigerated and frozen storage on activities of enzymes 
hydrolysing sucrose and starch in soils. Journal of Soil Science, 16(1), pp.86-94. 
Rozema, J., Boelen, P., Doorenbosch, M., Bohncke, S., Blokker, P., Boekel, C., and Konert, 
M., 2006. A vegetation, climate and environment reconstruction based on palynological 
analyses of high arctic tundra peat cores (50006000 years BP) from Svalbard. Plant 
Ecology, 182(1-2), pp. 155-173. 
Schdel, C., Bader, M.K.F., Schuur, E.A., Biasi, C., Bracho, R., apek, P., De Baets, S., 
Dikov, K., Ernakovich, J., Estop-Aragones, C. and Graham, D.E., 2016. Potential carbon 
emissions dominated by carbon dioxide from thawed permafrost soils. Nature Climate 
Change, 6(10), pp.950-953. 
Schnecker, J., Wild, B., Takriti, M., Alves, R.J.E., Gentsch, N., Gittel, A., Hofer, A., Klaus, 
K., Knoltsch, A., Lashchinskiy, N. and Mikutta, R., 2015. Microbial community composition 
shapes enzyme patterns in topsoil and subsoil horizons along a latitudinal transect in Western 
Siberia. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 83, pp.106-115. 
Schuur, E.A., McGuire, A.D., Schdel, C., Grosse, G., Harden, J.W., Hayes, D.J., Hugelius, 
G., Koven, C.D., Kuhry, P., Lawrence, D.M. and Natali, S.M., 2015. Climate change and the 
permafrost carbon feedback. Nature, 520(7546), pp. 171-179. 
Shackle, V.J., Freeman, C. and Reynolds, B., 2000. Carbon supply and the regulation of 
enzyme activity in constructed wetlands. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 32(13), pp.1935-
1940. 
Senga, Y., Hiroki, M., Terui, S. and Nohara, S., 2015. Variation in microbial function 
through soil depth profiles in the Kushiro wetland, north-eastern Hokkaido, Japan. Ecological 
Research, 30(4), pp. 563-572. 
Sinsabaugh, R. L., Antibus, R. K., Linkins, A. E., McClaugherty, C. A., Rayburn, L., Repert, 
D., and Weiland, T., 1993. Wood decomposition: nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in 
relation to extracellular enzyme activity. Ecology, 74(5), pp. 1586-1593. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., 2010. Phenol oxidase, peroxidase and organic matter dynamics of soil. Soil 
Biology and Biochemistry, 42(3), pp. 391-404. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., Lauber, C.L., Weintraub, M.N., Ahmed, B., Allison, S.D., Crenshaw, C., 
Contosta, A.R., Cusack, D., Frey, S., Gallo, M.E. and Gartner, T.B., 2008. Stoichiometry of 
soil enzyme activity at global scale. Ecology Letters, 11(11), pp. 1252-1264. 
Song, Y., Song, C., Shi, F., Wang, M., Ren, J., Wang, X., and Jiang, L., 2019. Linking plant 
community composition with the soil C pool, N availability and enzyme activity in boreal 
peatlands of Northeast China. Applied Soil Ecology, 140, pp. 144-154. 
Szajdak, L.W., Lapshina, E.D., Gaca, W., Stya, K., Meysner, T., Szczepaski, M. and Zarov, 
E.A., 2016. Physical, chemical and biochemical properties of Western Siberia Sphagnum and 
Carex peat soils. Environmental Dynamics and Global Climate Change, 7(2), pp. 13-25. 
Turner, B.L., 2010. Variation in pH optima of hydrolytic enzyme activities in tropical rain 
forest soils. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76(19), pp. 6485-6493. 
Tveit, A. T., 2014. Microbial communities and metabolic networks in Arctic peatlands, PhD 
thesis, University of Troms the Arctic University of Norway. 
Tveit, A., Schwacke, R., Svenning, M.M. and Urich, T., 2013. Organic carbon 
transformations in high-Arctic peat soils: key functions and microorganisms. The ISME 
Journal, 7(2), pp. 299-311. 
Tveit, A.T., Urich, T. and Svenning, M.M., 2014. Metatranscriptomic analysis of arctic peat 
soil microbiota. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 80(18), pp. 5761-5772. 
Tveit, A.T., Urich, T., Frenzel, P. and Svenning, M.M., 2015. Metabolic and trophic 
interactions modulate methane production by Arctic peat microbiota in response to 
warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 112(19), pp. E2507-E2516. 
Voigt, C., Lamprecht, R.E., Marushchak, M.E., Lind, S.E., Novakovskiy, A., Aurela, M., 
Martikainen, P.J. and Biasi, C., 2017a. Warming of subarctic tundra increases emissions of 
all three important greenhouse gasescarbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Global 
Change Biology, 23(8), pp. 3121-3138. 
Voigt, C., Marushchak, M.E., Lamprecht, R.E., Jackowicz-Korczyski, M., Lindgren, A., 
Mastepanov, M., Granlund, L., Christensen, T.R., Tahvanainen, T., Martikainen, P.J. and 
Biasi, C., 2017b. Increased nitrous oxide emissions from Arctic peatlands after permafrost 
thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 114(24), pp. 6238-6243. 
Weintraub, M. N., and Schimel, J. P., 2005. The seasonal dynamics of amino acids and other 
nutrients in Alaskan Arctic tundra soils. Biogeochemistry, 73(2), pp. 359-380. 
Williams, C. J., Shingara, E. A., and Yavitt, J. B., 2000. Phenol oxidase activity in peatlands 
in New York State: response to summer drought and peat type. Wetlands, 20(2), pp. 416-421. 
Zak, D., Roth, C., Unger, V., Goldhammer, T., Fenner, N., Freeman, C., and Jurasinski, G., 
2019. Unravelling the importance of polyphenols for microbial carbon mineralization in 
rewetted riparian peatlands. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 7, p. 147. 
Chapter 3 
 Changes in biogeochemical processes with depth in tropical 
Colombian peatlands 
3.1. Abstract 
Despite the importance of tropical peatlands as one of the most important terrestrial carbon 
stores, the knowledge of their biogeochemical processes and the physicochemical variables 
influencing them at different depths remains insufficient. This study focussed on tropical 
Colombian peatlands and aimed to assess whether extracellular enzyme activity and soil 
respiration vary with depth in response to soil physicochemical characteristics. The activity 
of extracellular enzymes (hydrolases and phenol oxidase), the fluxes of greenhouse gas 
(carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O)), water and soil organic 
matter content, pH and conductivity as well as various soil water properties including 
dissolved organic carbon, phenolic compound and anion and cation concentrations were 
measured at different depths across six locations in an Andean peatland.  
Since the quantity and the quality of soil organic matter decrease with depth, soil enzymes 
activity is expected to decrease with depth and the microbial assemblages can be expected to 
change accordingly. In a manner proportional to soil characteristics, the findings of the 
present study showed a general decrease in soil enzymes activity (including both hydrolases 
and phenol oxidase) with depth. This observation was in line with decreasing pH and nutrient 
concentrations and increased phenolic concentrations with increasing depth, suggesting that 
soil organic matter quality and hence soil metabolism changed with depth. Consequently, 
CO2 flux gradually decreased with depth, while the production of CH4 followed the opposite 
direction, indicating that methanogens were more common in the deeper peat layers. N2O 
fluxes were strongly correlated with enzymatic activities although they showed insignificant 
variation across the different depths. To a great extent, phenolics concentration, pH and ion 
concentrations appeared to influence the enzymes activity and CO2 and N2O emissions. The 
content of nitrogen element correlated positively with enzymes activity and soil respiration, 
indicating that increased nitrogen deposition poses a significant risk to the function of 
peatlands.  
In agreement with the economic model of microbial enzyme production, statistically 
significant negative correlations were found between arylsulfatase activity and sulfate 
concentration and between phosphatase activity and phosphate concentration. 
3.2. Introduction  
Previous studies have estimated that nearly 11% (0.44 Mkm2 (M = million)) of the worlds 
peatlands are located in the tropical areas that spread across Central and South America, 
Africa, the Caribbean and Southeast Asia. Tropical peatlands are estimated to hold around 18 
to 25% of the total global peat volume (1758 Gm3 (G = 109)) and around 15 to 19% of the 
global peat carbon pool. Southeast Asia is estimated to have the largest area of tropical 
peatland (247 778 km2, 56%) and peat volume (1359 Gm3, 77%) followed by South America 
(107 486 km2, 24.4% and 192 Gm3, 11% peat volume), Africa (55 860 km2, 13% and 138 
Gm3, 8% peat volume) and the Caribbean and Central America (23 374 km2, 5.3% and 60 
Gm3, 3% peat volume for both) (Page et al. 2011). Interest in Southeast Asian peatlands has 
increased following extensive land use change for agricultural purposes, which has resulted 
degradation of soil carbon stores, and significant greenhouse gas (GHG) release (Page et al. 
2002, Koh et al. 2009).  
Recently, Gumbricht et al. (2017) published a new estimate of peatland extent and peat 
volume in the tropics. They estimated that tropical peatlands cover 1.7 Mkm2 and contain 7 
268 Gm3 of peat, of which 750 000 km2 (44%) and 3 117 Gm3 (43%) are in South America. 
These latest figures suggest that Southeast Asian peatlands are surpassed in extent and 
volume by South American peatlands and highlight the importance of focussing studies of 
tropical peatlands in this region. Specifically, more research is required to adequately 
understand tropical peatland biogeochemical processes and the environmental factors 
affecting them, which will help in developing strategies for the restoration or reconstruction 
of drained peatlands and for the maintenance of healthy peatlands (Knnen et al. 2018). 
Within South America, Colombia is estimated to have 74 950 km2 of the total tropical 
peatlands (Gumbricht et al. 2017). Like all tropical peatlands, Colombian peatlands at high 
elevations are susceptible to the impacts of climate change including global warming 
(Benavides et al. 2013). In the Andes Mountains, temperatures have already increased over 
the last two decades by 1.4C with a further temperature rise of 5C predicted during the next 
nine decades (Bradley et al. 2006, Ruiz et al. 2008). The resulting droughts and more 
oxygenated conditions pose a significant threat to the stability of peatlands, with carbon 
release also likely to cause positive climate feedbacks (Wieder 2001, Turetsky et al. 2002). 
To date, no data has been published regarding soil metabolism in relation to variations of 
abiotic variables in peatland of the Sumapaz National Park, where samples were collected 
during this project. 
Despite the importance of tropical peatlands as one of the largest terrestrial carbon storages, 
metabolic processes in the deep layers of tropical peat remain poorly understood, with 
relatively few studies having been conducted in this area (Rieley et al. 1996, Jackson et al. 
2009). In addition, and in contrast to boreal and temperate peatlands, GHG gas fluxes in 
tropical peatlands have received little attention (Jauhiainen et al. 2012). Despite their global 
importance, South American peatlands have received less attention than other tropical 
peatlands. This is due partly to methodological and logistical difficulties. However, as 
climate change and land use changes impact on these environments, their forgotten status 
could be reversed (Dargie et al. 2017, Gumbricht et al. 2017). 
Despite the fact that soil microorganisms occur throughout the soil profile, their activity and 
function in deep peat layers remains poorly understood (Schnecker et al. 2015). Typically, 
microbial processes in the top few centimetres of peat, where the oxygen content, fresh litter 
and hence density of microorganisms is highest, receive most attention (Fierer et al. 2003, 
Senga et al. 2015). In the deep layers of the peat profile, partially degraded organic matter 
decomposes slower due to the dominance of anaerobic conditions and the subsequent 
accumulation of recalcitrant compounds. However, substantial microbial communities in 
deep layers of soil have been reported in several studies (Fritze et al. 2000, Blume et al. 
2002, Fierer et al. 2003, Jackson et al. 2009, Eilers et al. 2012, Senga et al. 2015, Ko et al. 
2017), which suggests that even deeper layers of soil contribute to the processes involved in 
organic matter decomposition, nutrient cycling and GHG emissions (Jackson et al. 2009, 
Senga et al. 2015).  
In this study, the activities of extracellular enzymes (-D-glucosidase, arylsulfatase,  -D-
xylosidase, N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase), phosphatase and phenol oxidase) at 
various depths were analysed. Greenhouse gas emissions (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were also 
measured to yield further information on microbial processes. Various physicochemical 
properties including dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, pH, conductivity, water 
content, soil organic matter content, phenolic concentration and cations and anions 
concentrations were measured to test the hypothesis that enzymes activity and soil respiration 
differ with depth in response to changing soil conditions.  
3.3. Materials and methods 
3.3.1. Study site description and sample collection and preparation 
More detailed maps were unavailable for peatland distribution in Colombia.  The tropical 
peatland site used in this study is located at high altitude within the Sumapaz National Park in 
the Andean mountain range, Colombia (Figure 3.01). The area extension is about 154000 ha. 
The annual rainfall is between 1300 and 2400mm, with continuous and high humidity. The 
Park is a significant hydrographic center, containing river basins and lakes (Sesana 2006). 
Figure 3.01. Maps showing study site and peat core sampling locations in Sumapaz National 
Park, Colombia (Andean Mountains) (Source: Google Maps). 
The dominant vegetation was Sphagnum spp, Carex spp, Juncus spp, Espeletia spp and many 
other shrubs were also more common. The average air temperature was 13.4C and the water 
table was at the soil surface at the time of sampling. Soil sampling was performed at the end 
of July 2017, with peat cores of 100 cm depth were collected from six different Sphagnum-
dominated locations (Figure 3.02a-f), since vegetation is known to be an important variable 
affecting microbial communities, and to enable an effective comparison between regions. At 
each of these locations, three replicate cores were extracted using a Russian corer (50 cm 
long and 10 cm in diameter). After removing the vegetation layer, the cores were separated 
into several layers based on a visual assessment of colour and texture. Figures 3.02g and 
3.02h show the stratigraphy of a representative core from the six locations. In general, 
distinct layers occurred at the following approximate depths: blond superficial layer: 0-10 
cm, light brown organic layer: 10-40 cm, dark brown organic layer: 40-90 cm and mineral 
layer: > 90 cm. This approach yielded a total of 67 samples. After removal of stones, roots 
and macroinvertebrates, all samples were placed separately in labeled plastic bags and 
transported to the laboratory in Wales in a cooled container, where they were stored at 4C 
until further analysis. 
Figure 3.02. Photographs showing six peat 
core extraction locations (pictures a-f refer to 
sites 1-6, respectively). Photograph of typical 
peat core (g) and illustration showing discrete 
layers (h) (photographer J Mora-Gomez). 
Soil temperature, pH, and oxygen concentration were measured in the field at the time of 
sampling using a digital thermometer, a Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a dissolved oxygen 
probe, respectively. These data are presented in Table 3.01. 
Table 3.01. Peat core locations and basic environmental characteristics of pore waters of the 
studied sites during the time of sampling. Values are presented as the range of the 3 
replicates. 
Location Soil 
temp. 
pH  Soil O2 
conc. 
(mg L-1) 
Coordinates Altitude 
1 9.0-9.7 4.4-5.1 1.3-2.7 41'23.6'' N, 
7412'20.1'' W 
3714 m a.s.l 
2 9.3-10.1 4.0-4.1 2.4-2.6 417'22,1'' N, 
7412'19'' W 
3720 m a.s.l 
3 10.1-10.3 4.4-4.6 2.0-2.3 415'28.3'' N, 
7411'28.5'' W 
3578 m a.s.l 
4 9.2-9.6 4.9-5.4 1.3-2.8 417'23.1'' N, 
7412'12.8'' W 
3709 m a.s.l 
5 8.5-10.6 4.3-4.6 2.0-2.9 4 16' 25.1'' N, 
74 11' 38.1'' W 
3642 m a.s.l 
6 9.0-9.8 4.9-5.0 1.3-2.2 415'24'' N, 
7411'24.6'' W 
3573 m a.s.l 
3.3.2. Soil analyses 
In the present study, the aim was to estimate the emissions of GHG and the activities of 
extracellular enzymes that occur under natural conditions within peatlands. Therefore, field 
conditions were copied as closely as possible by matching gas production and enzyme assay 
temperature to that recorded in the field. 
3.3.2.1. Enzyme activity analyses 
Analyses were performed within two weeks of collection as previous studies have shown that 
soil enzymes to be stable for this period of time (Dunn et al. 2014). Before conducting any 
analyses, the samples were kept in the incubator at field temperature for around three hours.  
The activity of phenol oxidase (POX) in peat soil samples was determined using a procedure 
adapted from Pind et al. (1994) and Dunn et al. (2014).  Model compound L-DOPA (L-3,4- 
dihydroxy phenylalanine, Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) was used as a substrate for the 
enzymes degradation. The colour change is determined using a spectrophotometer 
measuring at 475 nm, from which the activity of phenol oxidase can be calculated. After 
homogenizing the bag containing the soil sample by hand, two separate 1 g soil samples were 
weighed and placed in two labelled stomacher bags (Seward, West Sussex, UK). After adding 
9 mL of ultrapure water to each bag, these were then placed in a paddle blender (Stomacher 
circulator, Seward) to mix the contents for 30 s on a normal speed setting. A 10 mL of 
ultrapure water was added to one bag, used as a blank. A 10 mL of the substrate (L-DOPA) 
was added to the other, and both bags were mixed for a further 30 s. All bags were then 
incubated at field temperature for 10 min before the bags were removed and mixed by hand. 
For each bag, three 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vials (Eppendorf, Stevenage, UK) were labelled 
and filled with the bags solution. The vials were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. A 300 
L of supernatant from each vial was transferred to a well of a clear 96 well microplate 
(Sterilin, Cambridage, UK). The microplate was then placed on the SpectraMax M2e plate 
reader spectrophotometer and absorbance values measured at = 475 nm. To obtain the 
average absorbance value, the mean absorbance of the three blanks was subtracted from the 
mean absorbance of the three samples containing the substrate. The activity of phenol oxidase 
was then calculated by using Beer-Lambert Law and expressed as mol of formed diqc per 
min per g of soil (dry weight). 
Hydrolase activities were determined using the procedures of Dunn et al. (2014), based on 
the measurement of fluorescence of methylumbelliferone (MUF). In five 1L volumetric 
flasks, the relevant amount of MUF-labeled substrates (4-MUF -D-glucopyranoside for -D-
glucosidase (B), 4-MUF sulfate potassium salt for arylsulfatase (S), 4-MUF -D-
xylopyranoside for -D-xylosidase (X), 4-MUF N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide for N-acetyl--
D-glucosaminidase (N) and 4-MUF phosphate for phosphatase (P)) were dissolved in 20 mL 
of cellosolve solvent (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK), and then ultrapure water was added 
up to the 1L mark. Magnetic stirrers were used if necessary.  
Five 1 g subsamples (one for each MUF substrate) were taken from each bag containing soil 
samples and placed in separate stomacher bags with 7 mL of the relevant substrate (stored at 
field temperature before use). These were homogenized using a Seward Stomacher 80 
Laboratory Blender for 30 s. The stomacher bags were then incubated at field temperature for 
45 min for the enzyme P and 60 min for the other enzymes (B, S, X, and N). The 
homogenates were then mixed by hand and transferred into separate 1.5 mL centrifuge vials, 
which were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. During this time, 50 L of ultrapure 
water was added to black microplate wells (Sterilin, Cambridge, UK). 
At the end of centrifugation, 250 L of the resulting supernatant was extracted from each 
sample and added to the relevant wells on the microplate. Fluorescence of the MUF molecule 
was measured using a microplate fluorometer (Molecular Devices SpectraMax M2e 
spectrophotometer) at 450 nm emission and 330 nm excitation. Hydrolase activities are 
expressed as nmol MUF g-1 of soil min-1. To prepare the calibration curve, 7 mL of ultrapure 
water was added to a stomacher bag (labelled as standard) containing 1 gram of soil sample 
and homogenized as described above. The contents from each standard bag were used to fill 
two 2 mL Eppendorf tubes, which were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 mins. Different 
MUF-free acid (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) concentrations (8 in total) were prepared in 
2 mL Eppendorf tubes using the MUF stock solution (prepared by dissolving the relevant 
amount of 4-methylumbelliferone free acid in 10 mL of cellosolve solvent and 500 mL of 
ultrapure water) and ultrapure water. 
A column of the 8 standard solutions was prepared per soil sample by pipetting 50L from 
each of the standard solution into a series of wells on a black microplate in addition to 250L 
from the supernatant of the two Eppendorf tubes. The microplate was then analyzed as 
before. 
3.3.2.2. Hydrochemistry analyses 
For measurement of pH, conductivity, DOC, phenolic compounds, cations and anions 
concentrations, a soil solution was prepared by adding 5 g of soil sample and 40 mL of 
ultrapure water to a 50 mL centrifuge tube, and shaking on a rotary shaker for 24 h. Allowing 
24h on a rotary shaker ensures that potentially leachable solutes are fully extracted into 
solution. There is some risk that this might allow changes in the microbial community 
(including consumption of solutes, reproduction, metabolism of solutes to other chemical 
forms), however, previous work has shown that without a 24h period it is impossible to be 
certain that the extractable solutes reach their maximum. 
Measurement of pH and electrical conductivity was conducted on un-filtered samples using a 
Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a Primo 5 handheld conductivity meter, respectively. 
Samples were then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 30 min. Finally, the supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.45m membrane filter (Whatman, Kent, UK). The supernatant was collected in 
20 mL plastic scintillation vials (Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd) and stored at 4C until 
further analysis.  
Filtered soil water samples were analyzed for their phenolics content using a version of the 
spectrophotometric procedures described by Box (1983). The analysis was run in triplicate, 1 
mL of the sample was placed in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vial with 50 L of Folins reagent 
and 0.15 mL of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3 used to rise the pH). The same reagents were 
added to 1 mL of each of the chosen standards (0-30 mg L-1 phenol standard solutions were 
chosen in order to prepare a standard curve). All samples and standards were mixed a few 
times and allowed to develop a colour for 1 h 15 min at room temperature before 0.3 mL 
from both standards and samples were transferred to three wells of a clear microplate. 
Phenolic content was then estimated by measuring absorbance at a wavelength of 750 nm 
with a BMG Labtech Fluostar Galaxy microplate reader. 
The concentration of DOC was measured on filtered and acidified samples using a 
Thermalox TOC/TN analyser (Analytical Sciences Ltd) equipped with a non-dispersive 
infrared CO2 analyser. Anion (chloride, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate) and cation (sodium, 
ammonium, magnesium and calcium) concentrations were measured using a Metrohm 850 
Professional Ion Chromatograph. 
3.3.2.3. Soil water and organic matter content measurements 
The water content of the soil samples was determined by oven drying a sample of known 
weight at 105C for 24 h and then reweighing the samples to determine the mass loss. 
Organic matter content was estimated by placing soil samples in the muffle furnace at 550C 
for 200 min and reweighing the samples to calculate mass loss (Frogbrook et al. 2009). 
3.3.2.4. GHG flux measurements 
For GHG flux measurements, 5 g of soil sample from each distinct layer within each core 
was weighed and placed in a 50 mL centrifuge tube with a lid fitted with a rubber septum 
(Fisher Scientific UK Ltd, Loughborough, UK). Using a 10 cm3 gas syringe (Sigma Aldrich 
Ltd, Dorset, UK) with a short hypodermic needle, 10 mL of gas sample was taken from 
inside the tubes as a starting or background concentration (time 1). The tubes were then 
sealed and incubated at field temperature. Every 15 min over a 90 min period, gas samples 
were collected through the pierceable rubber septa. A 10 mL of gas sample was extracted 
from the centrifuge tubes and then injected into labelled 5.9 mL glass screw-cap vials (Labco 
Exetainers Ltd, Lampeter, UK), fitted with a rubber septum in their caps.  
All the exetainers were evacuated three times before use to remove all air, using a 10 mL gas 
syringe. Calibration curves for the three GHGs (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were prepared using gas 
chromatograph (GC) standards of known concentrations. All gas samples and standards, in 
addition to three samples containing atmospheric air as blanks, were placed in the GC rack 
for analysis using a Varian model 450 GC. The instrument was fitted with two different 
detectors, an electron capture detector (ECD) to measure the concentration of N2O and a 
flame ionization detector (FID) with a methaniser to convert CO2 to CH4, for the 
measurement of CO2 and CH4. 
3.3.3. Statistical analyses 
Where conditions were met by the data, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to 
analyse potential significant differences in variables between different depths. Tukey HSD 
post-hoc test was performed to find where the significant differences among groups lay at a 
probability level of 0.05. Calculated F and degrees of freedom are provided as well. 
Significant correlations were determined using Pearson correlation analysis. Statistical 
analysis was carried out using version 22 of the SPSS statistics package. 
3.4. Results  
For all hydrolase enzymes (Figure 3.03 and Table 3.02), highest mean activity was recorded 
in the superficial layer (0-10 cm). ANOVA analysis showed that (with the exception of the 
superficial layer vs. mineral layer X enzyme comparison) the difference in mean enzyme 
activity between the superficial layer and all other layers was statistically significant (F (3, 
63) = 16.2, 19.2, 11.3, 19.1and 21.1 for the enzymes B, S, X, N, and P, respectively, p = 
0.000). Although in general, hydrolase enzymes activity tended to decrease with increasing 
depth, with four of the five enzymes (B, X, P and N) activity increased in the mineral layer (> 
90 cm) (Figure 3.03), though this difference was not statistically significant (Table 3.02). The 
same trend was observed in POX activity with depth, with highest activity in the superficial 
layer (3.06 mol dicq g-1 min-1) was significantly higher than the light brown (10-40 cm) and 
dark brown organic layer (40-90 cm) (F (3, 63) = 10.5, p = 0.000). The activity of POX in the 
mineral layer (>90cm) (1.7 mol dicq g-1 min-1) did not differ significantly from the other 
layers. 
Figure 3.03. Extracellular enzymes activity at different depths in the soil profile. Each circle 
represents the mean of the six sampling locations. Error bars represent standard deviation. 
Abbreviations: -D-glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S),  -D-xylosidase (X), N-acetyl--D-
glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX). 
The opposite trend was observed for mean phenolics concentration (Figure 3.04b and Table 
3.02), with concentration increasing between the depth of 10-40 cm (3.4 mg L-1) and the 
depth of 40-90 cm (3.5 mg L-1), and then decreasing at the mineral layer (1.9 mg L-1). One-
way ANOVA showed that phenolics concentration differed significantly between the 
different layers (F (3, 63) = 17.2, p = 0.000). Post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test 
revealed that the depth of 10-40cm and 40-90cm were significantly higher than the other two 
depths in this regard (p < 0.05).  Mean DOC concentration (Figure 3.04a and Table 3.02) 
increased between the superficial layer (13.75 mg L-1) and the dark brown organic layer (23.0 
mg L-1) then decreased in the mineral layer (9.2 mg L-1). Mean DOC concentration in the 
dark brown organic layer was significantly higher than in the superficial and mineral layers. 
In addition, DOC concentration in the light brown organic layer was significantly higher than 
in the mineral layer (F (3, 63) = 4.8, p = 0.005). 
0.0 50.0 100.0 150.0
-10.0 0.0 10.0 20.0 30.0
Enzyme activity (nmol MUF/mol dicq g-1 min-1)
Figure 3.04. Mean DOC (a) and phenolic compound concentration (b) at different depths. 
Error bars represent standard deviation. 
Mean pH level (Table 3.02) was acidic at all depths and ranged between 4.95 in the light 
brown organic layer and 5.58 in the mineral layer. Mean pH in the mineral and superficial 
layer were significantly higher than in the light brown organic layer (F (3, 63) = 6.4, p = 
0.001). 
Conductivity tended to decrease with depth except for a very slight and statistically 
insignificant increase between the dark brown organic layer and the mineral layer (Table 
3.02). Mean conductivity in the superficial layer (32.4 S/cm) was significantly higher than 
all other layers (F (3, 63) = 15.3, p = 0.000). 
Mean soil water content decreased from 92.99% in the superficial layer to 69.5% in the 
mineral layer (Table 3.02). The mineral layer had significantly lower water content than all 
other layers and the water content in the dark brown organic layer was significantly lower 
than in the superficial layer (F (3, 63) = 16.9, p = 0.000). 
Mean soil organic matter content (% SOM) ranged from 57.4% in the light brown organic 
layer to 23.4% in the mineral layer, which was significantly lower than in all other layers (F 
(3, 63) = 7.3, p = 0.000). 
0 10 20 30 40
40-90
10-40
mg L-1
0 1 2 3 4 5
40-90
10-40
mg L-1
Table 3.02. Values for various variables measured at each depth within the peat cores. Results are 
given as mean  standard deviation. Letter annotations refer to statistically significant differences 
between mean values of different depths identified by Tukey HSD post- hoc test (p < 0.05). 
Layer 
Variable 
Superficial 
(0-10 cm) (a) 
Light brown 
organic 
(10-40 cm) (b) 
Dark brown 
organic 
(40-90 cm) (c) 
Mineral  
(>90 cm) (d) 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
20.3611.62 
8.77.5 
4.32.68 
7.380.9 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
16.479.79 
12.488.39 
2.01.79 
0.80.7 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
4.82.6 
2.31.25 
1.970.58 
3.361.5 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
78.0744.5 
31.525.09 
11.816.19 
18.4510.67 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
14.29.37 
4.03.2 
2.581.1 
3.951.75 
mol dicq g-1 min-1 
3.061.9 
1.11.29 
0.750.68 
1.71.49 
Phenolics 
mg L-1 
1.40.8 
3.41.2 
3.51.2 
1.90.4 
mg L-1 
13.7510.27 
19.510.97 
23.08.99 
9.24.9 
pH 5.40.4 
4.950.36 
5.170.37 
5.580.6 
Conductivity 
S cm-1 
32.417.69 
15.96.09 
12.274.0 
12.654.17 
Water 
92.991.55 
89.22.6 
83.87.08 
69.520.76 
48.5819.6 
57.417.37 
45.814.29 
23.412.9 
g CO2 g
-1 h-1 
24.5614.56 
11.078.97 
6.874.4 
8.385.4 
ng CH4 g
-1 h-1 
4.4911.38 
8.014.97 
9.5632.4 
-1.391.7 
ng N2O g
-1 h-1 
2.61.8 
1.92.37 1.41.75 1.71.27 
Chloride 
mg L-1 
3.60.76 
1.190.8 
1.20.5 
1.21.86 
Nitrate 
mg L-1 
0.350.69 1.42.06 
0.30.58 0.00 
Phosphate 
mg L-1 
0.070.2 
0.10.19 
0.360.58 
0.50.3 
Sulfate 
mg L-1 
2.10.7 
2.860.8 
5.191.4 
4.850.68 
Sodium 
mg L-1 
4.851.58 
4.871.2 
5.580.67 
5.80.85 
Ammonium 
mg L-1 
1.01.56 
0.030.09 
0.0080.02 
0.0020.006 
Calcium 
mg L-1 
2.14.07 
2.92.67 
2.91.86 
3.10.9 
Magnesium 
mg L-1 
0.30.5 
0.490.8 0.460.7 0.20.1 
Mean CO2 and N2O flux decreased between the superficial and dark organic layer, then 
increased slightly at the mineral layer (Figure 3.05 and Table 3.02), though in the case of 
N2O, none of the differences were statistically significant (F (3, 63) = 1.3, p = 0.280). The 
CO2 flux in the superficial layer was significantly higher than in the other layers (F (3, 63) = 
12.6, p = 0.000).  
The opposite trend was observed for the CH4, with mean flux increasing between the 
superficial and dark brown organic layer, then decreasing between the dark brown organic 
layer and the mineral layer (Figure 3.05 and Table 3.02). Mean CH4 flux in the superficial 
and mineral layers was significantly lower than that in each of the other layers (F (3, 63) = 
5.5, p = 0.001). 
Figure 3.05. Mean CO2, CH4 and N2O fluxes at different depths. Error bars represent standard 
deviation.  
-40 -20 0 20 40 60
CH4 & N2O flux (ng CH4/N2O g
-1 h-1)
0 10 20 30 40 50
CO2 flux (g CO2 g
-1 h-1)
For anion measurements (Table 3.02), mean chloride concentrations ranged from 1.19 mg L-1 
in the depth of 10-40 cm to 3.6 mg L-1 in the superficial layer, which was significantly higher 
than all other depths (F (3, 63) = 15.2, p = 0.000). The nitrate concentration was below the 
limit of detection in the mineral layer and the maximum concentration was found in the light 
brown organic layer (mean 1.4 mg L-1), which was only significantly higher than the mineral 
layer (F (3, 63) = 4.04, p = 0.011). Mean phosphate concentration ranged from 0.07 mg L-1 in 
the superficial layer to 0.5 mg L-1 in the mineral layer, which were significantly higher than 
the light brown organic layer and the superficial layer. The dark brown organic layer was also 
significantly higher than the superficial layer (F (3, 63) = 3.97, p = 0.012). Mean sulfate 
concentration was lowest in the superficial layer (2.1 mg L-1) and highest in the dark brown 
organic layer (5.19 mg L-1), which was, in addition to the mineral layer, significantly higher 
than the other depths (F (3, 63) = 36.9, p = 0.000). 
For cation measurements (Table 3.02), mean sodium concentration ranged from 4.85 mg L-1 
in the superficial layer to 5.8 mg L-1 in the mineral layer. No significant differences in sodium 
concentration were found between depths (F (3, 63) = 2.55, p = 0.064). Mean ammonium 
concentration was highest in the superficial layer and substantially and significantly lower (< 
0.1 mg L-1) in the remaining depths (F (3, 63) = 6.65, p = 0.001). Mean calcium concentration 
was lower in the superficial samples (2.1 mg L-1) and higher in the mineral layer (3.1 mg L-1), 
without any significant differences (F (3, 63) = 0.42, p = 0.741). Magnesium concentration 
was highest in the light brown organic layer (0.49 mg L-1) and lowest in the mineral layer 
(0.2 mg L-1) although there were no statistically significant differences between the different 
depths (F (3, 63) = 0.47, p = 0.71).  
Pearson correlation analysis was performed to test for significant relationships between soil 
physicochemical variables, enzyme activities and GHG fluxes (Table 3.03). The key 
observations are that the activities of the five hydrolase enzymes correlated positively with 
each other and with phenol oxidase activity. There were also strong negative correlations 
between all extracellular enzyme activities and phenolic compound concentration. Figure 
3.06 shows the negative correlation between phenol oxidase activity and its phenolic 
substrate. Figure 3.07 shows the negative correlations between all hydrolase enzyme 
activities and phenolic compound concentration. The fluxes of CO2 and N2O were positively 
correlated with all enzyme activities, and with conductivity and pH level. Electrical 
conductivity, chloride and ammonium showed strong positive relationship with all enzyme 
activities. The pH values also correlated positively with all enzymes activities, with the 
exception of arylsulfatase (S) activity. Sulfate ions concentration showed significant negative 
correlation with all enzyme activities. 
Figure 3.06. Relationship between phenol oxidase activity (POX) and phenolic compound 
concentration for all samples (n = 67).  
Figure 3.07. Relationship between hydrolase enzyme activities and phenolic compound 
concentration for all samples (n = 67). 
Table 3.03. Results of Pearson correlation analysis (n = 67) (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 
0.001). Abbreviations: -glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S), -D-xylosidase (X), N-acetyl--
D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX), electrical 
conductivity (EC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), 
nitrous oxide (N2O) and soil organic matter (SOM). Significant correlations are shown in 
bold. 
 B S X N P POX 
S .639**      
X .664** .486**     
N .790** .574** .793**    
P .776** .640** .746** .927**   
POX .645** .592** .705** .833** .840**  
Phenolic -.519** -.365** -.496** -.532** -.484** -.570** 
DOC .010 .045 -.112 -.001 -.058 .076 
pH .251* .195 .465** .435** .416** .602** 
EC .617** .535** .619** .803** .808** .739** 
% water .311* .383** .121 .283* .312* .122 
% SOM -.218 -.059 -.418** -.295* -.277* -.453** 
CO2 .460
** .558** .472** .603** .606** .695** 
CH4 -.061 .015 -.116 -.044 -.042 .025 
N2O .358
** .322** .390** .485** .446** .485** 
Chloride .626**  .446
**  .569
**  .788
**  .788
**  .681
Nitrate -.038 .194 -.034 .006 .147 .118 
Phosphate -.181 -.258* -.219 -.235 -.241* -.095 
Sulfate -.463** -.571** -.271* -.371** -.476** -.299* 
Sodium -.354** -.203 -.215 -.179 -.250* -.093 
Ammonium .448** .343** .402** .737** .621** .592** 
Calcium -.231 -.089 -.153 -.200 -.154 -.148 
Magnesium -.206 -.046 -.203 -.188 -.132 -.195 
                                                                                              Continued 
 Phenolic DOC pH EC % 
Water 
CO2 CH4 N2O 
DOC .256*         
pH -.240 .140        
EC -.484** -.024 .467**       
% water -.121 -.059 -.400** .233      
% SOM .299* .114 -.473** -.139 .467**     
CO2 -.550
** .067 .439** .722** .261* -.123    
CH4 .058 -.037 .129 -.036 .034 -.023 -.003 
N2O -.189 .114 .317
** .295* .085 -.123 .176 .245*  
Chloride -.449** 
.052  .482
** .904**  .209 
-.176 
.592**  -.053 .256
Nitrate .062 -.173 -.107 .085 .072 -.070 -.014 .040 .094 
Phosphate .025 -.009 -.005 -.251* -.128 -.247* -.058 .128 -.222 
Sulfate .486** .281* .179 -.372** -.407** -.204 -.320** .118 -.095 
Sodium .073 .089 .071 -.125 -.080 -.066 .083 -.019 -.215 
Ammonium -.372** .121 .362** .651** .157 -.118 .582** -.034 .336** 
Calcium .180 .020 .008 -.037 -.169 .124 -.031 -.035 -.090 
Magnesium .243 -.070 -.133 -.056 .025 .198 -.046 -.088 -.193 
3.5. Discussion 
 Microbial activity in peatlands is generally thought to be concentrated in the uppermost layer 
of peat (Fierer et al. 2003, Senga et al. 2015) more likely due to the higher temperature, 
aeration, labile organic matter and the fact that this layer corresponds with the rhizosphere 
and hence highest density of microbes (Moore 2002). As a result, studies of soil microbial 
processes tend to focus on this upper layer (Page et al. 1999, Fierer et al. 2003, Senga et al. 
2015). However, substantial microbial processes are expected in deeper layers of peat as 
large numbers of microbes have been found well below the surface (Senga et al. 2015). 
Given that limited research has been conducted into South American peatlands (Gumbricht et 
al. 2017), and the importance of microbial processes in affecting the carbon budget of these 
environments, this study assessed enzymes activity and soil respiration throughout the peat 
profile and the potential drivers of their variability with depth.   
As can be seen in Figure 3.03, the activity of -glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S), xylosidase 
(X), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), phosphatase (P) and phenol oxidase 
(POX) tended to decrease with depth, with a slight but statistically insignificant increase in 
activity at the mineral layer. Higher enzymes activity in the upper layers of peat indicate 
higher rates of enzymic decomposition in this zone. Increased soil depth is corresponding to 
increasing age of organic matter and hence greater previous decomposition of the peat 
(Jackson et al. 2009).  
A  reduction in enzymes activity with depth has been previously reported in a tropical 
Malaysian peatland (Jackson et al. 2009), a tropical Indonesian peatland (Knnen et al. 
2018), a tropical Panamanian peatland (Hoyos-Santillan et al. 2015), in temperate peatlands 
(Pind et al. 1994, Freeman et al. 1995), in tropical Everglades wetlands (Wright and Reddy 
2001), in Japanese wetlands (Senga et al. 2015), and in other soil ecosystems (Niemi et al. 
2005, Jackson and Vallaire 2007, Baldrian et al. 2012, Stone et al. 2014, Schnecker et al. 
2015, Ko et al. 2017, Hsiao et al. 2018). This phenomenon has been attributed to the 
reduction in oxygen availability and substrates quality with increasing depth (Wright and 
Reddy 2001, Jackson et al. 2009, Jauhiainen et al. 2016). In addition to the other edaphic 
factors such as nutrient availability, moisture content and pH level, all of which were 
associated with decreased microbial activity as soil depth increased (Ko et al. 2017, Knnen 
et al. 2018). In the present study, soil physicochemical variables also varied with depth, 
which could explain the variations in the enzyme activity and the associated end products of 
decomposition processes. 
Peaty soil in tropical peatlands is dominated by aromatic compounds, which indicate greater 
recalcitrance and has been known to severely limit decomposition processes (Hodgkins et al. 
2018). Since phenolic content, that can inhibit substrate utilization and hence constrain 
hydrolytic enzymes activity, increase with soil depth, hydrolase activities can be predicted to 
decrease accordingly. Indeed here, while enzymatic activities were decreasing with depth, 
phenolic concentrations were increasing.  
A significant negative correlation was found between phenolic compound concentrations and 
the activity of each of the hydrolases, suggesting the phenolics to be exerting a hydrolase-
inhibitory effect. This supports the observations of a number of previous studies. For 
example, Freeman et al. (2004) showed that the depletion of phenolics stimulated the 
activities of a number of hydrolytic enzymes, B, S, X, N and P by 26, 47, 16, 22 and 
18%, respectively. The higher hydrolase activities under a lower abundance of phenolic 
compounds were suggested to indicate that the depletion of phenolics removed inhibitors in 
the soil solution. In that study, confirmation that the effect was due to the elimination of 
phenolics and not another component (which might include iron or manganese) was 
achieved by selectively reducing phenolic abundance in the phenolic-rich 
water using conditioned polymerised N-vinyl pyrrolidone (PVPP; Carpenter et al. 1976). In 
this study, it is not certain that the inverse relationship between phenolics and hydrolase 
activity directly indicated causality; to infer causality, it would have been necessary to repeat 
the selective phenolic-depletion experiment using PVPP carried out by Freeman et al. (2004). 
This significant negative relationship also helps to explain the decrease in enzyme activity 
with depth in the present study, since phenolics concentration increased between the 
superficial and dark brown organic layer. Phenolic compounds have inhibitory effects on 
hydrolase enzymes and undoubtedly on biodegradation and respiration rates because they can 
combine with the reactive sites of organic and inorganic substrates, making them resistant to 
further microbial attack. They can also inhibit litter decomposition by lowering pH (Min et 
al. 2015) and by themselves being strongly resistant to biodegradation (Zak et al. 2019). 
Increasing phenolic content with depth may be related to decreasing POX activity with depth, 
allowing phenolic compounds to build up in the deeper layers. Indeed, a significant negative 
correlation between POX activity and phenolic concentration (r = -0.570, p < 0.01) was found 
in the present study. This relationship has been widely reported previously (e.g., Pind et al. 
(1994) and Freeman et al. (2004)). Increasing phenolic compound concentrations with depth 
is in line with several previous studies (Whitmore 1984, Qualls and Haines 1990, Pind et al. 
1994, Whitten et al. 2000, Knnen et al. 2018). This trend may also be related to increasing 
DOC concentration with depth (since phenolics are a constituent of DOC). Indeed, DOC 
concentration correlated positively with phenolic concentrations (r = 0.256, p < 0.05) 
(Freeman et al. 1996, Jones 2006, Kang et al. 2018, Wan et al. 2018).  
Measurement of enzymes activity can reflect microbial nutrient demand as many 
microorganisms control their enzyme production aligned with the demand for nutrients 
(Chrst 1991). Therefore, it is believed that a negative correlation would occur between soil 
enzyme activity and nutrient availability depending on the economic model of microbial 
metabolism indicating that if nutrients are limited, enzymes production increases and vice 
versa (Sinsabaugh et al. 1993, 2008). In this context, the inverse correlations were found 
between S enzyme activity and sulfate ions concentration (r = -0.571, p < 0.01), and between 
P enzyme activity and phosphate ions concentration (r = -0.241, p < 0.05), which may 
indicate that higher nutrient availability, reduces soil enzyme activity. This finding is in 
agreement with that reported from a tropical peatland in Panama (Sjgersten et al. 2011). 
These relationships may also help to explain the highest S and P activities in the upper layers 
of peat, where sulfate and phosphate concentrations were lowest. 
The strong positive relationships between all hydrolytic enzyme activities and POX activity 
found in this study have been reported previously (Freeman et al. 2004) and reflect the 
indirect catalytic role of POX on hydrolytic enzymes (Jones 2006). Significant positive 
correlations between CO2 and N2O efflux rates and all extracellular enzymes activities 
demonstrate the relationship between enzymic decomposition rate and GHGs release. 
Conversely, a significant negative correlation between CO2 and phenolic content (r = -0.550, 
p < 0.01), highlights the important role of phenolic compounds in the carbon sink status of 
intact peatlands (Freeman et al. 2001).  
Contrary to the findings of the present study, Jackson et al. (2009) reported undetectable 
POX levels in all samples obtained from the different depths in a tropical Malaysian peatland, 
which they linked to low oxygen and pH levels (Pind et al. 1994). 
Decreasing enzyme activity with depth may also relate to ammonium concentration which 
was highest in the superficial layer (0-10 cm) and significantly lower in the lower depths. A 
significant positive correlation was found between ammonium concentration and all 
hydrolase activities, and between ammonium/ POX activity, ammonium/ CO2 flux, 
ammonium/N2O flux, and ammonium/ pH.  In this context, several studies have shown that 
elevated N availability in soil often increases hydrolase activity and soil respiration (Waldrop 
et al. 2004, Kim and Kang 2008, Jian et al. 2016, Chen et al. 2017, Li et al. 2018), and can 
accelerate the loss of C from the soil by activating POX (Bragazza et al. 2006). The negative 
correlation found in the present study between ammonium and phenolics may also signify 
this. These observations are in line with the findings of Bragazza et al. (2006) who found 
significant positive relationships between N deposition and each of B, P, POX activities and 
CO2 emission in peat bogs. 
Along with ammonium, high electrical conductivity (indicating higher nutrient loading) in the 
superficial layer (0-10 cm) is probably linked to high enzyme activity, all analysed 
extracellular enzymes, CO2 and N2O fluxes were strongly correlated with soil conductivity.  
Regarding the relationship between chloride concentration/enzymes activity and sulfate 
concentration/enzymes activity, Dinesh et al. (1995) found that chloride and sulfate ions have 
an inhibitory effect on microbial growth and hence on enzyme synthesis due to an osmotic 
pressure leading to microbial cell lysis, and/or a salting-out effect on enzyme protein. So, the 
observation of a positive correlation between chloride concentration and enzymes activity 
and GHG fluxes was therefore unexpected. However, it is likely that the chloride correlation 
is caused by an unrelated correlation with something else that does genuinely influence 
enzymes such as ammonium. The chloride might just be there as a result of dissolution of 
ammonium chloride. So, the positive correlation is really between ammonium and the 
enzymes activity and GHG fluxes, as found in this study. Additionally, statistically 
significant positive relationship between chloride/ ammonium was found (r = 0.639, p < 0.01, 
data not shown) which could also prove this. 
In the present study, the significant negative relationship with sulfate concentration may be 
linked to the acidifying effect of sulfate and hydrogen ions, which may originate from dilute 
sulfuric acid (H2SO4) in the soil solutions (Gorham 1958). However, no negative correlation 
with pH value was found to confirm this. 
Phosphatase, which is involved in phosphorus cycling, showed significantly higher activity 
than the other enzymes. Similar rates of phosphatase activity have been noted in tropical 
peatlands of Malaysia (Jackson et al. 2009) and Panama (Sjgersten et al. 2011). 
Another important edaphic factor known to affect enzyme activity is pH (Schnecker et al. 
2015, Kang et al. 2018). The declining enzyme activity with depth might therefore be 
expected to be accompanied by a decrease in pH value. Although no statistically big 
significant differences in pH were found between different depths, when correlation analysis 
was conducted on individual measurements, all enzyme activities except S showed a 
statistically significant positive correlation with pH. The stimulation of extracellular enzyme 
activity under high pH conditions can also explain the positive correlations found between 
pH and CO2 and N2O flux rates. Regarding the optimum pH for S enzyme activity, Turner 
(2010) found that soils with a pH of  3.0 had great rates of S activity, while soils with 
around an alkaline pH rang, had a little S activity. 
About the importance of pH for POX activity, the value of pH emerged to be the first agent in 
the control of POX activity, subsequently accelerating the release of DOC across a survey of 
a wide range of peatlands and through field and laboratory manipulation experiments (Kang 
et al. 2018).  
Given the decrease in enzyme activity with depth, the increase in DOC concentration 
between the superficial layer and the dark brown organic layer was unexpected. This could be 
due to the presence of phenolic compounds which tend to constitute a large proportion (50-
75%) of peatland-derived DOC pool (Kang et al. 1998), and was increasing between the 
superficial layer and the dark brown organic layer in the present study. In addition, decreased 
DOC concentration in the superficial layer compared to the deeper organic layers observed 
here is likely related to microbial processes under more aerobic conditions (Freeman et al. 
1993). Also, in the more aerobic conditions of the uppermost layers, the more efficient C 
metabolism tends to produce CO2 rather than DOC (Freeman et al. 1993).   
The low DOC and phenolic compounds concentrations in the mineral layer is likely to be the 
result of low overall SOM. Aside from DOC production, factors affecting DOC solubility are 
also known to affect DOC concentrations (e.g., pH, temperature and conductivity) (Gough et 
al. 2016). 
The % SOM (a substrate for enzyme activity) decreased significantly with depth. There were 
significant negative correlations between % SOM and enzymes activity identified. Previous 
studies have identified positive correlations between soil hydrolytic enzymes and % soil 
organic matter, since a greater availability of substrate will inevitably support higher 
microbial activity (Schnecker et al. 2015). The absence of a positive relationship between 
enzyme activity and SOM in the present study suggests that the chemistry of SOM also 
strongly influences substrate availability for enzymic decomposition (Schnecker et al. 2015).  
Globally, altered tropical peatlands are considered as critical carbon sources affecting on the 
atmospheric GHG composition (Jauhiainen et al. 2012, IPCC 2014). International interest in 
GHG emissions from tropical peatlands is growing, especially in the heavily degraded Asian 
peatlands, due to the large-scale human disturbance (Gumbricht et al. 2017). In contrast to 
the peatlands of Southeast Asia, where most tropical peatland studies of GHG emissions have 
occurred so far, the tropical peatlands of South America remain poorly understood. 
Jackson et al. (2009) examined the structure and the enzymatic activity of the prokaryotic 
community at several depths (between 0 to 50 cm) in tropical peatlands in Malaysia and 
found that each depth hosted different prokaryotic assemblages, with the upper few 
centimetres being more populated than the deeper layers. They only excluded archaeal 
community that were limited to the deeper layers (20-50 cm), where anoxic conditions are 
thought to facilitate their growth. In this study, mean CH4 flux varied with depth, with higher 
flux recorded in the deeper organic layers (10-40 and 40-90 cm), suggesting that the 
abundance of methanogenic Archaea was low in the superficial layer (0-10 cm) and increased 
with depth. This finding is similar to that shown in other peatland studies (Kotsyurbenko et 
al. 2004, Dedysh et al. 2006). Unlike CO2, CH4 fluxes seemed unaffected by phenolics 
concentration, perhaps because the inhibitory effect of phenolic compounds is mainly on the 
breakdown of more labile C compounds in the soil litter (Dunn 2013), while CH4 can also be 
generated through the hydrogenotrophic pathway (CO2 reacting with H2 directly to form the 
CH4), which does not involve the breakdown of organic matter (Dunn 2013).  
Regarding N2O flux, which showed insignificant variation with depth, strong positive 
correlations were found between chitinase, (relating to the degradation of N-rich structural 
compounds) and ammonium concentration, between chitinase and N2O flux and between 
N2O flux and ammonium concentration. This suggests that the nitrogen released in N-rich 
chitin degradation could contribute to the N2O production processes (Knnen et al. 2018).  
Organic carbon supplies are required by heterotrophic microorganisms as energy sources 
promoting microbial processes such as denitrification (Kayranli et al. 2010). In this regard, 
strong positive correlations between N2O fluxes and both oxidative (POX) and hydrolytic 
enzymes (B, X and N) were found. Similarly, Kang et al. (1998) found that the N2O emission 
increased with increasing -glucosidase activity (used as an indicator of labile carbon 
availability) in a Welsh peatland. 
3.6. Conclusions 
Our study aimed to investigate and explain variations in extracellular enzyme activities and 
soil respiration with depth within a Colombian peatland in the Andean mountains of south 
American continent, which have received relatively little attention in the literature, despite 
the fact that they represent a major contribution to global tropical peatland coverage (750 000 
km2) and volume (3 117 Gm3). In this study, extracellular enzymes activity (hydrolases and 
phenol oxidase) and the production of greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were investigated 
at different depths in a tropical peatland of the Andes, Colombia. In addition, the associations 
between these variables and pH, conductivity, nutrient concentration (cations and anions), 
phenolic compound concentration, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, and soil 
water and soil organic matter (SOM) content were assessed. 
In agreement with previous studies of tropical peatlands and other soil ecosystems, a general 
decrease in extracellular enzymes activity with depth was found and attributed to a 
combination of factors including decreasing pH, oxygen content, utilizable organic matter 
and increasing recalcitrant compounds concentration. Strong associations were found 
between enzyme activities and electrical conductivity, pH, water content and the 
concentrations of some nutrients. 
Given the decrease in enzymes activity with depth, the increase in DOC concentration 
between the superficial layer and the dark brown organic layer was unexpected. This could be 
due to the presence of phenolic compounds which are known to constitute a large proportion 
(50-75%) of the peatland-derived DOC pool, and was increasing between the superficial 
layer and the dark brown organic layer in the present study, with a significant positive 
correlation being found between the two factors (DOC concentration and phenolics 
concentration).  
The strong link between enzyme activities and decomposition rate (as indicated by CO2 and 
N2O flux) was also evident in the data of this study. Variations in GHG flux with depth can 
also be attributed to differences in the composition of the microbial community (e.g., the 
abundance of methanogens) in response to depth-related variations in abiotic conditions.  
The strong positive relationships between all hydrolytic enzyme activities and POX activity 
found in this study have been reported previously and reflect the catalytic role of POX on 
hydrolytic enzymes. The significant negative relationships with phenolic concentrations 
support the suppressing role of phenolics on enzymes activities and the resulting soil 
respiration. Altogether could support the enzymic latch mechanism. 
A significant positive correlation was found between ammonium concentration and all 
extracellular enzymes activity and soil respiration (CO2 and N2O), indicating that increased N 
content poses a significant risk to peatlands function. 
The significant inverse correlations found between S enzyme activity and sulfate ions 
concentration and between P enzyme activity and phosphate ions concentration support the 
economic model of microbial enzymes production. 
The statistically significant correlations with pH confirm the importance of pH in affecting 
decomposition rates of peatlands. 
This baseline information could contribute to the environment of moss-dominated peatlands 
in Colombian Andes, and more specifically will provide important knowledge for use by 
Sumapaz National Park employers in managing natural parks.  
Studying biogeochemical processes and the abiotic variables controlling them in peatlands 
has important implications for predicting the potential impacts of climate change, human 
intervention and management strategies on peatlands function. Further and more thorough 
studies are needed for better understanding the patterns in microbial community composition 
and function at each depth in light of the dominant environmental variables. 
3.7. Acknowledgments  
This research was funded by the Saudi Arabian government. I would also like to thank Dr 
Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, for collecting the 
samples and providing details of field conditions. I am also grateful for the supervision of 
Professor Christopher Freeman, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University. 
3.8. References 
Baldrian, P., Kolak, M., tursov, M., Kopeck, J., Valkov, V., Vtrovsk, T., 
ifkov, L., najdr, J., Rdl, J., Vlek, . and Vokov, J., 2012. Active and total 
microbial communities in forest soil are largely different and highly stratified during 
decomposition. The ISME Journal, 6(2), p. 248. 
Benavides, J.C., Vitt, D.H. and Wieder, R.K., 2013. The influence of climate change on 
recent peat accumulation patterns of Distichia muscoides cushion bogs in the highelevation 
tropical Andes of Colombia. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 118(4), pp. 
1627-1635. 
Blume, E., Bischoff, M., Reichert, J.M., Moorman, T., Konopka, A. and Turco, R.F., 2002. 
Surface and subsurface microbial biomass, community structure and metabolic activity as a 
function of soil depth and season. Applied Soil Ecology, 20(3), pp. 171-181. 
Bradley, R.S., Vuille, M., Diaz, H.F. and Vergara, W., 2006. Threats to water supplies in the 
tropical Andes. Science, 312(5781), pp. 1755-1756. 
Bragazza, L., Freeman, C., Jones, T., Rydin, H., Limpens, J., Fenner, N., Ellis, T., Gerdol, R., 
Hjek, M., Hjek, T. and Iacumin, P., 2006. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition promotes 
carbon loss from peat bogs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103(51), pp. 19386-19389.  
Box, J.D., 1983. Investigation of the Folin-Ciocalteau phenol reagent for the determination of 
polyphenolic substances in natural waters. Water Research, 17(5), pp. 249-261. 
Carpenter, A., Siggia, S. and Carter, S., 1976. Separation and/or concentration of phenolic 
materials from dilute aqueous solutions. Analytical chemistry, 48(1), pp.225-228. 
Chen, J., Luo, Y., Li, J., Zhou, X., Cao, J., Wang, R.W., Wang, Y., Shelton, S., Jin, Z., Walker, 
L.M. and Feng, Z., 2017. Co-stimulation of soil glycosidase activity and soil respiration by 
nitrogen addition. Global Change Biology, 23(3), pp. 1328-1337. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed.), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments, pp. 29-59. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Dargie, G.C., Lewis, S.L., Lawson, I.T., Mitchard, E.T., Page, S.E., Bocko, Y.E. and Ifo, 
S.A., 2017. Age, extent and carbon storage of the central Congo Basin peatland 
complex. Nature, 542(7639), p.86. 
Dedysh, S.N., Pankratov, T.A., Belova, S.E., Kulichevskaya, I.S. and Liesack, W., 2006. 
Phylogenetic analysis and in situ identification of bacteria community composition in an 
acidic Sphagnum peat bog. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(3), pp.2110-2117. 
Dinesh, R., Ramanathan, G., and Singh, H., 1995. Influence of chloride and sulphate ions on 
soil enzymes. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 175(2), pp. 129-133. 
Dunn, C., 2013. Generating carbon credits through application of the enzymic latch 
mechanism in peatland carbon sequestration, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Eilers, K.G., Debenport, S., Anderson, S. and Fierer, N., 2012. Digging deeper to find unique 
microbial communities: the strong effect of depth on the structure of bacterial and archaeal 
communities in soil. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 50, pp.58-65. 
Fierer, N., Schimel, J.P. and Holden, P.A., 2003. Variations in microbial community 
composition through two soil depth profiles. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 35(1), pp. 167-
Freeman, C., Lock, M.A. and Reynolds, B., 1993. Impacts of climatic change on peatland 
hydrochemistry, a laboratory-based experiment. Chemistry and Ecology, 8(1), pp. 49-59. 
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Jones, S.E. and Lock, M.A., 1995. The use of fluorogenic 
substrates for measuring enzyme activity in peatlands. Plant and Soil, 175(1), pp. 147-152. 
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Lock, M.A., Reynolds, B. and Hudson, J., 1996. 
Microbial activity and enzymic decomposition processes following peatland water table 
drawdown. Plant and Soil, 180(1), pp.121-127. 
Freeman, C., Ostle, N. and Kang, H., 2001. An enzymic 'latch' on a global carbon store - a 
shortage of oxygen locks up carbon in peatlands by restraining a single enzyme. Nature, 
409(6817), pp. 149-149.  
Freeman, C., Ostle, N.J., Fenner, N. and Kang, H., 2004. A regulatory role for phenol oxidase 
during decomposition in peatlands. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36(10), pp. 1663-1667. 
Fritze, H., Pietikinen, J. and Pennanen, T., 2000. Distribution of microbial biomass and 
phospholipid fatty acids in Podzol profiles under coniferous forest. European Journal of Soil 
Science, 51(4), pp. 565-573. 
Frogbrook, Z.L., Bell, J., Bradley, R.I., Evans, C., Lark, R.M., Reynolds, B., Smith, P. and 
Towers, W., 2009. Quantifying terrestrial carbon stocks: examining the spatial variation in 
two upland areas in the UK and a comparison to mapped estimates of soil carbon. Soil Use 
and Management, 25(3), pp. 320-332. 
Google Maps, 2020, accessed at https //www.google maps on 13/10/2020. 
Gough, R., Holliman, P.J., Fenner, N., Peacock, M. and Freeman, C., 2016. Influence of 
water table depth on pore water chemistry and trihalomethane formation potential in 
peatlands. Water Environment Research, 88(2), pp. 107-117.   
Gorham, E., 1958. Free acid in British soils. Nature, 181(4602), pp. 106-106. 
Gumbricht, T., RomanCuesta, R.M., Verchot, L., Herold, M., Wittmann, F., Householder, 
E., Herold, N. and Murdiyarso, D., 2017. An expert system model for mapping tropical 
wetlands and peatlands reveals South America as the largest contributor. Global Change 
Biology, 23(9), pp. 3581-3599. 
Hodgkins, S. B., Richardson, C. J., Dommain, R., Wang, H., Glaser, P. H., Verbeke, B., and 
Flanagan, N., 2018. Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in 
peat recalcitrance. Nature Communications, 9(1), pp. 1-13. 
Hoyos-Santillan, J., Lomax, B.H., Large, D., Turner, B.L., Boom, A., Lopez, O.R. and 
Sjgersten, S., 2015. Getting to the root of the problem: litter decomposition and peat 
formation in lowland Neotropical peatlands. Biogeochemistry, 126(1-2), pp. 115-129. 
Hsiao, C.J., Sassenrath, G.F., Zeglin, L.H., Hettiarachchi, G.M. and Rice, C.W., 2018. 
Vertical changes of soil microbial properties in claypan soils. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 121, pp. 154-164. 
IPCC, 2014. Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: 
Wetlands, IPCC, Geneva (2014), p. 353. 
Jackson, C.R. and Vallaire, S.C., 2007. Microbial activity and decomposition of fine 
particulate organic matter in a Louisiana cypress swamp. Journal of the North American 
Benthological Society, 26(4), pp. 743-753. 
Jackson, C.R., Liew, K.C. and Yule, C.M., 2009. Structural and functional changes with 
depth in microbial communities in a tropical Malaysian peat swamp forest. Microbial 
Ecology, 57(3), p. 402. 
Jauhiainen, J., Silvennoinen, H., Hmlinen, R., Kusin, K., Limin, S., Raison, R.J. and 
Vasander, H., 2012. Nitrous oxide fluxes from tropical peat with different disturbance history 
and management. Biogeosciences, 9(4), pp. 1337-1350. 
Jauhiainen, J., Silvennoinen, H., Knnen, M., Limin, S. and Vasander, H., 2016. 
Management driven changes in carbon mineralization dynamics of tropical 
peat. Biogeochemistry, 129(1-2), pp. 115-132. 
Jian, S., Li, J., Chen, J., Wang, G., Mayes, M.A., Dzantor, K.E., Hui, D. and Luo, Y., 2016. 
Soil extracellular enzyme activities, soil carbon and nitrogen storage under nitrogen 
fertilization: a meta-analysis. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 101, pp. 32-43. 
Jones, T.G., 2006. Climate change and dissolved organic carbon: impacts on drinking water 
supplies, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp. 449-454.  
Kang, H., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1998. Trace gas emissions from a north Wales fen-
role of hydrochemistry and soil enzyme activity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 105(1-2), pp. 
107-116. 
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
Kayranli, B., Scholz, M., Mustafa, A., and Hedmark, ., 2010. Carbon storage and fluxes 
within freshwater wetlands: a critical review. Wetlands, 30(1), pp. 111-124.  
Kim, S.Y. and Kang, H., 2008. Effects of elevated CO2 on below-ground processes in 
temperate marsh microcosms. Hydrobiologia, 605(1), pp. 123-130. 
Ko, D., Yoo, G., Yun, S.T., Jun, S.C. and Chung, H., 2017. Bacterial and fungal community 
composition across the soil depth profiles in a fallow field. Journal of Ecology and 
Environment, 41(1), p. 34. 
Koh, L.P., Butler, R.A. and Bradshaw, C.J., 2009. Conversion of Indonesia's 
peatlands. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 7(5), pp. 238-238. 
Knnen, M., Jauhiainen, J., Strakov, P., Heinonsalo, J., Laiho, R., Kusin, K., Limin, S. and 
Vasander, H., 2018. Deforested and drained tropical peatland sites show poorer peat substrate 
quality and lower microbial biomass and activity than unmanaged swamp forest. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry, 123, pp. 229-241. 
Kotsyurbenko, O.R., Chin, K.J., Glagolev, M.V., Stubner, S., Simankova, M.V., 
Nozhevnikova, A.N. and Conrad, R., 2004. Acetoclastic and hydrogenotrophic methane 
production and methanogenic populations in an acidic WestSiberian peat bog. Environmental 
Microbiology, 6(11), pp. 1159-1173. 
Li, J., Jian, S., de Koff, J.P., Lane, C.S., Wang, G., Mayes, M.A. and Hui, D., 2018. 
Differential effects of warming and nitrogen fertilization on soil respiration and microbial 
dynamics in switchgrass croplands. GCB Bioenergy, 10(8), pp. 565-576.  
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11.  
Moore, P. D., 2002. The future of cool temperate bogs. Environmental Conservation, 29(1), 
pp. 3-20. 
Niemi, R.M., Vepslinen, M., Wallenius, K., Simpanen, S., Alakukku, L. and Pietola, L., 
2005. Temporal and soil depth-related variation in soil enzyme activities and in root growth 
of red clover (Trifolium pratense) and timothy (Phleum pratense) in the field. Applied Soil 
Ecology, 30(2), pp. 113-125. 
Page, S.E., Rieley, J.O. and Banks, C.J., 2011. Global and regional importance of the tropical 
peatland carbon pool. Global Change Biology, 17(2), pp. 798-818. 
Page, S.E., Rieley, J.O., Shotyk, .W. and Weiss, D., 1999. Interdependence of peat and 
vegetation in a tropical peat swamp forest. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B, 354, pp. 1885-1897. 
Page, S.E., Siegert, F., Rieley, J.O., Boehm, H.D.V., Jaya, A. and Limin, S., 2002. The 
amount of carbon released from peat and forest fires in Indonesia during 
1997. Nature, 420(6911), p. 61. 
Pind, A., Freeman, C. and Lock, M.A., 1994. Enzymic degradation of phenolic materials in 
peatlandsmeasurement of phenol oxidase activity. Plant and Soil, 159(2), pp. 227-231. 
Qualls, R.G. and Haines, B.L., 1990. The influence of humic substances on the aerobic 
decomposition of submerged leaf litter. Hydrobiologia, 206(2), pp. 133-138. 
Rieley, J.O., Ahmad-Shah, A.A., Brady, M.A., 1996. The extent and nature of tropical peat 
swamps. In: Maltby, E., Immirzi, C.P., Safford, R.J. (eds.), Tropical lowland peatlands of 
Southeast Asia. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland, pp. 1753. 
Ruiz, D., Moreno, H.A., Gutirrez, M.E. and Zapata, P.A., 2008. Changing climate and 
endangered high mountain ecosystems in Colombia. Science of the Total 
Environment, 398(1-3), pp. 122-132. 
Schnecker, J., Wild, B., Takriti, M., Alves, R.J.E., Gentsch, N., Gittel, A., Hofer, A., Klaus, 
K., Knoltsch, A., Lashchinskiy, N. and Mikutta, R., 2015. Microbial community composition 
shapes enzyme patterns in topsoil and subsoil horizons along a latitudinal transect in Western 
Siberia. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 83, pp. 106-115. 
Senga, Y., Hiroki, M., Terui, S. and Nohara, S., 2015. Variation in microbial function 
through soil depth profiles in the Kushiro wetland, north-eastern Hokkaido, Japan. Ecological 
Research, 30(4), pp. 563-572. 
Sesana, L., 2006. Colombia Natural Parks. Bogot DC (Colombia): Villegas Asociados. 
Sinsabaugh, R. L., Antibus, R. K., Linkins, A. E., McClaugherty, C. A., Rayburn, L., Repert, 
D., and Weiland, T., 1993. Wood decomposition: nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in 
relation to extracellular enzyme activity. Ecology, 74(5), pp. 1586-1593. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., Lauber, C.L., Weintraub, M.N., Ahmed, B., Allison, S.D., Crenshaw, C., 
Contosta, A.R., Cusack, D., Frey, S., Gallo, M.E. and Gartner, T.B., 2008. Stoichiometry of 
soil enzyme activity at global scale. Ecology Letters, 11(11), pp. 1252-1264. 
Sjgersten, S., Cheesman, A.W., Lopez, O. and Turner, B.L., 2011. Biogeochemical processes 
along a nutrient gradient in a tropical ombrotrophic peatland. Biogeochemistry, 104(1-3), pp. 
147-163. 
Stone, M.M., DeForest, J.L. and Plante, A.F., 2014. Changes in extracellular enzyme activity 
and microbial community structure with soil depth at the Luquillo Critical Zone 
Observatory. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 75, pp. 237-247. 
Turetsky, M., Wieder, K., Halsey, L. and Vitt, D., 2002. Current disturbance and the 
diminishing peatland carbon sink. Geophysical Research Letters, 29(11), pp. 21-1. 
Turner, B.L., 2010. Variation in pH optima of hydrolytic enzyme activities in tropical rain 
forest soils. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76(19), pp. 6485-6493. 
Waldrop, M.P., Zak, D.R., Sinsabaugh, R.L., Gallo, M. and Lauber, C., 2004. Nitrogen 
deposition modifies soil carbon storage through changes in microbial enzymatic 
activity. Ecological Applications, 14(4), pp. 1172-1177. 
Wan, X., Xiang, W., Wan, N., Yan, S., Bao, Z. and Wang, Y., 2018. Complexation and 
reduction of iron by phenolic substances: implications for transport of dissolved Fe from 
peatlands to aquatic ecosystems and global iron cycling. Chemical Geology, 498, pp. 128-
Whitmore, T.C., 1984. Tropical Rain Forests of the Far East, 2nd edition. Clarendon Press. 
Whitten, T., Damanik, S.J., Anwar, J., Hisyam, N., 2000. The Ecology of Sumatra. Periplus, 
Singapore. 
Wieder, R.K., 2001. Past, present, and future peatland carbon balance: An empirical model 
based on 210Pbdated cores. Ecological Applications, 11(2), pp. 327-342. 
Wright, A.L. and Reddy, K.R., 2001. Phosphorus loading effects on extracellular enzyme 
activity in Everglades wetland soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 65(2), pp. 588-
Zak, D., Roth, C., Unger, V., Goldhammer, T., Fenner, N., Freeman, C., and Jurasinski, G., 
2019. Unravelling the importance of polyphenols for microbial carbon mineralization in 
rewetted riparian peatlands. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 7, p. 147. 
Chapter 4 
  Environmental controls on biogeochemical processes in a 
temperate Welsh peatland 
4.1. Abstract  
Improving the knowledge of the physicochemical factors affecting enzymic decomposition 
processes in peatlands is essential in order to predict the potential impacts of climate change 
and human exploitation and hence enable the development of effective peatland management 
strategies. Temperate peatlands are one of threatened peat-rich area due to the on-going 
climate change and human exploitation, which indicates that they warrant attention. In the 
present study, the effect of substrate depth on enzymes activity, greenhouse gas (GHG) 
production rates and different abiotic variables were examined and the relationships between 
them were investigated. 
The quantity and the quality of soil organic matter decrease with depth, and so soil enzyme 
activity was likewise expected to decrease with depth. Indeed, and in agreement with 
previous studies of temperate peatlands and other soil ecosystems, the highest mean enzyme 
activity tended to occur in the superficial layer and lowest enzyme activity was consistently 
found in the depth of > 60 cm. Interestingly, pH values, which ranged from 3.8 to 5.4, 
showed a significant positive correlation with each of the hydrolytic enzymes measured. 
Phenol oxidase (POX) activity did not vary significantly between depths despite presumed 
differences in oxygen concentration with depth. This observation could be related to the pH 
(which more strongly influences POX activity), not differing significantly between the 
different layers, although no statistically significant correlation was found between POX 
activity and pH. Additionally, with phenol oxidase not varying between depths it is 
unsurprising that phenolic concentrations (substrate for the enzyme) did not vary significantly 
between depths. However, no statistically significant correlation was found between POX 
activity and phenolics concentration. 
The activities of enzymes (except chitinase) and gaseous fluxes appeared unaffected by the 
concentration of phenolic compounds. These results suggest that phenolics are not always 
efficient inhibitors of microbial metabolism and that the forms, source and the chemical 
composition of phenolic compounds could play an important role in affecting the activities of 
soil extracellular enzymes. 
The absence of a positive association between enzyme activities and metabolic end products 
suggests that the measured activities were not due to de-novo enzyme synthesis but rather due 
to legacy enzymes. Legacy enzymes are enzymes immobilised in humus-enzyme or clay-
enzyme complexes. These enzymes are very stable and resistant to biological, physical and 
chemical degradation. They may persist independently in soils for far longer than the soil 
microbes from which they were synthesised.  
The mean flux of methane (CH4) was highest in the deeper soil layers, suggesting that 
methanogens are better adapted to the anaerobic conditions of the deeper peat layers. The 
production of soil enzymes is often driven by poor nutrient availability, as observed by an 
inverse correlation between enzyme activity and nutrients. However, the lack of statistically 
significant negative relationships between enzyme activity and nutrients in the present study 
confirms the importance of legacy enzymes that are present in large amounts in the soil and 
are independent of microbial regulation and thus do not respond to nutrient availability. 
4.2. Introduction 
An imbalance between the rates of organic matter decomposition and production means that 
peatlands are an extremely important store of terrestrial carbon (Potter et al. 2017) and are 
therefore an important component of the global carbon cycle (Yu et al. 2011). However, 
climate change threatens to alter the biogeochemical processes that occur in peatland 
ecosystems (Moore 2002) including temperate peatlands (Potter et al. 2017). Climate change 
including global warming is predicted to increase water loss and drought in peatlands. The 
associated oxygen ingress, combined with higher temperatures will result in higher enzymic 
decomposition rates, threatening their carbon sink status and causing the contraction of other 
peatland services such as drinking water production. The switching of peatlands from carbon 
sinks to carbon sources will also add a positive feedback to the global warming problem. In 
this context, it is important to study the conditions that influence the activities of soil 
enzymes responsible for peat decomposition as a prerequisite for predicting the ecosystem 
response to climate change, human utilization and management policies (Moore 2002). 
Indeed, rising concern about the potential consequences of climate change on soil metabolic 
processes in peat-forming ecosystems has stimulated a significant amount of experimental 
research focussed on the development of methods for enhancing ecosystem services and 
carbon sequestration (Freeman et al. 2012). 
In the UK, where temperate climatic conditions exist, peatlands cover around 24,640 km2 
(15% of the total area), store 2,302 Megatons (Mt) of carbon (Billett et al. 2010) and 
represent over 10% of the global peat store (IUCN 2014). Over 80% of the UKs peatlands 
have been the focus of protection and restoration efforts, following damage resulting from 
cultivation, drainage, peat extraction for fuel, grazing and burning (Holden et al. 2007). A 
report by the Committee on Climate Change (2013) went as far as to say that only 4% of 
peatlands in the UK are considered to be in good condition and are actively accumulating 
peat (Committee on Climate Change 2013). In Wales, where the present study is focused, 732 
km2 of land is occupied by peatlands, which are reported to store 119 Mt of carbon (Billett et 
al. 2010). 
Over several decades, scientists have made significant progress in understanding the role of 
enzymes in soil fertility and plant growth. More recently, the role of enzymes in carbon 
cycling and climate change has attracted growing attention (Dunn et al. 2014). 
The effects of soil properties including physical and chemical conditions on soil enzymes 
activity in peatland ecosystems are frequently debated (Pind et al. 1994, Freeman et al. 1995, 
1996, Moore 2002, Freeman et al. 2004, Freeman et al. 2012, Kang et al. 2018) in order to 
relate specific microbial processes to a narrow range of environmental properties. As the 
climate continues to change, understanding the relationship between biogeochemical 
processes and environmental variables in temperate peatlands, which are extensive and 
important pools for atmospheric carbon, is especially important (Moore 2002, Leifeld and 
Menichetti 2018).  
Compared with previous studies, the range of biogeochemical and environmental parameters 
investigated here has been extended. All of these parameters were measured across different 
depths. The statistically significant relationships between all measured parameters in a Welsh 
peatland in the Snowdonia National Park, UK were assessed. The activities of -glucosidase 
(B), arylsulfatase (S), xylosidase (X), phosphatase (P), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase or 
chitinase (N) and phenol oxidase (POX) within different substrate layers were analysed. 
Greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4 and N2O) emissions were also measured. Various 
physicochemical properties including dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, pH, 
conductivity, soil water content, soil organic matter content, phenolic concentration and 
cation and anion concentration were measured to test the hypothesis that the variation in 
enzymes activity and GHG production with depth is driven by soil physicochemical 
properties. 
4.3. Materials and methods 
4.3.1. Study site 
Six Sphagnum-dominated peatland sites located in the Migneint Valley (Snowdonia National 
Park), North Wales, UK were sampled at the beginning of September 2016 (Figure 4.01). 
More detailed maps were unavailable for peatland distribution in Wales. Annual rainfall in 
this area is 2,400 mm. The study sites were covered by Sphagnum spp, Juncus spp, and Carex 
spp interspersed with some cotton grasses such as Eriophorum spp and some Calluna 
vulgaris (common heather). Peat cores were collected from six sites with three replicates for 
each site (Figure 4.02).  
Figure 4.01. Maps of the sampled peatland in North Wales (Source: Google Maps). 
Figure 4.02. Photographs showing six peat 
core extraction locations (pictures a-f refer to 
sites 1-6, respectively). Photograph of typical 
peat core (g) and illustration showing discrete 
layers based on the colour and texture (h) 
(photographer J Mora-Gomez). 
The average air temperature was 14.3C and the water table level was at the soil surface at 
the time of sampling. Abiotic variables such as soil temperature, pH and oxygen 
concentration were measured directly in pore water at the time of sampling using a digital 
thermometer, a Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a dissolved oxygen probe, respectively. All 
the measurements were recorded in the field and are provided in Table 4.01. 
Table 4.01. Peat core locations and basic environmental characteristics of pore waters of the 
studied sites during the time of sampling. Results are presented as the range of the 3 
replicates. 
Location Soil 
temp. 
pH  Soil O2 
conc. 
(mg L-1) 
Coordinates Altitude 
1 12.3-12.6 2.2-3.5 5.0-5.2 5259'45.0"N, 
348'54.6"W 
459 m a.s.l 
2 14.5-15.1 2.7-3.0 3.8-4.3 5259'42.4"N, 
348'58.1"W 
456 m a.s.l 
3 12.3-12.7 3.5-3.8 4.0-4.6 5258'51.8"N, 
350'28.5"W 
468 m a.s.l 
4 12.7-13.2 3.3-3.6 3.3-3.9 5258'18.5"N, 
351'38.1"W 
462 m a.s.l 
5 13.0-13.3 3.3-4.0 4.3-5.2 5258'24.1"N, 
351'41.2"W 
470 m a.s.l 
6 13.0-13.1 3.4-3.5 2.0-3.1 5259'38.6"N, 
349'03.6"W 
455 m a.s.l 
4.3.2. Sample collection and preparation  
At each site, a Russian corer (50 cm long and 10 cm in diameter) was used to extract three 
peat cores from a depth of 1m. After removing the vegetation layer, the cores were separated 
into blond superficial (0-10 cm), light brown (10-40 cm), dark brown (40-60 cm) and black 
organic layers (> 60 cm), based on the degree of decomposition, which was inferred from 
visual assessment of the colour and the texture of the layers (Bayley et al. 2005) (4.02g&h).  
After removal of stones, roots and macroinvertebrates, all samples were placed in separate 
labeled plastic bags and transported to the laboratory in cooled container, where they were 
stored in at 4C until further analysis.  
4.3.2. Soil analyses 
In the present study, the aim was to estimate the emissions of GHG and the activities of 
extracellular enzymes that occur under natural conditions within peatlands. Therefore, field 
conditions were copied as closely as possible by matching the gas production and enzyme 
assay temperature to that recorded in the field. 
4.3.2.1. Enzyme activity analyses 
Analyses were performed within two weeks of collection as previous studies have shown that 
soil enzymes to be stable for this period of time (Dunn et al. 2014). Before conducting any 
analyses, the samples were kept in the incubator at field temperature for around three hours. 
The activity of phenol oxidase (POX) in peat soil samples was determined using a procedure 
adapted from Pind et al. (1994) and Dunn et al. (2014).  Model compound L-DOPA (L-3,4- 
dihydroxy phenylalanine, Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) was used as a substrate for the 
enzymes degradation. The colour change is determined using a spectrophotometer 
measuring at 475 nm, from which the activity of phenol oxidase can be calculated. After 
homogenizing the bag containing the soil sample by hand, two separate 1 g soil samples were 
weighed and placed in two labelled stomacher bags (Seward, West Sussex, UK). After adding 
9 mL of ultrapure water to each bag, these were then placed in a paddle blender (Stomacher 
circulator, Seward) to mix the contents for 30 s on a normal speed setting. A 10 mL of 
ultrapure water was added to one bag, used as a blank. A 10 mL of the substrate (L-DOPA) 
was added to the other, and both bags were mixed for a further 30 s. All bags were then 
incubated at field temperature for 10 min before the bags were removed and mixed by hand. 
For each bag, three 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vials (Eppendorf, Stevenage, UK) were labelled 
and filled with the bags solution. The vials were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. A 300 
L of supernatant from each vial was transferred to a well of a clear 96 well microplate 
(Sterilin, Cambridage, UK). The microplate was then placed on the SpectraMax M2e plate 
reader spectrophotometer and absorbance values measured at = 475 nm. To obtain the 
average absorbance value, the mean absorbance of the three blanks was subtracted from the 
mean absorbance of the three samples containing the substrate. The activity of phenol oxidase 
was then calculated by using Beer-Lambert Law and expressed as mol of formed diqc per 
min per g of soil (dry weight). 
Hydrolase activities were determined using the procedures of Dunn et al. (2014), based on 
the measurement of fluorescence of methylumbelliferone (MUF). In five 1L volumetric 
flasks, the relevant amount of MUF-labeled substrates (4-MUF -D-glucopyranoside for -D-
glucosidase (B), 4-MUF sulfate potassium salt for arylsulfatase (S), 4-MUF -D-
xylopyranoside for -D-xylosidase (X), 4-MUF N-acetyl--D-glucosaminide for N-acetyl--
D-glucosaminidase (N) and 4-MUF phosphate for phosphatase (P)) were dissolved in 20 mL 
of cellosolve solvent (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK), and then ultrapure water was added 
up to the 1L mark. Magnetic stirrers were used if necessary.  
Five 1 g subsamples (one for each MUF substrate) were taken from each bag containing soil 
samples and placed in separate stomacher bags with 7 mL of the relevant substrate (stored at 
field temperature before use). These were homogenized using a Seward Stomacher 80 
Laboratory Blender for 30 s. The stomacher bags were then incubated at field temperature for 
45 min for the enzyme P and 60 min for the other enzymes (B, S, X, and N). The 
homogenates were then mixed by hand and transferred into separate 1.5 mL centrifuge vials, 
which were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. During this time, 50 L of ultrapure 
water was added to black microplate wells (Sterilin, Cambridge, UK). 
At the end of centrifugation, 250 L of the resulting supernatant was extracted from each 
sample and added to the relevant wells on the microplate. Fluorescence of the MUF molecule 
was measured using a microplate fluorometer (Molecular Devices SpectraMax M2e 
spectrophotometer) at 450 nm emission and 330 nm excitation. Hydrolase activities are 
expressed as nmol MUF g-1 of soil min-1. To prepare the calibration curve, 7 mL of ultrapure 
water was added to a stomacher bag (labelled as standard) containing 1 gram of soil sample 
and homogenized as described above. The content from each standard bag was used to fill 
two 2 mL Eppendorf tubes, which were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 mins. Different 
MUF-free acid (Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) concentrations (8 in total) were prepared in 
2 mL Eppendorf tubes using the MUF stock solution (prepared by dissolving the relevant 
amount of 4-methylumbelliferone free acid in 10 mL of cellosolve solvent and 500 mL of 
ultrapure water) and ultrapure water. 
A column of the 8 standard solutions was prepared per soil sample by pipetting 50L from 
each of the standard solution into a series of wells on a black microplate in addition to 250L 
from the supernatant of the two Eppendorf tubes. The microplate was then analyzed as 
before. 
4.3.2.2. Hydrochemistry analyses 
For measurement of pH, conductivity, DOC, phenolic compounds, cations and anions 
concentrations, a soil solution was prepared by adding 5 g of soil sample and 40 mL of 
ultrapure water to a 50 mL centrifuge tube, and shaking on a rotary shaker for 24 h. Allowing 
24h on a rotary shaker ensures that potentially leachable solutes are fully extracted into 
solution. There is some risk that this might allow changes in the microbial community 
(including consumption of solutes, reproduction, metabolism of solutes to other chemical 
forms), however, previous work has shown that without a 24h period it is impossible to be 
certain that the extractable solutes reach their maximum. 
Measurement of pH and electrical conductivity was conducted on un-filtered samples using a 
Mettler Toledo S20 pH meter and a Primo 5 handheld conductivity meter, respectively. 
Samples were then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 30 min. Finally, the supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.45m membrane filter (Whatman, Kent, UK). The supernatant was collected in 
20 mL plastic scintillation vials (Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd) and stored at 4C until 
further analysis.  
Filtered soil water samples were analyzed for their phenolics content using a version of the 
spectrophotometric procedures described by Box (1983). The analysis was run in triplicate, 1 
mL of the sample was placed in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge vial with 50 L of Folins reagent 
and 0.15 mL of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3 used to rise the pH). The same reagents were 
added to 1 mL of each of the chosen standards (0-30 mg L-1 phenol standard solutions were 
chosen in order to prepare a standard curve). All samples and standards were mixed a few 
times and allowed to develop a colour for 1 h 15 min at room temperature before 0.3 mL 
from both standards and samples were transferred to three wells of a clear microplate. 
Phenolic content was then estimated by measuring absorbance at a wavelength of 750 nm 
with a BMG Labtech Fluostar Galaxy microplate reader. 
The concentration of DOC was measured on filtered and acidified samples using a 
Thermalox TOC/TN analyser (Analytical Sciences Ltd) equipped with a non-dispersive 
infrared CO2 analyser. Anion (chloride, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate) and cation (sodium, 
ammonium, magnesium and calcium) concentrations were measured using a Metrohm 850 
Professional Ion Chromatograph. 
4.3.2.3. Soil water and organic matter content measurements 
The water content of the soil samples was determined by oven drying a sample of known 
weight at 105C for 24 h and then reweighing the samples to determine the mass loss. 
Organic matter content was estimated by placing soil samples in the muffle furnace at 550C 
for 200 min and reweighing the samples to calculate mass loss (Frogbrook et al. 2009). 
4.3.2.4. GHG flux measurements 
For GHG flux measurements, 5 g of soil sample from each distinct layer within each core 
was weighed and placed in a 50 mL centrifuge tube with a lid fitted with a rubber septum 
(Fisher Scientific UK Ltd, Loughborough, UK). Using a 10 cm3 gas syringe (Sigma Aldrich 
Ltd, Dorset, UK) with a short hypodermic needle, 10 mL of gas sample was taken from 
inside the tubes as a starting or background concentration (time 1). The tubes were then 
sealed and incubated at field temperature. Every 15 min over a 90 min period, gas samples 
were collected through the pierceable rubber septa. A 10 mL of gas sample was extracted 
from the centrifuge tubes and then injected into labelled 5.9 mL glass screw-cap vials (Labco 
Exetainers Ltd, Lampeter, UK), fitted with a rubber septum in their caps.  
All the exetainers were evacuated three times before use to remove all air, using a 10 mL gas 
syringe. Calibration curves for the three GHGs (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were prepared using gas 
chromatograph (GC) standards of known concentrations. All gas samples and standards, in 
addition to three samples containing atmospheric air as blanks, were placed in the GC rack 
for analysis using a Varian model 450 GC. The instrument was fitted with two different 
detectors, an electron capture detector (ECD) to measure the concentration of N2O and a 
flame ionization detector (FID) with a methaniser to convert CO2 to CH4, for the 
measurement of CO2 and CH4. 
4.3.3. Statistical analyses 
Where conditions were met by the data, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to 
analyse potential significant differences in variables between different depths.  
Tukey HSD post-hoc test was performed to find where the significant differences among 
groups lay at a probability level of 0.05. Calculated F and degrees of freedom are provided as 
well. Significant correlations were determined using Pearson correlation analysis. Statistical 
analysis was carried out using version 22 of the SPSS statistics package. 
4.4. Results 
As can be seen in Table 4.02, highest mean -glucosidase (B) enzyme activity was observed 
in the superficial layer (0-10 cm) (8.80 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and decreased with depth to a 
minimum of 4.55 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in the depth of > 60 cm (Figure 4.03). B enzyme 
activity in the depth of > 60 cm was significantly lower than in all other layers F (3, 64) = 
4.536, P = 0.006. Lowest mean arylsulfatase (S) enzyme activity was observed in the depth 
of > 60 cm (0.4 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and highest activity in depth 10-40 cm (1.37 nmol 
MUF g-1 min-1) (Figure 4.03). Activity in depth of 10-40 cm was significantly higher than 
that in the other layers, except the first layer (0-10 cm), which had significantly higher 
activity than in depth of > 60 cm, F (3, 64) = 6.402, P = 0.001. Mean -D-xylosidase (X) 
enzyme activity decreased with depth from 2.96 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in the superficial layer 
to 2.0 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in > 60 cm (Figure 4.03). No statistically significant differences 
were found between layers F (3, 64) = 2.008, P = 0.122. Mean phosphatase (P) enzyme 
activity also decreased with depth, from 46.4 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in superficial layer to 8.2 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in > 60 cm (Figure 4.03). Mean P enzyme activity was significantly 
higher in the superficial layer than all the other layers. In addition, mean P enzyme activity in 
the depth of 10-40 cm (26.2 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) was significantly higher than > 60 cm, F 
(3, 64) = 13.417, P = 0.000. In comparison, differences in chitinase (N) enzyme activity 
between layers were relatively small, mean N enzyme activity was highest in the depth of 10-
40 cm (4.59 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and lowest in > 60 cm (3.0 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) (Figure 
4.03, Table 4.02). No statistically significant differences were found between soil layers in 
this respect, F (3, 64) = 1.956, P = 0.130.  
Mean phenol oxidase (POX) activity was fairly similar across all layers, ranging from 0.19 in 
the > 60 cm layers to 0.29 mol dicq g-1 min-1 in the superficial layer (Figure 4.03, Table 
4.02). No significant differences between the different layers were identified, F (3, 64) = 
0.260, P = 0.854.  
0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0
Figure 4.03. Extracellular enzymes activity at different depths in the soil profile. Each circle 
represents the mean of the six sampling locations. Error bars represent standard deviation. 
Abbreviations: -glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S), xylosidase (X), N-acetyl--D-
glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX). 
Lowest mean phenolics concentration (2.4 mg L-1) was recorded in the superficial layer and 
the highest in 40-60 cm (3.76 mg L-1). No significant differences were found between the 
different layers, F (3, 64) = 2.354, P = 0.080 (Figure 4.04b, Table 4.02). Highest mean 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration was found in > 60 cm (19.8 mg L-1) and the 
lowest (10.07 mg L-1) in the superficial layer (Figure 4.04a, Table 4.02). Mean DOC 
concentration in layer > 60 cm was significantly higher than in layers 0-10 cm and 10-40 cm. 
Mean DOC concentration in layer 40-60 cm (mean 18.4 mg L-1) was significantly higher than 
in the superficial layer F (3, 64) = 8.370, P = 0.000.  
-2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Enzymes activity (nmol MUF/mol dicq g-1 min-1)
Figure 4.04. Mean DOC (a) and phenolic compound concentration (b) at different depths. 
Error bars represent standard deviation. 
Mean pH was acidic in all layers and ranged from 4.6 in layer 0-10 cm to 4.36 in layer > 60 
cm. No statistically significant differences were found between layers, F (3, 64) = 2.326, P = 
0.083. 
Mean conductivity measurements were similar across all layers (Table 4.02). Highest 
conductivity was observed in the superficial layer (20.2 S/cm) and the lowest in layer > 60 
cm (mean 17.7 S/cm). However, no significant differences were found between the different 
layers, F (3, 64) = 0.408, P = 0.748.  
Mean soil water content was highest in the superficial layer (92.7%) and lowest (84.4%) in 
the depth of > 60 cm, which had significantly lower water content than all other layers, 
except layer 40-60 cm, F (3, 64) = 6.793, P = 0.000 (Table 4.02).  
Mean soil organic matter content (%SOM) was highest in layer 10-40 cm (77.7%) and lowest 
in layer > 60 cm (70.68%). Differences between the layers were not statistically significant, F 
(3, 64) = 0.461, P = 0.710 (Table 4.02). 
Mean CO2 flux decreased with increasing depth (Figure 4.05, Table 4.02), ranged from 9.19 
in the depth > 60 cm to 17.0 g CO2 g
-1 h-1 in the superficial layer. The only statistically 
significant difference was between these two depths (F (3, 64) = 3.036, P = 0.03). By 
contrast, mean CH4 flux tended to increase with increasing depth, with lowest flux observed 
in the first two layers (-1.3 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1and -1.6 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1, respectively) and the higher 
CH4 flux observed in layer > 60 cm (4.9 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1) (Figure 4.05, Table 4.02). However,  
0 10 20 30
40-60
10-40
mg L-1
0 2 4 6 8
40-60
10-40
mg L-1
no statistically significant differences were found between the different layers, F (3, 64) = 
1.310, P = 0.279. Mean N2O flux tended to be higher in the upper two layers (1.69 and 2.15 
ng N2O g
-1 h-1 in layers 1 and 2, respectively) and decreased with increasing depth to a 
minimum of 0.62 ng N2O g
-1 h-1 in layer > 60 cm. Differences between layers were not 
statistically significant, F (3, 64) = 0.661, P = 0.579 (Figure 4.05, Table 4.02). 
Figure 4.05. Mean CO2, CH4 and N2O fluxes at different depths. Error bars represent standard 
deviation. 
Mean chloride concentrations were similar across all layers, ranging from 1.69 mg L-1 in 
layer 10-40 cm to 1.93 mg L-1 in layer > 60 cm. No statistically significant differences were 
identified between layers F (3, 64) = 0.277, P = 0.842. Phosphate concentration also showed 
no statistically significant variation between layers F (3, 64) = 0.311, P = 0.818. The mean 
ranging from 0.17 mg L-1 in layers 40-60 cm and > 60 cm to 0.27 mg L-1 in layer 10-40 cm. 
For nitrate and sulfate, the lowest mean concentration was observed in superficial layer (0.24 
and 1.6 mg L-1, respectively). For nitrate, the highest concentration was observed in the depth 
0 10 20 30
CO2flux (g CO2 g
-1 h-1)
-20 -10 0 10 20 30
CH4&N2O flux (ng CH4&N2O g
-1 h-1)
of > 60 cm (0.8 mg L-1), which was significantly higher than the mean concentrations in the 
first two layers (F (3, 64) = 3.8, P = 0.014).  
For sulfate, the highest concentration was observed in layer 40-60 cm (4.14 mg L-1). The 
concentration in superficial layer was significantly lower than in all other layers (F (3, 64) = 
12.7, P = 0.000). 
For all cations except ammonium, highest mean concentration was observed in the depth of > 
60 cm. Mean sodium concentration ranged from 1.12 mg L-1 in the depth of 10-40 cm to 1.8 
mg L-1 in layer > 60 cm. No statistically significant differences were found between the 
different layers (F (3, 64) = 0.56, P = 0.64). Mean ammonium concentration ranged from 
0.77 mg L-1 in layer > 60 cm to 2.4 mg L-1 in layer 10-40 cm. The mean concentration in 
layers 10-40 cm and 40-60 cm was significantly higher than in 0-10 cm and > 60 cm (F (3, 
64) = 10.0, P = 0.000). Mean calcium concentration ranged from 1.2 mg L-1 in superficial 
layer to 1.6 mg L-1 in layer > 60 cm. No statistically significant differences were identified 
between the different layers (F (3, 64) = 0.114, P = 0.95). Mean magnesium concentration 
ranged from 0.39 mg L-1 in superficial layer to 0.8 mg L-1 in layer > 60 cm. The 
concentration in this layer was significantly higher than in the first two layers (F (3, 64) = 
4.64, P = 0.005).  
The results of the Pearsons correlation analyses are shown in Table 4.03. Several significant 
correlations were found between hydrolase enzyme activities and other measured variables. A 
significant weak positive correlation was identified between POX activity and B activity (p < 
0.05). Significant positive correlations were found between pH and the activities of the five 
hydrolase enzymes (p < 0.01 for the pH/B, pH/X and pH/N correlations and p < 0.05 for the 
pH/S and pH/P correlations). These correlations were weak in the case of B, S and P activity 
and moderate in the case of X and N activity. Figure 4.06 shows the positive correlations 
between pH and hydrolase activity. Significant weak positive correlations were also found 
between soil water content and all hydrolase activities (p < 0.05 for all except the % water/S 
activity correlation, which was significant at the p < 0.01 level). A number of significant 
correlations were found between cation concentration and hydrolase enzyme activity: weak 
positive correlations between ammonium concentration and B and X activity (both p < 0.05), 
a moderate positive correlation between ammonium concentration and N activity (p < 0.01), 
and weak negative correlation between magnesium concentration and P enzyme activity (p < 
0.05). 
Figure 4.06. Regression analysis exhibited the positive correlation between all hydrolytic 
enzyme activities and pH values within Welsh peatland (n = 68). 
Table 4.02. The results of environmental variables from peatlands in Wales based on the 
different depths. The results given as mean  standard deviation. Letter annotations refer to 
significantly different means between different depths identified by Tukey HSD post- hoc test 
(p < 0.05). 
                Layer (cm) 
Variable  
Superficial 
(0-10 cm) (a) 
Light brown 
organic 
(10-40 cm) (b) 
Dark brown 
organic 
(40-60 cm) (c) 
Black organic  
(> 60 cm) (d) 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
8.802.9 
8.252.48 
7.994.47 
4.552.66 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
1.291.08 
1.370.76 
0.60.5 
0.40.2 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
2.960.91 
2.811.09 2.61.27 2.00.7 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
46.428.6 
26.219.9 
14.84.98 
8.23.7 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
4.071.36 
4.591.9 4.22.2 3.01.3 
mol dicq g-1 min-1 
0.290.31 
0.220.29 0.230.2 0.190.3 
Phenolics 
mg L-1 
2.41.25 
3.752.0 
3.762.2 2.91.5 
mg L-1 
10.074.48 
13.65.7 
18.47.09 
19.87.6 
pH 4.60.2 
4.50.2 4.460.38 
4.360.28 
Conductivity 
S cm-1 
20.28.9 18.16.0 18.876.8 17.74.4 
Water 
92.72.36 
91.972.5 
87.55.75 
84.411.0 
76.117.2 
77.715.3 73.014.96 70.6826.8 
g CO2 g
-1 h-1 
17.08.36 
15.277.86 10.86.4 9.196.58 
ng CH4 g
-1 h-1 
-1.311.5 
-1.63.0 
0.713.8 
4.917.5 
ng N2O g
-1 h-1 
1.693.1 
2.155.8 
0.791.6 0.621.7 
Chloride 
mg L-1 
1.880.76 
1.690.63 1.921.0 1.931.2 
Nitrate 
mg L-1 
0.240.14 
0.340.23 
0.40.3 
0.81.06 
Phosphate 
mg L-1 
0.260.49 
0.270.29 0.170.36 
0.170.39 
Sulfate 
mg L-1 
1.60.6 
3.361.26 
4.141.4 
3.251.7 
Sodium 
mg L-1 
1.581.28 
1.120.30 1.651.3 1.81.75 
Ammonium 
mg L-1 
0.80.67 
2.41.5 
1.81.2 
0.770.7 
Calcium 
mg L-1 
1.21.7 
1.52.25 1.52.0 1.62.0 
Magnesium 
mg L-1 
0.390.24 
0.440.35 
0.60.36 
0.80.47 
Table 4.03. Pearson correlation analysis between soil properties, enzymes activity and soil 
respiration (n = 68) (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001). Abbreviations: -glucosidase 
(B), arylsulfatase (S), xylosidase (X), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) (N), 
phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX), electrical conductivity (EC), dissolved organic 
carbon (DOC), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and soil organic 
matter (SOM). Significant correlations are shown in bold. 
 B S X N P POX 
S .422**      
X .648** .714**     
N .521** .558** .738**    
P 0.145 0.225 0.166 0.227   
POX .263* -.027 .053 .079 -.047  
Phenolic .144 .103 .166 .397** .072 -.171 
DOC -0.078  -0.190  -0.190  0.047  -.360  0.049  
pH .379** .301* .424** .492** .304* .155 
EC .058 -.036 -.046 -.099 -.187 .156 
% water .278* .312** .291* .307* .307* .037 
% SOM -.055 .116 -.030 -.019 .045 -.003 
CO2 0.140  0.140  0.168  0.084  0.231  0.083  
CH4 -0.149  -0.206  -0.236  -0.184  -.326  -0.003  
N2O 0.060  .248  0.076  -0.012  .251  -0.042  
Chloride .168 -.049 .038 .068 -.105 .068 
Nitrate -.207 -.160 -.170 -.340 -.297 -.077 
Phosphate 0.127  -0.056  0.045  0.012  -0.163  -0.120  
Sulfate 0.075  -0.159  0.084  0.173  -.420
**  0.030  
Sodium .282  0.037  0.207  0.039  -0.153  0.057  
Ammonium .248*  0.211  .307
*  .494
**  -0.180  0.152  
Calcium 0.032  -0.198  -0.193  -0.112  -0.070  -0.035  
Magnesium -0.075 -0.231 -0.095 -0.094 -.253* 0.097 
                                                                                                             Continued. 
 Phenolic DOC pH EC % 
water 
CO2 CH4 N2O 
DOC .519** 
pH .190 -0.170 
EC -.406** -0.066 
-.309*       
% water .193 -.279* 
.492** -.130      
% SOM .280* 0.112 
.251* -.229 .572**     
CO2 -0.012 
-0.097 
.252* 0.054 
.297* 
0.151 
CH4 -0.134 
0.138 
-0.196 
0.082 
-0.195 
-0.037 
-0.172 
N2O 0.085 
-.250 
-0.020 
-0.167 
0.090 
0.036 
.278* 
-0.016 
Chloride .033 0.201  .024 .347
** -.092 -.230 .193 -0.073  -0.217 
Nitrate -.310* -0.006  -.346
** .083 -.391** -.380** -0.067  .188  -0.030 
Phosphate -0.018 
0.006  0.005  0.151  0.042 
-0.232 
0.099  -0.059  -0.235 
Sulfate 0.048 
0.227  -0.141  0.200  -0.113 
-.305* 
0.011  0.022  -0.182 
Sodium -0.032 
0.072  -0.011  0.197  -0.032 
-0.094 
0.126  -.036 -0.162 
Ammonium .447** 
.300* 0.160  -0.040  .278
0.221 
-0.066  -0.100  -0.089 
Calcium -0.057 
0.155  -0.046  .351
** -0.225 
-.382** 
0.156  0.032  -0.146 
Magnesium 0.150 .342** -0.224 0.101 -0.123 -0.022 -0.047 0.065 -0.077 
4.5. Discussion 
The extracellular enzyme activities reported in the present study are within the range of 
enzyme activities reported previously from Welsh peatlands (Pind et al. 1994, Freeman et al. 
1995, Kang et al. 1998, Kang and Freeman 1999) using a MUF-substrate-based method and 
L-DOPA-substrate-based method for measurement of soil hydrolase and phenol oxidase 
activities, respectively. 
The activities of -glucosidase (B), arylsulfatase (S) and phosphatase (P) decreased at depths 
of greater than 40 cm, while for xylosidase (X), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) 
(N) and phenol oxidase (POX) activities, data analysis demonstrated that there were no 
significant differences between the different depths. Generally, the highest mean enzymes 
activity tended to occur in the superficial layer and the lowest was consistently found in the 
depth of > 60 cm. These results are consistent with previous studies showing a reduction in 
enzyme activities with depth. Specifically, in Welsh peatland soils, Freeman et al. (1995) 
followed the depth-dependent variations in the activities of -glucosidase, arylsulfatase and 
phosphatase. They observed that the activities of the three enzymes declined with increasing 
depth. The -glucosidase, arylsulfatase and phosphatase data reinforce their finding of a 
depth-dependent decrease in enzymes activity. 
A previous study on Welsh peat cores also showed a gradual reduction in POX activity with 
depth, resulting in higher phenolics concentrations at greater depths, thereby further 
inhibiting hydrolytic enzymes activity (Pind et al. 1994). Although oxygen concentration did 
not measure at each depth, this is thought to relate to a decrease in oxygen concentration with 
depth, which inhibits enzyme activity (Pind et al. 1994, Freeman et al. 2004, Fenner and 
Freeman 2011, Bonnett et al. 2017, Potter et al. 2017). The inhibitory effects of phenolic 
compounds on hydrolytic enzymes activity and microbial growth are widely known (Fung et 
al. 1985, Freeman et al. 2004, Opelt et al. 2007, Mellegrd et al. 2009, Fenner and Freeman 
2011, Pizzolitto et al. 2015). In the present study however no statistically significant 
difference in POX activity were identified between depths. Nor were there any negative 
correlations between hydrolytic enzymes activity and phenolics concentration as would be 
expected according to the enzyme latch theory (Freeman et al. 2001). In fact, the only 
significant correlation between hydrolase enzyme activity and phenolics concentration was a 
positive correlation involving N enzyme activity, which could suggest a high demand for N 
element involved in phenolics chemical structure (e.g., lignin) (Li et al. 2018). This 
observation is in line with other studies that have identified a significant stimulation in 
hydrolase activities after low molecular weight phenolics were added (e.g., Dunn 2013). This 
observation suggests that at the time of this study, the phenolics measured in Wales may have 
lower molecular weight, and therefore they served as an enzyme substrate. In agreement with 
this suggestion, Fierer et al. (2001) observed that low molecular weight phenolics represented 
a labile substrate, inducing organic matter mineralization. 
 In addition, the fluxes of CO2, CH4 and N2O were unaffected by phenolic compounds, 
suggesting variations in the form, composition and the source of phenolic compounds, may 
be driving variations in enzyme activities and the resultant metabolic end products (Hoostal 
and Bouzat 2008, Min et al. 2015).  
A study of the effect of POX additions on hydrolase activities has shown that the addition of 
POX to Welsh peat slurries appeared to increase the activity of the enzymes B, S and P 
concurrent with a marked decline in inhibitory phenolics (Freeman et al. 2004). Similarly, 
Jones (2006) found strong relationships between the activities of B, S and P and the activity 
of POX at Welsh bog soils. The data regarding the positive relationship between POX and B 
activity supported their finding. However, no inverse correlation with phenolic concentrations 
was recorded here to confirm this (Bending and Read 1997, Tian and Shi 2010). 
In the present study, the concentrations of phenolic compounds were on average higher in the 
deeper depths than the upper layer. This observation could be due to POX activity, which is 
responsible for the transformation of phenolics (Fenner and Freeman 2011), as this enzyme 
did not differ significantly between the different layers. The lack of variation in POX activity 
between depths despite presumed differences in oxygen concentration with depth, could be 
due to the pH, which more strongly influences POX activity (Tahvanainen and Haraguchi 
2013, Kang et al. 2018), did not differ significantly between the different layers.  
Although some statistically significant differences in mean nutrient concentrations were 
found between different depths, no consistent pattern was identified. A number of statistically 
significant correlations were found between anion and cation concentrations and enzyme 
activities, the relative rise in S enzyme activity at the depths of 0-10 cm was concurrent with 
the relatively low sulfate concentrations at the same depth. Nevertheless, no inverse 
correlation was found between S enzyme activity and sulfate concentration. Also, no inverse 
correlation was found between P enzyme activity and phosphate concentration to confirm the 
economic model of enzymes production, which predicts that the lesser the nutrient 
availability, the more soil microbial enzyme activity and vice versa (Chrst 1991, Li et al. 
2019). This result is in line with the findings of Kang and Freeman (1999) who did not find 
an inverse correlation between S activity/sulfate concentration and between P 
activity/phosphate concentration in each studied sites of Welsh peatland. The lack of these 
relationships was attributed to the legacy enzymes which are defined as immobilised enzymes 
usually presented in large amounts in the soil and are independent of microbial regulation and 
thus do not respond to nutrient availability. These enzymes are very stable and resistant to 
biological, physical and chemical degradation. They may persist independently in soils for far 
longer than the soil microbes from which they were synthesised (Burns 1982, Kang and 
Freeman 1999). 
A higher N enzyme activity was observed consistent with an increase in the concentration of 
ammonium ions (Bayley et al. 2005, Jones 2006). Indeed, a positive relationship between N 
activity/ ammonium concentration was identified in this study (r = 0.494, p < 0.01). 
According to Bragazza et al. (2006), when more nitrogen is available, living Sphagnum moss 
will synthesize proteins over polyphenols and thus eventually lowering phenolics level in the 
litter, which in turn limit enzyme inhibition and promote soil metabolism. Similarly, Lu et al. 
(2011) mentioned that N element availability stimulated the activities of hydrolytic C-
acquiring enzymes, leading to elevated soil organic matter mineralisation and the release of C 
in gaseous and aqueous forms. Indeed, a positive correlation was identified here between 
ammonium/B activity, ammonium/X activity and ammonium/phenolics and DOC 
concentrations, suggesting that (although N cycling processes could change during the 
duration of soil storage; DeForest 2009) N enrichment may have had a stimulatory effect on 
the activities of hydrolytic enzymes, potentially leading to greater decomposition of labile 
compounds and weakening the C sequestration capacity of peatlands (Jian et al. 2016, Chen 
et al. 2017, Li et al. 2018).  
The pH did not vary significantly with depth, but significant positive correlations were 
identified between pH and each of the hydrolytic enzymes measured, suggesting that pH 
values, ranged from 3.8 to 5.4, were somewhat optimal for hydrolase activities in Wales. In 
addition, a positive correlation was found between pH and CO2 release (r = 0.252, p < 0.05). 
Overall, the positive correlations between hydrolyses/%water, hydrolyses/pH, CO2/pH and 
CO2/%water suggest that despite waterlogged conditions, labile carbon was mineralised 
hydrolytically under the favourable pH, resulting in high fluxes of CO2 (Guggenberger et al. 
1994). However, no positive correlation was found between hydrolase enzyme activities and 
CO2 fluxes to confirm this. 
Various studies have reported enhanced phenol oxidase activity under high pH conditions 
(Pind et al. 1994, Williams et al. 2000), which in turn leading to increased DOC production 
(Fenner and Freeman 2011, Kang et al. 2018). In the present study, neither phenol oxidase 
activity nor DOC concentrations showed significant correlations with pH. The most likely 
explanation for the lack of responses of POX activity to the pH is that all the samples of the 
present study were acidic, creating suboptimal condition for the action of oxidative enzymes, 
which require a pH level between around neutral to alkaline (Pind et al. 1994, Kang et al. 
2018). Also, the range of pH values in the samples was relatively narrow, which may give 
another explanation for the lack of a significant correlation between the two variables.  
The statistically significant positive correlations between pH and each of the hydrolytic 
enzymes and the absence of a correlation between pH and POX activity are agreed with a 
previous study on acidic soils by Xue et al. (2016). 
Mean DOC concentration increased with depth in the present study. This result was 
unexpected given that some previous studies report a decrease in pore water DOC 
concentration with depth (e.g., Freeman et al. 1993). Decreased DOC concentration in the 
superficial layer compared to the deeper layers observed here is likely attributed to microbial 
processes under more aerobic conditions (Freeman et al. 1993). Additionally, in the more 
aerobic conditions of the uppermost layers, the more efficient C metabolism tends to produce 
CO2 rather than DOC (Freeman et al. 1993). The range of DOC concentration (10.07-19.8 
mg L-1) in this study is higher than what has been previously reported from Welsh peatland 
(Freeman et al. 1993). 
The positive correlation observed here between DOC concentration and phenolic 
concentrations is expected since phenolic compounds are a constituent of DOC (Wetzel 1992, 
Freeman et al. 1996).  
The emissions of CO2, CH4 and N2O were not significantly affected by the activities of 
measured enzymes. A possible explanation for the lack of any positive correlations between 
enzyme activity and microbial respiration may be that the measured activities were for the 
legacy enzymes that were already present in the soil rather than the generalised measurement 
of microbial metabolic process that includes de-novo enzyme synthesis, which is usually 
associated with microbial respiratory activity. This finding is supported up by a previous 
study of a Welsh peat soils (Freeman et al. 1996). 
An expected positive correlation was found between conductivity and chloride (r = 0.347, p < 
0.01), and conductivity/ calcium (r = 0.351, p < 0.01) since both are a measure of ionic 
strength.  
A reduction in % water content with depth may reflect decreasing % SOM with depth. In the 
present study, a significant strong positive correlation was found between % water and % 
SOM contents (r = 0.572, p < 0.01), because, and unlike mineral content, organic matter can 
hold substantial amounts of water (Dunn 2013). A significant positive correlation was found 
here between the percentage of water content and all the activities of hydrolytic enzymes, 
indicating that water unavailability may constrain the activities of hydrolase and the drought 
conditions could reduce the production of hydrolytic enzymes, as microbial biomass declines 
(Allison and Vitousek 2005, Sardans and Penuelas 2005, Sowerby et al. 2005, Steinweg et al. 
2013).  In agreement with the findings of this study, a very recent study in temperate Chinese 
peatlands has described a strong dependence of soil enzymes activity on soil moisture (Song 
et al. 2019). 
Jobbgy and Jackson (2000) observed that the content of SOM varied vertically and 
horizontally in soil. However, no significant differences were recorded here between the 
different depths in this respect, probably due to the lack of variation in most of the enzyme 
activities along the Welsh soil profile in addition to there was little influence from mineral 
material (Schnecker et al. 2015).  
A general decrease in CO2 flux was observed, and an increase in CH4 flux with increasing 
depth, consistent with a shift towards methanogenic Archaea as a result of increasingly 
anoxic conditions (Kotsyurbenko et al. 2004, Dedysh et al. 2006). Similarly, DOC 
concentration was significantly higher in the deeper layer, all of which suggest that under 
anaerobic conditions of deep layers of peat, fermentative metabolisms are prevalent, inducing 
the production of CH4 and DOC (Bonnett et al. 2017). Indeed, Fenner and Freeman (2011) 
and Gough et al. (2016) reported that under anoxic conditions, anaerobic metabolism 
becomes dominant, switching metabolic end products towards CH4, DOC and CO2 rather 
than principally CO2. 
4.6. Conclusions 
It is important to understand the conditions that influence the activities of soil enzymes that 
mediate key processes as a prerequisite for predicting ecosystem responses to climate 
changes, human utilization and management strategies. 
 In the present study, extracellular enzymes activity (hydrolases and phenol oxidase) and the 
production of greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4 and N2O) were investigated at different depths in a 
temperate peatland of the Snowdonia National Park, Wales. In addition, the associations 
between these variables and pH, conductivity, nutrient concentration (cations and anions), 
phenolic compound concentration, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, and soil 
water and soil organic matter (SOM) content were assessed. There were statistically 
significant differences between depths in terms of most hydrolase activities and several 
abiotic variables, in addition to a number of significant correlations between measured 
parameters. 
Since the quantity and the quality of soil organic matter decrease with depth, soil enzymes 
activity is expected to decrease with depth. Indeed, the average activity of extracellular 
enzymes decreased with increasing soil depth, in agreement with previous studies that 
followed the depth-dependent variations in enzymes activities of peatlands. 
Also of interest, pH values, which ranged from 3.8 to 5.4, showed a significant positive 
correlation with each of the hydrolytic enzymes measured, meaning that as pH increases, 
hydrolase activities increase. 
The variation of phenol oxidase (POX) activity was not significant between depths despite 
presumed differences in oxygen concentration with depth. This observation could be due to 
the pH, which more strongly influences POX activity, not differing significantly between the 
different layers. However no statistically significant correlation was found between POX 
activity and pH, possibly due to the acidic and narrow range of soil pH.  
Additionally, the variation of phenolics concentration did not vary significantly between 
depths perhaps because POX activity, which is responsible for the transformation of 
phenolics, did not differ significantly between the different layers. However no statistically 
significant correlation was found between POX activity and phenolics concentration. 
The activities of hydrolytic enzymes, with the exception of chitinase, and phenol oxidase, in 
addition to the atmospheric end products appeared to be unresponsive to the concentrations of 
phenolic compounds. These results suggest that phenolics cannot all be considered as 
efficient inhibitors of microbial metabolism and that the forms, source and the chemical 
composition of phenolic compounds could play an important role in affecting the activities of 
soil extracellular enzymes. 
The absence of a positive association between enzyme activities and the metabolic end 
products suggests that the measured activities were not due to de-novo enzyme synthesis but 
rather due to legacy enzymes. The lack of statistically negative relationships between S 
activity/sulfate and between P activity/phosphate here can give further confirmation of 
measurement of legacy enzymes which are present in large amounts in the soil and are 
independent of microbial regulation and thus do not respond to nutrient availability. 
The mean flux of CH4 was highest in the deeper soil layers, suggesting that methanogens are 
better adapted to the anaerobic conditions of the deeper peat layers. 
Although some statistically significant differences in mean nutrient concentrations were 
found between different depths, no consistent pattern was identified. A positive correlation 
was identified here between ammonium and the activities of hydrolytic C-acquiring enzymes, 
alongside with N-acquiring enzyme and DOC concentration, indicating that increased N 
deposition poses a significant risk to the function of peatlands.    
Assessing microbial communities composition is recommended, since microbial 
communities are central to the mineralization of SOM and are responsible for a large 
proportion of soil GHGs emissions. 
4.7. Acknowledgments  
The Saudi Arabian government financially supported this research. I am also grateful for the 
support of Dr Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, who 
collected the samples and provided details of field conditions. I am also acknowledging the 
support of my supervisor, Professor Christopher Freeman, School of Natural Sciences, 
Bangor University. 
4.8. References 
Allison, S.D. and Vitousek, P.M., 2005. Responses of extracellular enzymes to simple and 
complex nutrient inputs. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(5), pp. 937-944.  
Bayley, S.E., Thormann, M.N. and Szumigalski, A.R., 2005. Nitrogen mineralization and 
decomposition in western boreal bog and fen peat. Ecoscience, 12(4), pp. 455-465.  
Bending, G.D. and Read, D.J., 1997. Lignin and soluble phenolic degradation by 
ectomycorrhizal and ericoid mycorrhizal fungi. Mycological Research, 101(11), pp. 1348-
1354. 
Billett, M.F., Charman, D.J., Clark, J.M., Evans, C.D., Evans, M.G., Ostle, N.J., Worrall, F., 
Burden, A., Dinsmore, K.J., Jones, T. and McNamara, N.P., 2010. Carbon balance of UK 
peatlands: current state of knowledge and future research challenges. Climate Research, 45, 
pp. 13-29. 
Bonnett, S.A.F., Maltby, E. and Freeman, C., 2017. Hydrological legacy determines the type 
of enzyme inhibition in a peatlands chronosequence. Scientific Reports, 7(1), p. 9948. 
Box, J.D., 1983. Investigation of the Folin-Ciocalteau phenol reagent for the determination of 
polyphenolic substances in natural waters. Water Research, 17(5), pp. 511-525. 
Bragazza, L., Freeman, C., Jones, T., Rydin, H., Limpens, J., Fenner, N., Ellis, T., Gerdol, R., 
Hjek, M., Hjek, T. and Iacumin, P., 2006. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition promotes 
carbon loss from peat bogs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103(51), pp.19386-19389. 
Burns, R.G., 1982. Enzyme activity in soil: location and a possible role in microbial 
ecology. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 14(5), pp.423-427.  
Chen, J., Luo, Y., Li, J., Zhou, X., Cao, J., Wang, R.W., Wang, Y., Shelton, S., Jin, Z., 
Walker, L.M. and Feng, Z., 2017. Co-stimulation of soil glycosidase activity and soil 
respiration by nitrogen addition. Global Change Biology, 23(3), pp. 1328-1337. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments, pp. 29-59. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Dedysh, S.N., Pankratov, T.A., Belova, S.E., Kulichevskaya, I.S. and Liesack, W., 2006. 
Phylogenetic analysis and in situ identification of bacteria community composition in an 
acidic Sphagnum peat bog. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(3), pp. 2110-2117. 
DeForest, J.L., 2009. The influence of time, storage temperature, and substrate age on 
potential soil enzyme activity in acidic forest soils using MUB-linked substrates and L-
DOPA. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(6), pp.1180-1186. 
Dunn, C., 2013. Generating carbon credits through application of the enzymic latch 
mechanism in peatland carbon sequestration, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Fenner, N. and Freeman, C., 2011. Drought-induced carbon loss in peatlands. Nature 
Geoscience, 4(12), p. 895. 
Fenner, N., Freeman, C. and Reynolds, B., 2005. Observations of a seasonally shifting 
thermal optimum in peatland carbon-cycling processes; implications for the global carbon 
cycle and soil enzyme methodologies. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(10), pp. 1814-1821. 
Fierer, N., Schimel, J.P., Cates, R.G. and Zou, J., 2001. Influence of balsam poplar tannin 
fractions on carbon and nitrogen dynamics in Alaskan taiga floodplain soils. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 33(12-13), pp. 1827-1839. 
Freeman, C., Lock, M.A. and Reynolds, B., 1993. Impacts of climatic change on peatland 
hydrochemistry, a laboratory-based experiment. Chemistry and Ecology, 8(1), pp. 49-59. 
Freeman, C., Evans, C.D., Monteith, D.T., Reynolds, B. and Fenner, N., 2001. Export of 
organic carbon from peat soils. Nature, 412(6849), p. 785. 
Freeman, C., Fenner, N. and Shirsat, A.H., 2012. Peatland geoengineering: an alternative 
approach to terrestrial carbon sequestration. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 370(1974), pp. 4404-4421.  
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Jones, S.E. and Lock, M.A., 1995. The use of fluorogenic 
substrates for measuring enzyme activity in peatlands. Plant and Soil, 175(1), pp. 147-152. 
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Lock, M.A., Reynolds, B. and Hudson, J., 1996. 
Microbial activity and enzymic decomposition processes following peatland water table 
drawdown. Plant and Soil, 180(1), pp. 121-127. 
Freeman, C., Ostle, N. and Kang, H., 2001. An enzymic 'latch' on a global carbon store - a 
shortage of oxygen locks up carbon in peatlands by restraining a single enzyme. Nature, 
409(6817), pp. 149-149.  
Freeman, C., Ostle, N.J., Fenner, N. and Kang, H., 2004. A regulatory role for phenol oxidase 
during decomposition in peatlands. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36(10), pp. 1663-1667. 
Fung, D.Y., Sheree Lin, C.C. and Gailani, M.B., 1985. Effect of phenolic antioxidants on 
microbial growth. CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 12(2), pp. 153-183.  
Frogbrook, Z.L., Bell, J., Bradley, R.I., Evans, C., Lark, R.M., Reynolds, B., Smith, P. and 
Towers, W., 2009. Quantifying terrestrial carbon stocks: examining the spatial variation in 
two upland areas in the UK and a comparison to mapped estimates of soil carbon. Soil Use 
and Management, 25(3), pp. 320-332. 
Google Maps, 2020, accessed at https //www.google maps on 13/10/2020. 
Gough, R., Holliman, P.J., Fenner, N., Peacock, M. and Freeman, C., 2016. Influence of 
water table depth on pore water chemistry and trihalomethane formation potential in 
peatlands. Water Environment Research, 88(2), pp. 107-117.  
Guggenberger, G., Glaser, B. and Zech, W., 1994. Heavy metal binding by hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic dissolved organic carbon fractions in a spodosol A and B horizon. Water, Air, 
and Soil Pollution, 72(1-4), pp. 111-127. 
Holden, J., Shotbolt, L., Bonn, A., Burt, T.P., Chapman, P.J., Dougill, A.J., Fraser, E.D.G., 
Hubacek, K., Irvine, B., Kirkby, M.J. and Reed, M.S., 2007. Environmental change in 
moorland landscapes. Earth-Science Reviews, 82(1-2), pp. 75-100. 
Hoostal, M.J. and Bouzat, J.L., 2008. The modulating role of dissolved organic matter on 
spatial patterns of microbial metabolism in Lake Erie sediments. Microbial Ecology, 55(2), 
pp. 358-368. 
IPCC., 2013. Climate change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(Eds. Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner G-K, Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J, Nauels A, Xia Y, 
Bex V, Midgley PM), UK, USA, Cambridge University Press. 
IUCN., 2014. IUCN: International Union for Conservation of Nature, UK committee. Peatland 
programme. Briefing - Peatbog ecosystems. 
Jian, S., Li, J., Chen, J., Wang, G., Mayes, M.A., Dzantor, K.E., Hui, D. and Luo, Y., 2016. 
Soil extracellular enzyme activities, soil carbon and nitrogen storage under nitrogen 
fertilization: A meta-analysis. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 101, pp. 32-43. 
Jobbgy, E.G. and Jackson, R.B., 2000. The vertical distribution of soil organic carbon and 
its relation to climate and vegetation. Ecological Applications, 10(2), pp. 423-436.  
Jones, T.G., 2006. Climate change and dissolved organic carbon: impacts on drinking water 
supplies, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp. 449-454.  
Kang, H., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1998. Trace gas emissions from a north Wales fen-
role of hydrochemistry and soil enzyme activity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 105(1-2), pp. 
107-116. 
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
Kotsyurbenko, O.R., Chin, K.J., Glagolev, M.V., Stubner, S., Simankova, M.V., 
Nozhevnikova, A.N. and Conrad, R., 2004. Acetoclastic and hydrogenotrophic methane 
production and methanogenic populations in an acidic WestSiberian peat 
bog. Environmental Microbiology, 6(11), pp. 1159-1173. 
Leifeld, J. and Menichetti, L., 2018. The underappreciated potential of peatlands in global 
climate change mitigation strategies. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 1071. 
Li, J., Jian, S., de Koff, J.P., Lane, C.S., Wang, G., Mayes, M.A. and Hui, D., 2018. 
Differential effects of warming and nitrogen fertilization on soil respiration and microbial 
dynamics in switchgrass croplands. GCB Bioenergy, 10(8), pp. 565-576. 
Li, T., Bu, Z., Liu, W., Zhang, M., Peng, C., Zhu, Q., Shi, S. and Wang, M., 2019. 
Weakening of the enzymatic latch mechanism following long-term fertilization in a 
minerotrophic peatland. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 136, p. 107528. 
Lu, M., Zhou, X., Luo, Y., Yang, Y., Fang, C., Chen, J. and Li, B., 2011. Minor stimulation 
of soil carbon storage by nitrogen addition: a meta-analysis. Agriculture, Ecosystems and 
Environment, 140(1-2), pp. 234-244. 
Mellegrd, H., Stalheim, T., Hormazabal, V., Granum, P.E. and Hardy, S.P., 2009. 
Antibacterial activity of Sphagnum acid and other phenolic compounds found in Sphagnum 
papillosum against foodborne bacteria. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 49(1), pp. 85-90. 
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11. 
Moore, P.D., 2002. The future of cool temperate bogs. Environmental Conservation, 29(1), 
pp. 3-20. 
Opelt, K., Chobot, V., Hadacek, F., Schnmann, S., Eberl, L. and Berg, G., 2007. 
Investigations of the structure and function of bacterial communities associated with 
Sphagnum mosses. Environmental Microbiology, 9(11), pp. 2795-2809. 
Pind, A., Freeman, C. and Lock, M.A., 1994. Enzymic degradation of phenolic materials in 
peatlands measurement of phenol oxidase activity. Plant and Soil, 159(2), pp. 227-231. 
Pizzolitto, R.P., Barberis, C.L., Dambolena, J.S., Herrera, J.M., Zunino, M.P., Magnoli, C.E., 
Rubinstein, H.R., Zygadlo, J.A. and Dalcero, A.M., 2015. Inhibitory effect of natural 
phenolic compounds on Aspergillus parasiticus growth. Journal of Chemistry, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
Potter, C., Freeman, C., Golyshin, P.N., Ackermann, G., Fenner, N., McDonald, J.E., Ehbair, 
A., Jones, T.G., Murphy, L.M. and Creer, S., 2017. Subtle shifts in microbial communities 
occur alongside the release of carbon induced by drought and rewetting in contrasting 
peatland ecosystems. Scientific Reports, 7(1), p. 11314. 
Pulford, I.D. and Tabatabai, M.A., 1988. Effect of waterlogging on enzyme activities in 
soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 20(2), pp. 215-219. 
Sardans, J. and Peuelas, J., 2005. Drought decreases soil enzyme activity in a Mediterranean 
Quercus ilex L. forest. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(3), pp. 455-461.  
Schnecker, J., Wild, B., Takriti, M., Alves, R.J.E., Gentsch, N., Gittel, A., Hofer, A., Klaus, 
K., Knoltsch, A., Lashchinskiy, N. and Mikutta, R., 2015. Microbial community composition 
shapes enzyme patterns in topsoil and subsoil horizons along a latitudinal transect in Western 
Siberia. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 83, pp. 106-115. 
Song, Y., Song, C., Shi, F., Wang, M., Ren, J., Wang, X. and Jiang, L., 2019. Linking plant 
community composition with the soil C pool, N availability and enzyme activity in boreal 
peatlands of Northeast China. Applied Soil Ecology, 140, pp. 144-154. 
Sowerby, A., Emmett, B., Beier, C., Tietema, A., Penuelas, J., Estiarte, M., Van Meeteren, 
M.J., Hughes, S. and Freeman, C., 2005. Microbial community changes in heathland soil 
communities along a geographical gradient: interaction with climate change 
manipulations. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(10), pp. 1805-1813. 
Steinweg, J.M., Dukes, J.S., Paul, E.A. and Wallenstein, M.D., 2013. Microbial responses to 
multi-factor climate change: effects on soil enzymes. Frontiers in Microbiology, 4, p. 146. 
Tahvanainen, T. and Haraguchi, A., 2013. Effect of pH on phenol oxidase activity on 
decaying Sphagnum mosses. European Journal of Soil Biology, 54, pp. 41-47.  
Tian, L., Dell, E. and Shi, W., 2010. Chemical composition of dissolved organic matter in 
agroecosystems: correlations with soil enzyme activity and carbon and nitrogen 
mineralization. Applied Soil Ecology, 46(3), pp. 426-435. 
Toberman, H., Freeman, C., Artz, R.R.E., Evans, C.D. and Fenner, N., 2008. Impeded 
drainage stimulates extracellular phenol oxidase activity in riparian peat cores. Soil Use and 
Management, 24(4), pp. 357-365. 
Wetzel, R.G., 1992. Gradient-dominated ecosystems: sources and regulatory functions of 
dissolved organic matter in freshwater ecosystems. Hydrobiologia, 229, pp. 181-198. 
Wickland, K.P. and Neff, J.C., 2008. Decomposition of soil organic matter from boreal black 
spruce forest: environmental and chemical controls. Biogeochemistry, 87(1), pp. 29-47.  
Williams, C.J., Shingara, E.A. and Yavitt, J.B., 2000. Phenol oxidase activity in peatlands in 
New York State: response to summer drought and peat type. Wetlands, 20(2), pp. 416-421. 
Xue, C., Zhang, X., Zhu, C., Zhao, J., Zhu, P., Peng, C., Ling, N. and Shen, Q., 2016. 
Quantitative and compositional responses of ammonia-oxidizing Archaea and bacteria to 
long-term field fertilization. Scientific Reports, 6, p. 28981. 
Yu, Z., Beilman, D.W., Frolking, S., MacDonald, G.M., Roulet, N.T., Camill, P. and 
Charman, D.J., 2011. Peatlands and their role in the global carbon cycle. Eos, Transactions 
American Geophysical Union, 92(12), pp. 97-98. 
Chapter 5 
A meta-analysis of biogeochemical data collected in Svalbard, 
Colombia and Wales. 
5.1. Abstract 
The comparison of soil extracellular enzyme activities on a global scale provides an 
opportunity to identify the global patterns of biogeochemical processes and the dominant 
controlling factors. Studying biogeochemical processes and the abiotic variables controlling 
them in peatlands has important implications for predicting the potential impacts of climate 
change, human intervention and management strategies on peatlands stability. In this study, 
the significant differences in measured parameters between different regions (Arctic 
(Svalbard, Norway), tropical (Sumapaz National Park in Andes mountains, Colombia) and 
temperate (Snowdonia National Park in Wales, United Kingdom)) were identified.  
Soil enzyme activities, with the exception of -glucosidase activity, and the fluxes of 
greenhouse gas (GHG), with the exception of methane (CH4), varied across the three climatic 
peatlands in relation to measured physicochemical variables. Relatively high hydrolase 
activities were observed in Colombia, possibly due to the higher demand for nutrients and/or 
higher energy supply. The activity of phenol oxidase was relatively high in Svalbard, where 
significantly higher pH and concentrations of most inorganic nutrients, and lower 
concentration of phenolic compounds was also observed. Conversely, the Welsh peatland 
exhibited the lowest phenol oxidase activity, consistent with lowest pH and consequently 
highest phenolic concentrations. The pH values were significantly different for each of the 
three regions, Svalbard (mean 7.1) > Colombia (mean 5.2) > Wales (mean 4.5). Guano is 
known to have an alkaline pH, and this may have contributed to the unexpectedly high pH 
observed in Svalbard. Phenolic concentration was highest in the Welsh and Colombian 
peatlands possibly due to the dominant vegetation being Sphagnum moss. 
 The greater dominance of Sphagnum moss in Colombia and Wales may also provide a 
reason for the lower pH value in these regions compared to Svalbard. The higher mean 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration in Colombia and Wales compared with 
Svalbard peatland could be related to the higher primary productivity towards the equator 
where temperatures are warmer and the growing season longer. In addition, decreased DOC 
concentration has been linked to increased sea salt, all of which were high in Svalbard 
possibly due to the proximity of the sampling sites to the sea. The fluxes of carbon dioxide 
(CO2) and nitrous oxide (N2O) were all highest in the Svalbard samples. Additionally, 
Svalbard peatland had the highest nutrient concentrations possibly due to its close proximity 
to the sea, the influence of the underlying mineral layer and nutrient supply from bird guano. 
5.2. Introduction 
Peatlands represent a significant terrestrial carbon pool, holding at least 550 Gt of 
atmospheric carbon as a result of the imbalance between organic matter production rates and 
decomposition rates in these persistently water-saturated environments (Mitsch and 
Gosselink 2000, Moore 2002, Holden 2005), which raising concerns over their potential to 
become a carbon source and contribute to climate change.  
Due to the importance of soil enzymes in the processing of organic matter in wetland 
ecosystems, many researchers have investigated the factors influencing enzyme activities and 
biogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Dunn et al. 2014). Studying biogeochemical 
processes and the abiotic variables controlling them in peatlands can be of value for 
predicting the potential impacts of climate change, human intervention and management 
strategies on peatlands function (Dunn et al. 2014). However, most studies in this field have 
been conducted in a single region with a limited number of studied variables. 
In the present study, the most widely measured soil enzyme activities, metabolic end products 
and various physicochemical variables of soil were compared across three climatic regions, 
Arctic, temperate and tropical. The description of soil extracellular enzyme activity on a 
global basis reveals the different ranges of variation and different distributions of enzymes 
activities in relation to ecosystem variables, which provides an opportunity to compare 
contrasting ecosystems and to relate soil microbial function to global patterns of microbial 
community composition, nutrient ratios and soil organic matter storage (Sinsabaugh et al. 
2008). Differences in microbial function between peatlands in different climatic regions are 
expected since vegetation composition, peat chemical composition and hence decomposition 
rates, which depend on microbial community composition, will inevitably vary between 
climates (Preston et al. 2012). Indeed, Hodgkins et al. (2018) examined plant and peat 
chemistry across a latitudinal transect from the Arctic to the tropics and found that peaty soils 
in temperate to tropical peatlands are more chemically recalcitrant, having higher aromatic 
content and lower carbohydrate content than those from Arctic and boreal peatlands. This 
recalcitrance towards the tropics may allow peats to persist despite warmer temperatures. 
Understanding the relationship between enzyme activities and physicochemical variables in 
peatlands, which are extensive sinks of carbon and nitrogen, is especially important (Moore 
2002, Voigt et al. 2017, Leifeld and Menichetti 2018) and necessary for anticipating the 
ecosystem response to climate change, land use change and restoration attempts (Moore 
2002). Peatlands along the transect showed large differences in climate and vegetation cover 
and presumably in the chemical composition of litter entering the soil and in the 
physicochemical variables of soil. The hypothesis of the present study proposed that 
biogeochemical processes show greater differences between peatlands of the three contrasting 
regions in relation to soil variables. This chapter aimed to compare enzyme activities 
(hydrolases and phenol oxidase) and production of GHG (CO2, CH4 and N2O) in relation to 
the potential controlling factors (pH, conductivity, water and soil organic matter contents, the 
concentrations of phenolic compounds, dissolved organic carbon, anions and cations) at 
regional and global scale. 
5.3. Materials and methods 
5.3.1. Study sites and soil sampling  
In this study, moss-dominated peatlands from three climatic regions were chosen. They were 
located in the Arctic region (Svalbard, Norway), a temperate region (Snowdonia National 
Park in North Wales, UK), and a tropical region (Sumapaz National Park in Andean 
mountains, Colombia). In each peatland, soil cores were collected from six different sites, 
and three replicates of soil cores were extracted from each site. Samples were collected from 
Svalbard, Norway in late July 2016. The average air temperature was 5C, the water table 
was at the soil surface during sampling and the moss tundra of the study sites was dominated 
by the species Tomenthypnum nitens and Calliergon richardsonii, without vascular plants.  
Six Sphagnum-dominated peatland sites located in the Snowdonia National Park, North 
Wales, UK were sampled at the beginning of September 2016. The study sites were covered 
by Sphagnum spp, Juncus spp, and Carex spp interspersed with some cotton grasses and 
some Calluna vulgaris (common heather). The average air temperature was 14.3C and the 
water table level was at the soil surface at the time of sampling. 
The tropical peatland sites were located at high altitude within the Sumapaz National Park in 
the Andean mountain range, Colombia. Sampling was performed at the end of July 2017. The 
dominant vegetation was Sphagnum spp, Carex spp, Juncus spp, Espeletia spp and many 
other shrubs were also more common. The average air temperature was 13.4C and the water 
table was at the soil surface during the time of sampling.  
Each soil core (100 cm depth) was examined and boundaries between distinct layers 
identified based on the colour and the texture. These individual layers were then placed in 
individual plastic bags and transported in ice to the laboratory in Wales. Distinct layers in the 
soil cores were handled and analysed separately. Subsamples of soil for enzymes activity 
measurement and chemical analysis were stored at 4C. Because the time between soil 
collection and enzyme assay can vary greatly between studies, it is possible that data 
variability in these studies can be explained, in part, by this variation (DeForest 2009). The 
soil temperature in the Arctic was 7.1C while that in Colombia was 9.8 C. The storage 
temperature was 4C, which means that the storage temperature was slightly below those of 
the field conditions, which would minimise the risk that storage could detrimentally affect 
microbial activities. The largest difference between storage temperature and field temperature 
was in Wales where the soil temperature was 13.2 C. However, these samples were collected 
locally, and so it was more feasible to minimise the delay between sample collection and 
storage. Work by Fenner et al. (2005) suggests that short term storage of samples at higher or 
lower than field conditions can potentially result in declines in activity over a two-week 
period. The work of Fenner et al. (2005) suggests that there is minimal risk with small 
temperature differences however. 
Soil temperature and pore water pH and dissolved oxygen concentration were measured in 
the field using portable instruments. Measurements of soil enzyme activity, greenhouse gas 
fluxes, organic matter content and water content, pH value, electrical conductivity, and soil 
water extraction in order to measure phenolic compound, dissolved organic carbon and ions 
concentrations were performed in the laboratory following standard protocols. 
5.3.2. Soil analyses 
The activities of extracellular enzymes were determined following a protocol described by 
Dunn et al. (2014). Briefly, the phenolic amino acid L-3,4- dihydroxy phenylalanine (L-
DOPA, Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) was used as a target substrate for assay phenol 
oxidase activity. The colour change is determined using a spectrophotometer at 475 nm and 
the activity of phenol oxidase was then calculated by using Beer-Lambert Law and expressed 
as mol of formed (diqc) per minute per gram of soil (dry weight). Hydrolase enzyme 
activities were determined using the procedures of Freeman et al. (1995) and Dunn et al. 
(2014), based on the measurement of fluorescence of methylumbelliferone (MUF). 
Fluorescence of the MUF molecule was measured using a microplate fluorometer (Molecular 
Devices SpectraMax M2e spectrophotometer) at 450 nm emission and 330 nm excitation. 
Hydrolase activities are expressed as nmol MUF g-1 of soil min-1. 
Soil subsamples were oven-dried for 24 h at 105 C in order to determine soil water content. 
Soil organic matter was determined by muffle-burning dried subsamples for 4 h at 550 C. 
To determine the amount of water-extractable carbon in the peat samples, 5 g subsample of 
peat was taken and homogenising with 40ml of water on a rotary shaker for 24 h. The 
resulting slurry was centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 30 minutes. The supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.45m membrane filter (Whatman, Kent, UK) to separate particulate organic 
carbon (POC) from dissolved organic carbon (DOC). The filtered samples were then 
collected in 20 mL plastic scintillation vials (Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd) and stored at 
4C until measurement. A pH meter and a Primo 5 handheld conductivity meter were inserted 
into peat slurry before filtration in order to measure the pH and the conductivity of the peat, 
respectively. 
The concentration of phenolics was assayed using Folin-Ciocalteu Reagent, as described in 
detail by Box (1983). 
Cation and anion concentrations were analyzed on extracted, filtered water by using a 
Metrohm 850 Professional Ion Chromatograph. 
The concentration of DOC was measured on filtered and acidified samples using a 
Thermalox TOC/TN analyser (Analytical Sciences Ltd) equipped with a non- dispersive 
infrared CO2 analyser. Microbial respiration (CO2, CH4 and N2O) was also measured in peat 
samples using Gas Chromatography equipped with flame ionization detector (FID) for 
measuring the concentration of CO2 and CH4 and electron capture detector (ECD) for 
measuring the concentration of N2O. 
5.3.3. Statistical analyses 
Where conditions were met by the data, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to 
analyse potential significant differences in variables between different regions. Tukey HSD 
post-hoc test was performed to find where the significant differences among groups lay at a 
probability level of 0.05. Calculated F and degrees of freedom are provided as well. 
Significant correlations were determined using Pearson correlation (r) analysis. Linear 
regression analysis (r2) was also used. Statistical analysis was carried out using version 22 of 
the SPSS statistics package. 
5.4. Comparing results at global scale: 
As can be seen in Figure 5.01 and Table 5.01, mean -glucosidase (B) activity was lowest in 
the Welsh samples (7.67 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and highest in Colombia (10.26 nmol MUF g-1 
min-1). However, one-way ANOVA analysis indicated no statistically significant differences 
between the three regions, F (2,183) = 1.7, p = 0.17. ANOVAs were carried out using each of 
the individual replicate measurements rather than simply the mean values, and so reflected 
fully the variability in the samples. 
Mean arylsulfatase (S) activity was lowest in Wales (0.97 nmol MUF g-1 min-1) and highest 
in Colombia (8.6 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). One-way ANOVA indicated that S differed 
significantly between the three contrasting regions, F (2,183) = 41.9, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD 
post-hoc test revealed that Colombian samples had significantly higher S activity than both 
Wales and Svalbard soil samples (p < 0.05), but that the Wales/ Svalbard comparison was not 
significant. 
Mean xylosidase (X) activity ranged from 2.1 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in the Svalbard samples to 
3.0 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in the Colombian samples. One-way ANOVA showed that X activity 
differed significantly between the three locations, F (2,183) = 4.9, p = 0.008. Post-hoc 
comparisons using the Tukey HSD test showed that Colombian peat samples had 
significantly higher X activity than in the Svalbard (p < 0.05). The Welsh samples, which had 
an intermediate mean X activity, did not vary significantly from the other two regions. 
Mean phosphatase (P) activity ranged from 18.86 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in the Svalbard 
samples to 35.0 nmol MUF g-1 min-1 in Colombia. One-way ANOVA showed that P activity 
varied significantly between studied regions, F (2,183) = 5.79, p = 0.004. Tukey post-hoc 
comparisons test revealed that Colombian peat samples had significantly higher P activity 
than in the Svalbard (p < 0.05). Waless peat samples, which had an intermediate mean P 
activity, did not vary significantly from the other two regions. 
Mean N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (N) activity was lowest in Svalbard (2.98 nmol MUF g-1 
min-1) and highest in the Colombian samples (6.2 nmol MUF g-1 min-1). One-way ANOVA 
indicated that N activity differed significantly between the three regions, F (2,183) = 8.5, p = 
0.000. Tukey HSD post-hoc test revealed that Colombian soil samples had significantly 
higher N activity than both Wales and Svalbard soil samples (p < 0.05), but that the Wales/ 
Svalbard comparison was not significant. 
Mean phenol oxidase (POX) activity was highest in the Svalbard (1.83 mol dicq g-1 min-1)    
and lowest in Wales (0.24 mol dicq g-1 min-1). One-way ANOVA showed that POX differed 
significantly between regions, F (2,183) = 15.4, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD post-hoc test revealed 
that Wales peat samples had significantly lower POX activity than both Colombia and 
Svalbard (p < 0.05), but that the Colombia/ Svalbard comparison was not significant (Figure 
5.01 and Table 5.01).  
Figure 5.01. Extracellular enzymes activity in Svalbard, Colombia and Wales. Abbreviations, 
B = -glucosidase, S = arylsulfatase, X = xylosidase, N = N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase 
(chitinase), P = phosphatase and POX = phenol oxidase. Enzyme activities are reported as 
mean along with  standard deviation. 
Table 5.01 Mean values for measured variables in Svalbard (S), Colombia (C) and Wales 
(W). The results represent the mean of all replicates, across all depths  standard deviation. 
Letter annotations refer to significantly different means (p < 0.05) identified by Tukey HSD 
post-hoc test. 
             Regions 
variables 
Svalbard (S) Colombia (C) Wales (W) 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
8.3910.2 10.269.7 7.673.5 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
1.00.58 
8.69.4 
0.970.8 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
2.11.07 
3.02.0 
2.661.07 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
18.8617.7 
35.037.8 
25.222.9 
nmol MUF g-1 min-1 
2.981.7 
6.27.1 
4.071.8 
mol dicq g-1 min-1 
1.832.7 
1.581.6 
0.240.28 
Phenolics 
mg L-1 
1.860.9 
2.71.4 
3.331.8 
mg L-1 
12.36.1 
16.3810.5 
15.127.2 
pH 7.10.6 
5.20.46 
4.50.29 
Conductivity 
S cm-1 
216.0228.0 
18.813.0 
18.86.8 
Water 
69.826.0 
83.910.2 
89.66.5 
50.231.5 
43.818.9 
74.7517.9 
g CO2 g
-1 h-1 
29.731.9 
12.711.8 
13.47.9 
ng CH4 g
-1 h-1 
1.910.3 
5.521.2 
0.269.8 
ng N2O g
-1 h-1 
5.711.3 
1.91.9 
1.43.6 
Chloride 
mg L-1 
3.02.4 
1.81.6 
1.850.89 
Nitrate 
mg L-1 
10.212.4 
0.61.3 
0.40.5 
Phosphate 
mg L-1 
0.332.1 0.20.4 0.20.38 
Sulfate 
mg L-1 
52.585.4 
3.61.66 
3.11.56 
Sodium 
mg L-1 
4.83.8 
5.21.2 
1.551.2 
Ammonium 
mg L-1 
0.150.4 
0.280.9 
1.51.2 
Calcium 
mg L-1 
43.621.8 
2.72.7 
1.471.97 
Magnesium 
mg L-1 
9.78.5 
0.40.66 
0.50.38 
Mean phenolic compound concentration ranged from 1.86 mg L-1 in Svalbard samples to 3.33 
mg L-1 in Wales (Figure 5.02). One-way ANOVA showed that phenolic concentration varied 
significantly between regions, F (2,183) = 12.5, p = 0.000. Tukey post-hoc comparison test 
indicated that phenolics concentration was significantly lower in the Svalbard soil samples 
than in Wales and Colombia (p < 0.05). No significant difference was found between the 
Welsh and Colombian peat samples (Table 5.01).  
Figure 5.02. Phenolic compound concentration in the Svalbard, Colombian and Welsh 
samples. Concentrations are reported as the mean along with  standard deviation. 
Mean DOC concentration (Figure 5.03) was lowest for the Svalbard (12.3 mg L-1) and 
highest in the Colombian samples (16.38 mg L-1). One-way ANOVA showed that DOC 
concentration differed significantly between the three regions, F (2,183) = 5.28, p = 0.006. 
Tukey HSD post-hoc test revealed that the Svalbard soil samples had significantly lower 
DOC concentration than Colombia (p < 0.05). The Welsh samples, which had an 
intermediate mean DOC concentration, did not differ significantly from the other two regions 
(Table 5.01). 
Figure 5.03. DOC concentrations of the Svalbard, Colombian and Welsh soil samples. The 
concentrations are reported as mean along with  standard deviation. 
Mean pH (Table 5.01) was highest in the Svalbard soil samples (7.1) and lowest in Wales 
(4.5). One-way ANOVA indicated that pH differed significantly between the three regions, F 
(2,183) = 475.6, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD post-hoc comparison test revealed that the Svalbard 
samples had a significantly higher pH than the other two regions (p < 0.05), and the Wales 
soil samples had significantly lower pH than both Svalbard and Colombia (p < 0.05). 
Mean conductivity was extremely high in the Svalbard samples (216 S/cm) and 
substantially lower in Wales and Colombian samples (both measuring 18.8 S/cm). One-way 
ANOVA showed that electrical conductivity differed significantly between the three 
locations F (2,183) = 50.3, p = 0.000. Post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test 
revealed that the Svalbard samples had significantly higher conductivity than the other two 
regions (p < 0.05). The Colombia/Wales comparison was not significant (Table 5.01).  
Mean soil water content ranged from 69.8% in the Svalbard peat samples to 89.6% in Wales 
(Figure 5.04). One-way ANOVA showed that water content varied significantly between 
regions, F (2,183) = 28.5, p = 0.000. Tukey post-hoc comparison test indicated that water 
content was significantly lower in Svalbard compared with Wales and Colombia (p < 0.05). 
No significant difference was found between the Welsh and Colombian samples (Table 5.01). 
Mean soil organic matter content (% SOM) was highest in Wales (74.75%) and lowest in 
Colombia (43.8%). One-way ANOVA showed that %SOM differed significantly between 
regions, F (2,183) = 28.5, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD post-hoc test revealed that Wales had 
significantly higher %SOM than both Colombia and the Svalbard (p < 0.05), but that the 
Colombia/ Svalbard comparison was not significant (Table 5.01). 
As can be seen in Figure 5.04 and Table 5.01, CO2 flux was highest in Svalbard (29.7 g CO2 
g-1 h-1), with the flux measurements in Wales and Colombia substantially lower (13.4 and 
12.7 g CO2 g
-1 h-1, respectively). One-way ANOVA showed that CO2 flux differed 
significantly between the three locations F (2,183) = 14.3, p = 0.000. Post-hoc comparison 
using the Tukey HSD test revealed that the Svalbard samples had significantly higher CO2 
flux than the other two regions (p < 0.05). The Colombia/Wales comparison was not 
significant. 
The Welsh samples showed the lowest mean CH4 flux (mean 0.26 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1), with 
intermediate flux (1.9 CH4 g
-1 h-1) in Svalbard and highest flux (5.5 ng CH4 g
-1 h-1) in 
Colombia. However, no significant differences were found between the three regions, F 
(2,183) = 2.15, p = 0.045. 
Mean N2O flux was lowest in the Welsh samples (1.4 ng N2O g
-1 h-1) and highest in the 
Svalbard (5.7 ng N2O g
-1 h-1). One-way ANOVA showed that N2O flux varied significantly 
between regions, F (2,183) = 7.46, p = 0.001. Tukey post-hoc comparison test indicated that 
the N2O flux were significantly higher in Svalbard compared with Wales and Colombia (p < 
0.05). No significant difference was found between the Welsh and Colombian samples.  
While many interesting features were found in the studies, it is worth noting that there is the 
potential for storage and transportation to have influenced the results in the same way that 
was described regarding the enzyme activities and solute concentrations (see page 41&137). 
Figure 5.04. Mean GHG flux for Svalbard, Colombian and Welsh samples. Error bars 
represent the standard deviation of the mean.  
All mean anion concentrations (Table 5.01) were highest in the Svalbard samples (3.0, 10.2, 
0.33 and 52.5 mg L-1 for chloride, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate, respectively). One-way 
ANOVA showed that chloride, nitrate and sulfate concentrations varied significantly between 
the three regions. Tukey HSD post-hoc comparison test showed that the concentrations of all 
anions, except phosphate, were significantly higher in the Svalbard samples than in Wales 
and Colombia (p = 0.000). No significant differences were found between Wales and 
Colombia. 
The concentration of phosphate varied slightly and insignificantly between the three 
contrasting regions (F (2, 183) = 0.143, p = 0.866). 
Mean sodium concentration was lowest in the Welsh samples (1.55 mg L-1) and highest in 
Colombia (5.2 mg L-1). One-way ANOVA showed that sodium concentration varied 
significantly between the three regions, F (2,183) = 52.3, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD post-hoc 
comparison indicated that the Svalbard and Colombian soil samples had significantly higher 
sodium concentration than Wales (p < 0.05). The Svalbard /Colombia comparison was not 
significant. 
Mean ammonium concentration was lowest for the Svalbard samples (0.15 mg L-1) and 
highest for Wales (1.5 mg L-1). One-way ANOVA showed that ammonium concentration 
varied significantly between the three regions, F (2,183) = 40.46, p = 0.000. Tukey HSD 
post-hoc test indicated that ammonium concentration was significantly higher in the Welsh 
samples compared with both Svalbard and Colombia (p < 0.05), but that the Svalbard 
/Colombia comparison was not significant (Table 5.01).  
Calcium and magnesium concentrations were significantly higher in the Svalbard samples 
compared with the other two regions (p < 0.05), but that the Wales/Colombia comparison 
was not significant (Table 5.01). 
Figure 5.05 shows the correlation between the in situ sample pH and extracellular enzyme 
activity. The activity of POX correlated positively with pH in the Svalbard and Colombia and 
no statistically significant correlation between pH and POX was found in Wales (Figure 5.05 
a). The activity of all five hydrolase enzymes correlated positively with pH in Wales and in 
Colombia, with the exception of S in Colombia, whilst no statistically significant positive 
correlations were recorded for the Svalbard samples (Figures 5.05 b, c, d, e and f). Figure 
5.06 displays the correlation between phenolic compounds and the activity of POX. POX 
activity correlated negatively with the concentration of phenolics in the Colombian peat, and 
no statistically significant correlation between phenolics and POX was found in Svalbard and 
Wales. 
R = 0.186
R = 0.3626
R = 0.0241
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
R = 0.1853
R = 0.0632
R = 0.1438
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
R = 0.0059
R = 0.2161
R = 0.18
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
R = 0.1679
R = 0.1894
R = 0.2423
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
Figure 5.05. The relationship between pH and the activity of (a) phenol oxidase (POX), (b) -
glucosidase (B), (c) xylosidase (X), (d) chitinase (N), (e) phosphatase (P) and (f) arylsulfatase 
R = 0.0257
R = 0.1729
R = 0.0925
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
R = 0.0341
R = 0.0379
R = 0.0909
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
Figure 5.06. The relationship between phenolic compounds and the activity of phenol oxidase 
(POX). 
Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to show the tendency of all measured variables 
within the different regions and to discover the links between the variables (Appendix A 
Figure 1). 
R = 0.0108
R = 0.3251
R = 0.0293
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
POX activity
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
5.5. Discussion 
This study presents a comparison of peatland soil parameters within and between different 
climatic regions (Arctic, temperate and tropical), and provides insight into the 
physicochemical controls on soil enzyme activity and the rate of greenhouse gas production 
based on field observation. 
Across the three climatic regions, enzyme activities and GHG fluxes exhibited different 
relationships with soil physicochemical variables. Generally, significant positive relationships 
between hydrolase activities were observed at a regional scale indicating that they act 
together in synergy (Bguin and Aubert 1994) to reduce the structurally heterogenous 
biopolymers to constituent monomers obtainable by microbes (Sinsabaugh et al. 2008).  
Several studies have demonstrated the indirect positive effect of POX activity on hydrolase 
enzyme activities (Freeman et al. 2001, 2004, Jones 2006, Fenner and Freeman 2011) due to 
the decline in inhibitory phenolics. The data of this study in this regard supported their 
finding as significant positive correlations were found between the activities of all hydrolytic 
enzymes and POX activity which in turn correlated negatively with its substrate phenolics. 
Phenolic compounds have an inhibitory effect on microbial functions involved in SOM 
decomposition, nutrient cycles and GHGs flux (Kim and Kang 2008) because they can 
combine with the reactive sites of organic and inorganic substrates, making them resistant to 
further microbial attack. They can also inhibit litter decomposition by lowering pH (Min et 
al. 2015) and by themselves being strongly resistant to biodegradation (Zak et al. 2019).  
The response of hydrolytic enzymes activity and GHG flux to phenolics concentration varied 
across the three peatlands, all hydrolytic activities in addition to CO2 flux were negatively 
related to phenolics concentration in Colombia. Such activities and fluxes showed no 
significant relationship with phenolics concentration in Svalbard. This observation suggests 
that the three climatic peatlands differ in parent plant chemistry that controls peat formation 
(peat chemical composition) and peat preservation across a latitudinal transect from the 
Arctic to the tropics. Indeed, Hodgkins et al. (2018) found that peaty soils from tropical 
peatlands are more chemically recalcitrant, having higher aromatic content and lower 
carbohydrate content than those from Arctic and boreal peatlands. Increasing peat 
recalcitrance towards the equator mirrors the increasing aromatic content in peat-forming 
plants with warmer climates and longer growing season (Hodgkins et al. 2018). Additionally, 
Tveit et al. (2013) mentioned that unlike Sphagnum species that contain lignin-like polymer, 
tundra mosses have less complex phenolic compound called lignan. 
 In Wales the only significant correlation between hydrolase enzyme activity and phenolics 
concentration was a positive correlation involving N enzyme activity (all other correlations 
were non-significant), which could suggest a high demand for N element associated with 
polyphenolic compounds (Li et al. 2018). Generally, variations in the form, composition and 
the source of phenolic compounds, may be driving variations in enzyme activities and the 
resultant metabolic end products (Hoostal and Bouzat 2008, Min et al. 2015). 
The Colombian peatland showed the highest arylsulphatase and chitinase activities of the 
three peatlands, and the highest xylosidase and phosphatase activities compared with 
Svalbard. The relatively high hydrolase activities in Colombia possibly due to the higher 
energy supply. Indeed, Bragazza et al. (2015) found that greater biomass of woody species 
toward the tropics enhanced the availability of low-molecular weight carbon through 
temperature-induced root exudation, fuelling a greater microbial biomass, which mirrors the 
increasing enzyme activities. 
The higher DOC concentration towards tropics compared with Arctic peatland may be related 
to the higher primary productivity towards the equator where warmer temperatures and 
longer growing season exist (Hodgkins et al. 2018). In addition, decreased DOC 
concentration has been linked to increased sea salt (Gough 2014), all of which were high in 
Svalbard possibly due to the proximity of the sampling sites to the sea. Ionic strength 
(conductivity) is one of the controls on DOC solubility and may be a significant factor 
affecting peat pore water DOC concentrations (Gough et al. 2016), an inverse relationship 
has been reported between DOC concentration in peat pore water and conductivity (Fenner et 
al. 2005). Similarly, in the present study, significant negative correlation was reported 
between DOC concentration and conductivity in the Svalbard peatland. The explanation for 
reduced DOC solubility with higher ionic strength is not fully understood but may relate to 
the reduced charge density of organic substances, which in turn causes coagulation (Kalbitz 
et al. 2000).  
Phenolic concentration was highest in the Welsh and Colombian peatlands possibly due to 
the dominant vegetation being Sphagnum moss, which dies back rapidly during warm periods 
resulting in large inputs of dead plant material into the soil. A large proportion of this plant 
material is comprised of phenolic compounds (Wetzel 1992, Worrall et al. 2002, Jones 2006, 
Sinsabaugh et al. 2008). 
Compared with Colombia, the activity of hydrolase enzymes in Svalbard was significantly 
lower, despite the soils higher conductivity, pH and lower phenolics concentration. This 
limited activity may be the result of low temperature (Kang et al. 2018). Hodgkins et al. 
(2018) reported that more recalcitrant organic matter is the key factor at the tropics, while 
cold temperature is the key factor at the Arctic. 
Compared with Wales, the activity of POX was significantly higher in Svalbard and 
Colombian soils. This is likely due to the higher pH, suggesting that around neutral to 
alkaline pH values are optimal for POX activity. Indeed, a strong positive correlation 
between POX activity and pH is frequently observed (Pind et al. 1994, Sinsabaugh et al. 
2008, Kang et al. 2018) and was observed in the present study in Colombia (n = 67, r = 
0.602, p < 0.01), and Svalbard (n = 51, r = 0.431, p < 0.01). 
 Regarding the relationship between POX activity and the concentrations of its substrate 
phenolics, many contradictory results have been reported, while some studies demonstrated a 
negative relationship (Pind et al. 1994, Waldrop and Zak 2006, Stursova and Sinsabaugh 
2008, Waldrop and Harden 2008, White et al. 2011), still others reported a positive (Freeman 
et al. 2001, Fenner et al. 2005, Yao et al. 2009, Theuerl et al. 2010, Kang et al. 2018) or no 
relationship (Bending and Read 1997, Tian et al. 2010). Such conflicting evidence could be 
due to the dual functions of phenolic compounds that enable them to serve as an enzyme 
substrate and/or as a product of enzyme action (Min et al. 2015). In this study, and as 
illustrated in Figure 5.06, a significant negative correlation between the activity of POX and 
phenolic concentrations was detected only in Colombian soil samples, while no statistically 
significant relationship was observed in Wales and in Svalbard.  
The remarkably higher conductivity measurements in the Svalbard samples observed in the 
present study were likely to be due to the high inputs of the major sea ions (from sea spray 
aerosols containing Na+, Cl-, Ca2+, Mg2+ and SO4
2-), the presence of which was likely to be 
resulting from the close proximity to the sea, in addition to the greater influence of the 
mineral substrate layer. Conversely, the lower conductivity levels in the Welsh and 
Colombian soils may reflect a lesser marine influence in these upland sites (Jones 2006, 
Pilson 2012).  
Measurement of enzyme activities can reflect microbial nutrient demand and it is believed 
that a negative correlation would occur between soil enzyme activity and nutrient availability 
depending on the economic theory of microbial metabolism indicating that if nutrients are 
limited, enzymes production increase and vice versa (Chrst 1991, Sinsabaugh et al. 1993, 
2008, Zhang et al. 2019). Based on this, the lower sulfatase activity in the Svalbard soil 
compared with the other regions could be explained by the markedly higher sulfate 
concentration, and the higher S enzyme activity in Colombian soils could also be explained 
by the lower sulfate concentration. Indeed, a significant negative correlation between S 
enzyme activity and sulfate concentration was identified at the Colombian samples (n = 67, r 
= -0.571, p < 0.01). In the Svalbard, the negative correlation between sulfatase 
activity/sulfate concentration was not significant. Because all the studied sites were close to 
the sea, it is possible that sea-salt aerosol represented an important sulfate source in the soils, 
which could explain the lack of statistically significant negative correlation between S 
activity and sulfate concentration (Kang and Freeman 1999) in Svalbard. 
Mean phosphatase activity showed the highest activity of all the enzymes in each region 
probably because of the phosphate ions, on average, being the lowest concentration at all 
regions. It is therefore unsurprising that a significant negative correlation was observed 
between phosphate ions and phosphatase activity in Colombia (n = 67, r = -0.241, p < 0.05). 
Conversely, there was a statistically significant positive correlation between phosphatase 
activity and phosphate concentration in the Svalbard peatland (n = 51, r = 0.337, p < 0.05), 
which means that the phosphate measurement could represent the product of phosphatase 
activity (Senga et al. 2015). Possibly, this was caused by phosphatase activity that was higher 
than what was required to meet phosphate demand (Weintraub and Schimel 2005). This 
disagrees with the theory that enzymes activity occurs only when there is a demand for 
nutrients and that the production of enzymes should therefore stop once nutrient availability 
increases to fulfil demand (economic model) (Burns et al. 2013). One possible explanation is 
that in situations where enzyme turnover, sorption (to soil particles) and/or deactivation (the 
enzyme active site changes shape and can no longer bind to the substrate) rates are low, 
enzyme produced to meet a particular demand for a nutrient may remain active even after that 
demand has been fulfilled (Allison et al. 2007). 
In Wales, no inverse correlation was reported between S enzyme activity and sulfate 
concentration. Also, no inverse correlation was reported between P enzyme activity and 
phosphate concentration to confirm the economic model of enzyme production. According to 
Kang and Freeman (1999), the lack of a significant inverse correlation between enzyme 
activity and nutrient concentration could be due to the legacy enzymes (immobilised 
enzymes) that are already present in large amounts in the soil, and are known to be 
independent of microbial regulation.  
Despite previous research suggesting that the availability of N element in soils could decrease 
the production of N-acquiring enzymes (Bragazza et al. 2006, Steinweg et al. 2013), a 
statistically significant positive correlation between N enzyme activity and ammonium 
concentration was identified in each of the three peatlands, in the Welsh soils (n = 68), r = 
0.494, p < 0.01, in the Colombian soils (n = 67), r = 0.737, p < 0.01, and in the Svalbard (n = 
51), r = 0.313, p < 0.05. These results suggest that ammonium was due to the decomposition, 
as it is end product of the mineralisation of nitrogen-containing compounds (Bayley et al. 
2005, Jones 2006).  
N enrichment significantly increased hydrolase activity (Min et al. 2015), DOC concentration 
and soil respiration (Lu et al. 2011) due to the lower release of polyphenols by Sphagnum 
mosses when N content is high, which would in turn limit enzyme inhibition and promote soil 
metabolism (Bragazza et al. 2006). In addition, N deposition can promote C loss from 
peatlands by activating phenol oxidase (Bragazza et al. 2006). Indeed, in the present study, 
many significant positive relationships have combined ammonium concentration with 
extracellular enzymes activity, GHG flux and DOC at regional scale, which indicate that 
increased N content poses a significant risk to peatlands function (Bragazza et al. 2006).    
Moreover, a significant positive correlation was found at a regional scale between percentage 
soil water content and the activities of all hydrolytic enzymes, suggesting that the aqueous 
medium is better for the activity of hydrolase enzymes providing a medium for enzymes and 
the drought conditions could reduce the production of hydrolytic enzymes, as microbial 
biomass declines (Allison and Vitousek 2005, Sardans and Penuelas 2005, Sowerby et al. 
2005, Steinweg et al. 2013).       
The lower percentage of SOM content in the Svalbard and Colombian samples compared 
with Wales is due to the influence from mineral inputs which were identified in most of the 
studied sites of the Svalbard and Colombian peatlands. 
The pH value may affect the enzymes active sites, as well as the interaction between 
immobilised enzymes and their associated matrix. Thus, pH is an important control on soil 
enzyme activity (Kang and Freeman 1999). The findings of this study suggest that higher pH 
is the dominant controlling factor for POX activity, but not for hydrolase enzyme activities, 
enzyme activity varied in relation to soil pH for all regions (Figure 5.05 a-f), in Colombia all 
activities, with the exception of S activity, were significantly related to soil pH which ranged 
from 4.4 to 6.5. Regarding the optimum pH for S activity, Turner (2010) found that 
arylsulfatase activity had a very acidic optimum pH in all soils (pH 3.0).  
In Wales, all hydrolase activities were significantly correlated with pH (which ranged from 
3.8 to 5.4), and POX activity showed no correlation, suggesting that acidic pH was to a great 
extent optimal for hydrolase activities. In the Svalbard peatland, where pH ranged from 
around neutral (5.64) to alkaline (8.6), only POX activity showed a significant positive 
correlation with soil pH, while the activity of B and N showed a significant negative 
relationship with soil pH which may reflect the fact that each enzyme has a different 
optimum pH range (Turner 2010, Robinson 2015). The optimum pH of the enzymes B 
(Robinson 2015) and N (Turner 2010) are 4.8 and 4.2, respectively, at which the activity is 
maximal. Above and below this point, the enzyme activity decreases (Robinson 2015). In 
Svalbard, the pH values ranged from 5.64 to 8.6, which means that they were above the 
optimum range for the enzymes action.   
 The average soil pH values differed significantly between each of the three regions, the pH 
of which was ranked: Svalbard > Colombia > Wales. Guano was found in Svalbard and is a 
material known to influence various physical and chemical parameters, including 
the concentration of nitrogen, phosphate, magnesium and potassium ions. Guano has an 
alkaline pH (Zwolicki et al. 2013), and this may have contributed to the unexpectedly high 
pH observed in Svalbard. The large divergence of the peatland in Svalbard from the other two 
locations, makes it more difficult to compare the data on a latitudinal basis. The findings 
create uncertainty about whether the differences observed were due to latitude or simply the 
unusual ecosystem inputs. However, while Svalbard may have been suboptimal as a 
representative site at which to carry out a latitudinal comparison, it has nevertheless 
suggested a need for further research to evaluate the extent to which guano creates an 
overriding influence on wetland ecosystem characteristics. 
 The lower pH observed in Wales may have contributed to the significant lower POX activity, 
as acidic conditions are known to be sub-optimal for POX activity (Pind et al. 1994). Low pH 
is one of the reasons why organic matter degradation is very low in wetlands (Clymo 1983). 
Fluxes of greenhouse gas from wetlands are related to soil enzymes activity and 
hydrochemistry (Kang et al. 1998). At a global scale, the higher flux of CO2 from the 
Svalbard peat soils was concurrent with high POX activity and pH and with the low 
phenolics concentration.  
Significant positive correlations were found in Colombia between all enzyme activities and 
the production of CO2 and N2O. Several significant relationships were also found between 
enzyme activities and GHG flux in the Svalbard. By contrast, enzyme activities in Wales did 
not correlate with GHG flux, possibly because the enzyme activity measured in Wales was 
from the legacy enzymes that were already present in the soil rather than the generalised 
measurement of microbial metabolic process that includes de-novo enzyme synthesis, which 
is usually associated with soil microbial respiration (Freeman et al. 1996, Preston et al. 
2012). 
It is important to note here that there was a significant amount of bird guano found at the 
Svalbard sites, which probably explains the high concentration of nitrate, a readily utilizable 
source of nitrogen and in turn may explain the significant N2O emission from the Svalbard 
peatlands (Kang et al. 1998, Thomson et al. 2012).  At a global scale, CH4 flux did not vary 
significantly between the three peatlands suggesting that the activity/biomass of methanogens 
did not vary across studied regions. 
5.6. Conclusions 
In this study, the responses of soil enzyme activities and soil respiration to physical and 
chemical properties were assessed within peat soils obtained from three climatic regions 
representing a gradient of environmental conditions: Arctic (Svalbard, Norway), temperate 
(Snowdonia National Park in Wales, UK) and tropical (Sumapaz National Park in Andean 
mountains, Colombia).  
When the data of each variable within each region was amalgamated and compared between 
the different regions, enzymes activity (except for -glucosidase) and GHGs flux (except for 
CH4), varied in relation to soil physicochemical variables which in turn extremely varied 
across the three contrasting peatlands. The Colombian peatland showed the highest 
arylsulphatase and chitinase activities of the three peatlands, and the highest xylosidase and 
phosphatase activities compared with Svalbard. For phenol oxidase, the lowest activity was 
observed in the Welsh peatland consistent with the lowest pH. The activity of POX was 
relatively high at Arctic soils in conjunction with this site having higher pH, conductivity and 
inorganic nutrients and lower concentration of inhibitory phenolic compounds. Interestingly, 
phosphatase activity was the highest recorded enzyme activity in all three peatlands, most 
likely due to higher demand for phosphorus, which is often less available in terrestrial 
environments. The higher mean DOC concentration in peatland of Colombia and Wales 
compared with Svalbard may be related to the higher primary productivity towards the 
equator where warmer climates and longer growing season exist. Phenolic concentration was 
highest in the Welsh and Colombian peatlands possibly due to the dominant vegetation being 
Sphagnum moss, which dies back rapidly during warm periods resulting in large inputs of 
dead plant material into the soil. A large proportion of this plant material is comprised of 
phenolic compounds. The dominance of Sphagnum moss in Colombia and Wales may also 
provide a reason for the lower pH value in these regions compared to Svalbard. Sphagnum 
acidifies its surroundings by cation exchange. It adsorbs base cations such as calcium and 
magnesium from the soil water and exchanges or releases hydrogen ions. 
The Arctic peatland had higher nutrient concentrations than the other two regions, most likely 
due to the close proximity to the sea and nutrient inputs from birds manure as well as the 
influence from the underlying mineral layer. 
The present study is the first, to current knowledge, giving a comparative view of 
biogeochemical processes in relation to the surrounding physicochemical factors in peatlands 
of three different climatic regions. This could have an implication for predicting how 
peatland biogeochemical processes may respond to climate change and human exploitation, 
which help in development of management strategies for maintain carbon storage function of 
peatlands. 
5.7. Acknowledgments  
The Saudi Arabian government financially supported this research. I am are also grateful for 
the support of Dr Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, who 
collected the samples and provided details of field conditions. I am also acknowledging the 
support of my supervisor, Professor Christopher Freeman, School of Natural Sciences, 
Bangor University. 
5.8. References 
Allison, S.D., Gartner, T.B., Holland, K., Weintraub, M. and Sinsabaugh, R.L., 2007. Soil 
enzymes: linking proteomics and ecological processes. In: Christon, J.H., Ronald, L.C., Jay, 
L.G., David, A.L., Aaron, L.M., Linda, D.S. (eds.), Manual of Environmental Microbiology, 
3rd edition (pp. 704-711). American Society of Microbiology.  
Bayley, S.E., Thormann, M.N. and Szumigalski, A.R., 2005. Nitrogen mineralization and 
decomposition in western boreal bog and fen peat. Ecoscience, 12(4), pp.455-465.  
Bguin, P. and Aubert, J.P., 1994. The biological degradation of cellulose. FEMS 
Microbiology Reviews, 13(1), pp. 25-58. 
Bending, G.D. and Read, D.J., 1997. Lignin and soluble phenolic degradation by 
ectomycorrhizal and ericoid mycorrhizal fungi. Mycological Research, 101(11), pp. 1348-
1354. 
Bragazza, L., Freeman, C., Jones, T., Rydin, H., Limpens, J., Fenner, N., Ellis, T., Gerdol, R., 
Hjek, M., Hjek, T. and Iacumin, P., 2006. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition promotes 
carbon loss from peat bogs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103(51), pp. 19386-19389.  
Bragazza, L., Bardgett, R. D., Mitchell, E. A., and Buttler, A., 2015. Linking soil microbial 
communities to vascular plant abundance along a climate gradient. New Phytologist, 205(3), 
pp. 1175-1182.  
Burns, R. G., DeForest, J. L., Marxsen, J., Sinsabaugh, R. L., Stromberger, M. E., 
Wallenstein, M. D., Weintraub, M. N., and Zoppini, A., 2013. Soil enzymes in a changing 
environment: current knowledge and future directions. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 58, pp. 
216-234. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments (pp. 29-59). 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Clymo, R. S., 1983. Peat. p. 159224. In: A. J. Gore (ed.), Mires: Swamp, Bog, Fen and 
Moor. Elsevier, New York, NY, USA. 
DeForest, J.L., 2009. The influence of time, storage temperature, and substrate age on 
potential soil enzyme activity in acidic forest soils using MUB-linked substrates and L-
DOPA. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(6), pp.1180-1186. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Fenner, N. and Freeman, C., 2011. Drought-induced carbon loss in peatlands. Nature 
Geoscience, 4(12), p. 895. 
Fenner, N., Freeman, C. and Reynolds, B., 2005. Observations of a seasonally shifting 
thermal optimum in peatland carbon-cycling processes, implications for the global carbon 
cycle and soil enzyme methodologies. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 37(10), pp. 1814-1821. 
Fierer, N., Schimel, J.P. and Holden, P.A., 2003. Variations in microbial community 
composition through two soil depth profiles. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 35(1), pp. 167-
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Jones, S.E. and Lock, M.A., 1995. The use of fluorogenic 
substrates for measuring enzyme activity in peatlands. Plant and Soil, 175(1), pp. 147-152. 
Freeman, C., Liska, G., Ostle, N.J., Lock, M.A., Reynolds, B. and Hudson, J., 1996. 
Microbial activity and enzymic decomposition processes following peatland water table 
drawdown. Plant and Soil, 180(1), pp. 121-127. 
Freeman, C., Ostle, N., and Kang, H., 2001. An enzymic 'latch' on a global carbon 
store. Nature, 409(6817), p. 149-149. 
Freeman, C., Ostle, N.J., Fenner, N. and Kang, H., 2004. A regulatory role for phenol oxidase 
during decomposition in peatlands. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 36(10), pp. 1663-1667. 
Gough, R., 2014. Catchment influences on dissolved organic carbon concentration and 
character, implications for potable water treatment and trihalomethane control, PhD thesis, 
Bangor University. 
Gough, R., Holliman, P.J., Fenner, N., Peacock, M. and Freeman, C., 2016. Influence of 
water table depth on pore water chemistry and trihalomethane formation potential in 
peatlands. Water Environment Research, 88(2), pp. 107-117.  
Hodgkins, S. B., Richardson, C. J., Dommain, R., Wang, H., Glaser, P. H., Verbeke, B., and 
Flanagan, N., 2018. Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in 
peat recalcitrance. Nature Communications, 9(1), pp. 1-13. 
Hoostal, M.J. and Bouzat, J.L., 2008. The modulating role of dissolved organic matter on 
spatial patterns of microbial metabolism in Lake Erie sediments. Microbial Ecology, 55(2), 
pp. 358-368. 
Jones, T.G., 2006. Climate change and dissolved organic carbon: impacts on drinking water 
supplies, PhD thesis, Bangor University. 
Kalbitz, K., Solinger, S., Park, J.H., Michalzic, B. and Matzner, E., 2000. Controls on the 
dynamics of dissolved organic matter in soils: a review. Soil Science, 165, pp. 277-304. 
Kang, H., Freeman, C., and Lock, M. A., 1998. Trace gas emissions from a north Wales fen-
role of hydrochemistry and soil enzyme activity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 105(1-2), pp. 
107-116. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp. 449-454. 
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
Kim, S.Y. and Kang, H., 2008. Effects of elevated CO2 on below-ground processes in 
temperate marsh microcosms. Hydrobiologia, 605(1), pp. 123-130. 
Leifeld, J. and Menichetti, L., 2018. The underappreciated potential of peatlands in global 
climate change mitigation strategies. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 1071. 
Li, J., Jian, S., de Koff, J.P., Lane, C.S., Wang, G., Mayes, M.A. and Hui, D., 2018. 
Differential effects of warming and nitrogen fertilization on soil respiration and microbial 
dynamics in switchgrass croplands. GCB Bioenergy, 10(8), pp. 565-576. 
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11. 
Moore, P.D., 2002. The future of cool temperate bogs. Environmental Conservation, 29(1), 
pp. 3-20. 
Pilson, M.E., 2012. An Introduction to the Chemistry of the Sea. Cambridge University Press.  
Pind, A., Freeman, C. and Lock, M.A., 1994. Enzymic degradation of phenolic materials in 
peatlands-measurement of phenol oxidase activity. Plant and Soil, 159(2), pp. 227-231.  
Preston, M.D., Smemo, K.A., McLaughlin, J.W. and Basiliko, N., 2012. Peatland microbial 
communities and decomposition processes in the James Bay Lowlands, Canada. Frontiers in 
Microbiology, 3, p. 70. 
Robinson, P. K., 2015. Enzymes: principles and biotechnological applications. Essays in 
Biochemistry, 59, pp. 1-41. 
Senga, Y., Hiroki, M., Terui, S. and Nohara, S., 2015. Variation in microbial function 
through soil depth profiles in the Kushiro Wetland, north-eastern Hokkaido, 
Japan. Ecological Research, 30(4), pp. 563-572. 
Sinsabaugh, R. L., Antibus, R. K., Linkins, A. E., McClaugherty, C. A., Rayburn, L., Repert, 
D., and Weiland, T., 1993. Wood decomposition: nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in 
relation to extracellular enzyme activity. Ecology, 74(5), pp. 1586-1593. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., Lauber, C.L., Weintraub, M.N., Ahmed, B., Allison, S.D., Crenshaw, C., 
Contosta, A.R., Cusack, D., Frey, S., Gallo, M.E. and Gartner, T.B., 2008. Stoichiometry of 
soil enzyme activity at global scale. Ecology Letters, 11(11), pp. 1252-1264. 
Steinweg, J.M., Dukes, J.S., Paul, E.A. and Wallenstein, M.D., 2013. Microbial responses to 
multi-factor climate change: effects on soil enzymes. Frontiers in Microbiology, 4, p. 146. 
Stursova, M. and Sinsabaugh, R.L., 2008. Stabilization of oxidative enzymes in desert soil 
may limit organic matter accumulation. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 40(2), pp. 550-553.  
Theuerl, S., Drr, N., Guggenberger, G., Langer, U., Kaiser, K., Lamersdorf, N. and Buscot, 
F., 2010. Response of recalcitrant soil substances to reduced N deposition in a spruce forest 
soil: integrating laccase-encoding genes and lignin decomposition. FEMS Microbiology 
Ecology, 73(1), pp. 166-177. 
Thomson, A.J., Giannopoulos, G., Pretty, J., Baggs, E.M. and Richardson, D.J., 2012. 
Biological sources and sinks of nitrous oxide and strategies to mitigate emissions. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Biological Sciences, 367(1593), 
pp. 1157-168. 
Tian, L., Dell, E. and Shi, W., 2010. Chemical composition of dissolved organic matter in 
agroecosystems: correlations with soil enzyme activity and carbon and nitrogen 
mineralization. Applied Soil Ecology, 46(3), pp. 426-435. 
Turner, B.L., 2010. Variation in pH optima of hydrolytic enzyme activities in tropical rain 
forest soils. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76(19), pp. 6485-6493. 
Tveit, A., Schwacke, R., Svenning, M.M. and Urich, T., 2013. Organic carbon 
transformations in high-Arctic peat soils: key functions and microorganisms. The ISME 
Journal, 7(2), pp. 299-311. 
Voigt, C., Marushchak, M.E., Lamprecht, R.E., Jackowicz-Korczyski, M., Lindgren, A., 
Mastepanov, M., Granlund, L., Christensen, T.R., Tahvanainen, T., Martikainen, P.J. and 
Biasi, C., 2017. Increased nitrous oxide emissions from Arctic peatlands after permafrost 
thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 114(24), pp. 6238-6243. 
Waldrop, M.P. and Harden, J.W., 2008. Interactive effects of wildfire and permafrost on 
microbial communities and soil processes in an Alaskan black spruce forest. Global Change 
Biology, 14(11), pp. 2591-2602.  
Waldrop, M.P. and Zak, D.R., 2006. Response of oxidative enzyme activities to nitrogen 
deposition affects soil concentrations of dissolved organic carbon. Ecosystems, 9(6), pp. 921-
Weintraub, M. N., and Schimel, J. P., 2005. The seasonal dynamics of amino acids and other 
nutrients in Alaskan Arctic tundra soils. Biogeochemistry, 73(2), pp. 359-380. 
Wetzel, R.G., 1992. Gradient-dominated ecosystems: sources and regulatory functions of 
dissolved organic matter in freshwater ecosystems. Hydrobiologia 229, pp. 181198. 
White, R.A., Freeman, C. and Kang, H., 2011. Plant-derived phenolic compounds impair the 
remediation of acid mine drainage using treatment wetlands. Ecological Engineering, 37(2), 
pp. 172-175.  
Worrall, F., Burt, T.P., Jaeban, R.Y., Warburton, J. and Shedden, R., 2002. Release of 
dissolved organic carbon from upland peat. Hydrological Processes, 16(17), pp. 3487-3504.  
Yao, H., Bowman, D., Rufty, T. and Shi, W., 2009. Interactions between N fertilization, grass 
clipping addition and pH in turf ecosystems: implications for soil enzyme activities and 
organic matter decomposition. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 41(7), pp. 1425-1432. 
Zak, D., Roth, C., Unger, V., Goldhammer, T., Fenner, N., Freeman, C., and Jurasinski, G., 
2019. Unravelling the importance of polyphenols for microbial carbon mineralization in 
rewetted riparian peatlands. Frontiers in Environmental Science, 7, p. 147. 
Zhang, Y., Wang, C. and Li, Y., 2019. Contrasting effects of nitrogen and phosphorus 
additions on soil nitrous oxide fluxes and enzyme activities in an alpine wetland of the 
Tibetan Plateau. PloS one, 14(5), p.e0216244. 
Zwolicki, A., Zmudczyska-Skarbek, K.M., Iliszko, L. and Stempniewicz, L., 2013. Guano 
deposition and nutrient enrichment in the vicinity of planktivorous and piscivorous seabird 
colonies in Spitsbergen. Polar Biology, 36(3), pp.363-372. 
Chapter 6  
Using environmental DNA metabarcoding to compare micro-
eukaryote populations in Arctic, temperate and tropical peatlands 
6.1. Abstract  
Peatlands arise because primary production rates exceed decomposition rates, leading to the 
importance of the ecosystem in global carbon sequestration. Ongoing climate change 
represents a threat both for the composition (biotic communities) and function (carbon 
storage) of peatlands. Alongside prokaryotes, eukaryotic microorganisms are key regulators 
of nutrients cycling within soil food webs and through their multiple functions, they can 
directly and/or indirectly influence the function of peatlands. They are used as bioindicators 
of abiotic changes in various environments. However, they have received relatively little 
attention in many ecosystems including peatlands. Studying the structure and function of 
micro-eukaryotes in peatlands along a climatic gradient could allow us to anticipate how 
peatland may respond to future climate change.  
In this study, for the first time, richness, diversity, relative abundance and the structure of 
micro-eukaryotic community were assessed in peat samples collected from three contrasting 
climatic regions (Arctic, temperate and tropical) representing a gradient in climate-driven 
environmental variables. In the present study, the general pattern of peat soil micro-eukaryote 
abundance was consistent with other studies of peatlands, where the supergroups Alveolata, 
Opisthokonta, Rhizaria and Stramenopiles were dominant. The findings based on redundancy 
analysis revealed that the community composition of micro-eukaryotes, which are presented 
here based on the functional groups (phagotrophs, phototrophs, mixotrophs, osmotrophs and 
parasites), changed significantly between the peatlands of the three climatic regions in 
response to the selected abiotic and metabolic variables of the soil; increased pH, 
conductivity, soil organic matter (SOM) content, oxygen concentration and lower 
temperature, structured micro-eukaryote community, which dominated by phagotrophs, 
phototrophs and mixotrophs, in the Arctic. Higher temperature and phenolic compound 
concentrations and lower pH and nutrient concentrations explained community composition, 
which represented by high relative abundance of parasites, in the temperate Welsh peatland. 
Micro-eukaryotic community in the Colombian peatland was dominated by osmotrophs and 
explained by high activities of the extracellular enzymes glucosidase, arylsulfatase, chitinase, 
phosphatase and phenol oxidase, which were also consistent with lower phenolic 
concentrations, and higher pH and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration. 
Furthermore, the occurrence of predator and host invertebrates was noted as well as prey 
organisms and considered their potential significance for micro-eukaryotic organisms.  
6.2. Introduction 
In the microbiomes found in soils, eukaryotic microbial communities are the most species 
rich (Geisen et al. 2015). These organisms, including fungi and protists, are functionally 
diverse (Araujo et al. 2018), which enables them to play a number of essential roles within 
the ecosystems food webs (Adl and Gupta 2006). In soils, phototrophs containing 
photosynthetic pigments are the primary producers fixing carbon during photosynthesis 
(Seppey et al. 2017). As phagotrophs, they feed mainly on bacterial and fungal communities 
in addition to other eukaryotic microorganisms and thus they contribute to elemental cycling, 
nutrient release and soil fertility, which in turn stimulating plant growth (Geisen 2016, Geisen 
et al. 2018). Through predation, phagotrophs also control their microbial prey populations 
(Geisen et al. 2018). Mixotrophic organisms are those that benefit from both trophic 
behaviours (phototrophy and phagotrophy), during both of these functions the mixotrophic 
organisms can directly and indirectly affect the carbon balance of the ecosystem (Jassey et al. 
2015). Osmotrophs absorb soluble nutrients through the cell membrane and are mostly found 
within the fungal group (Adl and Gupta 2006). These have been identified as the main 
decomposers of organic substrates, which they achieve by releasing extracellular enzymes 
(Min et al. 2015). Parasitic protists of animals and plants are likely to drive the diversity of 
animal (Mah et al. 2017) and plant (Schwelm et al. 2018) communities, respectively. 
Additionally, micro-eukaryotic organisms are distributed ubiquitously and are known to 
respond to changes in environmental conditions including water content, oxygen availability, 
temperature, pH, light intensity, nutrient availability, vegetation type and anthropogenic 
disturbances. They are therefore considered to be useful bioindicators of abiotic variations in 
their environments (Koenig et al. 2015), and can to some extent infer spatial heterogeneity in 
different habitats and reflect soil quality (Mitchell et al. 2000). For example, testate amoebae 
respond quickly to hydrological changes and thus their distribution is mainly controlled by 
soil water content (Booth et al. 2010) and water chemistry (Mitchell et al. 2000). Rose and 
Caron (2007) showed that temperature is the main factor affecting algal community, while 
nutrient availability can affect diatom distributions (Gilbert et al. 1998). Min et al. (2015), 
Fierer (2017) and Kang et al. (2018) noted that pH plays a key role in shaping fungal 
communities, under optimal temperature conditions (Kang et al. 2018), with higher pH 
stimulating phenol oxidase activity, resulting in higher dissolved organic carbon (DOC) 
production (Kang et al. 2018).  
Electrical conductivity, pH and total organic carbon concentration appear to be the dominant 
drivers of phagotroph abundance (Mieczan 2007). In addition, dissolved oxygen 
concentration has been identified as another important factor affecting the abundance of both 
phagotrophic and phototrophic microorganisms (Papadimitriou et al. 2010).   
The presence of phenolic compounds appears to negatively affect the presence of microbial 
communities (Fung et al. 1985, Opelt et al. 2007, Mellegrd et al. 2009, Pizzolitto et al. 
2015), which will in turn affect many essential processes such as decomposition (Freeman et 
al. 2012, Min et al. 2015) and photosynthesis (Mieczan 2007). Conversely, the darkness 
created by elevated phenolic concentrations in soil pore waters provides a natural protective 
shield for parasitic infective stages from harmful sunlight (Thomas et al. 1995, King et al. 
2008). Furthermore, studying the effect of environmental variables on community 
composition of micro-eukaryotes along a climatic gradient is useful for predicting how 
peatland may respond to the future climate change (Jassey et al. 2015).   
The structure and function of peatlands is threatened by ongoing global warming which has 
been attributed to high emissions of greenhouse gas into the atmosphere (IPCC 2013). 
Through their multiple functions, micro-eukaryotic communities can directly and/or 
indirectly affect the carbon balance of peatlands and hence possibly contribute to the climate 
change (Dedysh et al. 2006, Jassey et al. 2015). 
Among protists, the Ciliophora within supergroup Alveolata (Mieczan 2007, Papadimitriou et 
al. 2010, Geisen et al. 2015), Arcellinida and Euglyphida testate amoebae within supergroups 
Amoebozoa and Rhizaria, respectively (Gilbert et al. 1998, Mitchell et al. 2000, Lara et al. 
2011, Mieczan 2012), and Chrysophytes within supergroup Stramenopiles (Lara et al. 2011) 
are known to be peatland associated. In addition, Fungi within supergroup Opisthokonta 
(Lara et al. 2011) are considered typical inhabitants of peatlands. Recently, high throughput 
sequencing-dependent approaches revealed that parasitic protists are abundantly present in 
soils (Geisen et al. 2015, Mah et al. 2017), suggesting that contaminated soil can be an 
important source of pathogens to food, groundwater and surface water. As such, the potential 
for a role of soil in parasite transmission should not be disregarded (Santamaria and Toranzos 
2003).  
Wetland systems are ecotones between fully aquatic and terrestrial habitats, and so tend to 
support high levels of biodiversity (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000). Richer biodiversity, 
including more diverse hosts, vectors and parasites, may by implication lead to increased 
predation and parasite-host encounter rates, increasing the probability of transmission of 
parasites with complex life cycles between hosts (Thomas et al. 1997) due to consumption of 
infected intermediate hosts (Dobson et al. 2008). 
Thomas et al. (1997) in their study of parasitism in wetlands, concluded that in addition to the 
pathogenic effects of parasites, they can also affect the distribution, behaviour and diversity 
of their hosts. Such consequences of parasitism suggest that parasites are important players in 
ecosystems structuring and functioning (Thomas et al. 2005).  
Soil microbial communities, including prokaryotes and micro-eukaryotes, are an essential 
component of soil ecosystems, as they are responsible for nutrients cycling and ecosystem 
processes (Andersen et al. 2013). Prokaryotic and eukaryotic communities in peatlands are 
important in the net sequestration of atmospheric carbon and therefore play a unique role in 
global carbon cycling (Winsborough and Basiliko 2010). However, unlike prokaryotes, 
eukaryotic microorganisms have received relatively little attention in many ecosystems 
including peatlands. These are globally significant environments since they represent huge 
carbon storage, sequestering about one third of global soil carbon in the form of peat (Kang et 
al. 2018). To date, no published data giving a comparative view of micro-eukaryotic 
community composition in relation to the surrounding environmental factors in peatlands of 
different climatic regions. Also, no data has been published so far about micro-eukaryotes in 
the chosen field sites of this study.   
In the present study, the aim was to compare richness, diversity, relative abundance and 
composition of the micro-eukaryotic community between comparable peatlands in three 
distinct climatic regions, namely Arctic, temperate and tropical with contrasting 
biogeochemical conditions.  Soil DNA metabarcoding of the hypervariable V4 region of the 
18S SSU ribosomal RNA gene was used to assess the micro-eukaryotic community. 
Redundancy analysis (RDA) was used to test the hypothesis that the micro-eukaryotic 
community differs significantly between climatic regions in a manner predictable based on 
the biogeochemical soil conditions present. This analysis also enables a visualisation of the 
effect of the most important soil variables and metabolic factors on micro-eukaryote 
community composition. In order to more easily analyse and interpret the data, micro-
eukaryotes were organized into five functional groups according to their nutritional mode: 
phagotrophs, phototrophs, mixotrophs, parasites and osmotrophs. The biotic interactions of 
eukaryotic microorganisms were also considered with their potential hosts, predators and 
prey organisms. 
6.3. Materials and methods 
6.3.1. Soil sampling and laboratory analysis 
In this study, moss-dominated peatlands along a latitude gradient and from three climatic 
regions were chosen. They were located in the Arctic region (Svalbard, Norway), a temperate 
region (Snowdonia National Park in North Wales, UK), and a tropical region (Sumapaz 
National Park in Andean mountains, Colombia). In each peatland, soil cores were collected 
from six different sites, and three replicates of soil cores were extracted from each site. 
Samples were collected from Svalbard, Norway in late July 2016. The average air 
temperature was 5C, the water table was at the soil surface during sampling and the moss 
tundra of the study sites was dominated by the species Tomenthypnum nitens and Calliergon 
richardsonii, without vascular plants.  
Six Sphagnum-dominated peatland sites located in the Snowdonia National Park, North 
Wales, UK were sampled at the beginning of September 2016. The study sites were covered 
by Sphagnum spp, Juncus spp, and Carex spp interspersed with some cotton grasses and 
some Calluna vulgaris (common heather). The average air temperature was 14.3C and the 
water table level was at the soil surface at the time of sampling. 
The tropical peatland sites were located at high altitude within the Sumapaz National Park in 
the Andean mountain range, Colombia. Sampling was performed at the end of July 2017. The 
dominant vegetation was Sphagnum spp, Carex spp, Juncus spp, Espeletia spp and many 
other shrubs were also more common. The average air temperature was 13.4C and the water 
table was at the soil surface during the time of sampling.  
Each soil core was examined and boundaries between distinct layers identified based on the 
colour and the texture. These individual layers were then placed in individual plastic bags and 
transported in ice to the laboratory in Wales. Distinct layers in the soil cores were handled 
and analysed separately. Subsamples of soil for molecular analysis were frozen at - 20C, and 
for enzymes activity measurement and chemical analysis were stored at 4C. Molecular 
analysis was conducted on soil samples of the superficial layer (from 0-5 cm in the Arctic, 
and from 0-10 cm in Wales and Colombia). Soil temperature, pH and dissolved oxygen 
concentration were measured in the field using portable instruments. Measurements of soil 
enzyme activity, greenhouse gas fluxes, organic matter content and water content, pH value, 
electrical conductivity, and soil water extraction in order to measure phenolic compound, 
dissolved organic carbon and ions concentrations were performed in the laboratory following 
standard protocols. 
6.3.2. Soil analyses 
The activities of extracellular enzymes were determined following a protocol described by 
Dunn et al. (2014). Briefly, the phenolic amino acid L-3,4- dihydroxy phenylalanine (L-
DOPA, Sigma Aldrich Ltd, Dorset, UK) was used as a target substrate for assay phenol 
oxidase activity. The colour change is determined using a spectrophotometer at 475 nm and 
the activity of phenol oxidase was then calculated by using Beer-Lambert Law and expressed 
as mol of formed (diqc) per minute per gram of soil (dry weight). Hydrolase activities were 
determined using the procedures of Dunn et al. (2014), based on the measurement of 
fluorescence of methylumbelliferone (MUF). Fluorescence of the MUF molecule was 
measured using a microplate fluorometer (Molecular Devices SpectraMax M2e 
spectrophotometer) at 450 nm emission and 330 nm excitation. Hydrolase activities are 
expressed as nmol MUF g-1 of soil min-1. 
Soil subsamples were oven-dried for 24 h at 105 C in order to determine soil water content. 
Soil organic matter was determined by muffle-burning dried subsamples for 4 h at 550 C. 
To determine the amount of water-extractable carbon in the peat samples, 5 g subsample of 
peat was taken and homogenising with 40ml of water on a rotary shaker for 24 h. The 
resulting slurry was centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 30 minutes. The supernatant was filtered 
through a 0.45m membrane filter (Whatman, Kent, UK) to separate particulate organic 
carbon (POC) from dissolved organic carbon (DOC). The filtered samples were then 
collected in 20 mL plastic scintillation vials (Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd) and stored at 
4C until measurement.  
A pH meter and a Primo 5 handheld conductivity meter were inserted into peat slurry before 
filtration in order to measure the pH and the conductivity of the peat, respectively. 
The concentration of phenolics was assayed using Folin-Ciocalteu Reagent, as described in 
detail by Box (1983). 
Cation and anion concentrations were analyzed on extracted, filtered water by using a 
Metrohm 850 Professional Ion Chromatograph. 
The concentration of DOC was measured on filtered and acidified samples using a 
Thermalox TOC/TN analyser (Analytical Sciences Ltd) equipped with a non- dispersive 
infrared CO2 analyser. Microbial respiration (CO2, CH4 and N2O) was also measured in peat 
samples using Gas Chromatography equipped with flame ionization detector (FID) for 
measuring the concentration of CO2 and CH4 and electron capture detector (ECD) for 
measuring the concentration of N2O. 
6.3.3. Nucleic acid extraction and polymerase chain reactions (PCR) amplification 
DNA was isolated from soil samples of the superficial layer (54 samples) using the 
PowerSoil DNA Isolation kit (MoBio Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The amount of 
extracted DNA was checked using a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop 2000c machine. 
Eukaryote communities were assessed by amplifying the V4 regions of the 18S rDNA gene 
using the broad-spectrum eukaryotic primers (TAReuk454FWD1 and TAReukREV3) 
(Stoeck et al. 2010). 
The PCR reaction mixture (25 L) contained 12.5 L 2X Phusion Master Mix (New England 
BioLabs Inc.), 0.4 M of each of the primers, approximately 10 ng of isolated DNA as 
template, and 9.5 L of nuclease-free water. The PCR reactions basically comprised an initial 
denaturation step at 95C for 5 minutes, followed by 10 three-step cycles consisting of 94C 
for 30 seconds, 60 C for 45 seconds, and 72 C for 1 minute, followed by 25 further three-
step cycles consisting of 94 C for 30 seconds, and primer annealing temperature of 50 C for 
45 seconds, and 72 C for 1 minutes and a final two minutes elongation at 72 C (ProFlex 3 
x 32-well PCR System, Thermo Scientific). 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/4484073
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/4484073
High throughput sequencing was performed externally by the Research Technology Support 
Facility Genomics Core in Michigan State University (USA). 
6.3.4. Sequence processing 
Raw sequences were processed using the DADA2 R package and following a standard 
pipeline of paired end Illumina MiSeq data analysis 
(https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/tutorial.html) to produce the final taxa and sequence tables. 
In short, primers were eliminated from sequences and the quality of reads was checked before 
trimming them at 230 bases to avoid low quality scores present at the end of the reads, a 
common problem in illumine sequencing. Reads were denoised (to combine all identical 
sequencing reads into unique sequences), paired reads were merged, and chimeras were 
checked and removed. The amplicon sequence variant table (ASV) (a higher-resolution 
version of the OTU table) was constructed. Sequences were clustered into operational 
taxonomic units (OTUs) based on the RDP naive Bayesian classifier method (97% sequence 
similarity). Sequences were compared with the PR2 database using the assignTaxonomy 
function of DADA2 package.  
Generally, it is worth noting that amplicon sequence data are semi-quantitative. For 
example, in prokaryotes for 16S rRNA-based data, it has been shown that due to fluctuation 
of ribosomal operon copy numbers between microbial species, an absolute quantification of a 
given OTU is not feasible (Jacquiod et al. 2016). This same issue would also be relevant in 
eukaryotes where 18S rRNA is used as a genetic marker (Boers et al. 2019). 
A primary goal of microbiome studies can be to determine which microbial taxa are present 
and, by implication, that may play roles in ecosystem functioning. These studies may also 
entail assessment of differential abundance between different taxonomic groups 
(differentially abundant taxa). Whilst these abundance surveys are often achieved through 
amplification of the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplicon with universal primer sets 
before high-throughput sequencing, the fact that the nucleic acids are amplified 
experimentally means that they can only be illustrative of potential differential abundance of 
each taxon in each sample. Whilst a range of standard statistical tests or microbiome-specific 
packages can be used to assess differential abundance, it is important to note that these 
measurements are at best semiquantitative as they cannot enumerate the absolute number of 
individuals of a given species due to the amplification stage. Hence, data reported in this 
https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/tutorial.html
https://eur01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Flink.springer.com%2Farticle%2F10.1007%2Fs00374-017-1205-1%23ref-CR10&data=04%7C01%7Cbsp818%40bangor.ac.uk%7C21dc8fdb28d04b87a71608d8b9671be9%7Cc6474c55a9234d2a9bd4ece37148dbb2%7C0%7C0%7C637463199793855811%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C1000&sdata=XVfPFMzXSp0F1md8fSTxd0b%2FI0ZBaKOsC4b9UtB6S3U%3D&reserved=0
study are semiquantitative illustrations of likely relative abundances, and must be treated 
cautiously. 
6.3.5. Data analyses 
Firstly, phyloseq package was used to import and visualize the data (sequences and taxonomy 
tables). The complete OTUs database generated after sequencing analysis was used for 
diversity analysis of the micro-eukaryote community, while community composition analysis 
was conducted only on the taxa with > 0.01% of relative abundance in order to reduce the 
effect of rare species in the ordination analysis.  
Redundancy analysis (RDA) was used to discover which soil physicochemical properties 
were the most important in determining the community structure of micro-eukaryotes, as well 
as which microbial metabolic factors were most strongly correlated with protistan and fungal 
community composition (vegan package). Before conducting RDA, a presence-absence 
transformation was performed to calculate species number per site and then the rare species 
were removed. Next, gradient length was checked using detrended correspondence analysis 
(DCA). Community data was Hellinger transformed (Legendre and Gallagher 2001). The 
significant subset of the explanatory variables was selected using forward selection. Briefly, 
an initial global test was conducted, and model significance was tested using the Monte Carlo 
permutation test. If significant, forward selection was conducted using the ordistep function 
from vegan package. RDA plots represent only the selected subset of variables. Alpha 
diversity was calculated from an abundance matrix using Shannons index (vegan package). 
Barplot and boxplot were performed to determine the relative abundance by ggplot2 package, 
venn diagram was performed to determine the number of exclusive and shared OTUs by 
vennDiagram package. 
Statistically significant differences between the three climatic regions in terms of richness, 
diversity and relative abundances were analysed using ANOVA with Tukeys HSD post hoc 
test (p < 0.05) (nlme and multcomp packages). All statistical analyses and graphs were carried 
out using R V.3.5.1. 
6.4. Results 
6.4.1. Eukaryotic community structure  
After quality filtering, a total of 7,519,493 sequences and 18555 operational taxonomic units 
(OTUs) were obtained based on 97% similarity. More than half of the eukaryotic OTUs 
belonged to the protist group (64%), followed by animal (15%), fungi (7%) and plant (1%). 
In terms of the relative abundance of reads, most eukaryotic reads belonged to the animal 
group (42%), followed by protist (39%), fungi (9%) and plant (7%) (Figure 6.01&Table 
6.01). 
Figure 6.01. General relative abundance of reads associated with eukaryote groups. The 
animal group includes the Metazoa (Annelida, Arthropoda, Cnidaria, Gastrotricha, Mollusca, 
Nematoda, Platyhelminthes, Rotifera and Tardigrada taxa). The plant group includes the 
Streptophyta (Embryophyceae taxa). 
The relative abundance of the protistan group was higher in the Svalbard peatland than 
peatlands in both Colombia and Wales (F = 20, P < 0.001). The fungal group was higher in 
the Colombian peatland than in the other two regions (F = 19.54, P < 0.001). The relative 
abundance of the animal group was higher in Wales than in the other two regions (F = 10.8, 
P < 0.001. Finally, the relative abundance of the plant group was lower in Colombia than in 
the other two regions (F = 7.094, P < 0.01) (Table 6.01). 
Table 6.01. The relative abundance of eukaryote groups. The different letters denote 
statistically significant differences identified using the Tukeys HSD post-hoc test (p < 0.05). 
Eukaryote groups reads OTUs Svalbard (S) Colombia (C) Wales (W) 
Protist 39.0% 64.0% 49.5% 
21.8% 
28.7% 
Animal 42% 15% 20.1% 
46.7% 
Plants 7.0% 1.0% 37.0% 
14.0% 
49.0% 
Fungi 9.0% 7.0% 9.5% 
80.0% 
10.4% 
6.4.2. Micro-eukaryotic community patterns across studied peatlands 
After removing the OTUs of the Metazoa (animals) and Streptophyta (plants), 3,828,089 
sequences were obtained and 15507 OTUs were found to be affiliated to micro-eukaryote 
organisms.  
40.4% (6265) of obtained OTUs were observed in Colombia, 37.4% (5801) in Svalbard, 
whereas the fewest were found in the Welsh peatland (27.3%, 4229 OTUs). Only 55 of the 
OTUs (0.4%) were shared between all the three regions (Figure 6.02).  
Figure 6.02. Venn diagram representing the number of exclusive and shared micro-eukaryote 
OTUs between the three different climatic regions. 
Micro-eukaryotic alpha diversity and richness did not differ significantly between the three 
climatic regions (F = 1.614, P = 0.210 and F = 1.45, P = 0.247, respectively) (Figure 6.03). 
Figure 6.03. Richness and diversity of micro-eukaryote OTUs in the contrasting regions. 
6.4.3. Comparison of micro-eukaryote taxonomic and functional groups between peatlands 
Alveolates (44.3% of all micro-eukaryotes reads, 22.6% of all OTUs) dominated the micro-
eukaryotic community, followed by Opisthokonta (reads: 21.8%, OTUs: 18.3%), Rhizaria 
(reads: 11%, OTUs: 30.2%), Stramenopiles (reads: 11%, OTUs: 16%) and Amoebozoa 
(reads: 6.8%, OTUs: 7.6%). The else groups, that is, Hacrobia (reads: 2.8%, OTUs: 1.3%), 
Chlorophyta (reads: 2.1%, OTUs: 2.8%), Excavata (reads: 0.2%, OTUs: 0.6%) and Apusozoa 
(reads: 0.14%, OTUs: 0.5%) were generally less numerous (Figure 6.04&Table 6.02). 
Figure 6.04. Stacked barplot representing the community composition of micro-eukaryote 
supergroups at each site within the different climatic regions. NA, not available. 
All the nine micro-eukaryote supergroups and the five functional groups were found at each 
region (Figures 6.04& 6.05, Appendix B Figures 8&9, Tables 6.02& 6.03). 
Figure 6.05. The relative abundance of the five functional groups of micro-eukaryotes at each 
site within each climatic region. 
Alveolates and Chlorophyta were significantly more abundant in Svalbard compared with the 
others (F = 21.4, P = 0.000 and F = 7.95, P = 0.001, respectively). Opisthokonta organisms 
were more abundant in Colombian peat (F = 12.3, P = 0.000), while Hacrobia and Excavata 
were highest in Wales (F = 5.03, P = 0.01 and F = 5.5, P = 0.007, respectively). No 
differences in the relative abundance of Amoebozoa, Apusozoa, Rhizaria and Stramenopiles 
were observed (Table 6.02, p < 0.05). 
Our results indicated significant differences in the richness, diversity and the relative 
abundance of the functional groups (p < 0.05). The OTUs richness of mixotrophic group was 
higher in the Arctic region than Wales, while no significant differences between the three 
regions in the mixotrophic diversity (Appendix B Figure 2, p < 0.05). The relative abundance 
of mixotrophs, dominated by Chrysophyceae (represented 90.5% of mixotrophic reads), was 
highest in Svalbard than Colombia and Wales (Table 6.03, p < 0.05). 
Table 6.02. The relative abundance of micro-eukaryotic supergroups. The different letters 
denote statistically significant differences identified using the Tukeys HSD post-hoc test (p 
< 0.05). 
Supergroup reads OTUs Svalbard (S) Colombia (C) Wales (W) 
Alveolata 44.3% 22.6% 59.1% 
15.6% 
25.3% 
Amoebozoa 6.8% 7.6% 28.8% 37.4% 
33.8% 
Apusozoa 0.14% 0.5% 27.5% 29.1% 
43.4% 
Chlorophyta 2.10% 2.8% 78.3% 
19.1% 
Excavata 0.16% 0.6% 9.2% 
24.25% 66.6% 
Hacrobia 2.8% 1.3% 4.4% 
10.0% 
85.6% 
Opisthokonta 21.8% 18.3% 10.4% 
75.2% 
14.4% 
Rhizaria 11.0% 30.2% 34.4% 32.0% 
33.6% 
Stramenopiles 11.0% 16.0% 53.0% 27.0% 
20.0% 
Osmotrophs group was more abundant in Colombia than both Svalbard and Wales (Table 
6.03, p < 0.05), and was dominated by Mucoromycota (represented 41.2% of osmotrophic 
reads), Ascomycota (represented 18.23% of osmotrophic reads) and Basidiomycota 
(represented 14.98% of osmotrophic reads) (Appendix B Table 1). The OTUs richness of 
osmotrophs was higher in Colombia than both Arctic and Wales, while no differences in the 
diversity were detected (Appendix B Figure 3, p < 0.05). The relative abundances of 
phagotrophs, which dominated by ciliated Spirotrichea (represented 29.6% of phagotrophic 
reads) and Oligohymenophorea (represented 19.0% of phagotrophic reads), and phototrophs, 
which dominated by Bacillariophyta (represented 56.1% of phototrophic reads) and 
Chlorophyta (represented 34.6% of phototrophic reads), were highest in Svalbard (Table 
6.03, Appendix B Table 1, p < 0.05). The OTUs richness of phagotropic group was higher in 
Svalbard than Wales and the diversity of phagotrophs was higher in Colombia than the other 
two regions (Appendix B Figure 4, p < 0.05). The richness of phototropic OTUs was higher 
in Svalbard than Wales and Colombia. The latter was significantly higher than Wales. The 
phototrophs diversity was higher in Svalbard than both Colombia and Wales (Appendix B 
Figure 5, p < 0.05). The OTUs richness of parasitic group was higher in Wales than the two 
other regions, and the diversity was higher in Wales than Svalbard (Appendix B Figure 6, p < 
0.05). The relative abundance of parasitic group was significantly higher in Wales than both 
Svalbard and Colombia (Table 6.03, p < 0.05), and was dominated by apicomplexan parasites 
(represented 52.4% of parasitic reads). These are widespread parasites of humans and 
animals. Plant-parasitic Oomycetes were the second more abundant parasitic group 
(represented 12.6% of parasitic reads), followed by Phytomyxa (represented 6.3% of parasitic 
reads), Perkinsea and Ichthyosporea (represented 1.3% and 1.2% of parasitic reads, 
respectively).  All effects are outlined in Table 6.03& Appendix B Table 1. 
Table 6.03. The relative abundance of micro-eukaryotic functional groups. The different 
letters denote statistically significant differences identified using the Tukeys HSD post-hoc 
test (p < 0.05). 
Functional 
group 
reads OTUs Svalbard (S) Colombia (C) Wales (W) 
Mixotrophs 3.0% 4.0% 57.0% 
29.1% 
13.8% 
Osmotrophs 17.2% 5.6% 7.8% 
84.0% 
Parasites 6.0% 8.2% 22.8% 
30.1% 
47.1% 
Phagotrophs 59.3% 52.0% 49.7% 
21.0% 
29.4% 
Phototrophs 5.7% 5.0% 81.7% 
16.4% 
As can be seen in Table 6.04, Ciliophora (within Alveolata) and Cercozoa (within Rhizaria) 
were the most popular and OTU-rich groups (reads: 38.5%, OTUs: 14% and reads:11.0%, 
OTUs: 25.5%, respectively) (Figure 6.06). Ciliophora was the highest in the Arctic compared 
to the other regions (p < 0.05). Within Rhizaria, phytomyxean parasites represented 14.6% of 
the Cercozoa reads. The typical inhabitants of peat bogs within Rhizaria such as orders 
Euglyphida (represented 31.5% of Filosa reads), Limnofilida (represented 30.0% of Filosa 
reads) and Vampyrellida (represented 99.0% of Endomyxa reads) were widely observed in all 
the samples of the present study.  
Fungi represented 19.8% of Opisthokonts reads (8.5% of OTUs), with greater relative 
abundance in the Colombian peat than the others. Fungi group was dominated by 
Mucoromycota (38.6% of reads), Ascomycota (17.06% of reads) and Basidiomycota (14.03% 
of reads). Parasitic Apicomplexa (reads: 4%, OTUs: 3%) was comprised 86.5% Gregarines 
and 8.4% Coccidia. Parasitic Mesomycetozoa (reads: 0.1%, OTUs: 0.5%) was dominated by 
Ichthyosporea (98.3% of reads). All of these parasitic groups were higher in the Welsh peat 
than the other two peatlands (Table 6.04, p < 0.05). Stramenopiles (reads: 3.8%, OTUs: 
5.3%) were more abundant in Wales and Colombia. Ochrophyta (reads: 7.2%, OTUs: 8.2%) 
was more abundant in Svalbard than both Wales and Colombia.  
In addition, less abundant groups differed between the three regions such as Amoebozoa, 
Chlorophyta, Perkinsea and Telonemia being more abundant in Svalbard than the others, 
Choanoflagellida, Hilomonadea, Katablepharidophyta, Lobosa and Metamonada being higher 
in Wales than the others, Conosa being more abundant in the Colombian peat than Wales, 
while the opposite pattern was observed for Dinoflagellate (Table 6.04, p < 0.05). Within 
Amoebozoa, Variosea was the dominant Conosa taxa (represented 99.7% of Conosan reads) 
and Tubulina was the dominant Lobosa (represented 26.36% of Lobosan reads). Order 
Arcellinida (represented 54.1% of Tubulina reads) was higher in the Welsh peat than the 
other two peatlands (p < 0.05). 
A statistically significant positive correlation was found between parasite and animal relative 
abundance in Wales (n = 18, r = 0.740, p < 0.01), while in Colombia and the Arctic there was 
no statistically significant correlation (Figure 6.07).  
Figure 6.06. Stacked barplot representing the community composition of micro-eukaryote 
groups within each supergroup at each region. NA, not available. 
Figure 6.07.  Animal vs. parasite relative abundance in Svalbard, Colombia and Wales (n = 
18 for each region). 
R = 0.1561
R = 0.1067
R = 0.548
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
Abundance of animal group
Svalbard
Colombia
Wales
Table 6.04. The relative abundance of micro-eukaryotic groups. The different letters denote 
statistically significant differences identified using the Tukeys HSD post-hoc test (p < 0.05). 
Supergroup Group reads OTUs Svalbard  
Colombia 
Wales     
Alveolata 
Apicomplexa 4.0% 
3.0% 1.6% 
38.0% 
60.3% 
Ciliophora 38.5% 
14.0% 64.7% 
14.0% 
21.3% 
Dinoflagellata 1.7% 
1.5% 35.0% 
12.0% 
53.0% 
Perkinsea 0.1% 
0.45% 67.2% 
25.7% 
Amoebozoa 
Amoebozoa 0.3% 
0.3% 88.3% 
Conosa 3.0% 
3.0% 27.5% 52.4% 
20.0% 
Lobosa 3.5% 
2.8% 23.5% 
27.7% 
48.8% 
Apusozoa 
Hilomonadea 0.1% 
0.2% 4.8% 
39.3% 
55.8% 
Chlorophyta Chlorophyta 2.1% 
2.3% 78.3% 
19.1% 
Excavata Metamonada 0.1% 
0.4% 1.6% 
24.5% 
74.0% 
Hacrobia 
Centroheliozoa 0.2% 
0.5% 34.5% 
54.4% 
11.2% 
Cryptophyta 0.1% 
0.1% 9.0% 
21.3% 69.5% 
Haptophyta 0.1% 
0.25% 2.0% 
68.0% 
30.0% 
Katablepharidophyta 2.4% 
0.3% 0.0% 
97.0% 
Telonemia 0.03% 
0.01% 98.0% 
Opisthokonta 
Choanoflagellida 1.0% 
2.1% 14.6% 
19.6% 
65.8% 
Fungi 19.8% 
8.5% 9.5% 
80.0% 
10.4% 
Mesomycetozoa 0.1% 
0.5% 32.3% 
22.3% 
45.4% 
Rhizaria Cercozoa 11.0% 
25.5% 34.4% 32.0% 
33.6% 
Stramenopiles 
Ochrophyta 7.2% 
8.2% 71.0% 
18.6% 
10.5% 
Stramenopiles 3.8% 
5.3% 18.2% 
43.8% 
38.0% 
6.4.4. Abiotic parameters and metabolic factors     
The selected soil variables (8 variables of 20), that significantly influenced micro-eukaryote 
community composition, were soil temperature (F = 312.7, P < 0.001), pH (F = 130, P < 
0.001), conductivity (F = 25.1, P < 0.001), dissolved oxygen concentration (F = 72.2, P < 
0.001), SOM content (F = 30, P < 0.001), DOC concentration (F = 3.34, P = 0.001), 
phenolics concentration (F = 4.4, P = 0.006), and water content (F = 9.3, P < 0.001) (Figure 
6.08a). The selected metabolic factors were the enzymes -glucosidase (B) (F = 5.04, P = 
0.010), arylsulfatase (S) (F = 42.3, P < 0.001), chitinase (N) (F = 20.0, P < 0.001), 
phosphatase (P) (F = 9.02, P < 0.001), phenol oxidase (POX) (F = 19.7, P < 0.001) and 
nitrous oxide gas (N2O) (F = 8.8, P = 0.001) (Figure 6.08b). 
Results of the redundancy analysis (RDA) showed that the differences in abiotic and 
metabolic factors could explain the differences in the structure of micro-eukaryotic 
communities between the three contrasting peatlands. In the ordination space, samples within 
each region appeared close together because they had similar community structure. The first 
two axes of the graph explained 22% (Figure 6.08a) and 15.8% (Figure 6.08b) of the total 
variance and separated the samples in 3 groups, Svalbard, Colombia and Wales (F = 1.992, P 
= 0.001).  
Microbial community structure in Svalbard was characterized by an increasing dominance of 
phagotrophs, phototrophs and mixotrophs with increased pH, conductivity, SOM content, and 
oxygen concentration and decreased temperature, while higher temperature and phenolics 
concentration and lower pH, nutrient availability and oxygen concentration structured the 
community composition in the temperate Welsh peatland, which represented by an increasing 
dominance of parasitic group and decreasing dominance of other groups. Micro-eukaryotic 
communities in the tropical Colombian peatland were dominated by osmotrophs and 
determined by lower phenolic concentration, and higher soil moisture and DOC concentration 
(Figure 6.08a, Appendix B Table 2a, p < 0.05). In addition to the metabolic factors (-
glucosidase (B), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase or chitinase (N), arylsulfatase (S), 
phosphatase (P) and phenol oxidase (POX)) that correlated with the community composition 
of soil micro eukaryotes in Colombia (Figure 6.08b, Appendix B Table 2b, p < 0.05).  
Figure 6.08. Redundancy analysis (RDA) based on the selected soil variables with the 
functional groups of micro-eukaryotes (a) and the selected metabolic factors (b). The 
different shapes represent the different sampling sites in each peatland. Abbreviations: 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), soil organic matter (SOM), -glucosidase (B), N-acetyl--
D-glucosaminidase or chitinase (N), arylsulfatase (S), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX) 
and nitrous oxide gas (N2O). 
6.5. Discussion 
Peatlands at a global scale occur in a wide range of environmental conditions, which makes 
them suitable areas for studying different environmental determinants of microbial 
community structure (Wicek et al. 2013). Understanding these factors is required as a prior 
condition for using soil micro-eukaryotes in bioindication to reflect soil quality, heterogeneity 
of different habitats and for predicting the ecosystem response to future environmental 
changes (Geisen et al. 2018). Clearly, the communities of microbial eukaryotes varied greatly 
between the three compared regions included in the present study as they shared only 0.4% of 
OTUs. However, the observed differences in the relative abundances and the community 
composition were not mirrored in OTUs richness and diversity, as both analyses were similar 
across the three regions. 
6.5.1. Common inhabitants of peatland and the consideration of biotic factors 
In this study, the general patterns of peat soils micro-eukaryote abundances were in line with 
those reported previously. For example, the recording of highest relative abundances for the 
supergroup Alveolata (with the Ciliophora being the most abundant), followed by 
Opisthokonta (dominated by Fungi), Rhizaria (exclusively Cercozoa) and Stramenopiles 
(mostly Ochrophyta), was consistent with a number of other peatland studies (Gilbert and 
Mitchell 2006, Lara et al. 2011, Geisen et al. 2015).  
Micro-eukaryotic parasites are highly diverse and widespread across the eukaryotic tree of 
life (Bass et al. 2015). In the present study, parasitic organisms were distributed across the 
supergroups Alveolata, Opisthokonta, Rhizaria and Stramenopiles. Apicomplexan parasites 
(within supergroup Alveolata) were dominated by Gregarines and were more abundant in the 
temperate Welsh soil compared with the other two regions. Gregarines are widespread 
parasites of arthropods and other invertebrates (Mah et al. 2017). This dominating parasite 
can be attributed to the higher relative abundance of the animal group, including potential 
invertebrate hosts which were found in the Welsh peatland. Indeed, a statistically positive 
correlation was found in Wales between parasites and animals relative abundances. This 
pattern is supported by several previous studies (Grabda 1991, Mendonca 2011, Hong et al. 
2014, Dupont et al. 2016, Mah et al. 2017, Araujo et al. 2018). Similarly, Opisthokonta 
Ichthyosporea (Mesomycetozoan parasites) are targeting the metazoan taxa as hosts 
(Mendoza et al. 2002, Marshall et al. 2008), and they were most common in the Welsh 
peatland. Animal parasitic Ichthyosporeas have been described as parasites of aquatic 
animals, but recently have also been detected as inhabitants of terrestrial animals (Glockling 
et al. 2013, Geisen et al. 2015). As the Ichthyosporean taxa were found in all soil samples 
from Wales, Svalbard and Colombia, this suggests that they are also parasites of animals in 
terrestrial ecosystem. Additionally, parasitic Perkinsea within the Alveolata were more 
abundant in the Arctic peat samples probably as a result of a greater host availability 
(Arneberg et al. 1998, Lara et al. 2011).  
Arctic peat was also dominated by phytomyxean parasites (within supergroup Rhizaria), 
which are considered pathogens of the primary producers in terrestrial, marine and freshwater 
habitats and have a negative effect on carbon fixation process (Neuhauser et al. 2011). 
Terrestrial Oomycetes (within supergroup Stramenopiles) that contain a variety of parasites 
of plants (Latijnhouwers et al. 2003) and other organisms (Phillips et al. 2008) were the 
second most abundant parasitic group, suggesting an important role in structuring higher 
plant communities. In this context, Thomas et al. (1997) who reviewed parasitism in 
wetlands, concluded that in addition to the pathogenic effects of parasites, they can also affect 
the distribution, behaviour and diversity of their hosts.  
It should be noted that it is not intended that references to Alveolata and Rhizaria should be 
considered synonymous with parasites as both also contain non-parasites. For example, 
ciliates are a taxon-rich group of the Alveolata. Amongst all ciliates taxa, Colpodea and 
Haptoria are notably more diverse and well represented in soils. Most members of soil 
Rhizaria possess flagella and pseudopodia, and can therefore be associated to both amoebae 
and flagellates. This combined morphological variability appears particularly well suitable 
for foraging between soil aggregates. This group within Rhizaria includes the Glissomonads 
and Cercomonads, which are among the most abundant protists in soils (Geisen et al. 2018).                 
In the present study, although supergroups Alveolata and Rhizaria contain parasitic 
organisms, there were diverse species of free-living protozoan organisms within these 
supergroups (e.g., ciliated Spirotrichea and Oligohymenophorea within Alveolata and 
Euglyphida and Limnofilida within Rhizaria).  
The lower relative abundance of ciliates and most amoebas in Wales possibly due to the 
grazing effects of rotifers and arthropods (within the animal group) on protozoan 
communities. Indeed Francez (1986), Gilbert et al. (1998), Mitchell et al. (2003) and 
Mieczan et al. (2015), found that both rotifers and arthropods (copepods) play an important 
role in controlling the abundance of protozoa in peatland ecosystems.                                                                          
The biodiversity of Opisthokonta comprises metazoans, fungi and several additional 
microbial eukaryote lineages. Recent molecular studies suggest that Opisthokonta should be 
expanded to include a diverse collection of primitively single-celled eukaryotes previously 
classified as Protozoa. In the present study, the biodiversity range of Opisthokonta included 
examples of Metazoa, Choanoflagellida, Mesomycetozoa and Fungi. After removing the 
OTUs of the Metazoa, soil Fungi were the dominant group. The fungal group was more 
abundant in tropical Colombian peatland, in agreement with the findings of Field et al. (2015) 
and Singer et al. (2016). This probably due to the low grazing by animal group 
(invertebrates), which were present in low abundance in the Colombian peatland (Crowther et 
al. 2012).  
In agreement with Geisen et al. (2014, 2015), Variosea and Tubulinea (within Amoebozoan 
supergroup) were the dominant conosan and lobosan taxa, respectively. In particular, order 
Arcellinida (within Tubulina) had highest relative abundance in the Welsh peatland which 
had the highest field temperature at time of sampling, in agreement with earlier studies on 
Sphagnum bogs by Heal (1964) and Lara et al. (2011), who found the Arcellinida in higher 
numbers in the warm months. Other common peatland inhabitants such as those affiliated to 
rhizarian orders Euglyphida, Limnofilida and Vampyrellida were widely observed in all the 
samples, in agreement with earlier studies of peat bog environments (Strder-Kypke and 
Schnborn 1999, Kreutz and Foissner 2006, Bass et al. 2009, Lara et al. 2011).  
6.5.2. Soil variables driving micro-eukaryotic functional groups 
Assessing the variation in soil micro-eukaryotes using environmental DNA metabarcoding is 
one of the most important aims of protists community ecology (Geisen et al. 2018). 
As shown by the Redundancy Analysis (RDA), samples from Svalbard, Colombia and Wales 
did not overlap in the multivariate ordination space, meaning that each region has different 
community structure. In addition, the findings based on RDA indicated that the distribution 
and the relative abundance of peatland micro-eukaryotic communities were predictable based 
on eight soil variables; soil temperature, pH, electrical conductivity, water content, soil 
organic matter (SOM) content and the concentrations of oxygen, phenolic compounds and 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC). In addition to six metabolic factors that can be used as 
indicators for their producers; the enzymes -glucosidase (B), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase 
or chitinase (N), arylsulfatase (S), phosphatase (P), phenol oxidase (POX) and nitrous oxide 
gas (N2O). To easily visualize and explain the effects of soil variables on microbial 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1434461010000520#bib0345
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1434461010000520#bib0345
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1434461010000520#bib0190
eukaryotes, all micro-eukaryotic organisms were organized into five functional groups on the 
basis of their trophic behaviour (nutritional mode); osmotrophs, phototrophs, phagotrophs, 
mixotrophs and parasites. 
In line with the hypothesis of this study, the structure of micro-eukaryotes community based 
on the functional groups differed greatly between the three contrasting peatlands. This is 
likely to be attributed to the differences in soil abiotic factors, which strongly drive the 
above-ground plant species (Amorim and Batalha 2006, Maracahipes-Santos et al. 2017), and 
therefore potentially, below-ground soil biota as well (Araujo et al. 2017, 2018). 
In general, and compared with all other environmental variables, soil water content is 
considered to be one of the main factors affecting key microbial processes in peatlands 
(Bonnett et al. 2017), and it is a major factor shaping richness, abundance and community 
composition of soil micro-eukaryotes along a transect from the Arctic to the tropics 
(Tsyganov et al. 2013). Given the soil water content as one of the factors chosen in the 
present study, soil micro-eukaryotes permanently need water for their mobility and functions. 
Consequently, their activities are constrained by lack of water. In this context, the 
biodiversity of rainforest soil ciliates decreased significantly under the influence of air drying 
(Geisen et al. 2014, Geisen et al. 2018). On the other hand, excess soil water content causes 
anaerobic conditions, the presence of which contribute to lower micro-eukaryotic growth 
rates to less than 25% of that associated with more ventilated environments (Fenchel and 
Finlay 1990). 
Micro-eukaryotes show a wide range of responses to soil temperature depending on the 
species studied (Geisen et al. 2018). In this study, the high relative abundance of 
phototrophic Chlorophyta in the Arctic region is consistent with other studies from cold 
environments and is thought to relate to the high growth rate of micro-eukaryotic algae in low 
temperature conditions (Rose and Caron 2007). A significant influence of nutrient availability 
on the relative abundance of phototrophic Bacillariophyta was also found in the Arctic peat. 
A similar observation was reported by Gilbert et al. (1998) who found that the pigmented 
autotrophic Bacillariophyceae attained greater biomass concentrations in nutrient-rich 
environments and were closely correlated with total inorganic nutrients and conductivity. 
Amblard (1991) reported that the development ability of many phototrophic diatoms has not 
impeded by dark conditions, possibly due to the availability of dissolved nutrients and their 
ability to switch to heterotrophic feeding.  
The parasitic group (dominated by apicomplexans) was most abundant in the Welsh peatland, 
most likely due to the higher temperature. This finding is in line with previous studies that 
found positive correlations between the spread of parasites and temperature but in the tropics 
zone (Singer et al. 2016, Mah et al. 2017). In this context, Studer et al. (2010) stated that 
intermediate temperatures ranging from 20 to 25C are optimal for the development and 
transmission of parasites. Also, the susceptibility of hosts to infection was increased with 
increasing temperature. Overall, among apicomplexan orders, Gregarines were dominant in 
both reads and OTUs, a finding consistent with a study of soil protist diversity in tropical 
rainforests, where apicomplexan Gregarines represented the majority of the total protist 
abundance (Mah et al. 2017). 
A number of researchers (e.g., Wynn-Williams 1982, Nilsson et al. 1992, Czeczuga 1993, 
Zvyagintsev 1994, Lara et al. 2010) noted that the fungal group is a characteristic inhabitant 
of peatlands. In the present study, the osmotrophic group (with the Mucoromycota, 
Ascomycota and Basidiomycota being the most abundant groups), dominated the samples 
from the tropical peatland possibly due to the relatively high pH conditions and hence the 
high extracellular enzymes activity. This in turn suggests higher rates of phenolic compound 
degradation (Min et al. 2015) and higher DOC release as reported in the present study and as 
confirmed by Kang et al. (2018). Additionally, it is well known that the composition of 
fungal community is affected by litter type (Andersen et al. 2013). According to Hodgkins et 
al. (2018) plant litter towards the tropics is dominated by recalcitrant compounds due to the 
expansion of woody trees and shrubs, which influence microbial communities and favour 
fungal growth (Andersen et al. 2013). Therefore, the vegetation cover in Colombia may be 
another reason for the presence of recalcitrant compound decomposers in large quantities.  
A relatively low abundance of Fungi and hence low extracellular enzymes activity, in 
particular phenol oxidase, in the Arctic despite the significantly higher pH may be due to the 
low temperatures. Indeed, at each pH level tested, phenol oxidase activity and DOC 
concentration was higher at 15 C than at 5 C (Kang et al. 2018). The other possible reason 
for lower fungal relative abundance despite the higher pH in the Arctic may be consumption 
by phagotrophic organisms (Coteaux and Dvaux 1983) which were found to be particularly 
abundant in the Arctic peatland.  
Phagotrophs and phototrophs were abundantly observed in the Arctic most likely because of 
higher dissolved oxygen concentrations (Papadimitriou et al. 2010), the absence of which 
leads to decrease the growth rates of eukaryotic microorganisms. A predator-prey relationship 
is another possible reason behind the higher relative abundance of phagotrophs and 
phototrophs in the Arctic peat, as demonstrated by Coteaux and Pussard (1983). Gilbert et 
al. (1998) reported that the abundance of phagotrophic amoebas was strongly correlated with 
the abundance of phototrophic microorganisms such as Bacillariophyceae and Cyanobacteria 
and with other phagotrophic organisms such as flagellates and ciliates. All these organisms 
are likely the preferred food sources of phagotrophic amoebas. An additional reason for the 
high relative abundance of phagotrophs in the Arctic could be high abundance of their 
bacterial prey (Geisen et al. 2018). Also, the emission of N2O gas from the Arctic soils may 
indicate the presence of bacterial prey there (Fierer 2017).  
A relatively low abundance of phagotrophs in the phenolic-rich Welsh peatland could be due 
to low bacterial and fungal prey abundance. The negative effect of phenolic compounds on 
the growth rate of bacterial and fungal communities has been widely reported (Fung et al. 
1985, Opelt et al. 2007, Mellegrd et al. 2009, Pizzolitto et al. 2015), with the occurrence of 
predatory phagotrophs also likely to be inhibited. Other possible reasons for the low relative 
abundance of phagotrophic organisms in Wales is low pH, conductivity and DOC 
concentration, as provided by Mieczan (2007), who found positive relationship between pH, 
conductivity and total organic carbon concentration and the abundance of phagotrophic 
ciliates in the peat-bog reservoirs of eastern Poland. In this context, Papadimitriou et al. 
(2010), found high protozoans abundance in a wetland with low electrical conductivity soils 
(< 3.0 mS/cm), and attributed this to the destructive effect of high conductivity on cells as a 
result of the osmotic phenomenon. 
The nutrient-poor status of the Welsh peatland may also be responsible for the low relative 
abundance of phototrophs. Indeed, the density of phototrophic protists was increased by the 
addition of experimental fertilisers in nutrient depleted peatlands (Gilbert et al. 1998). A 
relatively low abundance of phototrophs in Wales could be also attributed to the high 
concentrations of phenolic compounds which stain soil water a dark colour (Lim et al. 2017), 
limiting the penetration of sunlight, and thus likely reducing the abundance of phototrophic 
microorganisms (Mieczan 2007). On the other hand, this darkness resulting from elevated 
phenolics concentrations could provide a natural protective shield for parasitic infective 
stages from harmful sunlight (Thomas et al. 1995, King et al. 2008).  
It was observed that the abundance of reads related to mixotrophic organisms (mostly 
belonging to Chrysophyceae) were higher in the Arctic samples. This is likely due to the 
lower temperature (Lara et al. 2011) in this site that favours a higher growth rate of 
mixotrophic organisms. In this context, Jassey et al. (2015) discussed direct and indirect 
impacts of mixotrophic protists on peatland carbon cycle; as primary producers they directly 
contribute to carbon fixation through photosynthesis using chloroplasts of endosymbiotic 
algae, while as heterotrophs they can indirectly affect organic matter decomposition by 
feeding on microbial decomposers. They found through field and microcosm experiments 
that the mixotrophs were extremely sensitive to relatively high temperature, which negatively 
affected the phototrophic ability of mixotrophic organisms and caused a significant decline in 
their abundance. This suggests that the decreased abundance of mixotrophs in response to 
climate warming may lead to decreased peatland carbon fixation (Jassey et al. 2015). The 
declined in the abundance of mixotrophs due to the disruption of their phototrophic ability 
under warming is due to the fact that these organisms cannot live as pure heterotrophs 
without their algal endosymbionts that fail to transmit from mother to daughter cells during 
cell division under higher temperatures (Jassey et al. 2015). 
Our findings conflict with a short-term warming experiment conducted by Wilken et al. 
(2012) who studied the response of mixotrophic organism Ochromonas sp. (within 
Chrysophyceae) to warming in freshwater samples and concluded that with rising 
temperatures, mixotrophs tended to change their trophic behaviour towards the heterotrophic 
mode, which was followed by an increase in their abundance. This inconsistency of results 
suggests that the responses of microbial communities to environmental factors are complex, a 
reality attributed to the type of environmental samples and micro-eukaryote species under 
study (Geisen et al. 2018).  
6.6. Conclusions 
The peatlands included in this study, representing a range of climatic conditions, all showed 
diverse micro-eukaryotic communities, with all major micro-eukaryotic supergroups present 
in each region. Overall, the following four micro-eukaryotic supergroups emerged as 
dominant: Alveolata (dominated by Ciliophora), Opisthokonta (mostly Fungi), Rhizaria 
(exclusively Cercozoa) and Stramenopiles (with Ochrophyta being the most abundant) were 
dominated the peat samples of the present study, in agreement with previous peatland studies. 
The observations based on the redundancy analysis revealed that micro-eukaryotic functional 
groups differed significantly between the three regions and are strongly influenced by the 
prevailing environmental conditions. This supported the hypothesis that the micro-eukaryotic 
community composition can in part be predicted by several abiotic soil variables. For 
example, high temperature and phenolic compound concentration, acidic pH, and low 
nutrient availability and oxygen concentration in the Welsh peatland were found to be 
optimal for parasites and sub-optimal for phototrophs, phagotrophs, mixotrophs and enzyme-
producing organisms. By contrast, the edaphic factors associated with the Arctic peatlands 
(low temperature, high pH, conductivity, SOM content, oxygen concentration) were 
relatively more favourable and produced higher relative abundances of mixotrophic, 
phototrophic and phagotrophic microorganisms. In the Colombian peatland, the relatively 
high abundance of osmotrophs (mostly Fungi) was consistent with low phenolic 
concentrations and high pH, extracellular enzyme activities and DOC concentrations. This 
finding could improve knowledge of micro-eukaryotic communities in peatlands from a 
global perspective focusing on the physicochemical constraints upon them, which allow to 
predict how peatlands structure and function may respond to the potential climate change. 
Parasites were ubiquitous in all the studied samples, which could have potential implications 
for public health and economic issues since peatlands are a source of drinking water in many 
areas.  An investigation of the extent to which peat soils contribute to the transmission of 
parasites to drinking water sources is recommended. The presence of prey organisms and the 
important roles of micro-metazoans were also considered as potential host and/or predator 
invertebrates.  
In the present study, there was an emphasis on variations in soil properties as a driver of 
micro-eukaryotic community composition. Further studies consider how micro-eukaryotic 
communities might in turn impact on soil properties are recommended. 
6.7. Acknowledgments  
This research was funded by the Saudi Arabian government. I am grateful for the support of 
Dr Juanita Mora Gomez, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, who collected the 
samples and assisted in sequence processing. I am also acknowledging the support of my 
supervisor, Professor Christopher Freeman, School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University. 
6.8. References 
Adl, M.S. and Gupta, V.S., 2006. Protists in soil ecology and forest nutrient cycling. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 36(7), pp. 1805-1817. 
Amblard, C., 1991. Activit htrotrophe des microalgues et des cyanobactries vis--vis du 
carbone: implications cophysiologiques [Heterotrophic activity of microalgae and 
cyanobacteria with respect to carbon: ecophysiological implications]. L'Anne 
Biologique, 30(2), pp. 73-107. 
Amorim, P.K. and Batalha, M.A., 2006. Soil characteristics of a hyperseasonal cerrado 
compared to a seasonal cerrado and a floodplain grassland: implications for plant community 
structure. Brazilian Journal of Biology, 66(2B), pp. 661-670. 
Andersen, R., Chapman, S.J. and Artz, R.R.E., 2013. Microbial communities in natural and 
disturbed peatlands: a review. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 57, pp. 979-994. 
 Araujo, A.S.F., Bezerra, W.M., Dos Santos, V.M., Nunes, L.A.P.L., Figueiredo, M.D.V.B. 
and Melo, V.M.M., 2017. Fungal diversity in soils across a gradient of preserved Brazilian 
Cerrado. Journal of Microbiology, 55(4), pp. 273-279. 
Araujo, A.S.F.D., Mendes, L.W., Bezerra, W.M., Nunes, L.A.P.L., Lyra, M.D.C.C.P., 
Figueiredo, M.D.V.B. and Melo, V.M.M., 2018. Archaea diversity in vegetation gradients 
from the Brazilian Cerrado. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, 49(3), pp. 522-528. 
 Araujo, A.S.F., Mendes, L.W., Lemos, L.N., Antunes, J.E.L., Beserra, J.E.A., Figueiredo, 
M.D.V.B., de Almeida Lopes, .C., Gomes, R.L.F., Bezerra, W.M., Melo, V.M.M. and de 
Araujo, F.F., 2018. Protist species richness and soil microbiome complexity increase towards 
climax vegetation in the Brazilian Cerrado. Communications Biology, 1(1), p. 135. 
Arneberg, P., Skorping, A., Grenfell, B. and Read, A.F., 1998. Host densities as determinants 
of abundance in parasite communities. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 265(1403), pp. 1283-1289. 
Bass, D., Chao, E.E.Y., Nikolaev, S., Yabuki, A., Ishida, K.I., Berney, C., Pakzad, U., 
Wylezich, C. and Cavalier-Smith, T., 2009. Phylogeny of novel naked filose and reticulose 
Cercozoa: Granofilosea cl. n. and Proteomyxidea revised. Protist, 160(1), pp. 75-109. 
Bass, D., Stentiford, G.D., Littlewood, D.T.J. and Hartikainen, H., 2015. Diverse applications 
of environmental DNA methods in parasitology. Trends in Parasitology, 31(10), pp.499-513. 
Boers, S.A., Jansen, R. and Hays, J.P., 2019. Understanding and overcoming the pitfalls and 
biases of next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods for use in the routine clinical 
microbiological diagnostic laboratory. European Journal of Clinical Microbiology & 
Infectious Diseases, 38(6), pp.1059-1070.  
Bonnett, S.A.F., Maltby, E. and Freeman, C., 2017. Hydrological legacy determines the type 
of enzyme inhibition in a peatlands chronosequence. Scientific Reports, 7(1), p. 9948. 
Booth, R.K., Lamentowicz, M. and Charman, D.J., 2010. Preparation and analysis of testate 
amoebae in peatland palaeoenvironmental studies. Mires and Peat, 7, pp. 1-7. 
Box, J.D., 1983. Investigation of the Folin-Ciocalteau phenol reagent for the determination of 
polyphenolic substances in natural waters. Water Research, 17(5), pp. 249-261. 
Coteaux, M.M. and Pussard, M., 1983. Nature du rgime alimentaire des protozoaires du sol 
[Nature of the diet of protozoa from ground]. International Colloquium of Soil Zoology, 8, 
pp. 179-195.  
Coteaux, M.M. and Dvaux, J., 1983. Effet d'un enrichissement en champignons sur la 
dynamique d'un peuplement thcamoebien d'un humus [Effect of mushroom enrichment on 
dynamics of a thecamoebian stand of a humus]. Revue d'Ecologie et de Biologie du 
Sol, 20(4), pp.519-545.  
Crowther, T.W., Boddy, L. and Jones, T.H., 2012. Functional and ecological consequences of 
saprotrophic fungusgrazer interactions. The ISME Journal, 6(11), p. 1992. 
Czeczuga, B., 1993. Acquatic fungi of the Gorbacz and Ostrwki peat bogs. Acta 
Mycologica, 28(1), pp. 69-75. 
Dedysh, S.N., Pankratov, T.A., Belova, S.E., Kulichevskaya, I.S. and Liesack, W., 2006. 
Phylogenetic analysis and in situ identification of bacteria community composition in an acidic 
Sphagnum peat bog. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(3), pp. 2110-2117. 
Dobson, A., Lafferty, K.D., Kuris, A.M., Hechinger, R.F. and Jetz, W., 2008. Homage to 
Linnaeus: how many parasites? How many hosts?. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 105(Supplement 1), pp.11482-11489. 
Dupont, A..C., Griffiths, R.I., Bell, T. and Bass, D., 2016. Differences in soil micro
eukaryotic communities over soil pH gradients are strongly driven by parasites and 
saprotrophs. Environmental Microbiology, 18(6), pp. 2010-2024. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Fenchel, T. and Finlay, B.J., 1990. Anaerobic free-living protozoa: growth efficiencies and 
the structure of anaerobic communities. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 74(4), pp. 269-275. 
Field, K.J., Rimington, W.R., Bidartondo, M.I., Allinson, K.E., Beerling, D.J., Cameron, 
D.D., Duckett, J.G., Leake, J.R. and Pressel, S., 2015. First evidence of mutualism between 
ancient plant lineages (Haplomitriopsida liverworts) and Mucoromycotina fungi and its 
response to simulated Palaeozoic changes in atmospheric CO2. New Phytologist, 205(2), pp. 
743-756. 
Fierer, N., 2017. Embracing the unknown: disentangling the complexities of the soil 
microbiome. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 15(10), p. 579. 
Francez, A.J., 1986. Sphagnum microfauna in two peat-bogs of the French Massif central. Suo, 
37, pp. 1-6. 
Freeman, C., Fenner, N. and Shirsat, A.H., 2012. Peatland geoengineering: an alternative 
approach to terrestrial carbon sequestration. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 370(1974), pp. 4404-4421. 
Fung, D.Y., Sheree Lin, C.C. and Gailani, M.B., 1985. Effect of phenolic antioxidants on 
microbial growth. CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 12(2), pp. 153-183.  
Geisen, S., 2016. The bacterial-fungal energy channel concept challenged by enormous 
functional versatility of soil protists. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 102, pp. 22-25. 
 Geisen, S., Bandow, C., Rmbke, J., Bonkowski, M., 2014. Soil water availability strongly 
alters the community composition of soil protists. Pedobiologia, 57(4-6), pp. 205-213. 
Geisen, S., Tveit, A.T., Clark, I.M., Richter, A., Svenning, M.M., Bonkowski, M. and Urich, 
T., 2015. Metatranscriptomic census of active protists in soils. The ISME Journal, 9(10), p. 
2178. 
Geisen, S., Mitchell, E.A., Adl, S., Bonkowski, M., Dunthorn, M., Ekelund, F., Fernndez, 
L.D., Jousset, A., Krashevska, V., Singer, D. and Spiegel, F.W., 2018. Soil protists: a fertile 
frontier in soil biology research. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 42(3), pp. 293-323. 
Gilbert, D., and Mitchell, E. A., 2006. Microbial diversity in Sphagnum 
peatlands. Developments in Earth Surface Processes, 9, pp. 287-318. 
Gilbert, D., Amblard, C., Bourdier, G. and Francez, A.J., 1998. The microbial loop at the 
surface of a peatland: structure, function, and impact of nutrient input. Microbial 
Ecology, 35(1), pp. 83-93. 
Glockling, S.L., Marshall, W.L. and Gleason, F.H., 2013. Phylogenetic interpretations and 
ecological potentials of the Mesomycetozoea (Ichthyosporea). Fungal Ecology, 6(4), pp. 237-
Grabda, J., 1991. Marine Fish Parasitology: An Outline. VCH Verlagsgesellschaft mbH.  
Heal, O.W., 1964. Observations on the seasonal and spatial distribution of testacea (Protozoa: 
Rhizopoda) in Sphagnum. The Journal of Animal Ecology, pp. 395-412. 
Hodgkins, S. B., Richardson, C. J., Dommain, R., Wang, H., Glaser, P. H., Verbeke, B., and 
Flanagan, N., 2018. Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in 
peat recalcitrance. Nature Communications, 9(1), pp. 1-13. 
Hong, S., Kim, K., Yoon, S., Park, W.Y., Sim, S. and Yu, J.R., 2014. Detection of 
Cryptosporidium parvum in environmental soil and vegetables. Journal of Korean Medical 
Science, 29(10), pp. 1367-1371. 
IPC, 2013. Climate Change 2013. The Physical Science Basis, OMM, Geneva. 
Jacquiod, S., Stenbk, J., Santos, S.S., Winding, A., Srensen, S.J. and Priem, A., 2016. 
Metagenomes provide valuable comparative information on soil microeukaryotes. Research 
in Microbiology, 167(5), pp.436-450. 
Jassey, V.E., Signarbieux, C., Httenschwiler, S., Bragazza, L., Buttler, A., Delarue, F., 
Fournier, B., Gilbert, D., Laggoun-Dfarge, F., Lara, E. and Mills, R.T., 2015. An 
unexpected role for mixotrophs in the response of peatland carbon cycling to climate 
warming. Scientific Reports, 5, p. 16931.  
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
King, B.J., Hoefel, D., Daminato, D.P., Fanok, S. and Monis, P.T., 2008. Solar UV reduces 
Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst infectivity in environmental waters. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 104(5), pp. 1311-1323.  
Koenig, I., Feldmeyer-Christe, E. and Mitchell, E.A., 2015. Comparative ecology of vascular 
plant, bryophyte and testate amoeba communities in four Sphagnum peatlands along an 
altitudinal gradient in Switzerland. Ecological Indicators, 54, pp. 48-59. 
Kreutz, M. and Foissner, W., 2006. The Sphagnum ponds of Simmelried in Germany: a 
biodiversity hot-spot for microscopic organisms. Protozoological Monographs, 3, pp. 1267. 
Lara, E., Moreira, D. and Lpez-Garca, P., 2010. The environmental clade LKM11 and 
Rozella form the deepest branching clade of fungi. Protist, 161(1), pp. 116-121. 
Lara, E., Mitchell, E.A., Moreira, D. and Garca, P.L., 2011. Highly diverse and seasonally 
dynamic protist community in a pristine peat bog. Protist, 162(1), pp. 14-32. 
Latijnhouwers, M., de Wit, P.J. and Govers, F., 2003. Oomycetes and fungi: similar 
weaponry to attack plants. Trends in Microbiology, 11(10), pp. 462-469. 
Legendre, P. and Gallagher, E.D., 2001. Ecologically meaningful transformations for 
ordination of species data. Oecologia, 129(2), pp. 271-280. 
Lim, T.Y., Lim, Y.Y. and Yule, C.M., 2017. Distribution and characterisation of phenolic 
compounds in Macaranga pruinosa and associated soils in a tropical peat swamp 
forest. Journal of Tropical Forest Science, 29(4), pp. 509-518. 
Mah, F., De Vargas, C., Bass, D., Czech, L., Stamatakis, A. and Lara, E., 2017. Parasites 
dominate hyperdiverse soil protist communities in Neotropical rainforests. Nature Ecology 
and Evolution, 1, pp. 1-8.  
Maracahipes-Santos, L., Lenza, E., Santos, J.O., Mews, H.A. and Oliveira, B., 2017. Effects 
of soil and space on the woody species composition and vegetation structure of three Cerrado 
phytophysiognomies in the Cerrado-Amazon transition. Brazilian Journal of Biology, 77(4), 
pp. 830-839. 
Marshall, W.L., Celio, G., McLaughlin, D.J. and Berbee, M.L., 2008. Multiple isolations of a 
culturable, motile Ichthyosporean (Mesomycetozoa, Opisthokonta), Creolimax fragrantissima 
n. gen., n. sp., from marine invertebrate digestive tracts. Protist, 159(3), pp. 415-433. 
Mellegrd, H., Stalheim, T., Hormazabal, V., Granum, P.E. and Hardy, S.P., 2009. 
Antibacterial activity of Sphagnum acid and other phenolic compounds found in Sphagnum 
papillosum against foodborne bacteria. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 49(1), pp. 85-90. 
Mendonca, J.R., 2011. Galling arthropod diversity in the subtropical neotropics: espinilho 
savannah and riparian forests compared. Revista Colombiana de Entomologa, 37(1), pp. 
111-116. 
Mendoza, L., Taylor, J.W. and Ajello, L., 2002. The class Mesomycetozoea: a heterogeneous 
group of microorganisms at the animal-fungal boundary. Annual Reviews in 
Microbiology, 56(1), pp. 315-344. 
Mieczan, T., 2007. Relationships among ciliated protozoa and water chemistry in small peat-
bog reservoirs (czna-Wodawa Lakeland, Eastern Poland). Oceanological and 
Hydrobiological Studies, 36(2), pp. 77-86. 
Mieczan, T., 2012. Distributions of testate amoebae and ciliates in different types of 
peatlands and their contributions to the nutrient supply. Zoological Studies, 51(1), pp. 18-26. 
Mieczan, T., Niedwiecki, M. and Tarkowska-Kukuryk, M., 2015. Effects of rotifers, 
copepods and chironomid larvae on microbial communities in peatlands. European Journal 
of Protistology, 51(5), pp. 386-400. 
Min, K., Freeman, C., Kang, H. and Choi, S.U., 2015. The regulation by phenolic compounds 
of soil organic matter dynamics under a changing environment. BioMed Research 
International, 2015, pp. 1-11.  
Mitchell, E.A., Buttler, A., Grosvernier, P., Rydin, H., Albinsson, C., Greenup, A.L., 
Heijmans, M.M., Hoosbeek, M.R. and Saarinen, T., 2000. Relationships among testate 
amoebae (Protozoa), vegetation and water chemistry in five Sphagnum-dominated peatlands 
in Europe. The New Phytologist, 145(1), pp. 95-106. 
Mitchell, E.A., Gilbert, D., Buttler, A., Amblard, C., Grosvernier, P. and Gobat, J.M., 2003. 
Structure of microbial communities in Sphagnum peatlands and effect of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide enrichment. Microbial Ecology, 46(2), pp. 187-199. 
Neuhauser, S., Kirchmair, M. and Gleason, F.H., 2011. Ecological roles of the parasitic 
phytomyxids (plasmodiophorids) in marine ecosystemsa review. Marine and Freshwater 
Research, 62(4), pp. 365-371.  
Nilsson, M., Bth, E. and Sderstrm, B., 1992. The microfungal communities of a mixed 
mire in northern Sweden. Canadian Journal of Botany, 70(2), pp. 272-276.  
Opelt, K., Chobot, V., Hadacek, F., Schnmann, S., Eberl, L. and Berg, G., 2007. 
Investigations of the structure and function of bacterial communities associated with 
Sphagnum mosses. Environmental Microbiology, 9(11), pp. 2795-2809. 
Papadimitriou, C.A., Papatheodoulou, A., Takavakoglou, V., Zdragas, A., Samaras, P., 
Sakellaropoulos, G.P., Lazaridou, M. and Zalidis, G., 2010. Investigation of protozoa as 
indicators of wastewater treatment efficiency in constructed wetlands. Desalination, 250(1), 
pp. 378-382.  
Phillips, A.J., Anderson, V.L., Robertson, E.J., Secombes, C.J. and Van West, P., 2008. New 
insights into animal pathogenic oomycetes. Trends in Microbiology, 16(1), pp. 13-19.  
Pizzolitto, R.P., Barberis, C.L., Dambolena, J.S., Herrera, J.M., Zunino, M.P., Magnoli, C.E., 
Rubinstein, H.R., Zygadlo, J.A. and Dalcero, A.M., 2015. Inhibitory effect of natural 
phenolic compounds on Aspergillus parasiticus growth. Journal of Chemistry, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
Rose, J.M. and Caron, D.A., 2007. Does low temperature constrain the growth rates of 
heterotrophic protists? Evidence and implications for algal blooms in cold waters. Limnology 
and Oceanography, 52(2), pp. 886-895. 
Santamara, J. and Toranzos, G.A., 2003. Enteric pathogens and soil: a short 
review. International Microbiology, 6(1), pp. 5-9. 
Schwelm, A., Badstber, J., Bulman, S., Desoignies, N., Etemadi, M., Falloon, R.E., Gachon, 
C.M., Legreve, A., Luke, J., Merz, U. and Nenarokova, A., 2018. Not in your usual top 10: 
protists that infect plants and algae. Molecular Plant Pathology, 19(4), pp. 1029-1044. 
Seppey, C.V., Singer, D., Dumack, K., Fournier, B., Belbahri, L., Mitchell, E.A. and Lara, E., 
2017. Distribution patterns of soil microbial eukaryotes suggests widespread algivory by 
phagotrophic protists as an alternative pathway for nutrient cycling. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 112, pp. 68-76. 
Singer, D., Lara, E., Steciow, M.M., Seppey, C.V., Paredes, N., Pillonel, A., Oszako, T. and 
Belbahri, L., 2016. High-throughput sequencing reveals diverse oomycete communities in 
oligotrophic peat bog micro-habitat. Fungal Ecology, 23, pp. 42-47.  
Stoeck, T., Bass, D., Nebel, M., Christen, R., Jones, M.D., Breiner, H.W. and Richards, T.A., 
2010. Multiple marker parallel tag environmental DNA sequencing reveals a highly complex 
eukaryotic community in marine anoxic water. Molecular Ecology, 19, pp. 21-31. 
Strder-Kypke, M.C. and Schnborn, W., 1999. Periphyton and sphagnicolous protists of 
dystrophic bog lakes (Brandenburg, Germany): II. Characteristic species and trophy of the 
lakes. Limnologica, 29(4), pp. 407-424. 
Studer, A., Thieltges, D.W. and Poulin, R., 2010. Parasites and global warming: net effects of 
temperature on an intertidal hostparasite system. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 415, pp. 
11-22.  
Thomas, D.M., Stanton, N.L. and Seville, R.S., 1995. A stable eimerian assemblage in 
Wyoming ground squirrels (Spermophilus elegans elegans): maintaining viability over 
winter. Journal of the Helminthological Society of Washington, 62(1), pp. 1-5.  
Thomas, F., Cezilly, F., De Mees, T., Crivelli, A. and Renaud, F., 1997. Parasitism and 
ecology of wetlands: A review. Estuaries, 20(3), pp. 646-654. 
Thomas, F., Guegan, J.F., Renaud, F. and Guegan, J.F. (eds.), 2005. Parasitism and 
Ecosystems. Oxford University Press on Demand. 
Tveit, A., Schwacke, R., Svenning, M.M. and Urich, T., 2013. Organic carbon 
transformations in high-Arctic peat soils: key functions and microorganisms. The ISME 
Journal, 7(2), pp. 299-311. 
Tsyganov, A.N., Keuper, F., Aerts, R. and Beyens, L., 2013. Flourish or flush: effects of 
simulated extreme rainfall events on Sphagnum-dwelling testate amoebae in a subarctic bog 
(Abisko, Sweden). Microbial Ecology, 65(1), pp. 101-110. 
Wicek, M., Martin, P. and Gbka, M., 2013. Distribution patterns and environmental 
correlates of water mites (Hydrachnidia, Acari) in peatland microhabitats. Experimental and 
Applied Acarology, 61(2), pp. 147-160. 
Wilken, S., Huisman, J., NausWiezer, S. and Van Donk, E., 2013. Mixotrophic organisms 
become more heterotrophic with rising temperature. Ecology Letters, 16(2), pp. 225-233. 
Winsborough, C. and Basiliko, N., 2010. Fungal and bacterial activity in northern 
peatlands. Geomicrobiology Journal, 27(4), pp.315-320. 
Wynn-Williams, D.D., 1982. Simulation of seasonal changes in microbial activity of 
maritime Antarctic peat. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 14(1), pp. 1-12. 
Zvyagintsev, D.G., 1994. Vertical distribution of microbial communities in soils. In: Ritz, K., 
Dighton, J., Giller, K.E. (Eds.), Beyond the Biomass. British Society of Soil Science, pp. 29-
Chapter 7 
Final Discussion 
7.1. Overview 
Peatlands represent a significant terrestrial carbon pool, holding at least 550 Gt of 
atmospheric carbon as a result of the imbalance between organic matter production rates and 
decomposition rates in these persistently water-saturated environments (Mitsch and 
Gosselink 2000, Moore 2002, Holden 2005), which raising concerns over their potential to 
become a carbon source and contribute to climate change.  
Due to the importance of soil enzymes in the processing of organic matter in wetland 
ecosystems, many researchers have investigated the factors influencing enzymes activity and 
biogenic greenhouse gas emissions (Dunn et al. 2014). Studying biogeochemical processes 
and the abiotic variables controlling them in peatlands has important implications for 
predicting the potential impacts of climate change, human intervention and management 
strategies on peatlands function. However, most studies in this field have been conducted in a 
single region with a limited number of studied variables and were focused on the uppermost 
layers of peat. This is problematic since soil microorganisms, which are central to the 
decomposition of soil organic matter and are directly responsible for a large proportion of soil 
respiration, occur throughout the soil profile (Jackson et al. 2009, Senga et al. 2015). 
In line with this, the present study includes three peatlands along a climatic gradient, Arctic 
(Svalbard, Norway), temperate (North Wales, UK) and tropical (Andean mountains, 
Colombia). Also, the range of biotic and abiotic variables investigated was deliberately broad 
and included key hydrolytic enzymes (-D-glucosidase, arylsulfatase,  -D-xylosidase, N-
acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase) and phosphatase), the oxidative enzyme phenol 
oxidase, the greenhouse gas (GHG), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide 
(N2O), and the physicochemical variables, pH, electrical conductivity, dissolved organic 
carbon (DOC), phenolic compounds, soil organic matter (SOM), soil water content, and 
cations and anions concentration. Several aspects were considered in this study: depth-
dependent enzymes activity was assessed in relation to a range of physicochemical variables 
in the three contrasting peatlands, fluxes of GHGs were also compared to physicochemical 
factors and enzyme activities, enzyme activities, metabolic end products and all other soil 
variables were compared across the three climatic regions. 
 The description of soil extracellular enzyme activities on a global basis reveals the different 
ranges of variation and different distributions of enzyme activities in relation to ecosystem 
variables, which provides an opportunity to compare contrasting ecosystems and to relate soil 
microbial function to global patterns of microbial community composition, nutrient ratios and 
soil organic matter storage (Sinsabaugh et al. 2008). Differences in microbial function 
between peatlands in different climatic regions are expected since vegetation composition, 
peat chemical composition and hence decomposition rates, which depend on microbial 
community composition, will inevitably vary between climate zones (Preston et al. 2012). 
Indeed, Hodgkins et al. (2018) found that peaty soils from tropical peatlands are more 
chemically recalcitrant, having higher aromatic content and lower carbohydrate content than 
those from Arctic and boreal peatlands. This recalcitrance may allow tropical peats to persist 
despite warmer temperatures.  
Additionally, at a global scale, peatlands occur across a wide range of environmental 
conditions, which makes them suitable areas for studying different structuring factors that 
shape microbial communities (Wicek et al. 2013). Peatlands are water-saturated 
environments thanks to the spongy layer of Sphagnum moss on their surface. This condition 
allows planktonic organisms to be mobile and dynamic. These organisms include 
prokaryotes, microbial eukaryotes and small metazoan taxa that together form the microbial 
food web where nutrients and energy are transferred through the trophic interactions (Jassey 
et al. 2015). Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotic microorganisms have received little attention in 
many ecosystems including peatlands despite their importance as bioindicators of abiotic 
variations in their environments (Koenig et al. 2015). Peatlands structure (biotic 
communities) and function (carbon storage) are threatened due to ongoing global warming, 
caused by the accumulation of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere (IPCC 2013). Micro-
eukaryotic communities, through their diverse functions, can directly and/or indirectly affect 
the carbon balance function of peatlands and hence possibly contribute to climatic warming 
(Dedysh et al. 2006, Jassey et al. 2015).  
These communities are including fungi, the main decomposers of SOM, phagotrophic 
protozoa, the main consumers of decomposers (bacterial and fungal communities) and hence 
influence decomposition process and nutrient cycling, phototrophic algae which contribute to 
carbon sequestration through photosynthesis, mixotrophic protists which have photosynthetic 
and phagotrophic functions, and parasitic protists which contribute to animal and plant 
diversity (Araujo et al. 2018). Understanding potential controlling factors, using a climatic 
gradient, is required as a prior condition for using soil micro-eukaryotes in bioindication and 
for predicting the response of peatland structure and function to future environmental changes 
(Geisen et al. 2018). 
 In the present study, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from the superficial layers of peat soil 
was extracted and a broader range of micro-eukaryotes was covered in the three peatlands by 
amplifying V4 region of 18S SSU rRNA gene. The richness, diversity and relative abundance 
of micro-eukaryotes in the three peatlands were determined. Also, a redundancy analysis 
(RDA) was carried out in which attempts were made to relate micro-eukaryote community 
composition to biogeochemical variables in order to improve understanding of the 
environmental factors that influence their distribution at a global scale. To easily visualize 
and explain the effects of these soil variables on microbial eukaryotes, all micro-eukaryotic 
organisms were organized into five functional groups on the basis of the trophic behaviour 
(nutritional mode), osmotrophs, phototrophs, phagotrophs, mixotrophs and parasites. Further, 
the occurrence of predator and host invertebrates was noted as well as prey organisms and 
recognise their potential significance for the relative abundance of micro-eukaryotic 
organisms. 
7.2. Environmental controls on the biogeochemistry of peatlands: a comparison of three 
regions. 
Our study has shown contrasting results concerning the relationships between measured 
parameters across the three peatlands. Generally, within each of the three peatlands, the 
concentrations of phenolic compounds increased with depth and no further increase was 
observed at the deeper mineral layers in Svalbard and Colombia. Enzyme activities decreased 
with depth in all the three regions, in agreement with the majority of previous studies. The 
occurrence of highest GHG flux and enzymes activity in the superficial layer indicates that this 
is the most biologically active layer (Moore 2002). However, in the deeper mineral layer of the 
Svalbard peatland, phenol oxidase activity was as high as in the superficial layer, with higher 
pH and nutrient concentrations, and lower phenolic concentration also notable in this zone. 
Also, N2O flux in the deeper layer did not differ significantly from that measured in the upper 
layers, further highlighting the importance of the deeper layers of peats. The CH4 production 
in the three contrasting peatlands increased gradually with soil depth, indicating a shift from 
aerobic to anaerobic metabolic pathways with depth (Kotsyurbenko et al. 2004, Dedysh et al. 
2006). The pH values were significantly different for each of the three regions, Svalbard (mean 
7.1) > Colombia (mean 5.2) > Wales (mean 4.5). The dominant controlling factor for phenol 
oxidase activity in the Svalbard and Colombian peatlands was pH, while in Wales only 
hydrolytic enzyme activities were positively correlated with pH. The response of hydrolytic 
enzymes activity and GHGs flux to phenolics concentration also varied across the three 
climatic regions, indicating that the peatlands in the three climatic zones differ in parent plant 
chemistry that controlling peat chemical composition and preservation across a latitudinal 
transect from the Arctic to the tropics (Hodgkins et al. 2018). 
A negative correlation could be anticipated between soil enzyme activity and nutrient 
availability according to the economic model of enzyme production (Chrst 1991). In the 
present study, however, there were contradictory results concerning this issue. This may have 
been related to the soil samples obtained from the Svalbard, Colombian and Welsh peatlands 
having different nutrient concentrations and therefore microbial communities in these 
contrasting regions would be expected to have different nutrient (and therefore enzyme 
production rates) requirements.  
The lack of significant correlation between enzymes activity and nutrients and between 
enzymes activity and GHG flux could be due to the measurement of independent legacy 
enzymes (Kang and Freeman 1999), as it was in Wales. 
The comparison of soil extracellular enzyme activity on a global scale provides an opportunity 
for identification of the global patterns of biogeochemical processes and the dominant 
controlling factors. In this study, significant differences in measured parameters between 
different regions were identified. Soil enzymes activity (except for -glucosidase) and the 
fluxes of GHG (except for CH4) varied across the three climatic peatlands in relation to 
physicochemical variables. Relatively high hydrolase enzyme activities were observed in 
Colombia, possibly due to the higher demand for nutrients and/or higher energy supply. The 
present study showed that the activity of phenol oxidase was relatively high in the Svalbard 
site, where significantly higher pH and concentrations of most inorganic nutrients, and lower 
concentration of phenolic compounds was also observed. Conversely, the Welsh peatland 
exhibited the lowest phenol oxidase activity, consistent with lowest pH and consequently 
highest phenolic concentrations. Phenolic concentration was significantly higher in the Welsh 
and Colombian peatlands possibly due to the dominant vegetation being Sphagnum moss, 
which may also has contributed to the lower pH values in both regions. The higher mean DOC 
concentration in Colombia and Wales compared with Svalbard can be attributed to the higher 
primary productivity towards the equator where warmer temperatures and longer growing 
season (Hodgkins et al. 2018). In addition, decreased DOC concentration has been linked to 
increased sea salt (Na+, Cl-, Ca2+, Mg2+ and SO4
2-) (Pilson 2012, Gough 2014), all of which 
were high in Svalbard possibly due to the proximity of the sampling sites to the sea.  
Among measured enzymes, phosphatase activity was the highest in all three peatlands and was 
attributed to low phosphorus availability. The fluxes of CO2 and N2O were all highest in the 
Svalbard samples despite the lower temperature. Additionally, these sites had the highest 
nitrate concentration, possibly due to nutrient supply from bird guano that covered the sampling 
areas in Svalbard. The latter may mean that the chosen sampling location was less 
representative of Arctic sampling locations than assumed. 
7.3. Biotic and abiotic variables driving micro-eukaryotic communities in peatlands 
As would be expected, the communities of microbial eukaryotes varied greatly between the 
peatlands of the three regions. Data of micro-eukaryotic functional groups were coupled with 
abiotic and metabolic data using redundancy analysis (RDA) which showed that 22% and 
15.8% of variance in micro-eukaryotic density was explained by abiotic and metabolic factors, 
respectively. The higher pH, conductivity, soil organic matter (SOM) content, oxygen 
concentration, and the lower temperature were the most important factors structuring micro-
eukaryote communities in Svalbard, while higher temperature and phenolic compound 
concentrations and lower pH and nutrients structured the community composition in the Welsh 
peatland, and micro-eukaryotic communities in the Colombian peatland were distinguished by 
the high activities of the extracellular enzymes glucosidase, arylsulfatase, chitinase, 
phosphatase and phenol oxidase, which were consistent with the decreased phenolic 
concentrations, and with the high pH and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations.  
The high relative abundance of phototrophic microorganisms (Chlorophyta) in the Arctic is 
likely to be linked to their adaptation to cold environments (Rose and Caron 2007). In addition, 
a significant influence of nutrient availability on the relative abundance of phototrophic 
Bacillariophyta (within supergroup Stramenopiles) was found in the Arctic peat. Similar 
observations have been reported in a French peatland by Gilbert et al. (1998), the pigmented 
autotrophic Bacillariophyceae attained greater biomass in nutrient-rich environments and were 
closely correlated with total inorganic nutrients and conductivity. Phagotrophs and phototrophs 
were more abundant in the Arctic peatland probably because of relatively high dissolved 
oxygen concentrations (Papadimitriou et al. 2010). High temperatures influence the 
phototrophic ability of mixotropic organisms, thus decreasing abundance and growth rates 
(Jassey et al. 2015). Indeed, in the present study, it was observed that sequences related to 
mixotrophic organisms (mostly taxon Chrysophyceae) were more common in the Arctic 
samples, where the preferred lower temperature environment. 
Kang et al. (2018) linked greater fungal abundance with the greater DOC release under rising 
pH conditions that accordingly enhanced key enzyme activities contributing to peat soil 
decomposition. In the present study, high fungal relative abundance in Colombia also appeared 
to be linked to high DOC concentrations, which may be driven by favourable (high pH) 
conditions for extracellular enzymes. 
A relatively low abundance of fungi and hence low extracellular enzymes activity, in particular 
phenol oxidase, in the Arctic peatland despite the high pH may be due to the effect of low 
temperature on fungal relative abundance, enzyme activities and hence DOC release. Indeed, 
over a range of pH conditions, phenol oxidase activity and DOC concentrations were 
consistently higher at 15 C than at 5 C (Kang et al. 2018). The other possible reason for lower 
fungal relative abundance in the Arctic peatland may have been their consumption by 
phagotrophic organisms (Coteaux and Dvaux 1983) that were found to be very abundant in 
the Arctic peatland. 
 A relatively low abundance of phagotrophs in the phenolic-rich Welsh peatland could be due 
to low bacterial and fungal prey. The inhibitory effects of phenolic compounds on the growth 
rates of bacterial and fungal communities have been widely reported (Fung et al. 1985, Opelt 
et al. 2007, Mellegrd et al. 2009, Pizzolitto et al. 2015). The relatively low abundance of 
phototrophs in the Welsh peatlands may be due to their nutrient poor status. Indeed, the density 
of phototrophic protists has been shown to increase following fertilizer addition in nutrient 
depleted peatlands (Gilbert et al. 1998).  
A relatively low abundance of phototrophs in Wales could be also attributed to the high 
concentrations of phenolic compounds. These compounds stain water in dark colour (Lim et 
al. 2017), limiting the penetration of sunlight, and thus likely reducing the abundance of 
phototrophic microorganisms (Mieczan 2007). On the other hand, this darkness resulting from 
elevated phenolics concentrations could provide a natural protective shield for parasitic 
infective stages from harmful sunlight (Thomas et al. 1995, King et al. 2008). The presence of 
hosts around the sampling areas could be the most important factor influencing parasite 
abundance since their presence is host availability-dependent (Hong et al. 2014, Mah et al. 
2017, Araujo et al. 2018). Parasitic groups (Apicomplexan and Mesomycetozoan parasites) 
were more abundant in the temperate Welsh soil compared with the other two regions. This 
may be related to the higher relative abundance of the animal group, which includes the 
potential invertebrate hosts in Wales as confirmed in this study. This pattern (the tendency to 
find more abundant parasites where populations of host animals are higher) is supported by 
several previous studies (Grabda 1991, Mendonca 2011, Hong et al. 2014, Dupont et al. 2016, 
Mah et al. 2017, Araujo et al. 2018).  
The lower relative abundance of ciliates and most amoebas in Wales may be due to the grazing 
effects of rotifers and arthropods (within the animal group) on protozoan communities. Indeed, 
Francez (1986), Gilbert et al. (1998), Mitchell et al. (2003) and Mieczan et al. (2015), reported 
that both rotifers and arthropods (copepods) play an important role in controlling the abundance 
of protozoa in peatland ecosystems.                                                                          
The general patterns of peat soil micro-eukaryote relative abundances observed in the present 
study were in line with other studies applied on peatlands, where the supergroups Alveolata 
(with group Ciliophora being the most abundant), followed by Opisthokonta (mostly Fungi), 
Rhizaria (exclusively contained the Cercozoa), and Stramenopiles (mostly Ochrophyta), were 
the dominant micro-eukaryote groups (Gilbert and Mitchell 2006, Lara et al. 2011, Geisen et 
al. 2015). 
7.4. Conclusions 
Understanding the relationship between enzyme activities, GHG emissions and 
physicochemical variables in peatlands, which are extensive sinks of carbon and nitrogen, is 
especially important (Moore 2002, Voigt et al. 2017, Leifeld and Menichetti 2018) and 
necessary for anticipating the ecosystem response to climate change, land use change and 
restoration attempts (Moore 2002).  
In this study, the responses of soil enzymes activity and biogenic GHG emissions to physical 
and chemical properties were assessed within peat soils obtained from three climatic regions: 
Arctic (Svalbard, Norway), temperate (Snowdonia National Park in North Wales, UK) and 
tropical (Sumapaz National Park in Andes mountains, Colombia). Several aspects were 
considered in the present study: depth-dependent enzyme activity and the resultant metabolic 
end products in relation to the physicochemical variables were assessed in each of the three 
peatlands, enzymes activity, metabolic end products and all other soil parameters across the 
three climatic regions were compared.  
This study is the first study giving a comparative view of biogeochemical processes in 
relation to the surrounding physicochemical factors in peatlands of three different climatic 
regions. Compared with previous studies, the range of biotic and abiotic parameters 
investigated has been extended to include key hydrolytic enzymes (-D-glucosidase, 
arylsulfatase, -D-xylosidase, N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase (chitinase), phosphatase) and 
oxidative enzyme (phenol oxidase), the GHGs (CO2, CH4 and N2O), and the physicochemical 
variables pH, conductivity, DOC concentration, phenolics concentration, SOM and water 
content, and cation (sodium, ammonium, magnesium and calcium) and anion (chloride, 
nitrate, phosphate and sulfate) concentrations. All together were measured across the peat 
profile. In addition, the biogeochemical processes and the abiotic factors controlling them are 
still relatively unknown in peatlands of Svalbard and Sumapaz National Park, both of which 
were included in the present study.  
This baseline information could contribute to the environment of moss-dominated peatlands 
in Colombian Andes, and more specifically will give important knowledge for use by 
Sumapaz's employers in managing natural parks.  
Our finding, together with a body of information from other studies applied on peatlands can 
enable us to gain an understanding of how environmental properties are affecting 
decompositional processes, which may allow us to identify strategies capable of slowing 
down biodegradation and improving carbon sequestration in peatlands. However, by field 
survey only, these results cannot be generalized. Manipulation experiments are recommended 
considering the different layers to determine the impact of a particular abiotic factor on 
enzyme activity. In addition to using contemporary molecular techniques to determine genes 
encoding key functions in soil organic matter degradation in order to expand the knowledge 
on how microbial communities functionally interact and how they may respond to 
environmental changes.  
Peatlands at a global scale have wide ranges in environmental conditions, which makes them 
ideal system for studying different structuring factors that can shape microbial communities. 
In the microbiomes found in soils, microbial eukaryotic communities are the most species 
rich. These organisms including fungi and protists, both of which are functionally diverse, 
which enables them to play a number of essential roles within the ecosystem food webs. 
Additionally, micro-eukaryotic organisms are distributed ubiquitously and are known to 
respond to environmental changes. They are therefore considered to be useful bioindicators 
of abiotic variations in their environments, inferring to some extent the heterogeneity of 
different habitats and reflect soil quality. Importantly, linking micro-eukaryotic communities 
to environmental variables along a climate gradient can help in predicting the effects of 
climate-driven changes in the structure and function of peatland. However, information on 
micro-eukaryotic communities of peatlands remains sparse. Specifically, no data has been 
published yet about micro-eukaryotic communities at any of the present study field sites.  
This study is the first, to current knowledge, giving a comparative view of micro-eukaryotic 
community composition in relation to the surrounding environmental factors in peatlands of 
three different climatic regions. The range of micro-eukaryotic organisms and abiotic factors 
investigated have been extended as well, compared with previous studies. The findings of this 
study could improve the understanding of micro-eukaryotic communities in peatlands from a 
global perspective, focusing on the physicochemical constraints upon them. This could allow 
to predict how peatland structure and function may respond to climate-driven environmental 
changes.    
In the present study, there was an emphasis on soil properties as drivers of community 
composition of micro-eukaryotes. Further studies to consider how micro-eukaryotic 
communities might in turn impact on soil properties are recommended.  
As a limited field survey of only one site from each region, these results cannot be 
generalized. Further field studies and experimental manipulations of environmental factors 
are needed to better explore the effects of soil variables on community composition of micro-
eukaryotes. 
Some studies have been addressed the effects of soil type on parasite movement and survival 
for public water supplies risk assessment (Zopp et al. 2016). As parasitic groups were found 
to be ubiquitous in peat soils, and since peatlands areas are a source of drinking water in 
many areas, an investigation of the extent to which peat soils contribute to the transmission of 
parasites to drinking water sources are recommended. 
7.5. References 
Araujo, A.S.F.D., Mendes, L.W., Bezerra, W.M., Nunes, L.A.P.L., Lyra, M.D.C.C.P., 
Figueiredo, M.D.V.B. and Melo, V.M.M., 2018. Archaea diversity in vegetation gradients 
from the Brazilian Cerrado. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, 49(3), pp. 522-528. 
Chrst, R.J., 1991. Environmental control of the synthesis and activity of aquatic microbial 
ectoenzymes. In: Chrst, R.J. (ed.), Microbial Enzymes in Aquatic Environments, pp. 29-59. 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Coteaux, M.M. and Dvaux, J., 1983. Effet d'un enrichissement en champignons sur la 
dynamique d'un peuplement thcamoebien d'un humus [Effect of mushroom enrichment on 
dynamics of a thecamoebian stand of a humus]. Revue d'Ecologie et de Biologie du 
Sol, 20(4), pp.519-545.  
Dedysh, S.N., Pankratov, T.A., Belova, S.E., Kulichevskaya, I.S. and Liesack, W., 2006. 
Phylogenetic analysis and in situ identification of bacteria community composition in an 
acidic Sphagnum peat bog. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(3), pp. 2110-2117. 
Dunn, C., Jones, T.G., Girard, A. and Freeman, C., 2014. Methodologies for extracellular 
enzyme assays from wetland soils. Wetlands, 34(1), pp. 9-17. 
Dupont, A..C., Griffiths, R.I., Bell, T. and Bass, D., 2016. Differences in soil micro
eukaryotic communities over soil pH gradients are strongly driven by parasites and 
saprotrophs. Environmental Microbiology, 18(6), pp. 2010-2024. 
Francez, A.J., 1986. Sphagnum microfauna in two peat-bogs of the French Massif 
central. Suo, 37, pp. 1-6. 
Fung, D.Y., Sheree Lin, C.C. and Gailani, M.B., 1985. Effect of phenolic antioxidants on 
microbial growth. CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 12(2), pp. 153-183. 
Geisen, S., Mitchell, E.A., Adl, S., Bonkowski, M., Dunthorn, M., Ekelund, F., Fernndez, 
L.D., Jousset, A., Krashevska, V., Singer, D. and Spiegel, F.W., 2018. Soil protists: a fertile 
frontier in soil biology research. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 42(3), pp. 293-323. 
Geisen, S., Tveit, A.T., Clark, I.M., Richter, A., Svenning, M.M., Bonkowski, M. and Urich, 
T., 2015. Metatranscriptomic census of active protists in soils. The ISME Journal, 9(10), p. 
2178. 
Gilbert, D., Amblard, C., Bourdier, G. and Francez, A.J., 1998. The microbial loop at the 
surface of a peatland: structure, function, and impact of nutrient input. Microbial 
Ecology, 35(1), pp. 83-93. 
Gough, R., 2014. Catchment influences on dissolved organic carbon concentration and 
character, implications for potable water treatment and trihalomethane control, PhD thesis, 
Bangor University. 
Grabda, J., 1991. Marine Fish Parasitology: An Outline. VCH Verlagsgesellschaft mbH.  
Hodgkins, S. B., Richardson, C. J., Dommain, R., Wang, H., Glaser, P. H., Verbeke, B., and 
Flanagan, N., 2018. Tropical peatland carbon storage linked to global latitudinal trends in peat 
recalcitrance. Nature Communications, 9(1), pp. 1-13. 
Holden, J., 2005. Peatland hydrology and carbon release: why small-scale process 
matters. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences, 363(1837), pp. 2891-2913. 
Hong, S., Kim, K., Yoon, S., Park, W.Y., Sim, S. and Yu, J.R., 2014. Detection of 
Cryptosporidium parvum in environmental soil and vegetables. Journal of Korean Medical 
Science, 29(10), pp. 1367-1371. 
Hong, S., Kim, K., Yoon, S., Park, W.Y., Sim, S. and Yu, J.R., 2014. Detection of 
Cryptosporidium parvum in environmental soil and vegetables. Journal of Korean Medical 
Science, 29(10), pp. 1367-1371. 
IPC, 2013. Climate Change 2013. The Physical Science Basis, OMM, Geneva. 
IPCC, 2013. Climate change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(Eds. Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner G-K, Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J, Nauels A, Xia Y, 
Bex V, Midgley PM), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Jackson, C. R., Liew, K. C., and Yule, C. M., 2009. Structural and functional changes with 
depth in microbial communities in a tropical Malaysian peat swamp forest. Microbial 
Ecology, 57(3), p. 402. 
Jassey, V.E., Signarbieux, C., Httenschwiler, S., Bragazza, L., Buttler, A., Delarue, F., 
Fournier, B., Gilbert, D., Laggoun-Dfarge, F., Lara, E. and Mills, R.T., 2015. An unexpected 
role for mixotrophs in the response of peatland carbon cycling to climate warming. Scientific 
Reports, 5, p. 16931. 
Kang, H. and Freeman, C., 1999. Phosphatase and arylsulphatase activities in wetland soils: 
annual variation and controlling factors. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 31(3), pp. 449-454. 
Kang, H., Kwon, M.J., Kim, S., Lee, S., Jones, T.G., Johncock, A.C., Haraguchi, A. and 
Freeman, C., 2018. Biologically driven DOC release from peatlands during recovery from 
acidification. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 3807. 
King, B.J., Hoefel, D., Daminato, D.P., Fanok, S. and Monis, P.T., 2008. Solar UV reduces 
Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst infectivity in environmental waters. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 104(5), pp. 1311-1323.  
Koenig, I., Feldmeyer-Christe, E. and Mitchell, E.A., 2015. Comparative ecology of vascular 
plant, bryophyte and testate amoeba communities in four Sphagnum peatlands along an 
altitudinal gradient in Switzerland. Ecological Indicators, 54, pp. 48-59. 
Kotsyurbenko, O. R., Chin, K. J., Glagolev, M. V., Stubner, S., Simankova, M. V., 
Nozhevnikova, A. N., and Conrad, R., 2004. Acetoclastic and hydrogenotrophic methane 
production and methanogenic populations in an acidic WestSiberian peat 
bog. Environmental Microbiology, 6(11), pp. 1159-1173. 
Lara, E., Mitchell, E.A., Moreira, D. and Garca, P.L., 2011. Highly diverse and seasonally 
dynamic protist community in a pristine peat bog. Protist, 162(1), pp. 14-32. 
Leifeld, J. and Menichetti, L., 2018. The underappreciated potential of peatlands in global 
climate change mitigation strategies. Nature Communications, 9(1), p. 1071. 
Lim, T.Y., Lim, Y.Y. and Yule, C.M., 2017. Distribution and characterisation of phenolic 
compounds in Macaranga pruinosa and associated soils in a tropical peat swamp forest. Journal 
of Tropical Forest Science, 29(4), pp. 509-518. 
Mah, F., De Vargas, C., Bass, D., Czech, L., Stamatakis, A. and Lara, E., 2017. Parasites 
dominate hyperdiverse soil protist communities in Neotropical rainforests. Nature Ecology and 
Evolution, 1, pp. 1-8.  
Mellegrd, H., Stalheim, T., Hormazabal, V., Granum, P.E. and Hardy, S.P., 2009. 
Antibacterial activity of Sphagnum acid and other phenolic compounds found in Sphagnum 
papillosum against foodborne bacteria. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 49(1), pp. 85-90. 
Mendonca, J.R., 2011. Galling arthropod diversity in the subtropical neotropics: espinilho 
savannah and riparian forests compared. Revista Colombiana de Entomologa, 37(1), pp. 
111-116. 
Mieczan, T., 2007. Relationships among ciliated protozoa and water chemistry in small peat-
bog reservoirs (czna-Wodawa Lakeland, Eastern Poland). Oceanological and 
Hydrobiological Studies, 36(2), pp. 77-86. 
Mieczan, T., Niedwiecki, M. and Tarkowska-Kukuryk, M., 2015. Effects of rotifers, copepods 
and chironomid larvae on microbial communities in peatlands. European Journal of 
Protistology, 51(5), pp. 386-400. 
Mitchell, E.A., Gilbert, D., Buttler, A., Amblard, C., Grosvernier, P. and Gobat, J.M., 2003. 
Structure of microbial communities in Sphagnum peatlands and effect of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide enrichment. Microbial Ecology, 46(2), pp. 187-199. 
Mitsch, W. and Gosselink, J., 2000. Wetlands. 3rd edition, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.   
Moore, P. D., 2002. The future of cool temperate bogs. Environmental Conservation, 29(1), 
pp. 3-20. 
Opelt, K., Chobot, V., Hadacek, F., Schnmann, S., Eberl, L. and Berg, G., 2007. Investigations 
of the structure and function of bacterial communities associated with Sphagnum 
mosses. Environmental Microbiology, 9(11), pp. 2795-2809. 
Papadimitriou, C.A., Papatheodoulou, A., Takavakoglou, V., Zdragas, A., Samaras, P., 
Sakellaropoulos, G.P., Lazaridou, M. and Zalidis, G., 2010. Investigation of protozoa as 
indicators of wastewater treatment efficiency in constructed wetlands. Desalination, 250(1), 
pp. 378-382.  
Pilson, M.E., 2012. An Introduction to the Chemistry of the Sea. Cambridge University Press.  
Pizzolitto, R.P., Barberis, C.L., Dambolena, J.S., Herrera, J.M., Zunino, M.P., Magnoli, C.E., 
Rubinstein, H.R., Zygadlo, J.A. and Dalcero, A.M., 2015. Inhibitory effect of natural phenolic 
compounds on Aspergillus parasiticus growth. Journal of Chemistry, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
Preston, M.D., Smemo, K.A., McLaughlin, J.W. and Basiliko, N., 2012. Peatland microbial 
communities and decomposition processes in the James Bay Lowlands, Canada. Frontiers in 
Microbiology, 3, p. 70. 
Rose, J.M. and Caron, D.A., 2007. Does low temperature constrain the growth rates of 
heterotrophic protists? Evidence and implications for algal blooms in cold waters. Limnology 
and Oceanography, 52(2), pp. 886-895. 
Senga, Y., Hiroki, M., Terui, S. and Nohara, S., 2015. Variation in microbial function 
through soil depth profiles in the Kushiro Wetland, north-eastern Hokkaido, 
Japan. Ecological Research, 30(4), pp. 563-572. 
Sinsabaugh, R.L., Lauber, C.L., Weintraub, M.N., Ahmed, B., Allison, S.D., Crenshaw, C., 
Contosta, A.R., Cusack, D., Frey, S., Gallo, M.E. and Gartner, T.B., 2008. Stoichiometry of 
soil enzyme activity at global scale. Ecology Letters, 11(11), pp. 1252-1264. 
Thomas, D.M., Stanton, N.L. and Seville, R.S., 1995. A stable eimerian assemblage in 
Wyoming ground squirrels (Spermophilus elegans elegans): maintaining viability over 
winter. Journal of the Helminthological Society of Washington, 62(1), pp. 1-5.  
Voigt, C., Marushchak, M.E., Lamprecht, R.E., Jackowicz-Korczyski, M., Lindgren, A., 
Mastepanov, M., Granlund, L., Christensen, T.R., Tahvanainen, T., Martikainen, P.J. and Biasi, 
C., 2017. Increased nitrous oxide emissions from Arctic peatlands after permafrost 
thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 114(24), pp. 6238-6243. 
Wicek, M., Martin, P. and Gbka, M., 2013. Distribution patterns and environmental 
correlates of water mites (Hydrachnidia, Acari) in peatland microhabitats. Experimental and 
Applied Acarology, 61(2), pp. 147-160. 
Zopp, Z., Thompson, A. M., Karthikeyan, K. G., Madison, F., and Long, S. C., 2016. 
Subsurface transport of Cryptosporidium in soils of Wisconsin's carbonate aquifer 
region. Journal of Environmental Quality, 45(5), pp. 1607-1615. 
Appendices 
Appendix A 
(for chapter 5) 
Figure 1. Principal component analysis (PCA), biplot chart represents the soil variables in the 
Arctic, temperate and tropical regions. 
The arrows represent the soil variables, ovals represent the three contrasting regions and the 
points represent the samples in each region. R 3.5.0. 
Appendix B 
(for chapter 6) 
Table1. The relative abundance of reads of the dominant taxa within each functional group in 
Arctic, Colombia and Wales. 
 Taxa Arctic Colombia Wales 
Apicomplexa 
1.6% 38.0% 60.3% 
Phytomyxa 
85.95% 9.5% 4.6% 
Ichthyosporea 
38.26% 20.6% 41.11% 
Perkinsea 
67.2% 7.0% 25.7% 
Oomycota 
40.56% 19.9% 39.5% 
Mucoromycota 
0.3% 98.6% 1.1% 
Ascomycota 
0.1% 99.5% 0.3% 
Basidiomycota 
3.88% 91.6% 4.47% 
Spirotrichea 
72.8% 5.04% 22.1% 
Oligohymenophorea 
58.8% 23.3% 17.9% 
s Bacillariophyta 84.5% 14.4% 1.14% 
Chlorophyta 
78.3% 19.1% 2.6% 
 Chrysophyceae 
62.98% 
24.87% 
12.14% 
Table 2a. Averages of the selected soil physicochemical properties in Arctic, temperate and 
tropical peatlands. The different letters denote the significant differences between the Arctic 
(A), Colombia (C) and Wales (W) based on Tukeys HSD test (p < 0.05). Abbreviations: 
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), soil organic matter (SOM). 
Region Soil 
temperature 
Water 
content 
content 
Conductivity 
(S/cm) 
(mg/L) 
Phenolics 
(mg/L) 
Oxygen 
(mg/L) 
Arctic 7.1 
154.4 
Colombia 9.8 
13.75 
Wales 13.2 
Table 2b. Averages of the selected soil metabolic factors along Arctic, temperate and tropical 
peatlands. The different letters denote the significant differences between the Arctic (A), 
Colombia (C) and Wales (W) (Tukeys HSD test, p < 0.05). Abbreviations: -D-glucosidase 
(B), N-acetyl--D-glucosaminidase or chitinase (N), arylsulfatase (S), phosphatase (P), 
phenol oxidase (POX) and nitrous oxide gas (N2O). 
Region B 
(nmol 
MUF g-1 
min-1) 
(nmol 
MUF g-1 
min-1) 
(nmol 
MUF g-1 
min-1) 
(nmol 
MUF g-1 
min-1) 
(mol 
dicq g-1 
min-1) 
(ng N2O 
g-1 h-1) 
Arctic 15.0 
Colombia 20.4 
Wales 8.8 
Figure 2. Mixotrophs richness and diversity. 
Figure 3. Osmotrophs richness and diversity. 
Figure 4. Phagotrophs richness and diversity. 
Figure 5. Phototrophs richness and diversity. 
Figure 6. Parasites richness and diversity. 
Figure 7. Boxplots represent the comparison of the relative abundances of reads (log scale) of 
eukaryotes between the different climatic regions. 
Figure 8. The relative abundance of the supergroups of micro-eukaryotes at each region. 
Figure 9. The relative abundance of the five functional groups of micro-eukaryotes at each 
region. 
