DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
Behaviour of multi-storey cross-laminated timber buildings under lateral loading
Hughes, Claire
Award date:
Awarding institution:
Queen's University Belfast
Link to publication
Terms of use
All those accessing thesis content in Queens University Belfast Research Portal are subject to the following terms and conditions of use
             Copyright is subject to the Copyright, Designs and Patent Act 1988, or as modified by any successor legislation
             Copyright and moral rights for thesis content are retained by the author and/or other copyright owners
             A copy of a thesis may be downloaded for personal non-commercial research/study without the need for permission or charge
             Distribution or reproduction of thesis content in any format is not permitted without the permission of the copyright holder
             When citing this work, full bibliographic details should be supplied, including the author, title, awarding institution and date of thesis
Take down policy
A thesis can be removed from the Research Portal if there has been a breach of copyright, or a similarly robust reason.
If you believe this document breaches copyright, or there is sufficient cause to take down, please contact us, citing details. Email:
openaccess@qub.ac.uk
Supplementary materials
Where possible, we endeavour to provide supplementary materials to theses. This may include video, audio and other types of files. We
endeavour to capture all content and upload as part of the Pure record for each thesis.
Note, it may not be possible in all instances to convert analogue formats to usable digital formats for some supplementary materials. We
exercise best efforts on our behalf and, in such instances, encourage the individual to consult the physical thesis for further information.
Download date: 06. Jul. 2022
https://pure.qub.ac.uk/en/studentTheses/23ffce5d-5d35-485f-81a0-f687d75ec7fd
Behaviour of Multi-Storey Cross-Laminated 
Timber Buildings under Lateral Loading 
Claire ine Hughes MEng 
A thesis submitted for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
School of Natural and Built Environment 
Queens University Belfast 
February 2020 
Abstract 
In response to the global drive towards sustainable construction, CLT has emerged as a 
competitive alternative to other construction materials. CLT buildings taller than 10-storeys 
and CLT buildings in regions of moderate to high seismicity would be subject to higher lateral 
loads due to wind and earthquakes than CLT buildings which have already been completed. 
The lack of structural design codes and limited literature regarding the performance of CLT 
buildings under lateral loading are barriers to the adoption of CLT for buildings which could 
experience high lateral loading. Previous research into the behaviour of CLT buildings under 
lateral loading has involved testing of building components. These studies have generally 
been limited to testing wall systems and connections which replicate configurations at 
ground floor storeys in buildings no taller than three storeys. Consequently, to develop the 
understanding of the performance of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading, the 
performance of wall systems and connections which replicate conditions of those in above 
ground floor storeys in buildings taller than three storeys were experimentally investigated. 
The testing of typical CLT connections involved testing eighteen configurations under cyclic 
loading in shear and tension. The results of this experimental investigation highlighted the 
need for capacity-based design of CLT connections to prevent brittle failure. It was found that 
both hold down and angle bracket connections have strength and stiffness in shear and 
tension and by considering the strength of the connections in both directions, more 
economical design of CLT buildings could be achieved. The testing of CLT wall systems 
involved testing three CLT wall systems with identical configurations under monotonic lateral 
load and constant vertical load, with vertical loads replicating gravity loads at storeys within 
a 10-storey CLT building. The results show that vertical load has a significant influence on wall 
system behaviour; varying the vertical load was found to vary the contribution of 
deformation mechanisms to global behaviour within the elastic region, reinforcing the need 
to consider connection design at each individual storey.  As there are still no structural design 
codes for CLT buildings, the accuracy of analytical methods presented within the literature 
for predicting the behaviour of CLT connections and wall systems under lateral loading was 
assessed. It was found that the analytical methods for both connections and wall systems are 
highly inaccurate and do not reflect experimentally observed behaviour. 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Dr Daniel McPolin, not only for his 
academic guidance, but for being a constant source of support and encouragement 
throughout some of my most challenging years. He has been instrumental in helping me get 
to this point. I would also like to thank my other supervisors, Dr Patrick McGetrick and Dr 
Daniel McCrum, for their knowledge and insightful suggestions. 
This work could not have been completed without the support of the staff of the Heavy 
Structures Lab: Eddie Moulds, Jamie Liang, Kenny McDonald and Desi Hill. They not only 
helped me with all experimental aspects of this work, but they also made the lab an enjoyable 
place to work.  
To the friends I was lucky enough meet during my PhD, you have made this experience 
immeasurably more fun than I ever expected. To Aimee, I am very lucky that we ended up 
sitting together on the first day of our undergraduate degree and that I have finished my PhD 
still sitting beside you. Thank you for your gossip, advice and encouragement over the past 
eight years. I wish to also express my gratitude to my friends from outside of Queens who 
have been there for me no matter what.  
To Raj, thank you for being so understanding and supportive of everything I do. Thank you 
for keeping me grounded and most of all, thank you for never failing to make me laugh. 
I want to thank my grandparents, aunties, uncles and cousins for the years of love and happy 
memories. To an equally important family member, Dylan the dog, thank you for providing 
me with unwavering love. Ciara, thank you for being the best big sister, friend and role model 
I could ever have. To Paddy, I am incredibly lucky to have a third parent, especially one like 
you. Thank you for your endless patience and encouragement. To my late dad, without you I 
would not be here and for that I am eternally grateful.  
Finally, I am indebted to my mum who is everything to me. I simply would not be the person 
I am without her and so I dedicate this thesis to her.  
Publications 
Journal paper 
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2019. Behaviour of Cross-Laminated 
Timber Wall Systems under Monotonic Lateral Loading. Journal of Structural Integrity and 
Maintenance, 4(3), pp. 153-161. 
Conference papers 
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2019. Performance of above ground 
floor CLT wall systems and connections under lateral loading. In: 7th International Conference 
on Structural Engineering, Mechanics and Computation. Cape Town, South Africa.  
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2019. Performance of CLT wall 
systems and typical CLT connections under monotonic loading. In: RILEM International 
Conference on Sustainable Materials, Systems and Structures 2019. Rovinj, Croatia. 
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2019. Performance of above ground 
floor CLT wall systems and connections under lateral loading. In: Institution of Structural 
Engineers Young Researchers Conference. London, UK. 
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2018. Behaviour of cross-laminated 
timber wall systems under monotonic loading. In: Civil Engineering Research in Ireland 2018. 
Dublin, Ireland. 
Hughes, C., McPolin, D., McGetrick, P. and McCrum, D. 2018. Performance of CLT wall 
systems and typical CLT wall panel to CLT floor panel connections under monotonic loading. 
In: Young Researchers' Forum IV - Innovation in Construction Materials. Newcastle, UK
Table of Contents 
Abstract .....i 
Chaper 3:   Behaviour of Typical Cross-Laminated Timber Connections under 
Cyclic Loading....45 
Table of contents 
3.4.1. Characteristic lateral Load-carrying capacity of the connections in accordance 
3.4.2. Characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the connections in accordance 
3.5.3. Comparison of strength predictions using analytical methods with 
Chaper 4:   Behaviour of Cross-Laminated Timber Wall Systems under Monotonic 
4.5.5. Comparison of lateral displacement predictions using analytical methods 
Table of contents 
5.1.1. Experimental investigation of the behaviour of typical cross-laminated 
5.1.2. Experimental investigation of the behaviour of cross-laminated timber wall 
References  212 
Appendix A: Experimental results of all test specimens tested under cyclic loading 
List of Figures 
Figure 2.4: Examples of narrow face profiles of CLT panels to facilitate connections between 
Figure 2.6: Charring depth for CLT panels with layer thicknesses of 9 mm, 10 mm, 17 mm, 20 
mm, 28 mm and 30 mm compared with charring depth according to BS EN 1995-1-2 (BSI, 
Figure 2.10: Above ground floor hold down connection detail for Dalston Works (Ramboll, 
Figure 2.11: Above ground floor angle bracket connection detail for Dalston Works (Ramboll, 
Figure 2.12: Concealed CLT wall panel to CLT floor panel connection details: (a) self-tapping 
screws; (b) KNAPP system; (c) threaded/glued-in rod; (d) concealed metal plates 
Figure 2.13: CLT panel to CLT panel connection details: (a) internal spline with screws; (b) 
surface spline with screws; (c) half-lapped joint with screws; (d) threaded/glued-in rods; (e) 
Figure 2.15: (a) X-RAD system; (b) X-RAD system fixed to one CLT element; (c) multiple X-RAD 
systems and a linking plate connecting three CLT elements (Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017)
Figure 2.16: CLT wall panel to foundation connection using the XL-stub (Latour and Rizzano, 
List of figures 
Figure 2.17: (a) CLT wall panel to foundation connection using X-bracket; (b) CLT wall panel 
Figure 2.18: Resilient slip friction joint developed by Zarnani, Valadbeigi and Quenneville 
Figure 2.20: (a) Brock Commons during construction; (b) Brock Commons after construction 
Figure 2.21: Typical structure at each storey proposed in the Timber Tower Research Project 
Figure 3.1: (a) Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket; (b) Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm 
Figure 3.2: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened with nails only), b (two-thirds fastened 
with nails only) and c (two-thirds fastened with nails and screws) for connections using the 
Figure 3.3: (a) Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down; (b) ) Rothoblaas KOS20160B Hexagonal Head 
Bolt with Nut; (c) Rothoblaas ULS707720 WHT washer; (d) Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular 
Figure 3.4: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened), b (two-thirds fastened) and c (one-third 
Figure 3.5: (a) Rothoblaas WHT340 Hold Down; (b) Rothoblaas KOS16140B Hexagonal Head 
Figure 3.6: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened), b(two-thirds fastened) and c (one-third 
Figure 3.7: Shear test set up for configurations using the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
Figure 3.8: Shear test set up for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 57 
Figure 3.9: Shear test set up for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 57 
Figure 3.10: Tension test set up for configurations using the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R 
Figure 3.11: Tension test set up for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down
List of figures 
Figure 3.12: Tension test set up for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down
Figure 3.13: Loading procedure for cyclic testing of timber connections in accordance with 
Figure 3.14: Method to determine Fmax, Vmax, Fy, Vy, Fu, Vu, kel and kpl using test data in 
Figure 3.15: Definition of the energy dissipated per half cycle, Ed,i, and the available potential 
Figure 3.17: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections under 
Figure 3.18: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection under 
Figure 3.19: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 1
Figure 3.20: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 2
Figure 3.21: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 3
Figure 3.22: Typical hysteresis loops for Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
Figure 3.23: Comparison of the average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
Figure 3.24: Hysteresis loops of all test specimens for Configuration 2: (a) Test specimen 1; 
Figure 3.25: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections under 
List of figures 
Figure 3.26: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 
Figure 3.27: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 
Figure 3.28: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 
Figure 3.29: Typical hysteresis loops for Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
Figure 3.30: Comparison of the average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
Figure 3.31: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 7 without tearing of hold down; (b) 
Figure 3.32: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
Figure 3.33: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 7 .. 92 
Figure 3.34: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 8 .. 92 
Figure 3.35: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 9 .. 93 
Figure 3.36: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections tested 
Figure 3.37: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
List of figures 
(D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
Figure 3.38: Hysteresis loops of all test specimens for Configuration 7: (a) Test specimen 1; 
Figure 3.39: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
Figure 3.40: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
Figure 3.41: Failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under monotonic loading 
Figure 3.42: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 10
Figure 3.43: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 11
Figure 3.44: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 12
Figure 3.45: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections tested 
Figure 3.46: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
Figure 3.47: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections under cyclic 
Figure 3.48: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 13
List of figures 
Figure 3.49: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 14
Figure 3.50: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 15
Figure 3.51: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections tested 
Figure 3.52: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
(D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
Figure 3.53: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 16; (b) Configuration 17; (c) Configuration 18
Figure 3.54: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 16
Figure 3.55: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 17
Figure 3.56: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 18
Figure 3.57: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections tested 
Figure 3.58: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
List of figures 
Figure 3.59: Comparison of the average properties of Configuration 10, Configuration 12 and 
Configuration 16 determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (d) impairment of strength (F1-3); (e) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
Figure 3.60: Comparison between the experimental maximum shear strengths, the 
characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear strength determined from the experimental 
Figure 3.61: Comparison between the experimental maximum tensile strengths, the 
characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength determined from the experimental 
Figure 4.2: (a) Rothoblaas WHT340 Hold Down; (b) Rothoblaas KOS16140B Hexagonal Head 
Bolt with Nut; (c) Rothoblaas LBA 60x4mm annular ring nail; (d) Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-
Figure 4.3: (a) Arrangement of nails in hold down connection; (b) Arrangement of nails in wall 
part of angle bracket connection; (c) Arrangement of nails in floor part of angle bracket 
Figure 4.4: (a) Elevation of wall system showing arrangement of connectors; (b) Plan or wall 
Figure 4.7: Displacement transducers measuring vertical and lateral displacements of the 
Figure 4.8: Displacement transducer 9 measuring the vertical displacement of angle bracket 
Figure 4.10: Displacement transducer 16 and displacement transducer 8 measuring the 
List of figures 
Figure 4.13: Deformation mechanisms contributing to global behaviour of CLT wall systems 
Figure 4.19: Lateral load [kN] vs. lateral displacement due to sliding/lateral displacement due 
Figure 4.20: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
Figure 4.21: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
Figure 4.22: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
Figure 4.26: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
Figure 4.27: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
Figure 4.28: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
Figure 4.29: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for T1.1, T9, T8.1, T10, T4.3, 
Figure 4.30: Lateral load [kN] vs. vertical displacement [mm] for T1.1, T9, T8.1, T10, T4.3, 
List of figures 
Figure 4.32: (a) Linear stiffness profile exhibited in test T1-T7; (b) bilinear stiffness profile 
Figure 4.33: (a) Example linear load  displacement curves used to determine lateral stiffness 
values; (b) Example bilinear load  displacement curves used to determine lateral stiffness 
Figure 4.35: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is 
maximum (H:50 kN)/residual lateral displacement when the lateral load, H, is removed (H:0 
Figure 4.37: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for the lateral loading and 
Figure 4.38: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T1 as the lateral load 
Figure 4.39: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T4 as the lateral load 
Figure 4.40: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T8 as the lateral load 
Figure 4.41: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
Figure 4.42: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
Figure 4.43: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
Figure 4.44: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
Figure 4.45: Lateral load [kN] vs. experimental/predicted total lateral displacement [mm] 
Figure 4.46: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
Figure 4.47: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
List of figures 
Figure 4.48: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods 
adapted to consider the vertical load as a point load and experimental results for tests T8.1, 
Figure 4.49: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
List of Tables 
Table 2.1: Typical characteristics of adhesives used in the manufacturing of CLT (Wang, Pirvu 
Table 3.1: Configurations tested under monotonic loading (1 repetition) and cyclic loading (3 
Table 3.2: Average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections 
determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction in accordance 
Table 3.3: Average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections 
determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension direction in 
Table 3.4: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections determined 
Table 3.5: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections determined 
Table 3.6: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections determined 
Table 3.7: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections determined 
Table 3.8: Dimensions of hold down and number of nails used in Configuration 10, 
Table 3.9: Comparison of the characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear strength 
determined from the experimental results and the predicted characteristic shear strength of 
Table 3.10: Comparison of the characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength 
determined from the experimental results and the predicted characteristic tensile strength 
List of tables 
xviii 
Table 4.5: Percentage contribution of sliding and rocking to the total lateral displacement 
Table 4.7: Total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is maximum (H:50 kN) and residual 
Table 4.8: Total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is maximum (H:150 kN) and 
residual lateral displacement end of the test when the lateral load, H, is removed (H:0 kN) 
List of Symbols 
a Width of timber boards used in CLT panel [mm] 
A Cross-sectional area of CLT panel [mm2] 
Aef Effective cross-sectional area of CLT panel [mm2] 
b Width of wall panel [mm] 
c Distance of the centre of the hold down connection to the edge of 
the panel [mm] 
d Nominal diameter of the fastener [mm] 
dn Nominal diameter of the annular ring nail [mm] 
ds Nominal diameter of the screw [mm] 
D  Ductility ratio [-] 
D30  Ductility ratio at 30mm displacement [-] 
E Elastic modulus of CLT panel [GPa] 
Ed,i Energy dissipated in a particular half cycle 
Ep,i Potential energy in a particular half cycle 
c,0,k Compressive strength of the timber parallel to the grain [N/mm2] 
h,k Characteristic embedment strength of the timber [N/mm2] 
h,k:EC5 Characteristic embedment strength of the timber according to 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [N/mm2] 
u,k Characteristic tensile strength of the fastener [N/mm2] 
F Load [kN] 
Fax,Rk Characteristic withdrawal capacity of the fastener [kN] 
Fax,Rk:EC5,n Characteristic withdrawal capacity of the annular ring nail 
according to Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [kN] 
Fax,Rk:U&B,n Characteristic withdrawal capacity of the annular ring nail 
according to Uibel and Bla (2014) [kN] 
Fax,Rk:EC5,s Characteristic withdrawal capacity of the screw according to 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [kN] 
List of symbols 
Fax,Rk:U&B,s Characteristic withdrawal capacity of the screw according to Uibel 
and Bla (2014) [kN] 
Fi Maximum load achieved in a particular half cycle [kN] 
Fmax  Maximum strength [kN] 
Fmax,i Maximum strength of each test specimen [kN] 
Fmax,0.05 Characteristic 5th percentile maximum strength [kN] 
FRk Predicted characteristic strength [kN] 
Ft,i, Tensile force resisted by each connection [kN] 
Ft,HD1 Tensile force resisted by the hold down connection HD1 [kN] 
Fs,i, Shear force resisted by each angle bracket connection [kN] 
Fu  Ultimate strength [kN] 
FV,Rk Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the fastener [kN] 
FV,Rk (connection) Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the connection [kN] 
FV,Rk:EC5,n Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the annular ring nail 
according to Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [kN] 
FV,Rk:U&B,n Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the annular ring nail 
according to Uibel and Bla (2014) [kN] 
FV,Rk:EC5,s Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the screw according to 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [kN] 
FV,Rk:U&B,s Characteristic load-carrying capacity of the screw according to 
Uibel and Bla (2014) [kN] 
Fy  Yield strength [kN] 
F30  Load at 30 mm displacement [kN] 
G Shear modulus of CLT panel [GPa] 
Gef Effective shear modulus of CLT panel [GPa] 
h Height of CLT wall panel [mm] 
H Lateral load applied to wall system [kN] 
Ief,1 Effective second moment of area [mm4] 
Ief,2 Effective second moment of area [mm4] 
k Stiffness [kN/mm] 
kel Elastic stiffness [kN/mm] 
kfr Coefficient of friction [-] 
List of symbols 
kpl Plastic stiffness [kN/mm] 
ks Standard deviation correction factor 
ks,AB Shear stiffness of the angle bracket connections [kN/mm] 
kt,i Tensile stiffness of the connection [kN/mm] 
kt,HD1 Tensile stiffness of the hold down connection HD1 [kN/mm] 
k1 Elastic lateral stiffness of the CLT wall system [kN/mm] 
k2 Plastic lateral stiffness of the CLT wall system [kN/mm] 
lef Nominal threaded length of the fastener including the point [mm] 
lef,n Nominal threaded length of the nail including the point [mm] 
lef,s Nominal threaded length of the screw including the point [mm] 
My,Rk Characteristic fastener yield moment [Nmm] 
My,Rk:EC5,n Characteristic fastener yield moment of the annular ring nail 
according to Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [Nmm] 
My,Rk:EC5,n Characteristic fastener yield moment of the screw according to 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) [Nmm] 
My,Rk:U&B Characteristic fastener yield moment according to Eurocode 5 
[Nmm] 
nAB Number of angle brackets connections in the wall system [-] 
nef Effective number of fasteners (-) 
qv Vertical load applied to the wall system [kN] 
t Thickness of CLT wall panel [mm] 
tlayer Thickness of the vertically spanning layers of CLT panel [mm] 
t1 Minimum of the fastener penetration length including the tip or 
the timber thickness [mm] 
t1,n Minimum of the annular ring nail penetration length including the 
tip or the timber thickness [mm] 
t1,s Minimum of the screw penetration length including the tip or the 
timber thickness [mm] 
ui Vertical displacement of the connection [mm] 
uHD1 Vertical displacement of hold down connection HD1 [mm] 
V Displacement [mm] 
List of symbols 
Vi Displacement corresponding to maximum load achieved in a 
particular half cycle [mm] 
Vmax  Displacement corresponding to maximum strength [mm] 
Vu  Displacement corresponding to ultimate strength [mm] 
Vy Displacement corresponding to yield strength [mm] 
xi Distance of the connection from the point of rotation [mm] 
 Mean experimental maximum strength [kN] 
total Total lateral displacement [mm] 
r Lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] 
sl Lateral displacement due to sliding [mm] 
sh Lateral displacement due to shear [mm] 
b Lateral displacement due to bending [mm] 
F1-3  Impairment of strength [%] 
 Position of the fastener relative to the CLT panel [] 
eq, Equivalent viscous damping ratio [%] 
k Characteristic timber density [kg/m3] 
 Standard deviation  
 Angle of rotation of wall panel [] 
Chaper 1:  Introduction 
1.1. Background 
The worlds urban population is growing rapidly; over half the worlds population is currently 
living in cities and this number is expected to increase to approximately 68% by 2050 (United 
Nations, 2018). To facilitate the growing urban housing and infrastructure demands, 
governments have been required to assess the way in which cities are planned and 
constructed leading to a global drive towards smart and sustainable future cities. To address 
some of the sustainability challenges associated with rapid urbanisation, engineers and 
architects are being encouraged to consider the use of timber before other construction 
materials. Consequently, cross-laminated timber (CLT) has emerged as a competitive 
alternative to other construction materials due to its sustainable attributes.  
CLT is an engineered wood product formed from layers of timber boards bonded to each 
other orthogonally to create large two-way spanning structural panels which can be used to 
form walls, floors and roofs of buildings. CLT panels are typically connected using metal 
connectors including hold downs which resist uplift of the walls, angle brackets which resist 
sliding of the walls and screwed connections which resist shear between adjacent and 
orthogonal panels. CLT is a prefabricated material which results in reduced on-site 
construction times, reduced material wastage and therefore reduced costs. Due to its high 
strength-to-weight ratio, it is fast becoming the solution to constructing high density housing 
on inner-city sites where underground infrastructure limits foundation loads. 
Large scale production of CLT was established in Europe in the early 2000s, however, 
Structurlam and Nordic Structures in Canada became the first North American manufacturers 
of CLT more recently in 2010 (Pei et al., 2016b). As a result, the majority of tall CLT buildings 
have been constructed in Europe. Hackney, London, is one of several local authorities across 
the world encouraging engineers and architects to consider timber before other construction 
materials. This led to Dalston Works (formerly known as Dalston Lane), a 10 storey residential 
building, being constructed in Hackey in 2017 and it is currently the worlds tallest pure CLT 
building (Harley et al., 2016). 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Timber is a commonly used material in seismically active regions due to its high strength-to-
weight ratio and the ductility and high energy dissipation capability of its connection systems. 
While CLT buildings up to 10 storeys have been constructed, and taller buildings are being 
considered, few CLT buildings have been constructed in areas of moderate to high seismicity 
(Pei et al., 2016b). CLT has not been adopted as a construction material in areas of moderate 
to high seismicity due to lack of knowledge regarding the performance of CLT buildings under 
lateral loading and lack of structural codes for the material. Therefore, further research is 
required to provide the experimental basis necessary to develop the understanding of the 
behaviour of components of CLT buildings under lateral loading, such as seismic or wind 
loading, so that CLT can become a competitive construction material for use in mid-rise and 
high-rise construction.  
1.2. Previous Research 
Previous research into the behaviour of CLT buildings under lateral loading has involved 
experimental testing of CLT buildings as well as components of these buildings, such as wall 
systems and connections. Despite this, there is still limited information available in the 
literature regarding the performance of CLT building components and consequently there is 
minimal guidance for the design of tall CLT buildings under lateral loading.  
Previous studies which have investigated the performance of CLT wall systems have 
replicated conditions within multi-storey buildings, however, they have been limited to 
replicating conditions within buildings no taller than three storeys (Dujic, Pucelj and Zarnic, 
2004; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Popovski, Schneider and Schweinsteiger, 
2010). In most of these studies, the CLT wall panels were anchored to a steel or concrete 
foundation which is typical of ground floor wall systems within multi-storey CLT buildings. In 
above ground floor stories, the wall systems will comprise of a CLT wall panel fixed to a CLT 
floor panel. Therefore, despite the above ground floor wall system configuration being the 
most common configuration of wall system in CLT buildings with more than two storeys, it is 
the least investigated. As limited information is available to suggest how these walls systems 
at storeys above ground floor will perform under lateral loading, it is difficult to predict the 
behaviour of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading. Therefore, to develop greater 
understanding of the performance of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading, it is 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
important to investigate wall systems which replicate conditions of those in storeys above 
ground floor in buildings taller than three storeys.  
Previous studies have found that connections significantly influence the behaviour of CLT 
wall systems under lateral loading (Ceccotti et al., 2006; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 
2015a; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). Therefore, the behaviour of typical CLT 
connections, particularly those used within above ground floor storeys, must also be 
experimentally investigated to develop greater understanding of the performance of CLT wall 
systems and therefore multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading. 
While there is minimal guidance for the design of tall CLT buildings under lateral loading, the 
literature proposes analytical methods for predicting the behaviour of CLT wall systems and 
connections. Two analytical methods are proposed for predicting the tensile and shear 
strength of CLT connections (BSI, 2014; Uibel and Bla, 2014) and four analytical methods 
are proposed for predicting the deformation of CLT wall systems under lateral loading 
(Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori, 2016; Hummel, Seim 
and Otto, 2016; Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock, 2014). Before these analytical 
methods are recommended for use, their validity should be evaluated by comparing 
predicted values calculated using the methods with a range of experimental results.  
1.3. Aim and Objectives 
Given the knowledge gaps outlined in the previous section, the aim of this research is to 
experimentally investigate the behaviour of above ground floor wall systems and typical 
connections within multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading. This will contribute to 
the experimental basis necessary to inform design guidance for CLT buildings under lateral 
loading, such as seismic or wind loading. In addition to this, the validity of analytical methods 
proposed within the literature is assessed. The aim of this research was achieved by the 
following objectives: 
1. Experimental investigation of typical connections used in above ground floor storeys 
within CLT buildings, made using commercially available components, under cyclic 
loading in shear and tension. These experimental tests contributed to achieving the 
aim by allowing the behaviour of the CLT connections to be evaluated and the 
mechanical properties of the connections to be determined.  
Chapter 1: Introduction 
2. Experimental investigation of above ground floor wall systems, representative of 
those within a 10 storey CLT building, under monotonic lateral loading. These 
experimental tests contributed to achieving the aim by allowing the global behaviour 
of CLT wall systems under lateral loading to be evaluated. 
3. Comparison of the experimentally observed behaviour of the CLT connections and 
wall systems with predicted behaviour determined using the analytical methods 
presented within the literature.  
1.4. Structure of Thesis 
Chapter 2 presents an extensive review of the literature in this field. This review gives an 
overview of cross-laminated timber as a construction material; it details its constituent 
materials, the manufacturing process, its properties, typical connection systems and any 
material or structural design standards and guidelines. Following this, previous experimental 
research into the behaviour of CLT buildings and wall systems under lateral loading is 
outlined, as well any studies which involved cyclic testing of CLT connections using 
commercially available or novel components. Finally, this chapter summarises lateral stability 
systems either used within completed multi-storey CLT buildings or proposed for use in multi-
storey CLT buildings.  
Chapter 3 details the experimental investigation of typical CLT connections used in above 
ground floor storeys under cyclic loading in shear and tension. Chapter 4 details the 
experimental investigation of above ground floor wall systems, representative of those 
within a 10 storey CLT building, under monotonic lateral loading. In these chapters, the 
methodology employed in the experimental investigation is outlined and the results are 
presented and discussed. In both Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, a comparison is made between 
the experimental results and predicted values calculated using the analytical methods 
presented within the literature, with details of the relevant analytical methods outlined in 
each chapter.  
Chapter 5 summarises the main findings of the research and provides recommendations for 
future work. 
Chaper 2:  Literature Review 
2.1. Introduction 
Over half the worlds population are currently living in cities and this is expected to increase 
to approximately 68% by 2050 (United Nations, 2018). To facilitate the growing urban 
housing and infrastructure demands associated with this rapid urbanisation, governments 
have been required to assess the way in which cities are planned and constructed leading to 
a global drive towards smart and sustainable cities. However, this poses significant challenges 
for the construction industry, as the industry will be required to respond to the growing 
housing demand while employing sustainable measures to halt the advancement of climate 
change and the resulting increase in the risk of our urban communities to natural hazards.  
The construction industry is a major contributor to the exhaustion of the worlds natural 
resources, with the industry responsible for the extraction of half of the worlds raw materials 
(Herczeg et al., 2014). Commonly used construction materials such as steel, reinforced 
concrete and brick use substantial amounts of non-renewable resources both as constituents 
of the materials and in the manufacturing processes to produce the materials. If these 
materials were to be used to meet the growing demand for urban housing, the worlds non-
renewable resources would be further depleted at a higher rate. Consequently, it is vital that 
sustainable alternatives are employed within the construction industry. 
A potential solution to the growing urban housing demand is to construct tall residential 
buildings which are capable of providing high density housing and preventing urban sprawl 
(Ali et al., 2012). Timber has been a widely used construction material for centuries for the 
construction of low-rise residential buildings, although its popularity declined with the 
emergence of tall buildings for which concrete and steel were more appropriate materials. 
However, in response to the global drive towards sustainable construction, interest in timber 
is growing once again as it is a natural, renewable material which is sustainable when sourced 
from sustainably managed forests. As a result, engineers and architects are being encouraged 
by local authorities across the world to consider the use of timber before other materials in 
the construction of new buildings (British Columbia, 2009; Hackney Council, 2012; Rotorua 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Lakes Council, 2015; Tasmanian Government, 2017; Powys County Council, 2017). The 
reignited interest in timber has led to considerable research and development with new 
engineered wood products, such as cross-laminated timber, emerging as competitive 
alternatives to steel and concrete for use in circumstances that previously timber would not 
have been considered for, such as in the construction of tall residential buildings.  
2.2. Cross-Laminated Timber 
Cross-laminated timber, also known as CLT, crosslam and Xlam, was first developed in Europe 
in the 1990s as a result of collaborative research between academia and industry 
(FPInnovations, 2011). This research was driven by need of sawmills to find a more profitable 
use for the sideboards produced during the cutting of logs to produce solid timber planks 
(Brandner et al., 2016). By the early 2000s, CLT was recognised as a viable alternative to other 
construction materials, such as steel and concrete, and the CLT market has continued to grow 
exponentially since then (Espinoza et al., 2016). The largest European manufacturers of CLT 
are Stora Enso, KLH and Binderholz and it is expected that by 2021, these three companies 
alone will be capable of producing more CLT than the current combined output of all CLT 
manufacturing facilities in Europe (Jauk, 2018). Whilst large scale production of CLT was 
established in Europe in the early 2000s, Structurlam and Nordic Structures in Canada 
became the first North American manufacturers of CLT more recently in 2010 (Pei et al., 
2016b). 
CLT is an engineered wood product formed from at least three layers of timber boards 
bonded to each other using adhesives to create large structural panels. Unlike glulam in 
which the timber boards are orientated in the same direction, the layers in CLT are generally 
orientated orthogonally to the adjacent layers (Figure 2.1). This results in two-way spanning 
structural panels which can bear load both in-plane and out-of-plane and therefore can be 
used to form walls, floors and roofs of buildings. In some cases, several adjacent layers may 
be orientated in the same direction to achieve a particular structural capacity and examples 
of typical CLT cross-sections are illustrated in Figure 2.2 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.1: Typical arrangement of layers in a CLT panel 
Figure 2.2: Examples of typical CLT cross-sections (FPInnovations, 2011) 
2.2.1. Material standards 
BS EN 16351:2015 (BSI, 2015) details the components of CLT panels, performance 
requirements and procedures for testing and assessment of the CLT panels;  however, as CLT 
is a relatively new material there is no widely accepted standardisation. Instead, European 
manufacturers of CLT hold European Technical Assessments (ETAs) for the panels 
manufactured in their factories, with all of the three largest European manufacturers holding 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
ETAs (KLH: ETA-06/0138 (OIB, 2017),  Binderholz: ETA-06/0009 (DIBt, 2017), Stora Enso: ETA-
14/0349 (OIB, 2018)). 
2.2.2. Constituent materials 
Timber 
In Europe, Norway spruce is the type of timber most commonly used in CLT, although it can 
be manufactured from other softwoods including larch, white fir, silver fir, Douglas fir and 
pine (Sutton, Black and Walker, 2011). The use of locally grown timber to manufacture CLT 
has been implemented by CLT manufacturing facilities in Japan where Japanese cedar, known 
locally as sugi, is predominately used (Passarelli and Koshihara, 2018). Research has been 
undertaken globally to investigate the use of other types of locally available timber to 
manufacture CLT. The use of American hardwoods was investigated in the US by Beagley et 
al. (2014) and Espinoza and Buehlmann (2018). Franke (2016) investigated the use of another 
hardwood, beech, grown in the Swiss forests which currently supply softwood for European 
manufactured CLT. The timber boards used in CLT are generally of grade C24, however it has 
been demonstrated that lower grade timber could also be used where it provides acceptable 
load capacity and performance. Sikora, McPolin and Harte (2016) manufactured and tested 
CLT panels from Irish grown Sitka spruce of grade C16, while Crawford, Hairstans and Smith 
(2014) manufactured and tested CLT panels from UK grown Sitka spruce of grade C16. Some 
ETAs, such as the ETA-14/0349 (OIB, 2018), allow manufacturers to produce CLT with 
predominately C24 grade timber but up to 10% C16 grade timber, although BS EN 16351 (BSI, 
2015) states that all timber boards in a layer must be of the same strength class. The use of 
non-structural grade timber boards which did not meet the requirements for structural grade 
(Cherry et al., 2019; Sigrist and Lehmann, 2014) or were produced as a waste product of other 
processes (Srivaro, Matan and Lam, 2019) has also been investigated for use in CLT. 
Adhesive 
According to BS EN 16351 (BSI, 2015), the following adhesives are permitted for use in CLT: 
 Phenolic and aminoplastic adhesives (e.g. MF, MUF, PRF, UF); 
 Moisture curing one-component polyurethane adhesives (PUR); 
 Emulsion polymer isocyanate adhesives (EPI). 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Typical characteristics of the adhesives used in the manufacturing of CLT are given in Table 
2.1. PRF adhesive is a widely used structural adhesive and commonly used in the manufacture 
of glulam (Sikora, McPolin and Harte, 2016); it is the cheapest of the three types of adhesive, 
however when cured it is dark in colour and has a higher target spreading rate and a 
considerably greater pressing time than EPI and PUR adhesives. PUR adhesive is more 
expensive than PRF and EPI adhesives, although it has several advantages over the other 
adhesives, including that it is light in colour, has a much lower target spreading rate than EPI 
and PRF adhesives and it is formaldehyde-free. Consequently, PUR adhesives are the most 
commonly used adhesive in Europe to manufacture CLT (Wang, Pirvu and Lum, 2011). 
Table 2.1: Typical characteristics of adhesives used in the manufacturing of CLT (Wang, 
Pirvu and Lum, 2011) 
Adhesive 
PRF EPI PUR 
Cured adhesive colour Dark Light Light 
Component Liquid, two 
components 
Liquid, two 
components 
Liquid, single 
components 
Solid content [%] 50 43 100 
Wood moisture content [%] 6-15 6-15 > 8 
optimal 12 
Target application rate 
(single spread) [g/m2] 
375-400 275-325 100-180 
Assembly time [min] 40 20 45 
Pressing time [min] 420-540 60 120 
Applied pressure [N/mm2] 0.8 0.8 0.8-1.4 
Cost [$/kg] 4.4 7.7 10.6 
2.2.3. Manufacture 
The timber boards to be used in the manufacture of CLT are kiln-dried to a moisture content 
of 12% +/- 2% and visually or machine strength graded. The timber boards are cut to remove 
knots or defects, finger jointed flatwise on the end face of the board (Figure 2.3) so that the 
finger joint is not visible on the side face of the CLT panel and planed (Brandner et al., 2016). 
Some manufacturers may bond the narrow faces of timber boards to form a single layer panel 
which is then bonded to the side face of other single layer panels to reduce gaps between 
boards; this is done for several reasons including fire resistance, airtightness, acoustics, 
aesthetics or because the method for joining panels involves dowel-type fasteners (Brandner, 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2014). However, this is not necessary, and the timber boards can be laid side by side, without 
being bonded together, to form a layer which is then bonded on the side face only to another 
layer of timber boards. The three largest European manufacturers of CLT produce panels 
using layers with minimum thickness of 20 mm and maximum thickness of 40 mm; the layer 
thickness used depends on the overall thickness of the CLT panel which ranges from 60-500 
mm (Binderholz, 2019; KLH, 2019; Stora Enso, 2015). 
Figure 2.3: Timber boards finger jointed flatwise on the end face (Stora Enso, 2014)  
The layers are bonded together using adhesive, which is preferably mechanically applied in a 
line-wise direct application, and then pressure is applied by means of a hydraulic press, 
vacuum press or nails, screws and brackets to ensure the layers adhere to one another. 
Adhesives should be applied within 24 hours of planing (Wang, Pirvu and Lum, 2011). The 
pressure which must be applied depends on the type of timber and adhesive used, the 
roughness and flatness of the layer surface, the method for adhesive application and the 
quantity of adhesive applied (Brandner et al., 2016).  
Once the adhesive has cured, the CLT panel is trimmed and the side face of the CLT panel is 
planed or sanded. The panels can then be cut to size and any openings for doors and windows 
cut out using a computer numerical control (CNC) cutting machine. The dimensions of CLT 
panels are not only limited by the machinery within the manufacturing facility, but also by 
the maximum length and width that can be transported on road networks between the 
manufacturing facility and the construction site. KLH and Stora Enso produce panels with 
maximum width of 2.95 m, whereas Binderholz manufacturers panels up to a width of 3.5 m 
(Binderholz, 2019; KLH, 2019; Stora Enso, 2015). The length of CLT panels is generally limited 
to 13.5 m to allow for standard road transportation although some manufacturers will 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
produce panels with length up to 24 m, however this increases transportation costs (Sutton, 
Black and Walker, 2011). The narrow face of the CLT panels can also be cut to form various 
profiles to aid connection to adjacent panels with examples of these profiles illustrated in 
Figure 2.4. The manufacturing process of CLT is summarised in Figure 2.5. 
Figure 2.4: Examples of narrow face profiles of CLT panels to facilitate connections between 
adjacent panels (Binderholz, 2019) 
Figure 2.5: Overview of CLT manufacturing process (Brandner et al., 2016) 
2.2.4. Properties 
Structural performance 
CLT panels have strength both in-plane and out-of-plane and therefore can be used as both 
structural floor and wall elements. Due to the cross-lamination of the timber boards, CLT 
panels can be two-way spanning.  
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Dimensional stability  
The cross-lamination of the timber boards leads to improved dimensional stability compared 
to solid timber, with movements due to swelling and shrinkage reduced. In-plane swelling 
and shrinkage of CLT manufactured using Norway spruce in-plane is 0.02% for each 1% 
change in moisture content and out-of-plane is 0.24% for each 1% change in moisture 
content (Brandner, 2014; Stora Enso, 2015). 
Strength-to-weight ratio 
CLT has a higher strength-to-weight ratio than reinforced concrete and therefore CLT 
buildings have lower weight than equivalent reinforced concrete buildings. This reduces the 
depth, and consequently the cost, of the foundations required. It also has the benefit of 
allowing taller buildings to be constructed on sites where foundation loads are limited, and 
this advantage was exploited in the design of Dalston Works (formally known as Dalston 
Lane) (Harley et al., 2016). Dalston Works was constructed on a site where strict foundation 
loads were imposed due to the presence of High Speed 1 underground railway lines and its 
location within the proposed Crossrail 2 exclusion zone. The designers estimated that an 
equivalent concrete frame would have weighed four times the weight of the CLT building and 
therefore CLT was utilised on this site. This allowed for an additional three storeys containing 
15 apartments, when compared to an equivalent concrete building, to be constructed on the 
site (Harley et al., 2016).  
Fire resistance 
When exposed to fire, large timber members char slowly at a predictable rate maintaining 
their structural capacity and they can be used unprotected whereas non-combustible 
materials, such as steel, would require special fire protection (Porteous and Kermani, 2013). 
Due to the size of CLT panels, they too will maintain structural capacity when exposed to fire 
through the charring of the outer layers which forms a protective barrier between the 
internal layers and the fire. As the outer layers in a CLT panel are sacrificial for this purpose, 
the reduced cross-sectional area of the CLT panel in the event of a fire must be consider in 
the structural design of a CLT building to ensure structural capacity can be maintained. CLT 
panels are commonly covered with gypsum plasterboard as it enhances the fire resistance of 
the panels, with Neve (2017) stating that fire resistance can be increased from 30 minutes to 
60 minutes through the use of one 15 mm layer of gypsum plasterboard with a 5no. layer 
100 mm thick CLT panel, and 90 minute fire resistance can be achieved with the use of two 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
15 mm layers of plasterboard on the same CLT panel. Figure 2.6 illustrates how charring 
depth varies with time for CLT panels with different layer thicknesses. The predicted charring 
depth of a homogenous timber panel, calculated using BS EN 1995 (BSI, 2014) and assuming 
a charring rate of 0.65 mm/min, is also presented in Figure 2.6 to provide a comparison 
between the fire resistance of solid timber and CLT. It can be seen that while CLT does not 
demonstrate fire performance as good as that of solid timber, increasing the layer thickness 
decreases the charring depth, and if the layer thickness was increased to more than 30 mm 
the fire performance of CLT may become comparable to the performance of solid timber. To 
improve fire resistance, the panel thickness may also be increased by increasing the number 
of layers (Neve, 2017). 
Figure 2.6: Charring depth for CLT panels with layer thicknesses of 9 mm, 10 mm, 17 mm, 20 
mm, 28 mm and 30 mm compared with charring depth according to BS EN 1995-1-2 (BSI, 
2014) for solid timber (Wong and Tee, 2014) 
While the outer timber layers within CLT will behave in a predictable way when exposed to 
fire, Frangi et al. (2009) observed that the fire performance of CLT is strongly influenced by 
the properties of the adhesive at elevated temperatures. In some cases, delamination of the 
CLT panel occurs, with the charred outer layers coming off during fire tests, increasing the 
charring rate. Therefore, an appropriate adhesive must be used to ensure adequate fire 
resistance of the CLT panels by preventing delamination. It has been suggested the 
delamination of the CLT panel when exposed to fire is more prevalent in CLT floor elements 
than CLT wall elements (Craft et al., 2018).  
Chapter 2: Literature review 
In response to the Grenfell Tower fire which was exacerbated by the use of combustible 
exterior cladding, the UK government banned the use of combustible materials for external 
walls in new residential buildings taller than 18 m, with the ban effective since December 
2018 (UK Government, 2018). Despite its proven fire resistance, which in some situations 
exceeds that of non-combustible materials, this ban includes CLT. The UK is at the forefront 
of CLT use for high-rise residential buildings, with many of the worlds CLT buildings taller 
than 18 m located in the UK (e.g. Murray Grove, Bridport House, Kingsgate House, Barretts 
Grove, Trafalgar Place, and UEA Blackdale Student Residences). The worlds tallest pure CLT 
building, Dalston Works, located in Hackney, London, has 10 storeys and is 33.8 m in height. 
However, buildings of this height will no longer be permitted and there is concern within the 
industry that this will be detrimental to the adoption of CLT, as it will lead to clients, architects 
and engineers having no choice but to revert to traditional, unsustainable materials 
(Gardiner, 2019). 
Environmental 
The primary constituent of CLT is timber, a renewable resource, and so CLT is a sustainable 
material if the timber used in its production is sourced from sustainably managed forests. 
Despite the increased felling of trees to produce CLT in Austria and Germany where most 
European CLT is manufactured, the area of forests is increasing in these countries and this is 
partly attributed to the sustainable management of the forests and the rapid growth of trees 
planted to replenish the forest (BMEL, 2014; BMLFUW, 2015). The rapid growth of the trees 
used to manufacture CLT is highlighted by the case study of Dalston Works, the worlds 
largest CLT building, where enough timber is grown in Austrian and German forests in one 
hour to produce the 4,649 m3 of timber used in the construction of this building (Waugh 
Thistleton Architects, 2018). The production of cement, a key constituent of concrete, on 
average emits 668 kg of carbon dioxide into the earths atmosphere for every 1000 kg of 
cement produced (Leese and Casey, 2019), whereas the production of CLT releases relatively 
low levels of greenhouse gases and the timber used to manufacture CLT also sequesters 
carbon (Pasay, 2018). Consequently, the use of CLT in construction results in buildings with 
much lower embodied carbon than equivalent buildings constructed using traditional 
materials such as concrete. Waste material produced during the manufacturing process of 
CLT can be processed to form biomass which can then be used as the fuel source to power 
the manufacturing facility resulting in a self-sufficient process (Waugh Thistleton Architects, 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2018). Waste can also be reduced in the event of the demolition of a CLT building as the 
connections allow the panels to be easily disassembled and reused (Harte, 2017). In practice 
it has been noted that the use of CLT can also reduce the number of deliveries to site; 
construction of Dalston Works saw an 80% reduction in the number of deliveries required 
when compared to an equivalent reinforced concrete building (Da Col, 2017). Therefore, CLT 
also has the potential to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions associated with transportation 
of materials to site. However, this is only likely to be significant for sites near the CLT 
manufacturing plant. Figure 2.7 illustrates the life cycle for timber used in CLT production.  
Figure 2.7: Life cycle of timber for CLT production (Waugh Thistleton Architects, 2018)  
Acoustic performance 
CLT walls demonstrate better airborne sound insulation compared to timber stud walls and 
their acoustic performance can be improved through the use of sound insulation layers such 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
as gypsum plasterboard. Their acoustic performance can be even further enhanced by 
separating the sound insulation layers from the CLT wall panel by mounting the boards on 
acoustically insulated brackets and placing mineral wool in the cavity between the CLT wall 
panel and sound insulating boards (Gagnon and Kouyoumji, 2011). While the continuity 
between walls and floors in CLT buildings ensures good structural and thermal performance, 
it also provides a pathway for the transmission of noise throughout a building and so acoustic 
breaks should be included through the use of compressible insulating material. It may not be 
necessary to provide acoustic breaks if the sound insulation layers are separated from the 
CLT wall panel as this reduces the likelihood of sound being transmitted to the wall (Waugh 
Thistleton Architects, 2018). Impact sound insulation of the floors in CLT buildings should also 
be considered, and this can be achieved again through the inclusion of sound insulation 
layers. The sound insulation layers may include a combination of sound insulation materials, 
sheet materials, gypsum plasterboard and a concrete screed. Sound insulation can also be 
provided on the underside of the CLT floor panel through the use of a suspended ceiling 
(Gagnon and Kouyoumji, 2011). Acoustic testing of completed CLT buildings have shown that 
acoustic performance often considerably exceeds the design level, therefore suggesting good 
acoustic performance of CLT buildings (Waugh Thistleton Architects, 2018). 
Thermal performance 
As timber has a low thermal conductivity, CLT too has a low thermal conductivity of 0.13 
W/mK, reducing the risk of thermal bridging and simplifying structural detailing (Sutton, Black 
and Walker, 2011). This low thermal conductivity also reduces the need to use insulation 
materials with high embodied carbon, further reducing the embodied carbon of a CLT 
building (Waugh Thistleton Architects, 2018). As the panels are manufactured to low 
tolerances, a good level of airtightness can be achieved with the use of pre-compressed foam 
and/or vapour permeable tape along the outside joints (Sutton, Black and Walker, 2011).  
Prefabrication 
Prefabrication reduces the on-site labour requirements, on-site construction times and time 
loss due to poor weather. The construction of Trafalgar Place, a residential CLT building 
constructed in London in 2015, reduced its labour requirements to 8 construction workers 
from the 60-70 construction workers who would have been required for the construction of 
an equivalent concrete building (Lane, 2014). The Timber Research and Development 
Association (Trada 2009) reported that the use of CLT instead of a traditional reinforced 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
concrete frame for Murray Grove, a residential CLT building in London, led to a reduction in 
construction time from 72 weeks to 49 weeks, with the entire CLT superstructure constructed 
in 27 working days over 9 weeks. While the material cost of CLT can be greater than the cost 
of other materials, achieving such significant reduction in construction time can substantially 
decrease the costs associated with labour and construction plant, offsetting the higher 
material cost  (Wells, 2011; Yates, Linegar and Dujic, 2008). Structural CLT elements 
incorporating finishes and other materials (e.g. insulation material) may be assembled off-
site, further reducing the on-site labour requirement and construction time (Gasparri et al., 
2015). As the material is manufactured off-site in a controlled environment, material 
manufacture can proceed regardless of weather conditions and quality can be guaranteed. 
The panels are ready to be installed on arrival at site, and their arrival can be scheduled so 
that the panels are delivered in erection sequence and as required, preventing the need to 
stockpile the panels which is particularly beneficial for inner city sites where storage space 
may be limited.  
It is estimated that on average the amount of construction waste produced during the 
construction of a building is approximately 30% of the total weight of building (Osmani, 
2011), and waste accounts for 19% of a buildings embodied carbon (Hammond and Jones, 
2008). Prefabrication of CLT panels means that on site construction waste can be significantly 
reduced as the CLT panels are cut to the designers plans, including any openings for doors 
and windows, in the manufacturing facility and then transported to site ready to be installed. 
As previously mentioned, the offcuts produced from the cutting of the panels in the 
manufacturing facility can be utilised as a fuel source to power the manufacturing facility, 
resulting in a self-sufficient process with minimal net waste. Since no cutting is required on 
site, prefabrication also leads to cleaner, safer and quieter construction sites. 
While prefabrication has many advantages, more thorough planning and design is required 
prior to commencing construction as there is little flexibility to adjust the proposed design 
after the panels have been manufactured. Another disadvantage of offsite prefabrication of 
CLT can be the distance between the manufacturing facilities and the construction site, as 
transportation over long distances can incur significant costs and have a substantial impact 
on raising the overall costs of CLT buildings. As the CLT market grows and production 
becomes more widespread, it is likely that transportation costs will become a less of a barrier 
to the use of CLT (Crawford, Hairstans and Smith, 2014). 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2.3. Typical Connection Systems 
CLT buildings are constructed using either platform or balloon construction methods. In 
platform construction the CLT wall panels are connected to each other and the foundations 
and then the CLT floor panel is placed on top and connected to the wall panels (Figure 2.8(a)). 
This creates a working platform for the construction of the next storey, eliminating the need 
for scaffolding to construct the structure. The next storey is then erected following the same 
process as the ground floor storey, with the CLT wall panels connected to the CLT floor panel. 
In Balloon construction the walls are the height of several storeys and floors of intermediate 
storeys are formed by connecting CLT floor panels to the inside of the CLT wall panels (Figure 
2.8(b)). This method of construction requires more complex connection detailing and 
therefore platform construction is the preferred construction method for multi-storey CLT 
buildings as the connections can be easily made using a combination of metal brackets and 
fasteners (Mohammad and Munoz, 2011).  
Figure 2.8: (a) Platform construction; (b) balloon construction 
The metal brackets used in platform construction to connect the wall panels with the 
foundations or CLT floor panel consist of hold downs and angle brackets. Hold downs are 
designed to have high tensile strength and therefore are used to resist uplift of the walls, 
preventing overturning; as their purpose is to resist uplift, they are typically placed at the 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
corners of the building (Figure 2.9(a)). They are anchored to the foundations and CLT floor 
panels using a bolt and can be fixed to the CLT wall panel using screws or nails. Angle brackets 
are designed to have high shear strength and therefore are used to resist shear forces to 
prevent sliding of the wall (Figure 2.9(b)).  They are anchored to the foundations using bolts 
and can be fixed to the CLT wall panel and CLT floor panel using nails and screws. Metal 
brackets are often used on both sides of the CLT floor panels; by using a hold down on both 
sides of the floor panel the vertical load can be transferred from the wall panel to the floor 
panel, then to the wall panel of the floor below and eventually to the foundations. As the 
metal bracket connections provide resistance to shear and uplift, they are critical for 
providing lateral strength and stiffness to buildings subject to lateral loads and therefore play 
an essential role in a CLT buildings ability to withstand earthquakes or strong winds.  
Figure 2.9: (a) Typical hold down; (b) Typical angle bracket 
Figure 2.10 shows the above ground floor hold down connection detail for Dalston Works 
and as shown, a hold down is used either side of the CLT floor panel with a bolt used to hold 
the metal brackets together. It is noted in Figure 2.10 that localised floor stiffening between 
the CLT wall panels of adjacent storeys was also implemented in the connection detail. In 
platform construction, where the CLT wall panels bear directly on the CLT floor panel, 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
deformation due to the perpendicular to grain crushing of the floor panels may be significant 
if vertical loads are high causing movement which may affect the faade. As the compression 
load at lower storeys increases as the building height increases due to a greater number of 
storeys above and therefore increased gravity loads, this is a particular issue for high-rise CLT 
buildings. Consequently, Harley et al. (2016) describe how the significant predicted 
movements in Dalston Works due to this were overcome by filling holes, cut during the 
production of the CLT panels in the manufacturing facility, with non-shrink grout allowing for 
direct compression load transfer between the CLT wall panels. Figure 2.11 illustrates the 
above ground floor angle bracket connection detail for Dalston Works. Similar to the hold 
down connection detail, an angle bracket is used either side of the CLT floor panel, however 
they are not connected with a bolt and instead both are nailed to the floor panel.  
Figure 2.10: Above ground floor hold down connection detail for Dalston Works (Ramboll, 
2016) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.11: Above ground floor angle bracket connection detail for Dalston Works (Ramboll, 
2016) 
While metal brackets are efficient forms of connection between walls and floors in CLT 
buildings, they dont necessarily meet the aesthetics the architects hope to achieve as the 
brackets will be visible if the CLT panel is left exposed. Therefore, there are alternative, 
concealed methods of connection between CLT wall panels and CLT floor panels, including: 
self-tapping screws, KNAPP system, threaded rod, glued-in rod and concealed metal plates 
(Mohammad and Munoz, 2011). These methods are illustrated in Figure 2.12. 
Figure 2.12: Concealed CLT wall panel to CLT floor panel connection details: (a) self-tapping 
screws; (b) KNAPP system; (c) threaded/glued-in rod; (d) concealed metal plates 
(Mohammad and Munoz, 2011) 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Connections between CLT panels are generally made using screws and either an internal or 
surface spline or a half-lapped joint, however the KNAPP system or threaded/glued-in rods 
may also be used. Figure 2.13 illustrates the methods for the connection of adjacent CLT 
panels. These connection details can be used for CLT wall panel to CLT wall panel connections 
and CLT floor panel to CLT floor panel connections.  
Figure 2.13: CLT panel to CLT panel connection details: (a) internal spline with screws; (b) 
surface spline with screws; (c) half-lapped joint with screws; (d) threaded/glued-in rods; (e) 
KNAPP system (Mohammad and Munoz, 2011) 
2.4. Structural Design of Cross-Laminated Timber Buildings 
Cross-laminated timber buildings should be designed in accordance with Eurocode 5 (BSI, 
2014),  however at present there are no specific guidelines for CLT construction included 
within the standard. Austria and Germany are currently the only European countries to have 
incorporated general design principles regarding the design of CLT buildings within their 
National Annexes to Eurocode 5 (ASI, 2014; DIN, 2010). A working group within CEN Technical 
Committee 250: Structural Eurocodes (CEN/TC 250/SC 5/WG 1 - Cross laminated timber) is 
currently progressing towards the inclusion of cross-laminated timber within Eurocode 5. 
Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock (2014) provide guidelines for the design of CLT 
structures in accordance with Eurocode 5, while in North America, both the Canadian edition 
and US edition of the CLT Handbook provide structural design guidance for CLT buildings 
(Ross, Gagnon and Keith, 2014; Gagnon and Popovski, 2011). In addition to written design 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
guidelines, Stora Enso have developed free online software called Calculatis to assist 
designers with the design of structural CLT elements under static load. 
Structural CLT elements are to be designed for both ultimate limit state and serviceability 
limit state and can be loaded both in-plane and out-of-plane, depending on which structural 
element the CLT panel is intended to be used for. In the absence of specific guidelines for CLT 
in Eurocode 5, the ETAs for CLT panels can provide the relevant information needed for their 
design. Several methods are proposed for the ultimate limit state design of CLT elements 
loaded out-of-plane (e.g. floors and roofs); these methods include the Mechanically Jointed 
Beam Theory (also known as the Gamma Method) detailed in Annex B of Eurocode 5 (BSI, 
2014), the Shear Analogy method and the Timoshenko Transverse Shear-Flexible Beam 
method. Brandner et al. (2016) and Harte (2017) suggest that all three of these methods 
produce similar, applicable results when the span to thickness ratio of the CLT panel is greater 
than 15. When loaded out-of-plane, it is assumed that no normal stress is transferred to 
those layers which are not perpendicular to the axis of bending due to unavoidable gaps and 
cracks between layers (Brandner et al., 2016). Consequently, only the layers perpendicular 
to the axis of bending are considered when calculating stresses due to the out-of-plane 
loading of a CLT panel. For serviceability limit state, deflection and vibration is considered 
and these factors generally dictate the design of CLT panels loaded out-of-plane (Brandner 
et al., 2016). For CLT walls loaded vertically in-plane, checks for both compression and 
buckling must be undertaken.  
CLT walls may also be loaded laterally in-plane due to wind or earthquakes. Similar to the 
design of a CLT panel loaded out-of-plane, the entire cross-sectional area of the CLT panel is 
not considered to resist the load when designing a CLT panel loaded in-plane. For CLT panels 
loaded in-plane, stresses are calculated by only taking in to account the layers spanning in 
the direction of the applied load. 
As with CLT panels, the connections within CLT buildings should be designed in accordance 
with Eurocode 5, however there are no specific guidelines for connections made with CLT 
panels. Using experimental data, Uibel and Bla (2014) have adapted the Eurocode 5 
equations for solid timber connections to be specific for CLT connections. A detailed overview 
of the Eurocode 5 and Uibel and Bla (2014) equations, and a comparison between the values 
predicted using these equations and the experimental results obtained in this study, are 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
presented in Chapter 3. Information specific to the fasteners and metal brackets used within 
the connection can be found in the relevant ETAs. 
2.5. Perceived Barriers to the Adoption of Cross-Laminated Timber  
Although CLT is gaining popularity, a survey was undertaken by Espinoza et al. (2016) to 
identity any perceived barriers to the use of CLT instead of other construction materials in 
Europe. Fifty-one experts responded to the survey, with the respondents from both 
academic and industry, and their responses are summarised in Figure 2.14. Figure 2.14 
highlights that despite confidence in the performance of CLT as a construction material, the 
most significant perceived barrier to CLT adoption is the lack of design codes and technical 
information available. Another significant perceived barrier is the publics misperceptions 
about timber as a construction material, and this is reinforced by Lehmann's (2012) 
observation that in Australia buildings constructed using timber are seen as less valuable than 
those constructed with concrete or masonry, leading to the material being associated with 
status. The misperceptions about timber are generally regarding fire resistance, durability 
and acoustics.  
Figure 2.14: Perceived barriers to CLT adoption (Espinoza et al., 2016) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2.6. Performance of Cross-Laminated Timber Structures under 
Lateral Loads 
Historically, timber has been a commonly used material for the construction of low-rise and 
mid-rise timber framed buildings in North America, Central America, South America, Japan 
and New Zealand. Extensive areas of these countries are affected by both earthquakes and 
strong winds, signifying the suitability of timber as a construction material for buildings which 
may be subjected to high lateral loading. Timber has a high strength-to-weight ratio which is 
favourable for buildings subject to lateral load as lightweight structures attract lower inertial 
forces (Booth, 2014). The high level of redundancy exhibited by timber framed buildings is 
beneficial to its ability to resist lateral loads; it provides more mechanisms for energy 
dissipation as well as additional load paths for the transmission of the lateral load through 
the structure and to the foundations, which is especially important if any structural members 
were to fail (Branco and Neves, 2011). Adequate connections between structural elements 
are also essential to facilitate additional load paths and connections within timber structures 
made with metal fasteners and connectors enable high energy dissipation due to the yielding 
of the metallic elements. Timber framed buildings often have shear walls formed from 
structural plywood sheeting nailed or screwed to the timber frame. Timber framed buildings 
incorporating shear walls have demonstrated good performance in earthquakes as they 
provide lateral strength and stiffness to the building (Booth, 2014). The use of shear walls is 
not only effective in resisting lateral loading due to earthquakes, but it is also effective in 
resisting lateral loading due to wind.  
While CLT construction has emerged as a sustainable alternative to steel or reinforced 
concrete buildings, it has also become a more robust alternative to timber framed buildings. 
As timber framed construction is prevalent in regions where buildings may be subject to high 
lateral loads, it is vital that the performance of CLT buildings under lateral load is thoroughly 
understood to determine whether they are a suitable replacement for timber framed 
construction in these areas.  
In CLT buildings, the CLT wall panels are responsible for transferring vertical load in-plane to 
the foundations, although when a CLT building is subjected to lateral load, the CLT wall panels 
resist lateral load in-plane and therefore act as shear walls. CLT floor panels are loaded out-
of-plane due to the imposed load associated with the use of the building, however when a 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
CLT building is subjected to lateral load, the CLT floor panels may be loaded laterally in-plane, 
acting as a diaphragm (Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017). Similar to timber framed buildings, 
CLT buildings are lightweight relative to equivalent reinforced concrete buildings, therefore 
attracting lower inertial forces, while typical connections within CLT buildings consist of 
metal fasteners and connectors and therefore should be capable of high energy dissipation. 
Also, like timber framed buildings, redundancy can be achieved in cross-laminated timber 
buildings as the panels have high stiffness and are two-way spanning (Wells, 2011). Even 
though these properties of CLT buildings suggest that they can be a suitable replacement for 
timber framed construction in areas where s building may be subject to high lateral loads, 
very few CLT buildings have been constructed in areas of moderate to high seismicity (Pei et 
al., 2016a) and at present no pure CLT building is taller than 10 storeys. This is because there 
is still limited knowledge and understanding regarding the performance of multi-storey CLT 
buildings under lateral loading and there are no design codes for CLT buildings. Espinoza et 
al. (2016) suggests that experts from both industry and academia recommend that structural 
performance of CLT buildings, and in particular seismic performance, should be a priority 
research area in Europe. Buchanan (2016) proposed that the performance of tall CLT 
buildings under wind loading may be even more critical than that of CLT buildings in areas of 
high seismicity due to the high flexibility of tall timber buildings. Therefore, it is critical that 
the performance of CLT buildings under lateral loading is reporting in the context of both 
seismic and wind loading. While further research is required to encourage the construction 
of and provide design guidance for taller CLT buildings and CLT buildings in areas of moderate 
to high seismicity, the following sections detail all significant studies undertaken to date in 
this field. It should be noted that most of the previous research into the behaviour of CLT 
buildings under lateral loading has been reported in the context of seismic loading with fewer 
references to wind loading.  
2.6.1. Wall systems and buildings 
As CLT construction has been established in Europe for longer than it has been in other 
regions, most research into the performance of CLT buildings under lateral loading has been 
undertaken in Europe, with the first notable project beginning in the early 2000s in Slovenia. 
Dujic, Pucelj and Zarnic (2004) began by testing CLT wall panels under quasi-static monotonic 
and cyclic lateral loading. Further experimental investigations were carried out to determine 
the influence of boundary conditions (Dujic, Aicher and Zarnic, 2006) and openings within 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
the panel (Dujic, Klobcar and Zarnic, 2007, 2008) on the behaviour of the wall. The results of 
experimental investigations were used to verify analytical models developed to undertake a 
parametric study to evaluate the effect of openings on the shear strength and stiffness of CLT 
wall panels (Dujic, Klobcar and Zarnic, 2007, 2008). 
Further testing of CLT wall systems has been undertaken by multiple research institutions. 
Popovski, Schneider and Schweinsteiger (2010) conducted an extensive investigation of the 
behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral loading. Thirty-two wall systems were tested 
under monotonic or cyclic lateral loading, with the wall systems having different aspect 
ratios, connections, foundations (CLT floor panel and steel beam), vertical load (0 kN/m, 10 
kN/m and 20 kN/m) and openings. Most wall systems consisted of single wall panels with 
two tests using coupled wall panels. One test configuration consisted of two CLT wall systems 
with an intermediate CLT floor panel, representing the ground and first floor wall systems 
within a multi-storey CLT building. The type of fasteners used in the connections was varied, 
and it was observed that the use of nails instead of screws led to better performance of a 
wall system under lateral loading (Popovski, Schneider and Schweinsteiger, 2010).  Tomasi 
(2014) carried out testing of wall systems under monotonic and cyclic lateral loading varying 
connector types, vertical loads (0 kN/m and 20 kN/m) and foundation (concrete and CLT 
panel). The wall systems tested by Seim et al. (2014) at the University of Kassel were also 
tested under monotonic and cyclic lateral loading, with vertical load (10 kN/m and 50 kN/m) 
and foundation (CLT floor panel and steel beam) varied. In these tests it was found that the 
vertical load significantly influenced the capacity of the wall system and the failure 
mechanism was different depending on the loading procedure, with the monotonic loading 
leading to failure of the hold downs and cyclic loading leading to failure of the angle brackets. 
Testing of CLT wall systems under monotonic and cyclic loading was undertaken at TU Graz 
on single and coupled wall systems with varying vertical load (0 kN/m, 5 kN/m and 20.8 kN/m) 
and connections (Seim et al., 2014). Hristovski et al. (2013) tested a CLT wall system under 
seismic excitation on a shaking table at the Institute of Earthquake Engineering and 
Engineering Seismology in North Macedonia.  
To date the most comprehensive project researching the overall seismic performance of low-
rise and mid-rise CLT buildings is the Sistema Costruttivo Fiemme (SOFIE) project which was 
undertaken in Italy in collaboration with research facilities in Japan. Initially wall 
configurations with varying connection layouts, vertical loads and openings were tested 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
under in-plane quasi-static monotonic and cyclic loading (Ceccotti et al., 2006). Wall 
configurations were designed to replicate the conditions of walls within a three-storey 
building later constructed and dynamically tested as part of the SOFIE project (Ceccotti, 
2008). The 2D wall system tests found the overall behaviour of the wall system to be dictated 
by the behaviour of the metal connections; while the CLT panel behaves rigidly, the metal 
connections provide ductility and energy dissipation within the system.  
Following these tests, a full-scale three-storey CLT building, approximately 7 m x 7 m in plan 
and 10 m in height, was built and tested on a shake table at the National Institute for Earth 
Science and Disaster Prevention in Japan (Ceccotti, 2008). The building was tested under 
various earthquake ground motions until near-collapse was reached, and for these tests 
near-collapse was defined as the tension failure of one or more hold downs. The building was 
subjected to 15 earthquakes without significant damage and near collapse was reached 
under the Nocera Umbra earthquake record with a peak ground acceleration of 1.2g. Despite 
reaching near-failure, no residual deformations were observed, thus highlighting the 
potential for CLT construction in highly seismic regions. 
After the successful testing of a three storey CLT building, shake table testing of a full-scale 
seven-storey building was undertaken in Japan (Ceccotti et al., 2013). The building was 7.5 m 
x 13.5 m in plan and 23.5 m in height. Similar to the three-storey building, the seven-storey 
building performed well with no significant damage or residual deformation observed. The 
CLT panels behaved rigidly and the damage observed was mainly concentrated within the 
metal connections (hold downs, angle brackets and vertical screwed connections between 
adjacent CLT panels) which experienced ductile failure and could be easily repaired after the 
test.  
To conclude the SOFIE project, additional cyclic testing of CLT wall systems comprised of 
single or coupled CLT wall panels and typical CLT connections was carried out (Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Gavric et al., 2014; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2013). 
Variables in these tests included the number of hold downs, the number of angle brackets, 
vertical load (0 kN/m, 9.25 kN/m and 18.5 kN/m) and for the coupled wall panels, the method 
for connecting the CLT wall panels. The deformation mechanisms of the wall systems were 
observed and important characteristics, such as strength, stiffness, ductility and energy 
dissipation, were found. The study found that the CLT panels behave rigidly under lateral 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
loading, and any shear or bending deformation of the panel was found to be negligible with 
the displacement due to sliding or rocking the main components of the overall lateral 
displacement of the panel. Therefore, it is suggested that there are three predominant types 
of deformation of the wall system and the deformation type is determined by the capacity 
of the anchoring connectors (hold downs and angle brackets). The deformation types were 
noted as; rocking behaviour, sliding behaviour and rocking-sliding behaviour. The results of 
the investigation indicate that rocking behaviour leads to greater ductility, energy dissipation 
and ultimate displacement compared to walls with predominantly sliding behaviour (Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2013). It was also noted that rocking behaviour resulted in the self-
centering of the wall system, unlike sliding behaviour which resulted in a residual lateral 
displacement of the wall (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a). Hence it is recommended 
that the metal connectors remain elastic in shear and yield only in tension to ensure 
predominantly rocking behaviour with minimal sliding. In addition to the experimental 
investigation, Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) developed a verified analytical model 
for the pushover analysis of CLT wall systems. This analytical model will be discussed in 
Chapter 4. 
In addition to the full-scale buildings tested under seismic excitation as part of the SOFIE 
project, Popovski and Gavric (2016) tested a full-scale two-storey building under quasi-static 
monotonic and cyclic lateral loads in both directions. Piazza et al. (2015) tested a full-scale 
three-storey CLT building on a shaking table, comparing the performance with full-scale 
buildings constructed using alternative timber framing systems (platform frame and log 
house). Yasumura et al. (2016) tested two full-scale two-storey CLT buildings of identical 
dimensions with the aim of investigating the influence of CLT wall panel length on the 
performance of CLT buildings under reversed cyclic lateral loading. It was found that the 
building with walls formed from one 6m long panel had higher lateral stiffness than the 
building formed from multiple 1m long panels, while the building formed from shorter length 
panels had higher equivalent viscous damping and ultimate displacement. The increase in 
lateral stiffness and decrease in ultimate displacement of the building with longer wall panels 
is comparable to the experimental observation of Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2013) 
that single panel wall systems exhibit higher lateral stiffness and lower ultimate displacement 
than coupled panel wall systems when both wall systems have the same overall dimensions. 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2.6.2. Connection systems 
 Commercially available connection systems 
It is particularly important that the behaviour of connections in CLT buildings under lateral 
loading is understood, given that previous studies have suggested that the behaviour of CLT 
wall systems, and therefore buildings, is dictated by connection behaviour (Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Ceccotti et al., 2006). Several studies have been conducted 
to investigate the behaviour of commercially available connection systems under both 
monotonic and cyclic loading, and to determine their mechanical properties.   
The SOFIE project concluded with a thorough investigation of connections formed using 
commercially available components used within the full-scale CLT buildings dynamically 
tested as part of the project (Ceccotti, 2008; Ceccotti et al., 2013). Gavric, Fragiacomo and 
Ceccotti (2015b, 2015c) investigated connections using metal connectors between CLT wall 
panels and foundations, screwed connections between adjacent panels and screwed 
connections between orthogonal panels under quasi-static monotonic and cyclic loading. A 
total of twenty configurations were tested and these configurations reflected connections 
used within the three storey CLT building constructed as part of the SOFIE project (Ceccotti, 
2008). Eight configurations of connections between CLT wall panels and foundations made 
using metal connectors and annular ring nails were tested under monotonic and cyclic 
loading (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). The configurations varied due to direction 
of loading, type and size of metal connector, number of annular ring nails and foundation 
material, with four configurations using a steel beam as the foundation to represent ground 
floor connections and four configurations using a CLT panel as the foundation to represent 
above ground floor connections. The screws, nails and hold downs used were manufactured 
by Rothoblaas and the angle brackets were manufactured by Simpson Strong-Tie. Both hold 
down and angle bracket connections were tested with two lengths of hold downs tested, one 
540 mm in length (Rothoblaas WHT540 hold down) and one 440 mm in length (Rothoblaas 
WHT440 hold down). The connections using the longer length hold down were observed to 
have higher strength, stiffness and ductility while energy dissipation appeared to be similar 
for both hold down connections. Brittle failure modes were seen for some configurations 
using angle brackets, however all configurations using hold downs failed in a ductile manner. 
This study found that despite the use of angle brackets to resist shear forces in CLT buildings, 
angle bracket connections also have significant axial strength and stiffness and therefore are 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
capable of resisting tension forces. This means that angle brackets can also be used to resist 
overturning of a CLT wall system when the building is subjected to a lateral load. The study 
also noted that while hold down connections have significant axial strength and stiffness, 
reaffirming their suitability for providing overturning resistance of wall systems, they did not 
exhibit notable shear strength of stiffness.  
Connections between CLT wall panels and CLT floor panels made using metal angle brackets 
and self-tapping screws of varying length (25 mm, 50 mm and 75mm) were tested under 
monotonic and cyclic loading in the shear and tension direction by OCeallaigh and Harte 
(2019). Additionally, the withdrawal capacity and lateral load bearing capacity of the screws 
was investigated by conducting two separate tests on single screws embedded in a CLT panel. 
Both the angle brackets and self-tapping screws used were manufactured by Rothoblaas. The 
CLT panels used in this study were manufactured using C16 grade timber, lower than the C24 
grade timber generally used in CLT. This study found that fastener length influences the 
strength and ductility of a connection. For single screw connections, increasing fastener 
length increases strength and decreases ductility. Similarly, for the connections using an 
angle bracket and multiple self-tapping screws strength increased with increasing fastener 
length. While ductility was observed to decrease with increasing fastener length during the 
shear tests for the connections using an angle bracket and multiple self-tapping screws, 
during the tension tests fastener length had little influence on ductility.   
In addition to testing novel angle bracket connections, Tomasi and Smith (2015) tested 
connections between CLT wall panels and a steel foundation using five commercially 
available angle brackets fixed with two annular ring nails of two different lengths (40 mm and 
60 mm). Flatscher, Bratulic and Schickhofer (2015) tested two connections between CLT wall 
panels and a foundation under monotonic and cyclic loading in shear and tension; a Simpson 
Strong-Tie HTT22 hold down and Simpson Strong-Tie AE116 were used in the connection 
along with Simpson Strong-Tie CNA ring shank nails. 
Izzi et al. (2016) tested connections made using annular ring nails supplied by Simpson 
Strong-Tie under monotonic and cyclic loading. Tension and bending tests were carried out 
on the annular ring nails to determine their ultimate tensile strength and the yield moment. 
Nail withdrawal tests were carried out on a nail embedded in the side face of a CLT panel to 
determine the withdrawal capacity of the nails. Shear tests were carried out by applying load 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
to the nail cap of nails embedded in the side face of a CLT panel to determine the lateral load 
bearing capacity of the nails. The load was applied to the nail cap using a 4mm thick metal 
plate which was placed between the nail cap and CLT panel and pulled vertically upwards.  
Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c), OCeallaigh and Harte (2019) and Izzi et al. (2016) 
compared the results of their experimental studies to analytical predictions made using 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) and an analytical method presented with the literature (Uibel and 
Bla, 2014). Compared to the characteristic 5th percentile strength of the connections made 
with metal connectors and fasteners, as determined using the experimental results, both 
analytical methods predicted conservative values, with the Eurocode 5 predicted values the 
most conservative (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c; OCeallaigh and Harte, 2019). 
OCeallaigh and Harte (2019) noted that the Uibel and Bla (2014) analytical method over-
predicted the strength of the single 25 mm long self-tapping screw and suggested that this 
method should not be used for self-tapping screws shorter than 50 mm in length embedded 
in CLT panels formed from C16 grade timber. Similarly, both analytical methods predicted 
conservative load-carrying capacity of the annular ring nails (Izzi et al., 2016).   
In most tests carried out on connections using metal connectors and fasteners, two test 
specimens for each connection configuration were tested, one under shear force only and 
the other under tensile force only. While this allowed the mechanical properties of the 
connection to be determined for both the shear and tension loading direction, this loading 
condition is not realistic of the loading the connections experience when a building is 
subjected to strong wind loading or seismic loading. When a building is under lateral loading, 
connections are required to resist both sliding and overturning and so the connections will 
be subjected to both shear and tension forces simultaneously. Therefore, it is necessary to 
evaluate the performance of CLT connections using metal connectors and fasteners under 
bidirectional loading and studies have been conducted in which test specimens are subjected 
to loading in both the shear and tension directions (Liu and Lam, 2018, 2019; Pozza et al., 
2018a, 2018b). While in a real-life scenario the connections would be loaded in shear and 
tension simultaneously, in these studies the shear and tension load were not applied 
simultaneously. When testing the angle bracket connections the loads were applied in two 
phases; firstly a monotonic tension load was applied, followed by the application of a 
perpendicular (shear) monotonic or cyclic load (Liu and Lam, 2018; Pozza et al., 2018b). When 
testing the hold down connections the loads were also applied in two phases; firstly a 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
monotonic shear load was applied, followed by the application of a perpendicular (tension) 
monotonic or cyclic load (Liu and Lam, 2019; Pozza et al., 2018a). These tests confirmed that 
the mechanical properties of the connections are influenced by bidirectional loading and 
therefore it is critical that this is considered in the design of CLT buildings and the properties 
measured during testing under unidirectional loading may not be achieved. 
In previous experimental studies outlined above, each test specimen used two identical 
connections, one on either side of the wall panel, so that the test specimen was symmetrical, 
or the test specimen was restrained to prevent out-of-plane movement. In CLT buildings 
connections are typically used only on the internal side of the walls and so in reality CLT 
connections will be subjected to asymmetric loading (Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017). 
Therefore, the test setups which have been used to determine the mechanical properties of 
typical CLT connections are not entirely representative of the configuration of connections 
within real CLT buildings.  
An alternative X shaped connection system to replace hold downs and angle brackets by 
providing both tension and shear resistance within one connection called the X-RAD system 
was developed by Polastri, Giongo and Piazza (2017). The X-RAD system consists of an inner 
hardwood core, an external metal envelope with an internal steel plate and six all-threaded 
self-tapping screws as shown in Figure 2.15(a) and Figure 2.15(b). The screws are inclined at 
different angles to maximise their withdrawal capacity, increasing the strength of the 
connection. The connection between multiple CLT elements can be made with the X-RAD 
system using linking plates (Figure 2.15(c)) with various shapes of linking plates required 
depending on the arrangement of adjacent elements. Polastri, Giongo and Piazza (2017) 
suggest that the X-RAD system could be attached to the CLT panels in the CLT manufacturing 
facility and used as lifting hooks, reducing on-site construction times. The X-RAD system 
experimentally demonstrated high strength and stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation 
(Polastri et al., 2018; Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017). This connection system has been 
adopted by Rothoblaas who commercially supply all components of the X-RAD system. 
Rothoblaas (2017) estimate that using the X-RAD system instead of hold downs and angle 
brackets can reduce the total construction time of a CLT building by 70% and labour costs by 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.15: (a) X-RAD system; (b) X-RAD system fixed to one CLT element; (c) multiple X-RAD 
systems and a linking plate connecting three CLT elements (Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017) 
 Novel connection systems 
Several studies have been undertaken by both industry and academia to develop novel CLT 
connection systems which exhibit improved behaviour in wall systems subjected to lateral 
loading compared to connection systems comprised of commercially available components. 
Some of these novel connection systems are adapted versions of commercially available 
angle bracket and hold down connection system, whereas others are offered as alternatives 
to the commercially available connection systems. 
Rothoblaas, a company which manufactures and supplies the hold downs and angle brackets 
routinely used in CLT buildings, have developed a new angle bracket connection with 
improved strength and stiffness both in shear and tension (Darenzo et al., 2018). The 
improved strength and stiffness both in shear and tension was achieved through the use of 
more annular ring nails, and the tensile strength and stiffness was significantly increased 
through the inclusion of inclined fully threaded screws on the floor part of the angle bracket. 
The improved strength and stiffness in both shear and tension were experimentally verified 
by Darenzo et al. (2018) at the Laboratory of Earthquake and Dynamic Engineering (LEDA) of 
the Enna Kore University.  
Latour and Rizzano (2015) aimed to improve the performance of commercially available hold 
downs by developing a metal bracket called the XL-stub. Unlike CLT connections using 
commercially available hold downs in which the metal bracket is intended to undergo elastic 
(a) (b)  (c)  
Chapter 2: Literature review 
deformation with failure due to the ductile deformation of the fasteners, the XL-stub is 
designed for ductile failure of the metal bracket to occur instead of the fasteners to improve 
energy dissipation. This is based on the principles of added stiffness and damping (ADAS) 
devices and achieved through the hourglass shape of the flange plate (Latour and Rizzano, 
2017). Experimental testing of this connection demonstrated greater energy dissipation and 
ductility compared to commercially available hold downs (Latour and Rizzano, 2015). Figure 
2.16 shows a CLT wall panel to foundation connection using the XL-stub. 
Figure 2.16: CLT wall panel to foundation connection using the XL-stub (Latour and Rizzano, 
2017) 
A metal bracket to replace hold downs and angle brackets by providing both tension and 
shear resistance within one connection was proposed by Scotta et al. (2016). It is also 
suggested that this metal bracket, called the X-bracket, could be used for connections 
between CLT wall panels. Figure 2.17 illustrates the X-bracket and the locations which it could 
be used within a CLT wall system. Similar to the XL-stub, the X-bracket was found to have 
higher ductility and energy dissipation compared to commercially available hold downs.  
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.17: (a) CLT wall panel to foundation connection using X-bracket; (b) CLT wall panel 
to CLT wall panel connection using X-bracket (Scotta et al., 2016) 
Hashemi, Masoudnia and Quenneville (2016) undertook the numerical analysis of two types 
of slip friction connections, one to replace the nailed or screwed connections between CLT 
and laminated veneer lumber (LVL) wall panels, and the other to replace the connection 
between CLT and LVL wall panels and the foundation made using a hold down and nails or 
screws. While the slip friction connection between CLT and LVL wall panels was developed 
by Hashemi, Masoudnia and Quenneville (2016), the slip friction connection between the 
wall and foundation was initially developed by Loo, Quenneville and Chouw (2012) for use 
within LVL wall systems and had not been assessed for use within CLT wall systems. It was 
found that slip friction connections can improve seismic performance by reducing stiffness 
degradation and increasing energy dissipation while preventing inelastic deformation of the 
CLT walls (Hashemi, Masoudnia and Quenneville, 2016). While slip friction connections 
exhibit improved performance compared to connection systems comprised of commercially 
available components, residual drifts can be significant using these connections and 
therefore a restoring force is needed to re-centre the walls (Hashemi et al., 2018). For timber 
walls, the restoring force can be provided by post-tensioned cables, however additional 
connections and/or energy dissipation devices are required and these usually sustain damage 
when the system is under lateral load and must be repaired or replaced to restore the 
necessary strength and stiffness to the system (Smith et al., 2007; Dunbar, Pampanin and 
Buchanan, 2014; Iqbal et al., 2016, 2015; Sarti, Palermo and Pampanin, 2016a; b; Ganey et 
al., 2017). Zarnani, Valadbeigi and Quenneville (2016) have developed a resilient slip friction 
(RSF) joint which can be used in steel or concrete buildings, or to replace hold down 
connections in CLT buildings as shown in Figure 2.18. This connection achieves self-centering 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
of the walls in addition to improved seismic performance and minimal need to repair or 
replacement after the lateral load is removed. Energy is dissipated through friction as a result 
of the central steel plate, which is fixed to the CLT wall panel using self-tapping screws and 
bolted to the foundation, sliding over the outer metal plates of the connection, and self-
centering is achieved through the use of Belleville springs and the shape of the grooves within 
the metal plates (Hashemi et al., 2018).  
Figure 2.18: Resilient slip friction joint developed by Zarnani, Valadbeigi and Quenneville 
(2016) used within CLT wall system (Hashemi et al., 2018) 
Hashemi et al. (2018) experimentally tested a CLT wall system incorporating the RSF joint to 
replace the use of hold downs as well as a novel connection designed to replace the use of 
commercially available angle brackets. The connection included an angle bracket formed 
from thick steel plates which was bolted to the wall panel and foundation, ensuring efficient 
transfer of shear to the foundation. The holes in the wall part of the angle bracket were 
slotted to allow uplift to occur.  Figure 2.19 shows the novel shear resisting connection. The 
testing of the wall system using the RSF joints in place of commercially available hold downs 
and the novel shear resisting connection in place of commercially available angle brackets 
demonstrated good performance with complete self-centering observed as well as negligible 
damage to both the CLT wall panels and the connections. 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.19: Novel angle bracket connection (Hashemi et al., 2018) 
While these innovative connection systems demonstrate improved behaviour under lateral 
load compared to the connection systems using commercially available components, with 
the exception of the X-RAD system, they have not yet been routinely adopted for use in CLT 
buildings by the construction industry. 
2.7. Lateral Stability Systems for Cross-Laminated Timber 
Buildings 
Lateral stability in pure CLT buildings is provided by the wall panels which act as shear walls 
and which can be used to form a shear core. The CLT floor panels also act as diaphragms, 
transferring lateral load to the CLT wall panels (Polastri, Giongo and Piazza, 2017; van de Lindt 
et al., 2013). Although pure CLT buildings have inherent lateral stability, more complex lateral 
stability systems may need to be used in tall CLT buildings or those located in areas of 
moderate to high seismicity. CLT can be used in combination with other construction 
materials to achieve building heights greater than 10 storeys. These hybrid buildings often 
use reinforced concrete, steel or glulam with CLT to improve the lateral stability of the 
building.  
CLT was used in the 14 storey Treet building which was constructed in Norway in 2015, 
however the CLT elements were not used within the main load-bearing system and the ability 
of CLT panels to provide lateral stiffness was not exploited (Malo, Abrahamsen and Bjertns, 
2016). Modelling of the building during the design process indicated that the CLT elements 
did not contribute to the overall building stiffness and were subject to minimal stress under 
lateral loading, with the lateral stability system being provided by glulam trusses. CLT was 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
however used in the gravity load resisting and lateral stability systems for the current worlds 
tallest mass timber building, Brock Commons, which is 53 m in height. Brock Commons is an 
18 storey student residence building located at the University of British Colombia in 
Vancouver, Canada, and was completed in 2017 (Fast, Gafner and Jackson, 2017). The gravity 
load resisting system within Brock Commons uses glulam columns which support two-way 
spanning CLT floor panels, removing the need for beams. A reinforced concrete transfer 
structure was constructed between the concrete ground floor structure and the 17-storey 
high timber structure. Lateral stability is provided by two reinforced concrete cores which 
are the full height of the building, with the CLT floor panels capable of acting as diaphragms 
to transfer lateral load to the cores. The gravity load-resisting and lateral stability systems 
can be seen in Figure 2.20.  Fast, Gafner and Jackson (2017) noted that while reinforced 
concrete cores were used in this building, timber only lateral stability systems could have 
been implemented. However, alternative timber-based options could not be explored 
further due to the need for time-consuming and costly testing to obtain regulatory approval 
which would have delayed the intended project completion date.  
Figure 2.20: (a) Brock Commons during construction; (b) Brock Commons after construction 
(Forestry Innovation Investment, 2017) 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Following the completion of Brock Commons, Connolly et al. (2018) investigated the 
potential to use CLT for the cores instead of reinforced concrete, which they suggest could 
have reduced construction times and increased the environmental benefits. However, it was 
found the CLT would not have been a suitable alternative given the maximum thickness of 
commercially available CLT panels in Canada is 315 mm. Chapman (2012) has also assessed 
the possibility of using a CLT core for a building with 30 storeys, suggesting that it is 
potentially a suitable option for buildings at this height, however, more comprehensive 
research would be required to recommend this option. Therefore, at present hybrid buildings 
are a suitable and reliable solution for buildings using CLT at heights greater than 10 storeys. 
Van de Kuilen et al. (2011) detailed a concept involving the use of CLT walls and a concrete 
core in conjunction with outriggers at three intermediate storeys and tension cables 
integrated within the CLT walls to provide lateral stability in a building as tall as 150 m or 40 
storeys. Skidmore, Owings & Merrill LLP (2013) developed an alternative timber-concrete 
hybrid conceptual solution for a 42-storey building. This solution involves the use of CLT 
panels to form floors and interior shear walls with timber columns and reinforced concrete 
spandrel beams at the perimeter to resist gravity loads. The lateral stability system is 
designed to be provided by a core formed from CLT panels as well as shear walls, again 
formed from CLT panels, which radiate from the internal core to the perimeter to the 
building. These CLT shear walls are coupled by reinforced concrete link beams. Figure 2.21 
illustrates the typical structural layout at each storey within the proposed 42 storey building.  
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.21: Typical structural layout at each storey proposed in the Timber Tower Research 
Project building (Skidmore, Owings & Merrill LLP, 2013) 
The FFTT system was devised by  Green (2012) as a timber-steel hybrid solution, which is not 
only suitable for CLT, but also to other mass timber panel products including laminated strand 
lumber (LSL) and laminated veneer lumber (LVL). It proposes a strong column-weak beam 
balloon-frame approach which utilises mass timber panels for the walls, floors and core, 
glulam columns and steel beams bolted to the mass timber floor panels to form the weak 
beam component which provides ductility to the system. The proposed solution is adaptable 
depending on building height, with four different options available (Figure 2.22). Option (a) 
is applicable for buildings up to 12 storeys and consists of a mass timber core and floors with 
glulam columns and steel/glulam beams. Similar to option (a), option (b) uses a mass timber 
core and floors, glulam columns and steel beams, but it also uses mass timber interior shear 
walls allowing this option to be used for buildings up to 20 storeys. Option (c) is also 
applicable for building up to 20 storeys and consists of mass timber core and floors with steel 
beams, however exterior walls made of mass timber panels are used instead of perimeter 
glulam columns. Option (d) is applicable for buildings up to 30 storeys and the structural 
components are the same as those in option (c) with the addition of mass timber interior 
walls. In all options mass timber panels, such as CLT, are critical components of the gravity 
load-resisting and lateral stability systems. 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
Figure 2.22: FFTT system options (Green, 2012) 
2.8. Summary 
The world is experiencing an ever-growing housing crisis due to urbanisation and tall 
residential buildings offer a solution to this issue. At the same time, the construction industry 
is having to reconsider the materials and methods it uses given its significant contribution to 
greenhouse gas emissions and consequently climate change. As a result, cross-laminated 
timber has emerged as an alternative to traditional materials because as an engineered wood 
product it is an inherently sustainable material. It is capable of being used to construct 
buildings taller than can be achieved with timber frames, and therefore tall buildings which 
previously could only be constructed using concrete or steel. Despite the growing preference 
for CLT as a construction material, the material has not yet been included within structural 
design codes.  
The worlds tallest pure CLT building, Dalston Works, is 10 storeys high and was completed 
in 2017. While many CLT buildings as tall as ten storeys have been constructed in areas of 
low seismicity, few multi-storey CLT buildings have been constructed in areas of moderate to 
high seismicity despite the seismic testing of a full-scale seven storey CLT building 
demonstrating good seismic performance. CLT buildings taller than 10 storeys and CLT 
buildings in regions of moderate to high seismicity would be subjected to higher lateral loads 
due to wind and earthquakes than the CLT buildings which have already been completed. 
The lack of structural design codes and limited literature regarding the performance of CLT 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
buildings under lateral loading are barriers to the adoption of CLT for buildings which could 
be subjected to high lateral loading. Therefore, more research regarding the performance of 
CLT buildings under lateral loading is necessary to develop the knowledge required to inform 
structural design codes needed to construct taller CLT buildings and CLT buildings in areas of 
moderate to high seismicity. 
In order to inform structural design codes for entire CLT buildings it is necessary undertake 
experimental testing of CLT building components, such as connections and wall systems, as 
these components influence overall building behaviour. Most previous experimental studies 
of CLT wall systems under lateral loading have been limited to replicating the conditions 
within multi-storey buildings with approximately three storeys. Thus, to develop sufficient 
understanding of how CLT wall systems in high-rise buildings will behave when subjected to 
lateral loading, testing of configurations reflecting the conditions of CLT wall systems in taller 
buildings needs to be undertaken. There has been limited research on performance 
assessment of CLT wall systems and connections in above ground floor storeys. In most wall 
configurations and connection configurations tested, the CLT wall panels are anchored to 
steel or concrete foundations; limited information has been published about configurations 
tested in which the CLT wall panels are fixed to CLT floor panels, as typically found in above 
ground floor storeys. As tall buildings would have large numbers of CLT wall panel to CLT floor 
panel connections, the behaviour of these connections must be further investigated in order 
to evaluate the behaviour of wall systems in above ground floor storeys, and therefore the 
overall performance of tall CLT buildings.  
Consequently, the aim of this research is to further the understanding of the behaviour of 
wall systems in multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading, such as seismic or wind 
loading, focussing particularly on the behaviour of above ground floor storeys in a 10 storey 
CLT building. For this purpose, three different types of above ground floor CLT connections 
made using commercially available components were tested under cyclic loading in shear 
and tension with fastener arrangements also varied to determine optimum connection 
configurations. The test setup for the connection tests was asymmetrical, with a connection 
on one side of the wall panel only to reflect the configuration of connections within real CLT 
buildings where connections are made on the internal side of the wall only. It is particularly 
important for the safe and economical design of CLT buildings that commercially available 
CLT building components are experimentally tested, as in some circumstances they have 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
been implemented in buildings despite limited experimental research to validate their use or 
verify the applicability of analytical methods used in their design. Experimental tests have 
also been carried out to evaluate the global behaviour of above ground floor CLT wall 
systems, representative of those found within a 10 storey CLT building, under monotonic 
loading. Eight tests have been undertaken on one CLT wall system to understand the effect 
of varying load on the deformation behaviour and stiffness of the wall system within the 
elastic region. An additional two tests were undertaken on the same CLT wall system to 
assess post-yield behaviour. These tests will allow the variation in global behaviour of wall 
systems at each storey within a multi-storey CLT building to be evaluated and design 
considerations to be identified. 
Chaper 3:  Behaviour of Typical Cross-Laminated Timber 
Connections under Cyclic Loading 
3.1. Introduction  
While the use of CLT is established for certain applications, there are still no structural design 
codes relating to the design of CLT buildings. Previous studies have found that when CLT wall 
systems are subjected to lateral loading, the CLT wall panel behaves rigidly with deformation 
occurring within the connections (Ceccotti et al., 2006; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 
2015a; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). Therefore, the connections are thought to 
dictate the structural behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral loading and it is essential 
that their behaviour is thoroughly understood to inform design guidance for CLT buildings.  
In CLT connections, fasteners are typically used in conjunction with metal brackets, or 
connectors. At present there are no specific design guidelines for the use of these metal 
connectors with fasteners in Eurocodes 5 (BSI, 2014) and their use is supported through the 
provision of product specific interpretation of Eurocode 5 design rules within a European 
Technical Assessment (ETA) obtained by the manufacturer (OCeallaigh and Harte, 2019). The 
material for which these ETAs are applicable is generally stated as timber, or wood-based 
materials, and not specifically cross-laminated timber. Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti 
(2015c) suggest that it is more difficult to predict the capacity of fasteners in CLT compared 
to sawn timber or other engineered wood products due to the orthogonal orientation of 
adjacent layers, gaps between the longitudinal boards forming each layer, grooves sawn in 
to the boards to relieve drying stresses and the possibility of edge gluing. Consequently, 
experimental testing is necessary to determine the properties of CLT connections using 
commercially available metal connectors with fasteners. 
Through the experimental testing of typical CLT connections, it is important to assess the 
extent of ductility provided by the connections and whether any loss of stiffness or strength 
may occur. This could affect the structural integrity of a building under lateral loading, 
potentially leading to significant damage or collapse. Eurocode 8 (BSI, 2013) states that for 
the design of timber buildings, the properties of dissipative zones should be found through 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
the cyclic testing of single joints, whole structures or parts thereof in accordance with BS EN 
12512 (BSI, 2005). Consequently, cyclic testing of CLT connections is necessary to determine 
properties which influence the response of a wall system, and therefore a CLT building, under 
lateral loading. The connection properties which are required for the design of CLT buildings 
subjected to lateral loading, and which can be found through cyclic testing in accordance with 
BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005), include: strength, stiffness, ductility, impairment of strength and 
energy dissipation.  
3.2. Objectives 
The aim of this research is to further the understanding of the behaviour of multi-storey CLT 
buildings under lateral loading, focussing particularly on the behaviour of above ground floor 
storeys in which connections are made between CLT wall panels and CLT floor panels. As 
connections have been found to have significant influence on the behaviour of CLT wall 
systems, understanding the behaviour of CLT connections is critical to informing the design 
of CLT buildings.  The experimental tests described in this Chapter will contribute to the aim 
of this research by allowing the behaviour of typical CLT connections in above ground floor 
storeys to be evaluated and the mechanical properties of these connections to be 
determined. The aim will be achieved by undertaking a series of experimental tests on typical 
CLT connections using commercially available metal connectors and fasteners to form above 
ground floor wall to floor connections in which a CLT wall panel is fastened to a CLT floor 
panel. A connection will be made on one side of the wall panel only which is realistic of 
connections within CLT buildings where the metal connectors are fastened to the internal 
side of the wall panel only.  
3.3. Methodology 
The study considers two types of connection between CLT wall panels and CLT floor panels 
in CLT buildings, hold downs which are typically used to resist overturning of the wall and 
angle brackets which are typically used to resist sliding of the wall. It was noted in a previous 
study that connections using angle brackets have significant tensile strength and stiffness 
and therefore are also able to contribute to the overturning resistance (Gavric, Fragiacomo 
and Ceccotti, 2015c). However, the specific hold down connection configuration tested in the 
same study did not demonstrate notable shear strength and stiffness and therefore would 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
not contribute to sliding resistance of a wall system (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). 
This study will test alternative configurations of hold down connections and angle bracket 
connections in both shear and tension to assess whether these configurations have 
significant strength and stiffness in the loading direction which it is not usually considered in 
the design of CLT buildings. As well as the loading direction, the variables considered in this 
investigation include the type of fasteners, arrangement of fasteners and length of hold 
down. The connections have been tested under both monotonic and cyclic loading in shear 
and tension to provide important mechanical properties of the connection such as strength, 
stiffness, ductility ratio, impairment of strength and equivalent viscous damping ratio in both 
loading directions. 
3.3.1. Test programme 
A total of 18 configurations were tested and for each configuration one monotonic test and 
three cyclic tests were undertaken resulting in a total of 72 tests (18 monotonic tests and 54 
cyclic tests). Configurations varied due to connector type, fastener arrangement and the test 
setup which depended on the loading direction. Three different connectors using three 
different fastener arrangements were tested under monotonic and cyclic loading in both 
shear and tension. The 18 configurations are summarised in Table 3.1. Details of the 
connector types and fastener arrangements can be found in Section 3.3.2. A different 
configuration is specified for connections using the same connector and fastener 
arrangement but tested in different loading directions, as the shear and tension tests use 
two different test setups. Details of the test setup for both the shear and tension tests can 
be found in Section 3.3.3. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.1: Configurations tested under monotonic loading (1 repetition) and cyclic loading 
(3 repetitions) 
Connector 
Loading 
Direction 
Fastener  
Arrangement 
Configuration 
Simpson Strong-Tie  
ABR105-R 
Angle Bracket 
Shear 
Tension 
Rothoblaas  
WHT620 
Hold Down 
Shear 
Tension 
Rothoblaas  
WHT340 
Hold Down 
Shear 
Tension 
3.3.2. Connectors and fastener arrangements 
A total of 18 configurations were tested, and the configurations can be split into three 
categories based on the type of connector used; a) Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket; b) Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down; c) Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down. The Simpson 
Strong-Tie AB105-R angle bracket was selected because it was the angle bracket which was 
used in above ground floor storeys in the 3 storey CLT building seismically tested as part of 
the SOFIE project (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). Rothoblaas manufacture four 
hold downs with different lengths, with the length of the hold down in mm corresponding to 
the number in the product name. The hold downs manufactured by Rothoblaas include; 
WHT340, WHT440, WHT540 and WHT620 (Rothoblaas, 2015). The Rothoblaas WHT620 and 
WHT340 hold downs were selected for this study as they are the longest and shortest hold 
downs available, with the length of the hold downs 620 mm and 340 mm, respectively. These 
hold downs are different to those used within the 3 storey CLT building tested as part of the 
SOFIE project, as this building used the Rothoblaas WHT440 and WHT540 hold downs (Gavric, 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). However, given that length of hold down was a variable of 
this study, using hold downs with the largest difference in length allowed the influence of 
hold down length on the behaviour of the connection to be clearly assessed, as the difference 
in behaviour would be expected to greatest for these two hold downs.  
For the hold downs, Rothoblaas provides details for full or partial fastening of the hold down. 
Partial fastening is described as using 60-70% of the maximum number of fasteners 
(Rothoblaas, 2015). In the study conducted by Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c) to 
investigate the behaviour of the connections used within the 3 storey CLT building 
constructed and tested as part of the SOFIE project, the Rothoblaas WHT440 hold down was 
fastened using 9no. nails and the Rothoblaas WHT540 hold down was fastened using 12no. 
nails. These numbers of nails account for 27% and 30% fastening of the Rothoblaas WHT440 
hold down and Rothoblaas WHT540 hold down, respectively. Using fewer nails would 
increase the speed of installing connections in CLT buildings, however there is no 
experimental data available in the literature to evaluate how the number of nails affects the 
connection behaviour as no study has included the number of nails as variable in the 
investigation. Consequently, this study used three different fastener arrangements for each 
hold down and these fastener arrangements varied due to the number of nails used. The 
three fastener arrangements for the hold down connections tested involved fully fastening 
(Fastener Arrangement a in Table 3.1) and partially fastening the connectors to the CLT 
panels using nails, with two partial fastening arrangements used; approximately two-thirds 
of the maximum number of nails fixing the connector to the CLT panel (Fastener 
Arrangement b in Table 3.1) and approximately one-third of the maximum number of nails 
fixing the connector to the CLT panel (Fastener Arrangement c in Table 3.1).  
Simpson Strong-Tie does not provide information regarding the partial fastening of ABR105-
R angle brackets and in the study conducted by Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c) the 
angle brackets were fully fastened. Similar to the hold down connections, using fewer 
fasteners would increase the speed of installing angle bracket connections in CLT buildings, 
however there is no experimental data available in the literature to evaluate how the number 
of fasteners affects the behaviour of the angle bracket connection as no study has used 
fastener numbers as variable in the investigation. Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015b) 
proposed that screws should be used in the floor part of the angle bracket instead of nails to 
improve withdrawal capacity. Consequently, this study used three different fastener 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
arrangements for the angle bracket connections and these fastener arrangements varied due 
to the number of fasteners and the type of fastener used. The three fastener arrangements 
for the angle bracket connections tested involved fully fastening (Fastener Arrangement a in 
Table 3.1) and partially fastening the connectors to the CLT panels with two partial fastening 
arrangements used. The angle bracket was fully fastened using nails only in Fastener 
Arrangement a. For both the partially fastened angle bracket connections, approximately 
two-thirds of the maximum number of fasteners were used to fix the connector to the CLT 
panel. However, in one fastener arrangement only nails were used (Fastener Arrangement b 
in Table 3.1) and in the other fastener arrangement both nails and screws were used 
(Fastener Arrangement c in Table 3.1). The fastener arrangements will be discussed in more 
detail in Sections 3.3.2.1, 3.3.2.2 and 3.3.2.3. 
 Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
Angle brackets are typically used within CLT buildings to resist sliding of the wall and the 
angle bracket used within this study was the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
(Simpson Strong-Tie, 2019). The Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket can be fastened 
using nails and screws at a maximum of 24no. locations, ten on the wall part of the connector 
and fourteen on the floor part of the connector. The fasteners used within the configurations 
using the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket included Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm 
annular ring nails and Rothoblaas LBS 5x60 mm screws (Rothoblaas, 2015). Figure 3.1 shows 
the angle bracket, nails and screws.   
Figure 3.1: (a) Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket; (b) Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm 
annular ring nail; (c) Rothoblaas LBS 5x60 mm screw 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
The three fastener arrangements involved fully fastening and partially fastening the angle 
bracket to the CLT wall panel and CLT floor panel and these arrangements are illustrated in 
Figure 3.2. In fastener arrangement a, the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket was 
fully fastened with 24no. Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails; ten nails fastening the 
bracket to the wall panel and fourteen nails fastening the bracket to the floor panel. In 
fastener arrangement b, the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket was partially 
fastened with 16no. Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails; eight nails fastening the 
bracket to both the floor panel and the wall panel. In fastener arrangement c, the Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket was partially fastened with 14no. Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 
mm annular ring nails and 2no. Rothoblaas LBS 5x60 mm screws; eight nails fastening the 
bracket to the wall panel, and six nails and two screws fastening the bracket to the floor 
panel. 
Figure 3.2: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened with nails only), b (two-thirds fastened 
with nails only) and c (two-thirds fastened with nails and screws) for connections using the 
Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
 Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
Hold downs are typically used within CLT buildings to resist overturning of the wall panel and 
the hold downs used within this study were the Rothoblaas WHT hold downs with two 
different lengths, 620 mm and 340 mm. The Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down is 620 mm long, 
Floor 
Screw 
(a) (b) (c) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
80 mm wide and 3 mm thick. It can be fastened to the wall panel at a maximum of 55no. 
locations using nails or screws and anchored to the base with one 20mm diameter bolt 
(Rothoblaas, 2015). Due to the expected high strength of this hold down, the Rothoblaas 
ULS707720 WHT washer (Rothoblaas, 2015) is supplied to prevent the bolt pulling through 
the 3 mm thick base of the connector and this washer was used within all Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down configurations in this study. The fasteners used with this hold down were 
Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails and Rothoblaas KOS20160B 20 mm diameter 
hexagonal head bolts with washers and nuts. Figure 3.3 shows the hold down, bolt, washer 
and nails.  
Figure 3.3: (a) Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down; (b) ) Rothoblaas KOS20160B Hexagonal Head 
Bolt with Nut; (c) Rothoblaas ULS707720 WHT washer; (d) Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular 
ring nail 
The three fastener arrangements involved the full fastening and partial fastening of the hold 
down to the CLT wall panel as illustrated in Figure 3.4. In fastener arrangement a, the 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down was fully fastened to the CLT wall panel with 55no. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails. In fastener arrangement b, the Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down was partially fastened to the CLT wall panel with 37no. Rothoblaas LBA 
4x60 mm annular ring nails. In fastener arrangement c, the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
was partially fastened to the CLT wall panel with 18no. Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring 
nails. 
Figure 3.4: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened), b (two-thirds fastened) and c (one-third 
fastened) for connections using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down  
 Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
The Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down is 340 mm long, 60 mm wide and 3 mm thick. It can be 
fastened to the wall panel at a maximum of 20no. locations using nails or screws and 
anchored to the base with one 16 mm diameter bolt (Rothoblaas, 2015). Unlike the 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down, a washer is not specified by the manufacturer for use with 
this hold down and so no washer was used to prevent the bolt pulling through the 3 mm thick 
(a) (b) (c) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
base of the connector. The fasteners used with this hold down were Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 
mm annular ring nails and Rothoblaas KOS16140B 16 mm diameter hexagonal head bolts 
with washers and nuts (Rothoblaas, 2015). Figure 3.5 shows the hold down, bolt and nails. 
Figure 3.5: (a) Rothoblaas WHT340 Hold Down; (b) Rothoblaas KOS16140B Hexagonal Head 
Bolt with Nut; (c) Rothoblaas LBA 60x4mm annular ring nail 
The three fastener arrangements involved the full fastening and partial fastening of the hold 
down to the CLT wall panel as illustrated in Figure 3.6. In fastener arrangement a, the 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down was fully fastened to the CLT wall panel with 20no. 
Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails. In fastener arrangement b, the Rothoblaas 
WH340 hold down was partially fastened to the CLT wall panel with 12no. Rothoblaas LBA 
4x60 mm annular ring nails. In fastener arrangement c, the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
was partially fastened to the CLT wall panel with 6no. Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring 
nails. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.6: Fastener arrangements a (fully fastened), b(two-thirds fastened) and c (one-third 
fastened) for connections using the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
3.3.3. Test setup 
Two different test setups were required for the testing of the connections under shear and 
tension. The same setup was used for the testing of the connections under both monotonic 
and cyclic shear loading and similarly the same setup was used for the testing of the 
connections under both monotonic and cyclic tension loading. The shear test setup was the 
same for all three connections, however the sizes of the CLT wall panel and floor panels 
varied to account for the different size of the connectors and to ensure minimum edge 
distances. Similarly, the tension test setup was the same for all three connections, however 
the sizes of the CLT wall panel and floor panels varied to account for the different size of the 
connectors and to ensure minimum edge distances. The CLT panels used in these tests were 
manufactured in Austria by Stora Enso using spruce of C24 grade and the mean density of 
the panels is 470 kg/m3 as per the manufacturers specification (Stora Enso, 2015). The panels 
were cut to the required size in the laboratory. 
A displacement-controlled load was applied to the test specimens and further details of the 
loading procedure can be found in Section 3.3.4. The load was measured by a load cell within 
(a) (b) (c)
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
the ZwickRoell testing machine and the displacement was measured by the testing machine 
as the vertical movement of the crosshead. No pilot holes were drilled in any test specimens.  
 Shear 
In the setup for the testing of the connections in shear, the CLT wall panel was restrained 
using restraint beams and threaded rods while the CLT floor panel was moved vertically 
upwards only in the monotonic tests, and upwards and downwards in the cyclic tests (see 
Figures 3.7-3.9). The test setup for the connections loaded in shear was adjusted for each of 
the three connectors to accommodate the different sizes of CLT panels. The test setups for 
the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections loaded in shear, Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connections loaded in shear and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
connections loaded in shear are illustrated in Figure 3.7, Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.9, 
respectively. In this test setup the floor panel was restrained in the vertical direction only by 
the vertical load.  
Figure 3.7: Shear test setup for configurations using the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.8: Shear test setup for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down  
Figure 3.9: Shear test setup for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
 Tension 
In all tension tests the CLT floor panel was restrained using restraint beams and threaded 
rods while the CLT wall panel was moved vertically upwards only in the monotonic tests, and 
upwards and downwards in the cyclic tests (see Figures 3.10-3.12). The test setup for the 
connections loaded in tension was adjusted for each of the three connectors to 
accommodate the different sizes of CLT panels. The test setup for the Simpson Strong-Tie 
ABR105-R angle bracket connections loaded in tension, Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections loaded in tension and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections loaded in 
tension are illustrated in Figure 3.10, Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12, respectively.  
Figure 3.10: Tension test setup for configurations using the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R 
angle bracket  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.11: Tension test setup for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down  
Figure 3.12: Tension test setup for configurations using the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
3.3.4. Loading procedure 
To determine the mechanical properties of the connection, such as strength, stiffness, 
ductility ratio, impairment of strength and energy dissipation, which are important for the 
design of CLT buildings under lateral loading, the connections were tested under cyclic 
loading in accordance with BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005). The laboratory in which the tests 
specimens were assembled and tested was maintained at 20C and 55% relative humidity. 
The complete procedure as per BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) was followed; a displacement-
controlled loading rate of 0.2 mm/s was used with the maximum displacement for each cycle 
determined from the displacement corresponding to yield strength, Vy, observed during the 
monotonic testing of the configuration. The monotonic tests were undertaken with a 
displacement-controlled loading rate of 0.2 mm/s and continued until failure of the 
connection occurred. Figure 3.13 illustrates the loading procedure for the cyclic testing of 
timber connections in accordance with BS EN 12512 complete procedure.  
Figure 3.13: Loading procedure for cyclic testing of timber connections in accordance with BS 
EN 12512 complete procedure (BSI, 2005) 
For tests in which failure was not expected to occur before 4Vy, an additional three cycles 
with a maximum displacement of 6Vy were included in the loading procedure. A 
displacement greater than 6Vy was not required to achieve failure (as defined by BS EN 12512 
(BSI, 2005) and outlined in Section 3.3.5) in any of the tests undertaken. In the tests which 
involved the connections loaded in shear, displacements greater than 100 mm were not 
included within the loading procedure due to the limited clear space between the restraint 
beams and machine crosshead. Therefore, load was applied to the test specimen until either 
failure occurred or a displacement of 100 mm was reached.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
All cyclic shear tests were reversed cyclic tests, however the setup for the testing of the 
connections under tension did not permit reversed cyclic loading due to the presence of the 
CLT floor panel which prevented negative cycles. Consequently, the complete procedure 
outlined in BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) was modified to allow for non-reversed cyclic testing of 
the connections under tension whereby another positive cycle followed zero displacement 
at the end of a positive cycle.  
3.3.5. Analysis of experimental results 
As per BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005), the following properties of the connection were found using 
the hysteresis loops obtained during the cyclic tests: yield strength, Fy; displacement 
corresponding to yield strength, Vy; maximum strength, Fmax; displacement corresponding to 
maximum strength, Vmax; ultimate strength, Fu; displacement corresponding to ultimate 
strength, Vu; elastic stiffness, kel; plastic stiffness, kpl; ductility ratio, D; impairment of 
strength, F1-3; equivalent viscous damping ratio,eq.   
To find properties of the connection the 1st cycle backbone curve was established. The 1st 
cycle backbone curve is the envelope curve which connects the maximum loads of each set 
of cycles at the same displacement. In all tests the load-displacement curve  did not have two 
well-defined linear parts and the properties were found using the procedure outline in BS EN 
12512 (BSI, 2005) for a load-slip curve without two well-defined linear parts. The elastic 
stiffness, kel, is defined as the slope of the line through 0.1Fmax and 0.4Fmax. The plastic 
stiffness, kpl, is defined as the slope of the tangent to the curve with a slope of kel /6. The 
yield strength, Fy, and displacement corresponding to yield strength, Vy, are defined by the 
intersection point of the line through 0.1Fmax and 0.4Fmax and the tangent to the curve with 
a slope of kel /6. Figure 3.14 illustrates the method for determining Fmax, Vmax, Fy, Vy, kel and 
kpl using test data. These values were found for both the positive and negative load-
displacement curves from the test data of the reversed cyclic tests. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.14: Method to determine Fmax, Vmax, Fy, Vy, Fu, Vu, kel and kpl using test data in 
accordance with BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) 
Ultimate strength, Fu, is defined by BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) as the value of the load 
corresponding to whichever of the following occurs first: failure, a displacement of 30 mm, 
or 80% of the maximum load if the displacement is less than 30 mm (Figure 3.14). Vu is the 
displacement corresponding to the ultimate load, Fu. Ductility ratio was calculated as the 
ratio of displacement corresponding to ultimate strength, Vu, and displacement 
corresponding to yield strength, Vy, as per Eq. 3.1. 
(3.1) 
In this study is was found that for some configurations the displacement corresponding to 
yield strength was significantly greater than 30 mm, and therefore the connection was not 
near failure at a displacement of 30 mm. Consequently, it was decided for these 
configurations to report both ultimate strength, Fu, and the displacement corresponding to 
ultimate strength, Vu, at failure and the load at 30 mm displacement, F30, separately. Ductility 
was also calculated at a displacement of 30 mm as the ratio of 30 mm displacement and 
displacement corresponding to yield strength, Vy, as per Eq. 3.2. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
30 = 
(3.2) 
Impairment of strength, F1-3, is defined as the difference in force required to achieve the 
cycles specified displacement (e.g. 0.75Vy, Vy, etc.) for the first and third cycles and is 
calculated as a percentage of the force required to achieve the specified displacement in the 
first cycle. It was calculated using the first and third cycle of the set of three cycles in which 
maximum strength occurred, or if the failure was brittle and maximum strength occurred in 
the same cycle as failure, the final set of three complete cycles before maximum strength 
occurred was used (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015c). 
In accordance with BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005), equivalent viscous damping ratio, eq,i, is used 
to express the hysteresis damping properties of the connection. It is defined as the ratio 
between the energy dissipated in a particular half cycle, Ed,i, and the available potential 
energy in the same half cycle, Ep,i, multiplied by 2 as per Eq. 3.3.  
, = 
2,
(3.3) 
The energy dissipated in a particular half cycle, Ed,i, is defined by the area enclosed by the 
hysteresis loop (Figure 3.15) and the available potential energy in the same half cycle, Ep,i, is 
calculated using Eq. 3.4 where Fi  is the maximum load achieved in the particular half cycle 
and Vi  is the corresponding displacement achieved.  
, = 
   
(3.4) 
Similar to impairment of strength, the equivalent viscous damping ratio, eq, was calculated 
using the first (eq (1st)) and third (eq (3rd)) cycle of the set of three cycles in which maximum 
strength occurred or if the failure was brittle and maximum strength occurred in the same 
cycle as failure, the final set of three complete cycles before maximum strength occurred was 
used.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.15: Definition of the energy dissipated per half cycle, Ed,i, and the available potential 
energy, Ep,i, (BSI, 2005) 
For the reversed cyclic tests, the connection properties for both positive and negative half 
cycles were reported as required by BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005). Reporting both positive and 
negative cycles will also allow any asymmetry to be noted as some asymmetry is expected 
due to the variability of timber and due to the varying presence of defects noted when 
assembling the test specimens. 
3.4. Analytical Methods  
CLT buildings could be designed to exhibit elastic behaviour under high lateral loads, however 
this would result in the uneconomical overdesign of building components given that events 
in which a building is subjected to high lateral load are likely to be very infrequent. Therefore, 
the most economical approach to the design of CLT buildings under high lateral load is to 
permit ductile behaviour, while ensuring displacements are not large enough to compromise 
the structural integrity of the building by exceeding the displacement capacity of the 
structure (Fragiacomo, Dujic and Sustersic, 2011); this design approach is called capacity-
based design. Capacity-based design of CLT buildings requires the definition of regions that 
are allowed to undergo large deformations and provide stable energy dissipation (Izzi et al., 
2016). It should be undertaken at building level, wall level and connections level.  As CLT 
panels behave rigidly under lateral load, the ductility within the building is provided by the 
connections only and the ability of the connections to undergo significant plastic deformation 
is key to providing a mechanism for energy dissipation within a CLT structure under high 
lateral load. The ductility of a connection signifies the extent to which a connection can 
undergo deformation beyond the yield point before failure occurs (Williams, 2009) and high 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
ductility suggests that the connection can undergo significant plastic deformation before 
failure occurs, as opposed to a brittle failure with low ductility. At present there is no codified 
recommendation for the preferred ductile failure mechanism for CLT connections, however 
Fragiacomo, Dujic and Sustersic (2011) suggest that brittle failure is avoided by allowing the 
plasticisation of the fasteners (nails and screws) and the overdesigning the metal connector 
to avoid plasticisation. Figure 3.16 shows the potential failure modes for steel-to-timber 
connections given in Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014). As shown in Figure 3.16, plasticisation of the 
fastener occurs only in failure modes (b), (d) and (e), with failure mode (e) the most desirable 
failure mode as two plastic hinges form unlike the other two ductile failure modes in which 
only one plastic hinge forms. Failure modes (a) and (b) occur in steel-to-timber connections 
when a thin metal plate in used, while failure modes (c), (d) and (e) occur in steel-to-timber 
connections when a thick metal plate in used. 
Figure 3.16: Failure modes for steel-to-timber connections (BSI, 2014) 
While designing CLT connections to have high ductility will prevent brittle failure of the 
connection and ensure a more economic design of the building, brittle failure of the CLT panel 
which may result from the overdesign of the connections must also be avoided. Therefore, 
when designing a CLT wall system, capacity-based design must be considered at wall level as 
well as connection level. Capacity-based design at wall level considers potential overstrength 
of the ductile elements (connections), and the potential strength degradation of these 
elements under repeated loading. This ensures that the CLT wall panel will behave elastically 
so that brittle failure does not occur (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2013; Izzi et al., 2016). 
Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c) suggest that it is more difficult to predict the 
capacity of fasteners in CLT compared to sawn timber or other engineered wood products. 
Thus, it is necessary to evaluate whether existing analytical methods for predicting 
connection properties produce values which are similar to the values determined from the 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
experimental testing of connections using CLT. The existing analytical methods include 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) and the alternative analytical method specifically for connections with 
dowel-type fasteners in CLT devised by Uibel and Bla (2014). These methods assume that 
the metal connector is overdesigned and exhibits elastic behaviour only, with failure of the 
connection due to one of the failure modes illustrated in Figure 3.16 
3.4.1. Characteristic lateral Load-carrying capacity of the connections in 
accordance with Eurocode 5 and ETA-13/0523 
The characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of dowel-type fasteners, FV,Rk, can be 
calculated using the European Yield Model which is based on the Johansen yield theory 
(Johansen, 1949) and detailed in Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014). ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 
2018) provides an interpretation of the rules for determining the characteristic lateral load-
carrying capacity of fasteners outlined in Eurocode 5 specifically for Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm 
annular ring nails and Rothoblaas LBS 5x60 mm screws. As the characteristic lateral load-
carrying capacity is calculated per fastener, the characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity 
of the connection, FV,Rk(connection), can be calculated by multiplying the characteristic lateral 
load-carrying capacity of one fastener, FV,Rk,  with the effective number of fasteners, nef, as 
per Eq. 3.5. 
According to Johansen yield theory (Johansen, 1949), the characteristic lateral load-carrying 
capacity of a fastener, FV,Rk, is calculated using the characteristic withdrawal capacity of the 
fastener, Fax,Rk, the characteristic fastener yield moment My,Rk and the characteristic 
embedment strength of the timber, h,k. In this study, the CLT panel was not pre-drilled for 
the nails, in accordance with Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014), as the density of the CLT panel was less 
than 500 kg/m3 (Stora Enso, 2015) and the diameter of the nails was less than 6 mm. 
Therefore, as stated in ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018) the characteristic withdrawal 
capacity of the nail, Fax,Rk:EC5,n, is calculated using Eq. 3.6, where dn is the nominal diameter 
of the nail in mm, lef,n  is the nominal threaded length of the nail including the point in mm 
and k is the characteristic timber density in kg/m3. The characteristic density of the CLT 
panels used is not specified by the manufacturer and was not measured as part of this study, 
 ,() =  ,   
(3.5) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
consequently the characteristic density is assumed to be 350 kg/m3 as per the characteristic 
density of C24 grade timber.  
 ,:5, =   7.5, (
(3.6) 
As stated in ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018), the characteristic withdrawal capacity 
of the screw, Fax,Rk:EC,s, is given by Eq. 3.7, where ds is the nominal diameter of the screw in 
mm and lef,s  is the nominal threaded length of the screw including the point in mm. 
 ,:5, =   10.5, (
(3.7) 
The characteristic fastener yield moment of the annular ring nail, My,Rk:EC5,n, is stated in ETA-
13/0523  (ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018) as 6500 Nmm for the 4 mm diameter annular ring nail 
used within this study. The characteristic fastener yield moment of the screw, My,Rk:EC,s, is 
stated by the manufacturer as 5417.2 Nmm for the 5 mm diameter screw used within this 
study (Rothoblaas, 2015). The characteristic embedment strength of the timber, h,k:EC5, is 
calculated using Eq. 3.8 in accordance with Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) where d is the diameter 
of the fastener in mm. 
 ,:5 =   0.082
(3.8) 
Eurocode 5 (BSI, 2014) states that thick metal plates have a thickness greater than the 
diameter of the fastener. However, according to ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018), a 
thick metal plate used with Rothoblass LBA annular ring nails is defined as a metal plate with 
a thickness greater than 1.5 mm and a thick metal plate used with Rothoblass LBS screws is 
defined by as a metal plate with a thickness greater than 2 mm. The metal plates forming all 
three connectors used within this study are 3 mm thick and therefore all three connectors 
are considered to be composed of thick metal plates according to ETA-13/0523 (ETA-
Danmark A/S, 2018). Consequently, the characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the 
fastener, Fv,Rk, is calculated using the equations stated in ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 
2018) for connections made with thick metal plates. The characteristic lateral load-carrying 
capacity of a nail, Fv,Rk:EC,n, is given by Eq. 3.9, where t1,n  is the minimum of the nail 
penetration length including the tip or the timber thickness in mm. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
 ,:5, = 
,1,
,1, [2 +
4,:,
,1,
 1] +
,:, 
2.3.:,,:5 +
,:,
(3.9) 
The characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of a screw, Fv,Rk:EC5, is given by Eq. 3.10, 
where t1,s  is the minimum of the screw penetration length including the tip or the timber 
thickness in mm. 
 ,:5, = 
,1,
,, [2 +
4,:5,
,1,
 1] +
,:5, 
2.3.:5,,:5 +
,:5,
(3.10) 
The characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the annular ring nail, Fv,Rk:EC,n, is the 
minimum value determined using Eq. 3.9a-c and the characteristic lateral load-carrying 
capacity of the screw, Fv,Rk:EC,s, is the minimum value determined using Eq. 3.10a-c. These 
equations indicate which of the failure modes illustrated in Figure 3.16 would occur (Izzi et 
al., 2016). Eq.3.9a and Eq. 3.10a indicate a failure in which the nail becomes embedded in 
the timber and no plastic deformation of the nail occurs as shown in Figure 3.16(c). Figure 
3.16(d) and Figure 3.16(e) indicate failure modes in which plastic deformation of the nail 
occurs as well as the embedment of the nail in the timber. The failure mode defined by Eq. 
3.9b and Eq. 3.10b is one in which one plastic hinge forms and therefore this equation 
describes the failure shown in Figure 3.16(d). The failure mode defined by Eq. 3.9c and Eq. 
3.10c is one in which two plastic hinge forms and therefore this equation describes the failure 
shown in Figure 3.16(e). The yielding of the fasteners causes the members of the connection 
to pull together as the fastener deforms, leading to what is known as the rope effect 
(Porteous and Kermani, 2013). The rope effect is taken into account in Eq. 3.9b and Eq. 3.9c 
through the inclusion of the Fax,Rk:EC5,n/2 term which represents a contribution of 50% of the 
characteristic withdrawal capacity of the nail, Fax,Rk:EC5,n, to the characteristic lateral load-
carrying capacity of the nail, FV,Rk:EC5,n. Similarly, the rope effect is taken into account in Eq. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
3.10b and Eq. 3.10c through the inclusion of the Fax,Rk:EC5,s/4 term which represents a 
contribution of 25% of the characteristic withdrawal capacity of the screw, Fax,Rk:EC5,s, to the 
characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the screw, FV,Rk:EC5,s. Eurocode 5 states that the 
contribution of the rope effect should be limited based on the type of fastener with annular 
ring nails limited to 50%, however screws are permitted to have a 100% contribution (BSI, 
2014). Therefore, Eq. 3.9b and Eq. 3.9c, as specified by ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 
2018), are in compliance with Eurocode 5, however Eq. 3.10b and Eq. 3.10c conservatively 
give a much lower contribution than permitted by Eurocode 5. This discrepancy between 
permitted percentage contributions according to Eurocode 5 and those included within the 
equations presented in ETAs has been noted by OCeallaigh and Harte (2019) and Izzi et al. 
(2016). Given that ETA-13/0523 (ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018) provides specific equations for the 
fasteners used in this study, the product specific interpretation of the Eurocode 5 equations 
will be used in subsequent calculations.  
3.4.2. Characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the connections in 
accordance with Uibel and Bla (2014) 
An alternative analytical method to Eurocode 5 for determining the characteristic withdrawal 
capacity of the fasteners, Fax,Rk, and the characteristic embedment strength of the CLT, h,k, 
was proposed by Uibel and Bla (2014). This method was developed using the results of 
experimental tests on CLT connections with dowel-type fasteners. According to this analytical 
method, it is proposed that the characteristic withdrawal capacity of the nail, Fax,Rk:U&B,n, is 
calculated using Eq. 3.11 (Bla and Uibel, 2007), where  represents the position of the 
fastener relative to the CLT panel. For connections along the narrow face of the CLT panel  
=0 and for connections on the side face of the CLT panel  =90 (Ringhofer, Brandner and 
Bla, 2018). 
 ,:&, =
0.116
,
3.72 + 2
(3.11) 
Uibel and Bla (2014) propose that the characteristic withdrawal capacity of the screw, 
Fax,Rk:U&B,s, is calculated using Eq. 3.12. 
 ,:&, =
0.35
,
1.52 + 2
(3.12) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Based on experimental tests, Uibel and Bla (2014) propose that the characteristic 
embedment strength for screws or nails in CLT, h,k:U&B, is calculated using Eq. 3.13. 
 ,:& =   0.112
1.050.5 
(3.13) 
Uibel and Bla (2014) state that Eq. 3.13 is only applicable in CLT with a maximum layer 
thickness of 9mm. As explained in Section 2.2.3, CLT layers are commonly thicker than 9mm, 
with the three largest European manufacturers of CLT producing panels with a minimum 
layer thickness of 20 mm. Consequently, Eq. 3.13 is not applicable for connections formed 
using most commercially manufactured CLT panels. For CLT panels with layers thicker than 
9mm, it is suggested that the embedment strength is calculated according to Eurocode 5 as 
for solid timber, and therefore using Eq. 3.8 (Ringhofer, Brandner and Bla, 2018). The 
characteristic fastener yield moment of a fastener, My,Rk, defined is Uibel and Bla by Eq. 3.14 
(Izzi et al., 2016) where u,k is the characteristic tensile strength of the fastener in N/mm2. 
 ,:& =   0.30,
(3.14) 
The characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the annular ring nail, Fv,Rk:U&B,n, can then 
be calculated using Eq. 3.9, and the characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the screw, 
Fv,Rk:U&B,s, can then be calculated using Eq. 3.10. 
3.5. Results and Discussion 
Using the hysteresis loops resulting from the experimental testing of the connections under 
cyclic loading, the properties of each configuration were determined in accordance with BS 
EN 12512 (BSI, 2005). The mean values reported were calculated using the results from the 
testing of three specimens for each configuration. The coefficient of variation was also 
calculated for the three results of each configuration. As the cyclic shear tests were reversed, 
properties are reported for both the positive and negative side of the hysteresis loops where 
applicable, however only positive values of properties are reported for cyclic tension tests as 
negative half cycles could not be carried out as explained in Section 3.3.4. 
3.5.1. Angle bracket connections 
Configuration 1, Configuration 2 and Configuration 3 used Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R 
angle brackets and were tested under cyclic loading in shear. Configuration 1 was fully 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
fastened using nails, Configuration 2 was partially fastened using nails and Configuration 3 
was partially fastened using nails and screws (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). Figure 3.17(a) 
shows the typical failure observed for Configuration 1 and Figure 3.17(b) shows the typical 
failure observed for Configuration 2. It can be seen from Figure 3.17 that both Configuration 
1 and Configuration 2 failed due to bending and withdrawal of the nails, ultimately leading 
to tearing of the nail heads closest to the fold in the angle bracket. Figure 3.18 shows the 
typical failure observed for Configuration 3 and it can be seen that bending and withdrawal 
of the nails and screws was also observed in Configuration 3. Shear deformation of the angle 
brackets and damage to the CLT panel can be seen in Figure 3.17 and Figure 3.18 for all three 
configurations. Bending deformation of the angle bracket is also evident and this was 
observed due to the out-of-plane rotation of the floor panel. This rotation occurred because 
there was a connection on only one side of the wall panel and the floor panel was restrained 
in the vertical direction only. While using a connection on only one side of the wall panel is 
more realistic of wall systems in CLT buildings, in a CLT building there would be gravity load 
acting downwards on the wall panel and another angle bracket connection connecting the 
floor panel to the CLT wall panel below as shown in Figure 2.8. This gravity load and 
connection on the underside of the floor panel would limit out-of-plane rotation of the floor 
panel. 
Figure 3.17: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections under 
cyclic loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 1; (b) Configuration 2 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.18: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection under 
cyclic loading in the shear direction: Configuration 3 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.19, Figure 3.20 and Figure 3.21 for 
Configuration 1, Configuration 2 and Configuration 3, respectively. The 1st cycle backbone 
curve, 2nd cycle backbone curve and 3rd cycle backbone curve have also been included for 
reference. Strength degradation of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded to 
the same displacement and strength degradation of the connections when displacement was 
increased is apparent in Figure 3.19, Figure 3.20 and Figure 3.21. The difference between the 
1st cycle backbone curves and 3rd cycle backbone curves indicates strength degradation when 
the configurations were repeatedly loaded to the same displacement, as lower load was 
required to achieve the same displacement in the third cycle compared to the first cycle. The 
difference between the 1st, 2nd and 3rd backbone curves increases as displacement increases, 
showing that at higher displacements strength degradation becomes more significant. 
Strength degradation due to increasing displacement is shown by the downwards slope of 
the 1st cycle backbone curves after the maximum load was reached. Stiffness degradation of 
the connections when they were repeatedly loaded at the same displacement and stiffness 
degradation of the connections when displacement was increased is also evident in Figure 
3.19, Figure 3.20 and Figure 3.21. The reducing slope of each of the backbone curves shows 
stiffness reduction as displacement is increased. The difference between the 1st, 2nd and 3rd 
cycle backbone curves increases as displacement increases because the slope of the 2nd and 
3rd cycle backbone curves decrease at a higher rate than that of the 1st cycle backbone curve. 
This indicates that the reduction in stiffness between the first and third cycle becomes larger 
as displacement increases. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.19: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 1 
Figure 3.20: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 2 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.21: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 3 
Figure 3.22 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 1, Configuration 2 and 
Configuration 3. It can be seen from Figure 3.22 that maximum shear strength is greatest for 
Configuration 1 and lowest for Configuration 3. The hysteresis loop for the final cycle in which 
failure occurred is much wider for Configuration 3 than that of Configurations 1 and 2 which 
suggests that ductility is greatest for Configuration 3. As shown in Figure 3.15, energy 
dissipation is defined as the area enclosed by the hysteresis loop. Given that the 
displacement corresponding to maximum shear strength increases as maximum shear 
strength decreases, there is no obvious difference in the areas enclosed by the hysteresis 
loops of each configuration shown in Figure 3.22. Therefore, Figure 3.22 would suggest that 
energy dissipation is similar for all three configurations. As connections are generally 
designed to not exceed maximum shear strength and will only do so in the case of extreme 
and unpredictable loading, energy dissipation of the connections up to maximum shear 
strength is important. The equivalent viscous damping ratios for the three configurations 
presented in Table 3.2 provide a numerical comparison of energy dissipation by considering 
the energy dissipation at maximum shear strength. The equivalent viscous damping ratios 
values will be discussed later. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.22: Typical hysteresis loops for Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
connections tested under shear loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Simpson Strong-Tie angle brackets tested 
under cyclic loading in shear (Configuration 1, Configuration 2 and Configuration 3) are 
summarised in Table 3.2. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are reported for 
each property. Figure 3.23 illustrates the important average properties of these connections 
as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from the 
experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.2: Average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections 
determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction in 
accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Configuration 
1   2   3 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 19.67 5.09  15.97 9.71  13.57 10.17 
Vy [mm] 16.20 13.54  17.58 18.00  10.30 10.27 
Fmax [kN] 22.06 5.84  18.52 4.82  18.30 7.76 
Vmax [mm] 30.39 34.12  34.60 0.00  36.79 11.23 
Fu [kN] 13.47 3.18  11.66 21.52  10.32 40.07 
Vu [mm] 42.35 5.84  42.50 20.93  59.63 38.09 
kel [kN/mm] 1.20 10.14  0.90 8.43  1.31 4.63 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.20 10.14  0.15 8.43  0.22 4.63 
-Fy [kN] -20.92 -4.90  -14.97 -9.52  -16.10 -10.98 
-Vy [mm] -15.30 -17.79  -13.83 -3.26  -10.58 -17.91 
-Fmax [kN] -22.93 -6.53  -17.66 -10.36  -18.49 -7.68 
-Vmax [mm] -24.34 -0.41  -32.00 -8.03  -26.32 -43.68 
-kel [kN/mm] 1.38 18.49  1.05 12.57  1.54 15.27 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.23 18.49  0.18 12.57  0.26 15.27 
F30 [kN] 17.03 19.66  17.62 4.81  17.48 8.13 
D [-] 2.82 0.76  2.43 6.37  5.30 31.92 
D30 [-] 1.87 13.05  1.73 5.11  2.93 9.80 
F1-3  [%] 28.63 25.00  32.30 45.11  39.02 56.08 
-F1-3  [%] 23.50 27.86  26.55 67.68  22.11 40.30 
eq (1st)  [%] 15.71 3.74  13.75 23.03  14.57 26.49 
eq (3rd)  [%] 10.67 22.39  9.58 4.67  9.10 18.71 
-eq (1st)  [%] 16.24 8.19  16.68 30.69  22.73 59.99 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 8.32 13.35  9.36 22.67  9.43 38.48 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.23: Comparison of the average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
the first cycle (eq(1st)) 
As previously described, failure of Configurations 1-3 was primarily due to bending and 
withdrawal of the fasteners, ultimately leading to failure by tearing of the nail heads. 
However, some deformation of the angle bracket and damage to the CLT panels was also 
observed. Configuration 2 and Configuration 3 have approximately two-thirds of the number 
of fasteners used in Configuration 1 (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2) and therefore these 
configurations would have a lower combined lateral load-carrying capacity of the fasteners. 
Consequently, Configuration 2 and Configuration 3 would be expected to exhibit lower 
maximum shear strength (Fmax) than Configuration 1 and this was observed experimentally 
as shown in Table 3.2 and Figure 3.23(b). Similarly, Configuration 2 and Configuration 3 would 
be expected to exhibit lower yield shear strength (Fy) than Configuration 1 and this was also 
observed experimentally as show in Table 3.2 and Figure 3.23(a). Configuration 3 replaces 
the two nails used in Configuration 2 with screws (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). This was 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
found to not significantly influence the maximum shear strength of the connection with 
minimal difference between maximum shear strength of Configuration 2 and Configuration 
3. The presence of screws does however influence the elastic and plastic stiffness (kel and kpl) 
of the connection with higher elastic and plastic stiffness observed for Configuration 3 than 
Configuration 1 and Configuration 2 (Figure 3.23(c)). In the configurations using nails only, 
increasing the number of nails increases the elastic and plastic stiffness of the connection 
with higher elastic and plastic stiffness observed for Configuration 1 than Configuration 2.  
While Configuration 3 has much greater initial stiffness than Configuration 2, despite failure 
occurring at similar ultimate loads (Fu), Configuration 3 yields at a lower displacement (Vy) 
and fails at a higher displacement (Vu) This leads to Configuration 3 having higher ductility 
than Configuration 2, as demonstrated by the ductility ratios (D) shown in Table 3.2. It can 
be seen in Table 3.2 and Figure 3.23(d) that the average ductility ratio for Configuration 3 is 
over twice that for Configuration 2, although the coefficient of variation for the ductility ratio 
of Configuration 3 is relatively large with values for individual test specimens between 3.46 
and 6.79. In the configurations using nails only, increasing the number of nails increases the 
ductility of the connection with a higher ductility ratio observed for Configuration 1 than 
Configuration 2. 
Although Figure 3.23(f) would suggest that the equivalent viscous damping ratio for the first 
cycle (eq (1st)) is highest for Configuration 1, Table 3.2 shows that the while the positive and 
negative side of the hysteresis loops are fairly similar, the equivalent viscous damping ratio 
for the first cycle on the negative side is the lowest out of the three configurations. Therefore, 
there is no clear trend between the equivalent viscous damping ratios of Configurations 1-3, 
and consequently the number or type of fasteners used. Although there is no distinct trend 
between configurations, it can be seen in Table 3.2 that the equivalent viscous damping ratio 
is greater for the first cycle (eq (1st)) compared to the third cycle (eq (3rd)), with the reduction 
in equivalent viscous damping ratio between the first and third ranging from 30-58%. This 
can be explained by the strength and stiffness degradation observed in Figure 3.19, Figure 
3.20 and Figure 3.21 when the connection is loaded to the same displacement. Similarly, 
while Figure 3.23(e) would suggest that the impairment of strength (F1-3) increases with an 
increasing number of fasteners and the use of screws instead of nails, Table 3.2 shows that 
the values for the negative side of the hysteresis loops are not consistent with this trend. The 
coefficient of variation (COV) is relatively high for some average values of equivalent viscous 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
damping ratio (eq (1st) and eq (3rd)) and impairment of strength (F1-3). This is because not all 
test specimens for each configuration failed in the same cycle, for example Test Specimen 3 
for Configuration 2 failed in the 9th cycle (Figure 3.24(c)) whereas Test Specimen 1 and Test 
Specimen 2 for Configuration 2 failed in the 12th cycle (Figure 3.24(a) and Figure 3.24(b)). Test 
Specimen 3 experienced maximum strength on the positive side of the 9th cycle followed by 
a brittle failure just before the specified displacement on the negative side of that cycle was 
reached. Therefore, maximum strength occurred in the same cycle as failure and so the set 
of three cycles previous to this cycle (6th-8th) were used in the calculation of equivalent 
viscous damping ratios and impairment of strength. For Test Specimen 1 and Test Specimen 
2 failure was more ductile and maximum strength did not occur in the same cycle as failure, 
with maximum strength also occurring on the positive side of the 9th cycle but failure 
occurring on the 12th cycle. Thus, the set of three cycles used in the calculation of equivalent 
viscous damping ratios and impairment of strength were the 9th-11th cycles resulting in 
relatively higher values of equivalent viscous damping ratios. As the failure of Test Specimen 
1 and Test Specimen 2 was more ductile, these connections experiences greater strength 
degradation leading to relatively higher values of impairment of strength compared to Test 
Specimen 3. Therefore, the occurrence of higher coefficient of variations for the average 
equivalent viscous damping ratio and impairment of strength values compared to other 
average properties can be explained by non-consistent failure cycles of test specimens.  
Figure 3.24: Hysteresis loops of all test specimens for Configuration 2: (a) Test specimen 1; 
(b) Test specimen 2; (c) Test specimen 3 
It can be concluded that for angle bracket connections subject to shear loading, increasing 
the number of nails increases yield strength, maximum strength, stiffness and ductility of a 
(a) (b) (c) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
connection. However, there is no notable effect on equivalent viscous damping ratios and 
impairment of strength. In a partially fastened angle bracket connection subject to shear, 
replacing two nails with screws significantly increases ductility beyond that of a fully nailed 
angle bracket connection, as well as increasing the stiffness of the connection. However, the 
use of screws does not have a notable positive effect on the yield strength, maximum 
strength, energy dissipation or impairment of strength under repeated loading. Therefore, 
Configuration 1, the fully fastened angle bracket connection using nails only, is the optimum 
configuration for use in CLT buildings under low lateral loading, which will behave in an elastic 
manner. For CLT buildings which will be subjected to higher lateral loading due to either 
earthquakes or high winds, Configuration 3 is optimum given that it has significantly higher 
ductility and comparable energy dissipation to Configurations 1 and 2. Configuration 3 could 
achieve comparable strength with Configuration 1 if more fasteners were to be used.  
Configuration 4, Configuration 5 and Configuration 6 used Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R 
angle brackets and were tested under cyclic loading in tension. Configuration 4 was fully 
fastened using nails, Configuration 5 was partially fastened using nails and Configuration 6 
was partially fastened using nails and screws (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). All three 
configurations failed in a similar manner and Figure 3.25 shows the typical failure observed. 
Failure occurred due to the bending and withdrawal of the fasteners on the floor part of the 
angle bracket and bending of the nails on the wall part of the angle bracket.  
Figure 3.25: Typical failure of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections under 
cyclic loading in the tension direction 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.26, Figure 3.27 and Figure 3.28 for 
Configuration 4, Configuration 5 and Configuration 6, respectively. Strength degradation of 
the connections when they were repeatedly loaded to the same displacement and strength 
degradation of the connections when displacement was increased is apparent in Figure 3.26, 
Figure 3.27 and Figure 3.28. The difference between the 1st cycle backbone curves and 3rd 
cycle backbone curves, particularly in the set of cycles in which maximum tensile strength 
was reached, indicates strength degradation when the configurations were repeatedly 
loaded to the same displacement. This is because lower load was required to achieve the 
same displacement in the third cycle compared to the first cycle. Strength degradation due 
to increasing displacement is shown by the downwards slope of the backbone curves after 
the maximum load was reached. For Configuration 4, the difference between the backbone 
curves increases as displacement increases until the maximum tensile strength is reached. 
Although, beyond the maximum tensile strength the difference between the backbone 
curves does not continue to increase like the trend observed for Configurations 1-3. Instead, 
the difference remains relatively consistent with backbone curves having similar shapes. 
Similar to Configuration 4, for Configuration 5 and Configuration 6 the difference between 
the backbone curves increases as displacement increases until the maximum tensile strength 
is reached. Although, for Configurations 5 and 6, after the maximum tensile strength has 
been reached all three backbone curves converge as displacement increases, with the 
difference between the backbone curves at the end of the test smaller than the difference 
at maximum shear strength. This indicates that strength degradation as displacement 
increases beyond that at the maximum tensile strength is more significant for the 1st cycle 
than the 2nd and 3rd cycles, as the slope of the 1st cycle backbone curve decreases at a higher 
rate.  
Stiffness degradation of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded at the same 
displacement and stiffness degradation of the connections when displacement was increased 
is evident in Figure 3.26, Figure 3.27 and Figure 3.28. The reducing slope of each of the 
backbone curves shows stiffness reduction as displacement is increased. The difference 
between the 1st and 3rd cycle backbone curves increases as displacement increases to that at 
maximum tensile strength as the slope of the 3rd cycle backbone curve decreases at a higher 
rate than the slope of the 1st cycle backbone curve.  This indicates that the reduction in 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
stiffness between the first and third cycle becomes larger as displacement is increased until 
maximum tensile strength.  
It can be seen in Figure 3.26, Figure 3.27 and Figure 3.28 that a compressive force has been 
applied to the connections despite the cyclic tests being tension only. This is because the 
loading procedure is displacement based (refer to Figure 3.13) and therefore at the end of 
the positive cycles a compressive force was needed to return the connection to the initial 
position (displacement of 0 mm). In a CLT building, the wall systems would be subjected to a 
vertical load due to gravity load. Consequently, it is likely that in reality CLT connections 
would be returned to their initial positive after the lateral load the building is subjected to is 
removed, as the vertical load acting of the wall system will provide the restoring force. Thus, 
applying a compressive force to the connections in the cyclic tension tests to return the 
connection to its initial position is not dissimilar to the real behaviour. The compressive force 
required to return the connection to its initial position at the end of a positive cycle increases 
as the displacement of the cycles increases and this is because the plastic deformation of the 
connection becomes more significant. 
Figure 3.26: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 4 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.27: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 5 
Figure 3.28: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Simpson 
Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 6 
Figure 3.29 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 4, Configuration 5 and 
Configuration 6. It can be seen from Figure 3.29 that maximum tensile strength is greatest 
for Configuration 4 and lowest for Configuration 5. Therefore, it can be concluded that the 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
use of screws in the angle bracket connection had a greater influence on maximum tensile 
strength than the maximum shear strength, as Table 3.2 indicated minimal difference 
between the maximum shear strength of Configuration 2 and Configuration 3.  It is evident 
from the shape of the hysteresis loops for Configurations 4-6 that the use of screws in 
addition to nails changes cyclic behaviour of the connection. The hysteresis loops of the two 
connections which used nails only (Configuration 4 and Configuration 5) have similar shapes, 
whereas the hysteresis loops of the connection with used two screws to replace two nails 
(Configuration 6) has a different shape which does not plateau towards the end of the test. 
It can be seen in Figure 3.29 that energy dissipation over the entire test is greatest for 
Configuration 4 and lowest for Configuration 5, as Configuration 4 has the largest area 
enclosed by the hysteresis loops and Configuration 5 the lowest. This demonstrates that 
increasing the number of fasteners increases energy dissipation of the connection when 
loaded to failure in tension as Configuration 4 was fully fastened with nails and Configuration 
5 two-thirds fastened with nails. The area enclosed by the hysteresis loops for Configuration 
6 is greater than that for Configuration 5, indicating that the use of screws also increases 
energy dissipation of the connection when loaded in tension to failure. The equivalent 
viscous damping ratios presented in Table 3.3 provide a numerical comparison of energy 
dissipation by considering the energy dissipation at maximum tensile strength. 
Figure 3.29: Typical hysteresis loops for Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket 
connections tested under tension loading 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Simpson Strong-Tie angle brackets tested 
under cyclic loading in tension (Configuration 4, Configuration 5 and Configuration 6) are 
summarised in Table 3.3. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are reported for 
each property. Figure 3.30 illustrates the important average properties of these connections 
as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from the 
experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration. 
Table 3.3: Average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket connections 
determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension direction in 
accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Configuration 
4   5   6 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 18.47 5.64  11.40 21.36  16.15 4.17 
Vy [mm] 7.03 7.01  4.72 30.44  6.07 6.24 
Fmax [kN] 19.46 4.83  12.70 20.33  18.75 1.38 
Vmax [mm] 9.57 14.25  8.45 27.84  13.30 16.77 
Fu [kN] 15.57 4.83  10.16 20.33  15.00 1.38 
Vu [mm] 15.72 17.03  12.51 32.63  16.84 8.91 
kel [kN/mm] 2.63 7.59  2.37 10.67  2.52 1.94 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.44 7.59  0.40 10.67  0.42 1.94 
D [-] 2.23 13.91  2.64 4.27  2.79 14.50 
F1-3  [%] 7.15 12.66  8.36 17.99  9.37 34.26 
eq (1st)  [%] 7.18 34.46  9.78 20.47  8.99 18.05 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.79 16.82  2.11 28.89  2.91 28.11 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.30: Comparison of the average properties of Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle 
bracket connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
the first cycle (eq(1st)) 
As previously described, Configurations 4-6 failed primarily due to failure of the fasteners, 
with bending and withdrawal of the fasteners observed. Configuration 5 and Configuration 6 
have approximately two-thirds of the number of fasteners used in Configuration 4 (refer to 
Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). Therefore, these two configurations would be expected to have 
lower combined lateral load-carrying capacity and withdrawal capacity of the fasteners and 
exhibit lower maximum tensile strength (Fmax) than Configuration 4. As shown in Table 3.3 
and Figure 3.30(b), this was experimentally observed and the maximum tensile strength is 
higher for Configuration 4 than Configurations 5 and 6.  However, while the maximum tensile 
strength of Configuration 5 was 35% lower than that of Configuration 4, there is a relatively 
small difference of 4% between the maximum tensile strength of Configuration 6 and 
Configuration 4. Similarly, Configuration 5 and Configuration 6 would be expected to exhibit 
lower yield tensile strength (Fy) than Configuration 4 and this was also observed 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
experimentally as shown in Table 3.3 and Figure 3.30(a). Again, the yield tensile strength of 
Configuration 6 is greater than that of Configuration 5 with the yield tensile strength of 
Configuration 5 being 38% lower than that of Configuration 4 and the yield tensile strength 
Configuration 6 being 13% lower. Like with Configuration 3, Configuration 6 replaces two 
nails used in Configuration 5 with screws (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). The inclusion of 
screws within the connection did not influence the maximum shear strength of the 
connection, however it can be seen that the use of screws has increased the yield and 
maximum tensile strength. This increase in yield and maximum tensile strength is likely due 
to the screws having higher withdrawal resistance than the annular ring nails. 
The use of screws also increases the elastic and plastic stiffness (kel and kpl) of the connection 
with higher elastic and plastic stiffness observed for Configuration 6 than Configuration 5. 
Comparing the configurations using nails only, increasing the number of nails increases the 
elastic and plastic stiffness of the connection with higher elastic and plastic stiffness observed 
for Configuration 4 than Configuration 5. While similar to the results of Configurations 1-3 in 
which increasing the number of nails or using screws was also observed to increase the elastic 
and plastic shear stiffness, the increase in the elastic and plastic tensile stiffness was less 
apparent for Configurations 4-6. Angle brackets are typically used within CLT buildings to 
resist sliding of the wall only, with overturning resistance provided by the hold downs. 
Therefore, in the design of CLT buildings angle bracket connections are considered to have 
shear strength only. However, Table 3.3 shows that angle bracket connections have notable 
tensile strength and stiffness and this strength and stiffness should be considered in the 
design of CLT buildings as the angle brackets will contribute to overturning resistance as well 
as sliding resistance. 
Although the ductility ratio (D) determined from the cyclic testing of the angle bracket 
connections under cyclic loading in shear was approximately doubled by replacing two nails 
(Configuration 2) with screws (Configuration 3), this did not occur when the connections 
were tested under cyclic loading in tension. A smaller increase in ductility ratio of 6% was 
seen by replacing two nails (Configuration 5) with screws (Configuration 6). Increasing the 
number of nails increased the ductility of the connection when tested under shear loading, 
however when tested under tensile loading, it can be seen from Table 3.3 that the fully nailed 
angle bracket connection (Configuration 4) has lower ductility than the partially nailed angle 
bracket connection (Configuration 5). 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
The equivalent viscous damping ratios (eq (1st) and eq (3rd)) given in Table 3.3 and illustrated 
in Figure 3.30(f) show that the equivalent viscous damping ratios are higher for the 
configurations which are two-thirds fastened (Configuration 5 and Configuration 6) than the 
configuration which is fully fastened (Configuration 4). This suggests that reducing the 
number of fasteners results in greater energy dissipation. It can be seen from Table 3.3 that 
the equivalent viscous damping ratio for the third cycle (eq (3rd)) is 67-78% lower than 
equivalent viscous damping ratio for the first cycle (eq (1st)). This is due to the strength and 
stiffness degradation observed in Figure 3.26, Figure 3.27 and Figure 3.28. From Table 3.3 
and Figure 3.30(e), it is evident that decreasing number of fasteners and the use of screws 
increases the impairment of strength (F1-3) exhibited when the connection is loaded under 
cyclic loading in tension, as Configuration 4 has the lowest impairment of strength and 
Configuration 6 the highest. Like with Configurations 1-3, coefficients of variation are 
generally higher for the average values of equivalent viscous damping ratio and impairment 
of strength as there is variation in the failure cycles across test specimens. There was 
however less variation in this with Configurations 4-6 than with Configurations 1-3 leading to 
less extreme coefficient of variation values.  
In summary, for angle bracket connections subject to tension, increasing the number of nails 
increases strength and stiffness of the connections. Although, unlike angle bracket 
connections subject to shear, increasing the number of nails does not increase ductility. An 
increased number of fasteners leads to increased energy dissipation, evident by the higher 
equivalent viscous damping ratio, and it also decreases impairment of strength under 
repeated loading. In a partially fastened angle bracket connection subject to tension, 
replacing two nails with screws increases tensile strength, stiffness and ductility. However, it 
also leads to greater impairment of strength under repeated loading. As angle brackets are 
primarily used for shear resistance, the tensile properties of the connection are beneficial 
but of secondary importance. When discussing the results of the angle bracket connections 
tested under shear loading, it was suggested that Configuration 1 was the optimum 
configuration for angle bracket connections to resist shear forces in a CLT building subject to 
low lateral loads only. Configuration 1 uses the same connector type and fastener 
arrangement as Configuration 4 and so they are essentially the same connection but the 
loaded in perpendicular directions, leading to two separate configurations. It was also 
suggested that Configuration 3 was the optimum configuration an angle bracket connection 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
to resist shear forces in a CLT building subject to high lateral loads. Similar to Configuration 1 
and Configuration 4, Configuration 3 uses the same connector type and fastener 
arrangement as Configuration 6 and so they are essentially the same connection but the 
loaded in perpendicular directions, leading to two separate configurations. Therefore, if 
Configuration 1 were to be used in a CLT building to resist low shear forces, it could also 
provide the tensile properties of Configuration 4, and if Configuration 3 were to be used in a 
CLT building to resist high shear forces, it could also provide the tensile properties of 
Configuration 6. 
3.5.2. Hold down connections 
Two types of hold downs were used in this experimental study, the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
down and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down, with the length of the hold downs 620 mm and 
340 mm, respectively. The results of the testing of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections under shear and tension 
loading will firstly be presented to provide an assessment of fastener arrangement on the 
properties of the connection. Subsequently, the influence of hold down length will be 
discussed.  
 Fastener arrangement 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
Configuration 7, Configuration 8 and Configuration 9 used Rothoblaas WHT620 hold downs 
and were tested under cyclic loading in shear.  Configuration 7 was fully fastened using nails, 
Configuration 8 was two-thirds fastened using nails and Configuration 9 was one-third 
fastened using nails (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.4). Typical failure of Configuration 7 is 
shown in Figure 3.31 and typical failure of Configurations 8 and 9 is shown in Figure 3.32. 
Configurations 7-9 failed due to the bending and withdrawal of the nails closest to the base 
of the hold down, ultimately leading to the tearing of the nail heads of those nails in the first 
row from the base of the hold down. Twisting and local buckling of the hold down was 
observed in all three configurations and in one test specimen for Configuration 7 tearing of 
the hold down at the first row of nails was observed as shown in Figure 3.31(b).  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.31: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 7 without tearing of hold down; (b) 
Configuration 7 with tearing of the hold down at the first row of nails 
Figure 3.32: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 8; (b) Configuration 9 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.33, Figure 3.34 and Figure 3.35 for 
Configuration 7, Configuration 8 and Configuration 9, respectively. Strength degradation of 
the connections when they were repeatedly loaded to the same displacement is apparent in 
Figure 3.33, Figure 3.34 and Figure 3.35. This is indicated by the difference between the 1st 
(a) (b) 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
cycle backbone curves and 3rd cycle backbone curves. Strength degradation when the 
configurations were repeatedly loaded to the same displacement is most significant for 
Configuration 8. This is demonstrated by the larger difference between the 1st and 3rd cycle 
backbone curves in Figure 3.35 compared to difference between the 1st and 3rd cycle 
backbone curves in Figure 3.33 and Figure 3.34. Strength degradation due to increasing 
displacement is negligible as all three configurations experienced brittle failure soon after 
maximum shear strength had been reached and therefore there is no downwards slope in 
any backbone curve. 
Stiffness degradation due to increasing displacement isnt as apparent for Configurations 7-
9 as it was for Configurations 1-6. In all three configurations, when the first 5 kN of load was 
applied to each configuration, the stiffness was initially high as the load was applied. 
Following the initially high stiffness, the stiffness decreased as the next 1-2 kN of load was 
applied, as illustrated by the reduction in slope of the backbone curves, before returning to 
a similar stiffness to the initial stiffness. The stiffness then begins to reduce closer to the 
maximum shear strength, with Configuration 9 showing the greatest reduction in slope. 
Stiffness degradation of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded to the same 
displacement is evident, particularly in Figure 3.34 where the slope of the 2nd and 3rd cycle 
backbone curves decreased more significantly than that of the 1st cycle backbone when the 
load approached the maximum value.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.33: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 7 
Figure 3.34: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 8 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.35: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 9 
Figure 3.36 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 7, Configuration 8 and 
Configuration 9. It can be seen from Figure 3.36 that for the final set of three cycles before 
maximum strength and failure occurred, Configuration 8 had higher strength in the first cycle 
compared to Configuration 9. However, the maximum shear strength of Configuration 8 was 
lower than that of Configuration 9. This can be explained by the greater strength degradation 
of Configuration 8 when repeatedly loaded to the same displacement in the final set of three 
cycles compared to the strength degradation seen in Configuration 9. It can be seen that the 
area enclosed by the hysteresis loops until maximum shear strength was reached is largest 
for Configuration 8 and therefore energy dissipated while the connections undergo cyclic 
loading in shear is the highest for this configuration.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.36: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections tested 
under shear loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections 
tested under cyclic loading in shear (Configuration 7, Configuration 8 and Configuration 9) 
are summarised in Table 3.4. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are reported 
for each property. Figure 3.37 illustrates the important average properties of these 
connections as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from 
the experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.4: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections determined 
from experimental tests under cyclic shear loading in accordance with BS EN 12512  
Property 
Configuration 
7   8   9 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 26.43 7.40  21.00 6.06  21.13 15.65 
Vy [mm] 55.07 10.44  50.65 9.35  50.03 12.48 
Fmax [kN] 28.41 8.81  21.36 5.13  23.12 16.90 
Vmax [mm] 80.02 14.18  56.18 4.59  69.24 34.66 
Fu [kN] 15.39 54.75  17.87 14.47  20.67 17.18 
Vu [mm] 63.54 10.18  108.76 2.42  82.32 20.26 
kel [kN/mm] 0.51 2.37  0.42 5.98  0.41 11.85 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.09 2.37  0.07 5.98  0.07 11.85 
-Fy [kN] -16.90 28.22  -24.35 -4.35  -19.70 -4.84 
-Vy [mm] -29.70 -49.05  -53.40 -12.18  -43.63 -12.95 
-Fmax [kN] -19.71 -27.60  -24.58 -2.99  -22.63 -8.52 
-Vmax [mm] -58.67 -43.30  -57.89 -0.27  -50.00 0.00 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.62 29.04  0.46 2.78  0.44 22.95 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.10 29.04  0.08 2.78  0.07 22.95 
F30 [kN] 13.85 5.88  12.75 8.25  13.17 13.44 
D [-] 1.95 58.08  2.16 11.76  1.65 17.09 
D30 [-] 0.55 9.85  0.59 9.35  0.61 12.12 
F1-3  [%] 10.39 76.91  54.14 16.00  20.40 62.28 
-F1-3  [%] 22.18 61.60  30.00 34.87  8.42 10.95 
eq (1st)  [%] 17.92 11.35  20.58 8.72  17.47 10.25 
eq (3rd)  [%] 14.82 14.85  14.88 11.55  13.75 29.32 
-eq (1st)  [%] 16.40 6.27  19.94 0.28  17.98 6.96 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 14.08 9.29  10.26 0.66  11.37 16.96 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.37: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
(D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
(eq(1st)) 
As previously described, Configurations 7-9 failed due to the bending and withdrawal of the 
nails closest to the bottom of the hold down, ultimately leading to the tearing of nail heads 
with twisting of the hold down also observed. The strength results in Table 3.4 suggest 
asymmetry in the hysteresis loops for all configurations, with Configuration 7 appearing to 
have the greatest asymmetry. The asymmetry in maximum shear strength (Fmax) for 
Configuration 7 can be explained by Figure 3.33 which shows no strength degradation as 
displacement increased, leading to a brittle failure whereby maximum shear strength 
occurred in the same positive cycle as failure. Hence, the maximum load achieved for the 
positive side of the hysteresis loops is higher than the maximum load achieved for the 
negative side of the hysteresis loops. This also explains the asymmetry in the yield strength 
(Fy) given in Table 3.4 as the yield strength for each side of the cycle is determined using the 
maximum strength of that side as per BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) (see Figure 3.14). The 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
asymmetry in maximum shear strength (Fmax) for Configuration 9, although less significant 
that than in Configuration 7, can also be explained by this (see Figure 3.35). The values for 
the maximum strength and yield strength of Configuration 8 show that the average strength 
values of Configuration 8 were greater on the negative side of the hysteresis loops. Unlike 
Configuration 7 and Configuration 9, for Configuration 8 maximum strength and failure did 
not occur in the same cycle, nor did they occur in the same side of the hysteresis loops. 
Therefore, the asymmetry in Configuration 8 cannot be explained in the same way as the 
asymmetry of Configurations 7 and 9. The asymmetry in Configuration 8 is possibility due to 
variability in the connections potentially caused by material defects.  
As maximum strength and failure for almost all test specimens occurred on the positive side 
of the hysteresis loops, the average properties determined from this side of the hysteresis 
loops will be subsequently discussed. Figure 3.36 would suggest that Configuration 9 has 
higher maximum shear strength (Fmax) than Configuration 7, however Table 3.4 and Figure 
3.37(b) shows that this is not the case when taking into account all three test specimens for 
each configuration. Instead, it can be seen from Table 3.4 and Figure 3.37(b) that 
Configuration 7 has the highest average maximum shear strength as well as highest average 
yield shear strength (Fy) of all three configurations. While the higher yield and maximum 
strength of Configuration 7 is due to the increased number of nails, given that this is the only 
difference between the three configurations, it cannot be concluded that increasing the 
number of nails increases strength in all cases. This is because despite Configuration 9 having 
half the number of nails of Configuration 8, Configuration 9 demonstrated comparable 
average yield strength and higher average maximum strength than Configuration 8. Although 
it should be noted that the range of results for Configuration 9 was greater than that for 
Configuration 8 as shown in Figure 3.37(a) and Figure 3.37(b). This could be due to the more 
significant local buckling of the hold down between the first and second row of nails from 
the base in Configuration 8 (Figure 3.32(a)) compared to the local buckling of the hold down 
observed in Configuration 9 (Figure 3.32(b)).  
BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) provides the only widely accepted European procedure for assessing 
the properties of timber connections under cyclic loading, however the standard is not 
specific to these types of connections. BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005) states that ultimate load (Fu) 
corresponds to the load at whichever of the following occurs first: failure, a displacement of 
30 mm, or 80% of the maximum load if the displacement is less than 30 mm. As can be seen 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
in Table 3.4, the displacement corresponding to yield strength (Vy) for Configuration 7, 
Configuration 8 and Configuration 9 are greater than 30 mm, with 50.03 mm the minimum 
displacement corresponding to yield strength. Therefore, the connections had not yet 
reached their yield load by the time the connection had reached the ultimate load defined 
by BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005). Therefore, to give a realistic representation of the strength 
properties of the connections, it is suggested that ultimate load is given as the load 
corresponding to failure, if failure occurs, and the load corresponding to a displacement of 
30 mm (F30) is reported separately.  
Similar to strength, the elastic and plastic stiffness is greatest for Configuration 7, with 
minimal difference between the elastic and plastic stiffness (kel and kpl) of Configuration 8 
and Configuration 9 (see Table 3.4 and Figure 3.37(c)).  Table 3.4 and Figure 3.37(d) suggest 
that Configuration 8 has the highest ductility ratio (D). The ductility ratio was calculated as 
the ratio between the displacement at failure (Vu) and the displacement at the yield load (Vy) 
(see Eq. 3.1). It can be seen from Table 3.4 that the average displacement at failure (Vu) for 
Configuration 7 was less than that for the average displacement at the maximum load (Vmax). 
While Figure 3.33 shows a brittle failure during the positive side of the 12th cycle for 
Configuration 7, this is Test Specimen 3 of Configuration 7, only one of the three test 
specimens. Maximum strength and failure also occurred in the 12th cycle for Test Specimen 
2 of Configuration 7, although they did not both occur on the positive side of the cycle as 
shown in Figure 3.38(b). Instead, for Test Specimen 2, maximum strength occurred on the 
positive side of the 12th cycle with failure occurring at a lower displacement on the negative 
side of the 12th cycle. Like with Test Specimen 2 and Test Specimen 3, Test Specimen 1 
reached maximum strength in the 12th cycle, however it did not fail until the 15th cycle and 
the displacement at failure was less than the displacement at maximum strength, as shown 
in Figure 3.38(c). As failure in two of the three test specimens occurred at a displacement 
less that the displacement at maximum strength, the average value for the displacement at 
failure in Table 3.4 is less that the average displacement at maximum strength, leading to 
lower average ductility than Figure 3.33 suggests and a high coefficient of variation. This 
highlights the limitation of providing an average value for the properties determined using 
the procedure for analysis outlined in BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005), as the average assumes similar 
behaviour for all test specimens and provides no explanation for the cause of variability. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.38: Hysteresis loops of all test specimens for Configuration 7: (a) Test specimen 1; 
(b) Test specimen 2; (c) Test specimen 3 
As illustrated in Figure 3.36, Configuration 8 had the greatest energy dissipation leading to 
the highest equivalent viscous damping ratios (eq (1st) and eq (3rd)) as shown in Table 3.4 and 
Figure 3.37. Configuration 8 experienced much greater impairment of strength than 
Configurations 7 and 9. Therefore, there is no trend between the number of nails and energy 
dissipation. The impairment of strength of Configuration 7 and Configuration 9 were 81% and 
62%, respectively, lower than that of Configuration 8.  
Configuration 10, Configuration 11 and Configuration 12 used Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
downs and were tested under cyclic loading in tension. Configuration 10 was fully fastened 
using nails, Configuration 11 was two-thirds fastened using nails and Configuration 12 was 
one-third fastened using nails (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.4).  Figure 3.39(a) shows the 
typical failure observed for Configuration 10, while Figure 3.39(b) shows the typical failure 
observed for Configuration 11. Failure of Configuration 10 and Configuration 11 was due to 
the brittle tension failure of the hold down plate at the net section where the first row of 
nails from the base of the bracket are located. This failure was sudden and no necking of the 
steel was observed prior to failure. Figure 3.40 shows the typical failure for Configuration 12 
which failed due to the bending of the nails followed by the tearing of the nail heads.  
(a) (b) (c) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.39: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the tension direction: (a) Configuration 10; (b) Configuration 11 
Figure 3.40: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the tension direction: Configuration 12 
(b) (a) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
No visible damage of the CLT floor panel was observed during the testing of these 
configurations under cyclic loading in tension. Although, when testing Configuration 10 and 
Configuration 11 under monotonic loading in tension, the connection failed due to the brittle 
shear and bending failure of the CLT floor panel as shown in Figure 3.41. In reality, the floor 
panel is unlikely to fail in this way as there would be another hold down connection 
connecting the floor panel to the CLT wall panel below as shown in Figure 2.8. 
Figure 3.41: Failure of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections under monotonic loading 
in the tension direction: (a) back of connection; (b) front of connection 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.42, Figure 3.43 and Figure 3.44 for 
Configuration 10, Configuration 11 and Configuration 12, respectively. Despite the different 
ultimate failure mechanisms observed for Configurations 10 and 11 (tension failure of the 
hold down plate at the net section) and Configuration 12 (tearing of nail heads), it can be 
seen from Figure 3.42, Figure 3.43 and Figure 3.44 that failure was brittle for all three 
configurations. Strength degradation due to repeated loading at the same displacement is 
not significant for Configuration 11 and Configuration 12, with minimal difference between 
the 1st cycle and 3rd cycle backbone curves for these configurations at the final set of three 
cycle. Configuration 10 exhibited more significant strength degradation due to repeated 
loading at the same displacement during the test, although the backbone curves appear to 
converge towards the end of the test like with Configuration 5 (Figure 3.27) and 
(b) (a) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Configuration 6 (Figure 3.28). Strength degradation due to increasing displacement is 
negligible as all three configurations experienced brittle failure soon after maximum shear 
strength had been reached and therefore there no downwards slope in any backbone curve 
exists.  
Stiffness degradation due to repeated loading at the same displacement is not as apparent 
for Configuration 11 and Configuration 12 as there is minimal difference between the three 
backbone curves for each test. It also appears that stiffness degradation due to repeated 
loading at the same displacement did not occur for Configuration 10 as the slope of the 1st 
cycle backbone curve reduces at a higher rate than that of the 2nd and 3rd cycle backbone 
curves. However, stiffness degradation due to increasing displacement is evident for all 
configurations with the slope of the backbone curves reducing until maximum tensile 
strength was reached.  
Figure 3.42: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 10 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.43: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 11 
Figure 3.44: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 12 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.45 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 10, Configuration 11 and 
Configuration 12. It can be seen from Figure 3.45 that Configuration 10 had the highest 
maximum tensile strength and Configuration 12 the lowest, although the maximum tensile 
strength of Configuration 11 is relatively similar to that of Configuration 10. This is expected 
as the same failure mechanism was observed for these two configurations. Despite having 
similar maximum tensile strength, Configuration 10 had much greater energy dissipation 
than Configuration 11, as shown by the larger area enclosed by the hysteresis loops of 
Configuration 10 than the hysteresis loops of Configuration 11. 
Figure 3.45: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections tested 
under tension loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections 
tested under cyclic loading in tension (Configuration 10, Configuration 11 and Configuration 
12) are summarised in Table 3.5. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are 
reported for each property. Figure 3.46 illustrates the important average properties of these 
connections as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from 
the experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.5: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections determined 
from experimental tests under tension loading in accordance with BS EN 12512  
Property 
Configuration 
10   11   12 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 82.43 0.62  80.73 1.79  72.10 8.02 
Vy [mm] 17.90 5.33  20.40 4.90  20.17 6.47 
Fmax [kN] 92.59 0.53  89.63 0.76  76.80 8.05 
Vmax [mm] 33.56 2.37  34.92 5.88  28.41 3.15 
Fu [kN] 91.11 1.27  88.05 1.04  68.56 12.48 
Vu [mm] 33.96 2.06  35.69 5.44  29.38 3.09 
kel [kN/mm] 4.71 3.33  4.04 1.11  3.59 5.97 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.79 3.33  0.67 1.11  0.60 5.97 
F30 [kN] 86.89 0.84  86.81 0.93  - - 
D [-] 1.90 4.38  1.75 9.24  1.46 8.63 
D30 [-] 1.68 5.50  1.47 4.91  - - 
F1-3  [%] 4.41 5.32  3.05 10.48  3.74 16.69 
eq (1st) [%] 6.18 0.55  2.45 1.57  2.50 9.81 
eq (3rd) [%] 1.29 1.63  0.99 3.71  1.06 16.67 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.46: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
(D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
(eq(1st)) 
Configuration 10 and Configuration 11 failed due to the tension failure of the hold down at 
the net section where the first row of nails from the base of the bracket is located, and this 
failure occurred shortly after the maximum tensile strength (Fmax) was reached. As the failure 
mechanism for Configuration 10 and Configuration 11 was the same, these Configurations 
had similar yield, maximum and ultimate tensile strengths (Fy, Fmax and Fu) as shown in Table 
3.5 and Figure 3.46. Configuration 12 had lower yield, maximum and ultimate tensile strength 
than Configurations 10 and 11 which is expected given that the failure of Configuration 12 
was due to tearing of the nail heads instead of the tensile failure of the hold down. Therefore, 
it can be concluded that the number of nails used to fasten the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
down to the CLT wall panel increases the tensile strength of the connection when the number 
of nails is less than two-thirds of the total number which can be used. However, beyond this 
the number of nails has no effect on the tensile strength of the connection as the lateral load-
carrying capacity of the fasteners exceeds the tensile strength of the hold down. The number 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
of nails does however influence the stiffness of the connection, with the elastic and plastic 
stiffness (kel and kpl) of Configuration 10 the highest and the elastic and plastic stiffness of 
Configuration 12 the lowest (refer to Table 3.5 and Figure 3.46(c)). 
 The number of nails also affects the ductility of the connection, with Configuration 10 having 
the highest ductility ratio and Configuration 12 the lowest as shown in Table 3.5 and Figure 
3.46(d). The properties which are most significantly influenced by the number of nails are the 
equivalent viscous damping ratios (eq (1st) and eq (3rd)). The equivalent viscous damping ratio 
of the first cycle (eq (1st)) is similar for Configuration 11 and Configuration 12 with a 0.05% 
difference, however the equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle (eq (1st)) for 
Configuration 10 is approximately 2.5 times that of Configurations 11 and 12. This indicates 
that Configuration 10 is capable of substantially greater energy dissipation than 
Configuration 11 and Configuration 12, as was previously indicated by the areas enclosed by 
the hysteresis loops shown in Figure 3.45. The impairment of strength (F1-3) of all three 
configurations is relatively small compared to that other Configurations 1-9. Comparing the 
impairment of strength of Configurations 10-12, Configuration 10 which has the highest 
ductility and equivalent viscous damping ratio also has the highest impairment of strength as 
shown in Table 3.5 and Figure 3.45(e). Despite having the lowest viscous damping ratio and 
ductility, Configuration 12 demonstrated higher impairment of strength than Configuration 
In summary, for Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections subject to tension, increasing 
the number of nails increases strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation of the 
connections. However, using too many nails and the manufacturers recommended washer 
can lead to the undesirable brittle failure of the hold down plate at the net section where the 
first row of nails from the base of the bracket are located.  The use of a washer appears to 
lead to the overdesign of the connection preventing failure of the fasteners, however without 
the washer the connection may fail due to the pull-through of the bolt, as described in 
Section 3.3.2.2. It is unlikely that ductile failure of the fasteners can be achieved with the 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections if the hold down is more than two-thirds 
fastened as the combined lateral load-carrying capacity of the nails exceeds the tensile 
strength of the hold down plate. Therefore, reducing the thickness of the washer to prevent 
failure of the hold down plate is likely to result in the washer being too thin to prevent pull-
through of the bolt, or too thick that tension failure of the hold down plate occurs. Although 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
it is unlikely that brittle failure of the connection can be avoided, Configuration 10 exhibits 
suitable properties suitable for CLT buildings subject to high lateral loading as this 
configuration has high strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation. It would be 
suitable for use in storeys which would experience high uplift under lateral loading. Hold 
downs are typically used within CLT buildings to resist overturning of the wall only, with shear 
resistance provided by the angle brackets. Therefore, in the design of CLT buildings hold 
down connections are considered to have tensile strength only. While the shear strength of 
a Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections is less than the tensile strength of the 
connection, these hold down connections have notable shear strength and stiffness. 
Consequently, this shear strength and stiffness should be considered in the design of CLT 
buildings as the hold downs will contribute to sliding resistance as well as overturning 
resistance. In general, the shear strength of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections 
is greater than the shear strength of the angle bracket connections tested within this study, 
although, the stiffness of these hold down connections is less than the stiffness of the angle 
bracket connections (Table 3.2 and Table 3.4). Consequently, angle brackets are still an 
important means of providing shear resistance in CLT buildings as sliding of wall using hold 
down connections for shear resistance only would be considerably greater than if angle 
brackets were used, leading to greater lateral displacements.  
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
Configuration 13, Configuration 14 and Configuration 15 used Rothoblaas WHT340 hold 
downs and were tested under cyclic loading in shear. Configuration 13 was fully fastened 
using nails, Configuration 14 was two-thirds fastened using nails and Configuration 15 was 
one-third fastened using nails (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.6). Configuration 13 and 
Configuration 14 failed in the same manner due to the bending and withdrawal of the nails, 
with twisting and local buckling of the hold down also observed as shown in Figure 3.47(a). 
Configuration 15 failed due to bending and withdrawal of nails ultimately leading to the 
tearing of nail heads, starting with those nails in the first row from the base of the hold down, 
as shown in Figure 3.47(b). While local buckling of the hold down occurred in Configuration 
15, it was not as significant as that observed in Configuration 13 and Configuration 14. 
Twisting of the hold down was observed in Configuration 15. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.47: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 13; (b) Configuration 15 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.48, Figure 3.49 and Figure 3.50 for 
Configuration 13, Configuration 14 and Configuration 15, respectively. Strength degradation 
of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded to the same displacement can be seen 
in Figure 3.48, Figure 3.49 and Figure 3.50. This is shown by the difference between the 1st 
cycle backbone curves and 3rd cycle backbone curves, as lower load was required to achieve 
the same displacement in the third cycle compared to the first cycle. Similar to the 
Rothoblaas WHT620 connections tested under shear loading (Configuration 7-9), strength 
degradation due to increasing displacement is not significant for Configuration 13 or 
Configuration 14. This is because Configuration 13 and Configuration 14 experienced brittle 
failure soon after maximum shear strength had been reached and therefore there is no 
downwards slope of the backbone curves. There is a slight downwards slope of the positive 
side of the 1st cycle backbone curve for Configuration 15, although failure occurred soon 
afterwards on the negative side of the cycle and failure was brittle with no evident strength 
degradation.  
Stiffness degradation of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded at the same 
displacement and stiffness degradation of the connections when displacement was increased 
is evident in Figure 3.48, Figure 3.49 and Figure 3.50. The reducing slope of each of the 
backbone curves shows stiffness reduction as displacement is increased. The difference 
between the 1st and 3rd cycle backbone curves increases as displacement increases because 
the slope of the 3rd cycle backbone curve reduces at a higher rate than the slope of the 1st 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
cycle backbone curve. This indicates stiffness degradation of the connections when they were 
repeatedly loaded at the same displacement. 
Figure 3.48: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 13 
Figure 3.49: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 14 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.50: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under shear loading: Configuration 15 
Figure 3.51 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 13, Configuration 14 and 
Configuration 15. It can be seen from Figure 3.51 that Configuration 13 had the highest 
maximum shear strength on the positive side of the hysteresis loop and Configuration 15 the 
lowest. Given that the energy dissipation is represented by the area enclosed by the 
hysteresis loops, it appears that Configuration 13 has the higher energy dissipation, followed 
by Configuration 14 and then Configuration 15 having the lowest.  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.51: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections tested 
under shear loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections 
tested under cyclic loading in shear (Configuration 13, Configuration 14 and Configuration 
15) are summarised in Table 3.6. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are 
reported for each property. Figure 3.52 illustrates the important average properties of these 
connections as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from 
the experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.6: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections determined 
from experimental tests under cyclic shear loading in accordance with BS EN 12512  
Property 
Configuration 
13   14   15 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 7.52 27.46  8.14 7.18  7.45 7.79 
Vy [mm] 26.27 29.90  25.87 36.83  35.93 34.70 
Fmax [kN] 10.29 24.53  9.50 19.68  8.81 6.84 
Vmax [mm] 58.70 33.22  57.21 21.02  62.43 18.82 
Fu [kN] 11.07 36.76  8.66 15.55  8.41 10.53 
Vu [mm] 58.10 26.83  67.21 42.83  56.26 3.37 
kel [kN/mm] 0.28 9.52  0.33 40.82  0.21 21.00 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.05 9.52  0.06 40.82  0.03 21.00 
-Fy [kN] -8.60 -23.84  -8.82 -20.13  -7.92 -7.56 
-Vy [mm] -32.90 -2.58  -29.50 -14.93  -36.07 -5.88 
-Fmax [kN] -8.93 -16.39  -9.72 -29.46  -8.76 -5.22 
-Vmax [mm] -39.00 0.00  -45.37 -39.59  -59.69 -14.64 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.24 23.84  0.30 21.49  0.22 12.46 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.04 23.84  0.05 21.49  0.04 12.46 
F30 [kN] 6.44 25.91  7.04 19.26  5.85 24.14 
D [-] 1.85 24.16  1.64 21.72  1.60 2.66 
D30 [-] 1.23 36.13  1.30 45.50  0.90 32.10 
F1-3 [%] 9.54 4.88  19.61 113.53  19.66 48.85 
-F1-3 [%] 6.20 66.69  15.31 98.26  11.07 39.37 
eq (1st) [%] 16.30 7.78  15.59 28.94  14.80 14.58 
eq (3rd) [%] 14.71 7.00  12.31 10.16  10.54 13.00 
-eq (1st) [%] 17.08 3.21  16.29 10.36  16.55 26.74 
-eq (3rd) [%] 12.18 4.68  11.93 11.56  10.71 9.41 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.52: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the shear direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
(D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
(eq(1st)) 
The properties of Configurations 13-15 have been reported for both the positive and negative 
sides of the hysteresis loops as per BS EN 12512 (BSI, 2005). Like with Configurations 7-9, 
asymmetry between the strength values (Fy and Fmax) for each side of the hysteresis loops of 
Configuration 13 can be seen in Table 3.6. As explained previously with regard to 
Configurations 7 and 9, asymmetry may due to brittle failure mechanisms whereby maximum 
shear strength and failure occur in the same cycle. This explains the asymmetry for 
Configuration 13 and it led to a higher maximum strength for the positive side of the 
hysteresis loops compared to the maximum strength achieved for the negative side of the 
hysteresis loops. The positive and negative strength values (Fy and Fmax) of Configuration 14 
and Configuration 15 are comparatively similar. As strength values from both sides of the 
hysteresis loops for Configuration 14 and Configuration 15 are similar, and the positive 
strength values for Configuration 13 provide absolute maximum strength, the average 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
properties determined from the positive cycle will be subsequently discussed. It can be seen 
from Table 3.6 and Figure 3.52(b) that maximum shear strength (Fmax) is highest for 
Configuration 13 and lowest for Configuration 15. This suggests that increasing the number 
of nails increases maximum shear strength of the connection. Although, this is not true for 
the yield strength (Fy) of the connections as Configuration 14 has the highest yield strength 
and Configuration 15 the lowest (see Table 3.5 and Figure 3.52(a)).  
The trend in stiffness of the configurations is similar to the yield strength of the 
configurations in that the elastic and plastic stiffness (kel and kpl) is greatest for Configuration 
14, as illustrated in Figure 3.52(c). Like maximum shear strength, it appears that ductility ratio 
(D) and equivalent viscous damping ratios (eq (1st)  and eq (3rd)) are dependent on the number 
of fasteners with ductility and equivalent viscous damping ratios highest for Configuration 13 
and lowest for Configuration 15 (refer to Table 3.5, Figure 3.52(d) Figure 3.52(f)). The average 
impairment of strength (F1-3) for Configuration 13 is approximately half of that for 
Configurations 14 and 15. While the average impairment of strength of 9.5% for 
Configuration 13 is reasonably reliable given the 4.9% coefficient of variation, the coefficients 
of variation for the average impairment of strength of Configurations 14 and 15 is much 
greater. The large coefficients of variation for impairment of strength for Configurations 14 
and 15 is due failure not occurring in the same cycle for all three test specimens of each 
configuration and maximum strength occurring in the same cycle as failure. Therefore, the 
impairment of strength of the test specimens which completed more cycles was much 
greater than that of the test specimens which completed less cycles, resulting in a high 
coefficient of variation. Due to the high coefficients of variation, a conclusive trend between 
the configurations and impairment of strength cannot be determined.  
Configuration 16, Configuration 17 and Configuration 18 used Rothoblaas WHT340 hold 
downs and were tested under cyclic loading in tension. Configuration 16 was fully fastened 
using nails, Configuration 17 was two-thirds fastened using nails and Configuration 18 was 
one-third fastened using nails (refer to Table 3.1 and Figure 3.6). Configuration 16 failed due 
to pull-through of the bolt with buckling of the hold down and bending of the nails also 
observed (Figure 3.53(a)). Configuration 17 and Configuration 18 failed due to bending of the 
nails, ultimately leading to tearing of the nails heads, with buckling of the hold down also 
seen (Figure 3.53(b) and (Figure 3.53(c)). While pull-through of the bolt did not occur in 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Configuration 17, there was significant deformation of the base of the hold down around the 
bolt head. 
Figure 3.53: Typical failure of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections under cyclic 
loading in the shear direction: (a) Configuration 16; (b) Configuration 17; (c) Configuration 18 
Typical hysteretic loops obtained from the cyclic tests and the load-displacement curve 
obtained from the monotonic test are shown in Figure 3.54, Figure 3.55 and Figure 3.56 for 
Configuration 16, Configuration 17 and Configuration 18, respectively. Strength degradation 
due to repeated loading at the same displacement can be seen in Figure 3.54, Figure 3.55 
and Figure 3.56 by the difference between the 1st cycle and 3rd cycle backbone curves at the 
final set of three cycles. It is most significant in Configuration 16 and least significant in 
Configuration 18. Failure of Configuration 17 and Configuration 18 was predominately due 
to tearing of the nails, a failure mechanism which can be characterised as brittle from the 
sudden decrease in strength at the ultimate displacement in Figure 3.55 and Figure 3.56. Due 
to the brittle failure mechanisms, the backbone curves did not begin to slope downwards 
once maximum tensile had been reached and so strength degradation due to increasing 
(a) (b) (c) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
displacement was not observed. The failure of Configuration 16 was not as highly brittle as 
that of Configuration 17 and 18 as the decrease in strength was more gradual, however the 
lack of strength degradation as displacement increased indicates that the failure was still 
brittle. 
Stiffness degradation of the connections when they were repeatedly loaded at the same 
displacement and stiffness degradation of the connections when displacement was increased 
is evident in Figure 3.54, Figure 3.55 and Figure 3.56. The reducing slope of each of the 
backbone curves shows stiffness reduction as displacement is increased. The difference 
between the 1st and 3rd cycle backbone curves increases as displacement increases because 
the slope of the 3rd cycle backbone curve is decreasing at a higher rate than the slope of the 
1st cycle backbone curve. This indicates stiffness degradation of the connections when they 
were repeatedly loaded at the same displacement. 
Figure 3.54: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 16 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.55: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 17 
Figure 3.56: Typical hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for a Rothoblaas 
WHT340 hold down connection tested under tension loading: Configuration 18 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.57 illustrates the typical hysteretic loops for Configuration 16, Configuration 17 and 
Configuration 18. It can be seen from Figure 3.57 that Configuration 16 had the highest 
maximum tensile strength and Configuration 18 the lowest. It is clear that Configuration 16 
has the highest energy dissipation and Configuration 18 the lowest as the area enclosed by 
the hysteresis loops of Configuration 16 is greater than that of Configuration 18. 
Figure 3.57: Typical hysteresis loops for Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections tested 
under tension loading 
The properties of the three configurations using Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections 
tested under cyclic loading in tension (Configuration 16, Configuration 17 and Configuration 
18) are summarised in Table 3.7. The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are 
reported for each property. Figure 3.58 illustrates the important average properties of these 
connections as well as the maximum and minimum values of the properties determined from 
the experimental testing of three test specimens for each configuration. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.7: Average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections determined 
from experimental tests under tension loading in accordance with BS EN 12512  
Property 
Configuration 
16   17   18 
Mean COV   Mean COV   Mean COV 
Fy [kN] 58.80 3.80  45.37 3.54  23.60 6.36 
Vy [mm] 28.73 8.06  24.10 15.45  12.74 13.98 
Fmax [kN] 63.28 1.82  51.00 7.24  26.14 6.52 
Vmax [mm] 42.17 3.09  31.46 5.80  21.47 13.89 
Fu [kN] 27.91 22.87  48.72 8.80  24.82 8.23 
Vu [mm] 54.98 7.45  32.40 5.37  22.00 13.90 
kel [kN/mm] 2.03 5.80  1.92 5.48  1.83 7.66 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.34 5.80  0.32 5.48  0.31 7.66 
F30 [kN] 55.71 1.84  49.65 3.27  - - 
D [-] 1.93 15.05  1.36 10.46  1.73 2.72 
D30 [-] 1.05 7.84  1.26 14.49  - - 
F1-3  [%] 8.79 3.17  6.11 5.63  5.44 4.97 
eq (1st)  [%] 4.86 4.59  4.52 6.39  4.25 4.18 
eq (3rd)  [%] 2.72 7.70  2.12 19.47  1.90 11.47 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.58: Comparison of the average properties of Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down 
connections determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension direction: 
(a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) ductility ratio 
(D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of the first cycle 
(eq(1st)) 
As previously stated, Configuration 16 was fully fastened with nails, Configuration 17 was 
two-thirds fastened with nails and Configuration 18 was one-third fastened with nails. The 
yield and maximum tensile strength (Fy and Fmax) of Configurations 16-18 appears to be 
dependent on the number of fasteners with Configuration 16 having the highest yield and 
maximum tensile strength and Configuration 18 having the lowest yield and maximum tensile 
strength (refer to Table 3.7, Figure 3.58(a) and Figure 3.58(b)). Stiffness was influenced by 
the number of fasteners with Configuration 16 having the highest elastic and plastic stiffness 
(kel and kpl) and Configuration 18 having the lowest as shown in Table 3.7 and Figure 3.58(c). 
The impairment of strength (F1-3) was also related to the number of fasteners, with 
Configuration 16 exhibiting the highest impairment of strength and Configuration 18 the 
lowest (see to Table 3.7 and Figure 3.58(e)). However, Table 3.7 and Figure 3.58(d) shows 
that the ductility ratio (D) did not follow this trend with the Configuration 17 having the  
lowest ductility and Configuration 16 having the highest ductility. The equivalent viscous 
damping ratios (eq (1st) and eq (3rd)) are highest for Configuration 16 and lowest for 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Configuration 18, suggesting that Configuration 16 has the best capacity to dissipate energy 
at maximum tensile strength (see Table 3.6 and Figure 3.58(f)). 
In summary, for Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections subject to tension, increasing 
the number of nails increases the strength, stiffness and equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
the connections, however it also increases impairment of strength. Ductility is also highest 
when the connection is fully fastened. The failure behaviour of Configuration 16 could be 
improved by preventing pull-through of the bolt and ensuring failure of the fasteners. This 
could be achieved by using a washer similar to the washer used with the Rothoblaas WH620 
hold down connections. If pull-through of the bolt was prevented, Configuration 16 is the 
most appropriate Rothoblaas WHT340 connection for use in CLT building subject to high 
lateral loading due to its high strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation. The tensile 
strength of the Rothoblaas WHT340 connections is less than the tensile strength of the 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections (see Table 3.5 and Table 3.7). Therefore, 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections are more suitable for buildings which will 
experience lower lateral loading, or at storeys within a multi-storey CLT building where the 
overturning moment isnt high. Similar to the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections, 
the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections have greater tensile strength than shear 
strength; however, the notable shear strength and stiffness of the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold 
down connections should not be neglected in the design of CLT buildings for a more 
economical design. 
 Length of hold down 
As the primary purpose of hold downs is to resist overturning of the wall, the comparison 
between the two lengths of hold down was made for the results of the testing of the 
connections under cyclic loading in tension. The length of the hold down affects the number 
of fasteners which can be used to fix the connector to the CLT wall panel; the Rothoblaas 
WHT620 hold down is 620 mm long and can be fully fastened using 55no. fasteners while the 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down is 340 mm long and can be fully fastened using 20no. 
fasteners. Configuration 10 represents the full fastening of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
down using 55no. annular ring nails and Configuration 16 represents the full fastening of the 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down using 20no. annular ring nails. Configuration 12 provides the 
best comparison of the effect of the length of the hold down when the number of the 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
fasteners is kept approximately the same as in this configuration the Rothoblaas WHT620 
hold down is partially fastened using 18no. annular ring nails, only two less than used in 
Configuration 16. While the defining difference between the hold downs is the length, the 
width of the hold downs is also different. The Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down is 60 mm wide 
whereas the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down is 80 mm wide. The thickness of plates used to 
form both hold downs is 3 mm. The dimensions of the hold downs and the number of nails 
used in Configuration 10, Configuration 12 and Configuration 16 are summarised in Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Dimensions of hold down and number of nails used in Configuration 10, 
Configuration 12 and Configuration 16 
Configuration 
Length of 
Hold Down 
Width of Hold 
Plate thickness 
Number of 
Nails 
10 620 80 3 55 
12 620 80 3 18 
16 340 60 3 20 
The mean value and coefficient of variation (COV) are reported for each property of 
Configuration 10, Configuration 12 and Configuration 16 in Table 3.5 and Table 3.7. Figure 
3.59 illustrates the important average properties of these three configurations as well as the 
maximum and minimum values of determined from the experimental testing of three test 
specimens for each configuration. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.59: Comparison of the average properties of Configuration 10, Configuration 12 and 
Configuration 16 determined from experimental tests under cyclic loading in the tension 
direction: (a) yield strength (Fy); (b) maximum strength (Fmax); (c) elastic stiffness (kel); (d) 
ductility ratio (D); (e) impairment of strength (F1-3); (f) equivalent viscous damping ratio of 
the first cycle (eq(1st)) 
As shown in Figure 3.59(a) and Figure 3.59(b), the maximum tensile strength (Fy and Fmax) of 
Configuration 10 is 32% greater than that of Configuration 16. This is expected due to 
Configuration 10 having 2.75 times the number of nails that Configuration 16 has. Despite 
Configuration 16 having two nails more than Configuration 12, Configuration 16 has a 
maximum tensile strength 17.5% lower than that of Configuration 12. This demonstrates that 
the hold down also plays a significant role in connections overall resistance to tensile load 
and the resistance is not just dependent on the number of fasteners. The greater strength of 
the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down compared to the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down is 
possibly due to the increased tensile strength of the hold down as a result of its greater cross-
sectional area due to its increased width (see Table 3.8). It could also be due to the different 
(a) (b) (c) 
(d) (e) (f) 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
location and spacing of fasteners and the increased diameter of the anchor bolt (refer to 
Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.5). 
Despite using a similar number of nails, Configuration 12 and Configuration 16 had different 
failure mechanisms. Configuration 16 was observed to fail due to pull-through of the bolt, 
but as Configuration 12 used the manufacturer specified washer, pull-through of the bolt was 
prevented and instead failure was due to the bending of the nails followed by the tearing of 
the nail heads. Therefore, if pull-through of the bolt was prevented in Configuration 16 
through the use of a washer, greater maximum tensile strength of the connection could be 
obtained. Although, it is possible that if a washer like that used in the Rothoblaas WHT620 
connections was used in a fully fastened Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection, tensile 
failure of the hold down at the net section, as was observed with Configuration 10, would 
occur. This is because the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down is not only shorter than the 
Rothoblaas WHT630 hold down, its width is 25% smaller and so the cross-section over which 
the tensile load is resisted is reduced. Therefore, the washer would need to have sufficient 
thickness to prevent pull-through of the bolt but be thin enough that tensile failure of the 
hold down does not occurs. 
Figure 3.59(c) shows that the trend between the elastic stiffness (kel) of Configuration 10, 
Configuration 12 and Configuration 16 is like the trend seen for maximum tensile strength 
(Fmax), with both Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections having higher elastic stiffness 
than the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection. Although, the difference between the 
elastic stiffness is more significant with Configuration 16 having an elastic stiffness 57% lower 
than that of Configuration 10 and 43.5% lower than that of Configuration 12. 
Despite the large differences in tensile strength and stiffness between hold down 
connections using Rothoblaas WHT620 hold downs and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold downs, the 
ductility ratio (D) of Configuration 16 is comparable to that of Configuration 10, as illustrated 
in Figure 3.59(d). Again, this signifies the influence of the hold down on the behaviour of 
connections as despite Configuration 10 having 2.75 times the number of nails of 
Configuration 16, this does not improve ductility. The design of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
down and associated washer appears to limit ductility by not preventing brittle failure of the 
hold down plate at the net section down before ductile failure of the nails occurs. 
Configuration 10 has an equivalent viscous damping ratio for the first cycle (eq(1st)) which is 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
21% greater than that of Configuration 16, indicating it has higher energy dissipation (Figure 
3.59(f)). Although, the equivalent viscous damping ratio of Configuration 16 is approximately 
twice that of Configuration 12. This demonstrates that despite having much lower strength 
than the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections, a fully fastened Rothoblaas WHT340 
hold down connection demonstrates reasonable energy dissipation. While Configuration 16 
exhibits comparable ductility and energy dissipation capability to Configuration 10, it also 
experiences much greater impairment for strength (F1-3) than both Configuration 10 and 
Configuration 12 (Figure 3.59(e)). 
Considering the important properties illustrated in Figure 3.59, it is clear that Configuration 
10 demonstrates the best overall performance. Although, it can be seen that while strength 
and stiffness of Configuration 16 is lower than that of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections (Configurations 10 and 12), the fully fastened Rothoblaas WHT340 connection 
exhibits good performance under repeated loading due to its high ductility ratio and 
equivalent viscous damping ratio. Consequently, this connection will still provide the 
necessary performance to prevent collapse of a building under lateral loading, providing the 
tensile forces do not exceed the maximum tensile strength. However, the higher strength, 
stiffness, equivalent viscous damping ratio, and comparable ductility ratio suggest that a fully 
fastened Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection is more suitable for resisting tensile 
forces in CLT buildings subject to high lateral loads, or at storeys within a CLT building where 
the overturning moment is greatest. 
3.5.3. Comparison of strength predictions using analytical methods with 
experimental results 
The analytical methods outlined in Section 3.4 assume failure of the connection is due to the 
failure of the fasteners while the metal connector and timber behave elastically. When the 
angle bracket connections are subjected to shear loading, the strength of the connection is 
calculated using the analytical methods assuming that the strength is due to the combined 
characteristic lateral load-carrying capacity of the fasteners (FV,Rk) in the floor and wall parts 
of the angle bracket. When the angle bracket connections are subjected to tensile loading, it 
is assumed that the strength of the connection is due to the combination of the combined 
characteristic load-carrying capacity of the fasteners (FV,Rk) in the wall part of the angle 
bracket and the combined characteristic withdrawal capacity of the fasteners (Fax,Rk) in the 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
floor part of the angle bracket. When the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections and 
the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections are subjected to loading in shear or tension, 
it is assumed that the strength of the connection is due to the combined characteristic load-
carrying capacity of the fasteners (FV,Rk). Using the equations outlined in Section 3.4, the 
predicted characteristic shear and tensile strengths of the Configuration 1-18 connections 
were calculated. These predicted strengths can be compared to the characteristic 5th 
percentile maximum strength (Fmax,0.05) calculated from the experimental results in 
accordance with BS EN 14358 (BSI, 2016).  As per BS EN 14358 (BSI, 2016), the data obtained 
in the experimental study is assumed to be logarithmically normally distributed. Therefore, 
the characteristic 5th percentile maximum strength values are calculated using Eq. 3.15. 
 ,0.05 =   (  ) 
(3.15) 
 is the mean experimental maximum strength and it is calculated using Eq. 3.16 where n is 
the number of test specimens and Fmax,i is the experimental maximum strength value for each 
test specimen.  is the standard deviation and it is calculated using Eq. 3.17. ks is the factor 
which corrects the standard deviation depending on the number of test specimens used. As 
three test specimens were used for each configuration in this study, ks is taken as 3.15 (BSI, 
2016). 
 =   
ln
(3.16) 
 =  
  1
(ln  )
(3.17) 
Figure 60 shows the predicted characteristic shear strengths, experimental maximum shear 
strengths for each test specimen and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear 
strength calculated from the experimental results for each of the connection configurations 
loaded in shear. Figure 3.61 shows the predicted characteristic tensile strengths, 
experimental maximum tensile strengths for each test specimen and the characteristic 5th 
percentile maximum tensile strength calculated from the experimental results for each of the 
connection configurations loaded in tension. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.60: Comparison between the experimental maximum shear strengths, the 
characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear strength determined from the experimental 
results and the predicted characteristic shear strength of the connection 
Figure 3.61: Comparison between the experimental maximum tensile strengths, the 
characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength determined from the experimental 
results and the predicted characteristic tensile strength of the connection 
Experimental 
Eurocode 5 
Uibel & Bla 
Experimental 5th percentile 
Experimental 
Eurocode 5 
Uibel & Bla 
Experimental 5th percentile 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
The ratio between the predicted characteristic shear strengths of the connections calculated 
using analytical methods and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear strengths 
calculated from the experimental results is given in Table 3.9. The ratio between the 
predicted characteristic tensile strengths of the connections calculated using analytical 
methods and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strengths calculated from the 
experimental results is given in Table 3.10. These ratios show the extent to which the 
analytical models underestimate or overestimate the maximum strength of the connections. 
A value close to 1 indicates agreement between the experimental results and analytical 
predictions, a value greater than 1 indicates that the analytically predicted characteristic 
strength is greater than the characteristic 5th percentile maximum strength and a value less 
than 1 indicates that the analytically predicted characteristic strength is less than the 
characteristic 5th percentile maximum strength. The experimentally observed ultimate failure 
mechanism of each configuration is also given in Table 3.9 and Table 3.10. 
Table 3.9: Comparison of the characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear strength 
determined from the experimental results and the predicted characteristic shear strength of 
the connection 
Configuration 
Fmax,0.05 
FRk:EC5 
: 
,. 
FRk:U&B  
:& 
,. 
Experimentally 
observed ultimate 
failure mechanism 
1 18.28 56.73 3.10 56.42 3.09 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
2 15.81 37.82 2.39 37.61 2.38 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
3 14.32 37.75 2.64 39.54 2.76 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
7 21.40 130.01 6.08 129.29 6.04 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
8 18.16 87.46 4.82 86.98 4.79 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
9 13.67 42.55 3.11 42.31 3.10 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
13 4.69 47.28 10.08 47.02 10.03 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
14 4.86 28.37 5.83 28.21 5.80 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
15 7.12 14.18 1.99 14.10 1.98 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Table 3.10: Comparison of the characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength 
determined from the experimental results and the predicted characteristic tensile strength 
of the connection 
Configuration 
Fmax,0.05 
FRk:EC5 
: 
,. 
FRk:U&B  
:& 
,. 
Experimentally 
observed ultimate 
failure mechanism 
4 16.61 44.64 2.69 43.74 2.63 
Withdrawal of nails 
in floor part of 
angle bracket 
5 6.44 30.91 4.80 30.37 4.72 
Withdrawal of nails 
in floor part of 
angle bracket 
6 16.02 33.79 2.11 35.16 2.19 
Withdrawal of nails 
and screws in floor 
part of angle 
bracket 
10 79.10 130.01 1.64 129.29 1.63 
Tension failure of 
connector 
11 76.57 87.46 1.14 86.98 1.14 
Tension failure of 
connector 
12 59.65 42.55 0.71 42.31 0.71 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
16 54.05 47.28 0.87 47.02 0.87 Pull-through of bolt 
17 40.70 28.37 0.70 28.21 0.69 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
18 21.23 14.18 0.67 14.10 0.66 
Tearing of nail 
heads 
Figure 60 and Table 3.9 show that for all configurations, the predicted characteristic shear 
strength of the connection calculated using analytical methods overestimates both the 
experimental maximum shear strengths and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum shear 
strength determined from the experimental results. The analytical methods assume ductile 
failure of the fasteners and although the nails behaved in a ductile manner before ultimate 
failure occurred, with bending and withdrawal of the nails observed, brittle failure of the nails 
due to the tearing of the nail heads was observed at ultimate failure in all configurations in 
which the connection was tested under shear. Tearing of the nail heads occurred at 
approximately the same location where the plastic hinge between the timber member and 
metal plate is shown to form in Figure 3.16(d) and Figure 3.16(e).  
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Figure 3.61 and Table 3.10 show that for some configurations, the predicted characteristic 
tensile strength of the connection overestimates both the experimental maximum tensile 
strengths and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength determined from 
the experimental results. For other configurations, the predicted characteristic tensile 
strength of the connection underestimates both the experimental maximum tensile 
strengths and the characteristic 5th percentile maximum tensile strength determined from 
the experimental results. The over-prediction of the tensile strength of the connection could 
be because of undesirable brittle failure mechanisms occurring before ductile failure of the 
fasteners occurs. This prevents the combined load-carrying capacity of the fasteners to be 
realised and is evident for Configurations 10 and Configuration 11 which failed due to the 
brittle failure of the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down. The analytical methods underestimated 
the maximum tensile strength of Configuration 12, Configuration 16, Configuration 17 and 
Configuration 18 in which failure was observed to be due to the bending and withdrawal of 
the nails, ultimately leading to tearing of the nail heads. This is contrary to the predicted 
characteristic shear strength values which were overestimated when tearing of the nail heads 
occurred. The configurations for which the analytical methods most accurately predicted the 
maximum strength are Configuration 11 and Configuration 16. Despite this, failure occurred 
in Configuration 11 due to the brittle failure of the hold down and in Configuration 16 due to 
the pull-through of the bolt, not due to ductile failure of the fasteners. Therefore, these 
seemingly accurate predictions are not due to the analytical methods correctly predicting the 
same behaviour shown experimentally. 
The predicted characteristic strengths using Eurocode 5 and the Uibel and Bla method are 
not significantly different. This is because there are small differences between characteristic 
withdrawal capacity of the nails (0.07 kN), characteristic withdrawal capacity of the screws 
(1.07 kN) and the characteristic yield moment of the nails (116.5 Nmm) calculated using these 
two methods. The primary limitation of these analytical methods is that they assume 
overstrength of the metal connectors and do not consider that in reality connections using 
commercially available metal connectors will not only experience plastic failure of the 
fasteners, but the connector will also undergo plastic deformation. Therefore, the analytical 
methods need to be revised to reflect typical connections formed using commercially 
available metal components, or manufacturers of commercially available metal components 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
must redesign these components to ensure overstrength of the metal bracket so that only 
plasticisation of the fasteners occurs.  
3.6. Summary 
There are currently no structural design codes for CLT buildings and further research is 
required to provide the experimental basis necessary to develop these codes. Previous 
research has suggested that connections dictate the behaviour of CLT wall systems subject 
to lateral loading, and therefore it is critical that their behaviour is thoroughly understood to 
inform design guidance of CLT buildings. Typical connections within CLT buildings are 
comprised of metal components, such as connectors and fasteners, which are not specified 
within Eurocode 5. Therefore, in practice, ETAs for commercially available products are relied 
upon to provide an interpretation of Eurocode 5 specifically for these connection 
components. However, a limitation of the ETAs is that they do not necessarily consider CLT 
as the material within the connection, and so experimental testing is necessary to determine 
the properties of connections in CLT using commercially available metal connectors with 
fasteners. 
Experimental testing of 18 configurations of typical CLT connections was undertaken. 
Configurations varied due to connector type, fastener arrangement and the test setup which 
depended on the loading direction. Connector types included one type of angle bracket, 
Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket, and two hold downs with different lengths, 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down. For each configuration 
one test specimen was tested under monotonic loading to establish an approximate 
displacement at yield strength which was used to determine the loading procedure for the 
testing of the configuration under cyclic loading. A total of three test specimens were tested 
under cyclic loading for each configuration. The cyclic tests allowed important properties, 
such as strength, stiffness, ductility, impairment of strength and energy dissipation, to be 
determined for each connection configuration.  
Ductility within CLT buildings is provided by the connections, and the ability of the 
connections to undergo significant plastic deformation is essential to providing a mechanism 
for energy dissipation within a CLT structure under lateral load. As there are no structural 
design codes for CLT buildings, there is no codified recommendation for the preferred ductile 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
failure mechanism for CLT connections, however it has been suggested that brittle failure of 
the connection can be avoided by allowing plasticisation of the fasteners and ensuring elastic 
behaviour only of the metal connectors. Therefore, the connections have been assessed not 
only on the numerical properties of the connection determined from the cyclic tests, but also 
on the failure mechanism of the connection. The findings of this study are summarised below. 
3.6.1. Angle bracket connections 
Angle bracket connections are typically used in CLT buildings to resist sliding of the walls and 
so they are intended to resist shear force only. Therefore, the findings of the testing of the 
angle bracket connections in shear will be discussed first. Following this, the findings of the 
testing of the angle bracket connections in tension will be discussed. 
Shear 
In shear, the angle bracket connections were observed to fail due to bending and withdrawal 
of the fasteners (nails and screws), with ultimate failure due to tearing of the nail heads. 
Increasing the number of nails was found to increases shear strength, stiffness, ductility and 
energy dissipation of a connection; however, it also led to greater impairment of strength 
under repeated loading. Ductility and stiffness were increased through the addition of screws 
to replace two nails in the floor part of the angle bracket connection; however, strength and 
energy dissipation was not notably influenced. Therefore, using a high number of nails and 
using screws in the floor part of the angle bracket improves the shear resistance of angle 
bracket connections under repeated lateral loading.  
Tension 
In tension, failure of the angle bracket connection was due to the bending and withdrawal of 
the fasteners in the floor part of the angle bracket and this failure mechanism was observed 
to be highly ductile. Similar to the angle bracket connections tested under shear load, 
increasing the number of nails increased the tensile strength, stiffness and energy dissipation 
of the connection. However, unlike angle bracket connections subject to shear, increasing 
the number of nails does not increase ductility. However, ductility was increased through the 
use of two screws, as was tensile strength and stiffness. While angle bracket connections are 
primarily used for shear resistance in CLT buildings, the testing of the angle bracket 
connections in tension showed that these connections also have significant tensile strength 
and stiffness which would contribute to the overturning resistance of CLT wall systems. 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
Consequently, the tensile properties of angle brackets should not be neglected in the 
economic design of CLT buildings. 
3.6.2. Hold down connections 
Hold downs are typically used in CLT buildings to resist overturning of the walls and so they 
are intended to resist tensile force only. Therefore, the findings of the testing of the hold 
down connections in tension will be discussed first. Following this, the findings of the testing 
of the hold down connections in shear will be discussed. 
Tension 
It was generally observed for both hold down connections that increasing the number of nails 
increased tensile strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation of the connections. 
However, for both Rothoblaas WHT620 and Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections, 
undesirable failure mechanisms were observed when the number of nails were increased. It 
was found that the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections experienced brittle failure 
of the hold down plate, at the net section where the first row of nails from the base of the 
bracket are located, when the connection was more than one-third fastened with annular 
ring nails. When only one-third fastened, this hold down connection experienced bending 
and withdrawal of the nails ultimately leading to failure due to tearing of the nail heads.  
The Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections also experienced undesirable failure of the 
hold down when the connection was fully fastened with annular ring nails. Although, unlike 
the fully fastened Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connection, this was not due to the failure 
at the net section of the hold down plate. This is because unlike the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold 
down connections, the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections did not use a washer to 
prevent pull-through of the bolt and so pull-through occurred when the Rothoblaas WHT340 
hold down was fully fastened. A washer was not used as it was not recommended by the 
manufacturer for use with this hold down. When the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down was 
partially fastened, ultimate failure was due to tearing of the nail heads with bending and 
withdrawal of the nails observed before failure occurred. Significant deformation of the base 
of the hold down was also observed when the connection was two-thirds fastened, although 
the fasteners failed before pull-through of the bolt occurred. Therefore, to ensure failure of 
the nails only with connections using this hold down, a washer should be used to prevent 
plastic deformation of the base of the hold down around the bolt head which could ultimately 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
lead to pull-through of the bolt. However, it is also possible that using a washer in a fully 
fastened Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connection could lead to failure of the hold down 
plate at the net section as observed with Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections. 
Therefore, further experimental testing of these hold down connections using washers with 
various thicknesses would be required to determine the optimum washer thickness to 
prevent failure due both pull-through of the bolt and tensile failure of the hold down plate. 
Comparing the results of the Rothoblaas WHT340 connections with the Rothoblaas WHT620 
hold down connections, if a washer was not used in the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections, it is likely that pull-through of the bolt would have occurred. This is because 
pull-through of the bolt occurred in the Rothoblaas WHT340 connections at a lower tensile 
load than failure load recorded when the one-third fastened Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connection failed due to tearing of the nails. It is unlikely that ductile failure of the fasteners 
can be achieved with the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections if the hold down is 
more than two-thirds fastened as the combined lateral load-carrying capacity of the nails 
exceeds the tensile strength of the hold down plate. Therefore, reducing the thickness of the 
washer to prevent failure of the hold down plate is likely to result in the washer being too 
thin to prevent pull-through of the bolt, or too thick that tension failure of the hold down 
plate still occurs.  
The comparison of the length of the hold downs on the tensile properties of the connections 
demonstrated that the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections are more suitable for 
use in CLT buildings which are subject to high lateral loading, or for use in wall systems at 
storeys in multi-storey CLT buildings where the overturning moment would be highest. 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections are more suitable for use in CLT buildings which 
are subject to lower lateral loading, or for use in wall systems at storeys in multi-storey CLT 
buildings where the overturning moment would be lower. While it was evident from the 
failure mechanisms observed that the hold downs brackets do not remain elastic with the 
fasteners only experiencing plastic deformation, the comparison of the length of the hold 
downs on the tensile properties of the connections highlighted that the hold downs 
contribute to overall connection properties and behaviour. For two hold down connections, 
one using the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down with 18no. nails and the other using the 
Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down with 20no. nails, there were significant differences in tensile 
properties despite a difference of only two nails. The connection using the longer Rothoblaas 
Chapter 3: Behaviour of typical CLT connections under cyclic loading 
WHT620 hold down demonstrated greater strength and stiffness, whereas the connection 
using the shorter Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down demonstrated greater damping and energy 
dissipation. Consequently, it is evident that the length of the hold down has a major influence 
on connection behaviour. 
Shear 
The experimental study found that while angle bracket connections are usually considered 
to have shear strength only, they have lower yet significant tensile strength. Similarly, while 
hold down connections are usually considered to have tensile strength and resist overturning 
of wall systems only, they have lower yet notable shear strength. Therefore, the strength of 
the connections in the weaker loading direction should not be neglected in the design of CLT 
buildings, as considering this strength in addition to the connections primary strength could 
lead to more economic design. 
3.6.3. Analytical methods 
The comparison of the experimental results with the two analytical methods showed that 
neither analytical method accurately predicts the strength of the connection configurations 
tested as part of this study. The analytical methods assume the preferred failure mechanism, 
ductile failure of the fasteners, however many configurations were experimentally observed 
to fail due to brittle failure mechanisms, including; tearing of the nail heads, pull-through of 
the bolt and tension failure of the hold down at the next section. Despite assuming ductile 
failure of the fasteners, the analytical methods still overpredicted the tensile strength of the 
angle bracket connections in which ductile failure due to withdrawal of the nails in the floor 
part of the angle bracket occurred. Therefore, these analytical methods cannot be safely used 
in the design of CLT connections using commercially available metal components. 
Chaper 4:  Behaviour of Cross-Laminated Timber Wall 
Systems under Monotonic Lateral Loading 
4.1. Introduction 
The SOFIE project demonstrated the ability of CLT buildings to withstand seismic loading in 
shake table tests undertaken on two full-scale buildings up to seven storeys in height 
(Ceccotti, 2008; Ceccotti et al., 2013). However, there is still insufficient information 
regarding the performance of building components, such as connections and wall systems, 
available to inform seismic design guidance for taller CLT buildings. Previous experimental 
studies of CLT wall systems under lateral loading have been limited to replicating the 
conditions within multi-storey buildings with approximately three storeys (Dujic, Pucelj and 
Zarnic, 2004; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Popovski, Schneider and 
Schweinsteiger, 2010). Thus, to develop sufficient understanding of how CLT wall systems in 
high-rise buildings will behave when subjected to lateral loading, testing of configurations 
reflecting the conditions of CLT wall systems in taller buildings needs to be undertaken. There 
has also been limited research on performance assessment of CLT wall systems in above 
ground floor storeys. In most wall system configurations tested, the CLT wall panels are 
anchored to steel or concrete foundations; little information has been published about 
configurations tested in which the CLT wall panels are fixed to CLT floor panels, as typically 
found in above ground floor storeys. In multi-storey CLT buildings, the wall systems within 
the building will be predominantly those in which the CLT wall panel is fixed to a CLT floor 
panel. Consequently, the behaviour of this configuration of wall system needs thorough 
experimental investigation as this configuration of wall system will have substantial influence 
on overall behaviour of a CLT building subjected to lateral loading.  
4.2. Objectives 
The purpose of this research is to further the understanding of the behaviour of multi-storey 
CLT buildings under lateral loading, focussing particularly on the behaviour of above ground 
floor storeys, and to contribute to the experimental basis necessary to inform design 
guidance. The experimental tests presented in this chapter contribute to this by allowing the 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
variation in global behaviour of wall systems at each storey within a multi-storey CLT building 
to be evaluated and design considerations to be identified. This was achieved by undertaking 
a series of tests on CLT wall systems subjected to realistic loading conditions and measuring 
displacements throughout the wall system. Eight tests were undertaken to understand the 
effect of varying loading conditions on the deformation behaviour and stiffness of above 
ground floor storey wall systems within the elastic region. An additional four tests were 
undertaken to assess post-yield behaviour of above ground floor storey wall systems.  
4.3. Methodology 
A series of tests was undertaken in which a constant vertical load, representing realistic 
gravity load in a multi-storey CLT building, was applied to a CLT wall system and maintained 
while a lateral load was applied incrementally until the maximum lateral load for the 
particular test was reached. Three wall systems with identical configurations were used in 
the study; the general setup is shown in Section 4.3.2.5. Eight tests (T1-T8), using various 
vertical loads but the same maximum lateral load, were undertaken on each of the three wall 
systems so that there were three repetitions of each of these tests. After the series of eight 
tests had been completed on each wall system, additional tests (T9-T12) were undertaken 
on the wall systems in which a larger lateral load was applied, resulting in irreversible damage 
of the wall system but allowing post-yield behaviour of the wall system to be investigated. A 
total of ten tests were undertaken using Wall System 1 while nine tests were carried out on 
both Wall Systems 2 and 3. Table 2.1 summaries the tests undertaken on each wall system. 
T1.1, T1.2 and T1.3 each refer to one of the three repetitions of test T1, with the second 
number referring to the wall system which the repetition of the test was carried out on (e.g. 
T1.1 refers to test T1 undertaken on Wall System 1). The same notation applies for the three 
repetitions of tests T2-T8. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.1: Tests undertaken on each wall system 
Wall System 1 Wall System 2 Wall System 3 
T1.1 T1.2 T1.3 
T2.1 T2.2 T2.3 
T3.1 T3.2 T3.3 
T4.1 T4.2 T4.3 
T5.1 T5.2 T5.3 
T6.1 T6.2 T6.3 
T7.1 T7.2 T7.3 
T8.1 T8.2 T8.3 
T9 T11 T12 
4.3.1. Loading procedure 
During each test, a vertical load was applied to the wall system and maintained throughout 
the test while the wall system was laterally loaded and unloaded incrementally. Each vertical 
load applied to a wall system was representative of the gravity load experienced by the walls 
at various storeys within a 10 storey CLT building. As this study focuses on wall systems in 
which the CLT wall panel is fixed to a CLT floor panel, the ground storey wall system in which 
the wall panel is typically fixed to a concrete or steel foundation was not investigated, nor 
was the top storey in which the gravity load is relatively small due to only the roof being 
present above this storey. Thus, the vertical loads applied to the wall systems in this study 
were representative of the gravity loads at floors 2-9 of a 10 storey CLT building.  
The vertical loads applied were calculated assuming all walls and floors within a 10 storey 
building are constructed using 100 mm thick CLT panels with a mean density of 470 kg/m3, 
as per the product technical information supplied by Stora Enso (Stora Enso, 2015). The 
thickness of the wall panel was not increased for tests in which a higher vertical load was 
used so that an additional variable was not introduced. By considering an imposed floor load 
as well as the dead load of both the floor and wall panels, the vertical loads, to which the 
wall systems were subjected to during the testing, are representative of realistic gravity loads 
within a multi-storey CLT building. As many of largest completed CLT buildings have been for 
residential purposes rather than commercial purposes, an imposed floor load of 1.5 kN/m2 
was selected for a Category A loaded area as per BS EN 1991-1-1:2002, Table 6.2 (BSI, 2010b). 
Partial safety factors of G=1.35 and Q=1.5 were considered in the calculation as per BS EN 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
1990:2002+A1:2005, Table A1.2 (BSI, 2010a). Calculations assumed a floor span of 3 m 
between internal CLT walls and a wall height of 2.95 m. The design gravity load associated 
with each storey was calculated to be 10.5 kN/m and this value was used to determine the 
gravity loads acting on walls at each storey depending on its position within the multi-storey 
building (e.g. a wall at floor 2 in a 10 storey building with 8 storeys above would experience 
a cumulative gravity load of 10.5 kN/m x 8 = 84 kN/m). Figure 4.1 illustrates the gravity loads 
calculated at each storey. 
Figure 4.1: Gravity loads at each storey in a 10 storey CLT building 
A wall system in a CLT building would be subjected to a gravity load as a uniformly distributed 
load (UDL). However, in these tests the load was applied as a point load in the middle of the 
wall and a steel beam was used to aid the spreading of this point load to a UDL. The point 
loads which were applied were calculated by multiplying the uniformly distributed gravity 
load calculated for each storey by the width of the CLT wall panel. 
During tests T1-T8, a maximum lateral load of 50 kN was applied to the wall system. The 
mean yield shear strength of the connections used in Wall System 1, Wall System 2 and Wall 
System 3 was determined through the testing of the connections under monotonic and cyclic 
shear loading as detailed in Chapter 3. The angle bracket connection used within the wall 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
system to provide shear resistance corresponds to Configuration 2 (refer to Table 3.1 and 
Figure 3.2) and the mean yield shear strength of one angle bracket connection is given as 
15.97 kN in Table 3.2. Eight of these angle bracket connections were used within Wall 
Systems 1-3 and these connections will be discussed in further detail in Section 4.3.2.2. As 
eight angle bracket connections were used, the combined mean yield shear strength of these 
connections is 127.76 kN. Consequently, a lateral load of 50 kN was selected to ensure the 
connections behaved elastically allowing one wall system to be used for a series of eight tests 
and the relationship between vertical load and global behaviour to be identified. After these 
eight tests were completed on each of the three wall system, additional tests were 
undertaken in which a maximum lateral load of 150 kN was applied to the wall system while 
a vertical load was maintained to investigate the post-yield behaviour of the wall system, as 
this maximum lateral load (150 kN) exceeds the combined mean yield shear strength of these 
connections. As shown in Table 2.1, two additional tests, T9 and T10 were undertaken on 
Wall System 1, one additional test, T11, on Wall System 2 and one additional test, T12, on 
Wall System 3. No further testing of the wall systems was undertaken following tests T10, 
T11 and T12 as the wall systems experienced irreversible damage during these tests. The 
vertical and lateral loads applied in each of the tests are summarised in Table 4.2. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.2: Vertical and lateral load applied in each test 
Test Floor 
Gravity load at 
this floor in CLT 
building 
Vertical point 
load applied to 
the wall system 
Maximum 
lateral load 
applied to the 
wall system 
Type of 
behaviour 
investigated 
in test 
[kN/m] [kN] [kN] 
2 84 245 50 
Elastic 
behaviour 
3 73.5 217 50 T2.2 
4 63 186 50 T3.2 
5 52.5 155 50 T4.2 
6 42 124 50 T5.2 
7 31.5 93 50 T6.2 
8 21 62 50 T7.2 
9 10.5 31 50 T8.2 
T9 2 84 278 150 
Plastic 
behaviour 
T10 9 10.5 31 150 
T11 5 52.5 155 150 
T12 9 10.5 31 150 
At the start of each test the vertical load was applied gradually to the top of the wall while 
no lateral load was applied. When the vertical load for the test was reached, it was 
maintained while a lateral load was applied in increments of 5 kN from 0 kN to the maximum 
lateral load for the particular test and displacements were recorded at each 5 kN increment. 
Once the maximum lateral load was reached the wall system was maintained at this load for 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
approximately two minutes and then the lateral load was decreased. For tests T1-T8 in which 
a maximum lateral load of 50 kN was applied, displacements were recorded at each 10 kN 
increment as the lateral load was decreased from 50 kN to 0 kN. For tests T9-T12 in which a 
maximum lateral load of 150 kN was applied, displacements were recorded at each 25 kN 
increment as the lateral load was decreased from 150 kN to 0 kN. After the lateral load was 
removed the vertical load was then gradually removed until the wall system was subjected 
to no external load. Once all load was removed the wall system was allowed to rest for 
approximately 5 minutes before subsequent tests commenced. 
4.3.2. Test setup 
 CLT panels 
The CLT panels were manufactured in Austria by Stora Enso using spruce of C24 grade in 
accordance with ETA-14/0349 (OIB, 2018). The CLT panels were 100 mm thick and comprised 
of five 20 mm thick layers. The outer two layers and the centre layer of the panel spanned in 
the same direction while the other two layers spanned in the orthogonal direction. The 
panels were cut to the required size by the manufacturer before transportation to Queens 
University Belfast. 
Previous studies have investigated the effect of aspect ratio (height to width) on the 
behaviour of CLT wall systems and concluded that wall systems with higher aspect ratios have 
greater deformation capacity but significantly less strength and stiffness than wall systems 
with lower aspect ratios (Popovski, Schneider and Schweinsteiger, 2010; Gavric, Fragiacomo 
and Ceccotti, 2015; Amini et al., 2018). Amini et al. (2018) suggested that an aspect ratio of 
2:1 is preferable, however there is a lower bound where the aspect ratio has negligible effect 
on the behaviour of the wall system, with the aspect ratios of 1:1 and 2:1 exhibiting similar 
strength and stiffness in their study. An aspect ratio of 2:1 may also not be achievable in 
every instance of CLT building design due to architectural constraints on the geometry of the 
building. Due to the limited clear space under the frame of the vertical actuator used in this 
study the height of the wall panels tested was 1.5 m, approximately half of the typical height 
of walls in CLT buildings, and the width of the wall panels was 2.95 m to allow the floor panel 
of the wall system to be rigidly fixed to the laboratory floor. Therefore, the aspect ratio of 
the wall system is approximately 0.5 and the findings of this study are specific to the chosen 
aspect ratio which is not a variable of this investigation. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
The wall panel was orientated so that the outer two layers and the centre layer of the panel 
spanned vertically in the 1.5 m direction while the other two layers spanned horizontally in 
the 2.95 m direction. As this study focusses on above ground floor wall systems, the CLT wall 
panel was fixed to a CLT floor panel. The floor panel was 1.5x2.95 m and the wall panel was 
placed centrally on the floor panel. The floor panel was rigidly fixed to the laboratory floor to 
minimise lateral movement of the floor panel allowing wall deformations to be observed. 
Based on crushing failure, the vertical load capacity of a wall using these panels was 
calculated to be approximately 605 kN/m. The product technical information supplied by 
Stora Enso (Stora Enso, 2015) states the timber used within the CLT panels is of grade C24 
and therefore the compressive strength parallel to the grain, c,0,k, was taken to be 21 N/mm2 
(BSI, 2010c). The vertical load capacity was then calculated in accordance with BS EN 1995-
1-1:2004+A2:2014 (BSI, 2014) by assuming the vertical load was resisted by the three 
vertically spanning layers of the CLT panel. As M is not yet specified for cross-laminated 
timber, the factor used for glued laminated timber was selected and thus M =1.25. The value 
of kmod was also selected based on that for glued laminated timber and therefore kmod =0.6. 
As previously mentioned, in a full-scale CLT building the wall height is typically twice the 
height of the wall used in this test setup and therefore buckling may be the failure mode of 
these walls which would result in a lower vertical load capacity than that based on crushing 
failure. 
 Connections 
Typical CLT connectors were used to fix the wall panel to the floor panel; the wall panel was 
fixed to the floor panel using two commercially available hold downs and eight commercially 
available angle brackets. The hold downs (HD) used were Rothoblaas WHT340 hold downs 
which were partially nailed with twelve Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails and 
anchored to the floor with one 16mm diameter bolt, Rothoblaas KOS16140B hexagonal head 
bolts with nuts (Rothoblaas, 2015). The angle brackets (AB) used were Simpson Strong-Tie 
ABR105-R angle brackets (Simpson Strong-Tie, 2019) which were partially nailed with sixteen 
Rothoblaas LBA 4x60 mm annular ring nails, eight nails fixing the bracket to both the floor 
and the wall panels. The hold down connections and angle bracket connections used within 
the wall systems correspond to configurations tested under monotonic and cyclic shear 
loading as detailed in Chapter 3. Configurations 14 and 17, use the same connector and 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
fastener arrangement as the hold down connection used within the wall system, however 
these configurations varied due to the loading direction (Table 3.1). Configurations 2 and 5, 
use the same connector and fastener arrangement as the hold down connection used within 
the wall system, however these configurations varied due to the loading direction (Table 3.1). 
Figure 4.2 shows the connectors and fasteners used within the wall system and Figure 4.3 
shows the arrangement of nails used to fix each connector to the CLT panels. Figure 4.4 
illustrates the arrangement of the connectors within the wall system.  
Figure 4.2: (a) Rothoblaas WHT340 Hold Down; (b) Rothoblaas KOS16140B Hexagonal Head 
Bolt with Nut; (c) Rothoblaas LBA 60x4mm annular ring nail; (d) Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-
R Angle Bracket 
 Figure 4.3: (a) Arrangement of nails in hold down connection; (b) Arrangement of nails in 
wall part of angle bracket connection; (c) Arrangement of nails in floor part of angle bracket 
connection 
 (c) (b) 
(c) (a) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.4: (a) Elevation of wall system showing arrangement of connectors; (b) Plan or wall 
system showing arrangement of connectors 
 Actuators 
The vertical load was applied using a load-controlled hydraulic actuator to the top of the wall 
panel through a 150x100x10 mm steel RHS beam to aid the spreading of the load to the ends 
of the panel. While the steel RHS beam facilitates spreading of the load, it does not provide 
a perfect redistribution of the point load to a UDL at the top of the wall. However, it was 
assumed that the load would be fully distributed at the base of the wall. The actuator was 
used in load-control to ensure the ram of the actuator was able to recede to allow a constant 
vertical load to be maintained without restricting rotation of the wall. A steel plate and two 
rollers were used beneath the vertical actuator to ensure that the rotation of the wall was 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
not restricted. Figure 4.5 illustrates the arrangement of plates and rollers beneath the vertical 
actuator. The lateral load was applied using a manual hydraulic ram. The hydraulic ram was 
supported by a steel frame which was rigidly fixed to the laboratory floor to prevent any 
sliding of the frame. 
Figure 4.5: Arrangement at top of wall 
 Displacement transducers 
To evaluate the global deformation of the wall system, displacements were measured at 
various locations within the wall system using displacement transducers (Novotechnik 
TR/TRS Transducer with return spring). The locations of these displacement transducers were 
the same in Wall System 1 and Wall System 2, however some modifications were made to 
the displacement transducer locations when testing Wall System 3 to further investigate 
behaviour observed during the first two sets of tests on Wall Systems 1 and 2. The locations 
of the displacement transducers used in wall System 1 and Wall System 2 are given in Table 
4.3 and Figure 4.6.  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.3: Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 displacement transducers 
Displacement 
Transducer (DT) No. 
Measurement  
1 Vertical displacement of left-hand side of wall panel 
2 Vertical displacement of left-hand side of floor panel 
3 Vertical displacement of right-hand side of wall panel 
4 Vertical displacement of right-hand side of floor panel 
5 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 1 (AB1) 
6 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 2 (AB2) 
7 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 3 (AB3) 
8 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 4 (AB4) 
9 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 5 (AB5) 
10 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 6 (AB6) 
11 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 7 (AB7) 
12 Vertical displacement of angle bracket 8 (AB8) 
13 Lateral displacement of floor  
14 Lateral displacement of wall at base of wall 
15 Lateral displacement of wall 300 mm from floor 
16 Lateral displacement of wall 600 mm from floor 
17 Lateral displacement of wall 900 mm from floor 
18 Lateral displacement of wall 1200 mm from floor 
19 Lateral displacement of wall at top of wall 
Figure 4.6: Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 displacement transducer locations 
Displacement Transducer (DT) 3 and DT4 which measured the vertical displacements of the 
end of the wall panel and the floor panel on the right hand side of the wall system were 
placed on L brackets which were fixed to the CLT panels as shown in Figure 4.7. Similarly, DT1 
and DT3 which measured the vertical displacements of the end of the wall panel and the floor 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
panel on the left-hand side of the wall system were placed on L brackets which were fixed to 
the CLT panels. DT13 and DT14 which measured the lateral displacement of the floor panel 
and base of wall panel respectively were placed directly on the CLT panels as shown in Figure 
4.7. Similar to DT13 and DT14, DT15-DT19 which measured the lateral displacement of the 
wall panel at various heights were placed directly on the CLT panels. DT5-DT12 which 
measured the vertical displacement of the angle brackets were placed directly on wall part 
of the angle bracket as shown in Figure 4.8. All displacement transducers recorded either 
vertical or lateral movement relative to the laboratory floor, however by measuring both 
movement of the floor panel and movement of the wall panel, movement of the wall panel 
relative to the floor panel could be deduced. 
Figure 4.7: Displacement transducers measuring vertical and lateral displacements of the 
floor panel and base of wall panel on the right hand side of wall system 
L bracket 
Floor panel 
DT 14 
DT 13 
Wall panel 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.8: Displacement transducer 9 measuring the vertical displacement of angle bracket 
In Wall System 3, additional displacement transducers were used to investigate the 
behaviour of the base of the wall during the tests and the displacement transducers 
measuring the lateral displacement of the right hand side end of the wall between the base 
and top of the wall in Wall Systems 1 and 2 (DT15-DT18 in Figure 4.6) were removed. The 
locations of the displacement transducers used in Wall System 3 are given in Table 4.4 and 
Figure 4.9. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.4: Wall System 3 displacement transducers 
Displacement 
Transducer (DT) No. 
Measurement  
1 Vertical displacement of left-hand side of wall panel 
2 Vertical displacement of left-hand side of floor panel 
3 Vertical displacement of right-hand side of wall panel 
4 Vertical displacement of right-hand side of floor panel 
5 Lateral displacement of floor  
6 Lateral displacement of wall at base of wall 
7 Lateral displacement of wall at top of wall 
8 Vertical displacement of AB1 
9 Vertical displacement of AB2 
10 Vertical displacement of AB3 
11 Vertical displacement of AB4 
12 Vertical displacement of AB5 
13 Vertical displacement of AB6 
14 Vertical displacement of AB7 
15 Vertical displacement of AB8 
16 Vertical displacement of wall at AB1 
17 Vertical displacement of wall at AB3 
18 Vertical displacement of wall at AB6 
19 Vertical displacement of wall at AB8 
Figure 4.9: Wall System 3 displacement transducer locations 
The displacement transducers for Wall System 3 were placed using the same method as used 
for Wall Systems 1 and 2; those measuring lateral displacements were placed directly on the 
panels and those measuring vertical displacements were placed on L brackets fixed to the 
wall. The additional displacement transducers introduced in Wall System 3 which measured 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
vertical displacements along the base of the wall were places on L brackets fixed to the wall 
approximately 5mm to the left of an angle bracket as show in Figure 4.10. 
Figure 4.10: Displacement transducer 16 and displacement transducer 8 measuring the 
vertical displacement of the base of the wall and angle bracket AB1, respectively 
 Overall test setup 
The overall test setup is shown in Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12. 
DT 16 
L bracket 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.11: Test setup 
Figure 4.12: Test setup 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
4.4. Analytical Methods 
There are four deformation mechanisms which may contribute to the global behaviour of a 
CLT wall system subjected to lateral load. These deformation mechanisms are rocking (Figure 
4.13(a)) and sliding (Figure 4.13(b)) of the wall panel as well in-plane deformation of the wall 
panel, including shear (Figure 4.13(c)) and bending (Figure 4.13(d)).  
Figure 4.13: Deformation mechanisms contributing to global behaviour of CLT wall systems 
(a) rocking; (b) sliding; (c) shear; (d) bending 
When a lateral load, H, is applied to a CLT wall system the wall experiences an overturning 
moment. If the overturning moment exceeds the stabilising moment due to the gravity load 
and tensile resistance of the connections, the wall will rotate leading to uplift of the bottom 
corner of the wall on the side the lateral load is applied as shown in Figure 4.13(a). If the 
lateral load is removed before the wall overturns, the wall would fall back to its original 
position. If the lateral load was once again applied either in the same direction or the 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
sh b 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
opposite direction and then removed, the same behaviour would be observed whereby the 
wall rotates causing a lateral displacement before returning to its original position. This 
deformation behaviour is known as rocking and is reflective of behaviour that would be 
exhibited by a wall system within a building over time as it is repeatedly loaded due to lateral 
loads such as wind or seismic loads. As the rocking walls move back to their original position 
after the lateral load is removed, rocking walls are self-centring. As shown in Figure 4.13(a), 
rocking results in a displacement in both the horizontal and vertical directions. Sliding occurs 
once the applied lateral force exceeds the resisting force which can be provided through the 
shear resistance of connections and friction. Sliding results in a displacement in the horizontal 
direction only as shown in Figure 4.13(b). The in-plane deformation of the wall panel also 
causes displacement in the horizontal direction as shown in Figure 4.13(c) and Figure 4.13(d). 
Therefore, each of the deformation mechanisms shown in Figure 4.13 result in a lateral 
displacement and the total lateral displacement of the wall system, total, when a lateral load 
is applied is the sum of the lateral displacements due to each of these four deformation 
mechanisms: 
  =   +   +   +    
(4.1) 
The lateral displacement of a wall system due to each deformation mechanism can be 
predicted using equilibrium equations which take into account the dimensions of the wall 
system, the connection properties and the external lateral and vertical loading applied. Four 
different analytical methods developed to predict the total lateral displacement of a CLT wall 
system under a lateral load have been identified (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; 
Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori, 2016; Hummel, Seim and Otto, 2016; Wallner-Novak, 
Koppelhuber and Pock, 2014). To check the validity of these methods for predicting the 
deformation behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral loading, lateral displacements of 
the wall systems tested as part of this study have been predicted using these methods and 
will be compared to the experimental results in Section 4.5.5. The following sections detail 
the assumptions and equations which form each of the four analytical methods.  
4.4.1. Method A  Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) method 
The analytical method developed by Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) takes into 
account deformation due to all four deformation mechanisms; rocking, sliding, shear and 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
bending. The experimental testing of hold down and angle bracket connections undertaken 
by Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c) found that angle bracket connections have 
notable strength and stiffness in tension as well as shear and therefore these connections 
are capable of resisting both shear and tensile forces. Consequently, angle bracket 
connections are assumed in this analytical method to contribute to overturning and sliding 
resistance. Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015c) suggested that hold down connections 
do not have significant strength in shear and therefore are considered in this analytical 
method to resist tension only. Consequently, hold down connections are assumed in this 
analytical method to contribute to overturning resistance only. It should be noted that this 
analytical method does not make any distinction between the types of foundation used in 
the wall system (e.g. concrete foundation or CLT floor panel). However, in the Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) study the method was used to predict behaviour of a wall 
system which was fixed to a steel beam and therefore has been verified by the authors for a 
typical ground floor wall system configuration only. For a wall system subjected to a 
monotonic lateral load and a vertical load, lateral displacements due to each deformation 
mechanism can be calculated using to the following method outlined by Gavric, Fragiacomo 
and Ceccotti (2015a): 
Lateral displacement due to rocking, r 
Figure 4.14: Schematic of CLT wall panel undergoing rocking deformation 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
This method assumes that when the wall panel rotates, it rotates about a fixed point at the 
bottom corner of the panel. According to Figure 4.14, once the wall begins to rotate the 
lateral displacement due to rocking can be calculated by Eq. 4.2, providing that the angle of 
rotation, , is small (sin = ).   
  =  sin =   
(4.2) 
The rotation of the wall causes uplift and the connections are required to provide adequate 
tensile strength and stiffness to resist overturning. The tensile force resisted by each 
connection, Ft,i, can be calculated using Eq. 4.3, again providing that the angle or rotation, , 
is small (sin = ).   
 , = , = ,( sin) =  , 
(4.3) 
Where kt,i is the tensile stiffness of the connection, ui is the vertical displacement of the 
connection and xi is the distance of the connection from the point of rotation. Gravity load 
also contributes to the stabilising moment which prevents rotation of the wall and 
consequently, the lateral displacement due to rocking depends on the resistance provided 
by both the connections and the gravity load. Assuming the wall system shown in Figure 4.14 
is in equilibrium and taking moments about the point of rotation: 
 =  
+, 
(4.4) 
Where qv is the vertical load per unit length applied to the wall system, H is the lateral load, 
h is the height of the wall panel and b is the width of the wall panel. Eq. 4.3 can be substituted 
into Eq. 4.4 to give Eq. 4.5. 
 =  
+(,  ) 
(4.5)  
 Eq. 4.2 can be rearranged and substituted into Eq. 4.5 to give Eq. 4.6. 
 =  
+(,   
 ) 
(4.6) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Eq. 4.6 can then be rearranged to give Eq. 4.7 which can be used to calculate the lateral 
displacement due to rocking, r. 
(  
,
(4.7) 
Lateral displacement due to sliding, sl 
Figure 4.15: Schematic of CLT wall panel undergoing sliding deformation 
Assuming the wall system shown in Figure 4.15 is in equilibrium: 
 =   +, 
(4.8)  
Where kfr is the coefficient of friction which is assumed to be 0.3 (Gavric, Fragiacomo and 
Ceccotti, 2015a) and Fs,i is the shear force resisted by each angle bracket connection which 
can be calculated using Eq. 4.9. ks,i is the shear stiffness of the angle bracket connection. 
, =  ,  
(4.9)  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Eq. 4.9 can be substituted into Eq. 4.8 to give Eq. 4.10. 
Eq. 4.10 can be rearranged to give Eq. 4.11 which can then be used to calculate the lateral 
displacement due to sliding, sl. 
 = 
  
  ,
(4.11)  
Lateral displacements due to shear and bending, sh and b 
CLT panels have high in-plane stiffness and therefore the lateral displacements due to shear 
and bending are calculated according to the analytical method assuming elastic behaviour 
when the wall system is loaded under a lateral load, H. The lateral displacement due to shear, 
sh, can be calculated using Eq. 4.12 where G is the shear modulus and the effective cross-
sectional area of the panel, Aef, is calculated using only the layers spanning vertically. Unlike 
the other analytical methods, a shape reduction factor of 1.2 is introduced in the equation 
for the lateral displacement due to shear, sh,  by Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) as 
shown in Eq. 4.12. 
 = 
1.2
(4.12)  
The lateral displacement due to bending, b, can be calculated using Eq. 4.13 where E is the 
elastic modulus and the effective second moment of area, Ief,1, is calculated using only the 
layers loaded parallel to the grain. 
3,1
(4.13)  
4.4.2. Method B  Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method 
The analytical method developed by Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) takes into account 
deformation due to rocking, sliding and shear, however deformation due to in-plane bending 
of the wall panel is not considered. According to this method, the hold down connections can 
 =   + ,  
(4.10)  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
only resist tension and the angle bracket connections can only resist shear, and so hold down 
connections are responsible for resisting overturning only and the angle bracket connections 
are responsible for resisting sliding only. For a wall system subjected to a monotonic lateral 
load and a vertical load, lateral displacements due to each deformation mechanism can be 
calculated using to the following method outlined by Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016): 
Lateral displacement due to rocking, r 
This method assumes that the point of rotation is a fixed point at the bottom corner of the 
panel. Like in Method A, Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) take the lever arm as the 
distance of the hold down connection to the edge of the panel, c. Sustersic and Dujic (2012) 
suggest that the reduced lever arm will be between 0.9b and 0.95b for CLT wall systems, 
however it will depend on the distance of the centre of the hold down connection to the 
edge of the panel, c, and therefore the reduced lever arm is taken by Casagrande, Rossi and 
Sartori (2016) as (b - c). As the angle bracket connections are not considered to contribute 
to overturning resistance, hold down connection HD1 (Figure 4.14) is solely responsible for 
providing overturning resistance. Taking moments about the point of rotation, the tensile 
force resisted by the hold down connection HD1, Ft,HD1, as it resists overturning of the wall 
system due to the applied lateral load can be calculated using Eq. 4.14. 
,1 = 
(  )
(4.14)  
Taking into account the vertical load which also contributes to the overturning resistance, 
therefore reducing the tensile force the hold down connection must resist, Eq. 4.14 becomes 
Eq. 4.15. 
,1 = 
(  )
(4.15)  
The force in the hold down connection is also given by Eq. 4.16 where kt,HD the tensile 
stiffness of the hold down connection and uHD1 is the vertical displacement of hold down 
connection HD1. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
,1 = ,1 
(4.16) 
Therefore, substituting Eq. 4.15 into Eq. 4.16 and rearranging the equation gives Eq. 4.17. 
The angle of rotation, , is given by Eq.  4.18, providing that the angle of rotation, , is small 
(sin = ). 
(  )
(4.18)  
Similar to the Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) method, once the wall begins to rock 
the lateral displacement due to rocking can be calculated by Eq. 4.2, providing that the angle 
of rotation, , is small (sin = ).  Therefore, by substituting Eq. 4.17 and Eq. 4.18 into Eq. 
4.2, the lateral displacement due to rocking, r, can be calculated using Eq. 4.19. When the 
stabilising moment provided by the vertical load exceeds the overturning moment rotation 
will not occur, and therefore lateral displacement due to rocking is zero until the stabilising 
moment is exceeded. 
 =  {
(  )
; 0} 
,  (  )
(4.19) 
Lateral displacement due to sliding, s 
This method assumes that the vertical load provides no resistance to horizontal movement 
of the wall panel and the resistance is provided solely by the angle bracket connections. 
Therefore, the lateral displacement due to sliding, sl, can be calculated using Eq. 4.20 where 
ks,AB is the shear stiffness of the angle bracket connections and nAB is the number of angle 
brackets connections in the wall system. 
 = 
,  
(4.20)  
1 = [
(  )
,
(4.17) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Lateral displacement due to shear, sh 
Unlike the Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti (2015a) method, the Casagrande, Rossi and 
Sartori (2016) method does not use an effective area and instead calculates the area, A, using 
the cross-sectional area of the entire CLT panel. The lateral displacement due to shear, sh, 
can be calculated using Eq. 4.21. 
 = 
(4.21)  
4.4.3. Method C  Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016) method 
This method considers all four deformation mechanisms; rocking, sliding, shear and bending. 
Similar to the Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method, the Hummel, Seim and Otto 
(2016) method considers the hold down connections to resist overturning only and the angle 
bracket connections to resist sliding only. For a wall system subjected to a monotonic lateral 
load and a vertical load, lateral displacements due to each deformation mechanism can be 
calculated using to the following method outlined by Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016): 
Lateral displacement due to rocking, r 
Unlike other methods, this method takes into account the stiffness of the foundation, with 
separate equations for the lateral displacement due to rocking presented for a rigid 
foundation (e.g. concrete foundation or CLT floor panel without an elastic intermediate layer) 
and an elastic foundation (e.g. CLT floor panel with an elastic intermediate layer). As the wall 
system experimentally tested in this study uses a CLT floor panel as the base of the wall 
system without an elastic intermediate layer, the equation for predicting the lateral 
displacement due to rocking for a rigid foundation is used. The wall is assumed to rotate 
about a fixed point at the bottom corner of the panel and the equation for the lateral 
displacement due to rocking, r, is derived in the same way as it is in the Casagrande, Rossi 
and Sartori (2016) method. However, the difference between the two methods is the way in 
which the reduced lever arm is defined. In this method the lever arm is further reduced by 
considering it as the distance between the centre of the two hold downs at either end of the 
panel, (b - 2c), rather than the distance between the point of rotation at the edge of the 
panel and the centre of the hold down resisting uplift, (b - c) as assumed by Casagrande, 
Rossi and Sartori (2016). The lateral displacement due to rocking, r, is given by Eq.  4.22. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
 =  {
(  2)
; 0} 
,  (  2)
(4.22)  
Lateral displacement due to sliding, sl 
The lateral displacement due to sliding, sl, is calculated using Eq. 4.20, the same equation 
used in the Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method.  
Lateral displacements due to shear and bending, sh and b 
The lateral displacement due shear, sh, is given by Eq. 4.23 where A is the cross-sectional 
area of the entire CLT panel and Gef is the effective shear modulus. 
The effective shear modulus, Gef, can be calculated using Eq. 4.24 where t is the thickness of 
the CLT panel and a is the width of the timber boards. 
 = 
1 + 6  [0.32 (
0.77
]  (
(4.24)  
The lateral displacement due bending, b, is given by Eq. 4.25. 
3,2
(4.25)  
Ief,2 can be calculated using Eq. 4.26 where tlayer is the thickness of the vertically spanning 
layers. 
,2 = 

(4.26)  
4.4.4. Method D  Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock (2014) method 
This method considers all four deformation mechanisms; rocking, sliding, shear and bending. 
Similar to the Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method and Hummel, Seim and Otto 
(2016) method, hold down connections are considered to resist overturning only and the 
angle bracket connections are considered to resist sliding only. For a wall system subjected 
 = 
(4.23)  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
to a monotonic lateral load and a vertical load, lateral displacements due to each 
deformation mechanism can be calculated using to the following method outlined by 
Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock (2014): 
Lateral displacement due to rocking, r 
The wall is assumed to rotate about a fixed point at the bottom corner of the panel and the 
equation for the lateral displacement due to rocking, r, is derived in the same way as it is in 
the Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method. Although, unlike the Casagrande, Rossi and 
Sartori (2016) method or Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016) method, this method does not used 
a reduced lever arm and instead uses the entire width of the panel, b, as shown in Eq. 4.27 
 = [
,1
(4.27)  
Lateral displacement due to sliding, sl 
The lateral displacement due to sliding, sl, is calculated using Eq. 4.20, the same equation 
used in the Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori (2016) method.  
Lateral displacements due to shear and bending, sh and sh 
The lateral displacement due shear, sh, is given by Eq. 4.28. Instead of calculating an effective 
shear modulus as with the Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016) method, the Wallner-Novak, 
Koppelhuber and Pock (2014) method reduces the shear modulus by 25%. 
 = 
0.75
(4.28)  
The lateral displacement due bending, b, is calculated using Eq. 4.21 where Ief,2 is calculated 
using Eq. 4.22, the same equations used in the Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016) method. 
4.5. Results and Discussion 
The data obtained from the tests carried out on each wall system was analysed and the 
results for all tests are presented in the following subsections. The data from the tests was 
analysed to assess the effect of vertical load on the global behaviour of the wall system, 
allowing the global behaviour of wall systems at each storey within a 10 storey CLT building 
to be inferred. The global behaviour can be summarised by the lateral and vertical 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
displacements of the wall as the lateral load was applied. Using the load-displacement curves 
obtained, apparent lateral stiffness of the wall system was deduced. Residual displacements 
were monitored after the lateral load was removed and any notable residual displacement is 
reported. Vertical displacements of the angle bracket and vertical displacement of the wall 
along its base as lateral load was applied have also been presented. Finally, the results of the 
experimental tests are compared to lateral displacements predicted using the four analytical 
methods outlined in Section 4.4. 
4.5.1. Lateral and vertical displacements of the wall system  
Effect of lateral load on lateral displacement for tests T1-T8 
The total lateral displacements resulting from each lateral loading increment for tests T1.1-
T8.1 are shown in Figure 4.16, for tests T1.2-T8.2 they are shown in Figure 4.17 and for tests 
T1.3-T8.3 they are shown in Figure 4.18. For Wall Systems 1 and 2, the total lateral 
displacements are calculated as the difference in the lateral displacement at the top of the 
wall panel relative to the laboratory floor measured by DT19 and the lateral displacement of 
the floor panel relative to the laboratory floor measured by DT13 (see Figure 4.6). For Wall 
System 3, the total lateral displacements are calculated as the difference in the lateral 
displacement at the top of the wall panel relative to the laboratory floor measured by DT7 
and the lateral displacement of the floor panel relative to the laboratory floor measured by 
DT5 (see Figure 4.9). Although, the lateral displacement of the floor panel relative to the 
laboratory floor was minimal given than the floor panel was fixed to the laboratory floor at 
all four corners as illustrated in Figure 4.4(b). 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.16: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for T1.1-T8.1 
Figure 4.17: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for T1.2-T8.2 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.18: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for T1.3-T8.3 
It can be seen from Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18 that the relationship between 
lateral load and total lateral displacement is generally linear for tests T1-T7. As test T1 used 
the highest vertical load and test T8 the lowest (refer to Table 4.2), it can be seen that the 
total lateral displacement at each lateral load increases as vertical load increases. Figure 4.16 
shows an initially high lateral stiffness at the start of all eight tests, with the stiffness then 
reducing, resulting in a generally linear curve for tests T1.1-T7.1. This initially high stiffness is 
likely due to removal of the slack in Wall System 1 at the start of the test as it was not evident 
in Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18 for Wall Systems 2 and 3. 
As outlined in Section 4.4, the deformation mechanisms which may be observed when a CLT 
wall system is subjected to lateral load include sliding and rocking of the wall, as well as shear 
and bending deformations of the wall panel. Gavric et al. (2015) suggested that wall panel 
deformations are negligible, with sliding and rocking the predominant deformation 
mechanisms which are controlled by the response of the connections. The horizontal 
displacements at various heights along the right-hand side profile of the wall between the 
top of the wall panel and its base were measured in Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 by 
DT14-DT19 as shown in Figure 4.6. These measurements experimentally verified that the 
assumption that in-plane deformations are negligible, and therefore displacement 
transducers were not used at these locations in Wall System 3.  As data obtained during these 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
tests confirms the validity of this assumption, it can be concluded that the only notable 
deformation mechanisms contributing to the overall behaviour are rocking and sliding.  
The lateral displacement of the wall due to sliding, relative to the laboratory floor, is directly 
measured at the base of the wall panel using DT14 for Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 
(Figure 4.6), and using DT6 for Wall System 3 (Figure 4.9).  The lateral displacement of the 
floor panel relative to the laboratory floor was measured by DT13 for Wall System 1 and Wall 
System 2 (Figure 4.6), and by DT4 for Wall System 3 (Figure 4.9).  Therefore, the lateral 
displacement due to sliding of the wall panel relative to the floor panel was determined for 
Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 as the difference of the measurements recorded between 
DT13 and DT14, and for Wall System 3 as the difference of the measurements recorded 
between DT5 and DT6. Lateral displacement due to rocking however was not directly 
measured. Although, as the in-plane deformation panel was negligible, it can be assumed 
that the total lateral displacement of the wall panel measured by a displacement transducer 
at the top of the wall (DT19 in Figure 4.6 and DT7 in Figure 4.9) is a product of both the lateral 
displacement due to sliding and the lateral displacement due to rocking. Therefore, the 
lateral displacement due to rocking can be calculated given that the total lateral 
displacement and lateral displacement due to sliding are known. The relationship between 
the lateral load applied and the total lateral displacement, lateral displacement due to sliding 
and the lateral displacement due to rocking for test T8.1 is shown in Figure 4.19. All of tests 
T1-T8 demonstrated a similar relationship to that shown in Figure 4.19 in which total lateral 
displacement, lateral displacement due to sliding and the lateral displacement due to rocking 
increased with increasing lateral load. Lateral displacement due to rocking was greater than 
the lateral displacement due to sliding in all tests, as shown in Figure 4.19 for test T8.1. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.19: Lateral load [kN] vs. lateral displacement due to sliding/lateral displacement due 
to rocking [mm] for T8.1 
Effect of vertical load on lateral displacement for tests T1-T8 
The relationship between the vertical load applied and the total lateral displacement, lateral 
displacement due to sliding and the lateral displacement due to rocking is shown in Figure 
4.20 for tests T1.1-T1.8, Figure 4.21 for tests T1.2-T.8.2 and Figure 4.22 for tests T1.3-T.8.3. 
Figure 4.20: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
T1.1-T8.1 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.21: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
T1.2-T8.2 
Figure 4.22: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement/lateral displacement due to 
sliding/lateral displacement due to rocking [mm] when the applied lateral load is 50 kN for 
T1.3-T8.3 
For tests T1-T8 on all three wall systems, the contribution of the lateral displacement due to 
sliding and the lateral displacement due to rocking to the total lateral displacement when the 
applied lateral load is 50 kN is summarised in Table 4.5. The mean percentage contribution 
of each deformation mechanism is also presented in Table 4.5.  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.5: Percentage contribution of sliding and rocking to the total lateral displacement 
measured in tests T1-T8 when the applied lateral load is 50 kN 
Wall System 1  Wall System 2  Wall System 3  Mean 
Sliding 
Rocking 
 Sliding 
Rocking 
 Sliding 
Rocking 
Sliding 
Rocking 
T1 12 88  12 88  12 88  12 88 
T2 12 88  9 91  13 87  11 89 
T3 9 91  10 90  13 87  11 89 
T4 10 90  10 90  14 86  11 89 
T5 11 89  8 92  16 84  12 88 
T6 11 89  8 92  19 81  13 87 
T7 13 87  9 91  20 80  14 86 
T8 27 73  27 73  25 75  26 74 
While rocking behaviour was the predominant deformation mechanism in all eight tests, 
sliding is evident in Figure 4.20, Figure 4.21 and Figure 4.22. Table 4.5 shows that the mean 
contribution of the lateral displacement due to sliding to the total lateral displacement was 
similar for tests T1-T7, with the contribution ranging from 11-14%. However, it can be seen 
from Table 4.5 that sliding is more significant for test T8 with the lateral displacement due to 
sliding accounting for 26% of the total lateral displacement. Rocking walls are self-centring, 
meaning they will return to their original position after the lateral load is removed with no 
residual lateral displacement. However, sliding of the wall may result in a residual lateral 
displacement once the lateral load is removed if the connections have undergone plastic 
deformation and therefore sliding should be avoided. The increased lateral displacement due 
to sliding in test T8 is likely due to a perceived reduction in stiffness from a combination of 
reduced frictional force and the reduced shear capacity of the angle bracket connections due 
to bidirectional loading of the connection. The reduced shear capacity of the angle bracket 
connections will be explained in more detail with regard to the residual lateral displacements 
in Section 4.5.3.  
The lateral displacement due to rocking is dependent on the overturning moment, the 
stability moment provided by the vertical load as well as the tensile resistance of the 
connections. Therefore, the lateral displacement due to rocking is dependent on the 
geometry of the wall system and so it is influenced by aspect ratio. Lateral displacement due 
to sliding is dependent on frictional force and the shear resistance of the connections, and 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
therefore it is independent of the aspect ratio. While the findings of this study are specific to 
the chosen aspect ratio of 0.5, by maintaining a constant aspect ratio an assessment of the 
effect of vertical load was achieved. 
Effect of lateral load on vertical displacement for tests T1-T8 
The vertical displacement at the left hand side of the wall systems (refer to Figure 4.6 and 
Figure 4.9) resulting from each loading increment for tests T1.1-T8.1 are shown in Figure 
4.23, for tests T1.2-T8.2 they are shown in Figure 4.24, and for tests T1.3-T8.3 they are shown 
in Figure 4.25. For all three wall systems, these vertical displacements are calculated as the 
difference in the vertical displacement of the wall panel relative to the laboratory floor 
measured by DT1 and the vertical displacement of the floor panel relative to the laboratory 
floor measured by DT2 (see Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.9). Although, the vertical displacement of 
the floor panel relative to the laboratory floor was minimal given than the floor panel was 
fixed to the laboratory floor at all four corners as illustrated in Figure 4.4(b). 
Figure 4.23: Lateral load [kN] vs. vertical displacement [mm] for T1.1-T8.1 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.24: Lateral load [kN] vs. vertical displacement [mm] for T1.2-T8.2 
Figure 4.25: Lateral load [kN] vs. vertical displacement [mm] for T1.3-T8.3 
It can be seen from Figure 4.23, Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.25 that the relationship between 
lateral load and vertical displacement is generally linear for tests T1-T4 and non-linear for 
tests T5-T8. The vertical displacement increases as the lateral load increases which is due to 
the increasing overturning moment. As test T1 used the highest vertical load and test T8 the 
lowest (refer to Table 4.2), it can be seen that the vertical displacement at each lateral load 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
increases as vertical load is decreased and this is because the stabilising moment provided 
by the vertical load decreases as the vertical load is decreased. In each test, the vertical 
displacement is smaller than the lateral displacement which can be explained by the 0.5 
aspect ratio. 
Effect of vertical load on vertical displacement for tests T1-T8 
The relationship between the vertical load applied and the vertical displacement is shown in 
Figure 4.26 for tests T1.1-T1.8, Figure 4.27 for tests T1.2-T.8.2 and Figure 4.28  for tests T1.3-
T.8.3. 
Figure 4.26: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
for T1.1-T8.1 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.27: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
for T1.2-T8.2 
Figure 4.28: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. vertical displacement [mm] when lateral load is 50 kN 
for T1.3-T8.3 
Comparing Figure 4.20, Figure 4.21 and Figure 4.22 with Figure 4.26, Figure 4.27 and Figure 
4.28, it can be seen that the range of values of vertical displacement obtained from the three 
repetitions of each test is greater than the range of values of lateral displacement obtained 
from the three repetitions of each test. Despite this, Figure 4.20, Figure 4.21 and Figure 4.22 
still demonstrate a similar trend between displacement and vertical load whereby the 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
vertical displacement increases non-linearly with decreasing vertical load. Therefore, it can 
be concluded that different global behaviour of wall systems at each storey within a multi-
storey building would be expected during the elastic response of the building as the 
contribution of each deformation mechanism to the global behaviour varies. However, as 
neither maximum load capacity nor ultimate load capacity of the wall system was reached it 
is uncertain whether this remains true for the plastic response of CLT wall systems at 
different storeys. Nonetheless, the varying contribution of deformation mechanisms to 
global behaviour within the elastic region reinforces the need to consider connection design 
at each individual storey. 
Effect of lateral load on lateral and vertical displacements for tests T9-T12 
The total lateral displacement resulting from each lateral loading increment between 0 kN 
and 150 kN for tests T9, T10, T11 and T12 is shown in Figure 4.29. In tests T9, T10, T11 and 
T12 a higher lateral load was applied than in tests T1.1, T8.1, T4.2 and T8.3, but the tests 
were carried out on the same wall system and the same vertical load was applied in tests T9 
and T1.1, T10 and T8.1, T11 and T4.2, and T12 and T8.3 (see Table 4.2). Therefore, by 
including the results of tests T1.1, T8.1, T4.2 and T8.3 in Figure 4.29 a comparison of the 
behaviour observed between the two tests subjected to the same vertical load and 
undertaken on the same CLT wall system over the 0-50 kN lateral load range can be made. 
Figure 4.29 and Figure 4.30 show that there is minimal difference between the lateral and 
vertical displacements observed for tests T9 and T1.1, T10 and T8.1, T11 and T4.2, and T12 
and T8.3 between a lateral load of 0 kN and 50 kN. This suggests minimal strength and 
stiffness degradation due to repeated testing of the wall system under different load 
scenarios and confirms elastic behaviour of the connections. It can also be seen from Figure 
4.29 that the two tests carried out on Wall System 1 involving a vertical load of 10.5 kN/m 
(T8.1 and T10) and the two tests carried out on Wall System 3 involving the same vertical 
load of 10.5 kN/m (T8.3 and T12) show similar behaviour with minimal difference between 
the load-lateral displacement curves for these tests. As previously mentioned, there is 
variation between the vertical displacements measured when the same loading combination 
was applied to different wall systems (see Figure 4.26, Figure 4.27 and Figure 4.28). This is 
again evident in Figure 4.30 which shows load-vertical displacement curves for tests T10 and 
T12 which are less similar than the load-lateral displacement curves for the same tests as 
shown in Figure 4.29.  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.29: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for T1.1, T9, T8.1, T10, T4.3, 
T.11, T.8.3 and T12 
Figure 4.30: Lateral load [kN] vs. vertical displacement [mm] for T1.1, T9, T8.1, T10, T4.3, 
T.11, T.8.3 and T12  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.31 shows the connections after test T10 and it is apparent that both connections 
experienced plastic deformation. Plastic deformation is evident in both parts of the hold 
down with deformation of the base around the bolt and the wall part of the hold down has 
rotated from its original position. Similarly, plastic deformation is evident in both the wall 
and floor parts of the angle bracket and withdrawal of the nails on the floor part of the 
connection can be seen. While post-yield behaviour was observed during tests T9, T10, T11 
and T12, maximum load and ultimate load were not yet reached. 
Figure 4.31: Connections after test T10 
4.5.2. Lateral stiffness of the wall system  
Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18 show that as lateral load is increased from 0 kN to 
50 kN the total lateral displacement also increases, with the maximum lateral displacement 
occurring at the maximum lateral load. Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18 also show 
that there is generally linear behaviour of the wall system as lateral load is increased for tests 
T1-T7, with only test T8 showing bilinear behaviour. The lateral stiffness of the wall systems 
in tests T1-T7 was found by determining the gradient of the linear trend line for the load-
displacement curves shown in Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18, as illustrated by Figure 
4.32(a). The lateral stiffness of the wall systems in test T8 was found by determining the 
gradient of both sections of the bilinear trend line for the T8 load-displacement curves shown 
in Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18, as illustrated by Figure 4.32(b). Figure 4.33 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
demonstrates how the lateral stiffness was determined using example linear and bilinear 
load-displacement curves. As previously mentioned, the apparent initial high stiffness for the 
tests T1.1-T8.1 shown in Figure 4.16 is likely due to removal of the slack in Wall System 1 at 
the start of the test, rather than yielding of the wall system, as it was not evident in Figure 
4.17 and Figure 4.18 for the same tests carried out on Wall Systems 1 and 2. Therefore, this 
part of the load-displacement curves was not included when drawing the trend lines used to 
calculate the lateral stiffness.  
Figure 4.32: (a) Linear stiffness profile exhibited in test T1-T7; (b) bilinear stiffness profile 
exhibited in test T8 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.33: (a) Example linear load  displacement curves used to determine lateral stiffness 
values; (b) Example bilinear load  displacement curves used to determine lateral stiffness 
values 
The lateral stiffness for the linear displacement curves (tests T1-T7) and lateral stiffness at 
both sections of the bilinear displacement curves (tests T8) for tests T1-T8 carried out on all 
three wall systems are given in Table 4.6. The relationship between the vertical load applied 
in each test and the mean lateral stiffness, k1, is illustrated in Figure 4.34. 
Table 4.6: Lateral stiffness of wall system 
Vertical 
[kN/m] 
Lateral Stiffness [kN/m] 
Wall System 
 Wall System 
 Wall System 
k1 k2  k1 k2  k1 k2  k1 k2 
T1 84 41.7 -  45.9 -  47.5 -  45.0 - 
T2 73.5 46.0 -  43.8 -  46.6 -  45.5 - 
T3 63 40.0 -  41.4 -  43.9 -  41.8 - 
T4 52.5 36.8 -  36.8 -  39.9 -  37.8 - 
T5 42 30.7 -  23.8 -  34.9 -  29.8 - 
T6 31.5 23.8 -  27.3 -  29.3 -  26.8 - 
T7 21 18.4 -  17.0 -  21.5 -  19.0 - 
T8 10.5 12.4 9.5  12.1 7.5  15.9 10.0  13.5 9.0 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.34: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. mean lateral stiffness, k1 [kN/mm]  
The gradient of the linear load-displacement curves shown in Figure 4.16, Figure 4.17 and 
Figure 4.18 decreases as vertical load is decreased between tests T1 and T7. This suggests 
that the apparent lateral stiffness of the wall system decreases as vertical load is reduced 
which is confirmed by Table 4.6 and Figure 4.34. As the vertical loads represent the gravity 
load at different storeys within a multi-storey CLT building, the trend illustrated in Figure 
4.34, in which lateral stiffness decreases with decreasing vertical load, suggests apparent 
variable stiffness throughout a multi-storey CLT building. This is likely due to a combination 
of decreased overturning resistance due to decreased vertical load and decreased frictional 
resistance due to decreased vertical load. 
4.5.3. Residual lateral displacements of the wall system  
As previously discussed, rocking walls are self-centring however sliding of a wall may result 
in a residual lateral displacement once the lateral load is removed, if the connections resisting 
sliding have undergone plastic deformation. Residual lateral displacement can be avoided by 
ensuring that the connections within the wall system that provide shear resistance, and 
therefore resistance to sliding, have sufficient shear capacity to prevent yielding when a 
lateral load is applied to the wall system. As previously mentioned, the mean yield shear 
strength of the angle bracket connections used within the wall systems was determined 
through the testing of this connection under monotonic and cyclic shear loading as detailed 
in Chapter 3, and the mean yield shear strength of one angle bracket connection is given as 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
15.97 kN in Table 3.2. As illustrated in Figure 4.4, all three wall systems had a total of eight 
angle bracket connections and therefore the combined mean yield shear strength of these 
connections is 127.76 kN. Consequently, it would be expected that there would be negligible 
residual lateral displacement after tests T1-T8 given that the maximum applied lateral load 
in these tests is 50 kN, less than the combined mean yield shear strength of the angle bracket 
connections. However, residual lateral displacement would be expected after tests T9-T12 as 
the maximum applied lateral load in these tests is 150 kN which exceeds the combined mean 
yield shear strength of the angle bracket connections. 
The residual lateral displacements of the wall systems after each test were determined after 
the lateral load had been removed from the wall system but before the vertical load was 
removed. This loading condition in which the vertical load was maintained after the lateral 
load was removed is realistic of the loading condition experienced by wall systems in a CLT 
building after the lateral load imposed on the building by wind or an earthquake has ended. 
The total lateral displacements when the lateral load, H, was maximum (H:50 kN) and the 
residual lateral displacements after the lateral load was removed and the vertical load was 
maintained (H:0 kN) for tests T1-T8 undertaken on all three wall systems are summarised in 
Table 4.7. The mean total lateral displacement when the lateral load, H, was maximum and 
mean residual lateral displacement are also presented in Table 4.7, as well as the mean 
percentage of the total lateral displacement at the maximum lateral load which was not 
recovered for each test. 
Table 4.7: Total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is maximum (H:50 kN) and residual 
lateral displacement when the lateral load, H, is removed (H:0 kN) for tests T1-T8 
Lateral Displacement [mm] 
Mean H:0 kN 
Mean H:50 kN 
Wall System  
 Wall System 
 Wall System 
H:50 kN  H:0 kN     H:50 kN  H:0 kN     H:50 kN  H:0 kN       H:50 kN  H:0 kN 
T1 0.76 -0.09  1.15 0.12  1.09 0.19  1.00 0.07 7.4 
T2 0.78 0.03  1.17 0.06  1.09 0.12  1.01 0.07 6.8 
T3 0.91 0.00  1.25 0.04  1.15 0.12  1.10 0.05 5.0 
T4 1.00 -0.01  1.37 0.05  1.27 0.13  1.22 0.06 4.6 
T5 1.29 0.00  2.00 0.05  1.47 0.17  1.58 0.07 4.6 
T6 1.81 0.00  1.91 0.09  1.82 0.22  1.85 0.11 5.7 
T7 2.39 0.14  3.01 0.64  2.57 0.43  2.66 0.41 15.3 
T8 4.00 0.69  4.89 1.69  4.03 0.83  4.31 1.07 24.8 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.35 illustrates the relationship between vertical load and the mean total lateral 
displacement when the lateral load, H, was maximum (H:50 kN), and between vertical load 
and the mean residual lateral displacement after the lateral load was removed (H:0 kN) and 
the vertical load was maintained. 
Figure 4.35: Vertical load [kN/m] vs. total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is 
maximum (H:50 kN)/residual lateral displacement when the lateral load, H, is removed (H:0 
kN) and vertical load is maintained [mm] 
It can be seen from Table 4.7 and Figure 4.35 that the mean residual lateral displacement is 
negligible for test T1-T6. Despite the lateral load not exceeding the combined yield shear 
strength, residual lateral displacement is significant for test T8 in which the lowest vertical 
load was applied, with a mean residual lateral displacement of 1.07 mm measured which was 
approximately 25% of the total lateral displacement at maximum lateral load. This residual 
lateral displacement suggests that some connections may have yielded during this test 
despite the testing of the angle bracket connection under shear loading indicating a yield 
shear strength of 15.97 kN. A potential explanation for this could have been that there was 
strength degradation of the connections due to repeated loading. However, as explained in 
Section 4.5.1, Figure 4.29 showed that strength degradation was minimal and therefore 
strength degradation is unlikely to have contributed to this.  In Chapter 3, and in previous 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
studies (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a), the angle bracket connections were found 
to have notable tensile strength and therefore must contribute to the overturning resistance 
of a wall. This means that as a wall begins to rotate, the angle bracket connection resists 
tensile force as well as shear force and so the angle bracket connection is subjected to 
bidirectional loading. Overturning of a wall is not only resisted by the connections but also 
by the stabilising moment provided by the vertical load, and so the overturning resistance of 
the wall systems during tests T1-T8 would have been lowest when the vertical load was 
lowest as the connections were kept the same. Therefore, for test T8 in which the lowest 
vertical was used, overturning resistance would be lowest leading to the largest uplift of the 
walls, as shown in Figure 4.23, Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.25. Since the largest vertical 
displacement occurred in test T8, the angle bracket connections would have been subjected 
to the highest tensile forces during this test. Therefore, it is likely that the reduction in shear 
capacity of the angle bracket connection is most significant in test T8 as the extent of 
bidirectional loading will be highest. This explains why the angle bracket connections in test 
T8 only appeared to yield before the yield shear strength of the connection determined from 
testing the connection under unidirectional load would suggest. While previous studies have 
stated that the behaviour of wall systems is dictated entirely by the connections (Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a), it is clear that vertical load has a major influence on the 
behaviour of these connections. Therefore, more sophisticated and realistic ways of 
investigating the performance of connections must be developed. It is important that the 
connections are tested under realistic bidirectional loading when determining the properties 
of the connections to be used within CLT building design. This will allow any strength 
reduction due to bidirectional loading of the connections to be quantified in order to ensure 
sufficient shear capacity will be provided by connections within the CLT wall system to 
prevent significant sliding which could lead to undesirable residual lateral displacements.  
The total lateral displacements when the lateral load, H, was maximum (H:150 kN) and the 
residual lateral displacements after the lateral load was removed and the vertical load was 
maintained (H:0 kN) for tests T9-T12 are summarised in Table 4.8. The mean percentage of 
the total lateral displacement at the maximum lateral load which was not recovered for each 
test is also presented in Table 4.8.  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Table 4.8: Total lateral displacement when lateral load, H, is maximum (H:150 kN) and 
residual lateral displacement end of the test when the lateral load, H, is removed (H:0 kN) for 
tests T9-T12 
Vertical Load 
Lateral Displacement [mm] H:0 kN 
H:150 kN  
[%]  H:150 kN H:0 kN 
T9 84 3.96 0.37 9.5 
T10 10.5 24.43 10.17 41.6 
T11 52.5 7.79 2.51 32.2 
T12 10.5 24.09 7.97 33.1 
As expected, Table 4.8 shows that significant residual lateral displacements were observed 
when the maximum applied lateral load was 150 kN. It can be seen from Table 4.8 that the 
residual lateral displacement increases as vertical load decreases. This further reinforces the 
fact that vertical load contributes to the resistance of the wall system to sliding which is 
contradictory to analytical methods B, C and D (Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori, 2016; 
Hummel, Seim and Otto, 2016; Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock, 2014) which assume 
sliding resistance is provided by the angle bracket connections only (refer to Section 4.4).  
Figure 4.46 shows the residual lateral displacement observed at the end of test T12. 
Figure 4.36: Residual lateral displacement at the end of test T12 
Residual lateral 
displacement  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
The lateral displacements reported for all tests conducted as part of this study were 
determined relative to any initial lateral displacement at the start of each test due to any 
residual lateral displacements from previous tests. Figure 4.37 illustrates the loading and 
unloading displacement curves for tests T8.1, T9 and T10 in which significant residual lateral 
displacements were observed. As all tests were carried out on the same wall system, tests T9 
and T10 were undertaken after yielding of the connections had occurred and for these tests 
there was an initial lateral displacement due to incomplete recovery of the maximum total 
lateral displacement in the previous test. Figure 4.37 shows the progressive increase in 
residual lateral displacement across these three inelastic tests to the end of the testing 
program where a residual lateral displacement of approximately 11.2 mm was recorded for 
Wall System 1.  
Figure 4.37: Lateral load [kN] vs. total lateral displacement [mm] for the lateral loading and 
unloading of T8.1, T9 and T10 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
4.5.4. Vertical displacements of the base of wall and connectors 
In Wall System 1 and Wall System 2, the vertical displacement of the angle brackets relative 
to the laboratory floor was measured by DT5-DT12 (Table 4.3 and Figure 4.6). The vertical 
displacement of the floor panel relative to the laboratory floor was measured by DT2 and 
DT4 at the end profile of the floor panel on the left hand side and right hand side, respectively 
(Table 4.3 and Figure 4.6). The vertical displacement of the floor panel at the location of each 
angle bracket connection was estimated assuming a linear displacement profile between DT2 
and DT4. Therefore, the vertical displacement of the angle brackets relative to the floor panel 
was calculated as the difference between the vertical displacement measured by DT5-DT12 
and the estimated vertical displacement of the floor panel. The vertical displacements of the 
angle brackets relative to the floor panel as the lateral load was increased from 0 kN to 50 
kN in tests T1.1/T1.2, T4.1/T4.2 and T8.1/T8.2 on Wall System 1 and Wall System 2 (refer to 
Table 2.1) , are shown in Figure 4.38, Figure 4.39 and Figure 4.40, respectively.  
Figure 4.38: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T1 as the lateral load 
was increased from 0 kN to 50 kN for Wall Systems 1 and 2 (a) T1.1; (b) T1.2  
(a) (b) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.39: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T4 as the lateral load 
was increased from 0 kN to 50 kN for Wall Systems 1 and 2 (a) T4.1; (b) T4.2  
Figure 4.40: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets during test T8 as the lateral load 
was increased from 0 kN to 50 kN for Wall Systems 1 and 2 (a) T8.1; (b) T8.2  
It can be seen from Figure 4.38, Figure 4.39 and Figure 4.40 that in general the vertical 
displacements of the angle brackets increased and the shapes of the displacement profiles 
remained similar as the applied lateral load was increased for each test on each wall system. 
However, it is evident that there is not a linear trend between the vertical displacements of 
the connectors with no obvious relationship between the location of the angle bracket and 
the vertical displacement. It is also apparent that there significant variability in the vertical 
displacements of the angle brackets and the shapes of the displacement profiles for the same 
(a) (b) 
(a) (b) 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
tests on different wall systems as illustrated in Figure 4.38(a) and Figure 4.38(b), Figure 
4.39(a) and Figure 4.39(b), and Figure 4.40(a) and Figure 4.40(b). 
In Wall System 1 and Wall System 2, the vertical displacement of the wall panel was only 
measured at the ends by DT 1 and DT3 (Table 4.3 and Figure 4.6). Therefore, it could not be 
determined for these wall systems whether the base of the wall would follow a similar 
displacement profile to that of the angle brackets or whether it would exhibit a linear 
displacement profile as assumed by the analytical models described in Section 4.4. 
Consequently, additional displacement transducers were used in Wall System 3 to investigate 
the displacement profile of the base of the wall during the tests. These displacement 
transducers were placed on L brackets fixed to the wall panel adjacent to four of the angle 
brackets, as shown in Figure 4.10. They allowed a displacement profile of the base of the wall 
panel for each test to be determined so that comparisons could be made with the 
corresponding displacement profile of the angle brackets. These displacement transducers 
measured the vertical displacement of the base of the wall panel relative to the laboratory 
floor in at four locations and are DT16-DT19 shown in Figure 4.9.  
The vertical displacement of the floor panel at the location of DT16-DT19 was estimated 
assuming a linear displacement profile between DT2 and DT4. Therefore, the vertical 
displacements of the base of the wall panel relative to the floor panel were calculated as the 
difference between the vertical displacements measured by DT16-DT19 and the estimated 
vertical displacements of the floor panel. The vertical displacement of the angle brackets 
relative to the floor panel in Wall System 3 was calculated in the same way as that for Wall 
System 1 and Wall System 2, with the vertical displacement of the angle brackets relative to 
the laboratory floor measured by DT8-DT15 (Table 4.4 and Figure 4.9). The vertical 
displacements of the angle brackets and the base of the wall relative to the floor panel when 
the applied lateral load was 50 kN in tests T1.3, T4.3 and T8.3 are shown in Figure 4.41, Figure 
4.42, Figure 4.43, respectively. Figure 4.44 shows the vertical displacements of the angle 
brackets and the base of the wall relative to the floor panel when the applied lateral load was 
150 kN in tests T12. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.41: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
test T1.3 when the applied lateral load was 50 kN  
Figure 4.42: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
test T4.3 when the applied lateral load was 50 kN 
Figure 4.43: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
test T8.3 when the applied lateral load was 50 kN 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.44: Vertical displacement [mm] of angle brackets and the base of the wall during 
test T12 when the applied lateral load was 150 kN 
It is evident from Figure 4.41, Figure 4.42, Figure 4.43 and Figure 4.44 that the base of the 
wall does not follow the displacement profile that would be suggested by the vertical 
displacements recorded for the angle brackets, nor is the displacement profile linear as 
assumed by the analytical methods. It can be seen that the vertical displacements of the wall 
at the four locations measured are generally greater than the vertical displacements of the 
angle brackets at these locations. Although not visually apparent during the tests, this 
difference in vertical displacement suggests that there would have been significant bending 
of the nails which fasten the angle brackets to the wall panel with the extent of nail bending 
likely to be greatest where the difference in vertical displacements is largest. Figure 4.41, 
Figure 4.42, Figure 4.43 and Figure 4.44 show negative vertical displacements of the wall at 
different locations. This negative vertical displacement indicates the movement of the wall 
downwards from its initial position despite the presence of the floor panel underneath the 
wall panel. Therefore, this suggests that there is a compression zone at the base of the wall 
and the point of the rotation is not a fixed point at the bottom corner of the wall panel as 
assumed by the analytical methods. Comparing the length of the negative part of the 
displacement profiles for the wall shown in Figure 4.41, Figure 4.42, Figure 4.43 and Figure 
4.44, it appears that the length of the compression zone is not constant and varies with the 
vertical and lateral loading combination applied. Low vertical load and high lateral load 
(Figure 4.44) result in a relatively small compression zone, concentrated towards the bottom 
corner of the wall panel on the side which the lateral load is not applied. Whereas higher 
vertical load and lower lateral load leads to the compression zone extending across almost 
the entire length of the wall (Figure 4.41).   
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
It was previously mentioned that there is variability in the vertical displacements of the angle 
brackets and the shape of the displacement profiles observed for Wall Systems 1 and 2. 
Comparing the vertical displacements of the angle brackets and the shape of the 
displacement profiles of Wall System 3 with those of Wall Systems 1 and 2, it can be seen 
that this variability is also evident between all three wall systems with the same test (T1, T4 
and T8) on each wall system resulting in different behaviour of the wall system. As previously 
discussed with regard to Wall System 3, bending of the nails must be occurring due to the 
difference in vertical displacement of angle brackets and the wall at the same location. The 
variability in vertical displacement of the angle bracket across the three wall systems suggests 
that the behaviour of the nails in the angle bracket connections is variable and therefore 
cannot be accurately predicted. This poses a significant challenge for predicting the 
behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral load as the behaviour of the connections within 
the wall systems is one of the two main factors which dictates wall system behaviour, with 
vertical load the other factor. One cause of this variability might be the shape of the angle 
bracket connections as it was noticed when assembling the wall systems prior to testing that 
the two parts of the angle bracket were not perpendicular to each other. 
4.5.5. Comparison of lateral displacement predictions using analytical methods 
with experimental results 
To check the validity of the analytical methods proposed in the literature and outlined in 
Section 4.4, predicted lateral displacements were calculated using each of the four methods 
and compared to the experimental results. The validity of the methods can be evaluated by 
assessing how accurately they predict the experimentally observed total lateral 
displacements as well as the lateral displacements due to each deformation mechanism. As 
the lateral displacements of the wall system reflect the lateral stiffness of the wall system, it 
is important that these displacements can be accurately predicted if an analytical method is 
used. Over-predicted lateral displacement could lead to the inefficient design of a wall 
system with greater stiffness than necessary, while under-predicted lateral displacement 
could lead to the design of a wall system with insufficient lateral stiffness to safely withstand 
expected lateral loads.  
When using the analytical methods, all dimensions used were the same as those of the wall 
systems experimentally tested (Figure 4.4). The elastic modulus, E, for the CLT panels used 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
in this study is given as 12 GPa by ETA-14/0349 (OIB, 2018). The shear modulus, G, was taken 
as 0.69 GPa in accordance with BS EN 338 (BSI, 2010c). The tensile and shear stiffness values 
of the connections were those determined through the experimental testing of the 
connections undertaken as part of this study (Chapter 3). The tensile stiffness of the hold 
down connection corresponds to that of Configuration 17, the shear stiffness of the hold 
down connection corresponds to that of Configuration 14, the tensile stiffness of the angle 
bracket connection corresponds to that of Configuration 5 and the shear stiffness of the angle 
bracket connection corresponds to that of Configuration 2. The tensile and shear stiffness 
values of the connections are summarised in Table 4.9. It is assumed that the connections 
undergo linear elastic deformation as there is no provision within the methods which 
considers yielding of the connections. Consequently, the stiffness values reported in Table 
4.9 and used within the calculations are the elastic stiffness of the connections. 
Table 4.9: Elastic tensile and shear stiffness of connections 
Tensile stiffness of 
hold down 
connection, kt,HD 
[kN/mm] 
Shear stiffness of 
hold down 
connection, ks,HD 
[kN/mm] 
Tensile stiffness of 
angle bracket 
connection, kt,AB 
[kN/mm] 
Shear stiffness of 
angle bracket 
connection, ks,AB 
[kN/mm] 
1.92 0.33 2.37 0.9 
Method B (Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori, 2016) and Method C (Hummel, Seim and Otto, 
2016) are the only methods which explicitly state that rotation, and therefore lateral 
displacement due to rocking, does not occur until the overturning moment exceeds the 
stabilising moment provided to the vertical load (Eq. 4.19 and Eq. 4.22). Without this  
stipulation, calculating the lateral displacement due to rocking using Method A (Gavric, 
Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a) and Method D (Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock, 
2014) before the stabilising moment has been exceeded would lead to negative values and 
therefore suggest displacement in the opposite direction to the lateral load. As this would 
not realistically occur, the stipulation that rotation does not occur until the stabilising 
moment is exceeded has been applied to Method A and Method D. Therefore, it is assumed 
that the lateral displacement due to rocking is zero until the stabilising moment due to the 
vertical load is exceeded. Similarly, Method A does not state that sliding cannot occur until 
the lateral force exceeds the frictional force due to the vertical load. Therefore, calculating 
the lateral displacement due to sliding using this method (Eq. 4.11) before the lateral load 
exceeds the frictional force would lead to displacements in the opposite direction to the 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
lateral load which again is not realistic of actual behaviour. Consequently, it has been 
assumed that until the lateral force is greater than the frictional force, the lateral 
displacement due to sliding is zero. This does not apply to Method B, Method C and Method 
D as these methods do not take frictional force into account. 
Total lateral displacements were predicted for the wall system when it was subjected to a 
constant vertical load of 10.5 kN/m and a lateral load of 50 kN, the same loading combination 
used in tests T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3 when the maximum lateral load was applied. The vertical 
load of 10.5 kN/m was used to compare the experimental results with the predicted values 
as it was the lowest vertical load applied in the experimental study and resulted in the largest 
lateral displacements. The four predicted load-displacement curves produced using the 
analytical methods and the load-displacement curves produced using the experimental 
results of tests T8.1, T.82 and T8.3 are shown in Figure 4.45. Figure 4.45 shows that the 
existing analytical methods generally over-predict the total lateral displacement, therefore 
under-predicting the lateral stiffness of the wall system. Method A gives the most similar 
load-displacement curve to the experimental load-displacement curves, however the total 
lateral displacements predicted by Method A appear to become increasingly dissimilar to the 
experimentally recorded total lateral displacements as the lateral load increases.  
Figure 4.45: Lateral load [kN] vs. experimental/predicted total lateral displacement [mm] 
when vertical load is 10.5 kN/m 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Defined by Eq. 4.1, the total lateral displacement is the sum of the lateral displacements due 
to four deformation mechanisms; rocking, sliding, shear and bending. For all loading 
combinations used within the experimental study, the predicted lateral displacements due 
to shear and bending were found to be negligible in all cases, with calculated values less than 
0.001 mm. This is consistent with the results of the experimental tests which indicated 
negligible in-plane deformation of the wall panel for all tests. Consequently, the lateral 
displacements due to shear and bending do not appear in any of the subsequent graphs 
which illustrate the predicted and experimentally observed lateral displacements due to each 
deformation mechanism. 
Figure 4.46 illustrates the experimentally observed values of the lateral displacements due 
to rocking and sliding for tests T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3 when the maximum lateral load of 50 kN 
was applied, as well as the values predicted using all four analytical methods. The 
predominant deformation mechanisms in the experimental tests (T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3) was 
rocking, however all four analytical methods predict sliding to be the predominant 
deformation mechanism. While all four methods significantly over-estimated the lateral 
displacement due to sliding, the lateral displacement due to rocking is under-estimated. 
Therefore, the inaccurate total lateral displacement predictions when a lateral load of 50 kN 
is applied (Figure 4.46) are not due to the inaccurate prediction of the lateral displacement 
due to one of the deformation mechanisms, but rather the inaccurate prediction of both 
deformation mechanisms. In Chapter 3 it was noted that the floor panel of the connections 
was not restrained to prevent out-of-plane movement during the testing of the connections 
under shear load and so bending deformation as well as shear deformation was observed. 
Therefore, it is likely that the shear stiffness of the connections in the wall system is higher 
than the shear stiffness measured from the testing of the connections (Table 4.9) because 
during the wall system tests the connections were subject to shear deformation only. This 
underestimation of shear stiffness may explain the extent to which the analytical methods 
over-estimate the lateral displacement due to sliding.  
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
Figure 4.46: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
experimental results for tests T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3 when the lateral load is 50 kN 
Figure 4.47 also illustrates the predicted and experimentally observed values of the lateral 
displacements due to rocking and sliding for tests T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3, but when lateral load 
of 25 kN is applied rather than the maximum lateral load. Again, the analytical methods 
significantly over-predict the lateral displacement due to sliding. It can be seen from Figure 
4.47 that the analytical methods predict no lateral displacement due to rocking because, 
according to relevant equations (Eq. 4.7, Eq. 4.19, Eq. 4.22 and Eq. 4.27), the lateral load is 
not large enough to overcome the stabilising moment due to the vertical load. While the 
analytical methods predicted no lateral displacement due to rocking, rocking behaviour was 
observed in the experimental tests. A possible reason for this discrepancy between the 
experimental and predicted lateral displacements due to rocking is how the vertical load is 
considered in the equations. These equations assume the vertical load is a uniformly 
distributed load, however perfect redistribution of the point load applied to the wall systems 
to a uniformly distributed load could not be achieved within the test setup for this study. By 
adapting these four equations (Eq. 4.7, Eq. 4.19, Eq. 4.22 and Eq. 4.27), to consider the 
vertical load as a point load, the displacements were recalculated and are shown in Figure 
4.48. Method A takes into account vertical load in the calculation of the lateral displacement 
due to sliding and so Eq. 4.11 was also adapted to consider the vertical load as a point load. 
By considering the vertical load as a point load, lateral displacements due to rocking are 
predicted to occur, however lateral displacements due to sliding are the same or greater than 
those predicted considering the vertical load as a uniformly distributed load. Therefore, there 
is an even greater difference between the predicted total lateral displacements and the 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
experimentally recorded total lateral displacements when the vertical load is considered as 
a point load. Hence, it can be concluded that considering the vertical load as a point load 
does not provide a better prediction of lateral displacements experimentally observed and is 
not the primary cause of the disagreement between the predicted and experimental values. 
Figure 4.47: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
experimental results for tests T8.1, T8.2 and T8.3 when the lateral load is 25 kN 
Figure 4.48: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods adapted 
to consider the vertical load as a point load and experimental results for tests T8.1, T8.2 and 
T8.3 when the lateral load is 25 kN  
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
The experimental load-displacement curves shown in Figure 4.45 are either linear or bilinear 
while the Method B, Method C and Method D load-displacement curves are bilinear curves 
and the Method A load-displacement curve is trilinear. The reduction in the gradient of the 
curve suggests a reduction in lateral stiffness and the apparent reduction in stiffness shown 
in the bilinear and trilinear curves can be explained by Figure 4.46 and Figure 4.47. Figure 
4.46 and Figure 4.47 shows that certain deformation mechanisms may not occur until the 
lateral load is large enough to overcome the stabilising moment or the frictional force. The 
gradient of the bilinear curves for Method B, Method C and Method D changes when the 
applied lateral load is 30 kN. This is because before a lateral load of 30 kN was reached, the 
overturning moment resulting from the lateral load did not exceed the stabilising moment 
provided by the constant vertical load. Once the overturning moment was greater than the 
stabilising moment, rocking behaviour occurs leading to an apparent reduction in lateral 
stiffness. Method A shows a trilinear curve in which the lateral displacement was negligible 
until the lateral load was increased to 10 kN. This is because Method A predicted that the not 
only was a lateral load less than 10 kN too small to overcome the stabilising moment, but it 
was also too small to overcome to frictional force. Consequently, no notable displacement 
occurred until the lateral load was increased beyond 10 kN when the frictional force resisting 
sliding was exceeded. From the observed predicted behaviour, it could be suggested that a 
change in gradient of an experimental load-displacement curve before yielding of the 
connections has occurred is due to the lateral load overcoming the stabilising moment or the 
frictional force. 
Figure 4.49 shows the predicted and experimental lateral displacement when vertical load of 
84 kN/m and lateral load of 50 kN were applied to the wall system. Method A considers the 
vertical load to provide resistance to both rocking and sliding. It was observed that when the 
vertical load was increased but the maximum lateral load was not increased, this method 
predicted that no lateral displacement would occur despite lateral displacements recorded 
during the experimental testing (Figure 4.49). Figure 4.49 shows that for this loading 
combination, all methods give highly inaccurate predictions. The experimental results show 
a relatively low total lateral displacement with minimal lateral displacement due to sliding 
and more significant lateral displacement due to rocking. Methods B, Method C and Method 
D significantly over-predict the lateral displacement due to sliding, while predicting no lateral 
displacement due to rocking. Figure 4.46 and Figure 4.49 show that the predicted lateral 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
displacements due to sliding made using Methods B, C and D are the same regardless of the 
difference in vertical load applied to the wall system. Experimentally, the lateral 
displacements due to sliding varied with vertical load, with the tests using a higher vertical 
load (Figure 4.49) resulting in lower lateral displacements due to sliding than the tests using 
a lower vertical load (Figure 4.46). This suggests that the assumption made by Casagrande, 
Rossi and Sartori (2016), Hummel, Seim and Otto (2016) and Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber 
and Pock (2014) that the vertical load does not contribute to sliding resistance is incorrect 
and leads to highly conservative predictions of lateral displacement due to sliding.  
Figure 4.49: Comparison of lateral displacements predicted using analytical methods and 
experimental results for tests T1.1, T1.2 and T1.3 when the lateral load is 50 kN 
Method A generally produces conservative values by over-predicting the total lateral 
displacement and the undesirable lateral displacement due to sliding (Figure 4.46, Figure 
4.47 and Figure 4.48), but when vertical load increases it can produce unconservative values 
which over-predict the lateral stiffness of the wall system by under-predicting lateral 
displacements (Figure 4.49). Therefore, Method A is not an accurate method for use in 
predicting lateral displacements for the design of CLT wall systems as it could lead to either 
inefficient over-design or unsafe under-design of a wall system, depending on the design 
loads. While Method B, Method C and Method D conservatively over-predicted the lateral 
displacements in all loading scenarios, these methods are highly inaccurate methods and 
their use would lead to the inefficient over-design of a wall system. Hence, based on the wall 
configurations tested in this study, none of the existing analytical methods are recommended 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Method 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
for use as none of the methods provided accurate predictions of the experimentally observed 
behaviour. While the non-perfect redistribution of the applied point load to a uniformly 
distributed load in the test setup may account for minor inaccuracy in the results, Figure 4.47 
and Figure 4.48 demonstrate this is not the primary reason. Instead, the experimental testing 
highlights incorrect assumptions made to develop the analytical methods. It is recommended 
that the following issues are clarified through further testing to provide the experimental 
basis necessary to improve the analytical methods: 
 All four analytical methods assume that the wall panel rotates about a fixed point at 
the bottom corner of the wall that can withstand infinite stress. However, the 
experimental testing of the CLT wall systems found that the wall system does not 
rotate about a fixed point at the corner of the wall. Instead, when the lateral load is 
applied to the wall system, the wall experiences an overturning moment and the 
compression force due to this overturning moment is transferred over a particular 
length of the base of the wall at the end of the wall opposite to where the lateral 
load is applied. This length, and therefore the point of rotation, change depending 
on the loading combination used. 
 The experimental testing of the connections used in the wall system detailed in 
Chapter 3 indicated that both the angle bracket and hold down connections had 
notable strength and stiffness in shear and tension. Therefore, both connections are 
likely to contribute to the resistance of sliding and overturning of the wall. Method 
B, Method C and Method D do not consider this and assume that the hold down 
connections resist overturning only and the angle bracket connections resist shear 
only, while Method A assumes that angle bracket connections resist both 
overturning and shear while hold down connections resist overturning only. 
Furthermore, the analytical methods do not account for reduced stiffness of the 
connections after yielding has occurred. 
 The wall system tests suggested that reduction in shear capacity of the angle brackets 
occurs due to bidirectional loading. None of the analytical methods account for 
reduction in strength of the connections due to bidirectional loading. This requires 
further experimental testing of the connections to quantify the interaction of the 
shear and tension forces on the connections under realistic loading conditions. 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
 Method B, Method C and Method D assume that lateral displacement due to sliding 
is not influenced by vertical load. However, it is evident in this experimental study 
that as vertical load increases, the frictional force increases and consequently the 
lateral displacement due to sliding decreases. Method A does consider frictional 
force, however the co-efficient of friction is assumed. An experimentally verified 
value for the co-efficient of friction should be determined to more accurately predict 
the frictional force.  
4.6. Summary 
A series of tests were undertaken on three identical CLT wall system to investigate the 
behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading. The wall systems were 
subjected to a constant vertical load during each test, with each load calculated to reflect the 
gravity load at floors 2-9 within a 10 storey CLT building. In the wall systems, the CLT wall 
panel was fixed to a CLT floor panel, replicating the configuration of above ground floor wall 
systems within a multi-storey CLT building. Displacements were measured at nineteen 
locations within the wall system to determine the global behaviour of the wall system during 
each loading scenario.  
Through these tests, the aim of this study was to further the understanding of the behaviour 
of wall systems in multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading, focussing particularly on 
the behaviour of above ground floor storeys in a 10 storey CLT building. The study found that 
connection behaviour alone does not control the behaviour of a wall system; vertical load 
has a significant influence on the type of behaviour exhibited by CLT wall systems. Non-linear 
relationships between both vertical load and total lateral displacement, and vertical load and 
vertical displacement were observed. As a consequence, variable global behaviour of wall 
systems is expected throughout a multi-storey CLT building which confirms the requirement 
for different connection design at each storey. Sliding and rocking were the only two 
deformation mechanisms observed to occur with in-plane deformation of the wall panel 
negligible due to the high in-plane stiffness of the CLT panel. While rocking was the 
predominant deformation mechanism in all tests, significant sliding of the wall was observed 
in some tests when the applied vertical load was low. Despite negligible strength and stiffness 
degradation, notable residual lateral displacement was recorded after test T8 in which the 
vertical load was lowest and shear force did not exceed the design shear capacity of the wall 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
system. This suggests frictional effects that are dependent on vertical load are highly 
significant in resisting lateral sliding and that shear capacity of the angle brackets was lower 
than expected due to bidirectional loading. Elastic, non-linear, behaviour was observed in the 
majority of tests, however, in instances of low vertical load, or high lateral load, inelastic 
behaviour occurred, i.e. yielding of connectors. The lateral stiffness generally decreased as 
vertical load decreased indicating variable stiffness throughout a multi-storey CLT building. 
As all other parameters were held constant, it can be stated that the apparent variable 
stiffness at different storeys of a building is a result of variable vertical load which influences 
the resistance to overturning and friction.  
There was significant variability between the vertical displacements of the angle brackets and 
the vertical displacements along the base of the wall recorded for identical tests undertaken 
on each of the three wall systems with identical configurations. As these vertical 
displacements give an indication of the deformation of the nails within the angle bracket 
connection, this suggests the deformation of the nails was not consistent across the three 
repetitions of each test. This poses a significant challenge for developing methods to predict 
the behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral load as the behaviour of the connections 
within the wall systems is one of the two main factors which dictates wall system behaviour, 
with vertical load the other factor. 
 All four analytical methods available within the literature were found to inaccurately predict 
lateral displacement and the extent to which each deformation mechanism contributes to 
the behaviour of a CLT wall system. This is because the analytical methods have made 
assumptions which do not reflect the experimental behaviour observed in this study. The 
analytical methods assume the wall panel rotates around one fixed point at the bottom of 
the wall panel. However, the experimental testing undertaken suggests that this is not the 
case and instead there is a compression zone along the base of the wall, with the length of 
this zone depending on the combination of lateral and vertical load the wall system is 
experiencing. Chapter 3 demonstrated that the connections used within this wall system 
have notable shear and tensile strength and stiffness and therefore both will jointly 
contribute to overturning and sliding resistance of a wall system. The analytical methods do 
not consider this, nor do they consider potential reduction in capacity of the connections due 
to bidirectional loading, as observed during the experimental tests undertaken in this study. 
Finally, this study emphasises that behaviour of CLT wall systems is not solely dictated by the 
Chapter 4: Behaviour of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
connections as vertical load has significant influence on resistance of overturning and sliding. 
Therefore, the analytical methods should consider the contribution of vertical load in 
increasing lateral stiffness of the wall system which limits lateral movement due to sliding 
and rocking.  
Chaper 5: Conclusion 
5.1. Contribution to Knowledge 
Most previous experimental studies of CLT wall systems under lateral loading have been 
limited to replicating the conditions within multi-storey buildings with approximately three 
storeys (Dujic, Pucelj and Zarnic, 2004; Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Popovski, 
Schneider and Schweinsteiger, 2010). There has also been limited research on performance 
assessment of CLT wall systems and connections in above ground floor storeys. As above 
ground floor connections and wall systems are the most common configuration of 
connection and wall system in CLT buildings with more than two storeys, and there is limited 
information available to suggest how they will perform under lateral loading, it is difficult to 
predict the behaviour of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading. Consequently, to 
develop the understanding of the performance of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral 
loading, it is important to investigate wall systems which replicate conditions of those in 
above ground floor storeys in buildings taller than three storeys, as well as typical 
connections used at above ground floor storeys in multi-storey CLT buildings. Hence, the aim 
of this research was to experimentally investigate the behaviour of wall systems and 
connections at above ground floor storeys within multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral 
loading. 
It is intended that the findings of this study will contribute to the experimental basis 
necessary to inform design guidance for CLT buildings under lateral loading, such as seismic 
or wind loading, as at present there are no structural design codes for CLT buildings. The 
contributions that the experimental investigations of the connections and wall systems make 
to the knowledge in this field will be subsequently discussed in Sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2. 
Recommendations for future work based on the finding of this study are outlined in Section 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
5.1.1. Experimental investigation of the behaviour of typical cross-laminated 
timber connections under cyclic loading 
The experimental testing of typical CLT connections involved testing eighteen configurations 
under cyclic loading in shear and tension with the configurations varying due to the 
connector type, fastener arrangement and the test setup which depended on the loading 
direction. All connectors and fasteners used are commercially available and manufactured 
by Rothoblaas and Simpson Strong-Tie who are key suppliers of CLT connection components. 
It is important that connections made using commercially available components are 
investigated given that connections using these components have been used within 
completed CLT buildings despite the limited research into their performance and verification 
that their ETAs provide accurate methods for determining connection strength. The 
connector types included a shear resisting connector and two tension resisting connectors; 
therefore, one angle bracket, the Simpson Strong-Tie ABR105-R angle bracket, and two hold 
downs with different lengths, the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down and Rothoblaas WHT340 
hold down, were used. The behaviour and properties of these particular connectors have not 
been investigated as part of any previous experimental study. Using fewer fasteners would 
increase the speed of installing connections in CLT buildings, however there is no 
experimental data available in the literature to evaluate how the number of fasteners affects 
the connection behaviour as no study has included the number of fasteners as variable of the 
investigation. Therefore, this study used three different fastener arrangements to fasten 
each connector to the CLT panels to assess the effect of the number of fasteners on 
connection behaviour. The fastener arrangements for all hold down connections used 
Rothoblaas LBA annular ring nails only, whereas Rothoblaas LBS screws were used in 
combination with the annular ring nails in one fastener arrangement for the angle bracket 
connections with the other two fastener arrangements using annular ring nails only. In all 
test specimens, the CLT wall panel was fixed to a CLT floor panel, replicating connections in 
above ground floor storeys within a multi-storey CLT building. A total of three test specimens 
were tested under cyclic loading for each configuration and mean values of important 
properties, such as strength, stiffness, ductility, impairment of strength and energy 
dissipation, were determined for each configuration.  
Chapter 3 details the results of the experimental investigation of typical connections used in 
above ground floor storeys within CLT buildings, made using commercially available 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
components, under cyclic loading in shear and tension. This Chapter also provides a detailed 
summary of the findings of the investigation; however, the main contributions of this 
investigation to furthering the understanding of CLT buildings under lateral loading will 
subsequently be discussed. 
In general, it was found that the number and type of fasteners used in CLT connections 
influences connection properties. For hold down connections which are typically used in CLT 
buildings to resist overturning of walls, and therefore tensile forces only, increasing the 
number of nails increased strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation of the 
connection when loaded in tension. For angle bracket connections which are typically used 
in CLT buildings to resist sliding of walls, and therefore shear forces only, increasing the 
number of nails increased strength, stiffness, ductility and energy dissipation when loaded in 
shear. Ductility and stiffness of the angle bracket connections was also increased through the 
use of screws in the floor part of the angle bracket connection, although shear strength was 
not notably affected. 
The number of fasteners was found to not only influence the properties of the connection, 
but in some cases, it also affected the experimentally observed failure mechanism. While the 
shear failure mechanism of the angle bracket connections was due to tearing of the nail 
heads regardless of the number or type of fasteners used, the tensile failure mechanism of 
the hold down connections was not consistent. For the shorter hold down connection which 
used the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down, increasing the number of nails increased the extent 
of plastic deformation of the base of the hold down around the bolt head. When this hold 
down was fully fastened, failure occurred due to pull-through of the bolt. For the longer hold 
down connection which used the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down, using approximately two-
thirds or more of the maximum number of nails or more led to sudden tensile failure of the 
hold down plate at the net section.  
The different failure mechanisms of the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down connections and 
Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down connections can be explained by the use of a washer, 
specified by the manufacturer, with the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down. This washer 
successfully prevented the pull-through of the bolt in the Rothoblaas WHT620 hold down 
connections, however failure still occurred within the connector rather than the fasteners. It 
is unlikely that ductile failure of the fasteners can be achieved in the Rothoblaas WHT620 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
hold down connections if the hold down is more than two-thirds fastened as the combined 
lateral load-carrying capacity of the nails was demonstrated to exceed the tensile strength of 
the hold down plate. Therefore, reducing the thickness of the washer to prevent failure of 
the hold down plate is likely to result in the washer being too thin to prevent pull-through of 
the bolt, or too thick that tension failure of the hold down plate still occurs. Although no 
washer is specified for use with the Rothoblaas WHT340 hold down, if a washer were to be 
used pull-through of the bolt could be avoided. However, the thickness of the washer would 
have to be carefully considered to ensure that it prevents pull-through of the bolt while 
ensuring that the tension failure of the hold down plate does not occur when the hold down 
is fully fastened.  
Capacity-based design of CLT buildings would prevent brittle failure of building components 
by requiring the definition of regions that are allowed to undergo large deformations and 
provide stable energy dissipation (Izzi et al., 2016). As CLT panels behave rigidly under lateral 
loading, the ductility within the building is provided by the connections only and so the 
connections must be designed to avoid brittle failure. It is recommended in the literature 
that brittle failure is avoided by allowing the plasticisation of the fasteners and the 
overdesigning the metal connector to avoid plasticisation (Fragiacomo, Dujic and Sustersic, 
2011). The brittle failure mechanisms of the hold down due to pull-through of the bolt or the 
tension failure of the hold down plate demonstrate that capacity-based design principles 
have not been employed by manufacturers in the design of commercially available 
connection components. The plastic behaviour of the hold downs was also highlighted 
through the comparison of the different lengths of hold down as it was found that different 
length of hold downs using a similar number of fasteners had considerably different 
properties. Therefore, assuming elastic behaviour of the connectors and using ETAs to 
predict connection strength based on ductile failure of fasteners will provide inaccurate 
strength values. The inaccuracy of the ETAs in predicting strength of the connections was 
confirmed by the comparison of characteristic 5th percentile maximum strengths of the 
connections determined from the experimental results with predicted characteristic 
strengths of the connections calculated using the ETAs interpretation of Eurocode 5 rules 
(ETA-Danmark A/S, 2018; BSI, 2014). It was also found that the alternative analytical method 
devised by Uibel and Bla (2014) specifically for connections with dowel-type fasteners in 
CLT provides inaccurate predictions of connection strength. Consequently, analytical 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
methods should not be relied upon and experimental investigations are critical in providing 
designers with knowledge regarding the performance of the connections made using 
commercially available components. 
While angle bracket connections are typically used in CLT wall systems to provide shear 
strength and stiffness to prevent sliding of the wall, this experimental investigation found 
that these connections have lower yet notable tensile strength and stiffness. Similarly, while 
hold down connections are typically used in CLT wall systems to provide tensile strength and 
stiffness to prevent overturning of the wall, this experimental investigation found that these 
connections have lower yet notable shear strength and stiffness. Therefore, the angle 
bracket connections and the hold down connections will contribute to both overturning and 
sliding resistance of the wall in a CLT wall system. The strength of the connections in the 
weaker loading direction should not be neglected in the design of CLT buildings, as 
considering this strength in addition to the connections primary strength could lead to more 
economic design. 
5.1.2. Experimental investigation of the behaviour of cross-laminated timber 
wall systems under monotonic lateral loading 
The experimental testing of above ground floor wall systems under lateral loading involved 
undertaking a series of tests on three CLT wall systems with identical configurations. The wall 
systems were subjected to a constant vertical load during each test, with each load calculated 
to reflect the gravity load at floors 2-9 within a 10-storey CLT building. Therefore, the range 
of vertical loads applied to the wall systems in this study are greater than those applied in 
previous studies. In the wall systems, the CLT wall panel was fixed to a CLT floor panel, 
replicating the configuration of above ground floor wall systems within a multi-storey CLT 
building. Displacements were measured at nineteen locations within the wall system to 
determine the global behaviour of the wall system during each loading scenario. This was 
more extensive monitoring of the deformation of the wall system compared to that of any 
previous study into the behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral loading. 
Chapter 4 details the results of the experimental investigation of above ground floor wall 
systems, representative of those within a 10 storey CLT building, under monotonic lateral 
loading. This Chapter also provides a detailed summary of the findings of the investigation; 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
however, the main contributions of this investigation to furthering the understanding of CLT 
buildings under lateral loading will subsequently be discussed. 
While previous studies suggested that connections dictate the behaviour of CLT wall systems, 
by varying the vertical load applied to the wall system it was found that vertical load also has 
significant influence on the behaviour exhibited by CLT wall systems under lateral loading. 
Through the extensive monitoring of the wall systems within the study, the assumption made 
in previous studies that in-plane deformation of the panel is negligible was confirmed. 
Therefore, it was concluded that global deformation of a CLT wall system subject to lateral 
loading is due to a combination of rocking and sliding of the wall. The extent of rocking and 
sliding were found to depend on the vertical load applied to the wall system as the stabilising 
moment which resists overturning and the frictional force which resists sliding increase with 
increasing vertical load. Therefore, it can be concluded that different global behaviour of wall 
systems at each storey within a multi-storey building would be expected during the elastic 
response of the building as the contribution of each deformation mechanism to the global 
behaviour varies. However, as neither maximum load capacity nor ultimate load capacity of 
the wall system was reached it is uncertain whether this remains true for the plastic response 
of CLT wall systems at different storeys. Nonetheless, the varying contribution of 
deformation mechanisms to global behaviour within the elastic region reinforces the need 
to consider connection design at each individual storey. 
Connection design becomes particularly important when the vertical load applied to the wall 
system is low and the frictional force resisting sliding is exceeded by the lateral load. This is 
because the angle bracket connections which are used within CLT buildings to resist sliding 
were observed to yield at a load lower than suggested by the yield shear strength of the angle 
bracket connections determined from the testing of these connections under shear load only. 
This can be explained by results of the testing of this connection under tensile load which 
demonstrated that the angle bracket connection has notable tensile strength and stiffness 
and so the angle bracket connections will contribute to the resistance of both sliding and 
rocking of a CLT wall. As a consequence of this, the angle bracket connections will be subject 
to bidirectional loading and this may lead to reduced shear capacity of the angle bracket 
connection. It is critical that this reduced shear capacity is quantified as sliding must be 
avoided as it was observed to result in undesirable residual lateral displacement of the wall. 
It is recommended that once any reduction in shear capacity of the angle bracket is 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
quantified, the angle bracket connections are designed to behave elastically only to prevent 
residual lateral displacements. 
Like with the analytical methods used to predict the strength of the CLT connections, the 
analytical methods available in the literature for predicting deformation of a wall system 
under lateral loading (Gavric, Fragiacomo and Ceccotti, 2015a; Casagrande, Rossi and Sartori, 
2016; Hummel, Seim and Otto, 2016; Wallner-Novak, Koppelhuber and Pock, 2014) are highly 
inaccurate and therefore should not be used in the design of CLT wall systems. The results of 
this experimental investigation highlighted incorrect assumptions made in the development 
of the analytical methods regarding the behaviour of CLT wall systems under lateral loading. 
One of the assumptions was that the wall panel rotates around one fixed point at the bottom 
of the wall panel. However, the experimental testing undertaken suggests that this is not the 
case and instead there is a compression zone along the base of the wall, with the length of 
this zone depending on the combination of lateral and vertical load the wall system is 
experiencing. The analytical methods also assume that hold down connections resist tensile 
forces only, and therefore only contribute to overturning resistance, and the angle bracket 
connections resist shear forces only, and therefore only contribute to sliding resistance. 
Chapter 3 demonstrated that the hold down connections and angle bracket connections used 
within this wall system have both notable shear strength and stiffness and tensile strength 
and stiffness. Therefore, in reality both connections will jointly contribute to overturning and 
sliding resistance of a wall system. It was also observed in the testing of the CLT wall systems 
that the angle bracket connections likely experience reduced shear capacity due to 
bidirectional load and as it is considered that the angle bracket connections resist shear 
forces only, this is not taken into account in the design of CLT connections. Finally, this study 
emphasises that behaviour of CLT wall systems is not solely dictated by the connections as 
vertical load has significant influence on resistance of overturning and sliding. While all four 
analytical methods consider gravity load to provide a stabilising moment which resists 
overturning of the wall, three of the four analytical methods do not account for the frictional 
resistance to sliding provided by the gravity load. 
5.2. Recommendations for Future Work 
The research presented in this thesis contributes to the experimental basis necessary to 
inform design guidance for CLT buildings under lateral loading by providing details of the 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
behaviour of typical connections and wall systems at above ground floor storeys in multi-
storey CLT buildings subject to lateral loading. However, the findings of this study have 
identified some additional gaps in knowledge which must be investigated to further the 
understanding of CLT buildings under lateral loading. Consequently, the following work is 
recommended: 
 Capacity-based design of CLT connections to prevent brittle failure of the connection. 
 Experimental investigation of CLT connections under simultaneous bidirectional 
loading to evaluate the potential reduction in connection capacity in the primary 
direction. 
 Development of analytical methods which accurately predict the strength of CLT 
connections. 
 Development of analytical methods which accurately predict the behaviour of CLT 
wall systems under lateral loading. 
 Experimental investigation to determine the coefficient of friction between a CLT 
wall panel and a CLT floor panel.  
 Experimental investigation of CLT wall systems with different aspect ratios under 
monotonic lateral loading.  
 Experimental investigation of CLT wall systems under monotonic lateral loading until 
maximum and ultimate load capacity is reached. 
 Experimental investigation of CLT wall systems under cyclic lateral loading.
References 
Ali, M.M., Al-Kodmany, K., Ali, M.M. and Al-Kodmany, K. 2012. Tall buildings and urban 
habitat of the 21st century: a global perspective. Buildings, 2(4), pp.384423. 
Amini, M.O., van de Lindt, J.W., Rammer, D., Pei, S., Line, P. and Popovski, M. 2018. 
Systematic experimental investigation to support the development of seismic performance 
factors for cross laminated timber shear wall systems. Engineering Structures, 172, pp.392
ASI 2014. NORM B 1995-1-1 - Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures - part 1-1: general - 
common rules and rules for buildings - national specifications, national comments and 
national supplements concerning NORM EN 1995-1-1. Vienna: Austrian Standards Institute. 
Beagley, K.S.M., Loferski, J.R., Hindman, D.P. and Bouldin, J.C. 2014. Investigation of 
hardwood cross-laminated timber design. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2014. 
Quebec, Canada. 
Binderholz 2019. Binderholz CLT BBS. [online] Available at: 
https://www.binderholz.com/en/basic-products/binderholz-clt-bbs/ [Accessed 2 Jul. 2019]. 
Bla, H.J. and Uibel, T. 2007. Tragfhigkeit von stiftfrmigen Verbindungsmitteln in 
Brettsperrholz. Karlsruhe: Universittsverlag Karlsruhe. 
BMEL 2014. The forests in Germany. Berlin: Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture, 
Republic of Germany. 
BMLFUW 2015. Sustainable forest management in Austria - Austrian forest report 2015. 
Vienna: Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management, 
Republic of Austria. 
Booth, E. 2014. Earthquake design practice for buildings. 3rd ed. London: Thomas Telford Ltd. 
Branco, J.M. and Neves, L.A.C. 2011. Robustness of timber structures in seismic areas. 
Engineering Structures, 33(11), pp.30993105. 
References  
Brandner, R. 2014. Production and technology of cross laminated timber (CLT): A state-of-
the-art report. In: R. Harris, A. Ringhofer and G. Schickhofer, eds. Focus Solid Timber Solutions 
- European Conference on Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT). Graz, Austria: University of 
Bath.pp.336. 
Brandner, R., Flatscher, G., Ringhofer, A., Schickhofer, G. and Thiel, A. 2016. Cross laminated 
timber (CLT): overview and development. European Journal of Wood and Wood Products, 
74(3), pp.331351. 
British Columbia 2009. Wood First Act c.18. Victoria: Queens Publishers. 
BSI 2005. BS EN 12512:2001 -  Timber structures - Test methods - Cyclic testing of joints made 
with mechanical fasteners. London. 
BSI 2010a. BS EN 1990:2002+A1:2005 - Eurocode - Basis of structural design. London: British 
Standards Institution. 
BSI 2010b. BS EN 1991-1-1:2002 - Eurocode 1: Actions on structures - Part 1-1: General actions 
- Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings. London. 
BSI 2010c. BS EN 338:2009 - Structural timber - Strength classes. London. 
BSI 2013. BS EN 1998-1:2004 +A1:2013 - Eurocode 8: Design of structures for earthquake 
resistance - Part 1: General rules, seismic actions and rules for buildings. London. 
BSI 2014. BS EN 1995 - Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures. London: British Standards 
Institution. 
BSI 2015. BS EN 16351:2015 - Timber structures - Cross laminated timber - Requirements. 
London: British Standards Institution. 
BSI 2016. BS EN 14358 - Timber structures - Calculation and verification of characteristic 
values. London: British Standards Institution. 
Buchanan, A.H. 2016. The challenges for designers of tall timber buildings. In: World 
Conference on Timber Engineering 2016. Vienna, Austria. 
Casagrande, D., Rossi, S. and Sartori, T. 2016. Proposal of an analytical procedure and a 
simplified numerical model for elastic response of single-storey timber shear-walls. 
References  
Construction and Building Materials, 102, pp.11011112. 
Ceccotti, A. 2008. New technologies for construction of medium-rise buildings in seismic 
regions: The XLAM case. Structural Engineering International: Journal of the International 
Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering, 18(2), pp.156165. 
Ceccotti, A., Lauriola, M.P., Pinna, M. and Sandhaas, C. 2006. SOFIE Project - Cyclic tests on 
cross-laminated wooden panels. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2006. Portland, 
Oregon, USA. 
Ceccotti, A., Sandhaas, C., Okabe, M., Yasumura, M., Minowa, C. and Kawai, N. 2013. SOFIE 
project - 3D shaking table test on a seven-storey full-scale cross-laminated timber building. 
Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics, 42(13), pp.20032021. 
Chapman, J. 2012. 30-level timber building concept based on cross-laminated timber 
construction. The Structural Engineer, 90(8), pp.3640. 
Cherry, R., Manalo, A., Karunasena, W. and Stringer, G. 2019. Out-of-grade sawn pine: A 
state-of-the-art review on challenges and new opportunities in cross laminated timber (CLT). 
Construction and Building Materials, 211, pp.858868. 
Da Col, R. 2017. From Murray Grove to Dalston Lane. In: Europischer Kongress EBH 2017. 
Cologne, Germany. 
Connolly, T., Loss, C., Iqbal, A. and Tannert, T. 2018. Feasibility study of mass-timber cores 
for the UBC tall wood building. Buildings, 8(8), p.98. 
Craft, S., Barber, D., Klippel, M., Schmid, J. and Frangi, A. 2018. Test methods to evaluate the 
adhesive performance in CLT when exposed to fire. In: World Conference on Timber 
Engineering 2018. Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Crawford, D., Hairstans, R. and Smith, R.E. 2014. Feasibility of cross-laminated timber 
production from UK Sitka spruce. In: R. Harris, A. Ringhofer and G. Schickhofer, eds. Focus 
Solid Timber Solutions - European Conference on Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT). Graz, Austria: 
University of Bath.pp.3752. 
Darenzo, G., Rinaldin, G., Fossetti, M., Fragiacomo, M., Nebiolo, F. and Chiodega, M. 2018. 
Tensile and shear behaviour of an innovative angle bracket for CLT structures. In: World 
References  
Conference on Timber Engineering 2018. Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
DIBt 2017. ETA-06/0009 - Binderholz Brettsperrholz BBS. Brussels: European Organisation for 
Technical Assessment. 
DIN 2010. DIN EN 1995-1-1/NA - National Annex - Nationally determined parameters - 
Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures - Part 1-1: General - Common rules and rules for 
buildings. Berlin: Deutsches Institut fr Normung. 
Dujic, B., Aicher, S. and Zarnic, R. 2006. Testing of wooden wall panels applying realistic 
boundary conditions. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2006. Portland, Oregon, 
Dujic, B., Klobcar, S. and Zarnic, R. 2007. Influence of openings on shear capacity of wooden 
walls. NZ Timber Design Journal, 16(1), pp.517. 
Dujic, B., Klobcar, S. and Zarnic, R. 2008. Shear capacity of cross-laminated wooden walls. In: 
World Conference on Timber Engineering 2008. Miyazaki, Japan. 
Dujic, B., Pucelj, J. and Zarnic, R. 2004. Testing of racking behavior of massive wooden wall 
panels. In: 37th CIB-W18 Meeting. Edinburgh, UK. 
Dunbar, A.J.M., Pampanin, S. and Buchanan, A.H. 2014. Seismic performance of core-walls 
for multi-storey timber buildings. In: New Zealand Society of Earthquake Engineering 
Conference 2014. Auckland, New Zealand. 
Espinoza, O. and Buehlmann, U. 2018. Cross-laminated timber in the USA: Opportunity for 
hardwoods? Current Forestry Reports, 4(1), pp.112. 
Espinoza, O., Trujillo, V.R., Laguarda Mallo, M.F. and Buehlmann, U. 2016. Cross-laminated 
timber: Status and research needs in Europe. BioResources, 11(1), pp.281295. 
ETA-Danmark A/S 2018. ETA-13/0523 - GH screws and GH ring shanked nails. Copenhagen: 
European Organisation for Technical Assessment. 
Fast, P., Gafner, B. and Jackson, R. 2017. Eighteen storey hybrid mass timber student 
residence at the University of British Columbia. Structural Engineering International, 27(1), 
pp.4448. 
References  
Flatscher, G., Bratulic, K. and Schickhofer, G. 2015. Experimental tests on cross-laminated 
timber joints and walls. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers - Structures and 
Buildings, 168(11), pp.868877. 
Forestry Innovation Investment 2017. Brock Commons Tallwood House: Construction 
overview. [online] Available at: http://wood-works.ca/wp-
content/uploads/brock_commons_-_construction_overview.pdf [Accessed 1 Jul. 2019]. 
FPInnovations 2011. Introduction to cross-laminated timber. In: S. Gagnon and C. Pirvu, eds. 
CLT Handbook: Canadian Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
Fragiacomo, M., Dujic, B. and Sustersic, I. 2011. Elastic and ductile design of multi-storey 
crosslam massive wooden buildings under seismic actions. Engineering Structures, [online] 
33(11), pp.30433053. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2011.05.020. 
Frangi, A., Fontana, M., Hugi, E. and Jbstl, R. 2009. Experimental analysis of cross-laminated 
timber panels in fire. Fire Safety Journal, 44(8), pp.10781087. 
Franke, S. 2016. Mechanical properties of beech CLT. In: World Conference in Timber 
Engineering 2016. Vienna, Austria. 
Gagnon, S. and Kouyoumji, J. 2011. Acoustic performance of cross-laminated timber 
assemblies. In: S. Gagnon and C. Pirvu, eds. CLT Handbook: Canadian Edition. Quebec: 
FPInnovations. 
Gagnon, S. and Popovski, M. 2011. Structural design of cross-laminated timber elements. In: 
S. Gagnon and C. Pirvu, eds. CLT Handbook: Canadian Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
Ganey, R., Berman, J., Akbas, T., Loftus, S., Dolan, J.D., Sause, R., Ricles, J., Pei, S., van de Lindt, 
J. and Blomgren, H. 2017. Experimental investigation of self-centering cross-laminated 
timber walls. Journal of Structural Engineering, 143(10). 
Gardiner, J. 2019. How is the CLT industry responding to the combustibles ban? [online] 
Building. Available at: https://www.building.co.uk/focus/how-is-the-clt-industry-
responding-to-the-combustibles-ban/5097651.article [Accessed 4 Jun. 2019]. 
Gasparri, E., Lucchini, A., Mantegazza, G. and Mazzucchelli, E.S. 2015. Construction 
management for tall CLT buildings: From partial to total prefabrication of faade elements. 
References  
Wood Material Science & Engineering, 10(3), pp.256275. 
Gavric, I., Fragiacomo, M. and Ceccotti, A. 2013. Capacity seismic design of CLT wall systems 
based on connection mechanical properties. In: 46th CIB-W18 Meeting. Vancouver, Canada. 
Gavric, I., Fragiacomo, M. and Ceccotti, A. 2015a. Cyclic behavior of CLT wall systems: 
Experimental tests and analytical prediction models. Journal of Structural Engineering, 
141(11). 
Gavric, I., Fragiacomo, M. and Ceccotti, A. 2015b. Cyclic behavior of typical screwed 
connections for cross-laminated (CLT) structures. European Journal of Wood and Wood 
Products, 73(2), pp.179191. 
Gavric, I., Fragiacomo, M. and Ceccotti, A. 2015c. Cyclic behaviour of typical metal connectors 
for cross-laminated (CLT) structures. Materials and Structures, 48(6), pp.18411857. 
Gavric, I., Fragiacomo, M., Popovski, M. and Ceccotti, A. 2014. Behaviour of cross-laminated 
timber panels under cyclic loads. In: RILEM International Symposium on Materials and Joints 
in Timber Structures. Stuttgart, Germany.pp.689702. 
Green, M. 2012. The case for tall wood buildings. Vancouver: MGB Architecture + Design. 
Hackney Council 2012. Hackney puts wood first. [online] Available at: 
http://apps.hackney.gov.uk/servapps/newspr/NewsReleaseDetails.aspx?id=2437 [Accessed 
29 Mar. 2019]. 
Hammond, G.P. and Jones, C.I. 2008. Embodied energy and carbon in construction materials. 
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers - Energy, 161(2), pp.8798. 
Harley, T., White, G., Dowdall, A., Bawcombe, J., Mcrobie, A. and Steinke, R. 2016. Dalston 
Lane - The worlds tallest CLT building. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2016. 
Vienna, Austria. 
Harte, A.M. 2017. Mass timber - the emergence of a modern construction material. Journal 
of Structural Integrity and Maintenance, 2(3), pp.121132. 
Hashemi, A., Masoudnia, R. and Quenneville, P. 2016. A numerical study of coupled timber 
walls with slip friction damping devices. Construction and Building Materials, 121, pp.373
References  
Hashemi, A., Zarnani, P., Masoudnia, R. and Quenneville, P. 2018. Experimental testing of 
rocking cross-laminated timber walls with resilient slip friction joints. Journal of Structural 
Engineering, 144(1). 
Herczeg, M., McKinnon, D., Milios, L., Bakas, I., Klaassens, E., Svatikova, K. and Widerberg, O. 
2014. Resource efficiency in the building sector. Rotterdam: Ecorys. 
Hristovski, V., Dujic, B., Stojmanovska, M. and Mircevska, V. 2013. Full-scale shaking-table 
tests of xlam panel systems and numerical verification: Specimen 1. Journal of Structural 
Engineering, 139(11), pp.20102018. 
Hummel, J., Seim, W. and Otto, S. 2016. Steifigkeit und Eigenfrequenzen im 
Mehrgeschossingen Holzbau. Bautechnik, 93, pp.781794. 
Iqbal, A., Pampanin, S., Palermo, A. and Buchanan, A.H. 2015. Performance and design of LVL 
Walls coupled with UFP dissipaters. Journal of Earthquake Engineering, 19(3), pp.383409. 
Iqbal, A., Smith, T., Pampanin, S., Fragiacomo, M., Palermo, A. and Buchanan, A.H. 2016. 
Experimental performance and structural analysis of plywood-coupled LVL walls. Journal of 
Structural Engineering, 142(2). 
Izzi, M., Flatscher, G., Fragiacomo, M. and Schickhofer, G. 2016. Experimental investigations 
and design provisions of steel-to-timber joints with annular-ringed shank nails for cross-
laminated timber structures. Construction and Building Materials, 122, pp.446457. 
Jauk, G. 2018. CLT market keeps growing briskly. [online] Available at: https://www.timber-
online.net/holzprodukte/2018/11/CLT-production-2017-growing-market.html [Accessed 29 
May 2019]. 
Johansen, K.W. 1949. Theory of Timber Connections. International Association for Bridge and 
Structural Engineering, 9, pp.249262. 
KLH 2019. Cross-Laminated Timber. Teufenbach-Katsch: KLH Massivholz GmbH. 
van de Kuilen, J.W.G., Ceccotti, A., Xia, Z. and He, M. 2011. Very tall wooden buildings with 
cross laminated timber. Procedia Engineering, 14, pp.16211628. 
References  
Lane, T. 2014. The rise of cross-laminated timber. [online] Building. Available at: 
https://www.building.co.uk/technical-case-studies/the-rise-of-cross-laminated-
timber/5069291.article [Accessed 3 Jun. 2019]. 
Latour, M. and Rizzano, G. 2015. Cyclic behavior and modeling of a dissipative connector for 
cross-laminated timber panel buildings. Journal of Earthquake Engineering, 19(1), pp.137
Latour, M. and Rizzano, G. 2017. Seismic behavior of cross-laminated timber panel buildings 
equipped with traditional and innovative connectors. Archives of Civil and Mechanical 
Engineering, 17(2), pp.382399. 
Leese, R. and Casey, D. 2019. Fact Sheet 18: Embodied CO2e of UK cement, additions and 
cementitious material. London: Mineral Products Association. 
Lehmann, S. 2012. Sustainable construction for urban infill development using engineered 
massive wood panel systems. Sustainability, 4, pp.27072742. 
van de Lindt, J.W., Rammer, D., Popovski, M., Line, P., Pei, S. and Pryor, S.E. 2013. Lateral 
design of cross-laminated timber buildings. In: E. Karacaybeli and B. Douglas, eds. CLT 
Handbook: US Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
Liu, J. and Lam, F. 2018. Experimental test of coupling effect on CLT angle bracket 
connections. Engineering Structures, 171, pp.862873. 
Liu, J. and Lam, F. 2019. Experimental test of coupling effect on CLT hold-down connections. 
Engineering Structures, 178, pp.586602. 
Loo, W.Y., Quenneville, P. and Chouw, N. 2012. A numerical study of the seismic behaviour 
of timber shear walls with slip-friction connectors. Engineering Structures, 34, pp.233243. 
Malo, K.A., Abrahamsen, R.B. and Bjertns, M.A. 2016. Some structural design issues of the 
14-storey timber framed building Treet in Norway. European Journal of Wood and Wood 
Products, 74(3), pp.407424. 
Mohammad, M. and Munoz, W. 2011. Connections in cross-laminated timber buildings. In: 
S. Gagnon and C. Pirvu, eds. CLT Handbook: Canadian Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
References  
Neve, O. 2017. How does CLT perform in a fire? In: Timber 2017 Industry Yearbook. High 
Wycombe: Trada. 
OCeallaigh, C. and Harte, A.M. 2019. The elastic and ductile behaviour of CLT wall-floor 
connections and the influence of fastener length. Engineering Structures, 189, pp.319331. 
OIB 2017. ETA-06/0138 - KLH-Massivholzplatten/KLH solid wood slabs. Brussels: European 
Organisation for Technical Assessment. 
OIB 2018. ETA-14/0349 - CLT - Cross laminated timber. Brussels: European Organisation for 
Technical Assessment. 
Osmani, M. 2011. Construction waste. In: D.A. Letcher, T.M. Vallero, ed. Waste: A Handbook 
for Management. Cambridge: Academic Press.pp.207218. 
Pasay, J. 2018. Cross laminated timber can reduce the carbon footprint of new buildings. 
[online] The Climate Trust. Available at: https://climatetrust.org/cross-laminated-timber-
can-reduce-the-carbon-footprint-of-new-buildings/ [Accessed 1 Jun. 2019]. 
Passarelli, R.N. and Koshihara, M. 2018. The implementation of Japanese cross laminated 
timber: Current situation and future tasks. In: World Conference in Timber Engineering 2018. 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Pei, S., van de Lindt, J.W., Popovski, M., Berman, J.W., Dolan, J.D., Ricles, J., Sause, R., 
Blomgren, H. and Rammer, D.R. 2016a. Cross-laminated timber for seismic regions: Progress 
and challenges for research and implementation. Journal of Structural Engineering, 142(4), 
p.E2514001. 
Pei, S., Rammer, D., Popovski, M., Williamson, T., Line, P. and Van De Lindt, J.W. 2016b. An 
overview of CLT research and implementation in North America. In: World Conference on 
Timber Engineering 2016. Vienna, Austria. 
Piazza, M., Tomasi, R., Grossi, P., Costa, A.C. and Candeias, P.X. 2015. Seismic performance 
of timber buildings: The Series project. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers - 
Structures and Buildings, 168(11), pp.788802. 
Polastri, A., Giongo, I., Angeli, A. and Brandner, R. 2018. Mechanical characterization of a pre-
fabricated connection system for cross laminated timber structures in seismic regions. 
References  
Engineering Structures, 167, pp.705715. 
Polastri, A., Giongo, I. and Piazza, M. 2017. An innovative connection system for cross- 
laminated timber structures. Structural Engineering International, 27(4), pp.502511. 
Popovski, M. and Gavric, I. 2016. Performance of a 2-Story CLT house subjected to lateral 
loads. Journal of Structural Engineering, 142(4). 
Popovski, M., Schneider, J. and Schweinsteiger, M. 2010. Lateral load resistance of cross-
laminated wood panels. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2010. Trentino, Italy. 
Porteous, J. and Kermani, A. 2013. Structural timber design to Eurocode 5. 2nd ed. Chichester: 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
Powys County Council 2017. Powys Wood Encouragement Policy. [online] Available at: 
https://en.powys.gov.uk/article/2645/Housing-Policies [Accessed 29 Mar. 2019]. 
Pozza, L., Ferracuti, B., Massari, M. and Savoia, M. 2018a. Axial  shear interaction on CLT 
hold-down connections  Experimental investigation. Engineering Structures, 160, pp.95
Pozza, L., Saetta, A., Savoia, M. and Talledo, D. 2018b. Angle bracket connections for CLT 
structures: Experimental characterization and numerical modelling. Construction and 
Building Materials, 191, pp.95113. 
Ramboll 2016. Dalston Lane: Tall timber. [online] Building. Available at: 
https://www.building.co.uk/technical-case-studies/dalston-lane-tall-
timber/5079749.article?adredir=1 [Accessed 6 Jun. 2019]. 
Ringhofer, A., Brandner, R. and Bla, H.J. 2018. Cross laminated timber (CLT): Design 
approaches for dowel-type fasteners and connections. Engineering Structures, [online] 171, 
pp.849861. Available at: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0141029617334107 
[Accessed 9 May 2019]. 
Ross, L., Gagnon, S. and Keith, E. 2014. Structural design of cross-laminated timber elements. 
In: E. Karacabeyli and B. Douglas, eds. CLT Handbook: US Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
Rothoblaas 2015. Wood Connections and Timber Plates. [online] Available at: 
References  
https://www.rothoblaas.com/catalogues-rothoblaas [Accessed 18 Apr. 2019]. 
Rothoblaas 2017. X-RAD. [online] Available at: https://www.rothoblaas.com/catalogues-
rothoblaas [Accessed 11 Jun. 2019]. 
Rotorua Lakes Council 2015. Council adopts Wood First Policy for Rotorua. [online] Available 
at: https://www.rotorualakescouncil.nz/our-
council/news/Pages/default.aspx?newsItem=6113 [Accessed 29 Mar. 2019]. 
Sarti, F., Palermo, A. and Pampanin, S. 2016a. Development and testing of an alternative 
dissipative posttensioned rocking timber wall with boundary columns. Journal of Structural 
Engineering, 142(4). 
Sarti, F., Palermo, A. and Pampanin, S. 2016b. Quasi-static cyclic testing of two-thirds Scale 
unbonded posttensioned rocking dissipative timber walls. Journal of Structural Engineering, 
142(4). 
Scotta, R., Marchi, L., Trutalli, D. and Pozza, L. 2016. A dissipative connector for CLT buildings: 
Concept, design and testing. Materials, 9(3), p.139. 
Seim, W., Hummel, J., Flatscher, G. and Schickhofer, G. 2014. CLT wall elements under cyclic 
loading - details for anchorage and connection. In: R. Harris, A. Ringhofer and G. Schickhofer, 
eds. Focus Solid Timber Solutions - European Conference on Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT). 
Graz, Austria: University of Bath.pp.152165. 
Sigrist, C. and Lehmann, M. 2014. Potential of CLT produced from non-structural grade 
Australian Pinus Radiata. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2014. Quebec, Canada. 
Sikora, K.S., McPolin, D.O. and Harte, A.M. 2016. Effects of the thickness of cross-laminated 
timber (CLT) panels made from Irish Sitka spruce on mechanical performance in bending and 
shear. Construction and Building Materials, 116, pp.141150. 
Simpson Strong-Tie 2019. Technical data sheet: ABR  Reinforced Angle Bracket (105-R). 
[online] Available at: https://www.strongtie.co.uk/products/detail/reinforced-angle-
bracket-105-r/259 [Accessed 3 Jul. 2019]. 
Skidmore Owings & Merrill LLP 2013. Timber tower research project. [online] Available at: 
https://www.som.com/ideas/research/timber_tower_research_project [Accessed 1 Jul. 
References  
2019]. 
Smith, T., Ludwig, F., Pampanin, S., Fragiacomo, M., Buchanan, A. and Deam, B. 2007. Seismic 
response of hybrid-LVL coupled walls under quasi-static and pseudo-dynamic testing. In: New 
Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering Conference 2007. Palmerston North, New 
Zealand. 
Srivaro, S., Matan, N. and Lam, F. 2019. Performance of cross laminated timber made of oil 
palm trunk waste for building construction: A pilot study. European Journal of Wood and 
Wood Products, 77(3), pp.353365. 
Stora Enso 2014. General finger joint for CLT. [online] Available at: https://www.clt.info/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/General-finger-joint-for-CLT-EN.pdf. 
Stora Enso 2015. Stora Enso wood products: Building solutions. [online] Available at: 
http://www.clt.info/clt-technical-folder/. 
Sustersic, I. and Dujic, B. 2012. Simplified cross-laminated timber wall modelling for linear-
elastic analysis. In: 45th CIB-W18 Meeting. Vxj, Sweden. 
Sutton, A., Black, D. and Walker, P. 2011. An introduction to low-impact building materials: 
Cross-laminated timber. Watford: BRE. 
Tasmanian Government 2017. Tasmanian Wood Encouragement Policy. [online] Hobart: 
Tasmanian Government. Available at: 
https://www.stategrowth.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/149868/Tasmanian_Wo
od_Encouragement_Policy.PDF. 
Tomasi, R. 2014. Seismic behavior of connections for buildings in CLT. In: R. Harris, A. 
Ringhofer and G. Schickhofer, eds. Focus Solid Timber Solutions - European Conference on 
Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT). Graz, Austria: University of Bath.pp.138151. 
Tomasi, R. and Smith, I. 2015. Experimental characterization of monotonic and cyclic loading 
responses of CLT panel-to-foundation angle bracket connections. Journal of Materials in Civil 
Engineering, 27(6), p.04014189. 
Trada 2009. Case studies: Stadthaus Murray Grove, Hackney, London. [online] Available at: 
https://www.trada.co.uk/case-studies/stadthaus-murray-grove-hackney-london/ [Accessed 
References  
3 Jun. 2019]. 
Uibel, T. and Bla, H.J. 2014. Joints with dowel type fasteners in CLT structres. In: R. Harris, 
A. Ringhofer and G. Schickhofer, eds. Focus Solid Timber Solutions - European Conference on 
Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT). Graz, Austria: The University of Bath.pp.119134. 
UK Government 2018. The Building (Amendment) Regulations 2018, No. 1230. London: The 
Stationery Office Limited. 
United Nations 2018. World urbanization prospects: The 2018 revision - Key facts. [online] 
New York. Available at: https://population.un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-
KeyFacts.pdf [Accessed 7 Feb. 2019]. 
Wallner-Novak, M., Koppelhuber, J. and Pock, K. 2014. Cross-laminated timber structural 
design - Basic design and engineering principles according to Eurocode. [online] Available at: 
https://www.binderholz.com/fileadmin/PDF/Basisprodukte/Brettsperrholz_BBS/201411_pr
oHolz_Cross-Laminated_Timber_Structural_Design.pdf [Accessed 26 Jun. 2019]. 
Wang, B., Pirvu, C. and Lum, C. 2011. Cross-laminated timber manufacturing. In: S. Gagnon 
and C. Pirvu, eds. CLT Handbook: Canadian Edition. Quebec: FPInnovations. 
Waugh Thistleton Architects 2018. 100 UK CLT Projects. Canada. 
Wells, M. 2011. Tall Timber Buildings. CTBUH Journal, 1, pp.2427. 
Williams, M.S. 2009. Seismic Design of Buildings to Eurocode 8. 1st ed. Oxford: Spon Press. 
Wong, B.V.Y. and Tee, K.F. 2014. The Fire Performance of Exposed Timber Panels. World 
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology International Journal of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering, 8(10). 
Yasumura, M., Kobayashi, K., Okabe, M., Miyake, T. and Matsumoto, K. 2016. Full-scale tests 
and numerical analysis of low-rise CLT structures under lateral loading. Journal of Structural 
Engineering, 142(4). 
Yates, M., Linegar, M. and Dujic, B. 2008. Design of an 8 storey residential tower from KLH - 
cross laminated solid timber panels. In: World Conference on Timber Engineering 2008. 
Miyazaki, Japan. 
References  
Zarnani, P., Valadbeigi, A. and Quenneville, P. 2016. Resilient slip friction (RSF) joint: A novel 
connection system for seismic damage avoidance design of timber structures. In: World 
Conference on Timber Engineering 2016. Vienna, Austria. 
Appendix A: Experimental results of all test specimens 
tested under cyclic loading for each connection 
configuration 
For each configuration tested under cyclic loading, Chapter 3 presents one figure to show 
typical hysteresis loops and the monotonic load-displacement curve. Chapter 3 also presents 
only the average property values for each configuration which were calculated using the 
property values determined for all three test specimens for each configuration. Figures 
showing the hysteresis loops of all three test specimens for each configuration and tables 
summarising the property values determined from each of these hysteresis loops are 
presented within this appendix. 
Appendix A 
Configuration 1 
Figure A.1: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 1, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.2: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 1, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.3: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 1, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.1: Properties of Configuration 1 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 19.60 20.70 18.70  19.67 5.09 
Vy [mm] 18.60 15.70 14.30  16.20 13.54 
Fmax [kN] 22.97 22.63 20.59  22.06 5.84 
Vmax [mm] 42.36 24.40 24.40  30.39 34.12 
Fu [kN] - 13.17 13.77  13.47 3.18 
Vu [mm] - 44.10 40.60  42.35 5.84 
kel [kN/mm] 1.06 1.29 1.24  1.20 10.14 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.18 0.22 0.21  0.20 10.14 
-Fy [kN] -20.35 -22.10 -20.30  -20.92 -4.90 
-Vy [mm] -12.80 -14.90 -18.20  -15.30 -17.79 
-Fmax [kN] -22.91 -24.43 -21.44  -22.93 -6.53 
-Vmax [mm] -24.40 -24.40 -24.23  -24.34 -0.41 
-kel [kN/mm] 1.56 1.50 1.09  1.38 18.49 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.26 0.25 0.18  0.23 18.49 
F30 [kN] 19.59 13.24 18.25  17.03 19.66 
D [-] - 2.81 2.84  2.82 0.76 
D30 [-] 1.61 1.91 2.10  1.87 13.05 
F1-3  [%] 22.28 36.39 27.21  28.63 25.00 
-F1-3  [%] 17.00 30.09 23.40  23.50 27.86 
eq (1st)  [%] 15.46 16.38 15.28  15.71 3.74 
eq (3rd)  [%] 10.93 12.92 8.16  10.67 22.39 
-eq (1st)  [%] 16.64 17.33 14.76  16.24 8.19 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 8.07 9.54 7.36  8.32 13.35 
Appendix A 
Configuration 2 
Figure A.4: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 2, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.5: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 2, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.6: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 2, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.2: Properties of Configuration 2 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 17.50 16.00 14.40  15.97 9.71 
Vy [mm] 21.00 17.00 14.75  17.58 18.00 
Fmax [kN] 19.31 18.70 17.55  18.52 4.82 
Vmax [mm] 34.60 34.60 34.60  34.60 0.00 
Fu [kN] 8.76 13.00 13.20  11.66 21.52 
Vu [mm] 50.40 44.25 32.87  42.50 20.93 
kel [kN/mm] 0.82 0.94 0.96  0.90 8.43 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.14 0.16 0.16  0.15 8.43 
-Fy [kN] -16.40 -14.95 -13.55  -14.97 -9.52 
-Vy [mm] -13.80 -13.40 -14.30  -13.83 -3.26 
-Fmax [kN] -19.57 -17.50 -15.92  -17.66 -10.36 
-Vmax [mm] -32.37 -34.37 -29.27  -32.00 -8.03 
-kel [kN/mm] 1.20 1.03 0.94  1.05 12.57 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.20 0.17 0.16  0.18 12.57 
F30 [kN] 18.44 17.67 16.75  17.62 4.81 
D [-] 2.40 2.60 2.30  2.43 6.37 
D30 [-] 1.63 1.76 1.79  1.73 5.11 
F1-3  [%] 44.19 36.66 16.05  32.30 45.11 
-F1-3  [%] 45.11 25.34 9.22  26.55 67.68 
eq (1st)  [%] 14.70 16.34 10.22  13.75 23.03 
eq (3rd)  [%] 9.12 10.01 9.62  9.58 4.67 
-eq (1st)  [%] 21.54 17.15 11.34  16.68 30.69 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 11.76 8.60 7.72  9.36 22.67 
Appendix A 
Configuration 3    
Figure A.7: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 3, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.8: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 3, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.9: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 3, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.3: Properties of Configuration 3 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 12.00 14.60 14.10  13.57 10.17 
Vy [mm] 9.50 11.50 9.90  10.30 10.27 
Fmax [kN] 16.96 19.79 18.16  18.30 7.76 
Vmax [mm] 39.60 38.73 32.05  36.79 11.23 
Fu [kN] 9.72 6.52 14.72  10.32 40.07 
Vu [mm] 66.56 78.09 34.26  59.63 38.09 
kel [kN/mm] 1.27 1.28 1.38  1.31 4.63 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.21 0.21 0.23  0.22 4.63 
-Fy [kN] -15.45 -14.75 -18.10  -16.10 -10.98 
-Vy [mm] -11.80 -8.40 -11.55  -10.58 -17.91 
-Fmax [kN] -17.70 -17.64 -20.13  -18.49 -7.68 
-Vmax [mm] -39.60 -19.80 -19.57  -26.32 -43.68 
-kel [kN/mm] 1.30 1.76 1.55  1.54 15.27 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.22 0.29 0.26  0.26 15.27 
F30 [kN] 15.86 18.50 18.08  17.48 8.13 
D [-] 5.64 6.79 3.46  5.30 31.92 
D30 [-] 3.16 2.61 3.03  2.93 9.80 
F1-3  [%] 42.81 58.76 15.49  39.02 56.08 
-F1-3  [%] 32.18 18.91 15.24  22.11 40.30 
eq (1st)  [%] 17.20 16.36 10.14  14.57 26.49 
eq (3rd)  [%] 10.47 9.63 7.19  9.10 18.71 
-eq (1st)  [%] 19.22 37.78 11.19  22.73 59.99 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 7.87 13.57 6.83  9.43 38.48 
Appendix A 
Configuration 4  
Figure A.10: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 4, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.11: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 4, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.12: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 4, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.4: Properties of Configuration 4 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 19.30 17.30 18.80  18.47 5.64 
Vy [mm] 6.70 7.60 6.80  7.03 7.01 
Fmax [kN] 20.25 18.42 19.71  19.46 4.83 
Vmax [mm] 8.76 11.14 8.80  9.57 14.25 
Fu [kN] 16.20 14.73 15.77  15.57 4.83 
Vu [mm] 12.64 17.56 16.94  15.72 17.03 
kel [kN/mm] 2.75 2.40 2.75  2.63 7.59 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.46 0.40 0.46  0.44 7.59 
F30 [kN] - - -  - - 
D [-] 1.89 2.31 2.49  2.23 13.91 
D30 [-] - - -  - - 
F1-3  [%] 7.10 8.08 6.27  7.15 12.66 
eq (1st)  [%] 6.00 10.02 5.52  7.18 34.46 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.57 1.67 2.14  1.79 16.82 
Appendix A 
Configuration 5 
Figure A.13: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 5, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.14: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 5, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.15: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 5, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.5: Properties of Configuration 5 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 11.65 13.70 8.85  11.40 21.36 
Vy [mm] 4.35 6.30 3.50  4.72 30.44 
Fmax [kN] 13.09 15.06 9.95  12.70 20.33 
Vmax [mm] 8.16 10.94 6.26  8.45 27.84 
Fu [kN] 10.47 12.05 7.96  10.16 20.33 
Vu [mm] 10.94 17.14 9.44  12.51 32.63 
kel [kN/mm] 2.62 2.11 2.39  2.37 10.67 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.44 0.35 0.40  0.40 10.67 
F30 [kN] - - -  - - 
D [-] 2.51 2.72 2.70  2.64 4.27 
D30 [-] - - -  - - 
F1-3  [%] 7.87 10.05 7.16  8.36 17.99 
eq (1st)  [%] 8.09 11.99 9.27  9.78 20.47 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.93 2.79 1.61  2.11 28.89 
Appendix A 
Configuration 6 
Figure A.16: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 6, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.17: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 6, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.18: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 6, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.6: Properties of Configuration 6 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 15.95 16.90 15.60  16.15 4.17 
Vy [mm] 5.90 6.50 5.80  6.07 6.24 
Fmax [kN] 18.46 18.95 18.85  18.75 1.38 
Vmax [mm] 12.40 11.66 15.84  13.30 16.77 
Fu [kN] 14.77 15.16 15.08  15.00 1.38 
Vu [mm] 16.84 15.34 18.34  16.84 8.91 
kel [kN/mm] 2.52 2.47 2.57  2.52 1.94 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.42 0.41 0.43  0.42 1.94 
F30 [kN] - - -  - - 
D [-] 2.85 2.36 3.16  2.79 14.50 
D30 [-] - - -  - - 
F1-3  [%] 7.27 7.77 13.06  9.37 34.26 
eq (1st)  [%] 7.47 8.81 10.70  8.99 18.05 
eq (3rd)  [%] 2.20 2.71 3.80  2.91 28.11 
Appendix A 
Configuration 7 
Figure A.21: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 7, 
Test Specimen 3 
Figure A.20: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 7, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.19: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 7, 
Test Specimen 1 
Appendix A 
Table A.7: Properties of Configuration 7 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 25.90 28.60 24.80  26.43 7.40 
Vy [mm] 51.50 61.70 52.00  55.07 10.44 
Fmax [kN] 28.72 30.74 25.76  28.41 8.81 
Vmax [mm] 88.00 85.04 67.03  80.02 14.18 
Fu [kN] 10.20 10.85 25.11  15.39 54.75 
Vu [mm] 66.24 56.16 68.23  63.54 10.18 
kel [kN/mm] 0.50 0.51 0.52  0.51 2.37 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.08 0.09 0.09  0.90 2.37 
-Fy [kN] -22.40 -14.40 -13.90  -16.90 28.22 
-Vy [mm] -45.70 -17.20 -26.20  -29.70 -49.05 
-Fmax [kN] -25.86 -17.74 -15.53  -19.71 -27.60 
-Vmax [mm] -88.00 -44.00 -44.00  -58.67 -43.30 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.48 0.82 0.54  0.62 29.04 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.08 0.14 0.09  0.10 29.04 
F30 [kN] 14.78 13.47 13.29  13.85 5.88 
D [-] 1.29 3.27 1.31  1.95 58.08 
D30 [-] 0.58 0.49 0.58  0.55 9.85 
F1-3  [%] 25.27 -1.57 7.47  10.39 76.91 
-F1-3  [%] 47.90 18.83 -0.21  22.18 61.60 
eq (1st)  [%] 20.12 16.11 17.54  17.92 11.35 
eq (3rd)  [%] 17.26 12.98 14.23  14.82 14.85 
-eq (1st)  [%] 15.54 16.11 17.54  16.40 6.27 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 15.53 12.98 13.73  14.08 9.29 
Appendix A 
Configuration 8 
Figure A.22: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 8, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.23: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 8, 
Test Specimen 2 
Appendix A 
Table A.8: Properties of Configuration 8 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 21.90 20.10 -  21.00 6.06 
Vy [mm] 54.00 47.30 -  50.65 9.35 
Fmax [kN] 22.14 20.59 -  21.36 5.13 
Vmax [mm] 58.00 54.35 -  56.18 4.59 
Fu [kN] 19.70 16.04 -  17.87 14.47 
Vu [mm] 106.90 110.62 -  108.76 2.42 
kel [kN/mm] 0.40 0.44 -  0.42 5.98 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.07 0.07 -  0.07 5.98 
-Fy [kN] -23.60 -25.10 -  -24.35 -4.35 
-Vy [mm] -48.80 -58.00 -  -53.40 -12.18 
-Fmax [kN] -24.06 -25.10 -  -24.58 -2.99 
-Vmax [mm] -57.78 -58.00 -  -57.89 -0.27 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.47 0.45 -  0.46 2.78 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.08 0.08 -  0.08 2.78 
F30 [kN] 12.00 13.49 -  12.75 8.25 
D [-] 1.98 2.34 -  2.16 11.76 
D30 [-] 0.56 0.63 -  0.59 9.35 
F1-3  [%] 48.01 60.26 -  54.14 16.00 
-F1-3  [%] 22.60 37.40 -  30.00 34.87 
eq (1st)  [%] 19.31 21.85 -  20.58 8.72 
eq (3rd)  [%] 13.66 16.09 -  14.88 11.55 
-eq (1st)  [%] 19.90 19.98 -  19.94 0.28 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 10.21 10.31 -  10.26 0.66 
Appendix A 
Configuration 9 
Figure A.24: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 9, 
Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.25: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 9, 
Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.26: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 9, 
Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.9: Properties of Configuration 9 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 19.80 18.70 24.90  21.13 15.65 
Vy [mm] 44.50 48.80 56.80  50.03 12.48 
Fmax [kN] 20.08 21.74 27.53  23.12 16.90 
Vmax [mm] 48.38 63.87 95.46  69.24 34.66 
Fu [kN] 17.18 20.53 24.28  20.67 17.18 
Vu [mm] 83.52 65.07 98.36  82.32 20.26 
kel [kN/mm] 0.45 0.35 0.42  0.41 11.85 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.07 0.06 0.07  0.07 11.85 
-Fy [kN] -19.80 -18.70 -20.60  -19.70 -4.84 
-Vy [mm] -44.50 -48.80 -37.60  -43.63 -12.95 
-Fmax [kN] -24.84 -21.30 -21.75  -22.63 -8.52 
-Vmax [mm] -50.00 -50.00 -50.00  -50.00 0.00 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.41 0.37 0.56  0.44 22.95 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.07 0.06 0.09  0.07 22.95 
F30 [kN] 15.08 11.59 12.83  13.17 13.44 
D [-] 1.88 1.33 1.73  1.65 17.09 
D30 [-] 0.67 0.61 0.53  0.61 12.12 
F1-3  [%] 34.56 9.99 16.66  20.40 62.28 
-F1-3  [%] 9.11 7.38 8.78  8.42 10.95 
eq (1st)  [%] 19.45 15.96 16.99  17.47 10.25 
eq (3rd)  [%] 18.39 11.78 11.08  13.75 29.32 
-eq (1st)  [%] 18.92 16.56 18.46  17.98 6.96 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 13.47 9.68 10.95  11.37 16.96 
Appendix A 
Configuration 10 
Figure A.27: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
10, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.28: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
10, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.29: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
10, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.10: Properties of Configuration 10 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 83.00 82.30 82.00  82.43 0.63 
Vy [mm] 18.50 18.40 16.80  17.90 5.33 
Fmax [kN] 92.82 92.02 92.93  92.59 0.53 
Vmax [mm] 34.46 33.26 32.96  33.56 2.37 
Fu [kN] 92.33 90.98 90.02  91.11 1.27 
Vu [mm] 34.76 33.66 33.46  33.96 2.06 
kel [kN/mm] 4.64 4.60 4.89  4.71 3.33 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.77 0.77 0.82  0.79 3.33 
F30 [kN] 86.20 86.82 87.65  86.89 0.84 
D [-] 1.88 1.83 1.99  1.90 4.38 
D30 [-] 1.62 1.63 1.79  1.68 5.50 
F1-3  [%] 4.68 4.30 4.25  4.41 5.32 
eq (1st)  [%] 6.22 6.15 6.17  6.18 0.55 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.27 1.31 1.29  1.29 1.63 
Appendix A 
Configuration 11 
Figure A.30: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
11, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.31: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
11, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.32: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
11, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.11: Properties of Configuration 11 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 21.40 20.40 19.40  80.73 1.79 
Vy [mm] 89.98 88.85 90.07  20.40 4.90 
Fmax [kN] 32.66 36.65 35.46  89.63 0.76 
Vmax [mm] 89.06 87.27 87.83  34.92 5.88 
Fu [kN] 33.56 37.35 36.16  88.05 1.04 
Vu [mm] 4.03 4.01 4.09  35.69 5.44 
kel [kN/mm] 0.67 0.67 0.68  4.04 1.11 
kpl [kN/mm] 87.43 85.89 87.09  0.67 1.11 
F30 [kN] 1.57 1.83 1.86  86.81 0.93 
D [-] 1.40 1.47 1.55  1.75 9.24 
D30 [-] 2.69 3.19 3.28  1.47 4.91 
F1-3  [%] 2.42 2.50 2.44  3.05 10.48 
eq (1st)  [%] 1.00 1.02 0.95  1.45 1.57 
eq (3rd)  [%] 21.40 20.40 19.40  0.99 3.71 
Appendix A 
Configuration 12 
Figure A.33: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
12, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.34: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
12, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.35: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
12, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.12: Properties of Configuration 12 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 78.20 66.70 71.40  72.10 8.02 
Vy [mm] 21.20 18.70 20.60  20.17 6.47 
Fmax [kN] 83.59 71.51 75.30  76.80 8.05 
Vmax [mm] 29.44 27.95 27.85  28.41 3.15 
Fu [kN] 74.65 58.78 72.25  68.56 12.48 
Vu [mm] 29.74 30.05 28.35  29.38 3.09 
kel [kN/mm] 3.80 3.61 3.37  3.59 5.97 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.63 0.60 0.56  0.60 5.97 
F30 [kN] - - -  - - 
D [-] 1.40 1.61 1.38  0.02 8.63 
D30 [-] - - -  - - 
F1-3  [%] 3.18 3.63 4.41  3.74 16.69 
eq (1st)  [%] 2.23 2.71 2.56  2.50 9.81 
eq (3rd)  [%] 0.86 1.18 1.15  1.06 16.67 
Appendix A 
Configuration 13 
Figure A.36: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
13, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.37: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
13, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.38: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
13, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.13: Properties of Configuration 13 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 9.50 7.67 5.38  7.52 27.46 
Vy [mm] 31.00 30.60 17.20  26.27 29.90 
Fmax [kN] 13.00 8.00 9.87  10.29 24.53 
Vmax [mm] 59.11 39.00 78.00  58.70 33.22 
Fu [kN] 10.06 7.60 15.55  11.07 36.76 
Vu [mm] 58.11 42.51 73.68  58.10 26.83 
kel [kN/mm] 0.30 0.25 0.30  0.28 9.52 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.05 0.04 0.05  0.05 9.52 
-Fy [kN] - -10.05 -7.15  -8.60 -23.84 
-Vy [mm] - -33.50 -32.30  -32.90 -2.58 
-Fmax [kN] -9.05 -10.32 -7.41  -8.93 -16.39 
-Vmax [mm] -39.00 -39.00 -39.00  -39.00 0.00 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.19 0.30 0.22  0.24 23.84 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.03 0.05 0.04  0.04 23.84 
F30 [kN] 7.80 6.94 4.58  6.44 25.91 
D [-] 1.87 1.39 2.28  1.85 24.16 
D30 [-] 0.97 0.98 1.74  1.23 36.13 
F1-3  [%] 10.02 9.51 9.09  9.54 4.88 
-F1-3  [%] 1.90 10.15 6.55  6.20 66.69 
eq (1st)  [%] 14.94 17.45 16.50  16.30 7.78 
eq (3rd)  [%] 13.65 15.71 14.76  14.71 7.00 
-eq (1st)  [%] 17.46 16.45 17.33  17.08 3.21 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 12.20 11.60 12.74  12.18 4.68 
Appendix A 
Configuration 14 
Figure A.39: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
14, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.40: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
14, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.41: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
14, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.14: Properties of Configuration 14 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 7.95 7.68 8.80  8.14 7.18 
Vy [mm] 33.20 15.10 29.30  25.87 36.83 
Fmax [kN] 7.40 11.00 10.08  9.50 19.68 
Vmax [mm] 46.13 70.00 55.49  57.21 21.02 
Fu [kN] 7.40 8.50 10.08  8.66 15.55 
Vu [mm] 46.13 100.00 55.49  67.21 42.83 
kel [kN/mm] 0.22 0.48 0.29  0.33 40.82 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.04 0.08 0.05  0.06 40.82 
-Fy [kN] -7.58 -10.85 -8.02  -8.82 -20.13 
-Vy [mm] -34.00 -29.30 -25.20  -29.50 -14.93 
-Fmax [kN] -7.61 -12.98 -8.57  -9.72 -29.46 
-Vmax [mm] -35.00 -66.12 -35.00  -45.37 -39.59 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.23 0.35 0.31  0.30 21.49 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.04 0.06 0.05  0.05 21.49 
F30 [kN] 6.09 8.59 6.43  7.04 19.26 
D [-] 1.39 - 1.89  1.64 21.72 
D30 [-] 0.90 1.99 1.02  1.30 45.50 
F1-3  [%] 8.94 45.21 4.69  19.61 113.53 
-F1-3  [%] 6.62 32.69 6.63  15.31 98.26 
eq (1st)  [%] 12.98 20.80 12.98  15.59 28.94 
eq (3rd)  [%] 11.76 11.44 13.75  12.31 10.16 
-eq (1st)  [%] 15.25 18.24 15.39  16.29 10.36 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 11.85 10.59 13.34  11.93 11.56 
Appendix A 
Configuration 15 
Figure A.42: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
15, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.43: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
15, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.44: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
15, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.15: Properties of Configuration 15 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 7.66 7.89 6.79  7.45 7.79 
Vy [mm] 32.70 49.70 25.40  35.93 34.70 
Fmax [kN] 9.50 8.44 8.48  8.81 6.84 
Vmax [mm] 48.89 70.00 68.40  62.43 18.82 
Fu [kN] 9.04 - 7.78  8.41 10.53 
Vu [mm] 54.92 - 57.60  56.26 3.37 
kel [kN/mm] 0.23 0.16 0.24  0.21 21.00 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.04 0.03 0.04  0.03 21.00 
-Fy [kN] -8.30 -7.23 -8.23  -7.92 -7.56 
-Vy [mm] -33.70 -37.80 -36.70  -36.07 -5.88 
-Fmax [kN] -9.14 -8.25 -8.89  -8.76 -5.22 
-Vmax [mm] -54.02 -69.76 -55.30  -59.69 -14.64 
-kel [kN/mm] 0.24 0.19 0.22  0.22 12.46 
-kpl [kN/mm] 0.04 0.03 0.04  0.04 12.46 
F30 [kN] 7.15 4.35 6.04  5.85 24.14 
D [-] 1.63 - 1.57  1.60 2.66 
D30 [-] 0.92 0.60 1.18  0.90 32.10 
F1-3  [%] 12.15 30.48 16.36  19.66 48.85 
-F1-3  [%] 6.89 15.59 10.73  11.07 39.37 
eq (1st)  [%] 12.63 16.94 14.82  14.80 14.58 
eq (3rd)  [%] 9.26 10.38 11.98  10.54 13.00 
-eq (1st)  [%] 13.81 21.66 14.19  16.55 26.74 
-eq (3rd)  [%] 9.94 11.85 10.35  10.71 9.41 
Appendix A 
Configuration 16 
Figure A.45: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
16, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.46: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
16, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.47: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
16, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.16: Properties of Configuration 16 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 58.10 57.00 61.30  58.80 3.80 
Vy [mm] 28.10 26.80 31.30  28.73 8.06 
Fmax [kN] 62.65 62.58 64.61  63.28 1.82 
Vmax [mm] 41.14 43.64 41.74  42.17 3.09 
Fu [kN] 25.33 23.22 35.18  27.91 22.87 
Vu [mm] 55.14 58.98 50.80  54.98 7.45 
kel [kN/mm] 2.04 2.13 1.90  2.03 5.80 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.34 0.36 0.32  0.34 5.80 
F30 [kN] 55.37 54.90 56.86  55.71 1.84 
D [-] 1.96 2.20 1.62  1.93 15.05 
D30 [-] 1.07 1.12 0.96  1.05 7.84 
F1-3  [%] 8.61 9.11 8.65  8.79 3.17 
eq (1st)  [%] 4.88 5.08 4.63  4.86 4.59 
eq (3rd)  [%] 2.80 2.88 2.48  2.72 7.70 
Appendix A 
Configuration 17 
Figure A.48: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
17, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.49: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
17, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.50: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
17, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.17: Properties of Configuration 17 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 46.90 43.70 45.50  45.37 3.54 
Vy [mm] 22.80 28.30 21.20  24.10 15.45 
Fmax [kN] 49.29 55.24 48.48  51.00 7.24 
Vmax [mm] 30.56 33.56 30.27  31.46 5.80 
Fu [kN] 46.25 53.67 46.25  48.72 8.80 
Vu [mm] 31.06 34.36 31.77  32.40 5.37 
kel [kN/mm] 1.95 1.80 2.01  1.92 5.48 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.32 0.30 0.33  0.32 5.48 
F30 [kN] 49.09 51.49 48.39  49.65 3.27 
D [-] 1.36 1.21 1.50  1.36 10.46 
D30 [-] 1.32 1.06 1.42  1.26 14.49 
F1-3  [%] 5.75 6.43 6.14  6.11 5.63 
eq (1st)  [%] 4.24 4.82 4.50  4.52 6.39 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.75 2.56 2.03  2.12 19.47 
Appendix A 
Configuration 18 
Figure A.51: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
18, Test Specimen 1 
Figure A.52: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
18, Test Specimen 2 
Figure A.53: Hysteresis loops and monotonic load-displacement curve for Configuration 
18, Test Specimen 3 
Appendix A 
Table A.18: Properties of Configuration 18 test specimens in accordance with BS EN 12512 
Property 
Test Specimen  
Mean COV 
1 2 3  
Fy [kN] 23.60 25.10 22.10  23.60 6.36 
Vy [mm] 11.75 14.80 11.68  12.74 13.98 
Fmax [kN] 26.37 27.72 24.34  26.14 6.52 
Vmax [mm] 20.28 24.86 19.26  21.47 13.89 
Fu [kN] 23.18 27.11 24.17  24.82 8.23 
Vu [mm] 20.88 25.46 19.66  22.00 13.90 
kel [kN/mm] 1.98 1.70 1.83  1.83 7.66 
kpl [kN/mm] 0.33 0.28 0.30  0.31 7.66 
F30 [kN] 0.00 0.00 0.00  0.00 0.00 
D [-] 1.78 1.72 1.68  1.73 2.72 
D30 [-] 0.00 0.00 0.00  0.00 0.00 
F1-3  [%] 5.13 5.56 5.63  5.44 4.97 
eq (1st)  [%] 4.44 4.23 4.09  4.25 4.18 
eq (3rd)  [%] 1.99 2.06 1.65  1.90 11.47 
