Dementia Narratives in Contemporary Literature, Life
Writing, and Film

Rebecca Anna Bitenc 
Dementia Narratives in Contemporary Literature, Life Writing, and Film 
This thesis aims to delineate the affordances and limitations of narrative, 
and narrative studies, for the project of developing new ways of 
understanding, interacting with, and caring for people with dementia. 
Engaging with a growing body of contemporary dementia narratives, it 
investigates the potential of life writing and fiction as a means for exploring 
the phenomenology of dementia. In particular, the study considers the extent 
to which dementia narratives align with or run counter to the dominant 
discourse of dementia as loss of self. In considering the question of 
selfhood and identity, the study highlights the need to attend to embodied 
and relational aspects of identity in dementiaas well as in the stories we 
tell about dementia. Finally, even as the thesis disputes the idea that the 
modes of empathy fostered by narrative lead in any direct or simple way to 
more humane care practices, overall the analysis suggests ways in which 
both fictional and non-fictional narratives may contribute to the 
development of dementia careparticularly to the ethical exploration of 
caregiving dilemmas. From a broader perspective, in engaging with 
dementia narratives across genres and media, this thesis demonstrates how 
ideas from literary narratology bear relevantly on current debates about the 
role of narrative in the medical or health humanities. 
Dementia Narratives in Contemporary Literature, Life 
Writing, and Film 
Rebecca Anna Bitenc 
Doctor of Philosophy 
Department of English Studies 
Durham University 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisors David Herman and Patricia Waugh. A 
special thank you goes to my primary supervisor David Herman, for his 
exceptional supervision, inspiring intellectual curiosity and generosity of 
spirit.  
I would like to thank the Arts and Humanities Research Council for funding 
my research, as well as the Faculty of Art and Humanities, Department of 
English Studies and Ustinov College, Durham for financial support over the 
years.  
Thank you to my parents, Karl and Deborah Reichl, and all my friends who 
have contributed in their own unique ways over the years. 
Finally, an enormous thank you to my husband Urban: for sharing your life 
with me and for your steadfast support throughout this entire venture. 
To Clara Maria 
Table of Contents 
THE ALZHEIMERS EPIDEMIC: CONSIDERING CARE, COSTS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 
1 Illness Narratives: Countering Biocultural Master Narratives and Exploring 
2 Debates in Medical Humanities: Considering Narrative Empathy and 
CHAPTER 1 NARRATING EXPERIENCES OF DEMENTIA: EMBODIED 
FROM THE CAREGIVERS PERSPECTIVE: INTERSUBJECTIVITY IN DAVID SIEVEKINGS 
CHAPTER 2 FROM THE OUTSIDE IN? DEMENTIA IN FILM AND THE 
CHAPTER 3 LIFE WRITING AT THE LIMITS: NARRATIVE IDENTITY 
CHAPTER 4 RELATIONAL IDENTITY IN (FILIAL) DEMENTIA 
CHAPTER 5 CARE-WRITING RECONSIDERED: TOWARDS A NEW 
List of Illustrations 
Fig. 1 Evoking parallel experience in the reader through photographic style in 
Henderson (1998: 
9).56 
Fig. 2 Using photographic style to elicit imaginative engagement with the ways 
dementia changes the experience of space in Henderson 
(1998:10).57 
Fig. 3 Flow and relationality captured in photography in Henderson (1998: 43; 
75)67 
Fig. 4 Questioning cultural expectations of filial caregiving in Chast (2014: 
146)184 
Fig. 6 Interplay of narrative voice and drawing style in the expression of emotion 
in Leavitt (2011: 
66)...187 
Fig. 7 Facial expression and gesture indicate emotional distress in Leavitt (2011: 
102)188 
Fig. 8 The question of coercion: Nonverbal communication of fear in Sieveking 
(2012: 30:14; 
30:54)...201 
Fig. 9 Good grooming: Ethical issues in personal care in Leavitt (2010: 
110)203 
Fig. 10 Care as connection in Leavitt (2010: 111)204 
Fig. 11 Figuring the effects of caregiver stress in Leavitt (2010: 116-117)..205 
Fig. 12 Drawing style as part of narrative rhetoric in Leavitt (2010: 
116)206 
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. No quotation from it 
should be published without the authors prior written consent and 
information derived from it should be acknowledged. 
Introduction: (Re)considering Dementia Narratives 
Three Starting Points  
Consider these three descriptions of dementia: 
Dementia is a syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a chronic or 
progressive nature, in which there is disturbance of multiple higher cortical 
functions, including memory, thinking, orientation, comprehension, 
calculation, learning capacity, language, and judgement. Consciousness is 
not clouded. Impairments of cognitive function are commonly 
accompanied, and occasionally preceded, by deterioration in emotional 
control, social behaviour, or motivation. This syndrome occurs in 
Alzheimers disease, in cerebrovascular disease, and in other conditions 
primarily or secondarily affecting the brain. (ICD-10, Classification of 
Mental and Behavioural Disorders 46) 
Mum says  that she feels lucky and glad and relieved now Grandma is 
dead. But she says she also feels a coward too because now Grandma is 
dead she can ignore the problem of all the other Grandmas and she 
shouldnt, she should be inspired to do something and she knows she isnt 
going to. She is going to dodge the issue now. She doesnt want to think 
about senile dementia or hear about it or read about it ever again. She isnt 
an activist and she cant help it. But somebody, somewhere, will have to do 
something soon. Theyll have to. Weve tinkered around enough with the 
start of life, weve interfered with all kinds of natural sequences, and now 
well have to tinker with the end. Mum says, Your generation, Hannah, 
will have to have pro-death marches, youll have to stop being scared to 
kill the old. Will we? (Margaret Forster Have the Men Had Enough? 
1989: 250) 
Ive been thinking about myself. Some time back, we used to be, I hesitate 
to say the word, human beings. We worked, we made money, we had 
kids, and a lot of things we did not like to do and a lot of things we 
enjoyed. We were part of the economy. We had clubs that we went to, like 
Kiwanis Club and Food Bank. I was a busy little bee. I was into all sorts of 
things, things that had to do with music. Just a lot of things I did back then 
when I was, I was about to say  alive  that may be an exaggeration, but I 
must say this really is, its living, its living halfway. (Cary Henderson, 
Partial View: An Alzheimers Journal 1998: 35)  
Dementia represents a major public health concern. As our societies age, 
more and more people are affected by dementia and the number of people 
involved in providing dementia carefrom family members to professional 
caregiversis rising accordingly. Caregiving can constitute a tremendous 
burden for family members, as they may experience ill health, depression 
and social alienation due to their caregiving duties. Increasing incidence 
rates, coupled with restricted financial and human resources, raise moral 
questions about solidarity and caregiving. How much will future generations 
be prepared to investemotionally as well as financiallyin older and 
increasingly incapacitated generations? At the same time, international 
reports and local care scandals show that dementia care frequently falls 
short of what may be called adequate or indeed humane care (see also Burke 
2016). People with dementia1 are disadvantaged, neglected or even abused. 
Rectifying such situations and creating sustainable and humane dementia 
care, in which both caregivers and people with dementia can thrive, 
represents one of the global challenges of the present century.  
In this socio-political context, dementia has also, however, become part 
of the cultural imaginary. Indeed, dementia has become ubiquitous in our 
times. It features not only in news reports, but in TV series, films, novels, 
plays,2 short stories, autobiographies, graphic memoirs and documentaries. 
It has become a major theme in poetry and even a topic deemed suitable for 
operatic exploration (see Maxwell and Langer 2010). Dementia is discussed 
on radio programmes, via personal blogs and during coffee breaks. It is 
considered a tragedy, a fate worse than death, or a death that leaves the 
body behind. Due to the progressive loss of cognitive functions, people 
with dementia lose their memories and their ability to use language
qualities often viewed as defining what makes us human. People with 
dementia are considered to have lost their self and are therefore at risk of 
being denied personhood. In short, dementia has become one of the most 
dreaded diseases in Western societies. But what is dementia? Why has it 
become such a feared disease? What does it mean in the current economic 
1 A note on terminology. First, talking about dementia and people with dementia may 
seem to suggest a homogenous group and clear-cut, stable disease category. However, 
dementia is a progressive disease syndrome with variable patterns of symptom progression. 
Second, throughout this study I prefer the descriptive term people with dementia over the 
terms victim or afflicted person. While I use the adjective dementing for characters in 
novels, as it stresses the progressive nature of the disease, I avoid the use of dementing or 
demented in relation to actual people with dementia. 
2 See, among others, Tom Murphys Bailegangaire (2009), Abi Morgans 27 (2011) and 
Fiona Evans Geordie Sinatra (2013). 
and political climate? And what, finally, can a literary exploration of 
dementia contribute to our understanding of dementia and of its place in our 
society?   
In this introduction I address these and other questions raised by 
narratives about dementia while using the three starting points quoted 
previously as touchstones for my discussion. Exploring first the ways 
dementia has been configured and reconsidered will enable me to address 
the question why narrative? in terms of four discrete, but interrelated, 
reasons for examining narrative and concepts of narrative identity when 
considering dementia in contemporary literature and life writing:  
- First, both fictional and non-fictional illness narratives may 
contribute to a better understanding of the phenomenology of 
dementia. In this thesis, I explore the possibilities and limitations of 
narratives of dementia to further our understanding of the lived 
experience of the diseaseespecially vis--vis narratives told from 
the insideand their ability, or indeed inability, to counter negative 
stereotypes of people with dementia as living dead.  
- Second, narrative is at the heart of a number of debates within the 
medical humanities (Charon 2006, Woods 2011), and indeed the role 
of the humanities in society at large (Nussbaum 1997). The novel, in 
particular, has been central to discussions about narrative empathy 
and pro-social action (Keen 2007) and about narrative ethics more 
broadly (Morris 2002, Nussbaum 1990, 1995,). Issues of narrative 
empathy and narrative ethics both emerge as important concerns in 
my study of dementia narratives. 
- Third, narrative identity has come to the fore in discussions about 
what constitutes selfhood and how we claim identity for ourselves. It 
has been argued that identity is always narratively constructed 
(Bruner 1991, 2004). Such a view has both positive and negative 
implications for people with dementia. Determining the limits of the 
narrative identity hypothesis as well as suggesting the importance of 
considering the embodied and relational aspects of identity in 
dementia (and in stories about dementia) constitutes another 
important strand of my research. 
- Fourth, and finally, narrative functions as a sense-making device 
(Herman 2013). I contend that in order to make sense of dementia 
we need to consider it at the person-level rather than at (or at least in 
addition to) a sub-personal level, where phenomena such as 
neurotransmitters, neurons and fibrillary tangles are situated. 
Dementia narratives open up the possibility of exploring dementia 
(and indeed, other aspects of what it means to be human) at the 
person-level. While I do not mean to suggest that neurological 
research into the disease does not have its place, given the personal 
and societal effects of dementia there is also an urgent need to 
consider this disease syndrome holistically and within the domain of 
human action and meaning. 
A comprehensive analysis of the ways dementia is represented in 
contemporary film, fiction and life writing is beyond the scope of this thesis. 
However, by engaging with a range of case studies across different genres, 
media, and modes,3 I outline ways of understanding the cultural significance 
of dementia, with a view to developing a more nuanced understanding of 
how we construct and consequently live with this disease syndrome. My 
aim is to raise awareness for an underexplored strand of contemporary 
literaturethat is, fictional and non-fictional dementia narratives across a 
range of mediato situate this literature in contemporary discourses about 
dementia, and to mine its potential for an as yet imperfectly understood and 
certainly underfunded area of health care: dementia caregiving. 
Biomedicine and the Cultural Meaning of Dementia  
Neurobiological disease models of dementia currently underpin our 
understanding of what dementia is. Indeed, the neurological disease model 
3 Usage of the term mode differs between theorists but a broad distinction can be drawn 
between uses of the term in local and global senses (Ryan 2005: 315). In the local sense, 
mode refers to the different ways or types of representation within a narrative text (such as 
perspective or focalisation) as well as different types of representation across different 
narrative media (such as audio-visual in film but not print texts). In the global sense, mode 
is used as a term for what might be called macro-genres or higher-level text types, such as 
lyric, epic, and drama. Since the focus of this thesis is on narrative, my chief concern is 
with mode taken in the local sense. 
has come to be the dominant way of understanding dementia. In this thesis, I 
largely take this model for granted and accept the distinctions between 
different forms of dementiaamong others, Alzheimers disease, vascular 
dementia, fronto-temporal dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. Rather 
than delving into state-of-the art neurobiological explanations of the disease 
syndrome, I here trace the biomedical history and the biocultural meanings 
attached to dementia, in order to suggest some reasons why dementia 
narrativesthe stories we tell each other about dementia across different 
media and in different contextsneed to be considered (or perhaps 
reconsidered) in the first place.  
Dementia is a progressive neurodegenerative syndrome. As highlighted 
in the definition quoted at the outset, common symptoms include a range of 
impairments to cognitive functions, among them memory and language. 
Furthermore, dementia can be caused by multiple underlying conditions, 
such as cardio-vascular dementia, AIDS or Alzheimers disease. Since 
Alzheimers currently constitutes the most common cause of dementia it 
frequently stands in symbolically for the disease syndrome. 4  Despite 
difficulties in determining the factors that cause dementia, as well as 
difficulties in distinguishing normal from pathological ageing, 5  the 
neurobiological explanation of dementia as brain disease presents the 
dominant and accepted mode of understanding the symptoms of memory 
loss and cognitive decline which frequently accompany advanced old age
and in rarer cases affect young or middle-aged adults.6 
4 In much of the non-medical literature on dementia, Alzheimers disease is used to refer 
to all types of dementia, although dementia actually constitutes the umbrella term. I prefer 
to use the term dementia as both the more accurate and more inclusive term. Nonetheless, 
although dementia represents a disease syndrome, that is, a constellation of symptoms that 
may be caused by a number of underlying diseases, for ease of reading I refer to dementia 
as disease in the singular.  
5 See the famous Nun Study in which the brains of elderly nuns who manifested 
symptoms of dementia while alive did not show the characteristic plaques and tangles of 
Alzheimers on autopsy, while conversely, some of the brains that manifested plaques and 
tangles belonged to individuals who had not shown any symptoms of dementia when living 
(Snowdon 1997). The study has recently been explored in the stage drama 27 (Morgan 
2011). 
6 For dissenting views compare Whitehouse (2008) who questions the validity of the 
Alzheimers disease category. For other dissenting voices see Holstein (2000: 171). 
In the age of Alzheimers it may be difficult to imagine that cognitive 
decline in old age was not always considered pathological.7 As far back as 
2200 BC Egyptian vizier Ptahhotep describes the effects of old age as 
entailing feebleness, childishness, the loss of language andsignificantly
the loss of memory (Wetzstein 2005: 24). Memory loss, lack of orientation 
and difficulties with tasks of daily livingnow considered symptoms of 
Alzheimers diseasewere long considered natural, that is, expected 
aspects of ageing. Conversely, some classical writers considered old age 
itself pathological. The history of medical and cultural attitudes to old age 
and age-related decline is long and complex (see, among others, Thane 
2005). Further, there is significant variability across cultures in 
understandings of the life-course. Both a diachronic exploration as well as 
cross-cultural comparisons of attitudes towards people with dementia are 
worth exploring in their own rightand might shed light on contemporary 
(Western) constructions of the disease.  
Diachronic or cross-cultural comparison, however, would have made 
this study scientifically unmanageable. I am not concerned here either with 
tracing a literary history of the disease, or indeed with retrospectively 
diagnosing characters in Shakespeare or Dickens with some specific form 
of dementia (cp. Douglas 2008). Instead, I consider dementia principally as 
a contemporary problemas it is currently construed in medical, socio-
economic and demographic termsand examine the way this problem of 
dementia is constructed in the cultural imaginary.  
The conceptual history of dementia is well documented (see amongst 
others Ballenger 2006,  Fox 1989, Gubrium 1986, Holstein 1997, 2000, 
Leibing and Cohen 2006, Shenk 2001, Wetzstein 2005, Whitehouse, 
Maurer, and Ballenger 2000). Most accounts begin with Alois Alzheimers 
well-known case study of his patient Auguste D.a fifty-one-year-old 
woman who presented at his clinic with paranoia and memory problems. 
After admittance to a mental hospital, Auguste deteriorated rapidly over the 
next few years, becoming progressively cognitively impaired, disorientated, 
delusional, and hostile (Shenk 2001: 13). When Alzheimer dissected her 
7 See Leibing and Cohen (2006) on the pathologisation of senility. 
brain post-mortem, he discovered the amyloid plaques and senile or 
neurofibrillary tangles which have since become the hallmark of 
Alzheimers disease. Although Alzheimer presented his work in 1906 and 
Emil Kraeplin named the disease after him in 1910, the disease category lay 
more or less medically dormant until the 1960s (Gubrium 1986: 1). Even 
Alzheimer himself evinced some uncertainty over whether his case 
represented a new disease category or could be equated with the more 
common form of senile dementia. It was only in the late 1970s and early 
80s, due to a complex set of socioeconomic, technological and political 
developments, that dementia emerged as disease category (Ballenger 2006, 
Fox 1989, Gubrium 1986, Holstein 2000, Lyman 1989). Alzheimers 
became the dread disease of the century (Thomas 1983). It is worth 
keeping in mind the complex social history of the biomedicalisation of 
dementia when approaching this disease or disease syndrome as a 
contemporary problem. Tracing the history of Alzheimers highlights the 
degree to which disease, in general, is always at least partially socially 
constructed (Hacking 1999a, b) and accrues meaning in its bio-cultural 
context (Morris 1998). 
While demographic changes clearly play an important role in the 
contemporary rise of Alzheimers, the particular fear generated by 
dementia is arguably linked to the fact that this condition threatens core 
values in contemporary Western societies, such as youth, productivity, 
autonomy, capability and rationality (Basting 2003a, Snyder 1999). 
Importantly, the worth of a person, or indeed the status of personhood itself, 
is determined on the basis of whether or not a person can conform to these 
values. As ethicist Stephen Post argues, We live in a culture that is, at least 
in large segments, dominated by heightened expectations of rationalism and 
economic productivity, so clarity of mind and productivity inevitably 
influence our sense of the worth of a human life (2000: 5). Post calls 
attention to the risks inherent in such hypercognitive value systems, in that 
people with dementia may be removed from the sphere of moral concern. 
They frequently become victims of abuse and neglect. In the worst case, 
their lives might no longer be considered worth protecting and they may be 
under pressure to consent to assisted suicide or may become the victims of 
euthanasia or murder. Indeed, as Megan-Jane Johnstone reveals, the way 
media coverage constructs dementia and thereby influences public 
understanding of the disease has contributed to what she perceives as a 
subtle but noticeable shift towards euthanasia as a solution for people with 
dementia at any stage in the disease (Johnstone 2011, 2013).  
If people with dementia are dehumanised, the core element of this 
dehumanisation lies in the fact that dementia is commonly understood to be 
synonymous with losing ones self. This notion long remained 
unquestioned and formed the basis of both popular and scientific 
understandings of the disease (see Millett 2011). Indeed, as Herskovits 
(1995) argues, scientific literature on dementia tended to enforce the notion 
that the self is lost, by using such disturbing metaphors as death before 
death and a funeral without end (Cohen and Eisdorfer 1986, qtd. in 
Herskovits 1995: 148). According to the sociologists Fontana and Smith, for 
instance, in people with dementia the self has slowly unravelled and 
unbecome a self. The authors assert that while the caregivers act on the 
illusion that there is a person behind the largely unwitting presentation of 
self in the victim  in reality there is less and less, until where once there 
was a unique individual there is but emptiness (Fontana and Smith 1989: 
45, qtd. in Herskovits 1995: 147). Such descriptions of dementia resonate 
with images that characterise people with dementia as shells, husks, 
ghosts of their former selves or even zombies (Behuniak 2011). 
Frequently family members will state of a person with dementia that He is 
no longer there, or She is long gone. Although such descriptions speak to 
the experience of loss that family members go through, such statements 
deny the continuing subjectivity of the person with dementia. Indeed, 
Herskovits characterises the current construction of Alzheimers disease as a 
monsterizing of senility (Herskovits 1995: 153, original emphasis) and 
Wetzstein speaks of a demonisation of dementia in public discourse 
(Wetzstein 2005). Such metaphors as shell, husk, or vegetable are 
deeply troubling since they risk removing people with dementia from the 
sphere of personhood and hence moral concern (Post 2000). 
Since the 1980s a growing body of research on dementia, especially 
from a social constructivist perspective, has engaged in what Herskovits 
identifies as reparative work (Herskovits 1995: 159); this work aims to 
reconstitute the humanity and dignity of people with dementia and 
challenges the notion that selfhood is simply lost. Karen Lyman (1989) 
discusses how disease labelling and seeing all aspects of behaviour as 
pathological facilitates social and medical control (599). The 
biomedicalisation of dementia may result in, among other things, a self-
fulfilling prophecy of impairment and excess disability (Brody et al. 
1971; qtd. in Lyman 1989: 599). In short, the conjunction of labelling and 
stigma results in the spoilt identity of the person to whom a disease label is 
attached (Goffman 1963).  
Tom Kitwood, a pioneer in dementia studies, similarly, draws attention 
to the way social-psychological factors contribute to the process of dementia 
and may thereby undermine the personhood of those living with the 
condition. By highlighting the malignant social psychology pervasive in 
care settings, Kitwood explores the dynamic interplay between neurological 
processes of degeneration and psychological factors such as 
disempowerment, infantilisation, labelling and objectification in the 
progression of dementia (Kitwood 1990, 1997: 45-49). His exhaustive 
description of the factors which contribute to the dehumanisation of people 
with dementia in care settings is followed by practical guidance on how to 
prevent these processes from occurring: his dementia care mapping system 
has since been implemented in numerous care environments with the aim of 
developing more person-centred care in dementia. 
Steven R. Sabat and Rom Harr (1992) also approach dementia from a 
social constructivist or interactionist perspective. They analyse speech data 
from people with Alzheimers disease to show that (1) there is a self, a 
personal singularity, that remains intact despite the debilitating effects of the 
disorder, and (2) there are other aspects of the person, the selves that are 
socially and publicly presented, that can be lost, but only indirectly as a 
result of the disease (444, original emphasis). Their argument is based on a 
distinction between what they term self1 and self2. Self1 refers to the self of 
personal identity, which is experienced as the continuity of ones point of 
view in the world of objects in space and time  coupled with ones sense 
of personal agency, in that one takes oneself as acting from that very same 
point in time (445), while self2 refers to the number of selves that are 
publicly presented in the episodes of interpersonal interaction in the 
everyday world, the coherent clusters of traits we sometimes call 
personae (445). The latter are usually discursively created through 
narration and declarations and require the cooperation of others in order to 
exist. Sabat and Harr reveal how the social positioning of people with 
dementia as confused, and of their behaviour as meaningless, threatens the 
recognition of their discursive acts as displays of selfhood. In other words, 
we need to listen to people with dementia in order to recognise them as 
semiotic subjects (Sabat and Harr 1994). If we fail to do so people with 
dementia lose their selfhoodnot due to the dementing illness but because 
of the way they are socially positioned.  
While setting a laudable example of paying attention to the words and 
stories of people with dementiaone I intend to follow in this thesisSabat 
and Harr perhaps underplay the role of neurological impairment in the 
construction or deconstruction of selfhood. Further, their recognition of 
selfhood overemphasises the correct use of first-person indexicals (such as 
references to I, me etc.) as proof that selfhood persists. Their work 
suggests that there is nonetheless a cut-off line at which the subjectivity of 
the person with dementia ceases, and this cut-off line hinges on the use of 
language. By contrast, Pia Kontos (2003, 2004, 2005) emphasises the role of 
embodied memory and meaningful behaviour and gestures in people with 
dementia as examples of the persistence of selfhood. As I suggest in chapter 
1, the vexed ontological question of the persistence of selfhood in dementia 
may perhaps best be understood if we replace Sabat and Harrs self1 with 
the phenomenological description of selfhood as the first-personal 
perspectival givenness of the world (Zahavi 2007). This subjective 
perspective on the world, I argue, persists until the very end, as people with 
dementia continue to experience their being-in-the-world as long as they are 
alive. By contrast, self2the social identities or personae of a person with 
dementiamay indeed be eroded, both by disease processes and social 
interactions, relatively early on.8 
More recently a growing literature explores the question of what may 
actually constitute selfhood in dementia. This question has been addressed 
in, for instance, philosophical and psychiatric practice-based investigations 
of the disease syndrome (Hughes, Louw, and Sabat 2006). While some 
work in this area might be classified as reparative in that it challenges the 
construction of people with dementia as non-persons, other studies espouse 
post-Lockean notions of identity, which posit that to be a person one needs a 
certain mental unity, and awareness of oneself as persisting in time which is 
grounded in memorythereby clearly denying people with dementia a 
claim to personhood. Of course, simply asserting that self- or personhood 
persists does not resolve practical or ethical questions around the limits of 
agency or moral responsibility. While the disempowerment of people with 
dementia is to be lamented, the safeguarding of people with dementia and of 
their caregivers clearly requires a difficult balance to be struck.   
One of the reparative moves within dementia studies, with particular 
relevance for this study, has been to see selfhood as narratively constructed. 
Research on how selfhood is constructed in dementia, both by people with 
the disease and by their caregivers, has been crucial in drawing attention to 
the narratives people with dementia tell (Hydn 2011, Hydn and rulv 
2009, Lyman 1998, MacRae 2010, Phinney 2002, Ryan, Bannister, and 
Anas 2009, Usita 1998) and also in emphasising the degree to which 
identity construction relies on the collaboration of others (Sabat and Harr 
1992, 1994, Small et al. 1998). However, as previously noted in relation to 
Sabat and Harrs work, some risks attach to positing identity as constituted 
by narrative in the context of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimers. People with dementia do experience significant decline in their 
linguistic capacities and in their ability to remember aspects of their life. 
Both of these symptoms clearly affect the ability to tell a life story and 
thereby reclaim social identity for oneself. The present study explores this 
8 The terms self, identity, person, and life are frequently used interchangeably not 
only in public but also in philosophical discourse. I acknowledge the contested nature of all 
these terms, but for ease of reading refrain from placing them in quotation marks.  
very tension, both in the context of fictional writing and in the context of 
life writing by and about people with dementia. In particular, I investigate 
how these narratives position themselves in relation to the dominant master 
narrative of dementia as loss of self, and to what extent narratives by and 
about people with dementia may act as counter-narratives to the current 
Alzheimers construct. 
In short, the representation of people with dementia is not neutral. 
Biomedicine has created a discourse of facts about the disease syndrome, 
but even this purportedly scientific description is an interpretation of the 
disease which impacts on the way the disease is treated and experienced. 
Biomedical approaches to dementia do not pay due attention to the way 
diseases of all sorts are, in part, socially constructed; nor do they consider 
the potentially harmful or iatrogenic9 effects of biomedical practice itself. 
However, my focus here is not so much on biomedicine as it is on the way a 
biomedical category like dementia is wedded to cultural meanings. The 
damaging effect of disease labels lies not in the labels themselves but in the 
cultural meaning that, because of these practices of naming and 
categorisation, certain illnesses accrue (Couser 1997, Sontag 1979, 1989). 
There are, as Lucy Burke underscores, ethical consequences that follow 
from the particular descriptive categories used to evoke Alzheimers 
and the ways of seeing that they prescribe (Burke 2007b: 64). 
Accordingly, the present study reconsiders the interpretive aspects of the 
purportedly descriptive categories we have developed: not just the 
biomedical model of Alzheimers disease but the metaphors we use and 
stories we tell to conceptualise dementia in the present age. As David 
Morris suggests, The stories we tell  are not just entertainment. They are 
the material with which a culture redefines its own image and self-
understanding (1998: 277). Examining the images and stories that have 
grown around dementia may thus provide an insight into how contemporary 
Western societies construct human identity. At the same time, understanding 
how Alzheimers is perceived and represented will, hopefully, lead to 
benefits for those living with this disease (see Basting 2003a: 88).  
9 The term iatrogenic relates to illness caused by medical examination or treatment. 
The Alzheimers Epidemic: Considering Care, Costs and Social 
Justice through Literature 
This section traces the care crisis narrative that Margaret Forsters novel 
engages with and in doing so explores further reasons for attending to 
dementia narratives. These reasons concern how such narratives relate to 
current ethico-political debates about social justice in the context of a 
dementia epidemic; how representations of dementia across a variety of 
media and contexts contribute to the construction of dementiawith very 
real consequences in the social realm; and how literary narratives can work 
as a moral laboratory for analsying caregiving dilemmas, thereby fostering 
new ethical insights into and practices of dementia care. 
Let us return to the second description of dementia quoted at the 
beginning of this introduction. This extract is taken from Margaret Forsters 
novel Have the Men Had Enough? (1989), a novel that explores the 
difficulties of providing home care for an ageing relative with dementia. 
The story is told from two different perspectives: the perspective of the 
daughter-in-law, Jenny, and the granddaughter, Hannah. Neither of these 
women, although intimately involved in caring for Grandma, is the 
primary caregiver; rather, that role falls to Grandmas daughter, Bridget. 
The main conflict in the novel arises from Bridgets desire to keep her 
mother at home while her mothers ever growing care needs make this 
increasingly difficult for the family as a whole to sustain. The extract quoted 
above must be situated in this larger context; rather than being a description 
of dementia, it is a description of the daughter-in-laws reaction to her 
mother-in-laws death. More precisely, it represents Jennys reaction as 
mediated through her own daughters perspective and includes a discussion 
about the responsibility and the limits of responsibility when it comes to 
caring for people with dementia.  
As Lucy Burke notes about this novel, Grandmas death represents a 
resolution of the care-crisis without actually offering a solution to the 
problem of how to live with dementia or care for people with dementia 
(Burke 2015: 39). Heike Hartung (2016: 202-203) goes so far as to suggest 
that the novel advocates for suicide and euthanasia in dementia. While I 
disagree with the latter analysis, the novel clearly does raise questions about 
the value and quality of life in dementia and about intergenerational justice. 
In particular, it frames these questions through a feminist enquiry into why 
dementia care is still predominantly carried out by women. It taps into one 
of the most prominent narratives about dementia propounded through public 
mediathat is, of Alzheimers as an epidemic that will lead to an 
insurmountable care crisis. As a novel, though, Fosters text offers its own 
vision of this situation and invites its readers to think through some of the 
complex ethical issues dementia raises. Extrapolating from this novel, I turn 
now to a discussion of the socio-political context in which debates about 
dementia care are currently framed, before suggesting, in a second step, how 
fictional and non-fictional dementia narratives may contribute to this debate. 
Dementia has become a major public health concern (World Health 
Organization 2012). Demographic prognoses of graying societies have led 
analysts to cast dementia as an epidemic, plague, rising tide, wave or 
even silent tsunami (Zeilig 2013: 260). Such rhetoric is motivated by 
statistical estimates presented in the World Alzheimers Report 2009, 
according to which the number of people with dementia will nearly double 
every twenty years, to 65.7 million in 2030 and 115.4 million in 2050 
(Alzheimers Disease International 2009: 8). Dementia is cited as the 
leading cause of dependency and disability among older people and in 2010 
the global economic cost of dementia was estimated at over 604 billion US 
dollars (Alzheimers Disease International 2010: 5). Dementia, on these 
accounts, represents one of the greatest social, health and economic 
challenges of the twenty-first century. 
Although Alzheimers Disease International and related associations 
have been instrumental in raising awareness about dementia and improving 
the lives of those affected, there are some negative implications inherent in 
the plot-lines or master narratives that the association employs in order to 
justify the urgent need for action. For one, the alarmist notion of an 
Alzheimers epidemic or tsunami, fed by demographic statistics, is likely to 
increase fear and dread of the disease. Such imagery dehumanises people 
with dementia by turning them into an indistinguishable mass that will 
swallow the resources of more able-bodied and able-minded sectors of 
society. We must therefore question the metaphors used to conceptualise 
dementia and ask how they make us see, understand and feel about this 
disease. On a different plane, as a number of scholars have pointed out 
(Ballenger 2006, Fox 1989), the associations lobbying strategy to increase 
funding for research into the disease is usually based on the projected costs 
dementia will incur if it is not cured. The advocacy movement uses statistics 
to support their claim for urgent action, but this use of statistics unwittingly 
undermines claims for more money to be invested in dementia care: 
supporting people with dementia and their caregivers, or investing resources 
in developing better insurance care plans and therapeutic interventions is not 
(yet) a top priority. 
Although health care provisions differ greatly between different 
Western countries, dementia emerges as a problem case in all systems. An 
in-depth analysis of the situation, specifically in the UK and the US, lies 
beyond the scope of this introduction, but it is evident that dementia 
challenges these systems, or rather that health care systems fail people with 
dementia. In the US, for instance, middle class families affected by 
dementia frequently fall through the net of insurance policies until they have 
spent all savings and assets and qualify for state benefits. Furthermore, 
policies such as Medicaid and Medicare often do not cover the type of care 
a person with dementia still living at home needs. In the UK, an ailing if not 
failing NHS struggles to offer the kind of care suitable for a person with 
dementia. Although all patients suffer from the fragmentation of health 
services and the lack of communication between different services, people 
with dementia, in particular, would benefit from having a designated health 
professional to organise all aspects of their healthcare. Government cuts to 
the care budget of local councils mean that people with dementia cannot be 
adequately cared for at home, resulting in increasing numbers of people 
with dementia in hospital beds. However, hospital visits have been noted to 
cause rapid decline in the functioning of people with dementia, due to the 
unfamiliar environment hospitals present. Further, limited visiting hours for 
caregivers deprive people with dementia in institutions of the familiar faces 
and support that would help orientate them and make them feel safe.10 
 In sum, institutions are not set up to cater to the needs of the deeply 
forgetful. Professional carers are underpaid and over-stretched. Agencies 
send different carers to people with dementia daily, undermining the 
possibility for a care relationship to form. This means the person with 
dementia is forced to accept help with dressing, bathing and other intimate 
aspects of daily living from a string of different individuals. The list of 
failings is long, perhaps endless. Importantly, besides these local problems, 
changes to the basic principles of the welfare state over the last decades 
have presented major challenges for dementia care. As Lucy Burke (2015) 
notes, the spread of neo-liberalist economic tendencies adversely affects 
dementia care by turning it into a commodityone that will not be available 
to everyone who may need it in the future.   
The growing prevalence of dementia together with declining welfare 
state systems then raises a number of questions. On the one hand, how do 
we as a society rise to the ethico-political dilemmas dementia raises in terms 
of social justice? What duty do we have to care for growing segments of 
dependent people in society? How do we conceptualise people with 
dementia and what effect does this have on their treatment in society? Are 
we moving towards political recognition of people with dementia or will 
euthanasia of the cognitively impaired become the norm in the next 
decades? (Johnstone 2011, 2013, Kaufman 2006). As Verena Wetzstein 
(2005) argues, the combination of the biomedical concept of dementia with 
reductionist notions of personhood has serious implications for how we treat 
people with dementia. No longer considered a person due to the loss of 
cognitive functions, a non-person may no longer seem to have a life worth 
protecting. At the same time, the loss of cognitive functions inevitably leads 
to a loss of autonomy which raises a different set of questions concerning 
coercion and paternalism. How can the need to protect people with dementia 
be balanced with the need to respect their autonomy? And what autonomy 
do people with dementia retain when it comes to making end-of life 
10 Johns campaign in the UK (see http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/) focuses on extending 
visiting hours and generally making family caregivers more welcome in hospital 
environments with the aim of supporting the well-being of people with dementia. 
decisions and to planning ahead through the use of advance directives or the 
nomination of a proxy?  
Fictional and non-fictional dementia narratives, I suggest, provide a 
means to address, or at least articulate more precisely, questions of this sort. 
Of course, literature does not provide answers or solutions to all the 
challenges of dementia care, but it does complement other modes of enquiry 
and offer a critical contribution to current debates. Critically analysing the 
representation of dementia in contemporary literature will yield insights into 
how our society conceptualises dementia, and particularly selfhood in 
dementia. Fictional representations of dementia may suggest how dementia 
narratives perpetuate stereotypes of lost selves and empty shells and 
thereby confirm the stigma attached to the condition. At the same time, 
literature may also critically reflect on current discourses, or may function 
as a counter-narrative to the dominant masterplot of dementia. As the long 
history of censorship demonstrates, literature is feared or revered
depending on ones perspectivefor its subversive potential. And yet, as 
my comments about stigmatising narratives suggest, literature also functions 
as a tool for consolidating cultural attitudes and for legitimating certain 
social practices. 
In recent years, a number of literary and cultural scholars, as well as 
scholars working in fields such as gerontology, have analysed the way 
dementia is represented in contemporary literature, film and life writing (see 
Swinnen and Schweda 2015). Foremost among them, Lucy Burke, a 
disability scholar, has challenged the representation of dementia in film-
poetry (Burke 2007b), life writing (Burke 2007a, 2008) and fictional 
narratives (Burke 2015, 2016). Burke specifically questions the notion that 
selfhood is lost in dementia and explores how personhood is constructed (or 
fails to be constructed) in illness narratives (Burke 2014). Her analysis 
stresses the socio-political relevance of dementia discourses and the need to 
challenge cognitivist notions of personhood in the context of neo-liberalist 
politics. Considering how dementia is represented in contemporary media 
becomes an ethico-political process geared towards acknowledging the 
personhood of people with dementia with the aim of recognising their basic 
human rights to dignity and care.   
While scholarship previously focused mainly on representations of 
dementia in the novel or life writing, it is now starting to catch up with the 
recent surge of dementia films. Relevant studies range across Japanese film 
(Asai, Sato, and Fukuyama 2009), Dutch documentaries (Swinnen 2012), 
non-mainstream films (Cohen-Shalev and Marcus 2012) and British 
biopics (Wearing 2013, Graham 2016).11 Wearing (2013) and Graham 
(2016), for instance, criticise the stereotypical representation of aged female 
bodies and voices in biopics such as Iris (Eyre 2001), about philosopher and 
novelist Dame Iris Murdoch, and the controversial film The Iron Lady 
(Lloyd 2011), about Margaret Thatchers life with dementia. Wearing 
argues that the latter film uses dementia as a narrative ploy that legitimises 
a subjective, one sided, and thereby depoliticised account of British politics 
(321), but does little to further the interests of people with dementia. 
Graham by contrast draws attention to how cinematic portrayals of the 
voices of women with Alzheimers can enforce damaging stereotypes of 
dementia as narrative of decline and devastation. Both authors agree that the 
ways dementia is represented in film, due to the affective potential by which 
film does its cultural workwith film producing a form of embodied social 
knowledge (Wearing 2013: 323)has serious implications for how we 
think and feel about, and therefore how we act towards, people with 
dementia.  
Similarly, Andrea Capstick and her collaborators (Capstick, Chatwin, 
and Ludwin 2015) have problematized representations of people with 
dementia in mainstream film. They find that popular TV series and films 
contribute to the epistemic injustice12 experienced by people with dementia. 
Further, they argue that such representations are particularly dangerous, 
compared to other fictional forms, such as the novel, as filmic 
representations are more likely to be believed and be experienced as a direct 
source of knowledge, because film involves a heightened sense of reality 
(235). While such general claims about the reception of film, in comparison 
11 David Orr and Yugin Teo (2015), by contrast, explore how dementia films reflect 
caregivers responses to their partners shifting identities, rather than discussing the films 
representations of dementia per se. 
12 The term epistemic injustice was coined by Fricker (2007) to highlight how particular 
social groups are deprived of their status as knowers and may consequently be 
dehumanised (see Capstick, Chatwin, and Ludwin 2015: 231). 
to other media, should be examined more closely, I agree that the benign 
social realism of a TV drama might make its acceptance as a faithful 
representation of diagnosis, assessment, and prognosis in dementia more 
likely (235). Importantly, because of the way fictional narratives employ 
dementia to meet their own aesthetic and dramatic ends, Capstick and her 
colleagues rightly caution against uncritically inserting filmic 
representations of dementia into curricula for health and social care 
practitioners on the assumption that this will have a humanising effect on 
future practitioners (238). More could be gained by teaching health 
practitioners to read such films, and their own preconceptions about 
dementia, critically. 
Yet the focus, both in dementia narratives and in critical analyses of 
these texts, is not always on the person with dementia. Indeed, it is only 
recently that the subjective perspective of the person affected has begun to 
be considered in social science investigations, in life writing by people with 
dementia, and in artistic explorations of the disease. Most explorations of 
dementia (both literary and scholarly) focus on the impact the disease has on 
the family caregiver. Martina Zimmermanns  (2010) article Deliver us 
from Evil: Carer Burden in Alzheimers Disease is paradigmatic on two 
counts: (1) the novels she discusses are written from the perspective of the 
adult children of a person with dementia, and (2), the focus of her article is 
on the burden dementia constitutes for these adult children. While she 
rightly suggests that fictional accounts of dementia may contribute to 
constructive public discussion regarding end-of-life treatment of demented 
patients (101), Zimmermans own analysis, however, is insufficiently 
circumspect about the rhetoric and structures of desire that her two case 
studies (Christine Devars Le Piano Dsaccord (2005) and Andrs Barbas 
Ahora Tocad Msica de Baile (2004)) may raise in their readers. In both 
cases, adult children decide to terminate the life of their parent with 
dementia: in Barbas account the protagonist first nearly beats his mother to 
death and then causes her to step in front of an oncoming car. In the 
narrative, the mother is constructed as no longer human, and her life 
considered undignified. Zimmermann does not explore the extent to which 
dehumanising imagery and a hypercognitive approach to personal identity in 
the narrative may lead to evaluations of the sons acts as, in her terms, 
positively motivated (36).  
Thus, both the fictional narratives and Zimmermans reading of these 
texts highlight what may happen if one doesnt engage critically with the 
rhetoric of dementia as it is portrayed in discourse concerned with the 
disease. Attending to the way dementia is constructed in the cultural 
imaginary is crucial, since it informs the way dementia is lived, experienced 
and treated. However, my argument is also more specific than that. I suggest 
that dementia narratives, in particular, provide key insights into the 
dilemmas of dementia care outlined abovedilemmas having to do with 
resource allocation, best care practice, questions of autonomy and coercion, 
and end-of-life decisions. Indeed, novels, films and life writing about 
dementia may function as a form of social phenomenology (Felski 2008: 
89) or practical counterpart of phenomenology (Waugh 2013), offering a 
means to live through (Rosenblatt 1995) and think through dementia care 
dilemmas. In short, dementia narratives can work as a moral laboratory13 
for considering the dilemmas of dementia care, with critical reading of these 
texts contributing to a new ethics and practice of dementia care. Although 
the Alzheimers disease movement since the 1980s has garnered increased 
research funds in an effort to defeat dementia (Fox 1989)in the popular 
militaristic parlance of contemporary illness discoursea cure for the 
multifactorial disease processes that cause dementia remains elusive. Since 
there is no cure in sight, the question remains how people with dementia can 
best be cared for and, also, how those who provide this careprofessional 
and familial caregivers alikecan best be supported (see World Health 
Organization 2012: 68).  
Why Narrative? The Life World Approach to Dementia 
 Some time back, Cary Henderson tells readers of his Alzheimers journal, 
we used to be, I hesitate to use the word, human beings (1998: 35). 
Reflecting on the many ways his life has changed due to Alzheimers, he 
contrasts his life as it was back thenfull of activities and 
13 See Hakemulder (2000) for empirical studies examining the effects of reading. 
responsibilitieswith his current limited horizon: Just a lot of things I did 
back then when I was, I was about to say  alive  that may be an 
exaggeration, but I must say this really is, its living, its living halfway 
(35). Hendersons journal evokes in a lively fashion how the world of a 
person with dementia changesmentally, physically and socially. It is one 
of a growing number of autopathographies 14  written by people with 
dementia about what it is like to live with this disease. As such, it is an 
example of the explosion of contemporary illness narratives, written against 
the background of biomedical interventions which risk depersonalising the 
illness experience and reinforcing the cultural stigma associated with 
disease. Henderson writes about no longer being considered a human 
being because of his inability to be a productive member of society. He 
details how Alzheimers interferes not only with his working life and 
recreational activities but also with his ability to interact with others and feel 
part of his family and wider social circle. Yet in doing so Henderson seems 
to have internalised the values of the society he lives in. In describing 
himself as only partially alive, as living halfway, he both expresses his 
subjective experience of living with Alzheimers and also confirms 
stereotypical views of the disease as a kind of living death. 
If Hendersons journal deals with the phenomenology of dementia and 
the stigma attached to the disease, it also feeds directly into debates about 
narrative identity and the politics, ethics and aesthetics of life writing. 
Hendersons journal represents a collaborative project: between Henderson 
and the photographer Nancy Andrews, but also between Henderson and his 
wife and daughter, who transcribed, organised and edited his many tape 
recordings. Using a tape recorder allowed Henderson to tell readers about 
his experience long after he had lost the ability to write. His journal thus 
points to the limits to life writing in dementia. The episodic nature of the 
musings in his journal also raises the question of how coherent a narrative 
need be in order to function as an identity narrativeas a means of claiming 
14 For studies of autopathography, defined as life writing primarily about the progression of 
a disease and written by the person affected directly by the disease, see, among others, 
Couser (1999) and Graham (1997). Avrahami (2007) uses instead the term illness 
autobiography. Hawkins study (1993) deals with both autopathography and pathography
illness narratives written by the carer of the person affected by diseaseunder the heading 
of pathography. 
selfhood in the social sphere. More generally, Hendersons autopathography 
highlights several important roles narrative plays in current discourses about 
dementia. 
Although some of these roles are particular to life writing, others also 
come into play in fictional dementia narratives, as brought out by the four 
claims for the study of dementia narratives outlined at the beginning of this 
introduction:  
- First, fictional and non-fictional illness narratives may contribute to 
a better understanding of the phenomenology of dementia and may 
act as counter-narratives to the current Alzheimers construct. 
- Second, narrative is central to debates within the (medical) 
humanities in terms of delineating the potential role of literature
specifically of narrative empathy and the ethics evoked by novels
in relation to pro-social action. 
- Third, identity can be considered to be (at least partially) constituted 
through narrative. There is thus a need to determine the limits of the 
narrative identity hypothesisto explore its positive and negative 
implications for people with dementiawhile also considering the 
embodied and relational aspects of identity in dementia (and in 
stories about dementia).  
- Fourth, narrative functions as a sense-making device that is 
optimally suited to explore dementia at the person-level.    
The latter claim, in particular, resonates with my previous discussion about 
the biocultural significance of dementia and the way that the 
conceptualisation of dementiathrough medical paradigms, metaphors, or 
storiesinfluences the way we see and act towards people with dementia. 
Rather than reiterating how this argument is relevant to a whole range of 
cultural productionsincluding but also extending beyond narrativeI here 
focus on the primary role narrative plays in human sense-making. In what 
follows, I outline the broader scholarly debates surrounding each claim in 
order to highlight the relevance of my approach to current academic 
discourse. 
1 Illness Narratives: Countering Biocultural Master Narratives and 
Exploring the Phenomenology of Illness 
In recent decades there has been both a surge in the publication of illness 
narratives and a growing scholarly interest in these stories about illness and 
disabilityfrom Arthur Kleinmans seminal The Illness Narratives (1988), 
across literary studies of pathography15 (Hawkins 1993, Wiltshire 2000), 
to Rita Charons practice-based Narrative Medicine (Charon 2006). While 
the focus was initially on doctors narratives of illness (Montgomery Hunter 
1993),16 illness narratives soon became the prerogative of the ill person 
herself. Indeed, illness narratives may be considered paradigmatic counter-
narratives which allow the ill person to reclaim her subjectivity in the face 
of reductionist biomedical (Frank 1995) and culturally stigmatising 
constructions of diseases (Avrahami 2007, Couser 1997).17 There are, of 
course, problems in defining what constitutes the master narrative of 
dementia and what may constitute a counter-narrativeas I discuss in more 
detail in chapter 3. In general, however, counter-narratives become active 
when one group of society is unduly marginalised or stigmatised (Bamberg 
and Andrews 2004). While stigma invariably attaches to diseases (Goffman 
1963), it seems particularly salient in those conditions that are in some form 
culturally significant (Couser 1997). I argue that dementia is one such 
culturally significant disease. As a disease of memory it taps into 
contemporary Western societies concern or even obsession with the 
capacity to remember. More importantly, it attacks those aspects of human 
cognition that are considered to distinguish humans from other animals
15 Auto/biographical illness narratives written, usually, by a family caregiver or by the 
person affected by the disease (Hawkins 1993). Autopathography was later coined to 
distinguish the point of view of the ill person from the caregivers perspective (see, for 
instance Couser 1991). Given that these texts aim to de-pathologise their authors 
experiences, Couser subsequently suggested the term autosomatography (Smith and 
Watson 2010). I use the term autopathography when referring to life writing by people 
with dementia and the term caregivers memoir for dementia pathography written by 
family caregivers. 
16 See Whitehead (2014: 109-111) on the psycho-analytic focus in doctors narratives in the 
UK context. 
17 There is a growing body of literature that deals with illness narratives and other 
alternative approaches to illness in journals such as Literature and Medicine, The British 
Journal of Medical Humanities, The Journal of Medical Humanities (US), The Journal of 
Critical Disability Studies, journals in (auto)biography studies, and the online journal 
Hektoen International.  
language, higher order thought, and memory. Dementia therefore goes to the 
heart of discussions of what it means to be human. Consequently, the 
disease syndrome activates many peoples worst fears in todays aptly 
described hypercognitive society (Post 2000), since it leads to a 
progressive loss in cognitive functioningand, presumably, concomitantly 
to a loss of self.  
Although the condition of dementia seems to defy the possibility of 
expression in autobiographical writing, there is a growing body of texts that 
tell the experience of dementia from the perspective of the person affected.18 
Karen Lymans statement that people with dementia are largely invisible in 
most of [the Alzheimers] literature (1989:603) fortunately no longer 
holdsalthough the representation, and the cultural salience, of the first-
person perspective remains low compared to the number of third-person 
perspectives found in caregivers memoirs, documentaries, and 
representations of dementia in mainstream TV series and films. In line with 
findings about other illness narratives, autopathographies by people with 
dementia can be seen as a means of reclaiming ones identity and the 
meaning of ones experience from the biomedical domain (Basting 2003a, 
Ryan, Bannister, and Anas 2009). Lisa Snyder contends, furthermore, that 
the narratives of people with dementia present an important means of 
bridging the gap in communication not only in early but also in later stages 
of the disease. In a collection of narratives compiled through interviews 
with people with dementia she writes, 
Although the individuals profiled in this book  are able to articulate their 
reflections and feelings verbally, in all likelihood their expressions will 
change over time form verbal to nonverbal  to more behavioural or 
symbolic gestures. We rely on language as the primary vehicle of 
communication to bridge minds. And when behaviour begins to speak, it 
can be seen as a new language  one fraught with confusion and frustration 
for both the sender and the receiver of the message.  If we can learn the 
themes of communication early on, perhaps we can be sensitive to the 
ways they might be repeated later in the course of the illness. People may 
continue to experience similar feelings but express them differently as their 
confusion increases and their capacity to articulate decreases. (Snyder 
1999: 10-11) 
Autopathographies may, then, have a valuable contribution to make to better 
communication and care in dementia. Both life writing by people with 
18 See chapters 1 and 3 in particular for an exploration of narratives of this kind. 
dementia and by their caregivers may challenge the dominant cultural 
construct of Alzheimers disease and question biomedical as well as care 
practices while providing detailed insight into the experience of living with 
dementia. These texts have something important to tell us about the 
phenomenology of being ill (Carel 2008).  
Nonetheless, there are inherent problems in dementia life writing. On 
the one hand, caregivers memoirs raise ethical issues about representing 
vulnerable subjects, persons who are liable to exposure by an intimate 
other or caregiver but who are unable to represent themselves or to offer 
meaningful consent to their representation (see Couser 2004: xii, 2005). On 
the other hand, people with dementia will eventually struggle to tell their 
own story in verbally coherent form. Burke (2007a), for instance, suggests 
that dementia autobiography, or what she calls first person testimony is 
not a suitable means for challenging cultural constructions of people with 
dementia as non-persons. Kathlyn Conway (2007) points more generally to 
the difficulties of expressing serious illness in language, especially in 
narrative form. Her critique of the dominant triumph narrative in 
contemporary stories about illness is particularly relevant to 
neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia. Indeed, I would extend this 
critique to Franks elevation of the quest narrative (Frank 1995) over other 
ways of telling about an illness experience. People with dementia cannot 
triumph over the disease in the terms of winning the battle against the 
progression of symptoms. Equally, they are unlikely to arrive at a stage in 
their disease from which they can comfortably contemplate their experience 
and share their insights with others, as Frank suggests. Of course, I would 
not want to deny that people with dementia learn from their experience, and 
especially that they have valuable first-hand knowledge to share with others. 
However, questions of form, genre and narrative coherence need to be 
thoroughly analysed when it comes to making claims about counter-
narratives in dementia discourse. To this end, the present thesis explores the 
emerging genre of dementia life writing with a view to assessing its ability 
to provide insight into the disease and into embodied selfhood (ch.1), its 
capacity to act as viable identity narrative and as counter-narrative to social 
constructions of dementia as loss of self (ch.3), its status as an 
underexplored genre that has much to teach us about the relational, political 
and ethical aspects of life writing more generally (ch.4), and its role as a 
source of knowledge for rethinking dementia care (ch.5). Chapters 2 and 6, 
by contrast explore the potential of fictional illness narratives: to provide 
insight into the phenomenology of dementia and the working of narrative 
empathy (ch.2), and as a tool for bioethical exploration of caregiving 
dilemmas (ch.6). 
Fictional narratives likewise evoke the life world of the person affected 
and may potentially allow readers insight into the workings of that persons 
mind (Cohn 1978). They further raise the possibility of exploring the 
complex phenomenology of this disease beyond the stage where the person 
affected might still be able to communicate her experience verbally. The 
question is then whether such texts may in some way imaginatively explore 
and fill the epistemic gap in our understanding of late stage dementia. 
Again, such possibilities raise ethical issues around the representation of 
vulnerable subjects, and, as suggested previously, dementia narratives may 
not necessarily challenge but rather enforce cultural stigma surrounding the 
disease. 
2 Debates in Medical Humanities: Considering Narrative Empathy and 
Narrative Ethics 
In her work towards developing a new ethics of dementia care, Verena 
Wetzstein (2005) suggests that the dehumanisation of people with dementia 
is fostered by the outside perspective we necessarily inhabit. According to 
Wetzstein, literature can further our insight into this disease and teach us to 
value the subjective perspective of the person with dementia (2005: 192). 
As I have argued elsewhere, fictional representations of dementia open up a 
new way of relating to the reality of this disease, by simulating insight into 
the mind of a person with dementia (Bitenc 2012).19 Wetzstein and I are not 
alone in claiming that literature, and the novel in particular, provides an 
19 Similar claims about the potential of narrative to further our understanding of the 
phenomenology of dementia have been made with regard to film, both with a focus on non-
mainstream cinematic idioms (Cohen-Shalev and Marcus 2012) and with a focus on 
embodiment and relationality (Kll 2015). 
inroad into understanding the life world of others. Third person fiction 
Rita Felski writes allows the narrator an epistemological privilege that 
accrues neither to real life nor to the writing of history: unrestricted access 
to the inner life of other persons (2008: 89).20 Further, she argues that the 
novel unfolds a social phenomenology, a rendering of the qualities of a life-
world, that is formally distinct from either non-fiction or theoretical 
argument (89). Similarly, Patricia Waugh speaks of narrative fiction as a 
practical counterpart of theoretical phenomenology (2013: 24). Even 
scholars outside literary studies, among them philosopher Martha Nussbaum, 
make claims about the wide-ranging effects of the immersive potential of 
literature and its ability to render qualia, a sense of what its like to be 
another human being. The greatest contribution literature has to make to 
the life of the citizen Nussbaum writes, is its ability to wrest from our 
frequently obtuse and blunted imagination an acknowledgment of those who 
are other than ourselves, both in concrete circumstances and even in thought 
and emotion (Nussbaum 1997: 111-112). Nussbaum goes so far as to 
suggest that the ability to empathise with others and meet them with respect 
is inextricably bound up with, even entirely dependent on acts of 
storytelling: 
For the insides of people  are not open to view. They must be wondered 
about. And the conclusion that this set of limbs in front of me has emotions 
and feelings and thoughts of the sort I attribute to myself will not be 
reached without the training of the imagination that storytelling promotes. 
(1997: 89) 
While I do not doubt that storytelling plays an important role in shaping the 
moral imagination and in developing the capacity for intersubjectivity (see 
also Hutto 2007b), it is equally important to acknowledge the embodied 
nature of intersubjective experience (Ratcliffe 2007, Zahavi 2007). Different 
medial representations of dementiaacross film, graphic narratives and 
print textsmight be able to draw on and exploit such embodied 
intersubjectivity, and not just the resources afforded by storytelling, to 
further an understanding of others to differing degrees. More importantly, 
the causal link that has been proposed between the readers experience of 
20 A key question for research in this area: To what extent does access to fictional minds 
translate or correspond to access to real-world minds. 
narrative empathy and consequent ethical, moral or altruistic action, must be 
questionedas Suzanne Keen stresses (Keen 2007). While the immersivity, 
promotion of perspective taking, and affective richness of novels raises the 
possibility that fiction may provide a special kind of insight into the 
phenomenology of dementia, it is important to determine what literature can 
and cannot do when it comes to enhancing the moral and empathetic 
capacities of readers. My thesis goes beyond questions of empathy to 
explore other ways in which narrative fiction may be relevant for dementia 
care: namely, by opening up, and keeping open (see Whitehead 2011: 59), 
important debates about specific dilemmas relating to the care of people 
with dementia. 
Indeed, the role that literature, and particularly narrative literature, plays 
in our ethical or moral education has recently become a key topic in debates 
within the medical humanities (Woods 2011). Angela Woods critique of 
the limits of narrative does not necessarily entail that we disregard the role 
narrative plays in the medical humanities entirely. Instead, it highlights the 
need to consider other modes and genres of expression (such as poetry, art, 
music, craft etc.) as well as the need to closely analyse the form and 
function of different narratives.21 Consequently, the effects of different 
narrative modes, media and genres on representing the phenomenology of 
dementia constitute another important strand of my research.22 At the same 
time, I also acknowledge the need to explore other avenues of expression 
beyond narrative modes. If I do not address all of these expressive 
possibilities in relation to the current cultural construction of dementia, this 
is due to the (necessarily) limited scope of this thesis. 
The question of narrative in the medical humanities must also be seen in 
the context of wider debates about the role of the humanitiesits methods 
and resourceswithin this emerging field. The first wave of medical 
humanities research and teaching was primarily concerned with inserting the 
arts and literary texts into medical curricula in order to humanise the 
21 Whitehead (2014) similarly proposes an opening up towards other genres such as graphic 
pathography, art, music, and drama since there are dimensions of illness that do not readily 
conform to conventional narrative modes and that remain elusive to expression (115).  
22 Although there are strong arguments for categorising plays as narratives (Richardson 
2007), I do not consider drama in this thesis. The omission was necessary to allow for 
sufficient space to focus on questions surrounding narrative identity and caregiving. 
practice of medicine. This approach has since been joined, and in some 
cases superseded, by what might be termed second-wave medical 
humanities. The critical medical humanities are coming to the forefront,23 
while, at the same time, the limitations inherent in the disciplinary label 
medical are being challenged. The health humanities aim to incorporate a 
wide set of research questions and practices which include but also go 
beyond medical settings (Crawford et al. 2010).24 Both within medical 
humanities contexts that remain concerned with improving the practice of 
medicinethrough medical training and by making social science and 
humanities research relevant to medical contextsas well as in research 
that addresses societal concerns around health more generally, debates 
continue to be waged over the exact role the humanities25 are to play in 
these contexts.  
On the one hand, teachers, researchers and practitioners working in this 
area are under pressure to make their work quantifiable according to the 
standards of evaluation developed in the natural sciences in order for their 
work to count in medical practice and policy makingin which case they 
may be criticised for selling out their disciplinary aims. From this 
perspective, doing medical humanities research is seen as a strategic 
means to meet the requirements of Research Excellence Frameworks, in the 
UK, and thereby survive the economic pressure generated by a global 
neoliberalist economy (see also Spiegel 2012: 206). On the other hand, 
medical humanities scholars are sometimes accused of relying on dated 
notions of humanism (Spiegel 2012: 206), in that they may be seen to 
suggest that exposure to the arts and humanitiesand especially narrative
creates more humane, attentive and empathetic health care professionals 
(Charon 2006, Greenhalgh and Hurwitz 1999).  
Additionally, Therese Jones points to the tension between the 
instrumental justifications for the humanities in medicine and the 
23 See, for instance, a special issue in the British Journal of Medical Humanities (Viney, 
Callard, and Woods 2015) and The Edinburgh Companion to the Critical Medical 
Humanities (Whitehead and Woods 2016).  
24 See also http://www.healthhumanities.org/. Last accessed 26/05/2016.  
25 Note that this disciplinary label is also misleading in that the medical humanities include 
and are even driven by social science disciplines such as (medical) anthropology, 
psychology and sociology. 
democratizing energies and dangerous possibilities of the humanities 
viewed as an intellectual practice (2014: 27). Humanities research methods, 
according to Jones, enable and promote fearless questioning of 
representations, challenges to the abuses of authority and a steadfast refusal 
to accept as the limits of enquiry the boundaries that medicine sets between 
biology and culture (Jones 2014: 27-28). Jones optimistic evaluation of the 
almost revolutionary potential of the humanities might, however, be 
challenged in turn. If, as Maura Spiegel suggests, proponents of medical 
humanities have been accused of retrograde rhetoric regarding the 
humanizing humanities (2012: 205), they may also be criticised for 
assuming a merely oppositional stance to biomedicineproviding an 
endless critique without being able to go beyond that critique. Overall, my 
thesis focuses on the subversive and empathetic potential of literature but 
also on the positive contributions critical literary scholarship may be able to 
make in the context of rethinking current dementia care.  
3 Narrative (and) Selfhood 
As Amelia DeFalco (2010) has recently remarked, the notion that identity is 
narratively constituted has become a theoretical truism. A whole range of 
scholars have probed the extent to which life is narrative and selfhood is 
constituted through narrative (see Bruner 1991, 2003, 2004, Dennett 1993, 
Eakin 1999, 2008, Ricur 1991b, a, White 1984). However, such views 
have not gone unchallenged (see, for instance, Sartwell 2000, Strawson 
2004). In Against Narrativity, Galen Strawson (2004) argues, first, against 
the widespread agreement that human beings typically see or live or 
experience their lives as a narrative or story of some sort, or at least as a 
collection of stories (428). He calls this the psychological Narrativity 
thesis (428; original emphasis). Second, and as it turns out more 
importantly, he challenges the ethical Narrativity thesisa normative 
thesis which holds that experiencing or conceiving ones life as a narrative 
is a good thing; a richly Narrative outlook is essential to a well-lived life 
and crucial to true and full personhood (428). According to Strawson, the 
ethical and psychological Narrativity thesis combined hinder human self-
understanding, close down important avenues of thought, impoverish our 
grasp of ethical possibilities, needlessly and wrongly distress those who do 
not fit their model, and are potentially destructive in psychotherapeutic 
contexts (429). Most importantly he highlights how according to strong 
narrativist views of identity, such as Marya Schechtmans (1996), heand 
with him many othersrisk not being considered as persons at all (447). 
Without going into all the particulars of this debate, the narrative 
identity hypothesis is clearly relevant to discourse about people with 
dementia. I have already highlighted how notions of selfhood become a 
contested terrain in discourse about dementia. People with dementia will 
eventually struggle to tell a coherent life story and may risk no longer being 
considered persons on that ground. At the same time, as discussed in my 
earlier remarks about reparative moves in dementia studies, the concept of 
narrative identity has also been employed to draw attention to how people 
with dementia continue to claim identities for themselves, or how caregivers 
and others who interact with the person with dementia may contribute to the 
social construction of identityperhaps by telling that persons story for 
them. As Lucy Burke notes, in the personhood movement models of 
narrative identity have been used in two ways:  
First, they have been evoked as descriptive frameworks for the 
conceptualisation of the relationship between brain, mind, and person and 
thus for the formation of personal identity in an intersubjective milieu. 
Second, they have been used in a prescriptive sense as the basis for an 
ethical argument about good dementia care that points to the importance of 
the social environment and nexus of relationships in which people live. 
(Burke 2014: 34-5) 
As the latter approach highlights, narrative identity also becomes relevant 
when considering the extent to which identities are constituted and held in 
relationships. Relational identity, especially as it has been thematised in life 
writing studies (Eakin 1998, Friedman 1988, Mason 1980, Miller 1994), 
plays an important role in understanding how identity, both of the person 
with dementia and of family caregivers, is constructed and reconstructed in 
familial life writing about the disease.  
The present study explores implications of narrativist accounts of 
selfhood for people with dementia. I outline both the strengths and limits of 
the narrative account when it comes to capturing the processes by which 
identity is expressed or constituted in the context of dementia. In this way, I 
adopt a position within the debate that can be characterised as a moderate 
or qualified narrativist approach. Narrative is a crucial vehicle for 
performing and communicating identity. Nonetheless certain aspects of 
selfhoodunderstood in phenomenological terms as a persistent point of 
view and an engaged creation of a life worldare better understood through 
the lens of embodiment and embodied experience. Narrative can be a means 
of communicating this changing sense of being-in-the-worldas in the case 
of narratives told by people with dementiabut it is not constitutive of 
selfhood as such. The ontological question of whether selfhood persists in 
dementia cannot easily be answered, and certainly not in this thesis. I 
therefore propose, with Stephan Millett (2011), that we bracket or even 
disregard the question of whether selfhood is lost and instead concentrate 
on understanding the experience of dementia. 
4 Narrative as Tool for Meaning-Making  
My fourth claim concerning why we need to consider narrative in the study 
of contemporary dementia discourses links back to my earlier comments on 
the bio-cultural construction of dementia. Narrative constitutes a sense-
making device. It allows us to learn about how the world, including other 
people in that world, function (Hutto 2007a, b). Narrative therefore shapes 
the way we think about things. David Herman writes, a focus on narrative 
as a means for sense making emphasizes how stories do not merely evoke 
worlds but also intervene in a field of discourse, a range of representational 
strategies, a constellation of ways of seeing (2013: 13). They also shape 
what it means to be a person, or to be human. Herman shows how 
engagements with characters in narratives not only depend on but also have 
the power to remold wider understandings of persons circulating in a given 
culture or subculture (18; 193-224). Furthermore, he makes a strong case to 
situate an approach to the study of the nexus of narrative and mind at the 
level of persons and person-environment interactions (ix). Herman defines 
the person level as the level of the medium-sized, human-scale world of 
everyday experience (x). He argues that whereas some cognitive 
narratologists have pursued 
a reductionist program of research based on the assumption that the 
concept of person, and person-level phenomena, must yield to some more 
fundamental level of explanation, such as neuronal activity, information-
processing mechanisms, or other causal factors operating at a subpersonal 
level,   it is at the personal rather than subpersonal level that narrative 
scholars are optimally positioned to contribute toand not just borrow 
fromframeworks for understanding the mind. (Herman 2013: ix-x) 
While Herman is concerned with a wider programme for illuminating how 
narrative and the mind interact, attending to the person level, or what might 
also be described as the semiotic level, in studies of dementia gains support 
from other scholars. Sabat and Harr, for example, argue that people with 
dementia continue to be semiotic subjects, that is, persons for whom 
meaning is the driving force behind their behavior (1994: 145). They 
contend that 
although it is possible to explain behaviour on a chemical or neural level, 
or by reference to neural dysfunction, considerations on the level of 
meaning provide  the bestindeed, the only scientifically respectable
explanation of action. (Sabat and Harr 1994: 147) 
In line with such reasoning, I suggest that to understand person-level 
experiences, it only occasionally makes sense to pursue an understanding at 
the subpersonal level. In addressing the challenges posed by dementia, the 
research on neurological disease processes has its placealthough in view 
of the ever receding hope of finding a cure there is an urgent need to also 
pursue other avenues for treatment and management of the disease. The 
predominant focus (both of economic resources and research efforts) on 
biomedical/neurological approaches to dementia occludes other possibilities 
of engaging with the disease, and significantly the person living with 
dementia. In dealing with persons and their life worlds, narratives provide a 
privileged site for addressing the complex effects of dementia on the person. 
Narratives deal primarily in the medium-sized, human-scale world of 
everyday experience. In evoking a rich experiential account, similarly to the 
argument put forth by Havi Carel for phenomenology, narratives may 
counter and complement biomedical understandings of dementia as a 
pathology of cognition.  
There is considerable overlap between these arguments for narrative and 
the reasons I have provided so far for why considering dementia in and 
through literature represents an important area of research. Literature shapes 
the way we think. It not only acts as a mirror of current trends and master 
plots, but also shapes and brings into being social realities.26 There is an 
urgent need to reconsider the ways dementia is represented in contemporary 
literature in order to reveal broader cultural attitudes about dementia, and 
consequently strategies for interacting with the people living with dementia. 
In what way do dementia narratives reinforce current (mis)conceptions 
about dementia? If engagements with characters in narratives have the 
power to remold wider understandings of persons (Herman 2013: 18), what 
do these texts suggest about personhood and selfhood in dementia? Can they 
act as counter-narratives to dehumanising tropes of Alzheimers? And how 
does public discourse influence public policy, particularly in such crucial 
areas as the Alzheimerization of the euthanasia debate (Johnstone 2011, 
2013)? 
Since illness is both embodied and socially constructed (Couser 1997, 
Hacking 1999a, Morris 1998), we must, as Morris argues, explore the 
complex relations between biology and culture if we hope to understand the 
contemporary experience of illness and ultimately  ourselves (Morris 
1998: 3). Acknowledging the role culture plays in the experience of illness, 
as Morris further argues, unavoidably invokes questions and texts lying far 
outside the ordinary range of medical knowledge such as novels, television 
programs, films, advertising, and obscenity laws (1998: 43). If this study 
is limited in its scope in terms of exploring some of these text-types, I 
nevertheless use a wide range of literary genres and narrative media to 
suggest how storytelling practices of many sorts help shape what dementia 
means in contemporary culture and what it may mean in the future. 
26 There are risks but also opportunities inherent in this interaction between literature and 
culture. As a cognitive tool of knowledge transmission, narratives (particularly novels and 
films) may reach wider audiences than medical or care journals and may thereby contribute 
to a better awareness of the disease phenomenon. The pedagogical, discursive, and dialogic 
potential of literary narratives to engage different viewpoints and stage a debate offer up 
possibilities of a more holistic view of the disease syndrome than in more monologic 
discourses such as scientific reports or newspaper articles. Further, narratives may function 
as case studies vis--vis moral and ethical dilemmas that arise in dementia care. 
Outline of Chapters 
The chief aim of the present study is to delineate the potential and 
limitations of narrative, and narrative studies, when it comes to challenging 
the current dementia construct and developing new ways of understanding, 
interacting with and caring for people with dementia. I thus move from two 
opening chapters in part I concerned with exploring the phenomenology of 
dementia and the relationship between representation and narrative empathy, 
to two chapters focusing on the aesthetic, ethical and political implications 
of the emerging genre(s) of dementia life writing in part II, to a final pair of 
chapters in part III engaging with how fictional and non-fictional narratives 
may inform the development of dementia care and thereby contribute to on-
going debates about the role of narrative in the medical humanities. 
Chapter 1 explores how life writing by people with dementia and by 
their caregivers might contribute to a better understanding of how dementia 
transforms self-experience as well as ones relationships to the physical and 
sociocultural world (Carel 2008). To develop this question, I draw, first, on 
a range of autopathographies by people with dementia. Second, and as a 
point of contrast, I explore issues of intersubjective understanding in David 
Sievekings documentary film Vergiss Mein Nicht (2012). On the one hand, 
I argue that attending to the embodied nature of selfhood can redress the 
simplistic or reductive notion that the self is lost in dementia. On the other 
hand, I explore how different storytelling media (especially documentary 
film and photography) foreground important aspects of embodied selfhood 
(see Kontos 2003, 2004, 2005) and provide means of exploring the potential 
of embodied communication in dementia. 
Chapter 2 addresses two questions: First, to what extent do fictional 
narratives (in particular the novel and film) act as a practical counterpart of 
theoretical phenomenology (Waugh 2013: 24)or, to put the question 
another way, how (using what techniques) may they be able to simulate 
what its like to be living with dementia? Second, does simulating the 
experience of dementia lead to an empathetic engagement with the 
dementing protagonist, and if so, in what way might narrative empathy lead 
to pro-social action towards real people with dementia? By exploring these 
questions across a range of case studies (Lisa Genovas novel Still Alice and 
its film adaptation, J. Bernlefs Out of Mind, B.S. Johnsons House Mother 
Normal, and Kazuo Ishiguros The Unconsoled) I aim to suggest how these 
fictional dementia narratives may contribute to the current theory of 
narrative empathy while also highlighting the importance of questioning the 
empathy-altruism hypothesis (Keen 2007), which is commonly invoked in 
first-wave medical humanities contexts as a reason for incorporating the arts 
into medical training. 
Part II turns to questions of self-presentation and representation in the 
emerging genre(s) of dementia life writing. Chapter 3 addresses the 
possibilities and limitations of the notion of narrative identity and narrative 
coherence in the context of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimers. 
I ask to what extent dementia life narratives, like other illness narratives, 
may function as counter-narratives (Bamberg and Andrews 2004) to the 
dominant cultural construction of dementia as loss of self' and death before 
death and how genre conventions affect the construction of counter-
narratives. To explore these questions I consider two types of case studies: 
first, autopathographies by people with early-onset Alzheimers and, second, 
collaborative life history projects in nursing homes, in particular the 
collection Tell Mrs Mill Her Husband Is Still Dead (Clegg 2010).  
Chapter 4 shifts the focus to the genre of caregivers memoirs. My 
intention is to highlight the particular political force of as well as the ethical 
issues raised by dementia life writingin particular the problem of 
representing vulnerable subjects (Couser 2004). I then move on to a close 
analysis of select examples of filial caregivers memoirs to address the 
impact of gender, genre and medium on current understandings of relational 
identity: Jonathan Franzens autobiographical essay My Fathers Brain 
(2002), Judith Levines memoir Do You Remember Me? (2004) and Sarah 
Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles (2010).  
Part III centres on questions that arise in relation to dementia care. 
Chapter 5 argues that care-writing may be considered a valuable source of 
evidence when it comes to theorising and developing dementia care. 
Caregivers memoirs explore the dilemmas involved in caring for someone 
with progressive cognitive impairment. They thereby provide a means for 
readers to live through (Rosenblatt 1995/1938)and think throughthese 
difficult issues. The authors of these memoirs imagine and develop 
alternative treatment and care options which could be adapted to other 
contexts. Indeed, because they have lived alongside the person with 
dementia, familial caregivers are ideally placed to identify that persons 
evolving needs and to advocate for them when those needs are no longer 
metwhether in the community or in institutional care. These authors are 
thus well-positioned to articulate strategies for addressing the needs of 
people with dementia, and of their caregivers, holistically (see also 
Greenhalgh and Hurwitz 1999). 
Lastly, chapter 6 aims to develop new avenues for thinking about how 
literary fiction may intervene in medical humanities contexts while 
problematizing some commonly accepted notions about the link between 
literature and the provision of empathetic care. First, given the dominant 
view of the field as driven by an ethical imperative (Rees 2010; qtd. in, 
Jones 2014), I ask whether fictional dementia narratives themselves are 
necessarily tools for the good, or whether they may instead compound the 
stigma attached to dementia. That is, I investigate to what extent particular 
fictional dementia narratives live up to, or fail to live up to, the ethico-
political standard that the term counter-narrative suggests, using Michael 
Ignatieffs Scar Tissue (1993) and B.S. Johnsons House Mother Normal 
(2013/1971) as case studies. Second, I suggest some ways in which 
dementia novels may engage their readers in considering bioethical 
questions that arise in contemporary Western care culture(s). To explore 
how different media and means of narrative presentation affect the process 
of bioethical decision-making, I discuss the film and book version of Still 
Alice as well as Margaret Forsters novel Have the Men Had Enough? 
(1989). I contend that these narratives offer special insights into the 
bioethical dilemmas attendant on dementia care, developing care-oriented 
thought experiments more fully than would be possible in non-fictional 
accounts of dementia.  
Part I Storytelling and the Phenomenology of Dementia 
Chapter 1 Narrating Experiences of Dementia: Embodied 
Selves, Embodied Communication  
In illness our bodies change. Biomedicine attempts to reverse, halt or 
alleviate the effects of bodily dysfunction. In pursuing this aim, biomedicine 
treats the body like an object to be fixed, rather than the locus of subjective 
experience. Accordingly, it has been criticised for paying too little attention 
to the person with disease and the way the identity and life world of the 
person are changed through the experience of illness (Carel 2008, Frank 
1995, Kleinman 1988). Using contemporary phenomenology, Havi Carel 
(2008) describes how bodily changes in illness radically transform our 
experience of ourselves as well as our relationships to the physical and 
sociocultural world. Paying attention to the multiple ways illness transforms 
subjective experience will not only provide a fuller understanding of a given 
illness, she argues, but will allow us to develop interventions that go beyond 
treating the physical body alone (Carel 2008: 73). I argue that life writing 
facilitates a phenomenological27 approach to illness. These texts provide 
rich accounts of particular people in a specific context and can therefore 
contribute to a better understanding of how subjective experience changes in 
illness. In a second step such knowledge may be used to adapt and develop 
therapeutic and social interventions. 
In this chapter, I explore the phenomenology of dementia through life 
writing by people with dementia and by their caregivers. I focus on 
embodied aspects of the disease as they are communicated by a range of 
narrative media, arguing that these embodied aspects shed a more nuanced 
light on what is lost, what changes, and what remains. To ground my 
discussion, I review how phenomenology, and particularly the notion of 
embodied selfhood (Kontos 2005) and embodied (or non-verbal) 
communication (Killick and Allan 2001) have been productively employed 
27 The term phenomenology is frequently used to describe first-person accounts of what 
it is like to have a certain experience. This usage differs from the technical usage which 
describes a philosophical discipline that aims to discover the underlying structures that 
make it possible for anyone to experience the world (Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: 10; 20; 
26). I use phenomenology both in the non-technical sense, when referring to the description 
of qualia or what it is like (Nagel 1974), and in the narrower, philosophical sense, when 
focusing on structures of experience that are relevant to understanding dementia but that 
may be masked by approaches that rely on dualistic views of mind-body and self-world.   
in dementia studies. I then turn to a close reading of contemporary 
autopathographies by people with dementia, and conclude the chapter by 
exploring the potential for intersubjective understanding in David 
Sievekings documentary Vergiss Mein Nicht (Forget-Me-Not) (2012).28 
There are two different aspects to the relationship between embodiment 
and selfhood that I address. On the one hand, different modal and medial 
representations of dementia point to changes in embodied (self-)experience 
in this disease. Relevant changes to self-experience include shifts in 
consciousness, emotions and cognition as well as body control. Yet these 
changes to self-experience also extend beyond the boundaries of the body. 
So for instance, due to both the symptoms themselves and the stigma 
attached to the disease, relationships also undergo significant changes. The 
pernicious effect of illness on social interaction, in turn, has serious 
repercussions on the ill persons sense of self.  
On the other hand, attending to the embodied nature of selfhood can 
redress the simplified notion that the self is lost in dementia. Equating 
selfhood with high-level cognitive functioning or narrative identity can 
obscure a) the extent to which memories are embodied (consider, for 
instance, procedural as opposed to episodic memory) and may thus be 
enacted even when verbal communication has disintegrated, and b) the 
extent to which selfhood can be understood as an embodied perspective that 
remains in dementia. This first-personal givenness of experience (Zahavi 
2007) may, furthermore, be communicated by drawing on nonverbal 
embodied forms of communication. A key question is therefore how 
aspects of embodied selfhood (see Kontos 2003, 2004, 2005) and 
embodied communication feature in various storytelling environments, 
including documentary film. Recognising embodied selfhood in dementia 
has important implications for dementia care, I argue, as it might lead to a 
more sensitive understanding of what is actually lost in the disease while 
allowing us to recognise and value the person who remains. 
28 For further documentaries on dementia that differ significantly in style see Complaints of 
A Dutiful Daughter (Hoffmann 1994), First Cousin Once Removed (Berliner 2012) and 
Glen Campbell: Ill Be Me (Albert and Keach 2014). 
Embodied Selves, Embodied Communication 
In dementia studies, embodiment has been used to argue both for and 
against the notion that selfhood is lost (see Davis 2004 and Kontos 2003, 
2004, 2005 respectively), 29 and also as a means to circumvent the equivocal 
question of selfhood in dementia altogether (Millett 2011). In this section, I 
do not intend to arbitrate between these opposing views and provide a 
definitive answer to what selfhood (or embodied selfhood) is or how it is 
constituted, nor to discriminate among terms such as self, identity, 
personhoodand also subjectivity (see Millett 2011: 511).30 Instead, I 
investigate how the notion of embodimentand relatedly, embodied 
selfhood and embodied communicationcan be productively used to 
engage with the subjective experience of dementia and, potentially, ground 
the moral standing of people with dementia not on a cognitive model of 
personhood, but on our embodied nature as human beings.  
The neurodegenerative nature of dementia impacts on memory, 
language, thinking and reasoning, all of which are traditionally seen to 
define our personhood. However, less cognitively orientated parameters of 
personhood, such as emotion31 and relationality,32 are also impacted by 
dementia. Applying the notion of embodiment in dementia allows us to ask 
a number of questions: What do the changes on a neurological level entail 
for people with dementia and their experience of their own cognition, as 
well as their experience of self-efficacy in physical and social environments? 
How do these changes speak to and elucidate the common understanding 
29 Davis (2004) emphasises loss of self to legitimate family caregivers grief. 
30 These terms represent different points on what could be considered a continuum of 
selfhood, one stretching between a (social) identity and (perspectival) self. In the present 
thesis, however, I make no hard and fast distinctions among the terms at issue. 
31 Recent neuroscientific studies reveal the extent to which emotions are a function of the 
brain and therefore equally prone to be affected by brain damage or disease (Damasio 1994, 
2000, 2010). 
32 I understand this term to refer to the fact that humans are relational beingsconstituted 
by their relations but also endowed with the capacity for relationships. This notion has 
gained currency in a range of disciplines and under a number of different guises. Relational 
models of identity have also figured importantly in life writing studies (Eakin 1998, 
Friedman 1988, Henry 2006, Mason 1980, Miller 1994, Peaches 2006, Smith and Watson 
2010). 
that the person with dementia is in some sense losing herself? And can 
embodiment perhaps provide a means of sustaining selfhood in dementia?  
Pia C. Kontos draws on Maurice Merleau-Pontys concept of embodied 
consciousness as well as Pierre Bourdieus concept of habitus to argue that 
the pre-reflective body is fundamental to the persistence of selfhood in 
dementia (Kontos 2003, 2004, 2005). Her notion of embodied selfhood 
captures the idea that fundamental aspects of selfhood are manifested in the 
way the body moves and behaves (2005: 556). Kontoss ethnographic study 
in a Jewish care home provides numerous rich examples to counter the 
dominant cultural conception that people with dementia experience a 
steady erosion of selfhood (2005: 553). Kontos makes a substantial 
contribution to dementia studies by bringing to light the continued 
coherence, purpose, and meaning with which people with dementia engage 
with the world (2004: 836). The strength of her analysis lies in attending to 
aspects of behaviour that are pre-reflective, or at least not overly reliant on 
higher-order cognition, as well as highlighting a multitude of nonverbal 
elements of communication, such as eye movement, eye contact, gesture, 
facial expressions and posture. Yet Kontos fails to acknowledge the fact that 
the brain is part of the body. She argues against cognitivist definitions of 
selfhood, but in the meantime fails to pay due attention to how aspects of 
bodily behaviour are essentially orchestrated by the brain and therefore also 
have a neurological substrate (even if some aspects rely on older brain 
structures and less on the neo-cortex). As such, the aspects of embodied 
selfhood she describes are equally at risk of being affected by dementia, and 
therefore of being erodedagain making people with more advanced 
dementia open to the risk of being construed as non-selves.   
Stephan Milletts (2011) proposal to ground an understanding of 
dementia in bio-phenomenology offers an illuminating alternative to 
Kontoss account. Millett proposes to leave aside the question of selfhood or 
personhood in dementia and instead focus on the experience of living with 
the disease, the continuity over time of an embodied individual, and our 
attitude toward that individual (Millett 2011: 515). The bracketing of the 
question of personhood, Millett suggests, allows us to focus on the idea that 
there is a being with an inner life confronting us, a being with value simply 
because he or she has a life-worlda constructed meaningful world 
revealed to him or her through their senses (515). Drawing on Jakob von 
Uexklls biologically grounded phenomenology, Millett emphasises the 
role of the lived body through which each of us creates a meaningful world 
(510). This view allows us to recognise that 
there is a life-world  or directly experienced world  for people with 
dementia, who continue to experience the world and create meaning, even 
in the presence of severe cognitive degradation. It is clear that people with 
dementia have an affective response to certain stimuli: they laugh, cry, 
express frustration and disappointment, engage playfully with others, and 
so on.  Affective or emotional responses  signs of happiness, sadness, 
frustration, anger and the like  are indicators of an interior life the extent 
of which may not be determinable using cognitive criteria alone. From the 
affective responses we can infer that people with even late-stage dementia 
still react to, engage with, and co-create a life-world. (510) 
Millett harnesses the concepts of von Uexhlls ethological studies
Innenwelt, Umwelt, semiotic, ecological and ontological niche valueto his 
argument that people with dementia continue to create a meaningful world 
and continue to be of value to others (517). His analysis widens the scope of 
subjectivity and meaningful interaction with the world beyond the examples 
of bodily intentionality provided by Kontos, to include bodily reactions of 
all sorts, to inputs from a range of external sources such as reactions to heat 
and cold, to smells, sounds and sights (517). Milletts approach thereby 
suggests that there is a continuing inner world even in the most advanced 
stages of dementia. This is a rare example of research that disallows positing 
some kind of cut-off point in the progression of dementia, at which stage 
the person no longer has an inner world and may therefore be considered 
valueless. Many reparative moves within dementia studies often, 
inadvertently, serve to enforce stigmatising and dehumanising accounts of 
the later stages of the disease, while recuperating people with less severe 
symptoms into the sphere of the fully human. By contrast, as Millett states, 
by employing the concept of bio-semiosis we can acknowledge, with 
Sabat  that people with dementia are semiotic subjectsthat is, they are 
driven by meaningbut without committing to cognition-reliant 
definitions of selfhood and intentionality (2011: 520).  
However, despite Milletts assertions, it is difficult to see how the very 
basic sense of meaning-making (what he terms semiotic niche value)such 
as reacting to hot or colddiffers from his example of a tick that reacts to 
warmth and butyric acid (516). Clearly, the moral standing of people with 
dementia is more closely related to what he terms ecological niche value
which is a statement of their value to other organisms, that is, their social 
interactions with other humansas well as to ontological niche value
that is, the [pre-existing] capacity or potential of an organism to interact 
with its environment (517). People with dementia  even severe dementia, 
Millett writes continue to have the capacity to interact with their 
environment and, simply because they have a body and the capacity to 
interact, they clearly occupy an ontological niche (517). By highlighting 
ecological and ontological niche value, Millett moves closer to a social 
constructivist position that focuses on the importance of social interaction 
and relationships in maintaining the dignity of people with dementia. 
Furthermore, Millett turns to philosophers such as Aristotle, Jonas, and 
Levinas in order to argue that each living thing has a unique non-
instrumental value-for-itself and each human being announces an ought-
to-care to the world that places each of us under an obligation to help that 
being (519)an argument that does not follow from bio-semiosis alone.  
Importantly, Milletts account acknowledges the effects that dementia 
has, especially on cognition, while productively circumventing the problem 
of making value-judgments based on aspects of cognition or on the notion 
of personhood. At the same time, he engages with Daviss suggestion that 
Kitwoods view that it is possible to maintain personhood at the extremes 
of this condition is damaging to those relatives forced to take on the role 
of primary carer (Davis 2004: 369). Millett emphasises that if we take the 
view that people with dementia maintain a self we may place an 
unnecessarily high burden on the untrained family carers who do most of 
the work of care, thereby denying them a proper mourning for the loss of 
their loved one as the dementia progresses, inducing guilt or shame at their 
changed feelings toward the obviously changing person, and making 
them complicit in defining those they care for as disabled and as having a 
progressive deficit (Millett 2011: 509-10). Milletts account indicates how 
attitudes about people with dementia can shift towards a more sympathetic 
understanding without having to rely on notions of selfhood. Nonetheless, in 
the following discussion I retain the notion of embodied selfhood as a 
shorthand expression both for embodied aspects of identity and for the way 
each human being experiences the worldwhat phenomenologists refer to 
as the first-personal perspectival givenness of experiential life (Gallagher 
and Zahavi 2008, Zahavi 2007), which can be claimed to persist in dementia. 
Attending to the body in dementia, also opens up the possibility of 
finding avenues for communication that do not rely heavily on coherent 
verbalisation. Speaking of embodied communication as opposite to verbal 
communication is of course misleading, since verbal communication is very 
much embodied. However, I use this term to draw attention to other ways 
that bodies and behaviour may speak. As Lisa Snyder highlights in her 
collection of interviews with people with dementia (Snyder 1999), because 
of the way the disease affects cognition, many individuals may not be able 
to maintain the same insight and verbal abilities as previously. But 
throughout the course of Alzheimer, she writes, each person continues to 
convey messages through action, gesture, expression and behavior. The 
disease does not result in a complete inability to communicate. But it can 
require our time, energy, receptivity, and ingenuity to observe, listen, and 
comprehend effectively (1999: 32-3). I agree with Snyder that the ability to 
communicate persists, although some forms of life writing may not be able 
to adequately capture this capacity for communication. Documentary film 
(and perhaps also graphic memoir, as I discuss in later chapters) offers a 
mediated opportunity to engage with these embodied forms of 
communication and to train ones receptivity to channels of communication 
outside language (see also Killick and Allan 2001). 
Inside Views: Life Writing by People with Early-Onset 
Alzheimers 
This is my attempt to leave a record of what is going on between my ears. 
(Taylor 2007: 3) 
Severe illness threatens the production of a life narrative (Couser 1997: 5). 
In dementia, in particular, all aspects of autobiography seem to be 
threatened: the auto/self in that it is seemingly eroded, the bios/life in that 
memory loss threatens the ability to remember and coherently narrate life 
events, and finally the graphein/writing is threatened by the erosion of 
higher order cognitive functions (see  Olney 1980). Despite these problems, 
a number of published dementia autobiographies or autopathographies exist, 
mainly written by people with early-onset Alzheimers disease.33 These 
accounts have taken the form of articles in Alzheimers care journalssuch 
as Marilyn Truscotts articles of testimony and advice (Truscott 2003, 2004a, 
b)and also of book-length memoirs34 as well as, more recently, blogs.35 
Many of the authors also appeared on radio programmes, TV shows, spoke 
at conferences or participated in documentaries about their experience as 
part of their fight to raise awareness of this disease and alleviate the stigma 
attached to dementia. As such, these autobiographical acts have played a 
crucial role in patient advocacy in the Alzheimers movement.  
In what follows, I draw on a range of autobiographical texts by people 
with dementia to explore what these texts suggest about the changing nature 
of embodied self-experience. Engaging with these texts elucidates the range 
of changes across cognitive, bodily and social spheres of experience, 
suggesting in turn common structures of experience that can be found across 
individual experiences of living with dementia. However, this is not to 
suggest that there is only one type of dementia experience. On the contrary, 
these autobiographical accounts highlight the extent to which the experience 
of the disease and the progression of symptoms vary significantly from one 
individual to the next. 
33 Some of the authors were diagnosed with a combination of Alzheimers disease, multi-
infarct dementia or fronto-temporal dementia. What unites these authors is that the disease 
manifested itself relatively early in life (before the age of 65).    
34 These include, among others, Bryden (1998, 2005), Davis (1989), DeBaggio (2002, 
2003), Henderson (1998), Lee (2003), McGowin (1994), Rose (1996, 2003), and Taylor 
(2007). 
35 The number of dementia blogs is too vast to list. Morris Friedells blog had a significant 
impact on patient advocacy in the 90s and early 2000s and can still be found at 
http://morrisfriedell.com/struggle1.html. Similarly, Taylors collection of essays was first 
published as blog at http://www.richardtaylorphd.com/blog.html. An example of a current 
(23.03.2015) blog by a person with Lewy-body dementia can be found at http://parkblog-
silverfox.blogspot.co.uk/.  
Memory 
Memory loss is frequently perceived to be the defining characteristic of 
dementia, especially of the Alzheimers type. However, memory is not just 
one thinga single faculty of the mindbut a variety of processes 
(Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: 70). Arguably, memory shapes everything the 
mind does (Fernyhough 2012: 5). Psychological accounts of memory 
generally distinguish between episodic memory, working memory, 
procedural and semantic memory (Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: 71). Of 
course, these categorical distinctions are not necessarily clearly demarcated 
processes and different types of memory effectively need to work together 
when an individual interacts with her environment. However, the 
distinctions can illuminate the different ways dementia affects memory.  
Semantic and episodic memory losses are usually the first to become 
apparent in the disease progressionoften manifesting in difficulties with 
remembering recent events or word-finding difficulties. Later, it can become 
increasingly taxing to accomplish activities of daily living, such as 
dressing or cooking, that rely more heavily on procedural memory. 
Therefore, an understanding of dementia as merely the loss of semantic 
memory underestimates the profound changes that the disease effects. 
Christine Bryden succinctly describes this more existential shift in being-in-
the-world in her memoir Dancing with Dementia (2005):  
You see, it is far more than simply memory loss. We are confused, we 
have problems with our sight, with our balance, with numbers and with 
direction.  We have no sense of time passing, so we live in the present 
reality, with no past and no future. We put all our energy into the now, not 
then, or later. Sometimes this causes a lot of anxiety because we worry 
about the past or the future because we cannot feel that it exists. (Bryden 
2005: 99) 
The challenges of living with progressively impaired memory are at the 
focus of autobiographical accounts of dementia. While these challenges 
relate to all kinds of everyday activities, one aspect that is thematised in all 
accounts is the impact that memory loss poses to communicating ones 
experienceboth generally and in life writing specifically. In producing his 
autobiographical journal Partial View: An Alzheimers Journal (1998), Cary 
Henderson used a tape-recorder to impart his thoughts about what it is like 
to be living with Alzheimers. The use of the tape-recorder is instrumental 
in his project of contributing to an understanding from the patients point of 
view (4) as it provides a memory device  to keep your ideas long 
enough so somebody else can hear them (7). At the same time, 
Hendersons difficulty in learning to handle the tape recorder highlights the 
extent to which dementia impedes the acquisition of new skills: I still 
havent mastered this, apparently very simple thing ofuhpushing down 
the two sides to get the machine to work. Pushing down two buttons ought 
to be the easiest thing in the world (7).  
Henderson also describes the disorientating effects of the loss of short-
term memory. In doing so he challenges common perceptions about what 
the behaviour of people with dementia meansthat is, he suggests that it is 
meaningful rather than meaningless. As Karen Lyman (1989: 602) notes, 
one of the adverse effects of the biomedicalisation of dementia is that all 
behaviour is henceforth interpreted as symptom of the disease pathology, 
and thereby robbed of its meaning. In particular, Lyman criticises health 
professionals for misinterpreting wandering as deviant or problem 
behavior needing to be restrained (1989: 600). Henderson describes what it 
feels like to forget what you are looking for in the very process of looking 
for it and how it feels important to keep looking: Once the idea is lost, 
everything is lost and I have nothing to do but to wander around trying to 
figure out what was it that was so important earlier (24). While wandering 
is often considered an aimless and meaningless activity, Hendersons 
account highlights how, quite to the contrary, it is an attempt to reconnect to 
the world and recover meaning: When Im wandering around, Im trying to 
touch base withanything, actually (24). Hendersons strategy highlights 
the extent to which memory and cognition can be understood as embodied, 
embedded cognition (Haugeland, 2009, Rowlands 1999, Wheeler, 2005; 
qtd. in Ratcliffe 2007: 107)), or, in other words, as extended (Clark and 
Chalmers 1998) beyond the physical mind or brain to include the social and 
physical environment.   
Partial View also highlights the unsettling effects of the loss of 
procedural memory. Henderson describes his problems with simple, 
everyday activities that, coupled with a lost sense of time, lead to a 
pronounced state of anxiety over the welfare of his dog:  
This was a real, first-rate panic. I opened up the can with alets see, what 
did I use for thatuh, well, whatever came at the moment. I had to find 
some way to give the doggie some food. But this was one of those things 
youremust get into if youre going to have a life with Alzheimers. Im 
too clumsy, because of the damned Alzheimers, my feet and legs, oh well, 
my hands, to do their job, and the best I can is kind of wiggle them and try 
to get mad and other silly things. But after tearing up the can, and tearing 
up a can is a real experience, but maybe my wife, one of these hours, will 
be feeling better and she can really open the can. Right now, the doggie 
seems to be in fairly good shapeI am not sure I am. (31) 
While this passage evokes the emotional impact of his deteriorating abilities, 
it also highlights the particular affordances of using a tape-recorder to 
produce his journal. Contrary to other memoirs, Hendersons narrative 
arguably enacts 36  moments of memory loss. In most other memoirs 
smooth, coherent, and rhetorically powerful prose starkly clashes with the 
language difficulties that the authors describe. In fact, the subsequent 
editing and polishing of the writing usually eliminates the diseased or 
disabled self from the text itself (Burke 2007a). Symptoms are described 
retrospectively rather than enacted. This is not only the case for language 
difficulties but for confusion, hallucination, paranoia, and moments of 
forgetfulness. In using a tape-recorder coupled with very sensitive editing, 
Hendersons journal provides rare insights into his experience. His musings 
reflect word-finding difficulties, the loss of the authors train of thought as 
well as expressions of anger, anxiety and paranoia. The effect of this 
closeness between experience and expression is a heightened sense of 
awareness of what it is like or, at least, what it may be like to be struggling 
with cognitive decline. The more polished accounts, by contrast, may at 
times make it difficult to imaginatively enter into the troubling experiences 
of the author as the reader is presented with such a reassuringly competent 
counterpart.  
36 The term enacts is not strictly speaking correct since these are still instances of mimetic 
verbal representations. In using this term, I mean to highlight the immediacy of the account 
and the lack of retrospective summary in representing symptoms. Basting (2001) similarly 
uses the term performance to call attention to this effect. 
Language 
Words slice through my mind so fast I cannot catch them and marry 
them to the eternity of the page. (DeBaggio 2002: 27) 
The effects of dementia on language production and reception are extensive. 
Since language provides the primary tool to communicate with others, the 
impairment of language has serious repercussions within the social sphere. 
Henderson, for instance, describes the effects of word-finding difficulties 
and slowed cognition on his ability to take part in conversations: I really 
cant converse very well at all. So thats very limiting. I cant think of things 
to say before somebodys already said it and theyve superseded what I have 
to say. The words get tangled very easily and I get frustrated when I cant 
think of a word (18). However, as Henderson points out, there is also a 
social dimension to why conversations with others are limited: when you 
have Alzheimers, he notes, nobody really wants to talk to you any longer 
(18). Henderson points out that people with dementia often experience a 
kind of social death (Lyman 1989: 601), as others no longer engage with 
them, address the caregiver or spouse rather than the person with dementia, 
and frequently shun interaction altogether (see also Aquilina and Hughes 
2006, Kitwood 1997).   
Hendersons journal highlights the importance of slowed interaction 
for people with dementia and the advantages of language production at the 
sufferers own pace. Writing or tape recording can be done as the thoughts 
occur and the person with dementia experiences a more cognitively alert 
moment. Furthermore, the process is less likely to be disturbed by time 
constraints, nervous tension, or distractions that occur during face-to-face 
interaction (see  DeBaggio 2002: 180, McGowin 1994, Ryan, Bannister, and 
Anas 2009: 145). DeBaggio describes the impact of Alzheimers on ones 
expressive capacity as the experience of living in two worlds:  
In one I am afflicted with Alzheimers, gasping as words slip through my 
lips with effort and suffering imprecision. This is the world in which I have 
to tell my companion I cant remember the word to make the sentence. In 
the other, slower world where I write on paper or directly on the computer, 
vocabulary is more fluid and I often surprise myself when the perfect word 
finds its way into the sentence without effort. This has puzzled me from the 
first sentence I wrote for this book. It is only now eight months later, I 
begin to see more clearly how necessary it is to slow the pace to achieve a 
former normality. (2002: 180) 
Not only language production, but language reception become progressively 
impaired in dementia. As Henderson notes: Readings almost impossible, 
for one thingthings dont stand still. Words dont stand still. It appears to 
me that its wavering. I cant pin it downthe wordsthey can be over 
yonder and over yonder and I cant catch them (Henderson 1998: 23). The 
link between perception and the ascription of meaning has broken down: I 
can see the words, I can pronounce the words, but they dont seem to mean 
a whole lot (23). Henderson, however, has a clear awareness that he has 
problems understanding what people tell him: A lot of things that I dont 
understand, even after somebody tells me. If I could signal in some way and 
tell them, oh sure, I heard it, but the ramifications of whatever the heck it 
was that I heard, I kind of missed (35). This lack of understanding 
frequently contributes to a sense of paranoia and a sense of being left out 
(81). Hendersons thoughts about language point to the fundamental 
difficulties of communication in general: But just keep in mind that 
everything you say or do is partialyoure probably never going to get a 
sentence, a nice clean sentence that says everything you want to say (19). 
The effects of dementia on verbal communication call for an 
exploration of the potential of nonverbal communication (Killick and Allan 
2001). As a woman with dementia describes it, Im observing myself and 
other people a little more closely. Ive always been very sensitive to body 
language, emotions and attitudes. I can tell from how a person moves 
whether it was a good thing or bad thing that I said. I have to use my 
intuition a lot more than I used to in order to pick up on the meaning of what 
people are saying to me (Snyder 1999: 122). As this quotation highlights, 
exploring the potential of nonverbal communication is not only relevant for 
the caregiver, as suggested earlier, but also for the person with dementia 
who may use nonverbal cues to interpret the meaning of an utterance and 
draw on nonverbal means to express herself.  
Bodily Engagements: Perception, Movement and the Senses 
I do believe Alzheimers does include what your feet do and what 
your hands do, as well as what your brain does. (Henderson 1998: 8) 
As will have become clear by now, memory is instrumental in our 
engagements with the world, including those involving perception and 
recognition. Agnosia, the loss of the ability to recognise visual, auditory or 
other sensual stimuli due to problems in processing information, is among 
the symptoms of dementia. As Bea, a woman suffering from dementia, 
explains: Sometimes what Im looking for will be lying right in front of me 
and I wont see it. I dont always misplace things; theyre right there, but I 
just dont recognize them (Snyder 1999: 21). Often these losses go hand in 
hand with apraxiathat is, problems in planning the coordination of 
movements to accomplish a learned, purposeful task. Previously habitual 
and ordinary tasks turn into an ordeal, as Bea notes: One of the worst things 
I have to do is put on my pants in the morning.  I sometimes will have to 
put them on and take them off half a dozen times or more.  I think I know 
the way to do it and I put them on and its wrong again (Snyder 1999: 19). 
Examples of apraxia have already been discussed above as examples of the 
impact dementia has on procedural memory. Here I explore the far-reaching 
implications of these losses for sufferers ability to engage with and make 
sense of the world. 
A key aspect of engagement with the world is the co-ordination of 
bodily movements in relation to objects as well as broader spatial or 
geographical environments. In her phenomenological account of illness, 
Carel (2008) draws attention to the fact that illness changes the geographical 
landscape one inhabits. She provides the example of how using a wheel-
chair changes the experience and navigability of a space. As the epigraph by 
Henderson underlines, the possibilities of bodily movement are curtailed in 
dementia. Hendersons journal attempts to capture and communicate 
something of this experience. The words I used to be able to talk to people 
and walk without wondering if the pavement is actually there (8; my 
emphasis) are accompanied by a heavily unfocused photo of Hendersons 
feet walking across a dizzying space of gravel (see Fig. 1). 
Fig. 1 Evoking parallel experience in the reader through photographic style in 
Henderson (1998: 9). 
The lack of focus and use of perspective seem aimed at creating the effect 
for the reader that the literary critic Leona Toker has termed parallel 
experience (Toker 1993).37 Nancy Andrews photography does not merely 
accompany the text; nor does it objectify Hendersonalthough there are 
some instances of uncomfortable representation. Rather, it provides a 
parallel, interpretative account of Hendersons words and life. So for 
instance, a birds-eye-view shot from the top of a long, public staircase, with 
Henderson posed at the bottom, gripping the handrail, seemingly hesitant to 
ascend, communicates something of the emotional tone of Hendersons fear 
of stairs: Im scared to death of climbing stairs  Ive got to hold on pretty 
tightly, then Ill go creaming meemies, the uncertainty of ones footage.  
You cant live at the bottom all the time, though (11). Photography here is 
used to heighten the readers awareness of how the subjective experience of 
space and motion change in dementia (see Fig. 2) 
37 Tokers use of the term focuses on placing the reader in a predicament that is cognitively 
similar to the characters. It is nonetheless pertinent for the way Andrews photography 
captures for the reader something of the sensory experience of symptoms of dementia and 
the dizzying effect of losing control over ones footage. 
Fig. 2 Using photographic style to elicit imaginative engagement with the ways 
dementia changes the experience of space in Henderson (1998:10). 
Various autobiographical accounts draw attention to the fact that 
environments with too many stimuliseveral people talking at once, 
background music, noisy restaurantsare impossible for a person with 
dementia to process (Bryden 1998: 67, Henderson 1998: 68). The 
difficulties presented by these environments are captured in Hendersons 
journal by the photographer Nancy Andrews: during a family gathering 
Henderson sits at the table, eyes averted, hands clasped, seemingly 
withdrawn. He is surrounded by several people talking and children who are 
playing noisily on the floor (Henderson 1998: 68-9). While this outside 
perspective risks enforcing the stereotype of the person with dementia as 
withdrawn or an empty shell, Hendersons words lucidly describe the 
difficulty for people with dementia to process stimuli in such situations
underscoring that the person and mind are anything but empty:  
Whenever theres a gathering of people, it seems, at least in my mind, to be 
a lot of confusion. I just feel the need for quiet.  if theres not much 
going on  I can think better. If theres anybody else in the room, it seems 
likemore than just one personI do sort of lose my grip. (Henderson 
1998: 68) 
These descriptions of changing bodily and perceptual relations to objects, 
spaces, sounds and movement underscore the changing sense of being-in-
the-world and highlight the extent to which this can have a destabilising 
effect on ones sense of self (see also Ratcliffe 2008). Bryden, for instance, 
when describing the overwhelming confusion of a night out with friends, 
emphasises how her difficulties in processing disparate information impact 
directly on her sense of self: I felt I was fading, the sounds were getting 
distant, faces were difficult to focus on, and I found it harder and harder to 
concentrate on what people were saying (Bryden 1998: 67; emphasis 
added). As the world fades, or the previously stable relationship to the world 
fades, the previous experience of self seems to fade with it.38 However, 
these accounts highlight that while there is a shift in self-experience, it does 
not make sense to speak of a loss of self per se.  
The visual and auditory senses are not the only ones to be affected by 
dementia. McGowin provides a vivid account of having olfactory 
hallucinations; the unpleasant sensation, for instance, of smelling cat pee 
when others cannot smell anything (McGowin 1994: 125). However, her 
account also highlights that there at times unexpected pleasures in her 
symptoms: I can sometimes enjoy the sweet fragrance of night-blooming 
jasmine, when no one else can. It is my own private sensation (125). In fact, 
McGowin is not afraid to broach the taboo of sexuality in people with 
dementia when pointing out how dementia has made her more sensual. 
Realising that she has experienced many last times without being aware of 
it enables McGowin to savor life more openly and ravenously [and to] 
appreciate all good things more, whether they be trusted friends, cherished 
memories, natures beauty  or physical pleasures (87). 
Overall, however, these experiences of disruption in habitual 
encounters with the world have profoundly pernicious effects on the 
authors sense of self. DeBaggio, for instance, describes how after having 
been baffled and shamed by the failed attempt to use a photocopier, his 
return home presented a turning point in his (self-)experience: On the way 
home I had a peculiar feeling that the sidewalk wavered every once in a 
while. At intersections I was careful to look in all directions. It was a walk 
in which I lost something I may never get back (2002: 116-7). 
Autopathographies by people with dementia attest to the way in which 
seemingly effortless processes of sense perception are fundamental in our 
experience of feeling at home in the world. Such narratives express the loss 
38 Similarly, see Ratcliffe (2008) on shifts in existential feelings in psychiatric illness. 
of this at-home-ness and attempt to convey a sense of this experience to 
the reader.  
Emotions and Cognition 
Memoirs by people with dementia abound with examples of deeply felt 
expressions of emotions: from frustration and anger to guilt, worry, 
appreciation and love. While highlighting the persistence of emotions, these 
narratives also reflect on the subtle and less subtle ways in which emotions 
and cognition are changed in dementialeading to substantial changes in 
how the authors experience themselves. DeBaggio, for instance, evokes the 
sense of his mind becoming one-dimensional of having almost lost [the] 
ability to hold two thoughts simultaneously (2002: 142). Bryden (1998) 
similarly describes how her inner thought processes are becoming 
unfamiliar as they become more stretched out,  more linear, more step by 
step (48-9). This loss of vibrancy, buzz and interconnectedness (1998) 
is paralleled on an emotional level:   
My emotions seem a little awry. Sometimes I am a bit more teary than 
before, for no apparent reason. But more often I seem to have what feels 
like a sort of emotional blank, which to my daughters looks like a lack of 
sparkle, of charisma. I dont get as excited as I used to, and I just feel a 
little flat. It takes too much energy to react with emotion: where once it 
seemed automatic, now it takes actual mental effort to consider a situation, 
and then how to react to it. (92) 
Brydens description highlights the sense in which emotional responses are 
a cognitive activity (Damasio 2000) and the extent to which this cognitive 
life is constitutive of her sense of selfhood: Im like a slow motion version 
of my old self, she writes (Bryden 1998: 49). And yet, Bryden sees some 
benefits to this change: Its not all bad, as I have more inner space in this 
linear mode to listen, to see, to appreciate clouds, leaves, flowers  I am 
less driven and less impatient (1998: 48-49). Like other authors, then, 
Bryden suggests that there is potential to live well with dementia and the 
possibility of positive changes in a disease that is usually described in terms 
of a living death or tragic downward spiral.  
In one of his essays, Taylor (2007) puts yet another spin on these 
emotional changes. He describes how he is beginning to care less about his 
forgetfulness and the lack of correspondence between his world and his 
caregivers reality. The feeling of no longer caring is experienced as both 
threatening and as a relief. It prompts him to ask whether he is turning into 
an android that really doesnt care where it is, what is happening around it, 
what is happening to it (57)drawing on a dehumanising metaphor to 
conceptualise people with dementia.  However, he also depicts his growing 
lack of concern as positive: In the past, behaviour like that would upset me. 
In the recent past, it would frustrate me. In the present, it just doesnt seem 
to bother me that much. Why are others around me so concerned? I forgot  
so what? (58). Read alongside his deep expression of fear about the future, 
this flippant remark does not ring entirely true, but it does speak to the 
fluctuation in his emotional responses to the lived experience of his disease. 
It is one of the strengths of the seriality of both essay and blog formats that 
they allow for varying responses, attitudes and emotions to be registered 
over time, rather than providing a fixed teleological outlookas in most 
retrospective memoirs.  
If emotional changes can lead to an increased appreciation of the here 
and now, Henderson also highlights the negative impact the disease has on 
his emotional landscape: Theres so many things about Alzheimers that 
are rather bewildering he writes. Sometimes you can have mood swings 
that are really awful I think. Sometimes I feel on top of the world, a couple 
of days ago I did and today I just feel absolutely devastated (Henderson 
1998: 32). As DeBaggio recounts, dementia can also have an impact on the 
(seemingly unmotivated) strength of an emotional reaction:  
Strange things are happening. I blew up this morning with surprising force 
and frustration. The cause? The newspaper hadnt arrived.  Little things 
wear down my emotional equilibrium. First vocabulary fractures; then my 
emotions explode like snowflakes in an angry blizzard. (DeBaggio 2002: 
The writers of dementia autopathographies sometimes experience their 
emotions as alien, out of control, or unmotivated. At the same time, they 
reflect on the potential benefits of some of the changes wrought by the 
disease. Importantly, by putting their emotions in the context of their life 
experiences, their narratives help to underline the continuity and validity of 
emotional reactions in people with dementia. As discussed previously, like 
other behaviour, expressions of emotions are often viewed through the lens 
of pathology, rather than being seen as legitimate reactions to a frustrating 
or undignified experience. In particular, the expression of negative emotions, 
such as anger, is classified as challenging behaviour (Killick and Allan 
2001). The social context of the situation in which this anger arose is 
frequently overlooked.  A closer look at the experience of living with 
dementia highlights how these expressions of emotions, while affected by 
disease processes, remain meaningful. This recognition, in turn, may help 
attune caregivers to acknowledging what these emotions express. 
The scariest thing is, I guess, the fact that I have no sense of time. I 
have not the slightest ideamy brain doesntwhats ten hours 
away or two hours away. (Henderson 1998: 47) 
Arguably, just like the experience of space, temporal aspects of being are 
generally changed in illness. As Rita Charon notes, Because the experience 
of time might be one of the most telling aspects of the divide between the 
sick and the well, health professionals have an urgent need to examine and 
make at least imaginative sense of how patients might experience time 
(Charon 2006: 121). In dementia, the experience of time is transformed in 
numerous ways. The person affected by the disease arguably becomes lost 
in time, due to the progressive inability to remember the current date, 
month, season or year she is living through. DeBaggio describes this state of 
affairs while highlighting that certain temporal markers are of less 
importance to the person with dementia than they are to others (see also  
Henderson 1998: 44): 
I awake in the dark morning without awareness of what day of the week it 
is. I wait for the newspaper or the radio to locate me in time. The day of 
the week, the hour of the day has little meaning for me even when I 
remember. I float in my own chaotic world, grateful to know I am still alive. 
(DeBaggio 2002: 148; original emphasis) 
A person with dementia may also be lost in time in the sense that she may 
seem to be living in the past; in such instances past autobiographical 
memories are being experienced as the present, or they colour the present to 
such a degree that the person is no longer aware of significant aspects of 
current reality. Such shifts are unlikely to be represented in autobiographical 
writing, since the writing project in itself relies on a certain amount of 
present-day information being available to the author. DeBaggios graphic 
description of a night of delusion, during which he calls out in distress to his 
wife as his Mommy, provides a rare exception to this rule:  
I was lost and had begun to regress to another time. I called her Mommy 
and I asked where Daddy was in mantra-like singsong. I saw my mother 
where Joyce had been. I sat up in the bed and reached out to touch her in 
the dark air of the room but my tingling fingertips met nothing. My mother 
had been dead for decades, but time melted away. (DeBaggio 2002: 203; 
emphasis added)39    
There is, however, a third way, frequently overlooked, in which people with 
dementia may become lost in time. Temporal units are experienced 
differently as memory loss significantly loosens the sense of being moored 
to a particular time and place. Even small units of time can no longer be 
made sense of as they cannot be linked to a coherent whole, a narrative 
before and after. Life writing by people with dementia is rich in 
phenomenological descriptions of such experiences of being lost in time; 
such as Hendersons unsettling experience of not knowing how long his 
wife has been absent and therefore becoming concerned about the well-
being of his dog. Henderson draws attention to the pervasiveness of this 
temporal unravelling: 
No two days and no two moments are the same. You cant build on 
experience. You can maybe guess whats going to happen a little while 
from nowminutes from now, hours from nowwe dont know what to 
expect. (Henderson 1998: 47) 
It is hard to imagine the disorientating effect such a transformed experience 
of temporal sequences must have and what the world may look like for a 
person experiencing these symptoms of dementia. In her memoir, Bryden 
39 The discrepancy between narrative voice and narrative experience are noticeable here. It 
is not clear to what extent this episode is something DeBaggio remembers, from an inside 
perspective, or presents a reconstructed account of, based on information provided to him 
by his wife. 
quotes an email communication from a friend who is also suffering from 
dementia, who evocatively describes the effect: 
Most of the time I live in the space I can see and the time called now  it 
is almost a virtual world  I move and a new space opens to 
view...even my rooted-ness to my place in space feels tenuous  as if I 
might be torn loose, uprooted, blown away. (Bryden 2005: 99) 
As this extract suggests, living in the now is not a comfortable experience. 
While a number of memoirs advocate a carpe diem approach to life and 
express their authors willingness to live each day to the full and make the 
most of their remaining capacities, Taylor draws attention to the fact that the 
symptoms of dementia that create this continuous present may in fact 
undermine the ability to enjoy the present, as living in and for the moment 
assumes the ability to know what is going on, what [one is] doing in a given 
moment (Taylor 2007: 131)an ability that is slowly eroded as the 
temporal unity of experience is disrupted.  
The Social World: Intimate Relationships and Strangers  
Id like a larger world than I have right now. (Henderson 1998: 24) 
In many ways, this quotation from Hendersons journal speaks to all the 
aspects of experience discussed so far that are changed in dementia. In 
selecting these words as an epigraph for this section on changes in the social 
world, I aim to underline how this particular aspect of being-in-the-world in 
dementia is determined less by changes on a neurological level than by 
changes in other peoples reactions. Therefore, it is one of the few aspects of 
dementia that could be reversed or at least alleviated (see Kitwood 1997, 
1990). Many of the memoirs highlight the extent to which interactions with 
othersstrangers, health care professionals, friends and family members
are changed after the diagnosis of dementia. The person with the disease 
may lose the ability to behave according to social norms (Carel 2008, 
Goffman 1963) or may become more dependent on others, thereby upsetting 
the nature of previous relationships. Importantly, research has shown that 
social relationships are severely undermined, not only by the disease itself, 
but also by the process of disease labelling (Lyman 1989). The labelling of 
their behaviour as pathological results in limited opportunities for people 
with dementia to assert agency and control over their lives and to interact 
socially (Lyman 1989: 600-1). One of the most devastating effects of the 
stigma attached to dementia is that it often leads to social isolation and 
loneliness, a form of social death (Lyman 1998). Indeed, sufferers describe 
the stigma attached to dementia as a fear of contagion:  
Weve never tried to hide that I have Alzheimers. But everyone acts like 
they dont want to get near because they might catch it. They dont know 
how to deal with it. (Snyder 1999: 22) 
The authors of dementia memoirs describe the harrowing experience of 
being ostracised by strangers and friends alike who may be alarmed by their 
behaviour, verbal mishaps or slowness to respond (see also Snyder 1999: 
60). They also express their guilt about how their social isolation impacts on 
their spouses lives.  
However, diagnosis need not necessarily lead to isolation and 
abandonment. DeBaggio describes the support and encouragement he 
received from friends and readers of his botanical newsletter after sharing 
his diagnosis. Although too often Alzheimers may curtail the formation of 
new relationships, the memoirs provide evidence that this is not a necessary 
consequence of the disease. Henderson describes forming new bonds with 
health care professionals through being involved in their research project. 
While appreciating their kindness and personal qualities, his involvement in 
research also provides him with a new role that boosts his self-esteem. As 
he writes, when I get to Durham and I have something I like to do, Im kind 
of on a high. Its something that I can do that not everybody can do, and it 
makes me feel good about this (Henderson 1998: 63). Furthermore, many 
memoirs highlight the importance of forming new relationships through 
support groups and long-distance communication with other people with 
dementia. They underline the value of friendships based on a shared 
understanding of each others experiences. While the memoirs often 
criticise health care professionals for callous behaviour, they also describe 
instances of supportive and lasting relationships with understanding 
neurologists, family doctors or psychiatrists (Bryden 1998: 4, 6, Lee 2003: 
20-21). Indeed, Brydens autobiographies underscore the potential for 
forming significant new relationships despite dementia. Bryden meets and 
learns to love her husband after having struggled with the symptoms of 
dementia for a number of years (Bryden 2005). Her experience underscores 
that people with dementia can form new bonds and maintain personal 
relationships, if given the chance.   
Nonetheless, intimate relationships with partners, children or other 
family members are bound to be affected by the diseases progression. In 
some instances, formerly estranged relations between family members may 
in fact improve due to the way dementia affects both the caregiver and care-
receiver. It is a common trope in filial caregivers memoirs that parent-child 
roles become inverted by dementia. Sufferers explore their own reactions to 
this often unwanted inversion of relationships in their autobiographical 
writing. Their growing dependence on others is frequently coupled with fear, 
anger and frustration:  
Sometimes I give Erika a hard time just to be nasty. I guess its because Id 
like to be doing things myself instead of having someone telling me to do 
this or do that. Im a little boy now. I have a mommy to take care of me. 
Its not a very good feeling. Id much rather be out there doing something 
else. (Snyder 1999: 85)  
However, the authors of dementia memoirs also express their deep 
thankfulness and appreciation for the roles their children or partners have 
taken on: My wife is trying extra hard to make things tolerable for meto 
give me things to do and make me feel good. I really, really do appreciate 
that (Henderson 1998: 28). While occasionally feeling left out in social 
interactions, Henderson also acknowledges the love and support he has 
received from his family: I think love is the key to all this stuff and love is 
something that my wife certainly has given to me and the family too and 
theres nothing that I can see to complain about (65). Furthermore, he 
underscores the pivotal role his wife plays in anchoring him in life: Im 
afraid of losing contact. Shes the only one who understands me and Im 
hard to understand (28). Hendersons account, among others, draws 
attention to the fact that relationships are never one-sided. The authors with 
dementia frequently voice concern for their loved ones and show an 
empathetic insight into what their family members may be experiencing. As 
Henderson notes, I think probably all of our caregivers, bless their souls 
and hearts, they do go through a little bit of hell themselvesa lot of it
and a lot of it because of us (37). Dementia then, changes not only the 
internal landscape of persons with dementia, but their social worldand 
with it the worlds of their companions and family members.  
Being-at-one-with-the-world: The Experience of Flow in Dementia 
I appreciate and sometimes immerse myself in the process rather 
than only or mostly on the outcome. I like doing things. I like and 
appreciate the doing. Doing is how I know I am alive, and how I 
appreciate being alive.  (Taylor 2007: 105) 
As has become clear from the discussion so far, the experience of being-in-
the-world is radically altered in dementia. While the changes wrought by the 
disease make certain ways of engaging with the world and with others 
difficult or even impossible, the memoirs also highlight the potential for 
new or previously unexplored ways of being-in-the-world. The notion of 
flow that the clinical psychologist Kate Allan has recently been exploring 
in the context of dementia seems pertinent here. Allan describes the 
experience of flow as being characterised by a total and intrinsically 
enjoyable focus on an activity that balances skills with challenges, and 
provides clear and immediate feedback. It results in a merging of action and 
awareness, loss of sense of self-consciousness, and altered experience of 
time. 40  Life writing by people with dementia provides a number of 
examples of experience that could be understood in such terms.  
For instance, DeBaggio considers writing not only a therapeutic means 
of distancing himself from the disease, allowing him to leave thoughts of 
the disease locked up in the computer (DeBaggio 2002: 7), but also a 
means of actually being-at-one-with-the-world. The only time I feel alive 
now is when I am writing, under the spell of work and memories 
(DeBaggio 2002: 121; original emphasis). This sense of feeling alive 
under the spell of work can be understood in terms of flow experienceof 
being completely immersed in an (enjoyable) activity. DeBaggio is bound 
up with his keyboard in this activity of writing rather than constituting 
40 http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/psychology/people/pgprofiles/kma2/ Accessed 31.03.2015 
separate subject and object in the world. At this stage, typing still comes 
automatically and seems to enable his thinking rather than disrupt his 
relationship to the world around him by interposing a baffling instrument he 
can no longer use.41 This sense of being at ease in his body and his 
environment contributes to the satisfying sense of feeling alive. Similar 
instances of flow, of being-at-one-with-the-world, are also highlighted in 
other dementia memoirs.42 
Arguably, writing is an unlikely candidate for a sustained experience of 
flow as the symptoms of dementia progress, and many memoirs
DeBaggios includedcomment on how the ability to write becomes 
increasingly impaired. Hendersons account, by contrast, highlights less 
cognitively demanding activities that can provide a sense of enjoyable 
immersion. Music, his only constant companion offers such an opportunity:   
Ive whiled away many many hours listening to music. I can just listen to 
music and feel that Im doing something that I just love to do. I cant make 
music anymore, but I can certainly use it for my own intentionswhich 
are just to be beautiful. (Henderson 1998: 42)  
His words are accompanied by this image of him physically expressing his 
enjoyment of music (see Fig. 3). Overall, Hendersons account underlines 
the importance of the appreciation of aesthetic objects, whether man-made 
or natural. Henderson takes pleasure in the changing colours of autumnal 
leaves and watching birds in his bird sanctuary. He writes Things are a lot 
more precious than they were (77). In other words, although dementia 
disrupts his experience of the world it also leads him to a deeper 
appreciation of all things, great and small. 
41 Compare Heideggers distinction between objects being present-at-hand (Vorhanden) 
versus ready-to-hand (Zuhanden) (1962). Objects usually present themselves to us as 
ready-to-hand. Standard examples include the use of a keyboard or of a tool: we do not 
encounter them as objects distinct from our activity, but instead they are bound up in our 
activity and typically they come to our conscious awareness as present-at-hand objects 
only when they fail to function and therefore become conspicuous (Ratcliffe 2008: 44, 45). 
42 Truscott (2004a) elaborates ways to achieve such flow in her autobiographical journal 
article. 
Fig. 3 Flow and relationality captured in photography in Henderson (1998: 43; 75). 
While there are numerous further examples of what Bryden describes as 
dancing with dementia, one final example shall suffice: many authors 
comment on the value of being in contact with animals. Henderson 
describes his relationship to his dog as one of care and mutuality.43 The dog 
provides him with an excuse to leave the house and walk when he is feeling 
antsy (48), but, more importantly, the dog provides a non-judgmental loyal 
companion, someone to play with, talk to and simply watch. As Henderson 
puts it, his dog is somebody  you know is not going to talk back. And 
you cant make a mistake that way (13). For Bryden stroking a purring cat 
is an activity that provides her with the kind of brain time-out that she 
finds necessary after being over-stimulated (1998: 82). As with music, there 
is a certain flow to being with and caressing an animal that is directional but 
non-instrumental and that does not necessitate the same kind of purposeful 
planning as other activities. As such, it can provide a reassuring sense of 
being-at-one-with-the-world, counter to the many examples of shifting self 
and world experience in dementia.  
Thus, life writing by people with dementia offers rich experiential 
detail on how both self-experience and world-experience are prone to 
change in dementia. At times, the difficulties of engaging with the world are 
experienced as attacks on the persons very sense of self. The memoirs 
underscore how this sense of losing oneself refers not only to the loss of 
characteristics or abilities that are considered central to ones sense of 
43 Compare, in this connection, research into animal-assisted therapy in dementia (see Marx 
et al. 2010).  
identity, but also to habitual and background ways of being-in-the-world. At 
the same time, these memoirs underline the fact that there continues to be a 
certain perspective on the world. Somebody experiences these changes, 
perceives an altered world, feels disorientated or diminished. This person, 
with all the constantly shifting abilities, continues to be a unique centre of 
perception on the world. Research suggests that this first-personal givenness 
of experience continues in the late stages of dementia, beyond the 
possibility of communicating it in words (Kontos 2003, 2004, 2005).  
Furthermore, attending to the ways people with dementia describe their 
shifting experience in the earlier stages may provide crucial means of 
interpreting nonverbal expressions of attitudes, preferences and emotions in 
behavioral or symbolic gestures (Snyder 1999: 10) in later stages of the 
disease. Although the channels of communication may change, Snyder 
underscores the value of paying close attention to verbal accounts provided 
by people with dementia as the themes in these accounts may in fact 
provide a basis for interpreting nonverbal expressions of experience later in 
the course of the illness (11). Furthermore, Snyder highlights the numerous 
channels of communication that remain open in dementia and the 
importance of acknowledging and trying to interpret these embodied ways 
of communicating (32-3). Arguably, such embodied ways of 
communicating are rarely translatable into written accounts of the disease. 
Although the use of photography in Hendersons collaborative journal 
partially explores the potential of embodied expressions of feelingssuch 
as when Henderson strokes his grandchilds head (see Fig.3), laughs with 
his wife, sits slumped at the tablewritten memoirs are limited in the ways 
they can communicate through the body and communicate embodied 
selfhood per se. In the next section I turn to a different medium, 
documentary film, that draws on the potential of visual and auditory modes 
in exploring these aspects of the phenomenology of dementia. David 
Sievekings documentary Vergiss Mein Nicht (Forget-Me-Not) provides 
medium-specific affordances when it comes to representing the embodied 
nature of the symptoms of dementia, embodied aspects of selfhood, and 
embodied means of communication in dementia. 
From the Caregivers Perspective: Intersubjectivity in David 
Sievekings Documentary Vergiss Mein Nicht 
Vergiss Mein Nicht (Sieveking 2012) explores the way Alzheimers changes 
not only the person with dementia but the entire family. Sieveking is 
narrator, protagonist, and film-maker alike. The documentary was filmed 
during several extended periods Sieveking spent living with his parents
during which he at times acted as primary caregiver for his mother Gretel. 
Due to its mimetic potential the documentary provides abundant material for 
an investigation of the ways that dementia changes the sufferers experience 
of the physical and social world. I examine the portrayal of the symptoms of 
dementia as entry-point into the documentary itself and into the broader 
question of how viewing symptoms of dementia on film may be different 
from reading about them in print.  
The documentary also opens up the possibility of representing instances 
of embodied communication; at issue are various forms of nonverbal 
communication, such as touch, gesture, facial expressions and posture as 
well as the role of body movement and tone of voice in nonverbal and 
verbal humour. What I am calling embodied communication also includes 
aspects of the voice of the person, such as modulation, tone and intonation, 
i.e., what linguists call paralinguistic features of communicative acts
features that help constitute the meaning of an utterance in ways that go 
beyond its semantic content. Documentary film provides the perhaps unique 
possibility, within dementia life writing, of exploring how people with 
dementia continue to express themselves through vocal modulations and 
bodily movements. As the forms of embodied communication just 
mentioned provide an important means of gaining access to Gretels state of 
mind, a large part of this analysis will be devoted to the way the 
documentary represents and reflects on these means of communication. My 
guiding questions here include the following: What opportunities do 
documentary film provide for contemplating aspects of embodied selfhood 
in dementia? And how do the affordances of film differ from written 
memoirs by people with dementia?  
Viewing Symptoms of Dementia 
As hinted at previously, the mimetic quality of filmography allows for a rich 
representation of the symptoms of dementia. The documentary highlights 
the ways that the loss of memory impacts on many different areas of human 
functioning and experience. It is therefore even more difficult than in 
written memoirs to discuss distinct areas of self-experience affected by the 
disease. I will nevertheless attempt to draw out some of the relevant areas 
that the medium of film speaks to in a particular way. 
For example, the documentary provides valuable insight into the 
complex ways that language is affected by dementia. In presenting the 
viewer with Gretels speech, rather than an indirect representation of her 
speechas in written caregivers memoirsthe viewer witnesses the 
repetitions, non-sequiturs, and word-finding difficulties that form the 
symptoms of Alzheimers disease. Neurolinguistic research generally 
corroborates the higher occurrence of discourse deficits in people with 
dementia, including empty or aborted phrases, indefinite termssuch as 
thing or stuffrepetitions, referential cohesion errors, and disruptive 
topic shifts (see Dijkstra et al. 2004: 275). In the first scenes of the 
documentary Gretels linguistic impairment seems to mark her as a person 
with dementia. There is a moment of vicarious shock or empathy with the 
narrator-figure David who is confronted with a decided change in his 
mother since his last visithaving just established the opening narrative 
opposition between now and then that is so typical of many caregivers 
memoirs. However, as the narrative progresses, the viewer gets used to the 
idiosyncrasies of Gretels speech. So rather than undermining her expressive 
capacity and marking her as demented, the documentary illuminates the 
way that language is not simply lost but retains much of its communicative 
function throughout the course of the disease. The film shows language in 
context: the setting of the conversational discourse renders intelligible even 
language that presents syntactical or semantic errors or lapses in coherence 
or cohesion. 
A scene depicting Gretel undergoing neurolinguistic testsa standard 
procedure in the diagnosis and tracking of the progression of dementia
highlights the extent of Gretels semantic difficulties. More importantly, 
however, it underscores the degree to which such testing undermines the 
patients sense of self-worth. Gretel is clearly baffled by the test procedures. 
She has been upset by the injunction to hold her peace during the EEG 
screening and feels put on the spot by word-finding tests she is subjected to, 
complaining that she is now being asked to speak while before she had been 
told to keep quiet. She is clearly having difficulties with naming the images 
presented to her and her attempt to withdraw from the situation by closing 
her eyes highlights her emotional discomfort. The scene presents one of 
many instances in which, despite her language impairment, body language 
and facial expressions clearly express her feelings or attitude. 
The documentary also reveals the many ways that bodily engagements 
with the world are changed in dementiafor instance, by tracking the 
changes in Gretels gait. Furthermore, it highlights the importance of haptic 
relations with the environment as Gretel develops a new way of interacting 
with the world when walking. In line with Hendersons notion of trying to 
touch base, it seems that touching objects in her environment helps Gretel 
to situate herself. So, for instance, the viewer witnesses her sliding her hand 
along the counter at a doctors office as she walks along. Much later in the 
film, she and her husband return to Hamburg, the setting of their budding 
love story. In a shop, Gretel touches all the sweets on display. Touching 
seems to allow her to establish a link to the world.44 With an understanding 
of how dementia impacts on habitual ways of being-in-the-world, self-
referential tactile behaviour, such as grasping ones own hands or stroking 
ones legs, can take on a new meaning. Contrary to seeing such repetitive 
actions as meaningless, they suggest that the person with dementia is 
attempting to establish a link with the world and familiarise herself with her 
own body and her environment. Touch, however, as indicated by the image 
of Henderson stroking his grandchild, and as I suggest below in my analysis 
of its communicative potential, also has a relational function. 
44 It is not incidental that the verb to graspto understand the meaning of somethingis 
a metaphorical extension of our haptic potential for holding an object. See also Lakoff and 
Johnson (2003) on the bodily substrates for metaphors that form the basis of everyday 
language.  
The documentary brings to the fore how sense perceptions such as taste 
and smell may change with Alzheimers. In additional information on the 
DVD the viewer learns that Gretels obsession with butter is a new 
culinary preference. In Sievekings discussion of this preference with a 
gerontologist, it emerges that Gretels butter-addiction may be in line with 
recent scientific insights into how early memories may gain importance later 
in life. It has been shown that in survivors of the Holocaust or of Stalins 
work camps the motives, wants and exigencies of this episode of their lives 
came to be constitutive for the way that motives and needs were structured 
later in life. The fact that Gretel lived through the war, during which fatty 
foods such as butter were a scarcity, may therefore account for her growing 
obsession with butter. This aspect of her conduct also attests to the subtle 
ways that memories may structure experience and surface in behavioural 
patterns. This tendency has been highlighted by people working on so-called 
challenging behaviour in dementia, such as the clinical psychologist 
Graham Stokes (2010). Stokes provides numerous narrativised case studies 
of how behaviour that was treated as merely pathologicaland seen as 
outlandish and bizarre (8)could actually be attributed to individual traits 
or past experiences and thereby interpreted as understandable reactions to 
the current situation.  
In filming Gretels daily life, the documentary registers many moments 
of confusion. Gretel is confused about how to handle objects (such as 
clearing the table or dealing with dirty dishes), about the identity of the 
person she is with, and about recent events in her life. So, for instance, after 
a long car journey to Switzerland to join her husband, she seems to retain no 
memory of the long hours just spent in the car. Further, she has trouble 
recognising her husband and distinguishing between her husband and son
presumably because her son had recently taken over the role of primary 
caregiver. Although she seems happy to be reunited with her husband, her 
confusion is palpable in her facial expression, tone of voice and bodily 
movements. 
Yet the documentary also registers many moments of being-at-one-
with-the-world. As in the autopathographies discussed above, such moments 
may involve a bodily sense of well-being or a satisfying sense of being-with 
another person. Gretel shows a surprising grace, joy and fluidity when she 
plays ball with her adult children. Further, as I discuss below, she also 
shares moments of communion with others, relying on embodied modes of 
communication. 
In sum, due to its mimetic quality, documentary film can provide 
insight into a wide array of symptoms associated with dementia. The outside 
view of the camera may, however, limit an understanding of how these 
symptoms are experienced by the person with dementia. As hinted at in 
some of the examples just mentioned, insight into Gretels state of mind can, 
at times, be gleaned not only from her comments but from her facial 
expressions, gestures and postures. Since paralinguistic information of this 
sort provides such a crucial form of communication in dementia (Killick and 
Allan 2001)and since the documentary captures such paralinguistic cues 
in a medium-specific wayI turn now to the films treatment of nonverbal 
or more generally embodied communication. 
The Communicating Body in Film 
In contrast to life writing by people with dementia, which is necessarily 
confined to the stage when the person can still tell a more or less coherent 
verbal narrative, documentary filmmaking provides the possibility of 
providing instances of nonverbal means of expression at later stages in the 
disease. Although Sievekings documentary is of course edited and 
narratively arranged, it nevertheless provides a mediated space for the 
presence of the person with dementia. Gretel, the film-makers mother, is 
continuously on scene. Her words, gestures, expressions and movements 
are thus available to the vieweralbeit at one step removed from face-to-
face encounter. Given Ratcliffes observations on how we understand other 
peoples states of mind directly through body language and gesture (2007), 
documentary provides fascinating possibilities to represent the 
phenomenology of illness nonverbally within a narrative genre.45 
Sieveking describes how before the onset of his mothers illness, the 
family thrived on intellectual discussions. He notes how in his family, the 
45 Fiction films provide similar affordances. See chapter 2. 
word was everything. 46  This remark echoes Killick and Allans 
observation that Sometimes it seems as if we were all living according to 
the slogan Words come first (44). This way of being and doing things in 
the world has significant impact on the perceived potential of people with 
dementia to express themselves, to build social relationships and to affect 
their reality, as the disease syndrome is linked to various forms of language 
impairment and the eventual loss of language itself. 
No doubt, language plays a crucial role in the way our species engages 
with and acts in the world. However, in overstating the role of language, or 
rather in underestimating the contribution of nonverbal behaviour to 
processes of communicative interaction, we risk missing the continuing 
expressive potential of people with dementia. Sievekings documentary 
highlights this potential in two ways. First, by portraying how Gretel 
communicates through and with her body, the film draws the viewers 
attention to the potential of embodied communication in people with 
dementia. Second, the narrative also traces how the experience of living and 
communicating with somebody who has dementia brings about a sea-change 
in the way family members relate to each other. As Sieveking describes it, 
they learn to relish the potential of touch and physical intimacy, not only in 
relation to Gretel but also to each other. Sieveking appreciates that through 
her new way of being-in-the-world his mother was able to teach him a 
valuable life lesson. Sievekings father similarly highlights a positive side to 
his wifes illness since, as he puts it, it allowed him to rediscover his love 
for her anew.47 The Sievekings are not alone in seeing dementia as a context 
for growth and learning, as the words of Michael Ignatieff, author of the 
novel Scar Tissue, confirm:  
I learned as much from my mother when she couldnt speak to me, when 
she couldnt communicate, when she simply stared and received our kisses 
on the cheek, as I learned when she was joking and laughing. (Ignatieff 
1994, qtd. in Killick and Allan 2001: 52) 
46 Sieveking states Alles ging bers Wort in an interview contained in the additional 
material on the DVD (see Potsdamer Filmgesprch mit Andreas Dresen). All translations 
are my own. 
47 Ich bin der Demenz eigentlich dankbar dass ich die Liebe zu meiner Frau noch einmal 
neu entdecken konnte, as quoted by David Sieveking (see Potsamer Filmgesprch mit 
Andreas Dresen). 
Yet contrary to Ignatieffs view that not speaking equals not communicating, 
Sievekings documentary draws out the many ways that communication is 
nonverbal. This is not to say that verbal and nonverbal communication are 
in opposition to each other: Although there are forms of nonverbal 
communication which do not involve words at all, in the majority of 
instances the two dimensions are intimately intertwined, Killick and Allan 
write. Facial expression, qualities of voice, and gestures help the listener to 
decode and interpret words (Killick and Allan 2001: 45). In normal 
language use, as in dementia, verbal and nonverbal cues act together to 
convey the full meaning of an utterance or gesture. 
One of the commonplaces in popular understandings of dementia has 
been that since people with dementia lose the ability to communicate, we 
have no way of accessing their states of mind, no way of knowing what it is 
like to be living with dementia. Although there are of course limits to 
intersubjective understanding in dementia, and the loss or impairment of 
language no doubt plays a contributing factor, it is important to keep in 
mind what Shaun Gallagher and Dan Zahavi describe as the primordial role 
of embodiment in intersubjective understanding. Drawing on Max Scheler, 
Gallagher and Zahavi point out that we can perceive the joy, sadness, 
puzzlement, eagerness of others  in their movements, gestures, facial 
expressions and actions (Gallagher and Zahavi 2008: 182). Contrary to 
mentalizing accounts of intersubjectivity, they hold that we gain access to 
other peoples minds through perceiving their bodies in a situation or 
meaningful context (183).  Accordingly, a phenomenological account holds 
that we experience the other directly as a person, an intentional being 
whose bodily gestures and actions are expressive of his or her experiences 
or states of mind. (183; emphasis added). So for instance, Gretel regularly 
expresses her disinclination to engage, her tiredness and her need for peace 
and quiet by closing her eyes and shutting out her surroundings. It would be 
wrong, however, to presume that when Gretel closes her eyes she is in some 
sense no longer there. During a conversation between father and son, 
Gretel expresses her wish to be included both verbally and behaviourally, by 
squeezing in between the two of them. She then closes her eyes while David 
and his father continue to talk about the parents past relationship as if she 
wasnt there. However, when her husband Malte hesitates in his narrative, 
she suddenly interjects with a question, clearly belying the impression that 
she is unaware that she is the topic of this conversation.  
Killick and Allan speculate whether language impairment leads people 
with dementia to develop a keener sense for engaging in and interpreting 
nonverbal modes of communication. This hypothesis is corroborated by 
people with dementia who describe how they have to rely on nonverbal cues 
to make sense of what others say. Gretels keen attunement to nonverbal 
cues and the emotional gist of a conversation comes out in a scene where 
Malte recounts a quarrel with his wifes professional caregiver, Valentina. 
Although Gretel may not be able to follow the details of the narrative, she is 
clearly aware of its unpleasant nature and that it has something to do with 
her. Furthermore, her partial understanding seems to make her feel 
responsible for the situation. Her worried look and her query What did I 
do?48 indicate her concern. The scene provides a poignant reminder to 
caregivers not to assume that people with dementia are oblivious to what is 
going on around them and that they no longer closely monitor what is said 
in their presence. As this example highlights, the remaining capacity for 
understanding can lead to unnecessary negative emotions, a sense of 
misplaced responsibility, shame or anxiety.  
Through her bodily movements, postures and gestures, Gretel clearly 
expresses feelings of distress, fear or hurtsuch as her sense of 
abandonment when her husband leaves her at the train station, leading her to 
turn away and avoid his good-bye kiss [22: 48]. However, her bodily 
movements also express her joyas when she throws up her hands in 
greeting her older sister Ise. Gretels comment This is good49 when 
cuddling with her husband indicates her appreciation of physical intimacy. 
She reaches out to others, wants to hold hands, and happily links arms with 
her caregiver Valentina. As Killick and Allan note, 
the potential of touch in enhancing well-being and promoting 
communication with people with dementia has yet to be explored properly. 
Most of us feel comforted and affirmed by touch which is employed in a 
respectful way, and for those with the condition it could make all the 
48 Was hab ich gemacht? [1:20:28]. 
49 Das ist gut [21:54]. 
difference between being able to remain in meaningful contact with others, 
and losing a sense of connectedness. (63) 
Touch, the documentary suggests, plays an ever-growing role in dementia: 
as a form of communication and therefore in maintaining relationships. 
As many memoirs about dementia indicate, humour remains a crucial 
means of communicating in the context of dementia. Seeing the funny side 
of certain situations can help alleviate the stress of dealing with the 
symptoms of dementia, both for caregiver and care-receiver. Humorous 
exchanges, as John Bayley recounts in the memoir of his wifes dementia, 
remain possible when intellectual discussion no longer is. The sharing of 
laughter, then, is both a means of communication and of maintaining 
relationships. Gretel signals the humorous intent of her words through facial 
expressions, such as playfully lifting her eyebrows, as well as through her 
intonation and the modulations of her voice. On their drive through 
Switzerland Gretel and David pass Die Jungfrau, a famous mountain 
named the virgin. After the name has been pointed out to her, Gretel quips: 
And who was that? Well it wasnt me, not me, for sure.50 She places 
unnatural stress on the me (ich in the original) to highlight that by no 
means could she have been called a virgin. Tone of voice, intonation, bodily 
language and facial expression all work together to communicate her 
humorous intent. Similarly, Gretel uses an exaggerated, mock-dramatic tone 
(Oh Who is this Malte?)51 just before being reunited with her husband, to 
cover up her confusion about who this person is. Her utterance and tone 
suggest that she has some awareness that his name should be meaningful to 
her and she might be using humour to make light of her trouble in 
remembering the specifics of this relationship. That said, most instances of 
Gretels humorous engagements with others do have a strong verbal content. 
Yet Killick and Allan, in their work on communicating with people with 
dementia, point out the importance of humour based on bodily movements. 
They highlight that much of what occasions smiling, and even outright 
laughter, appears to come out of relationship and they argue that by paying 
attention to the comical exchanges between people with dementia we can 
50 Oh, und wer war das zum Beispiel? Ich wars nicht. Ich wars nicht [42:08]. 
51 Oh, wer ist denn Malte? [42:25]. 
learn to encourage our own moments of sharing in the sheer fun of existence, 
often without a word being spoken (Killick and Allan 2001: 57). Humour, 
like touch, can provide an important means of being-with and building a 
relationship with people with dementia. Both remain, also, ways people with 
dementia can reach out to others and express their subjectivity. 
Embodied Selves and Relational Selves 
In its mimetic portrayal of living bodies, Vergiss Mein Nicht provides 
particularly rich examples of forms of embodied selfhood. In one sense, the 
continuing presence of Gretel on the screen as a living body, a unit of 
identity, strongly discourages viewing her as a non-person, as someone who 
has lost her self. The documentary allows the viewer to get to know Gretel 
as a person; she is a person who may be undergoing dramatic changes, but 
all her potential as human being and her unique subjectivity remain intact. 
The film also reaffirms the common sense notion of identity that we operate 
with in everyday life, which is based on the identity of a living body over 
time. No philosophical concept of identity has ever been able to resolve the 
paradox between identity and change that living beings present. Gretels 
body persists and so does Gretel. While aspects of her social identityher 
roles or personaechange, at no point in the course of her illness does she 
cease to be herself. 
A key aspect of her embodied identity, as represented in the 
documentary, is her unique voice. While autobiographies by people with 
dementia focus on the political notion of voice, in the sense of giving voice 
to a disadvantaged or stigmatised group, here voice represents Gretels 
unique personality in its embodied, literal sense. Her tone of voice, the use 
of intonation and modulation to convey humour or distress, as well as 
dialectal influences on her speech all attest to her unique personality. So, for 
instance, dialectal influences resurface when she returns to her hometown, 
Stuttgart, and talks to her sister, a strong dialect speaker. The shift to the 
phonetic variations of the Swabian dialect (in this case replacing the 
voiceless alveolar sibilant /s/ with the voiceless palato-alveolar sibilant //) 
can be seen as a form of embodied autobiographical memory, that is, a 
procedural memory from a former period in her life. However, this shift is 
also, significantly, a marker of relationship. Dialect speakers will often 
revert to their dialect when speaking to close family or old friends, even if 
they otherwise predominantly speak a standard variant of the language. 
Gretels shift marks her sense of belonging in relation to her sister. Indeed, 
Gretels appreciation of relationships, in her nonverbal gestures, touch and 
verbal expressions may be seen as a pervasive and important aspect of her 
continuing selfhood. As mentioned previously, she reaches out to others, 
and clearly enjoys moments of physical intimacy, compliments and a sense 
of being included.   
The documentary also highlights Gretels appreciation of physical 
pleasures, such as eating butter, devouring a waffle, or smacking her lips 
when drinking a glass of wine. Furthermore, playing ball, going for walks, 
or listening to music provide moments of engagement with the world 
through her body and her senses. Some of these may be new developments, 
some draw on long-term procedural memories or previous habits and 
preferences, and some may not persist into the later stages of the disease. 
Nevertheless, these actions on Gretels part highlight the many bodily and 
social resources of positive experiences of being-in-the-world that do not 
rely on higher-order cognitive functioning. As Murna Downs, caregiver and 
professor in dementia studies, puts it, 
I am not so sure that I would hope for a world without dementia, for in a 
world without dementia we would be without the ones we love who have 
taught us that remembering and planning and naming and knowing are not 
the key human activities, but rather that feeling and being and touching and 
singing have enormous riches and depths that we are often too busy to 
relish in our race to rationality. (Downs 2000, qtd. in Killick and Allan 
2001: 62) 
Human activity, as Downs highlights, is embodied, sensual, vocal. People 
with dementia then retain numerous means of engaging with others. 
The documentary also suggests that we understand embodied selfhood 
not merely as residual body memories that represent core characteristics of 
the persons previous identity (such as Kontoss examples of someone still 
being able to read the Torah or of making knitting movements). The film 
highlights how important it is to recognise the embodied nature of selfhood 
in terms of the continuing presence of an inner life world which relies on a 
continuing first-personal givenness of the world. Gretels inner life world is 
continuously revealed through her verbal expressions, facial expressions, 
gesture and posture. Furthermore, by drawing on Milletts adaptation of the 
notion of ecological niche value, one can argue that the film represents a 
woman who despite language difficulties and the growing inability to 
navigate the world, retains the potential for mutual relationships with other 
people. Her cognitive disabilities challenge her family to develop new and 
at times more intimate ways of being together. 
The film also underscores that Sievekings changing relationship with 
Gretel is not one-sided, based purely on catering to her disabilities, but 
reciprocal. Too often, a person with dementia is no longer seen for 
themselves but becomes a bundle of needsrepresenting a burden for 
the caregiver. The film underscores Gretels potential to give back in a 
relationship. So for instance, in a scene where David has clearly reached the 
end of his tether in terms of trying to get her to co-operate in necessary 
activities of daily living (such as going shopping), Gretels refusal and 
withdrawal suddenly turn to concern for her son. She opens her eyes to ask 
him how he is doing. When he replies that he is not doing too great, she asks 
why and then immediately goes on to try and cheer him up and enlist him in 
a joint activityin this case a trip to her home town, Stuttgart. The scene 
underscores that people with dementia may often develop an especially 
sensitive facility for reading information which comes through nonverbal 
channels (Killick and Allan 2001: 63), given that Gretels concern is a 
reaction to Davids tone of voice and posture. It also underscores that people 
with dementia remain relational agents, who are able to show concern and 
love for others, not just the passive recipients of care. Even in the last scenes 
of the film that were shot close to her death this dynamic persists. The film 
movingly closes with Gretels radiant smile as her husband and son join her 
at her bedside. Her joyful reaction highlights her continuing recognition of 
these people as all important to her. 
In short, the documentary provides unique ways of conceptualising 
embodied selfhood in dementia. The body functions as indicator of 
persistent selfhood that is recognised by othersincluding the viewer. 
Bodily expressions suggest an inner life world and the persistence of a first-
personal perspective in dementiaas expressed through embodied 
communication. Bodily expressions also highlight the persisting capacity 
for relationships in dementia. Documentary film thus provides particular 
affordances for representing the embodied experience of living with 
dementia and considering embodied selfhood in the context of 
neurodegenerative disease. 
Conclusion 
Dementia narratives, in the form of autobiographical writing and 
documentary film, are a powerful means of evoking the changing life world 
of the person with dementia. The authors of autopathographies illuminate 
how dementia influences their emotions and cognition, and with it, their 
very sense of self. Furthermore, they describe how the loss of a sense of 
time impacts on their negotiation of the world, while also highlighting the 
many ways that they continue to take pleasure in their life and experience 
moments of feeling at one with the world. The narratives attest to the fact 
that we do not have a body but are a body (Carel 2008); the changes illness 
works in our bodies significantly alter our way of being-in-the-world, and 
ultimately our sense of self. Life narratives by people with dementia record 
these changes and the complex ways that body, self and environment 
interact. Due to the nature of their production and the specific constraints of 
the genre they adhere to, the narratives cannot, however, address the 
phenomenology of dementia in the later stages of the disease. While some 
of the authors cling to a narrative self and fear that there will be nothing left 
once the ability to speak and remember has left them, others take a more 
optimistic view of the continuing ability to flourish. 
Caregivers memoirs provide equally rich accounts of the changes 
brought about by dementia. However, due to their outside view, they may 
not provide the same kind of access to the phenomenology of dementia that 
life writing by those affected clearly does. Nevertheless, despite taking on 
an outside perspective, the emergence of caregivers memoirs that draw on 
visual media, such as graphic memoir52 and film, speak in illuminating ways 
to questions of embodiment. Here Sievekings documentary serves as a 
counter-point to the written autopathographies. The audio-visual 
representation allows for detailed accounts of the embodied nature of the 
disease. More importantly, perhaps, the documentary underscores the 
potential for embodied communication and the persistence of forms of 
embodied selfhood in dementia. While I am not suggesting that these are 
entirely outside the reach of written memoirs, documentary film provides 
medium-specific ways of conceptualising embodied selfhood in dementia: 
the body functions as indicator of remaining selfhood that is recognised by 
others. Bodily expressions suggest an inner life world and the persistence of 
a first-personal perspective in dementiaas expressed through embodied 
communication. And this form of communication also highlights the 
persisting capacity for mutual relationships in dementia. 
Life writing both by people with dementia and by their caregivers 
provides a rich resource to consider the phenomenology of dementia. 
Grounded in first-hand experience, these texts speak from a position of 
experiential authority. However, autopathographies in particular are also 
limited by their mode of production. Due to the nature of the disease, that 
makes the communication of complex thoughts and emotions difficult 
beyond a certain stage, and the outside perspective of caregivers, the forms 
of life writing discussed here may not be able to evoke a sense of what its 
like to experience severe symptoms of confusion. In the next chapter, I turn 
from life writing to fiction, in order to explore how fictional narratives may 
simulate the experience of dementia. In the process, I investigate the 
question of how literary representations of dementia shape our 
understanding of the disease and whether the insight fiction might offer into 
the mind of a person with dementia is conducive to narrative empathy. 
52 See chapters 4 and 5. 
Chapter 2 From the Outside in? Dementia in Film and the 
Novel 
The present chapter explores to what extent fictional narratives may be able 
to simulate what its like to be living with dementia (see also Bitenc 2012). 
Fiction arguably provides the possibility of allowing the reader insight into 
the workings of another persons mind (see Cohn 1978, Herman 2011, 
Palmer 2004) and of conveying what it feels like to be alive (Waugh 2013: 
24). Indeed, Patricia Waugh suggests that to the extent that the novel 
creates a pre-reflective place which positions embodied minds in imaginary 
worlds and confers on them depth and thickness, we might think of it as the 
practical counterpart of theoretical phenomenology (2013: 24). Rita Felski 
speaks of novels as providing a form of social phenomenology (2008: 89). 
She argues that the technique of deep intersubjectivitya term borrowed 
from George Butteinstantiates a view of particular societies from the 
inside; we come to know something of what it feels like to be inside a 
particular habitus, to experience a world as self-evident (92). In evoking 
detailed storyworlds, both novels and films provide the possibility of 
exploring the experience of living with dementia within a particular physical 
environment and socio-cultural context. Fictional films and novels may, I 
argue, be thought of as a form of imaginative phenomenology. 
Furthermore, this chapter considers how, by simulating the experience 
of dementia, fictional narratives may elicit an empathetic engagement with 
the dementing protagonist. Novels, it has been argued, elicit empathy for 
characters by promoting character identification and allowing readers to 
share a characters point of view. Both in discussions about the uses of 
literature in relation to global citizenship (Nussbaum 1997) and in the 
medical humanities (Charon 2006), the view that novel reading promotes 
empathy has been harnessed to the argument that empathetic engagement 
with fictional characters will lead to pro-social behaviour in real-life. 
Charon, in particular, argues that novel reading plays a crucial role in 
expanding health care professionals ability to empathise and acknowledge 
the pain of their patients (see Charon 2006: 233).  
However, Suzanne Keen, leading scholar on narrative empathy, 
challenges the so-called empathy-altruism hypothesis (Keen 2007). She 
also complicates the notion that narrative empathy is simply created by 
alignment of point of view. Empathic concern, instead, depends on a 
number of textual characteristics together with the readers personal traits 
and preferences. Keens study nonetheless underlines that narrative empathy 
constitutes a robust element of the experience of novel reading. She 
therefore explores the ways in which narrative empathy is evoked and its 
various strategic uses. Overall Keens work suggests the value of exploring 
the formal means by which literary works arouse narrative empathy while 
remaining cautious about advancing overextended claims concerning 
narrative empathys effects in the socio-ethical domain.  
Based on my own corpus of fictional dementia narratives, I argue that 
further refinements in the theory of narrative empathy are called for if 
narrative empathy is to capture the full range of storytelling practices. What 
is needed is an even more nuanced understanding of the spectrum of 
empathic reading experiences. While I agree with Keen on the previously 
mentioned points, I demonstrate how a bottom-up approach, one that 
considers fictional accounts of the experience of dementia, may diversify 
the notion of narrative empathy. Further, a more fine-grained account of the 
working of narrative empathy has implications for debates about the value 
accorded to empathy in medical humanities research and education. 
As a route into questions about the potential of fictional narratives to 
simulate the phenomenology of dementia and evoke narrative empathy, I 
consider the dementia narrative Still Alice: firstly, the novel by Lisa Genova 
(2007) and secondly, the film adaptation (Glatzer and Westmoreland 2014) 
with the Oscar-Award-winning performance by Julianne Moore as the title 
protagonist. 53 Does narrative empathy in films, like novels, depend on 
seeing the world through the protagonists eyes? And what distinct 
53 Dementia films have seen a veritable boom in recent years. See, among others, Away 
from her (Polley 2006) and The Notebook (Cassavetes 2004), as well as biopics such as Iris 
(Eyre 2001), The Iron Lady (Lloyd 2011), and Robot and Frank (Schreier 2012). 
Furthermore, Alzheimers features in a number of science fiction films and sci-fi thrillers, 
in each case involving the trope of animal experiments for a new Alzheimers drug that 
spiral fatally out of control. 
affordances for the arousal of empathy and for exploring the experience of 
dementia does each medium provide? 
After engaging with these questions, I investigate how experimental 
fiction may be able to expand the limits of representing the symptoms of 
dementia in narrative form. I address how these texts may contribute to the 
current theory of narrative empathy via the dementing and partially 
unreliable narrator in J. Bernlefs Out of Mind (1988) as well as the 
configuration of multiple interior monologues in the stream of 
consciousness style used by B.S. Johnson in House Mother Normal (1971). 
Then, in the concluding section of the chapter, I discuss the effect of 
narratives that do not explicitly thematise dementia but may nonetheless be 
read through the lens of neurodegenerative decline. To this end, I argue that 
Kazuo Ishiguros novel The Unconsoled (1995), although not explicitly 
labelled and marketed as dementia narrative, may be productively read as 
an exploration of the phenomenology of dementia. More specifically, I 
suggest that this novels manifold textual ambiguities afford opportunities 
for empathetic engagement through parallel experience (Toker 1993). I 
suggest too that the novels resistance to being fully naturalised as a 
dementia narrative in fact opens up the possibility for the reader to come 
close to the existential uncertainty that living with dementia entails. In a 
condition like dementia, where sufferers may at some stage no longer be 
able to articulate what it is like to be living with this disease, works of 
fiction like Ishiguros may afford special insights into what its like to have 
or experience this illness.  
Still Alice: From Fiction to Film 
Still Alice tells the story of the fifty-year-old cognitive psychology professor 
Alice Howland who, in mid-career, is diagnosed with early-onset 
Alzheimers disease. The narrative explores the link between neurons, 
memory, and identity. Further, the narrative hones in on how the social 
world of a person with early-onset Alzheimers changes: how the disease 
alters and inverts both professional and personal relationships; and how the 
entire family is affected by the onset and progress of the disease. Yet Still 
Aliceboth in the novel and to a lesser but still noteworthy extent in the 
film versiondoes not focus on the experience of the people surrounding 
the person with dementia. Although the novel uses a third-person narrator,54 
events are largely focalised through Alice. Hence the symptomssuch as 
night-time wandering, confusion, or misinterpretations of realityare 
viewed from her point of view.  
Alices symptoms thus enter into the composition of the narrative 
discourse. For instance, when Alices thoughts begin to circle around, the 
narrative mirrors this symptom with almost verbatim repetitions of her 
thought processes. Yet the reader, briefed by the dust jacket and the 
prologue, has a better awareness of what is happening than the experiencing 
protagonist. This set-up frequently leads to instances of dramatic irony, 
where the reader knows things in excess of what the character knows. Such 
irony, however, limits the potential of the novel to portray an inside view of 
living with dementia. The evocation of parallel experience, whereby 
readers are placed in an intellectual predicament analogous to that of the 
characters (Toker 1993: 4), is restricted to only very brief moments of 
confusion, when there is a lack of information about some aspect of the 
storyworld. Such moments are usually resolved quickly. Generally, Genova 
uses detailed descriptions of contexts and characters to allow the reader to 
infer events or to identify characters, even when Alice no longer recognises 
them.  
That said, parallel experienceor feeling as the character doesmay 
not be necessary in order for the reader to feel with and for Alice. Even 
though the novel does not elicit the same mental confusion in the reader as 
Alice experiences, it nonetheless presents a rich account of how the life 
world of the person with dementia changes. Seeing and experiencing these 
changes from Alices point of view, and being privy to her thoughts and 
emotions, highlight the psychological impact these changes have on her 
54 In Genettes terms (1972), this narrator would be categorised as heterodiegetic as well as 
extradiegeticthat is, as a narrator who is not involved in the events being reported, and 
who is furthermore not a character in the storyworld who functions as an embedded teller in 
his or her own right. In this thesis, however, in discussing texts where the finer distinctions 
Genettes framework offers are not necessary, I mention the relevant narratological 
descriptors only in passing, while reverting to Genettean terminology when it is required or 
productive for my analysis. 
sense of self and self-esteem. The use of internal focalisation raises the 
readers awareness of some of the degrading and painful aspects of living 
with dementia: the hurt inflicted at being ostracised by her former 
colleagues and the emotional pain of witnessing her husbands growing 
estrangement from her, the deflating experience of neuropsychological 
testing or of being patronised by others, the despair at losing control over 
her bladder and her words. Indeed, the double perspective of seeing with but 
also knowing more than the protagonist allows for the reader to engage with 
the character with dementia while remaining aware of her own perspective. 
We are offered a certain degree of (imaginative) insight into what it feels 
like to have dementia, and yet we are the non-dementing other(s) ready to 
identify also with Alices family, friends and colleagues. Thus, we are 
offered an insight into how our behaviour is perceived, critically at times, 
by the person with dementia (see Bitenc 2012: 315). 
The theory of narrative empathy needs to address this double 
perspective. Rather than defining empathy strictly as the experience of 
sharing the same feelings as the character, the dual perspective that reading 
narrative fiction promotes may elicit feelings of sympathy, pity or 
compassion on behalf of the character. Keen, in her study of narrative 
empathy, acknowledges that the term empathy is frequently used 
synonymously to sympathy; but she argues for a stricter definition of 
empathy as a vicarious, spontaneous sharing of affect (Keen 2007: 4) in 
which we feel what we believe to be the emotion of others (5). That is, she 
distinguishes between I feel your pain as an example of empathy, and I 
feel pity for your pain as an example of sympathy, or empathic concern (4; 
5). Despite this initial distinction, however, her account frequently conflates 
the stricter sense of empathy with a broader understanding of the term.  
More generally, the current definition of narrative empathy lacks the 
necessary precision to disentangle the subject position of the empathiser 
from the object of empathy. As hinted at in my formulation above, I 
suggest that the stricter notion of empathy may be better defined as feeling 
as rather than feeling with the character. Such experiences of feeling 
(exactly) as another are likely very rareif not impossible. Feeling with 
or for a characterand here I would use the terms sympathy, pity, and 
compassion, despite their current unfashionableness in literary criticismis 
a pervasive element of reading fiction. These terms register how the reader 
necessarily inhabits both her own subject position and that of the imagined 
other. Since empathy is the accepted term to discuss these types of reader 
emotions with regard to fictional characters, I retain it in my discussion. 
Nevertheless, I attempt to clarify when a textual strategy or filmic technique 
elicits empathy as synonymous with sympathy and when it is more likely to 
provoke an experience of feeling as the character, roughly in line with 
Tokers notion of parallel experiencethat is, where the narrative discourse 
is organised in such a way as to evoke a similar cognitive experience in the 
reader as that of the character. Tokers emphasis on cognitive experiences is 
crucial to considering the use of narrative empathy in narratives concerned 
with representing neurodegenerative decline. Are we made to feel 
(confusion, frustration, panic) as the character does, or are we, primarily 
made to feel pity for the characters situation? At the same time, Tokers 
concept highlights that the current theory of narrative empathy needs to 
address the wide spectrum of emotions and states of consciousness that 
literary narrative evokes. 
Both the film and novel represent a wide array of experiences of living 
with dementiaboth in terms of its symptoms and in terms of its impact on 
the social sphere. In comparing the two versions, it is productive to focus on 
select examples that illustrate some of the parallels and the contrasts 
between the textual and the audio-visual medium. Overall, the 2014 film 
adaptation of Still Alice remains remarkably close to the original text. Some 
minor changes and a number of omissions necessitated by turning a 300-
page novel into a 90-minute filmdo not significantly alter the texts main 
storyline or its key thematic concerns. What is more, as shown by additional 
material on the DVD, the producers and director seem to share Genovas 
concern with presenting this story from Alices point of view. The novel 
allows insight into Alices thoughts through frequent use of free indirect 
discourse and direct thought representation. Short of using either a narrative 
voice-over to communicate her thought processes, or filming all scenes as if 
from Alices eye-line, there is no obvious one-to-one method of transposing 
the novels inside view in film. Granted, the film does use a number of 
over-the-shoulder-shots, which roughly align the viewer with the 
protagonists perspective; yet it largely employs medium-distance shots of 
Alice. We do not literally inhabit Alices point of view, but instead read her 
mind and emotions through close scrutiny of her body language, facial 
expression, or tone of voice. This occurs much in the same way as we read 
other peoples thoughts, intentions or emotions in real life, according to 
contemporary phenomenologists. The use of close-ups or portrait position in 
moments of emotional intensity allow the viewer close scrutiny of her facial 
expressions and gestures. So for instance, during a visit to her neurologist, 
the camera rests on Alice throughout the entire dialogue. The neurologists 
voice comes from off-screen, allowing (or compelling) the viewer to focus 
on the impact that his words have on Alice. We discern how the questions of 
the mini-mental state examination (such as, Where are we? What day is 
it?) seem laughable or demeaning to Alice. We also read in her face her 
embarrassment at being asked to bring someone with her to all subsequent 
appointments. In the novel, these thoughts and feelings are verbalised, but 
the visual representation is no less effective.  
If we consider recent research on mirror neurons, and Keens 
exploration of motor mimicry as a basic form of empathy, we can also see 
why film may evoke strong emotions in the viewer.55 Witnessing Alices 
struggle, as she has to inform her three children that early-onset Alzheimers 
is genetic and that they have a fifty percent chance of inheriting the disease, 
is heart-rending. Similarly, her daughter Lydias pained reaction, as she 
realises that her mother has just failed to recognise her for the first time, 
may evoke a strong emotional reaction in the viewer, resulting in empathy 
not only for Alices plight but for the ways others are affected by her 
disease. 
Nevertheless, while adept at evoking empathetic concern in the viewer, 
there are instances where the film seems less effective at portraying an 
inside experience of the disease than the novel. For example, when Alice 
loses her bearings while running a familiar route, the film employs a number 
of techniques to evoke a sense of this experience: the music soundtrack 
55 For an introduction to mirror neurons see Iacoboni (2008). 
becomes eerie and discordant, the sound of Alices breathing comes to the 
foreground and communicates something of her panic, and the camera lens 
goes out of focus [10:05]. However, the sense of being lostrecognising 
individual buildings but not being able to place them in relation to a mental 
mapis not very effectively evoked by this representation. The lack of 
focus in the visual field of the camera is more evocative of vertigo than of 
the feeling of being lost. And, compared to the novel, the lasting emotional 
impact of the experience, even after Alice has recovered her bearings, is 
glossed over. 
The novel is also more effective in simulating how Alice becomes lost 
in time. As described in the previous chapter, one of the challenges of 
dementia is that, as recent memories become affected, people with dementia 
may come to live in multiple, competing time frames. Here the novels use 
of thought representation is particularly salient. Thus, at one point the 
narrator reports Alices thought that Annes going to be so jealous (282; 
original emphasis) when, in fact her sister Anne has been dead for 30 years, 
thereby signalling that Alice is experiencing life through her childhood time 
frame. In returning to her childhood, Alice cannot yet know that her mother 
and sister died in a car crash in her college years. When confronted with the 
reality of their death, she re-experiences her initial despair and sense of loss: 
Lydia was talking to her, but Alice couldnt hear what she was saying. She 
could only feel the rage and grief coursing through her every cell, her sick 
heart, and her hot tears, and she could only hear her own voice in her head 
screaming for Anne and her mother (2007: 156). Significantly, this 
confrontation with what to her is a new piece of information is also one of 
the instances that suggest that Alices differing view of reality may lead to a 
sense of paranoia: 
John stood over them, drenched. 
What happened? 
She was asking for Anne. She thinks they just died. 
He held her head in his hands. He was talking to her, trying to calm her 
down. Why isnt he upset, too? Hes known about this for a while; thats why, 
and hes been keeping it from me. She couldnt trust him. (Genova 2007: 156; 
original emphasis) 
While the novel does not explore the problem of paranoia further, it 
raises the issue of how to deal with situations when the perception of reality 
by the person with dementia and by family caregivers diverges. The 
question arises as to whether to go along with delusions, misconceptions 
or confabulated memories or whether to confront the person with dementia 
with the caregivers view of reality. Validation therapy, as developed by 
Naomi Feil (1989, 1992), argues we should acknowledge and validate the 
point of view and emotions of the person with dementia. However, this may 
not always be a straight-forward possibility and may, at times, as Sue Miller 
suggests in her memoir of her fathers dementia (2003), even be harmful. 
Still Alice validates the perspective of the person with dementia by 
foregrounding her point of view above all others. The novel thereby makes 
the emotional reactions of a person with dementia understandable. Genovas 
strategy here could be described in Keens terms as either ambassadorial 
strategic empathy or broadcast strategic empathy in that its calls upon 
readers who are not suffering from dementia to feel with members of a 
group [here: early-onset Alzheimers patients], by emphasizing common 
vulnerabilities and hopes through universalizing representations (Keen 
2007: xiv). Most people, at some point in their life, lose a family member. 
By highlighting how Alice experiences the concomitant feelings of despair 
afresh due to her memory disorder, readers may come to feel sympathy for 
her pain, rather than dismissing it as delusional. However, the novel also 
pinpoints the difficulties of finding common ground in such cases of 
diverging realities. In this example, for instance, it may be impossible for 
Alices husband John to experience, or convincingly feign, sorrow at an 
event that happened three decades earlier. It remains an open question as to 
how to respond to the divergent perceptions of a person with dementia; what 
this novel does suggest is that people with dementia remain semiotic 
subjects (Sabat and Harr 1994) and that their views and perceptions 
should be taken into account and met with respect.  
At the same time, there are aspects of the filmic representation that, 
arguably, go beyond the limitations of novels. For example, the film can 
portray the extent to which the physical capabilities of a person with 
dementia are affected by the disease, leading to apraxia. We witness, for 
instance, how Alice eventually requires help getting dressed, since she is no 
longer capable of planning the order in which to put items on nor the 
movements required to do so. At the same time, the way her husband John 
overrides her choice of clothes in this scene, highlights how pervasive the 
loss of autonomy can be in dementia [1:16:38]. Although Alice can still 
make a choice and expresses her preferences, her wishes are ignored. The 
film manages to capture how easily even apparently benign actions, such as 
helping a person to get dressed, can contribute to the infantilisation of 
people with dementia. 
Further, while the novel glosses over Alices growing apraxia, the film 
highlights the extent to which Alice struggles with routine tasks. Towards 
the end of the film we are shown with what difficulty Alice ties her shoe 
laces. Her limber and confident movements from earlier in the film have 
slowed to a shuffling pace. Alice barely speaks and has difficulty getting 
words out. In the novel, the impact of Alzheimers on physical abilities is 
hardly hinted at. Alice seemingly moves without difficulty; at the end she 
can still carry and handle a small baby without problems. Arguably, the 
fluent third-person narrative, with but a few hints of Alices word-finding 
difficulties incorporated into the discourse, masks the more global 
deterioration in Alices abilities. This does, however, allow Genova to avoid 
stereotypical representations of people with late stage dementia. In this 
respect, it may be considered either a strength or a weakness of the novel 
that it ends before Alice enters the final stages of her disease.  
The filmic representation, with Alice vacantly shuffling along beside 
her caregiver, may confirm common stereotypes of people with more 
advanced dementia as empty shells or zombies. However, the film also 
works against such assumptions by highlighting how Alice can still 
recognise and name emotionssignificantly, lovein others and in herself. 
Nonetheless, it is somewhat disturbing that the closing scene in both film 
and novel suggests that in order for the subjectivity of the person with 
dementia to be recognised she must still be able to interpret and use words 
meaningfully. In the epilogue to the book and the final scene of the film, 
Alices youngest daughter Lydia acts out a monologue from one of her 
plays in front of her mother. Lydia then asks her mother to tell her how it 
makes her feel, what it is about. In each case, Alice identifies the emotion as 
love. The scene suggests that even a person with limited language 
capacities can still understand and express emotions. Yet it is problematic 
that Alice needs to be able to articulate her feelings and her understanding 
of other peoples feelings in order for her to be recognised as a sentient 
human being. 
Even though Still Alice emphasises the importance of linguistic 
expression, the narrative also asks us to consider more holistically how love 
and relationships play out in the context of dementia. Alice is still able to 
feel love and to respond emotionally to her family caregivers. As 
exemplified in this exchange, Alices youngest daughter Lydia finds new 
ways of engaging with her mother and continues to recognise her mothers 
subjectivity. Still Alice suggests that our identities, though seemingly rooted 
in professional roles and our own memories, reside equally in our everyday 
encounters with others and our capacity for relationships. Relational identity 
here works in two ways. The daughters not only honour their historic 
relationship with their mother, but also validate a new form of relationship 
with her, which is not based on her role as mother or her ability to recognise 
her daughters. In the novel, Alice is represented as a capable advice giver, 
despite her otherwise limited capacities, and she provides comfort and love 
to her grandchildren. The film, perhaps more realistically and less 
sentimentally, underlines Alices capacity to engage with others in the 
moment. Her relational identity, and her humanity, are enacted in such 
encounters with others.  
Experiencing Dementia/Experimenting with the Novel 
In this section, I turn to the question of how certain authors have aimed to 
extend the limits of representing the experience of dementia, especially the 
later stages, in verbal narrative. What techniques, within the limits of verbal 
narration, do these authors find to represent such symptoms as the loss of 
language, the loss of a coherent life narrative and the loss of the feeling of 
groundedness in everyday life? What aesthetic and ethical challenges does 
the imaginative engagement with later stages of dementia pose? Further, I 
ask how narrative fiction that engages in more experimental modes of 
representation may expand the current understanding of narrative empathy. 
Contrary to Keens view, which suggests that avant-garde texts, in 
emphasising defamiliarisation and a shock aesthetic, undermine empathetic 
reading (or viewing) experiences, I show how literary experimentation may, 
on the contrary, lead to the kind of empathetic experience, or experience of 
feeling as, that Toker describes as parallel experience; that is, the reader 
may be said to experience similar epistemological uncertainty as the 
character with dementia. 
Out of Mind 
J. Bernlefs novel Out of Mind (1988)56 follows a number of months in the 
life of Maarten, a 71-year old Dutch retiree, who emigrated to the United 
States during mid-adulthood. It remains one of the few texts that uses a first-
person narrator with dementia.57 From the start, we are plunged into the 
immediate thought processes of the first-person narrator, who, even though 
he is in Genettes terms an autodiegetic narrator telling his own story, 
remains unsure and indeed wrong about a number of aspects of his situation, 
such as the time of day and day of the week. In using concurrent present 
tense narration (see Margolin 1999), the narrative resembles a series of 
diary entries. The use of concurrent narration has significant effects on the 
narrative; it contributes, for instance, to a sense of immediacy. More 
importantly, perhaps, in contrast to retrospective first-person narration, there 
is no distance between the narrating-I (who has a fuller understanding of 
events) and the experiencing-I. Yet an organising consciousness can 
56 J. Bernlef is the pseudonym of Dutch author and poet Hendrik Jan Marsman. The novel 
was originally published in 1984 as Hersenschimmen by Em. Queridos Uitgeverij B.V., 
Amsterdam. 
57 See Richler (1997), LaPlante (2011) and Healey (2014). All three novels revolve around 
a crime story. In each case, the epistemological uncertainty that Alzheimers entails in the 
first-person narrator is used to increase suspense. Roy (2009: 50) argues that Richler 
employs dementia as a narrative device to query, in postmodern fashion, whether there is 
ever a true version of events. LaPlante and Healey, by contrast, engage more deeply with 
the question of what its like to suffer from dementia. Alzheimers does not function merely 
as narrative prosthesis (Mitchell and Snyder 2001: 47; qtd. in Roy 2009: 44), but instead 
the authors employ the murder mystery plot in order to explore the phenomenology of 
dementia. For a crime story with a heterodiegetic or third-person narrator that uses 
Alzheimers as plot device, see Suter (1997). 
nonetheless be discerned behind the novel, one which makes the narrative 
intelligible to the reader.  
An example from the text illustrates how the use of present-tense 
narration and Maartens lack of insight into the situation affect the narrative. 
While out for a walk with his dog, the retired Maarten comes to believe that 
he is on his way to a work meeting. Maarten seems simultaneously aware 
and unaware of the strangeness of the situation: I am the first to arrive, I 
can tell from the virgin snow all around. It is perhaps a rather strange and 
yet quite suitable place for an IMCO meeting, so close to the sea (Bernlef 
1988: 33; my emphasis); from time to time I glance briefly over my 
shoulder, because for the secretary to a meeting to be forcing a door open is 
not an everyday event, I realize that (34; my emphasis). When he becomes 
fully aware of his situationnamely that he is retired and has broken into a 
holiday residencehe is overcome by nausea:  
I just manage to reach the porch. As I hang over the rail my stomach 
empties itself into the snow, a mucky brown, steaming pulp in which even 
Robert shows no interest. I feel cold. 
      What am I doing here? In the summer, people from Boston live here. 
(35-36) 
The present tense here heightens the sense of immediacy and adds to the 
build-up of dramatic tension. It also allows the reader to follow the 
workings of Maartens mind, and emphasises the acute pang he experiences 
when he becomes aware of his delusion. However, it is important to note 
here that this is, of course, not the same as not knowing what is going on 
and therefore experiencing the situation as Maarten does. The reader 
remembers Maarten is a retiree and realises that Maartens memory loss 
distorts his reality. 
What happens, then, as Maartens cognitive decline accelerates and his 
narrative becomes more and more fragmented, enigmatic and 
idiosyncraticand therefore more difficult for the reader to decode? 
Bernlefs narrative techniques could be described as promoting parallel 
experience: at this stage in the narrative both the reader and the first-person 
narrator experience a sense of disorientation, the narrator-character with 
regard to his (fictional) reality and the reader in decoding the narrators 
words. Nonetheless, the effect is not perfect since a number of techniques 
ensure that despite the narrators decline the process of narrative 
transmission does not break down (Bitenc 2012: 308; 309).  
Providing detailed descriptions of the storyworld is one such technique. 
Maarten minutely describes his perceptions and, in that sense, remains a 
reliable narrator. Given that Bernlefs readers do not suffer from short-
term memory loss, they will be able to identify characters by their clothes or 
other characteristics, or remember what has happened recently, even when 
Maarten does not. Also, the author uses line breaks between paragraphs to 
signal that story-time has passed. When Maarten experiences a time shift 
that returns him to his kindergarten days, this, on the contrary, occurs 
seamlessly within the space of a short paragraph (Bernlef 1988: 5). Most 
notably, towards the end of the narrative Bernlef employs the use of 
brackets to indicate how Maarten retains dual awareness (as expressed, for 
instance, in second-order thoughts), even as his narrative disintegrates. The 
narrative voice here becomes split between a more confused version in the 
body of the text and a more lucid version in the brackets: The blonde girl 
from earlier (so I can remember her for a while at any rate) gets up and goes 
to the hall. (104); And a chair. (Was it already there or has it just been 
pushed forward?) I sit down. Notice that the rubbing has resumed. Not 
unpleasant actually (100). Here Bernlef begins to drop the first-person 
pronoun and to employ short and sometimes fragmented sentences in order 
to mimic the decline in Maartens linguistic abilities and the growing 
incoherence in his thought processes. 
Towards the end of the narrative the voice in bracketsand the 
narrative as a wholeincreasingly employs the imperative mode. Indeed, as 
the first-person pronoun is dropped in favour of he or it, the imperative 
mode seems to indicate the last vestiges of Maartens first-person narrative 
voice. It seems as if Maarten is speaking to himself, trying to make his 
(uncompliant) body do what he wants it to do. The third-person pronoun 
indicates his growing sense of loss of self, and self-control. Nevertheless, 
the perspective on the world or, as phenomenologists put it, the first-
personal givenness of experience, remains his own: Hands and feet it must 
have  eyes open and shut: same place  eyes open and shut again: same 
place (122). Despite the technique of fragmentation and the emphasis on 
Maartens dissociation from his body, the way Maarten remains the centre of 
consciousness and perceptionthe being that realises that he is in the same 
placeparadoxically highlights his continuing identity, suggesting that 
lower-order cognitive functions might be sufficient to accord personhood to 
a subject. In any case, the reader continues to see him as a character, a 
person in whom we are interested and with whom we empathise (see 
Bitenc 2012: 312).58 
As Maartens symptoms of dementia progress, the narrative discourse 
floats in and out of first-person, second-person and third-person narration, 
highlighting the shifting and unstable nature of Maartens sense of self. 
Through this back and forth between the first and third person the narrative 
does not follow a linear progression towards it-ness, the vacant empty 
shells of many contemporary representations of dementia, but highlights 
instead the narrators persisting subjectivity.59 In this part of the narrative, 
also, embodiment is foregrounded. For instance, Maarten begins to rely on 
physical sensations to feel himself, to feel at one with his body: by rubbing 
his hands on his legs, or even pinching himself (see 124). Maarten attempts, 
even in the later stages of the disease, to make use of any opportunity to 
recapture his former sense of self, and the blissful feeling of being one 
with the world: 
Get up, you  go and inspect that piano from close by he walks to the 
little steps by the side of the stage  toilingly clambers up  keys that go 
up and down all by themselves [] perhaps they can help your fingers  
teach them perhaps to play again  to play from memory again  that 
blissful feeling that your body is playing you  that you yourself have 
become music. (128; my emphasis)60 
The shift from the third-person pronoun he to the second-person pronoun 
you and possessive your holds out the possibility that Maarten may 
58 Damasios differentiation between core and extended consciousnessand the 
associated notions of core and extended selfhood (2000)provide useful concepts to 
reconceptualise (self-)consciousness in dementia. The concept of core consciousness may 
however feed into dehumanising discourses about people with dementia, since animals 
share core consciousness with humans.  
59 Krger-Frhoff similarly argues that the novel imagines a view from within that bears 
witness to the successive breakdown of perception and coherent language, but not of the 
protagonists self (2015: 105). Nevertheless, she asks whether Bernlefs aesthetics
drawing on modern and postmodern literary techniques such as stream of consciousness, 
semantic destruction, and alienation are convincing on an ontological level (104).  
60 Since the ellipsis here are part of the original, I use square brackets, here and elsewhere, 
to indicate where I have omitted text. 
overcome his sense of alienation from his own body. However, the pianola, 
with its own agency, impedes Maartens attempt to feel at one with the 
world: he sits down on the chair in front of the piano and feels the keys 
knocking against his fingers  they push you away  rebuff you (128). 
Right after this passage, in fact, one of the most objectivising moments of 
the entire narrative takes place: 
They take it to a space where there are beds  they make it sit on the edge 
of a bed  they undress it  they put pyjamas on it that look like the 
pyjamas of those other men with their big, staring, half-bald heads on the 
tall, white pillows and all turned towards him  they push a pill into his 
throat  they pour water through it as if he were a funnel  they lay him 
in the bed  they walk past the row of beds together  they are silent 
until they reach the door and call out together good night GOOD NIGHT they 
call and then it is dark. (129) 
The next paragraph begins with the eerie sentence There is breathing 
everywhere. Like Mrs Gradgrind in Dickens Hard Times who on her 
deathbed pronounces that I think theres a pain somewhere in the room  
but I couldnt positively say that I have got it (Dickens 1854: 191), Maarten 
seems to have lost the sense of himself and others as distinct persons. 
Nevertheless, the narrative itself upholds and communicates his subjectivity. 
The reader continues to read the words on the page as the perceptions, 
thoughts and feelings of Maartens consciousness. As Alan Palmer argues in 
Fictional Minds (2004) it takes very little (a personal pronoun, a name) for 
readers to project the extended consciousness of a character in fiction. 
Importantly, since readers are given insight into Maartens thought 
processes, even as these become less coherent, they are likely to be able to 
decode the little language Maarten still uses when talking to his caregivers. 
In narratives focalised through the eyes of the caregiver, such as Michael 
Ignatieffs Scar Tissue, the reader, together with the caregiver, can only 
speculate on whether the utterances of the person with dementia make any 
sense. Narratives such as Bernlefs are thus ethically important in 
suggesting that the enigmatic utterances of people with dementia have 
meaning when we take into account the persons life history and their 
current perception of the world. Such narratives suggest that rather than 
automatically disregarding the seemingly incoherent utterances of people 
with dementia, it is imperative to try and make sense of them as best as 
possible.61  
The closing paragraphs of the novel highlight the important role that 
respectful and gentle physical contact plays in the care of people with more 
advanced dementia, while also emphasising the importance of relationships. 
During the night Maarten seeks the hand of an unnamed woman (possibly 
Vera or his mother), to find, perhaps the hand of another male patient, or 
more likely his own. In any case, Maarten experiences the physical contact 
as reassuring:  
 she is among them somewhere seek her her hand we must seek  
this takes time [] her hand will come to you  here  first take that 
hand that gropes aimlessly in the dark  take it gently  calm him  
now you no longer need to hold anything yourself  she will do that from 
now on  she carries you  I carry you  little boy of mine  the whole 
long frightening night I will carry you until it is light again. (129) 
Again, the present tense highlights how Maarten experiences the past as the 
present. He seems to have returned to the scenes of early childhood where a 
loving female takes care of him. When on the following morning his wife 
Vera comes for a visit, it is clear that although Maarten does not recognise 
her voice, he takes comfort in her visit and in listening to her hopeful tale of 
renewal and repair: 
When it is already light and GOOD MORNING and someone says  
whispers  the voice of a woman and you listen  you listen with closed 
eyes  listen only to her voice whispering  that the window has been 
repaired  that where first that old door had been nailed  there is glass 
again  glass you can see through  outside  into the woods and the 
spring that is almost beginning  she says  she whispers  the spring 
which is about to begin  (129) 
It is notable that the novel ends with a section that is not only more coherent 
than many preceding it, but also inherently hopeful. Despite the excruciating 
pain and confusion that have gone before, the nature imagery which closes 
the novel suggests a positive outlook on dementia. Arguably, Maartens 
increasing loss of self-awareness and return to his childhood self allows for 
a more tranquil experience of his world. Maarten no longer perceives his 
environment through the traumatic experiences of World War II. (For a time, 
61 See also my discussion of collaborative life story work in chapter 3. 
possibly because they are speaking American English, Maarten mistakes 
both doctors and nurses for his liberators and is worried that they will treat 
him as a Nazi collaborator.) While the metaphorical spring in dementia 
that the narratives ending projects may resemble the more tranquil period 
towards the end of the disease that many caregivers describe, it also risks 
underestimating the continued potential for suffering in the person with 
dementia. Caregivers memoirs, such as Sally Magnussons Where 
Memories Go (2014), are powerful reminders that the last stages can be 
anything but painless. Yet, overall, Out of Mind questions the commonplace 
that the person with dementia loses all sense of awareness and the caregiver 
suffers more than the care-receiver. Fictional and non-fictional dementia 
narratives alike help expose such preconceptions as misrepresentations of 
the experience of dementia. 
House Mother Normal 
If the publication of Out of Mind coincides with the rise of the Alzheimers 
disease movement in the eighties, then B.S. Johnsons experimental novel 
House Mother Normal (1971) predates, by a decade, the growing 
contemporary concern with dementia. Nonetheless, House Mother Normal, 
in its medicalised understanding of dementia and its acutely contemporary 
concern over the running of care homes, resonates with contemporary 
explorations of dementia. 
Johnsons novel consists of a frame narrative by the house mother of a 
care home and eight twenty-one-page-long interior monologues by the 
elderly patients in that home, presented in stream of consciousness style. 
Each of these narratives tells of the same sequence of events: dinner, work, 
exercise and entertainments. As we come to see these events through 
different characters minds, we are able to piece together a sense of the 
actual events in the storyworld. The technique is similar to that found in 
modernist texts, such as William Faulkners The Sound and the Fury 
(1929/1995), where we come to make sense of the narrative of the mentally 
disabled character Benjy through subsequent retellings of the same events 
by other characters in the storyworld. Here, compared to Faulkners novel, 
the strategy of distributing fabula details is inverted, since we start out with 
the accounts of more verbally coherent characters and move towards those 
of the most severely cognitively impaired characters, George Hedbury and 
Rosetta Stanton. Importantly, Johnson exploits the over-determined 
narrative structure in order to enhance the readers mental map or situation 
model of the storyworld (Bernaerts 2014: 298). Not only do all narratives 
treat the same sequence of events, but the number of pages on which these 
events are evoked correlate with each other. So page 5 of each narrative 
relates to the moment in which the house mother gets her patients to sing the 
house hymn. One of the effects of this 3-D reading experience, as Lars 
Bernaerts calls it (2014: 298), is that we can complete the narrative puzzle 
by referring back and forth between pages. This narrative reconstruction is 
particularly important vis--vis the most fragmented and incoherent 
narratives towards the end. Johnsons narrative structure also ensures that 
the reader continues to attribute consciousness to or project experientiality 
(Fludernik 1996) onto word fragments, nonsense words and even blank 
pages (see also Bernaerts 2014: 297; 305). 
The text further differs in technique from the Sound and the Fury in 
that the patients narratives are framed by the house mothers prologue and 
epiloguethe latter providing her version of the evenings events. You 
shall see into the minds of our/eight old friends, and you shall see into 
my/mind, (5) the prologue reads. The instances of metalepsis in her 
narrative, i.e., the moments where different narrative levels and the 
ontological level occupied by the author get entangled with one another 
(Pier 2013), draw attention to the ways the supposedly mimetic insights 
into each characters mind are mediated not only by the house mother, but, 
in the final instance, also by the author: (you always knew/ there was a 
writer behind it all? Ah, theres/ no fooling you readers) (204). Each of the 
patients narratives is further framed by introductory remarks similar to case 
notes or patient charts; these notes include age, marital status, percentage of 
sight, hearing, touch, movement, while also providing a list of the various 
diseases the patients suffer from. Importantly, a cognitive quotient (CQ) 
countwhich could be compared to a score on a mini mental state 
examinationindicates the severity of the characters dementia. While, 
according to Bernaerts these ironic introductions set up a frame through 
which the fictional minds can be constructed and interpreted (300) (since 
we know that we are moving from the least to the most severely cognitively 
and physically impaired narrator), this play with genre has the further effect 
of highlighting the insufficiency of reductionist medicalisations of human 
experience. The mimicry of contemporary patient charts, which supposedly 
contain all relevant information about the human subject, is contrasted 
directly with a rich phenomenological approach to embedded, embodied and 
extended human minds.62 
As is obvious even from this brief description of the text, the novel 
plays with numerous genresmost notably dramaand is at several 
removes from the conventions of the realist novel. Through the house 
mothers direct address to the reader the novel deliberately draws attention 
to its constructed nature. Furthermore, Johnson exploits fonts, formatting 
and numerous other material textual features to explore the qualia of the 
subjective experience of dementia (see also Bernaerts 2014: 305). Line 
breaks, indents, different fonts and the blank page indicate gaps, jumps, or 
slowness of processing in the characters consciousness. Indeed, Johnson 
uses a number of strategies and techniques, which Monika Fludernik terms 
typification, to create a fiction of authenticity (Fludernik 1993: 17, 19, 
qtd. in Herman and Vervaeck 2005: 95). Typical, clichd turns of phrase 
and stylistic means that are supposedly inherent in oral languagesuch as 
swear words, exclamations, garbled syntax, hesitation, non-sequiturs and so 
onare employed in order to give the reader the sense that a representation 
is true to life (Herman and Vervaeck 2005: 96); in this case the technique is 
used to evoke a sense of how the mind of a person with dementia may 
work.63 
62 See Charon for the shortcomings of hospital charts in providing sufficient information 
about the patient as a basis for an empathic healing relationship (Charon 2006: 140-148). 
Charon develops the practice of Parallel Chart writing to address the phenomenology of 
illness and she demonstrates how this practice yields clinical benefits (173-4). 
63 Given that people in the later stages of dementia struggle to verbalise their experiences, it 
is important to ask: by what standard do we measure the verisimilitude of these interior 
monologues, or their hypothesised closeness to the phenomenology of dementia? These 
interior monologues mimic actual speech acts of people with dementia, such as the 
fragmented speech and repetitive style of reminiscing, recorded in social science research 
(Hydn 2010, Hydn and rulv 2009, rulv and Hydn 2006, Usita 1998) and 
The narratives represent a blend of immediate perceptions of the 
characters current environmentthose relating to ongoing activitieswith 
what might best be described as reminiscences or associative thought. 
Bernaerts (2014) notes that earlier readings of the novel may have over-
emphasised the element of memory narratives or reminiscence in House 
Mother Normal. His own reading, drawing on cognitive models, instead 
emphasises the embodied nature of these fictional minds. He argues that by 
highlighting perception and emotion, Johnson underscores the characters 
engagement with their environment and their action-oriented thought and 
plans or scenarios for the near future (307). Memories (in particular 
memories of relationships and traumatic memories), Bernaerts writes, are 
an important part of the minds evoked in House Mother Normal, but they 
alternate with thought induced by perception and oriented toward action, 
which brings the pensioners minds back to the present (307). Johnson 
employs this past-present-future continuum (307) as exploratory 
modelling of the phenomenology of embodied minds affected by dementia. 
The monologues, furthermore, include snippets of direct speech 
(marked by italics) and highlight the extent to which each fictional mind 
represents an embedded and social mind (Palmer 2004). Each characters 
consciousness is shaped by social norms and perceived wisdom and 
includes the perceptions of other characters minds. The reader comes to see 
how characters respond to each other with either sympathy or dislike. Also 
each character evaluates the same situation differently, based on their 
personal characteristics and values. As Bernaerts notes, fear and feelings of 
disgust towards the house mother are among the most pervasive and 
strongest emotions evoked and enhance the dynamics of the characters 
mental action (305). And yet, characters differ significantly in their 
evaluation both of the house mother and of her sardonic entertainments. 
These evaluations contribute to the complex individualised portrayal of each 
characters consciousness, while also shaping the readers evaluation of the 
ethics of the narrative. 
collaborative life writing (Clegg 2010). The disadvantage of judging verisimilitude of 
consciousness representation on the basis of actual speech is that it presumes that thought is 
necessarily or (primarily) verbal.  
 The novels focus on a relatively brief space of time in the storyworld 
allows for detailed, seemingly real-time descriptions of thoughts and events. 
House Mother Normal, compared with other dementia narratives, is less 
concerned with maintaining a protracted narrative arc in which the 
characters progressive decline is portrayed. The text can thus explore the 
limits of language and coherence to a greater degree than other texts. If 
George Hedburys narrative is, towards the end, marked by almost blank 
pages and only a few words, his fragmented language still makes sense 
insofar as readers have been briefed about what is going on by other 
narrators. So, for instance, the following fragment refers to the house 
mothers vile game of pass the parcel:                                                                  
                                                                                                       Package                                                    
for me               pass, parc                                       
                        what?         
 (152)64 
Similarly, the following passage may be seen to evoke Georges sense of 
disorientation at suddenly finding that he is being pushed around in his 
wheelchair during the exercise routine. 
                                         name           it 
       moving                           moving 
everythings moving 
 (153) 
Most notably, perhaps, Georges internal cries of pain (155) during the cruel 
game of a wheelchair tournament starkly emphasise his continuing capacity 
to suffer. The representation of his pain contrasts with the outside 
perspectives (both sympathetic and unsympathetic) offered to the reader in 
previous accounts. Since George does not utter a word he seems, in other 
narrators accounts, alright (23). 
As noted previously, the narrative progresses from the most mentally 
able to the most severely demented character. Rosetta Stantons medical 
64 While my quotations do not represent exact replicas of the original formatting, I follow 
the original text as closely as possible when doing so is relevant for my analysis. 
chart suggests a drastic stage of decline with her physical capacities ranked 
around five percent and her CQ count at zero. The first fourteen pages of her 
account contain only snippets of what to an Anglophone reader appear to be 
nonsense words, dispersed across an otherwise empty page.65 However, on 
page fourteen, as she is addressed directly by Ivy Nicholls who is pushing 
her wheelchair during exercise, Rosettas narrative suddenly becomes 
coherent: In response to Ivys question How are you Mrs S?which the 
reader will either have remembered or can return to on the corresponding 
page of Ivys accountRosettas internal monologue reads: 
I a m 
t e r r i b l e, I v y.                                                                                           
(175) 
Indeed, this passage is in ironic contrast to Ivys account. Following her 
questions to Rosetta, Ivys monologue continues: No answer. I have never 
heard her speak since I came here CANT HEAR A THING CAN YOU, MRS 
STANTON? (65). However, Rosettas internal monologue proves Ivy wrong: 
  N o w  I  c a n             e v e r y 
w o r d  y o u  s a y .. I am a prisoner in my 
self. It is terrible. The movement agonises me. 
Let me out, or I shall die                                                                     (175-76) 
Here Johnson is drawing on a common trope of dementia narratives. While 
some accounts argue that the person with dementia has lost her self and 
resembles an empty shell, other accounts insist that the self is locked into 
the disintegrating body. Such accounts suggest that the person within 
persists, much as before, but loses the ability to communicate her subjective 
experience to others. Becoming a prisoner inside ones body is seen as an 
even greater horror than the supposed state of selflessness. Johnson draws 
on this trope in Rosettas monologue. In fact, he even seems to suggest that 
65 In fact, the words are Welsh and a translation of the first few words (galluoag- 
competent/able; lwcus-lucky; ynad-justice or to judge) suggests that Johnson is adding 
another layer of meaning to his multi-layered challenge to perceived norms. Johnson 
throughout the text inverts the sane-insane dichotomy; here by playing with the fact that 
English speakers without a knowledge of Welsh will read these words as nonsense when 
instead they make perfect sense. 
her loss of consciousness at the end of her narrativerepresented by six 
uniformly blank pagesis a last act of agency, of willed oblivion. In 
response to Ivys further conversational remark DONT GET ANY LIGHTER, 
DO YOU, MRS STANTON? (66), Rosetta responds in her thoughts: 
No,   I   d o  
n o t  g e t     a  n  y  
l   i   g   h   t   e   r,     I   v   y, 
 I      i   n    
       t    e     n    d  
 n    o     t  
t        o              g         e       t 
      a         n         y      
t           h           i          n           g  
              a                n               y  
m                o               r                    e  
n        o         
m      o   r                                                          
(176)   
How does one read the six blank pages that follow? Do they represent her 
loss of self? Or do these blank pages, alternatively, constitute an attempt to 
represent the unfathomable experience of advanced dementia? Within the 
structure of the novel, with a set number of pages allocated to each character, 
the blank pages remain significant. They are not merely empty pages but a 
continued representation of Rosettas consciousness. After first 
experiencing this consciousness through the eyes of others, we then 
communed with it and continue to engage with it, even in its blankness. It 
is relevant, of course, that Rosettas account does not consist of blank pages 
from the start. We try to parse the information we do get as best we can, 
using the structural overlay provided by the text. The blank pages may then 
be read as a powerful representation of the loss of words, which is 
inexpressible by any other means than silence.  
Of course, some readers may simply skip the blank pages; in which 
case they omit to read the marked absence of thoughts or experiences that 
the author intended to convey. One could also argue that, here, Johnson 
confirms the trope of loss of self in dementia. Without actual text to 
represent the characters consciousness, the character may be considered as 
good as dead. Rosetta may then be seen to inhabit the same space of the 
living dead, on a textual level, that people with dementia are frequently 
understood to inhabit. That said, in its theatricality and artistically over-
determined form, House Mother Normal repeatedly draws attention to its 
constructed nature. The aesthetics embody an ethical value in that the 
disruption of a naturalised or immersive reading strategy repeatedly 
reminds readers that they are dealing with a representation of dementia as 
imagined by a specific author in a particular cultural and literary context.66 
The novel is designed to make its readers think about the problems of 
representing dementia, the difficulties of accessing, inhabiting or 
understanding the phenomenology of dementia. If, as I have argued in 
relation to Out of Mind, such disruptions of an immersive reading 
experience have a distancing effect on the reader and impede emotional 
engagement and empathy with the characters (Bitenc 2012), the 
foregrounding of the narrative as textual construct nevertheless fulfils an 
ethical function: by problematizing their own truth-value these novels call 
the readers attention to the risk of effacing the perspective of people with 
dementia in narratives written as if from their point of view.  
At the same time, in providing a number of inside perspectives, 
Johnson not only plays these narratives off against each other, but also 
orchestrates the novel such that each narrative comes to inform and enrich 
all subsequent (re-)tellings. Therefore, the configuration of parallel 
narratives allows readers to develop empathy for even the most severely 
impaired characters. As Andrew Motion suggests in his introduction to the 
novel, 
66 Krger-Frhoff similarly draws attention to the culturally constructed nature of dementia 
narratives: we as readers, together with the literary authors of imaginary inner 
perspectives, are left with what we think dissolution of memory and break-down of 
language may feel and look like. These expectations are culture-bound (2015: 104; original 
emphasis). 
by the end of the book, when we are hearing from characters who are 
hardly able to speak, and whose states of mind are represented by blank 
pages, or pages on which only a few words or letters appear, we have 
acquired sufficient knowledge to sympathize with them despite their 
inarticulacy  or all the more because of it (Motion in Johnson 2013/1971: 
vii).  
Given that even the least coherent narrative ends with a markedly coherent 
passage implies that even in this experimental mode, to recognise 
subjectivity, or to make it readable, one must draw on coherent language. 
Nevertheless, in employing the associative style of stream of consciousness 
narratives, and emphasising the embodied, embedded and extended nature 
of fictional minds, Johnson pushes against the limits of conveying an inside 
experience of dementia that apply to realist novels.  
In vividly portraying the characters personal reactions to events, their 
likes and dislikes, their moments of pride and their fond or painful 
memories, Johnson also manages to evoke a deep sense of the characters 
humanity. As Motion argues,  
as we watch his characters reach into their memories and contend with their 
losses (of husbands and wives, of places and positions, of physical opportunity 
and enjoyment), we also see them struggling to preserve for as long as possible 
the details of their existence. Details that appear humdrum and insignificant, 
but are a vital means of giving shape and value to their whole existence. 
(Motion in Johnson 2013/1971: vii-viii) 
Of course, the nature and extent of readers engagement will depend, as 
suggested by Keen (2007), both on their personal characteristics and on 
their reading preferences. For some, an accessible and emotive work, such 
as Still Alice, which draws on the conventions of the realist novel, may be 
most effective in raising awareness for the experience of dementia. A reader 
who shares with Alice an academic position as well as attributes of gender 
and age, may experience more empathic concern for the character than 
readers who differ from the protagonist in these respects. Similarly, reading 
preferencessuch as disdain for anything smacking of the sentimental, or, 
conversely, impatience with the modes of (post)modernist fictionwill 
influence the readers manner of engagement with any given narrative. In 
my own reading experience more experimental writing modes at times 
turn dementia into a kind of mind game;67 these modes, while raising 
interest for the symptoms of dementia, are not always conducive to empathy, 
or sympathy. However, these experimental modes afford innovative ways of 
representing certain aspects of what it might be like to live with dementia 
otherwise overlooked. Furthermore, they highlight the difficulties and 
ethical pitfalls attendant on representing people with advanced dementia 
who may no longer be able to express their own experience or correct the 
way they are represented by others. If literature provides a means of 
experiencing dementia from the inside out, it also suggests how the 
phenomenological viewpoint of actual others with dementia may be erased. 
Fictional dementia narratives such as House Mother Normal both enact such 
an erasure (in Rosetta Stantons case figured through the blank page) and 
draw attention to their own participation in this act. Ironically, while 
potentially effacing or overwriting the subjectivity of people with 
dementia, these narratives also push against the effacement of these others 
in the cultural imaginary by fictionally giving voice to and imaginatively 
constructing the embodied consciousness of a subject with dementia. 
The Unconsoled 
I turn now to a novel that does not signal its status as dementia narrative. In 
Kazuo Ishiguros The Unconsoled (1995) the concert pianist Mr Ryder 
arrives in a central European city to participate in an event which seems of 
unprecedented importance to the future of this city. The first-person 
narrative is told by Mr Ryder himself. From the start, his telling is marked 
by uncertainty: by gaps in Ryders knowledge about his situation, his recent 
past, his relation to others, and the nature of what is expected from him on 
this visit. While the narrative is presented through the limited viewpoint of a 
seemingly memory-impaired (autodiegetic) first-person narrator, Ishiguro at 
times extends the scope of his narrators vision or knowledge to include an 
almost omniscient understanding of other characters perceptions, thoughts, 
and memories. Ryder narrates events that occur in places he is not present, 
67 Bernaerts uses the term mind-game in his article on House Mother Normal. He comments 
on, but does not explore, how empathy and the attribution of pain are mitigated by irony 
and the tragicomic tone of the novel (2014: 306).  
exhibiting the spatio-temporal freedom conventionally attributed to 
omniscient narrators. Even more strikingly, he is privy to other characters 
thoughts and memories that cannot be understood or explained within the 
conventions of a first-person narrator. And yet, in these instances (rather 
than shifting into a different narrative voice) Ishiguro insistently emphasises 
Ryders perspective through the use of first-person or possessive pronouns. 
The narrative is marked, therefore by a clash between the narrators 
disturbing lack of knowledge and deficient grasp of his situation and an 
excess of knowledge about other characters perceptions, thoughts, and 
memories.68 One of the effects of this technique is that the reader does not 
inhabit a stable perspective. Attempts to naturalise the many inconsistencies, 
incoherencies and sheer impossibilities of the narrative are undermined by 
the very instability of narrative voice and focalisation. The narrative resists 
being decoded via the conventions of realist first-person narration, while 
nevertheless drawing on these conventions as dominant mode throughout. 
We come, therefore, to view the world through Mr Ryders limited (and 
simultaneously incongruously expanded) viewpoint. 
What allows a reading of this novel as a dementia narrative is that, on 
the story level, Ryder finds himself in situations that mirror what a person 
with dementia can be hypothesised to experience due to the symptoms of 
cognitive decline. At times, such situations take on a surreal or kafkaesque 
character. While Ryder does not seem to suffer from word-finding or other 
linguistic difficulties, he does, at one stage, entirely lose his ability to 
speakand, in consequence, fails to speak up for his long-term friend. 
Ryder, straining to reveal his true identity to a committee of officious local 
women, can bizarrely emit only grunts. Flushed red by the strain to speak, 
he presents a disturbing spectacle. Shortly afterwards, he inexplicably 
regains his capacity for language. While this sudden (and, as it turns out, 
reversible) language loss is not a realistic representation of dementia, the 
68 Genette (1972) classified such infraction[s] of the dominant code of focalization in 
which a narrator provides more information than is licensed by this code as paralepsis 
(Dawson 2013: 23). Scholars of unnatural narratology propose to classify such cases as 
instances of an unnatural mind (Iversen 2013); as telepathic first-person narrators (Alber 
2014) or as explained by the concept of impersonal voice (Nielsen 2004). Whereas Culler 
(2004) rejects omniscience as useful category of narrative analysis, Dawson argues first-
person omniscience constitutes another category of narrative voice (2013: 196).  
scene is evocative of how crucial language is in asserting our identity and in 
positioning ourselves positively in relation to others. Without language, the 
renowned pianist becomes a no-one, unable to represent himself or 
intervene on behalf of others. Significantly, he also becomes an object of 
disgust to those around him. 
Ryder also has a less than firm grasp on his recent autobiographical 
memories. And although the citizens expect him to play an inordinate role in 
upcoming eventsa role which would appear to be in excess of what one 
might expect from a concert pianistRyder remains confused about the 
precise nature (4) of the event as well as his role in it. Indeed, the narrative 
has, throughout, a nightmarish quality, in that Ryder is continually running 
late for appointments and never finds himself in the right place. He also 
frequently loses all sense of time, and since we see events through his eyes 
the reader cannot unambiguously pinpoint the actual passage of time in the 
storyworld. The nightmarish quality of the narrative is enhanced by physical 
impossibilities within the storyworld.69 Buildings frequently morph into 
each other as the protagonist navigates the confusing landscape of the city, 
and corridors and rooms change their shape as the narrator moves through 
them or returns to them. In a striking parallel with the experience of people 
with dementia in nursing homes, who often feel as if traces of  their 
childhood home [were] pushing forward under the wallpaper of the care 
home (Clegg 2010: 12), Ryder becomes convinced that his hotel room is 
one of his childhood rooms:  
I was just starting to doze off when something suddenly made me open my 
eyes again and stare up at the ceiling. I went on scrutinising the ceiling for 
some time, then sat up on the bed and looked around, the sense of 
recognition growing stronger by the second. The room I was now in, I 
realised, was the very room that had served as my bedroom during the two 
years my parents and I had lived in my aunts house on the borders of 
England and Wales. I looked again around the room, then, lowering myself 
back down, stared once more at the ceiling. It had been recently re-
plastered and re-painted, its dimensions had been enlarged, the cornices 
had been removed, the decorations around the light fitting had been 
entirely altered. But it was unmistakably the same ceiling I had so often 
stared up at from my narrow creaking bed of those days. (16) 
69 See Alber (2013) on impossible spaces in narrative worlds. 
What is notable about this passage is its assured toneas expressed through 
verb tense (simple past, past perfect) and the absence of modal verbs. 
Contrary to the use of concurrent narration in Bernlefs Out of Mind, 
Ishiguro uses conventional past tense narration throughout.70 Nevertheless, 
there seems to be very little distance between the narrating-I and 
experiencing-I. Despite all evidence to the contrary (that he is on the 
continent and not in the UK, that all aspects of the room have been altered 
including the ceilings dimensions) the narrator is entirely sure of his 
discovery: the sense of recognition growing stronger; I realised; 
unmistakably. Indeed, further contemplation of the room triggers a 
detailed memory of a specific afternoon during his childhood. Arguably, in 
contrasting the vividness of Ryders childhood memories with his recent 
memory lapses, and in allowing the narrator to experience no sense of 
contradiction at this superimposition of distinct geographical locations, 
Ishiguro at this point in the narrative (the conclusion of the first chapter) sets 
up the possibility of framing the rest of the narrative through the lens of 
progressive memory loss.  
That said, reading this novel as dementia narrative does not provide the 
reader with an all-purpose interpretative tool which makes sense of the 
inconsistencies of the storyworld or the narrators disorientating experiences. 
Instead, the narrative places the reader in a situation where she will need to 
contend with a certain level of uncertainty, disorientation and confusion 
which may be considered central to the experience of dementia. Similar to 
the dementia narratives I have discussed previously, Ryders loss of the 
sense of time as well his experience of getting physically lost are enacted in 
the narrative. Yet here the reader has no possibility of resolving these 
difficultiese.g., by naturalising them either through reference to genre71 or 
by reading them as indicators of the diseased narrators mind. The mental 
map of the storyworld resists falling into place and the reader is left with a 
70 An exception is the brief passage at the very end of the narrative which heavily employs 
the auxiliary modal would to indicate the counterfactual, hypothetical future scenario 
playing out in the narrators mind. 
71 The novel, despite many fantastic elements, emphasises the otherwise naturalist setting 
of events rather than invoking the conventions of science fiction or fantasyconventions 
which would allow readers to explain incongruous aspects of the storyworld through the 
possibilities of fantastic storyworlds. 
sense of confusion about the world she is inhabiting through Ryders 
consciousness. This aspect of the narrative makes it an interesting case for 
considering the notion of parallel experience in relation to the 
phenomenology of dementia.  
    The Unconsoled also resonates with other dementia narratives in that the 
novel explores how cognitive decline may affect not only ones ability to 
navigate space and time, but impact on ones social world. So, for instance, 
Ryders eminent position as renowned pianist is slowly undermined as he 
struggles to meet the demands made on him and, finally, fails entirely to 
fulfil any of his responsibilities. This process is intimated from the start of 
the narrative in his very first interaction with the hotels desk clerk. As the 
clerk begins to chat about the preparations for the elusive Thursday night 
he mentions how a certain Mr Brodsky, clearly the conductor of the 
orchestra, has been doing splendidly and is in the process of practicing in 
the hotels drawing room. Ryders response indicates how little he seems to 
be in the know about events: 
Brodsky, you say. I thought about the name, but it meant nothing to me. 
Then I caught the desk clerk watching me with a puzzled look and said 
quickly: Yes, yes. Ill look forward to meeting Mr Brodsky in good time. 
Ryder, it seems, is astute at reading other peoples reactions and quick to 
cover up any idiosyncrasies in his behaviour due to his failing memory. This 
behaviour resonates with accounts of people with dementia, who in the early 
stages frequently report trying to hide their symptoms from others. Even in 
the later stages, set phrases, which are still accessible, are often used to keep 
social interactions going and to gloss over the inability to express oneself 
more precisely. Such set phrases then provide a means to continue 
functioning on a social level. Ryder, like many people with dementia, 
despite his often disastrous lack of knowledge, retains the capacity to 
navigate social encounters relatively smoothly.  
Nonetheless, Ryders relationships to significant others are severely 
disturbed by his memory loss. In the hotel, Ryder meets an elderly porter 
named Gustav. As they become more closely acquaintedincidentally, 
through Ryders ability to read the porters mindGustav asks him to meet 
his daughter Sophie and find out what is troubling her. We then follow 
Ryder to a caf where he meets Sophie and her son, Boris. Initially, seeing 
events unfold from Ryders point of view, the reader expects this to be their 
first meeting.  
Turning, I saw a woman sitting with a young boy waving to me from a 
nearby table. The pair clearly matched the porters description and I 
couldnt understand how I had failed to notice them earlier. I was a little 
taken aback, moreover, that they should be expecting me  Although the 
porter had referred to her as a young woman, Sophie was in early middle 
age, perhaps around forty or so. For all that, she was somewhat more 
attractive than I had expected.  This is Mr Ryder, Boris, Sophie said. 
Hes a special friend. Of course he can sit with us if he wants. (32) 
It soon becomes clear, however, that Ryder is well-known to both Sophie 
and Boris, and indeed, it emerges that Ryder and Sophie have been in an 
intimate relationship for years. With this knowledge in mind it is difficult to 
make sense of why Ryder describes their initial meeting in the way he does, 
unless one posits that he has temporarily forgotten all about their joint 
history. 
Ishiguro thus largely limits the readers perspective on events to that of 
a partially unreliable, memory-impaired first-person narrator. Occasionally, 
the reader might, as in the passage just quoted, later suspect that Ryder is 
unreliable when the facts revealed contradict Ryders reporting: Is this 
really what Sophie said?, one might ask. Since, if Ryder has been acting as 
something of a father figure to Boris, then Sophies introduction (This is 
Mr Ryder, Boris) is incongruous. Indeed, Ryders narrative later suggests 
that a previously harmonious (step)father-son relationship has only recently 
been disrupted by some unnamed event. In the meantime, Ryder remains 
fundamentally uncertain about his shared past with Sophie and Boris, and 
concomitantly about how to behave towards them.  This is evident, for 
instance, when Ryder visits them in their home: 
I followed the pair of them up two flights of stairs. As Sophie unlocked the 
front entrance the thought struck me that I was perhaps expected to behave 
as though familiar with the apartment. On the other hand, it was equally 
possible I was expected to behave like a guest. As we stepped inside, I 
decided to observe carefully Sophies manner and take my cue from that. 
(283) 
This passage calls attention to the strategies that people with dementia may 
employ when they are uncertain about their relationship with others. Since 
the reader never gets the full story of their relationship and is therefore, like 
Ryder, left to speculate on events, the narrative technique brings readers 
closer to Ryders experience of epistemological uncertainty. The parallel 
experience of uncertainty about the storyworldabout time, space, events 
and relationshipsmay then intimate what it feels like to lose a firm grasp 
on ones life due to dementia. We become, like the narrator lost in time and 
lost in space, uncertain about our location within the storyworld and the 
(surreal or real) nature of the events taking place.  
If Ishiguros tale provides a resonant image of the phenomenology of 
dementia, then it is also about many other aspects of humans lives as 
embodied, social agents. Ishiguro, of course, is a master at depicting 
regretmost notably, the missed opportunities in relationshipsthe word 
not spoken, rather than the word spoken hastily. This theme resonates in The 
Unconsoled, especially in the relationship between the aged porter and his 
daughter Sophie. However, the novel also puts a particular twist on the 
theme of dysfunctional relationshipsone that may contribute to an 
understanding of how relationships may be impacted by progressive 
memory loss. Ryder seems to have had some kind of falling out with Sophie 
but cannot remember any of the details. Nonetheless, he repeatedly 
experiences surges of anger towards her. There appear to be various sources 
for this anger. On the one hand, his anger seems to be motivated by the 
underlying reasons for the falling out, even when he cannot remember the 
details. On the other hand, as events spiral out of control, Sophie becomes a 
convenient object for his anger at his own powerlessness. Ryder then begins 
to blame Sophie for everything that goes wrong. As is usual in Ishiguro, the 
characters never address these issues, never manage to reach an 
understanding of the others point of view. In the end, the couple parts ways. 
Ishiguros novel suggests how the capacity for misunderstanding is 
exacerbated when one of the partners suffers from memory loss and may 
lack insight into his own feelings. Although he does not engage in a direct 
exploration of dementia, Ishiguro here hints at some of the complexities 
inherent in interacting with intimate others when both the memory of recent 
interactions and even the history of ones relationship have been lost. 
Conclusion 
In this chapter I pursued two questions: one, can imaginative fiction 
contribute to a better understanding of the phenomenology of dementia? 
And two, how do narrative techniques used to project the phenomenology of 
dementia interact with the readers experience of empathyand with what 
implications for current theories of narrative empathy and its role in the 
medical humanities?  
Much like life writing, fictional narratives evoke the varied life world 
of the character or person with dementia. They place the character in a 
specific social and cultural context, while exploring both the characters 
inner life, her relationship with others and with her physical world. Fictional 
narratives are therefore well placed to explore how, in Havi Carels terms, 
the life world of a person changes due to serious illness (2008). Novels as 
well as films provide the kind of thick description that is necessary for a full 
understanding of any socio-cultural phenomenonincluding the experience 
of a neurodegenerative disease. Contrary to life writing, however, fictional 
narratives, and the novel in particular, may address the experience of the 
later stages of the dementia by simulating an encounter with the dementing 
characters mind. Nevertheless, it is important to stress that such 
representations draw on specific literary techniques and conventions and are 
based on culturally available conceptualisations of dementiawhat 
dementia is taken to be and what it means. Narrative technique influences 
the kind of understanding of the phenomenology of dementia readers and 
viewers procure. The modes of filmic representation engage, in particular, 
the possibility of intersubjectivity as grounded in the embodied agency of 
both the protagonist and the viewer. In the novel, various experimental 
modes push against the limits of representing serious cognitive impairment 
within language and narrative. Nevertheless, these narratives continue to act 
within the bounds of language and at least minimally coherent narrative acts.  
Still Alice, Out of Mind, and House Mother Normal are all recognisable 
dementia narratives. These texts allow rich possibilities of entering the mind 
of the character(s) with dementia. They allow numerous possibilities for 
narrative empathy while also stimulating intellectual curiosity about the 
limits of seeing the world through the eyes of a person with dementia, since 
the reader necessarily retains a grasp on the narrative storyworld that 
exceeds that of the characters. Furthermore, instances of empathic feeling 
with, or rather feeling as the character, are evoked by creating processes of 
parallel experience in the reader. Nevertheless, since these narratives are 
explicitly marked as dementia narratives, and the authors use certain 
techniques to make their storyworld intelligible to the reader, we, as readers, 
experience a certain sense of dramatic ironyof knowing more and 
understanding more than the character with dementia does. 
I suggested that the experience of narrative empathyfeeling as the 
character does, rather than feeling with (which is more akin to sympathy)
may be rather limited in coherent or conventional dementia narratives, 
such as Still Alice. Contrary to Keens view that certain literary avant-garde 
texts, in emphasising de-familiarisation and a shock aesthetic, undermine or 
actively eschew empathetic reading (or viewing) experiences, I showed how 
literary experimentation may create processes of parallel experience in the 
readers; that is, the reader may be said to experience an intellectual 
predicament analogous to that of the characters (Toker 1993: 4). To explore 
the empathic possibilities of experimental fiction, I considered the use of a 
dementing and unreliable narrator, such as in J. Bernlefs Out of Mind, as 
well as the configuration of multiple extended stream of consciousness 
monologues, such as those employed in B.S. Johnsons novel House Mother 
Normal (1971). Also, I suggested how a novel which does not announce 
itself as dementia narrative, such as Kazuo Ishiguros The Unconsoled, 
provides means for evoking the parallel experience of certain symptoms of 
dementia in the reader.72  
The potential of narratives which do not provide a clear disease 
pathology for their charactersthat do not name the disease or label the 
72 There are of course limits to the notion of parallel experience, since the reader retains her 
capacity to remember what has gone before in the narrative. 
character as a person with dementianeed to be explored in more detail. 
Particularly in the context of the pathologisation of many aspects of human 
experience, such narratives may allow for an exploration of what it is to be 
human, without limiting our understanding to supposedly stable disease 
conditions. I am aware that my reading of Ishiguros novel as dementia 
narrative in a sense goes against the possibility of de-pathologising human 
experience. However, I maintain that the novel provides rich opportunities 
for exploratory modelling of the phenomenology of dementia, without 
necessarily having to be reduced to merely being about this condition. 
Importantly, while the novel opens up a promising means of coming close to 
the existential uncertainty that living with dementia entails, in the last 
instance it resists being naturalised as a dementia narrative. 
A number of open questions remain about how narrative technique and 
empathetic feelings interact. For one, the correlation between 
defamiliarising strategies and narrative empathy may be less straight-
forward than commonplace literary theorising suggests. It is debatable 
whether Brechtian shock aesthetics and techniques of defamiliarisation 
aimed at impeding the automatic transfer of the emotions to the spectator 
(Brecht 1964: 94, qtd. in Keen 2007: 56) necessarily achieve such an effect. 
Felski (2008)in discussing the phenomenon of enchantment that Brecht 
notably worked against in his audiences (56)makes the case that contrary 
to current doxa anti-absorptive devices are widely used for absorptive ends; 
artifice does not exclude immersion (73). Of course, the link between 
immersive reading experiences and narrative empathy remains elusive as 
long as it is unclear what exactly we mean by immersive reading. Contrary 
to some definitions that suggest we become so emotionally absorbed in the 
storyworld that our reflective capacities are switched off until we emerge 
from this moment of enchantment, immersive reading may also include, at 
times even depend upon, significant cognitive (reflective and sense-making) 
activity in the reader.73 I would moreover argue that certain modes of 
73 Green and collaborators (Green 2004, Green and Brock 2000, Green, Garst, and Brock 
2004) by contrast suggest that cognitive scrutiny correlates negatively with the degree of 
immersion, or what they call transportation into a narrative world, following Gerrig 
(1993). While their research on how fictional narratives change attitudes and real-world 
beliefs still leaves many questions unanswered, it strongly suggests that there is a 
experimental fiction have an important contribution to make to the 
exploratory modelling of the phenomenology of dementia. These texts may 
be able to probe and extend the limits of engaging with the minds of the 
severely memory-impaired, or create instances of parallel experience in the 
reader. The parallel experience of trying to make sense of the narrative 
world may in itself be considered part of an immersive reading experience 
which nevertheless demands a high level of cognitive engagement. 
Furthermore, in its emphasis on deconstructing the illusion of reality, 
experimental fiction significantly contributes to an ethical probing of the 
risks of effacing the experience of real others by fictive imaginings.  
The ethical problems attendant on representing dementia here become 
clear. Thus, while the narrative technique of broadcast strategic empathy in 
Still Alice is employed to further the recognition of people with dementia 
and of their continued humanityin the ethico-polical sense of recognition 
as acknowledgment (Felski 2008: 29)the question arises whether this 
narrative does not instead contribute to the othering of people with more 
advanced dementia who can no longer use language coherently. As many 
critics would be quick to point out, representing the experience of another 
risks obliterating the radical alterity of that other and putting her actual point 
of view under erasure. Recognising oneself in the otheras when 
experiencing empathyis considered a violation of the others alterity 
(Levinas 1961/1990, 1979, Sartre 1943/1976, Zahavi 2007). Indeed, the 
entire narrative approach to understanding others might be criticized for 
entailing what could be called a domestication of otherness. You reduce the 
other to that which can be captured in narratives (Zahavi 2007: 199; 
original emphasis). Counter to a number of claims in first-wave medical 
humanities, literature, like philosophy, biomedicine and neuroscience, may 
then equally be considered a totalising and reductionist enterprise. 
Further, focusing on the other as an object of empathy may be seen to 
deny the others subjectivity. Empathetic feelings in the context of literary 
reading may indeed be considered entirely self-centred, or even selfish: 
Keen (2007) points out how feelings of recognition in the reader may lead to 
correlation between transportation and the extent to which reader attitudes shift after 
reading a narrative. In short, fictional narratives influence readers beliefs.   
an erasure of suffering others in a self-regarding emotional response that 
affronts others separate personhood (xxiv). In this context 
Empathy earns distrust for its apparent directional qualityan empathetic 
performance may appear condescending to its object or to an observer  
Feminists, postcolonial theorists, and critical race scholars in legal studies 
resist the universalizing of human emotions inherent in much of the 
commentary on empathy. (Keen 2007: xxiv) 
While such a cautionary view is warranted in the context of dementia 
narratives, due to the vulnerability of people with dementia, a global 
dismissal of narrative empathy and of the attempt to understand others 
through narrative perspective-taking may be even more detrimental to 
people with dementia. Considering the use that narrative empathy has been 
put to in furthering social causes in the past, it may be premature to dismiss 
its effects in the current Alzheimers advocacy movement. Not to engage 
with the question of what it may be like for people to live with the 
symptoms of dementiaand perhaps adapt attitudes and behaviours based 
on such imaginative explorationmight constitute a greater shortcoming. 
Considering that the link between empathy and pro-social behaviour in 
the real world is tenuous, the social relevance of empathic reading 
experiences in relation to dementia care remains an open question. 
Nonetheless, anecdotal evidence suggests that fictional dementia narratives, 
such as the film Still Alice, affect the film-goers view of dementiaand 
even lead to a moral re-assessment of the behaviour of various family 
members towards a relation with dementia. However, if fictional narratives 
have the potential to affect peoples viewswhich I believe they do (see 
also Green 2004, Green and Brock 2000, Green, Garst, and Brock 2004)
they might equally lead to negative outcomes for certain groups within 
society. In chapter 6, I therefore return to fictional dementia narratives to 
explore the possibility that rather than providing counter-narratives to either 
reductionist biomedical or dehumanising socio-cultural conceptualisations, 
novels and films may in fact compound negative stereotypes of dementia. 
Furthermore, I explore in what way fiction intervenes in contemporary 
debates about dementia care in ways that go beyond questions of empathy. 
Here I hope to have shown that whatever form of empathy novels or films 
evoke, and irrespective of whether this may lead to pro-social action on 
behalf of others, fictional narratives have the potential to raise awareness 
about certain aspects of the phenomenology of dementiasome of which 
may lie beyond the scope of non-fictional dementia life writing.  
My overall aim in this chapter was to provide a solid case for 
literatures value as a practical counterpart of theoretical phenomenology 
(Waugh 2013: 24) or, indeed, as a form of imaginative phenomenology. At 
the same time, by investigating the literary and filmic techniques that 
simulate an experiential reading or viewing experience, I not only hoped to 
underline the potential of imaginative narratives to explore the lived 
experience of others, but also to emphasise their necessarily constructed 
nature. In the context of representing people with progressive neurological 
decline, who at some stage lose the ability to communicate their experience 
and to challenge the way they are represented by others (see also Couser 
2004), it is of no small ethical importance to pay attention to how stories 
about those persons shape what readers and viewers take to be their 
experiences of the disease. In part II, I turn more squarely to these questions 
of self-presentation and representation in the context of dementia life 
writing.  
Part II Life Writing, Self-Writing 
Chapter 3 Life Writing at the Limits: Narrative Identity and 
Counter-Narratives in Dementia 
In this chapter I consider dementia autopathographies 74  as well as 
collaborative life story work with people with dementia (Clegg 2010) in 
order to shed light on the possibilities and limitations of the notion of 
narrative identity in the context of progressive neurodegenerative diseases. I 
probe the limits of narrative coherence in constructing identity, while also 
stressing the ethical imperative of attending to identity narratives in the 
context of dementia life story work and life writing. I suggest that in the 
context of collaborative dementia life narratives, as compared with other 
sorts of life writing, a relatively greater proportion of the task of co-creating 
coherence and co-constituting the interlocutors identity may shift to the 
editor, listener or reader. 
Further, I investigate how narrative identity links with the concept of 
counter-narratives which has gained currency across a range of disciplines 
(Bamberg and Andrews 2004) and which is particularly pertinent in the 
context of narratives of illness and disability (Couser 1997, Frank 1995). I 
ask to what extent dementia life narratives may function as counter-
narratives to the dominant cultural construction of dementia as loss of self 
and death before death and how genre influences the construction of 
counter-narratives in dementia life writing. 
To contextualise my discussion, I briefly outline the debates 
surrounding narrative identity and counter-narrativeswhile suggesting the 
implications of these debates for life writing by people with dementia. I then 
consider two types of case studiesautopathographies by people with early-
onset Alzheimers and collaborative life story projects in nursing homes, in 
particular the collection Tell Mrs Mill Her Husband Is Still Dead (Clegg 
2010)to elucidate how the notions of narrative identity and counter-
narrative come into play in these particular life writing environments. 
74 While I draw on the same corpus of texts discussed in chapter 1, the focus here is on how 
these texts function as counter-narratives, rather than as means to explore the 
phenomenology of dementia.  
Narrative Identity in Dementia 
Life is narrative. It is through narrative that we create selfhood. If we fail to 
produce an acceptable narrative, our normalcy is questioned. These are 
some of the tenets and implications of the narrative identity thesiswidely 
accepted today across a range of disciplines (Bruner 1991, 2003, 2004, 
Dennett 1993, Eakin 1999, 2008, Ricur 1991a, b, Schechtman 2007, 1996). 
Since dementia causes memory loss and severely affects cognitive 
functioning, the disease eventually erodes the ability to tell a coherent life 
narrative. If selfhood is tethered to the ability to tell ones life story, people 
with dementia will be seen to have lost their selves. Consider Jerome 
Bruners claim that there is now evidence that if we lacked the capacity to 
make stories about ourselves, there would be no such thing as selfhood 
(2003: 86). However, the view that selfhood is constituted through narrative 
is not without its opponents (see Sartwell 2000, Strawson 2004). Galen 
Strawson, for instance, challenges both the psychological Narrativity 
thesisaccording to which human beings typically see or live or 
experience their lives as a narrative (Strawson 2004: 428)and the ethical 
Narrativity thesisa normative view that experiencing or conceiving 
ones life as a narrative is essential to a well-lived life and crucial to true 
and full personhood (428). Although Strawsons argument has its problems 
(see Battersby 2006, Eakin 2006), his work has stimulated a timely debate, 
relevant to people with dementia, about the ethical implications of the view 
that identity or selfhood is constituted through narrative. It is certainly 
questionable whether neurological conditions such as Alzheimers disease 
indeed provide evidence for lost selfhood.  
In the following, I address the implications of narrativist accounts of 
selfhood for people with dementia. I outline both the strengths and limits of 
the narrative account when it comes to capturing the processes by which 
identity is expressed, constituted, or negotiated in the context of dementia. 
In doing so, I adopt a position within the debate that can be characterised as 
a moderate or qualified narrativist approach.  
One of the central problems that has emerged from the debate about the 
narrative constitution of selfhood is that the terms self, life and identity 
are frequently used interchangeably.75 Critics of the narrativist approach to 
selfhood have pointed out that not all kinds or levels of selfhood can be 
adequately accounted for narratively and that to require selfhood to be 
articulated in narrative can be problematic in some contexts. Expecting life 
to conform to the genre of a quest narrative (Frank 1995, MacIntyre 1981), 
and basing an evaluation of this life purely on the success or failure of this 
quest, places too large a strain on any ordinary human beingif such a 
being exists. It also places inordinate strain on the lives and narratives of 
those affected by illness and disability, failing to take into account the 
natural course of decline towards the end of lifeand disqualifying people 
with dementia from leading any kind of meaningful or valuable existence.76    
Scholars such as James L. Battersby (2006) recognise the plurality of 
possible selves and doubt that the notion of self can ever be exhaustively 
captured in a narrative, or even numerous narratives (37), while still 
according narrative a central function in human sense-making. Battersby 
argues that it is important to scrutinise the uses to which narrative is put in 
the social domain. Paul J. Eakin, similarly, rejects strong narrativist 
formulations of identity.77 He nonetheless pays tribute to the power of 
narrative not only as a form of self-representation but as an instrument of 
self-understanding (Eakin 2006: 184). At the same time, Eakin underscores 
the very real imperialism of narrative requirements that structure our social 
encounters and define us as persons (186). Eakin concludes that its all 
very well to attack narrativity, but its much harder to escape it in self-
presentation. Were part of a narrative identity system whether we like it or 
not (186). Instead of worrying about the lofty norm of the examined life, 
as Strawson does, we need to attend to the deep-seated social conventions 
that govern narrative self-presentation in everyday life (181-2). Eakin 
points out that in contemporary Western culture we are expected to be able 
75 An overview of the use of these terms across different disciplines lies beyond the scope 
of this study. For a historico-literary overview see Oksenberg Rorty (2000). For studies that 
consider personhood and personal identity specifically in dementia from a psychiatric and 
philosophical perspective, see Hughes (2011) and Hughes, Louw and Sabat (2006). 
76 For an exploration of the relation between philosophical approaches to the good life and 
old age see Small (2007).  
77 Compare Oliver Sacks claim: It might be said that each of us constructs and lives a 
narrative, and that this narrative is usour identities (Sacks 1985/2015: 110; original 
emphasis) 
to produce a self-narrative and that failing to do so leads others to deny in us 
the very existence of selfhood. Such social conventions are immensely 
relevant to people with memory loss. There is a difference, however, 
between posing narrative as essential to selfhood and recognising its social 
function in contributing to the formation or articulation of a particular kind 
of identity. In the context of personhood debates, strong narrativist claims
such as Bruners claim that the inability to tell a self-narrative leads to the 
death or loss of selfcan be detrimental to people with dementia and 
should be considered ethically suspect.   
A further objection that can be levelled at the strong narrativist 
approach is its lack of attention to the nature of embodiment. Dementia 
affects all areas of cognition and not just the capacity to tell a life story. 
Phenomenologist Dan Zahavi therefore argues that if selfhood is lost in 
dementia, the capacity to tell a self-narrative cannot reasonably be 
considered its sole cause (Zahavi 2007: 192). More importantly, Zahavi 
queries whether it is accurate to speak of lost selfhood in people with 
dementia at all. In phenomenological terms, Zahavi conceptualises selfhood 
as the first-personal givenness of experiential life (2007: 188). Selfhood, 
on this view, is bound up with experience itself and is not constituted 
through narrative. Thus Zahavi cautions that when speaking of a first-
person perspective one should consequently distinguish between having 
such a perspective and being able to articulate it linguistically (191; my 
emphasis). Based on this view, he concludes: 
It is by no means obvious that Alzheimers disease brings about a 
destruction of the first-person perspective, a complete annihilation of the 
dimension of mineness and that any experience that remains is merely an 
anonymous and unowned experiential episode, so that the subject no 
longer feels pain or discomfort as his or her own. (192) 
Indeed, the embodied first-person perspective on lived experience persists 
even into the last stages of dementia. In other words, it is erroneous to 
assume that dementia entails a loss of self. 
In my analysis of stories told by people with dementia I take into 
account the argument that whatever the ontological criteria for selfhood, we 
are part of an identity-system in which identity narratives, delivered 
piecemeal every day, function as the signature for others of the individuals 
possession of a normal identity (Eakin 2006: 182). As Eakin highlights, 
The verdict of those for whom we perform [identity narratives] is virtually 
axiomatic: no satisfactory narrative, no self (Eakin 2001: 120). In the world 
we inhabit, narrative plays a crucial role in claiming rights, assigning 
responsibility and having ones selfhood or identity recognised (see also 
Ritivoi 2009). Since people with dementia continue to use narrative to 
position themselves more favourably both in social interaction and through 
life story work, we need to investigate what these narratives look like and 
how they are used. 
It makes sense to take on Strawsons criticism that a diachronic or 
narrative self-experience is not necessarily the only or the best way to 
experience ones being in time. But it equally makes sense to acknowledge 
the practical importance that both a narrative organisation of memory 
(Fernyhough 2012) as well as a narrative performance and constitution of 
identity have both intrapersonally and socially. Not all life experience can or 
must be narrativised to constitute part of ones life or ones sense of self. 
However, lacking the means to narrativise ones life experience can put one 
on shaky terrain when it comes to positioning oneself in relation to others, 
this process being integral to what it means to be a person. 
When considering the question of narrative identity, I am therefore 
inclined to argue that it is less a question of whether identity is narrative or 
has to be but whether we negotiate or perform identity through narrative. 
The narrative self is not an ontological given but a social practice and a 
potential means of self-understanding and understanding othersincluding 
the possibility of misunderstanding. The notion of embodied, experiential 
selfhood as proposed by Zahavi and others usefully adds to our 
understanding of different levels of selfhood in dementia. The fact that a 
body-self or experiential self persists in dementia seems out of the question. 
It also seems clear that the person with dementia can at some point no 
longer communicate her perspective through narrative or constitute herself 
narratively in social encounters. Nevertheless, both social science research 
as well as collaborative life writing projects show that people with dementia 
continue to attempt to negotiate identity through narrativeand do so 
further into the disease than may have seemed possible. Such attempts 
demand our attention and participation. At issue is an ethical claim in which 
the task of performing or constituting narrative identity shifts from the teller 
to the listener (or reader), to a comparatively greater degree than in other 
storytelling situations. 
Reconsidering Counter-Narratives 
Life writing studies, the medical humanities and disability studies converge 
exactly around the issue addressed by Eakin: that is, the question of how 
people perform identity narratives that serve their tellers. In some cases at 
least, performing identity narratives may be used to counter disempowering 
ways in which one has been socially and culturally positioned. Generally 
speaking, counter-narratives arise in response to a given cultures 
masterplots (Abbott 2008: 236)alternatively described as dominant 
discourses, discursive configurations, or master narratives. Counter-
narratives are thus linked to identity politics, in that members of a 
marginalised group may challenge the way their identities are constructed in 
the mainstream. In the medical or health humanities, illness narratives are 
frequently considered paradigmatic examples of counter-narratives since 
they challenge the dominant discourse of biomedicine (Frank 1995) and the 
negative cultural constructions of illness and disability (Couser 1997). The 
question is whether life writing in dementia functions in a similar manner. 
To address this question I first develop some of the general issues relating to 
the concept of counter-narratives, and then move on to consider these issues 
in the context of autobiographical writing by people with dementia.  
 Scholars working in fields related to gender, ethnicity, or race 
underscore the extent to which counter-narratives are inextricably entangled 
in the masterplots they set out to subvert (Bamberg and Andrews 2004). 
Arguably, by invoking the very masterplots they aim to counter, these 
narratives contribute to upholding the dominant discursive configurations. 
Masterplots may also be so ingrained in the ways we think that it becomes 
impossible to communicate without them. As Bamberg points out, one is 
forced to enlist masterplots in order to make identity claims that are 
intelligible (or acceptable) to others (Bamberg 2004: 361). This need to 
employ masterplots in ones self-presentation is also evident in dementia 
autopathographies; and yet by enlisting models of competent and coherent 
narrative selfhood the authors of these narratives unwittingly undermine 
their aim to present a counter-narrative to the dominant discourse on 
dementia. 
To increase their heuristic power, developing working definitions of the 
concepts of master-narrative, masterplot, and counter-narrative will be 
helpful. Carlos Klbl has suggested a number of productive ways in which 
one might define master-narratives. I build on Klbls ideas in defining 
master-narratives about dementia as representing a narrative version (or 
rather discourse) that is most commonly spread within a particular 
population (Klbl 2004: 28)in this case, high-income Western 
democracies. As regards the content of this discourse, I argue that the 
masterplot of dementia can in shorthand form be described as loss of self 
and death before death (Behuniak 2011, Herskovits 1995). Dementia is 
seen to equal a tragic progression of losses, in the course of which the 
person with dementia becomes emptied out and her life and person 
become of little, if any, value. This view of dementia finds expression in a 
cluster of pernicious metaphors. Since the dominant construction of 
dementia is perpetuated and transmitted through cultural artefacts such as 
books, films, [and] newspaper articles (Klbl 2004: 28), literary and 
cultural criticism present productive means for investigating this discursive 
configuration. Cultural representations of dementia do not operate on their 
own, of course, but are underpinned by larger ideologies bound up with 
Western philosophy and contemporary biomedicine. The dominant cultural 
construction of dementia in the West is informed by cognitivist notions of 
personhood as well as a reductionist, materialist understanding of how body 
and mindin this case the brain and the mindinteract. In short, if the 
mind is nothing but the brain, then the severe neuropathological breakdown 
in dementia will entail loss of self. Further, by defining personhood on the 
grounds of rationality and cognitive capacity alone, people with dementia 
become non-persons. The dominant discourse on dementia therefore has far-
reaching implications for how societies think about and behave towards 
those who bear this disease label. 
I define as counter-narrative any narrativeor in the context of 
collaborative storytelling, any conversational move (Goffman 1981, qtd. in 
Hydn 2010: 40)that resists or questions dominant discourses, whether by 
directly challenging them or by obliquely undermining some aspect of the 
larger discursive economy in which they circulate. Counter-narratives may 
also challenge the effects of a masterplot, such as infantilisation, neglect or 
abuse. 
Despite the problems attendant on theorising master- and counter-
narratives, I argue that they represent valid and important ways to address 
the question of how dementia is understood in contemporary Western 
societies. As a neurodegenerative disease that affects language and 
memorycapacities that are supposedly what makes us humandementia 
raises complex ethical and political issues. In light of recent care scandals in 
the UK, continuing discussions about the allocation of scarce economic 
funds, the privatisation and commodification of care itself, and ongoing 
debates about the practice of euthanasia, how we understand dementia and 
how we define the rights of dementia sufferers are questions that will only 
become more pressing in the future. By referring to people with dementia as 
vegetables, shells or living dead we risk stripping these people of their 
personhood and their human rights (Burke 2007b, Herskovits 1995). By 
contrast, the stories told by people with dementia show how they may 
productively use autobiographical and confabulated stories in order to claim 
identities for themselves, to counter the negative cultural construction of 
dementia, and to critique the care environments in which they live. 
Reading Dementia Autopathographies as Counter-Narratives 
In exploring how autobiographical writing by people with dementia may 
function as counter-narrative, I ask, in what follows, what specific strategies 
(such as genre, metaphor, plot, or theme) dementia autopathographies 
employ to counter the stigma of dementia. Other relevant questions are: Can 
these accounts be considered successful instantiations of counter-
narratives? How might one assess the success or failure of counter-
narratives? Is it even feasible or possible to disentangle masterplots and 
counter-narratives from each otheror are they always enmeshed with one 
another? And finally, do the conventions of autobiographyin that they 
rely on the narrators ability to tell a coherent story and thereby confirm 
agentive, autonomous and cognitivist notions of personhoodundermine 
any potential the texts might have for countering the dominant discourse on 
dementia as loss of self (see also Burke 2007a)? 
An important first question to consider is how the conventions of 
autobiography shape the narratives. Autobiography generally demands a 
comic plot, one where the narrator is better off at the end than at the 
beginning of the story (see Couser 1997). This expectation of a happy 
outcome, and the predominance of triumph narratives in contemporary 
representations of illness (Conway 2007), prescribe certain forms of closure. 
Genre may then curtail the possibilities of representing neurodegenerative 
diseaseshere, by demanding that the authors put a positive spin on their 
illness experience. This is in stark contrast to the progressive decline that the 
disease syndrome entails. Of course, one may also argue for a converse 
relation. Authors of dementia autopathographies may be purposefully 
enlisting the comic plot of autobiography in order to paint a more positive 
picture of dementia and thereby counter the notion that dementia entails a 
death before death. In modelling their life narrative on the bildungsroman, 
shaping their narratives as conversion tale (see Bryden 1998, 2005), or as a 
quest narrative (see, amongst others, Lee 2003), in which spiritual 
enlightenment and personal growth constitute the holy grail, these authors 
draw on generic conventions to help them fashion their stories as counter-
narratives.  
As might be expected in a story about degenerative illness, however, 
the fit between the genre model and autopathography will by necessity only 
be partial. With respect to Zen enlightenment, for one, Richard Taylor notes 
in his autobiographical essays how living in and for the moment assumes 
the ability to know what is going on, what [one is] doing in a given moment 
(Taylor 2007: 131). Yet this ability is slowly eroded in dementia as the 
temporal unity of experience becomes fragmented and disjointedcasting 
doubt on the potentially facile moment of closure or redemption 
suggested by either the recurring carpe diem motif or the comic plot of 
many of these autobiographies.  
In general, Taylors essays provide a complex response to the widely 
employed strategy of countering stigma through a positive reinterpretation 
of life with dementia. Taylors reply to his own rhetorical question in the 
essay Whats the Upside to Having Alzheimers Disease? is initially 
Nothing that I can think of, right off the bat (77). And yet he subsequently 
lists a number of positive changes in his life due to the disease. Among them 
are an increased closeness to his family, gratitude for all he has and the 
deeper appreciation of what [he] should and should not respond to 
emotionally (78). However, he self-consciously reflects that while these 
responses to his disease feel good he wonders whether rather than being 
the upside of Alzheimers this is in fact how he should have lived his life 
in the first place (78). He concludes, Still, I couldnt say, as some others 
with Alzheimers do, that I am glad I know that I have Alzheimers, glad 
that I got the diagnosis early (78).  Taylor thus cannot participate in the 
practice of finding, as Couser terms it, redeeming significance even in 
terminal illness (Couser 1997: 16). 
 Furthermore, as compared with linear narration, Taylors collection of 
essays allows for a more nuanced understanding of how dementia affects 
experience and especially the authors sense of self. Thus later essays in the 
collection frequently undermine the claims or conclusions of previous 
essays. Rather than presenting the reader with closure and a stable 
viewpoint, Taylors shifting life experience and attitude towards dementia 
are documented as his life unfolds. Personal essays, as Couser notes about 
diaries and journals, 78  may present an advantage over retrospective 
autobiographies, precisely in that they do not await the resolution
whether in recovery from or accommodation to dysfunctionthat seems to 
license most retrospective autobiographical accounts of illness and disability 
(Couser 1997: 6). Nevertheless, Taylors voice and particular style provide 
coherence to the essays and allow for them to be read as one persons act of 
78 Taylors essays were initially published as blog posts. Blogging is comparable to 
journaling in its ad-hoc everydayness.   
reclaiming his identity from the dominant cultural construction of 
Alzheimers as living death.  
Most autopathographers stress the therapeutic quality of writing about 
their experience, thereby suggesting that narrative self-making can have 
psychological benefits. 79  For DeBaggio, for instance, writing not only 
affords a means of distancing himself from his illness, allowing him to 
leave thoughts of the disease locked up in the computer (DeBaggio 2002: 
7), but also provides a way of feeling at one with the world: The only time I 
feel alive now is when I am writing, under the spell of work and memories 
(121; original emphasis). While some authors stress the importance of 
writing as a personal and private process of coping with their experience, 
others see their writing as an important contribution to the dementia 
advocacy movement. The memoirs provide rich accounts of how the 
cognitive, bodily and social world changes after the onset of Alzheimers. In 
criticising the callous, unfeeling behaviour of health care professionals and 
the lack of understanding of friends or strangers, the authors of these 
memoirs challenge the notion that people with dementia lack insight into 
their own experience and may therefore be considered unaffected by 
inhumane or undignified treatment. They write back against the epistemic 
injustice perpetrated against people with dementia, who are no longer 
considered experts on their own experience (see Capstick, Chatwin, and 
Ludwin 2015). 
 In speaking out against discriminatory behaviour and helping to create 
a better understanding of the disease, dementia autopathographers therefore 
aim to alleviate the stigma attached to dementia. Their writing also 
constitutes a means of reclaiming agency. As Lucy Burke notes, to write is 
to align a person with a narrative voice, and to make a claim for social 
recognition and personhood (Burke 2007a). This view is also taken by 
79 From psychoanalysis to contemporary narrative or scriptotherapy, there is a long line 
of thought which suggests that telling or writing about ones life may have a beneficial 
effect on psychological well-being. Without entering into a debate about the pros and cons 
of these therapeutic interventions, I see no reason to challenge the anecdotal evidence 
provided by the life writers discussed here that writing had a therapeutic benefit. Beyond 
anecdotal evidence, see Klein (2003) for a review of how creating narratives about stressful 
events may lead to health benefits and an improvement in cognitive functioning. 
Ryan and her collaborators, who describe how writing provides the authors 
of dementia autopathographies with the socially recognised roles of writer, 
storyteller, teacher, advocate, and wisdom figure (Ryan, Bannister, and 
Anas 2009: 151). These new roles may go some way towards making 
amends for the loss of other social roles. Indeed, autobiographical writing 
can be seen as a means of reclaiming social identity per se. Here the 
notion of positioning comes into play, since the experience of being 
negatively positioned may, indeed, be detrimental to ones sense of identity. 
As Ryan and her collaborators point out, social identity is created, and needs 
to be constantly re-created, through discourse with others (Ryan, Bannister, 
and Anas 2009: 146). As these autopathographies attest, certain roles and 
identities become unavailable to people with dementia due to the 
progression of their disease, as well the disabling reactions of others. For 
instance, the authors of dementia autopathographies are often forced into 
early retirement due to their illness. They struggle with the sense of feeling 
useless, no longer a fully functioning member of society. As Cary 
Henderson highlights in one of the starting points mentioned in my 
introduction, the loss of social roles has a deep-seated impact on his sense of 
feeling fully human: 
Ive been thinking about myself. Some time back, we used to be, I hesitate to 
say the word, human beings. We worked, we made money, we had kids, and 
a lot of things we did not like to do and a lot of things we enjoyed. We were 
part of the economy. We had clubs that we went to . . .  Just a lot of things I did 
back then when I was, I was about to say  alive  that may be an exaggeration, 
but I must say this really is, its living, its living halfway. (35) 
Writing, then, provides a means of self-assertion and self-creation that is 
immensely important to people with dementia who are being deprived of 
former social roles (Basting 2003a). 
Thomas DeBaggios two memoirs Losing My Mind (2002) and When it 
Gets Dark (2003) provide illustrative examples of how the cultural 
construction of dementia informs the authors self-conception. These 
memoirs are not merely illness narratives, but come close to being fully-
fledged autobiographies. Losing My Mind includes three narrative strands; 
the first concerns his past life experiences from birth to the early 1970s, the 
second describes the progression of current symptoms, the stories of 
humiliation and loss containing the rough details of [his] tangle with 
Alzheimers (2002: ix), and the third is constituted by scientific reports on 
recent Alzheimers research. While the first strand is rich in 
autobiographical details, the second strand outlines the effects of a 
disintegrating memory on DeBaggios sense of self: This narrative 
represents a mind-clogged, uncertain present. It is filled with memory lapses 
and language difficulties and the sudden barks of disappointment and loss 
(ix). DeBaggio highlights the importance of memory and of language in his 
sense of self. In fact, DeBaggio sees the moment of losing language and the 
ability to communicate as the end of selfhood per se, thereby colluding with 
the dominant conceptualisation of Alzheimers as death before death: 
Although my body may still be sputtering along, the day will come when I 
can no longer write a clear sentence and tell a coherent story. That day will 
be the actual time of death. The person in me who lives on until natural 
death occurs is only a show left by the deadly laugh of Alzheimers. (117) 
DeBaggio evidently has a strongly narrativist and diachronic outlook on his 
life and identity. He describes how the stories he encountered through radio 
plays, television, and journalism shaped his own identity; how literature 
provided him with a model for living; and how it continues to provide 
comfort in his present situation. In Strawsons terms, DeBaggio is living 
according to the psychological Narrativity thesis in that he seems to see 
or live or experience his life as a narrative or story of some sort, or at least 
as a collection of stories (Strawson 2004: 428). Nonetheless, DeBaggio is 
clearly aware that the imagination and the act of storytelling reshape 
memoryand thereby the identity narrative one constructs. For instance, 
DeBaggio ironically comments on the way his parents reconstructed their 
past as benign, despite the fact that they lived during an era of enslavement, 
lynching, two world wars, an influenza epidemic, and the Great Depression. 
Similarly, DeBaggio reflects on the unreliability of his own memories in 
shaping his sense of personal identity. In this way his memoir not only 
produces a narrative version of selfhood, but reflects critically on the 
relation between narrative, memory and self in that production. 
Further, despite propounding a narrativist view of identity, DeBaggio 
also hints at other forms of selfhood. Reflecting on a piece of rock he has 
been given by a friend, DeBaggio writes: 
This coldly solid piece of the explosive past reminded me of the earths 
longevity and the firmness of the past in contrast with our ephemeral 
present. Like many old objects it is without verbal account but nevertheless 
it is full of meaning and a reminder of the permanence of time. Unlike our 
own wispy recollections, this rock is a survivor of memories beyond our 
knowledge, a mute reminder that the past lives silently in the present. (108; 
my emphasis) 
This passage suggests that memory may be embodied, or that the physical 
body may provide a base for selfhood. However, the meaning of the object 
without verbal account depends on a reflexive human Other who can 
recognise the stone as survivor of memories beyond [the perceivers] 
knowledge. Likewise, the person with advanced dementia who is mute and 
unable to project her sense of self requires another to recognise her past life 
that continues silently in the present.  
This passage in DeBaggio echoes Richard Taylors conviction that 
despite biological and psychological changes, at the end of the disease 
process, he will still be himself: I have no idea who I will be when I am 
wheeled out for the final act on the Alzheimers stage. But I do know I will 
be  I will still be me  perhaps a me different from what I have ever been 
before (Taylor 2007: 118). However, as noted previously, Taylors 
conclusions are never simple. Throughout his essays, Taylor struggles to 
define the degree to which his brain and his self are one, the extent to which 
he is Alzheimers and the disease is him (89). Taylor stresses the 
impossibility of knowing the truth about people with late-stage 
Alzheimers. To claim insight into the later stages, he argues, is like  
claiming to know the form and content of the fourth or fifth dimension. We 
are limited by our own thinking and language to imagining something we 
cannot see, hear, feel, touch, or taste. We can take what we know and 
project it, but we are still within the confines of our own minds. (24)  
Among other things, Taylor reminds us that due to its progressive nature, 
dementia is not one thing. Accounts by people with early stage dementia 
may thus have only limited purchase on what the later stages look or feel 
like across larger populations. Furthermore, dementia autopathographies are 
clearly constrained by the modes and conventions of their production. 
Indeed, these texts may be seen to compound the stigma attached to 
dementia, by relegating stigma to the later stages.80 The authors claim that 
although they bear the label of dementia sufferers, they are not (yet) to be 
equated with vegetables, zombies, or shells. However, by using these 
negative tropes themselves for their prospective selves (see in particular 
Davis 1989, DeBaggio 2002), and also by using life writing to assert agency, 
these authors potentially confirm the masterplot of dementia as loss of self 
and death before deathsuggesting that only when you can tell a (more or 
less) coherent life story are you still a valuable human being.  
The form of autobiography, as dictated by genre conventions, 
constitutes an ethical problem if we tie narrative formhow the subject is 
realised through writingto social recognition in personhood debates 
(Burke 2007a: n.p.). For it is precisely these fictions of autonomy 
[perpetuated through the conventions of life writing], Lucy Burke writes, 
that render the vulnerable and disabled beyond the pale of social, political 
and often legal recognition (n.p.). In this context, McGowins memoir 
Living in the Labyrinth (1994) has been singled out as an example of how 
narrative form, and its reception, may be ethically problematic. Basting 
notes that in McGowins account the symptoms of dementia are described 
rather than performed: The language of her memoir is cleansed of the 
disease  spelling, grammar and memory of dialogue and events are 
pristinely intact (Basting 2003: 89). The memoir also includes a number of 
rhetorically powerful arguments. Basting notes, quoting McGowin at length, 
how well McGowin is able to articulate the contradiction between her own 
feelings of self-worth and the depletion of her cultural value as a victim of 
Alzheimers:  
If I am no longer a woman, why do I still feel Im one? If no longer worth 
holding, why do I crave it? If no longer sensual, why do I still enjoy the 
80 This move is similar to the one that Leibing and Cohen (2006) describe in the context of 
gerontology: by way of distinctions between the young old or those who are successfully 
ageing and the old old, the brunt of the stigma attached to old age is shifted to the very 
old or frail elderly. In a second move, this stigma becomes attached to those affected by a 
deteriorating mind. In the final move, described above, people with early-onset dementia 
(or at an earlier stage in the disease) distinguish themselves from the severely demented, by 
asserting their continuing competencies. The end stages of dementia, in this paradigm, 
continue to be considered a stage of meaningless existence, a death before death.  
soft texture of satin and silk, against my skin? My every molecule seems to 
scream out that I do, indeed, exist, and that existence must be valued by 
someone (McGowin 114, qtd. in Basting 2003a: 90)   
While Basting suggests this passage captures the frustration she has seen in 
the behaviour of people with more advanced dementia, she nevertheless 
states that she finds McGowins eloquence almost disturbing (90)
presumably due to its lack of authenticity as the voice of a person with 
Alzheimers.   
However, not all contemporary forms of dementia life writing provide 
coherent narratives promoting fictions of autonomous selves. Cary 
Hendersons collaborative life writing project Partial View (1998) 
acknowledges not only the collaborative nature of dementia testimony but 
also the interdependent and relational nature of identity (see also Burke 
2007a). Furthermore, Hendersons account, through its repetitive and 
syntactically flawed style, enacts or performs the symptoms of dementia. 
Thereby the text fully acknowledges the difficulties Henderson experiences. 
While Burke is aware that collaborative texts raise their own ethical 
difficulties, she lauds them for raising the problems explicitly, rather than 
subsuming them behind what has always been a fiction  that of the 
autonomous, independent subject (Burke 2007a: n.p.). Burkes discussion 
of Alzheimers testimony resonates strongly with Angela Woodss recent 
challenge to the usesand potential abusesof narrative in the medical 
humanities, in that Woods questions the current promotion of one model of 
selfhood within medical humanities researchthat is, of the self as an 
agentic, authentic, autonomous storyteller (Woods 2011: 2)to the 
exclusion of more shifting, interdependent, relational, or embodied models 
of selfhood. 
By providing a collaborative account and highlighting the process of its 
production, Hendersons memoir challenges the agentic, authentic and 
autonomous notion of selfhood. However, it also provokes the reader to 
reconsider the extent to which narrative coherence in a life narrative is 
necessary for it to count as a claim to personhood. Hendersons memoir is 
illuminating, since it lacks any kind of overarching narrative frame and it 
includes hardly any references to the authors past. And yet his insights into 
his current situation, his appreciation of nature and music, his paranoia, 
anger, and fear as well as his deep compassion for his caregivers provide a 
powerful sense of self. The inscription of his now-self through the use of 
brief musings is no less powerful than, for instance, DeBaggios narrative 
that is more heavily focused on his past-self. Despite minimal coherence 
between and sometimes within sections, Burke notes how Hendersons 
personhood is asserted in the very act of narration (Burke 2007a: n.p.). 
Unlike other dementia life writers, Basting comments, Henderson does not 
rely heavily on memory to define who he was and, simultaneously, who he 
is. His narrative voice lives in the present moment, rather than describing 
the disease with the distance for reflection that more traditional narratives 
provideand, I would add, require (2003: 94). In short, small stories 
(Bamberg 1997) and not just life stories with a protracted narrative arc or in 
the form of a quest can function as a means for reclaiming identity and 
countering stigma. 
Nonetheless, in relying on the performance of neurotypical selves 
who can tell coherent life narratives, most of these memoirs ultimately 
reclaim selfhood only for people in the early stages of dementia. They may 
therefore, as Burke points out, collude with precisely those norms that 
underpin the stigmatisation of dementia in the first place (Burke 2007a: 
n.p.). Disability scholars question whether autopathographies can ultimately 
counter the dominant construction of dementia as loss of self (Basting 
2003a, Burke 2007a). Burke worries that in tying life writing to social and 
political recognition we are still working within a paradigm that potentially 
robs those unable to produce their own narratives of their personhood 
(Burke 2007a: n.p.). She raises the question whether to tell a good enough 
story about Alzheimers may not require a different genrea new set of 
conventionsfully to speak to the damage wrought by the condition and to 
the significance of relationships and intersubjectivity to the illness 
experience (n.p.). I argue that collaborative life story work represents just 
such a new genre of dementia life writing. 
Coherence in Broken Counter-Narratives: Mrs Mill and Other 
Stories 
In this section I argue that collaborative life history work with people with 
dementia not only extends the possibilities of representing the experience of 
cognitive decline, but also pays tribute to the intersubjective, interactive and 
relational nature of identity (see also Basting 2001: 79). I investigate what 
happens when we shift our attention from the published autobiographies of 
individuals to seemingly incoherent or broken81 narrative told in the 
context of a collaborative life writing project such as the Trebus Project.82 
These narratives challenge the extent and the nature of coherence expected 
conventionally of life stories. They alert readers to different forms of 
coherence in collaborative dementia narratives and appeal to readers to 
actively participate in the creation of coherence. 
The artist David Clegg has been producing collaborative life stories 
with people suffering from dementia since 2001. Tell Mrs Mill Her 
Husband Is Still Dead83 is one of the publications to emerge out of these 
collaborations. Cleggs Trebus Project shares certain goals with both life 
history work and dementia advocacy. In collecting the (life) stories of his 
participants, Clegg operates somewhere between the practices of 
ethnography, collaborative life writing and creative writing. The narratives 
cannot be clearly assigned to any of these genres or disciplines. The very 
nature of these narratives therefore demands an interdisciplinary approach. 
In developing such an approach, I map out a framework that leverages the 
ideas of identity narrative, narrative coherence and counter-narratives to 
generate new hermeneutic tools for understanding these collaboratively told 
(life) stories. 
81 I use the terms incoherent and broken advisedly, since collaborative storytelling is 
always an interactional achievement (Ochs and Capps 2001) and the seemingly whole 
stories published as autopathographies are themselves the product of shared literary 
conventions. Narrative coherence is, hence, to be understood as a graded quality. In other 
contexts, the term broken is frequently used to indicate a psychological rift or traumatic 
experience in life rather than, or in addition to, referring to characteristics of a given life 
narrative.   
82 See the project website for further information: http://www.trebusprojects.org/. 
83 Abbreviated henceforth as Tell Mrs Mill. 
Before I provide examples of how counter-narratives are constructed in 
collaborative storytelling, a few preliminary notes on the collection as a 
whole are in order. Tell Mrs Mill contains nearly fifty stories by people with 
dementia. Sometimes these narratives consist of conversations between 
participants, but usually each chapter is devoted to a single storyteller. 
Pseudonyms are used in all but one case. Cleggs practice differs here from 
the usual conventions of life writing. Despite having acquired consent for 
his work, he shields the narrators identityby changing names, addresses 
and occupations. This practice shows that Clegg is sensitive to the difficult 
ethical issues attendant on representing vulnerable subjects in life writing 
(Couser 2004). Nonetheless, it is somewhat surprising that Clegg chooses to 
obscure the storytellers identity since, according to his introduction to the 
collection, many of the participants told their stories because they would be 
published not despite it (Clegg 2010: 13). Indeed, Clegg adamantly 
criticises care homes for isolating the people it is supposed to be protecting 
and for cutting off avenues of real communication (13)under the pretext 
of adhering to patient confidentiality. In contrast to the institutional need to 
censor or to sanitise life stories, Clegg underlines how most of his 
participants insisted that their story be told warts and all (13). By 
allowing the storytellers unique voices to shine through, Clegg exposes 
their disability. By shielding their privacy in order to mitigate the effects of 
this exposure, however, he undermines the storytellers authority. 
Collaborative life writing in dementia raises complex ethical issues not 
easily resolved by any one set of rules or conventions. 
Defining the genre of the collection also poses a problem. Despite its 
parallels with life history work and patient advocacy, Clegg nevertheless 
regards his work as artistic practicedescribing the words he collects as 
the building blocks of his sculpture (11). Cleggs procedure raises 
complex questions about who these stories belong to and how they are to be 
received. Do we read these narratives as social history, testimony and/or 
identity narratives? Or do we assess them as collaborative art work? In 
which case, do we ascribe artistic intentionality to the storytellers or to 
Clegg (and the numerous other editors) since the editing process gave these 
stories their final form? Due to the nature of the collaboration process these 
questions cannot finally be resolved. Instead I propose an integrative 
approach that draws on life writing studies, literary criticism and 
conversational storytelling research to yield strategies for engaging with 
these accountsstrategies that will need to be further extended and 
diversified in future work on the narratives at issue.   
While ideas from the analysis of conversational storytelling influence 
my reading of these narratives, my case studies call for distinctive methods 
of inquiry. The narratives in Tell Mrs Mill are, for the most part, a far cry 
from the detailed transcriptions that appear in conversation analysis. Since 
Cleggs part in the conversation has been edited out, it is unclear how his 
contribution shaped the stories. Many stories were, furthermore, elicited 
over the course of numerous visits. The process of editing may then have 
rendered the final product either more or, indeed, less coherent. I have no 
way of reconstructing the editorial process. However, reconstructing this 
process is not necessary in order to get a sense of how the storytellers use 
narrative to position themselves both in the on-going interaction and in the 
context of the publication of their life story (when they retained the sense of 
this second level of engagement). That said, the editorial process, as I 
outline below, does play a prominent role in the way we read these 
narratives as counter-narratives. 
The collection is striking for the sheer variety of selves it represents. 
One is drawn into the storytellers life histories while also gaining insight 
into their current situation in the nursing home. Many narrators are openly 
critical of the care environment and the rigid structure of the institutions 
they live in. They criticise care staff for curtailing their freedom, denying 
them their individuality and invading their privacy. On this account alone, 
these stories can productively be read as counter-narratives to the potentially 
dehumanising, or at the very least infantilising,84 treatment of people with 
dementia in nursing homes.  
84 Lyman (1989) cites infantilisation as one of the negative outcomes of the current disease 
construct. People with dementia are deemed incompetent and irrational, when competence 
is in fact a local phenomenon and should be assessed case by case. Globally denying people 
with dementia agency in their lives may lead to excess disability since, as Stokes and 
Goudie argue, people can become de-skilled if their needs are automatically met by others 
(Stokes and Goudie 2002: 5-6). 
The narrators use autobiographical stories to make identity claims. 
Sometimes these narratives may lack coherencewhen the temporal order 
becomes disjointed, referents are unclear, or multiple versions of events 
contradict each other. Yet Hydn and rulv (2009) show how we can 
understand even such seemingly incoherent narratives by paying attention to 
how the narrators use the evaluative sections of their narratives to make 
identity claims. According to Hydn and rulv, evaluation tells the 
audience something about the teller or the narratorsignificantly about 
his or her moral standing in relation to what transpired in the story (210). 
Evaluative sections are used to present a continuous identity, to present 
oneself as the same person as previous to the onset of dementia with the 
same moral qualities (212). Many of the stories in Tell Mrs Mill function 
in this identity-building way. For instance, Aidan stresses how he has 
always been a loner and how his independent nature has kept him from 
becoming an alcoholic embroiled in bar fightsunlike many others from 
his socioeconomic background. By telling stories about his past and aligning 
his present self with them, Aidan emphasises continuous traits of his 
identity.  For Isabella, engaging in the Trebus Project represents a 
continuation of her life-long involvement in political advocacy. 
Remembering her experience of visiting an abattoir, Isabella notes, But 
now Ive seen people with dementia treated just as badly  people in 
care people with dementia drugged and sedated with a cup of tea and a 
digestive biscuit (Clegg 2010: 111). 85  The story content (inhumanity 
towards animals) is made pertinent to her current situation and employed as 
a searing critique of current dementia care practice. More generally, Isabella 
calls attention to the vulnerable position of people with memory loss: 
Dementia care in this country doesnt exist the problem is a great 
many people who are supposed to be carershave contempt for the loss 
of memory and the mental problems that that leads toand take advantage 
of it. They behave in the most diabolical way and think they can get away 
with itbecauseno one would believe the poor woman with dementia. 
(112) 
85 The ellipses are part of the original manuscript. They suggest hesitation in the 
storytellers speech. 
In her lively stories about her previous political battles as well as her 
damning evaluation of the current state of care, Isabella maintains her 
identity as political activist. Isabellas counter-narrative therefore functions 
on a number of levels. It undermines the notion that people with dementia 
undergo a loss of self since her narrative allows Isabella to present a 
continuous identity. She performs this identity in interaction with Clegg but 
also through the wider dissemination of her narrative on publication. 
Furthermore, she criticises the stigma attached to dementia and challenges 
the way people with dementia are treated. 
Autobiographical narratives may also be told to highlight changes over a 
life time. As the story of a former member of the Hitler Youth suggests, the 
teller of autobiographical stories can also make identity claims by distancing 
herself from past actions. Here the storyteller, Eva, dissociates herself from 
her youthful enthusiasm for Hitler by describing herself retrospectively as 
silly and weak (23). While her anecdote of offering a bunch of flowers to 
Hermann Gring may or may not be confabulatory, it vividly evokes her 
sense of having been swept up in a wave of mass enthusiasm. When it 
comes to making identity claims in her present situation, though, it is central 
that Eva retrospectively evaluates her girlhood self, specifically in relation 
to this incident, as proud and stupid (23). She thereby claims a different 
moral stance towards her youthful attitudes, resolving the conflict that 
subsequent knowledge of the Holocaust caused in her sense of herself as 
moral being. She performs this new identity and highlights her distance 
from her previous self by integrating self-quotation into her story. As Hydn 
(2010) notes, 
Telling autobiographical stories is a way to expand the present reality and 
thus expand ones own identity. By introducing new versions of the self, 
the teller is able to relate to these figures, by identifying with them, by 
rejecting them, or by claiming that a change or development has taken 
place, a development that may be continuous or discontinuous. (39) 
This narrative expansion of identities through which the teller can 
introduce new aspects of herself into an ongoing interaction provides the 
means by which a speaker, as in Evas case, negotiates her identity with the 
present audience (Hydn 2010: 39).  
Evas collaboration with Clegg also represents another instance of 
countering the dominant discourse on dementia. Validating her life 
experience as part of a life history project, the collaboration underlines that 
her life is anything but valueless. People with dementia witnessed a time 
which is slowly passing out of living memory. They have something 
important to tell us about how things were for them. The stories not only 
provide counter-narratives to the dominant construction of dementia, but, 
for instance by describing what it was like to live in war-time London, as a 
number of stories do, they also challenge the retrospective glorification, or 
sentimentalisation, of the past. 
Although a referential relationship to life is central to autobiography 
studies (Eakin 1992, Lejeune 1988), the criterion of referentiality may 
recede into the background in collaborative dementia life writingwithout, 
however, dropping out of the picture entirely. Recent work on confabulation 
in dementia illuminates how even confabulatory stories are used to make 
identity claims. To recognise these claims, however, we need to expand the 
notion of narrative coherence. Maria Medved and Jens Brockmeiers view 
of narrative as primarily a communicative activity (Medved and 
Brockmeier 2010: 25) opens the door for recuperating coherence in 
fragmented and possibly confabulatory autobiographical narratives. They 
underscore how the narratives told by a brain-injured person may be 
psychologically coherent, by highlighting a central pre-morbid personality 
trait. Other authors have stressed the relevance of emotional, 
metaphorical or thematic coherence in confabulatory stories by people 
with dementia (Crisp 1995, McLean 2006). Jane Crisp (1995) proposes a 
framework in which the relevant criteria for evaluating stories by people in 
advanced stages of dementia would no longer be the literal truth or falsity 
of the details, but among other things, the overall point of the story  the 
underlying message or thematic and metaphoric meaning it suggests (135). 
Crisp underscores that it is important to note the qualities to which the 
storyteller [of confabulatory stories] is laying claim: 
Sometimes these are fantasized qualities of strength, activity, 
resourcefulness and power, which serve to compensate for an actual 
position of weakness and dependency.  Less positive stories may present 
the teller as ill-treated, trapped, confused and miserable; qualities that 
make a direct claim on the listeners sympathy, reassurance and aid. (139) 
In her case study of the narrative told by Mrs Fine, a woman with dementia, 
Athena McLean (2006), shows how the tragic plot of wronged wife allows 
Mrs Fine to make an empathy-eliciting identity claim. The plot segment also 
helps Mrs Fine make sense of her current living situationin that the notion 
of having been disinherited explains why she finds herself in the seemingly 
reduced circumstances of a nursing home. While details of her story cannot 
be considered true to real-life events, McLean highlights the emotional 
truth value of the story (171).  
Nonetheless, neither Crisp nor McLean lose sight entirely of the 
criterion of referentiality in making sense of the confabulatory stories told 
by people with dementia. (Of course, designating a story as confabulatory 
already involves a value judgment in relation to real-life referents.) In 
deciphering the underlying message or metaphoric meaning of her 
mothers stories, Crisp uses her extensive knowledge of her mothers life. 
Rather than abandoning referentiality entirely, Crisp instead temporarily 
brackets it in an attempt to make sense of her mothers stories. At the same 
time, Crisp notes how confabulation is generally very disconcerting to 
caregivers who know enough about the tellers past life or present 
circumstances to realize how fantastic many of the claims made in them 
actually are (133). Since confabulation presents a major impediment to 
intersubjective understanding in the context of dementia, Crisps strategies 
for meaning-making are vital. Similar strategies can be used in the context 
of reading the narratives in Tell Mrs Mill. 
McLeans coherence-seeking analysis of Mrs Fines story represents a 
fine balancing act between drawing on biographical facts and not over-
estimating the criterion of facticity. Indeed, she alerts the reader to an 
inherent power dynamic that this criterion sets up. In turning to sources 
outside the storytellers narrative, she claims,   
we are treading on potentially dangerous territory by risking the elevation 
of some voicesand narrative truthsover others ... To the extent that 
additional information can reveal a sense in a story that would otherwise be 
disregarded as irrelevant, it should be embraced.  However, when these 
sources are used to disconfirm (or even affirm) an elders story on the basis 
of its lack (or presence) of correspondence to external indicators of truth, 
it risks disempowering and invalidating that elder. (175) 
In many cases external information can help make sense of a narrative and 
underscore the intelligibility of the storytellers claims to a certain identity. 
Nevertheless, I query the editorial practice, in Tell Mrs Mill, of inserting 
factual information in prefaces or footnotes, when the only function of 
these facts is to highlight the extent of that persons confusion and thereby 
undermine her authorial voice. Instead, it seems more productive to follow 
McLeans pragmatic suggestion about making use of real-life facts and 
including them in the paratext to help elucidate the metaphoric, 
psychological or emotional coherence of a narrative. What is at stake here, 
in short, is how to make sense of confabulatory and fragmented dementia 
narratives by acknowledging their use in the performance of identities in 
discourse.  
Attending to recurrent or dominant themes, as Crisp suggests, provides 
another way of reading the narratives in Tell Mrs Mill as a means of identity 
construction (self-making) and sense-making86 (rulv and Hydn 2006). 
Sids story, for example, revolves around his survivors guilt, a deep 
admiration for his mother and an overwhelming sense of loss at his close 
friend Frankies death during the war. In Sids account, versions of key 
events in his life (his mothers death by drowning, various people being 
killed by a bayonet) contradict each other. However, each version clearly 
highlights how his life was marked by violence and loss, how he continues 
to struggle with survivors guilt, and how his love for both his mother and 
his friend Frankie persist. Similarly, Ann repeatedly laments the loss of her 
dolls house, which her mother gave away when she was a child. The strong 
emotion this memory evokes indicates how formative early childhood 
experiences can be, while also suggesting the extent to which earlier 
memories may come to dominate the present in dementia. However, in the 
terms set out in Crisps study, the loss of the dolls house can also be seen as 
a metaphor expressing Anns current experiences of loss.     
86 See also Herman (2013) for an account of narrative as an instrument of mind and a sense-
making practice. 
Although much more could be said about the stories in this collection, I 
will focus on one to elucidate how the ideas discussed thus far may be 
brought to bear on a more detailed example. I focus on Janets story, not 
because it is representative, but to show how narrative identity is 
constructed in a comparatively fragmented, non-linear, and partly 
confabulatory narrative. Indeed, this text may not be considered narrative 
at all if one applies strict criteria of causal linearity and logical coherence. 
Yet in the context of everyday storytelling, let alone collaboratively 
produced dementia narratives, such criteria rarely apply (see Hyvrinen et al. 
2010, Ochs and Capps 2001). In the following discussion I elucidate how 
Janets narrative, though partly confabulatory, functions as a counter-
narrative. I engage with the question as to how much context needs to be 
restored to make sense of her utterancesand what role the listener, editor 
and reader play in constructing a coherent narrative and possibly by 
extension a coherent identity for and with Janet.    
Unlike most narratives, Janets story is framed by some introductory 
information (distinguished from the narrative proper through the use of 
italics). This introductory information states that she worked as a 
housekeeper for a large hotel in Great Yarmouth for thirty years and has 
been living in a modern purpose-built care home for three months (189). 
The first part seems intended to help the reader make sense of what she says, 
while the second emphasises the extent of her dementiasince she is 
uncertain about how long she has been in the care home and whether she 
lives there permanently. Despite her confusion, her narrative nontheless 
highlights how aware she is, both of her dementia and her environment. As 
she blandly puts it, People sometimes think Im not aware of whats 
happening but I am (189). She describes how disconcerting the symptoms 
of dementia are: I feel like Im out of my depth like Ive been swimming 
along and suddenly I cant feel the bottom. Thats the feeling. Its not my 
cup of tea at all (191). Her account is rich in emotional appeal since it 
evokes her sense of frustration, struggle and loss. Among other things, Janet 
is aghast at her loss of agency: I feel as if the rugs been pulled out from 
under my feet (191), she states. Also she feels she has been shuffled about 
a bit, inveigled or hustled into the care home by her family. Although 
Janet acknowledges that her children are trying to protect her from her own 
frailty she nevertheless states Id much rather take the risk and stay at home 
(191). Her account closes movingly with the words  all my life has gone 
nowall my memories are at homeIm sure all this is with the very best 
intentions (191). Janets evocative use of imagery and the insight she 
provides into her condition allow the reader to get a sense of what it might 
feel like to be losing all sense of certainty and agency. Her self-awareness 
clearly undermines the common presumption that people with dementia are 
mindless vegetables unaware of what is going on either inside or around 
them. 
Janets account also represents a counter-narrative in another, related 
sense. Her life experience of working in a hotel provides a framework for 
making sense ofand severely criticisingher care environment. So for 
instance, she refers to a member of staff as a waitress and to the other 
residents as guests. 
The way that waitress talks to me she swears its just not the thing. I 
told the lady last night that she didnt have to go just because they said its 
time to go to bed. I dont understand it. They came to the lounge, got hold 
of my hand and tried to cart me off to bed. I said I dont want to go to bed. 
I can go to bed on my own, thank you very much. (189) 
By applying the norms of social conduct of a hotel to her environment, Janet 
starkly highlights how radically social norms shift in the context of 
dementia care. While her account might be interpreted as a misapprehension 
of reality, the storyline she employs nevertheless exposes the forms of 
conduct in care homes as contrary to what is considered acceptable in other 
social contexts. Common courtesy, respect, and politeness all suddenly go 
out of the window: 
I think I irritate the staff sometimes but some of them are so rough that 
they scare me. I heard one of them say something to one of the guests the 
other day and I said, Please, you should say please. They looked at me 
as if Id gone mad because I asked them to say please rather than just pull 
the lady out of her chair. (190) 
In interpreting the care home as hotel Janet uses a dominant storyline from 
her life history. This storyline helps her make sense of her environment as 
well as assert her identity by linking the past to the present and by providing 
an evaluation of the current setting (rulv and Hydn 2006). Janets account 
illuminates how residents in care homes are infantilised and robbed of their 
autonomy in every conceivable instancefrequently unnecessarily. I find it 
remarkable that this aspect of her narrative, which could easily be dismissed 
as confusion, instead highlights the persistence of her social identity and 
provides a damning critique of this so-called home.  
Taken in context, Janets narrative suggests more generally how the 
whole Trebus Project represents a multi-layered and multi-faceted counter-
narrative to the dominant discourse on dementiain large part because of 
the way Clegg frames his project. The provocative title of the collection 
derives from what may be considered an exemplary counter-narrative
provided by Clegg himself. Clegg relates how Mrs Mill would camp out in 
front of the locked door to her residential unit because she wanted to get out 
to prepare tea for her husbanddead for twenty years. In order to keep her 
from obstructing the door the nursing staff would pretend her sister was on 
the phone. Clegg finds that repeatedly tricking a frail old woman and then 
hoping she would forget seemed so contrary to care, so mocking and so 
wrong that he decides to tell her the truth about her husbands demise (11). 
Clegg relates how Mrs Mill, after some initial confusion, visibly relaxed at 
the thought that her husband was not in fact waiting for her. He manages to 
persuade the staff to tell her the truth in the future. The next day he finds a 
message on the notice board: TELL MRS MILL HER HUSBAND IS STILL 
DEAD. The reader is left to infer with how much sensitivity the staff is 
likely to have proceeded. Interestingly, when more than a hundred pages 
later we come to Mrs Mills life story there is no mention of these events. 
Yet what is remarkable is, for want of a better description, how much of 
Mrs Mill is still there. She remembers her childhood and working life in 
detail and, notably, cherishes the opportunity to tell her life story: Im so 
pleased to do this I never thought I was popular enough to write a 
biography (157). Clegg advocates a change in the perception of dementia 
and the treatment of people with dementia and offers his own work as one 
way such a change can be brought about. 
Apart from this introductory anecdote, Cleggs strongest act of 
countering resides in one of the narratives in which his work as editor is 
seemingly least pronounced. The middle section of the collection is entitled 
(again provocatively) Fun and Games. This section is distinguished from 
the rest by being printed on harder, egg-shell coloured paper and framed by 
a stripy cover. It includes another introduction by Clegg in which he 
describes the opportunity to revisit three of his storytellers after a break of 
five years. Clegg here takes a much more ethnographic approach: describing 
and transcribing the background details, the date, time of day and the words, 
actions and gestures of both the residents and their caregivers. Although 
Clegg here takes less licence in editing out sections of the interaction, and 
therefore, arguably, has less of a shaping influence on the counter-narrative, 
I consider this section the most powerful counter-narrative of the 
collectionfittingly placed at its heart. In his transcriptions, Clegg provides 
context for what may otherwise seem meaningless or incoherent behaviour. 
Importantly, the detailed description reveals how callouslyand sometimes 
brutallythe care staff respond to the patients in their care. For instance, 
Clegg queries the enforced cropping of Daisys long hairlong hair which 
had previously been a great source of pride. Although her distress is evident 
in her wordslook at what they have done to me (XXXVI)Cleggs 
additional description leaves no doubt as to the meaning of her utterance: 
(She tugs violently at her cropped hair.) (XXXVI). The image of cropped 
or shaved hair is in turn reminiscent of other outrages against humanity. In 
evoking and underlining this image, Clegg highlights the brutality of acts of 
supposed care which instead humiliate and dehumanise the care-receiver.  
Conclusion 
The question of the relation between narrative and identity remains an open 
one. In this chapter I have argued that narrative identity is crucial to people 
with dementia, particularly in the context of dementia life writing. Rather 
than focusing on the ontological question of whether selfhood is constituted 
through narrative, I have suggested that narrative is a tool, a means of 
constructing and negotiating identity in the social world. Writing dementia 
autopathographies represents one means of making identity claims. In the 
context of collaborative dementia life writing, narrative is similarly a means 
of claiming identity, both locally in the context of interactions within the 
nursing home and more globally through the publication and dissemination 
of these texts to a wider audience. In turn, in order to be able to make sense 
of these narratives and understand their function, we need to expand the 
notion of coherence. In the light of ideas from conversation analysis, 
ethnographic approaches to narrative and previous research on storytelling 
in dementia, the narratives in Tell Mrs Mill can be read as 
emotionally/psychologically, thematically or metaphorically coherent. 
Further, the creation of coherence involves a collaboration among the 
storytellers, editors and readers. 
Coherence, in fact, is the contested backbone around which both identity 
narratives and counter-narratives are built. Recent work in narrative studies 
premised on the view that coherence is an interactional achievement opens 
up new avenues of thought for considering how coherence is constructed in 
collaborative dementia life writing. The operative terms then become 
positioning and performance rather than referentiality and factuality. People 
with dementia continue to make coherent, that is intelligible, identity claims. 
Whether their claims are recognised or not depends, however, less on the 
formal criteria of their identity narratives than on the willingness and ability 
of the people around them to engage with these claims. 
By showing how coherence is achieved through a two-way process that 
involves the coherence-creating capacity of the listener or reader, I have 
aimed to underline two issues: One, narratives by people with dementia, 
present an ethical demand or ought to for the listener/reader, who is 
prompted actively to engage with these attempts at meaning-making rather 
than disregard them as incoherenteven if this attempt entails the risk of 
over-reading or misinterpreting certain narratives. Two, not only narrative 
but identity is interactively and intersubjectively constructed, frequently 
through the exchange of narratives. Dementia life writing, especially 
collaborative life writing projects, acknowledge our interdependent nature
that we are socially constituted beingsthereby refuting the myth of the self 
as autonomous agent. Narrative is one means of creating and shaping a 
social environment (world-making), claiming and negotiating identity 
(self-making), and making sense of ones environment and ones position 
in the world (sense-making) (rulv and Hydn 2006)providing the 
answer to such questions as What is this? Who am I? How did I get here? 
Broadening the conception of narrative coherence we can attend to the 
actual ways people with dementia use narrative and the moves they make 
in social interactions. 
Further, I aimed to address the question to what extent life narratives by 
people with dementia represent counter-narratives to the dominant cultural 
construction of dementia as loss of self and death before death. My 
analysis of dementia autopathographies suggests that the authors of these 
texts criticise the stigma attached to Alzheimers; they reclaim a sense of 
agency for themselves by becoming writers, advice givers, and dementia 
advocates (Ryan, Bannister, and Anas 2009) and they revise the view that 
dementia entails a tragic progression of losses by suggesting ways in which 
the disease has changed them for the better (see Bryden 2005,  Lee 2003, 
Taylor 2007). But does this really mean they serve as counter-narratives vis-
-vis the dominant discourse on dementia? 
By and large, illness narrative by people with dementia represent 
ambiguous and unsettling examples of counter-narratives. Their authors 
frequently use the same dehumanising metaphors that circulate in the 
cultural imaginary to describe those in the later stages of the disease
including their prospective selves. They thereby confirm the dominant trope 
of dementia as living death (see Davis 1989, DeBaggio 2002). Moreover, 
these memoirs represent remarkably lucid, coherent and rhetorically 
powerful narratives about dementia (see, in particular Bryden 2005, 
DeBaggio 2002, McGowin 1994). There is a risk that countering is 
understood only in terms of resistance and oppositionin the sense of 
offering a counter-image to the dominant one.87 In the case of dementia life 
writing, there is an inherent risk that by (re)positioningand therefore 
valuingthe storyteller with dementia as an autonomous, able-minded, 
coherent, linguistically expressive person, as many of the above mentioned 
life narratives do, authors and readers alike continue to stigmatise the 
87 In the context of disability life writing, Thomas Couser similarly highlights the harmful 
depiction of disabled people as supercrips (Couser 2005). Seemingly positive 
representations according to the norms of the culture do little to question these norms and 
may place excessive burden on people who fall outside these norms to live up to cultural 
expectations. 
dependent, cognitively impaired persons that people with dementia 
increasingly become.  Together with disability critics I therefore query 
whether it is appropriate to use this form of life writing in rights-based 
movements in the context of neurodegenerative diseases.88  
By writing about their stigmatised diseases these authors entail certain 
risks. As Einat Avrahami has noted, in a society where health is upheld, 
paradoxically, both as a normative, regulating category and as an ideal state 
of personal utopia, the decision to disclose a seriously debilitating illness is 
itself transgressive, verging on admittance to a state of sin (Avrahami 2007: 
76). The authors of dementia autopathographies are well aware of such risks. 
In some cases, by positioning themselves as able-minded in their 
narratives, these authors may therefore be seen as attempting to curtail the 
risk of associating with dementia. Such a move will necessarily be double-
edged. 
In any case, neither the narratives nor the identities that these narratives 
project are untouched by the dominant, and overly negative cultural 
construction of dementia. This can be seen, for instance, in the reduced 
levels of self-esteem experienced by most narrators due to the cultural 
meaning attached to the symptoms of dementia. Even this expression of 
lowered self-esteem, however, can in itself be considered an act of 
countering in that it alerts the reader to the negative impact of the cultural 
construction of dementia. Countering is never a simple act and reading 
counter-narratives depends as much on authorial intent as it does on the 
perspective and values of the reader. 
Reading the collaborative life stories in Tell Mrs Mill we find that any 
given narrative may counter a different strand of the dominant discourse on 
dementia. Counter-narratives are also constructed at different levels: by the 
storyteller(s) in the original interaction; by the listener and interlocutor 
David Clegg; by the numerous editors of the stories; by the general reader; 
and by this reader and researcher, myself. My own research agenda will, of 
course, significantly shape the counter-narratives I construct (Jones 2004). 
88 Autopathography tends to be a white middle class endeavour not representative of other 
sections of society. While collaborative life writing is more diverse in terms of class and 
race it runs into similar ethical problems concerning the power dynamics of representation 
as ethnography. 
In the final analysis, counter-narrativesin general and about the 
experience of dementia in particularrepresent a subjective category that 
depends on the convictions and agenda of all involved, including the beliefs 
and goals of the researcher studying these stories. What is the story that I 
myself want to hear? Could it be that I herald certain narratives as counter-
narratives because I need reassuring narratives of resilience in the face of 
cognitive decline (see also Herskovits 1995)? Am I thereby continuing to 
ignore the essential vulnerability of human lifepreferring to erase the 
presence of decline and death in what is already a death-denying society? 
On the flip side, by criticising the authors of dementia memoirs for using the 
same devastating metaphors for dementia as are current in popular culture, 
and by claiming that these narratives on this account partially fail as 
counter-narratives, am I not denying these authors the right to express their 
fears about their illness through the means they find most pertinent?89 The 
problem remains too, that by highlighting how people with dementia 
continue to use narrative to make identity claims, I leave untouched the 
pernicious effects of the narrative constitution viewthat is, the view that 
identity is not just negotiated but constituted by storiesfor those who are 
no longer able to tell even these minimally coherent narratives. I therefore 
do not purport to provide here a definitive account of what counter-
narratives in dementia look like. Instead, I hope to have opened the floor for 
further debate about how we think aboutand act towardspeople living 
with dementia. 
The question of how to represent late-stage dementia remains. While 
current dehumanising tropes in the media increase fear and anxiety in the 
population as a whole and increase the stigma attached to the disease, there 
is also a responsibility to engage with our shared vulnerability. Therefore 
not to represent people in the later stages is equally problematic. Eliding the 
later stages or putting a positive twist on them, furthermore, risks denying 
the reality of the disease, and may also undermine needs-based advocacy 
movements that aim to increase funding for this care sector. How can we 
89 Compare the problem of triumph narratives as models for telling about serious illness 
(Conway 2007). Conway suggests that the triumph plot type suppresses some authors need 
and ability to express the calamity illness may present. 
represent people with advanced symptoms of dementia without othering 
them? Couser (2004) suggests drawing on contemporary ethics of 
ethnography, and based on his framework I argue that collaborative life 
writing projects, although clearly not exempt from ethical pitfalls, provide 
one productive means to attempt to represent dementia, as much from the 
inside out as possible. Whether this view may be able to counter the 
stigma attached to dementia or not will depend to a large extent on the 
reader.  
Collaborative life story work pays due attention to the interdependent 
and intersubjective nature of our lives and identities. Maybe the most vital 
counter-narrative is not the one that asserts agency and autonomy in cases 
where we no longer expect it but the one that draws attention to our 
vulnerability and interdependencyin practical matters as well as in matters 
of identity. The ability to express ones subjectivity, to tell an identity 
narrative, is not solely dependent on the individual but is rather a function of 
a communicative situation, which is co-created. Our identities rely on the 
willingness of others to engage with us and listen. 
Chapter 4 Relational Identity in (Filial) Dementia 
Caregivers Memoirs 
In this chapter, I investigate what caregivers memoirs contribute to an 
understanding of relational identity in dementia, and how genre and gender 
may modulate this understanding of relational identity. What is at stake in 
writing about a family member with dementia? Can caregivers memoirs 
contribute to a more nuanced understanding of what exactly is lost and what, 
in fact, remains? To answer these questions, I situate the subgenre of filial 
dementia memoirs in the wider political and literary context of a fast-
growing number of dementia caregivers memoirs. Genre, as Couser points 
out, is not about mere literary form; its about forcewhat a narratives 
purpose is, what impact it seeks to have on the world (Couser 2012: 9). In 
investigating caregivers memoir as a genre, and sketching out a number of 
subgenres, my intention is to highlight their particular political force as well 
as to explore the ethical issues raised by dementia life writing. I then move 
on to a close analysis of select examples of filial caregivers memoirs to 
address the impact of gender, genre and medium on relational identity: 
Jonathan Franzens autobiographical essay My Fathers Brain (2002), 
Judith Levines memoir Do You Remember Me? (2004) and Sarah Leavitts 
graphic memoir Tangles (2010).  
The Aesthetics, Ethics, and Politics of Caregivers Memoirs 
Caregivers memoirs are by far the most common type of dementia narrative. 
These autobiographical texts are written by family members, usually 
spouses or adult children,90 who are involved in the care of a family member 
with dementia. In detailing the progress of the disease, they represent a 
significant number of narratives of illness and disability that have emerged 
within the context of the memoir boom of the last few decades (Smith and 
Watson 2010). The memoirs often deal with the first occurrence of minor 
symptoms of dementia, the difficult process from denial to diagnosis, and a 
critique of the failures of the care system, thereby drawing on some of the 
90 Occasionally they may be written by a long-standing family friend (see Heywood 1994), 
or an in-law (see Gillies 2010). 
staple components of the master plot of illness narratives (see Avrahami 
2007: 75).  At the same time, caregivers memoirs are paradigmatic 
examples of what have been termed relational autobiographies (Couser 
2012, Eakin 1998, 1999, Smith and Watson 2010). While it has become a 
critical commonplace in life writing studies that all autobiography 
necessarily includes the lives of others and therefore is more properly 
described as heterobiography (Couser 2004: x) or auto/biography, 
caregivers memoirs, in particular, include significant parts of the life of the 
person with dementia, while also narrating the shared life history of 
caregiver and care-receiver.  
Caregivers memoirs are frequently born out of an impulse to 
memorialise the parent or spouse, 91 92 as well as out of the need to make 
sense of the devastating experience of watching a loved person die with 
dementia (see also Couser 2009: 223). Indeed, authors frequently comment 
on the therapeutic quality of writing, both during caregiving and after the 
family members death. In a first step, a diary or journal may provide a 
coping mechanism: an outlet for negative emotions that arise in the course 
of caregiving. Later, reworking these diary entries into a coherent memoir is, 
as Couser notes, a way of grieving, of achievingor at least approaching
emotional closure on a painful chapter of ones own life (Couser 2009: 
228). For literary memoirists the intellectual pursuit of researching and 
writing about dementia might be therapeutic because it provides a means of 
distancing themselves from the emotional rawness of caregiving 
encounters.93 It might also provide the caregivers with a meaningful activity 
in the face of a neurodegenerative disease that is prima facie meaning-
91 Less frequently, caregivers memoirs may aim to settle old scores. When written in a 
vindictive mood or when gratuitously exposing the dead or dying person, caregivers 
memoirs may be considered ethically dubious. The reception of Tilman Jens (2009) 
memoir about his father Walter Jens, a well-known German intellectual, provides a case in 
point. In the UK, John Bayley was criticised for publishing his memoir Elegy For Iris 
(1999) about his wife, the writer and philosopher Iris Murdoch, while she was still alive but 
too advanced in her disease to challenge his representation. 
92 Memoirs may serve the double function of memorialising a parent and providing an 
extended family memoir, such as Grant (1998) on her Eastern European Jewish heritage, 
Appignanesi (1999) on her Jewish familys history during the Holocaust in Poland, or 
Gordon (2007) on her mid-century American Catholic working class background. 
93 Graham (1997) suggests that writing provides such a distancing effect and a means of 
coping with illness by allowing the author to remain an authorative agent in one domain of 
her life. His analysis is concerned only with autopathographies written by the person 
affected by the disease but can be seen to apply equally to caregivers memoirs.   
defying. In many cases, the memoirs allow their authors to maintain a 
relationship to a declining and finally absent family member, by 
reconstructing and at times revising or re-envisioning their previous 
relationship. 
At the same time, the status and skill of these memoirists has 
implications for the political force of their narratives. In the spirit of the 
second-wave feminist slogan the personal is political, professional 
writers94 use their personal struggle with caregiving to engage the wider 
public in a debate about the ethics and politics of dementia care. Not unlike 
autopathographies by people with dementia, relational memoirs challenge 
the stigma attached to dementia, criticise the current health care system and 
seek to raise awareness for the financial, practical, emotional and ethical 
problems attendant on this condition. The writers of caregivers memoirs 
also aim to provide solace, support and advice for people who find 
themselves in a similar situation. As Arthur W. Frank has argued in relation 
to illness narratives in general, these stories are for the other. Frank sees 
such stories as living up to the moral duty of bearing witness (Frank 1995: 
17). However, such texts are not without certain ethical risks themselves. 
In fact, Couser identifies intimate life writingthat done within families, 
couples or close relationshipsas particularly prone to ethical pitfalls: The 
closer the relationship between writer and subject, and the greater the 
vulnerability or dependency of the subject, the higher the ethical stakes, and 
the more urgent the need for ethical scrutiny, he writes (Couser 2004: xii). 
People with dementia represent vulnerable subjectsdefined by Couser as 
persons who are liable to exposure by someone with whom they are 
involved in an intimate or trust-based relationship but are unable to 
represent themselves in writing or to offer meaningful consent to their 
representation by someone else (Couser 2004: xii). Indeed, according to 
Couser, dementia makes a person doubly vulnerable: subject to harm (abuse 
and exploitation) in their life and, in the context of life writing, vulnerable to 
being misrepresented (Couser 2004: x)at times, in such exposing media as 
94 Authors discussed here are fiction and memoir writers, poets, or work in professions such 
as journalism, broadcasting or literary criticism.  
film or photography.95  Furthermore, since people with dementia depend on 
others for tasks of daily living their caregivers have access to intimate 
details of their lives. These may be moments of confusion, hallucination, or 
loss of control over bodily functions. When such intimate moments are 
exposed in relational autobiographies, these texts violate the privacy of the 
person with dementia.  
Nancy K. Miller picks up on this sense of violation when she claims that 
writing about a parents death necessarily entails some form of betrayal 
(Miller 1996). The authors of filial caregivers memoirs frequently 
experience a sense of transgression. Mary Gordon, in describing her 
mothers bodily disintegration, notably feels like Ham, the son of Noah, the 
betraying son (Gordon 2007: 216). Deliberating on the conflicting demands 
of witnessing (and bearing witness in writing) and the injunction not to 
expose others, Gordon decides that she has made the most dishonourable 
choice: to speak and then to confess ones own (superior) knowledge of the 
dishonour of speaking (Gordon 2007: 217). The writers of caregivers 
memoirs struggle over the conflicting demands of their own need to tell on 
the one hand, and, on the other hand, the ethical imperative not to harm the 
family member with dementia. This conflict becomes particularly 
pronounced when the narrative reveals transgressions that involve 
disclosing intimate details that the subject has specifically asked not to be 
revealed, or when the person with dementia is defined as a private and 
reticent personas for instance in Jonathan Franzens description of his 
father Earl: My father was an intensely private person, and privacy for him 
had the connotation of keeping the shameful content of ones inner life out 
of public sight. Could there have been a worse disease for him than 
Alzheimers? (Franzen 2002: 24). The reader may wonder instead whether 
95 See Tony Harrisons (1993) film-poem Black Daisies for the Bride which, while winning 
a number of awards, was greeted with mixed responsesas can be gleaned from the 
reaction of one reviewer (Pitt 1993) as well as Burkes discussion of the work (Burke 
2007b). The film poem or musical docu-drama displays, alongside actors, the patients of a 
closed mental ward. These patients were unable to provide meaningful consent at the 
relative stages of their disease and their representation in the film raises uncomfortable 
questions with regard to the ethics of spectatorship (Burke 2007b: 62). John Killicks 
collaboration with a photographer (Killick and Cordonnier 2000) raises similar issues.  
there could have been a worse fate than being exposed posthumously by the 
sons writing. 
The possible misrepresentation of people with dementia might not only 
be harmful to the individual, or the individual persons memory, but also to 
other people suffering from the condition, in that a gruesome or 
dehumanising representation might reinforce the stigma attached to 
dementia (see Couser 2004: 31). As Couser notes, we need to recognise that 
groups, and not just individuals, may have interests, if not rights, and those 
interests may be harmed by representation (2005: 20). In this connection, it 
is important to distinguish between the mimetic and the political dimension 
of representation (Couser 2004: x).  
The mimetic dimension of representation raises questions about 
faithfulness to reality. Here the issue of infringing on another persons 
privacy and dignity, or to put it another way, the problem of voyeurism, is 
weighed against the writers need to provide a full account of his or her 
experience; for therapeutic reasons, because this constitutes part of the 
writers own story, or because the writer wants to raise awareness for 
aspects of dementia care that are silenced by powerful taboos concerning 
what type of story it is appropriate to tell. As Couser points out, memoirists 
assume two types of obligations: one to the historical or biographical record 
and another to the people they depict (Couser 2012: 10). At times these 
obligations may indeed be diametrically opposed. 
Representation in the political sense refers to the notion that in writing 
about certain groups or conditions, writers may actually be attempting to 
speak for those groups, that is, advocate for their rights and interests. A 
large number of dementia narratives by caregivers, explicitly or implicitly, 
engage with the politics of care: the insufficiency of care provisions, the 
callousness or ignorance of care professionals in relation to people with 
dementia, and the need for better, more sustainable and affordable dementia 
care. In pursuing better care provisions, writers simultaneously advocate for 
people with dementia and their caregivers. The question remains, who has 
the right to speak for a certain group; and what conditions or relationships, 
if any, confer surrogacy in life writing (Couser 2004: xi). 
The hybrid nature of relational life writing makes it difficult to decide to 
whom a life or life story belongs (see also Miller 1996: 3). Thinking about 
lives narratives in terms of property highlights that telling another persons 
life may represent an appropriation of that persons story. Paul J. Eakin has 
foregrounded the importance of the story of the story (Eakin 1998) when 
evaluating the extent to which a life narrative represents an appropriation of 
anothers story. Eakin is primarily concerned with memoirs that claim to 
incorporate their subjects own autobiography, such as as told-to 
narratives by slaves or indigenous people in the US. The memoirs I am 
concerned with rarely, if ever, claim to be telling the story from the point of 
view of the subject with dementia. However, different narratives allow for 
varying degrees of self-representation, or for the voice or perspective of 
the person with dementia to shine through.96 In representing dialogue with 
the person with dementia, the persons behaviour, or even attempts at 
conveying their thoughts, fears or attitudes, these memoirs risk over-writing, 
misreading or misrepresenting the subjectivity of the person with dementia. 
The writers of caregivers memoirs acknowledge the problem of 
appropriation and of misrepresentation, admitting also the limits of their 
own faulty memory. Rachel Hadas, in the prologue to her memoir cum 
poetry about her husbands early-onset dementia, notes: 
This story, if it is a story, lacks both a clear beginning and a final 
resolution. Within the cloudy confines of those years  I tried to keep 
track; I tried to tell the truth. Nevertheless, it is largely a one-sided truth  
I cant claim to be telling the story from his point of view. For better or 
worse, this is my story. (Hadas 2011: xi; my emphasis)   
Caregivers memoirs are frequently hedged by such disclaimers. Authors 
subscribe to an ethics of truth-telling while they simultaneously 
acknowledge the impossibility of realising such an agenda. At the same time, 
these memoirs become the stories of their authors not only because they 
outlive their subjects, but also because of their urgent need to tell:   
96 I am thinking here, for instance, of the potential of documentary film in contrast to 
written representations. As discussed in chapter 1, documentary allows for the words and 
gestures of the person with dementia to be recorded and re-transmitted verbatim. Although 
editing still raises the possibility of over-writing, the words and gestures of the person with 
dementia as well as their caregiver remain unchanged. See on this point Cousers 
discussion of Oliver Sacks television documentaries (Couser 2004). 
This is the way I have to tell this story, moving from these details into my 
parents lives, my fathers history. Into how it was for us. And all the while 
I feel behind me, over my right shoulder and my left, the sense of both my 
parents, of how differently they would tell it  Of how my representation 
itself makes the story mine, not hers or his. But uneasy and unsure as I 
sometimes feel as I call up the memories and the words to cast them in, I 
am the one who has the need to do it. (Miller 2003: 48; original emphasis) 
Such disclaimers and moments of self-reflection can be seen to represent 
the story of the story and play into the readers evaluation of the life 
narrative. 
Caregivers memoirs also raise aesthetic questions entangled with their 
ethics: how much poetic licence can one person take with another persons 
life? Does truthfulness to the biographical record outweigh aesthetic 
considerations of beauty and balance, on the linguistic and structural plane? 
Does the shock aesthetic of voyeurism, providing insight into intimate 
moments of bodily decline and dysfunction (at times going so far as to 
describe the actual moment of death) gratuitously violate the other persons 
privacy and dignity? And how does one create a coherent story out of 
dementia, provide closure in the face of the open-endedness of life? Couser 
has addressed some of these questions under the heading of the poetics of 
illness narratives (Couser 1997: 13-14). He particularly points to the 
intertextual nature of illness narratives, asking what genres, conventions, 
and formulas they employ. These questions of genre bear on how we are to 
interpret a memoir (Couser 2012: 38). 
Caregivers memoirs can be classified into a number of subgenres based 
on the type of literary genre(s) and media they draw on. Often this choice 
reflects the kind of audience the author aims to engage. Memoirs aimed 
primarily at other caregivers may be closer to advice literature or self-help 
books (see Alterra 1999). Those engaged in dementia advocacy frequently 
employ a journalistic style presenting current research into the condition
including demographics, drug research, the history of the disease, and 
philosophical inquiry (see Gillies 2010, Levine 2004, Magnusson 2014). 
They may also draw on literary genres such as testimony, apology, 
conversion narrative, elegy, or the bildungsroman. In the latter case, the 
memoir might enact the authors journey of discovery into the ways in 
which the potential for relationships and love remains, despite an initially 
bleak outlook based on the cultural script of inexorable decline. Filial 
narratives, in addressing the difficult ethical issues of exposing their parents 
lives, frequently draw on confessional life writing genresnot to be judged 
(and forgiven) by God but by their (secular) readers. Finally, these memoirs 
also often act as a memento mori, a reflection on the authors own inevitable 
decline and death.   
Drawing attention to the aesthetic, mimetic and political aspects of 
representation should not lead to the erroneous conclusion that these are 
neatly segregated dimensions. On the contrary, instances of 
misrepresentation by the standards of the individual with dementia may in 
fact be a fairly accurate representation of the effects of the disease, and 
necessary for political advocacy. However, an overly negative or 
dehumanising representation of people with dementia may reinforce the 
stigma of the disease and thereby disincline the reader or audience towards 
engaging with people with dementiathus indirectly harming the interests 
of all people suffering from the disease syndrome. Conversely, and 
somewhat paradoxically, a positive picture of dementia might equally be 
harmful for the community of dementia sufferers. Highlighting the 
persistence of personhood and the ability of people with dementia to 
contribute to society and engage in relationships risks eliding the difficulties 
both of caregiving and of living with dementia, thereby potentially 
undermining urgent calls for more support.  
It is important to note that caregivers memoirs are situated in the wider 
politics of cultural representation which affects whose life gets written (or 
published) in the first place and whose story gets read, or achieves critical 
acclaim. There are political (and demographic) reasons, for instance, to 
support a gender-sensitive approach to caregivers memoirs. The provision 
of care remains, globally, womans work (see World Health Organization 
2012: 69). Furthermore, the correlation between old age and dementia 
coupled with greater longevity in women means that, overall, more women 
than men are affected by the disease. More mother-daughter pairs, 
consequently, are engaged in the giving and receiving of dementia care. And 
yet, the only article to date to address filial caregivers memoirs notes a 
significant disparity between the demographics of the epidemic as a whole 
(and its representation in all published life writing) and the demographics of 
what might be called its literary representation (Couser 2009: 226; original 
emphasis). Couser remarks that despite a preponderance of women both as 
subjects and as narrators of dementia memoirs, the most visible memoirs, 
that is, those published by a mainstream press and recognized by 
mainstream reviewers (226), concern male subjects (and/or are written by 
male authors). While his analysis seems a fairly apt description of the North 
American contextalthough Couser omits examples of female authorship 
and female subjects that fall within the domain of literary memoirs (see 
Appignanesi 1999, Cooney 2003, Gordon 2007) 97 the situation is 
somewhat different on the other side of the Atlantic. One of the earliest 
British dementia memoirs is Linda Grants Remind Me Who I Am, Again 
about her mothers multi-infarct dementia.98 99 The title insistently calls 
attention to the relational component of identity construction. Equally, the 
last two memoirs to have achieved wide dissemination and to have won 
critical awards in the United Kingdom were both by and about female 
subjects (Gillies 2010, Magnusson 2014). I aim to redress this critical 
oversight of literary mother-daughter memoirs, by including a case study of 
Sarah Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles, while also emphasising the 
complex role of relational identity in any form of dementia life writing.100   
Beside questions of gender, the nature of the relationship to the person 
with dementia has important implications for the representation of the 
disease. If life writing can be seen as making identity claims, then one 
question to consider is what kind of claims are made in relational memoirs 
for both subjects involved. Are caregivers primarily concerned with the 
diseased persons loss of social rolestheir role as parent or spouse or their 
professional identityor are they concerned with the loss of certain 
characteristics of the person? Do they affirm the relationship and focus on 
97 A definitive inventory of such a fast-growing genre as filial dementia memoirs lies 
beyond the scope of this chapter. 
98 Grants memoir was preceded by Heywoods Caring for Maria (1994), a relatively 
unusual case of non-spousal male caregiving.  
99 Compare also the works of the French author Annie Ernaux (1987, 1999).  
100 The limited focus here on white, middle class Anglophone life writing needs to be 
expanded to take into account life narratives from other cultures and sections of society. A 
more extensive study would also address on-line and new media acts of self-
representation (see Smith and Watson 2009) 
what remains, or do they focus on what is lost? Do they help to preserve the 
individuality of the sufferer in contrast to a medical perspective that tends to 
conceive of people with dementia as a homogeneous group, or do they 
accede to the cultural script of dementia as dehumanising death before 
death? And how is the caregivers identity affected by the family members 
dementia? 
With regard to these questions, dementia in a parent might have different 
effects on a caregivers sense of self than if a life partner is losing his or her 
memory. Filial narratives often comment on the sense that roles have been 
inverted: parents have become children. And yet they simultaneously assert 
a continuing need for the parents to act as parents. Couser notes that as the 
baby boomers assume increasing responsibility for dependent parents, they 
are stimulated to reflect on the way they were parented and the extent to 
which they identify with their parents (Couser 2009: 227). In my reading, 
female authors writing about their mothers often identify strongly with them; 
compare Annie Ernauxs stark claim I am her (Ernaux 1999: 17).101 
However, gender affiliations may not unfold as expected. John Thorndike, 
in assuming the role of caregiver for his father, sees himself as taking his 
mothers role. He also identifies more strongly with his mother with respect 
to his temperament and his need for physical intimacy. Franzen, according 
to Couser (2009: 230), aligns himself with his father against his mothers 
materialism and insensitivity. And yet, in emphasising his fathers intensely 
reserved nature, Franzen, as a writer of autobiography, may also be seen as 
diametrically opposed to his father. Like many other filial memoirs, Franzen 
underscores the importance of his fathers role in his life: I was inclined to 
interpolate across my fathers silences and mental absences and to persist in 
seeing him as the same old wholly whole Earl Franzen. I still needed him to 
be an actor in my story of myself (2002: 15; my emphasis). In considering 
relationality then, one can ask a number of questions: What is the nature of 
the relationship between the author and the person with dementia? How is it 
affected, both positively and negatively by the disease and the process of 
101 Burke (2014: 29) argues that Ernauxs identification with her mother and exposure of 
painful and undignified experiences in both their lives leads to a reproduction of violence 
on the narrative plane. 
caregiving and care-writing? To what extent is identity, generally, relational? 
How does the narrative reconstruct, revise or perform relational identity?  
Indeed, memoirs can be viewed as enacting a form of relational identity, 
which is both particularly pertinent and particularly troubled in the context 
of neurodegenerative disease. Originally proposed as a concept to capture 
the unique development of female identity in both life and life writingin 
opposition to Gusdorfian notions of the autobiographical self as autonomous 
agent (Gusdorf 1980)relational identity is now recognised as central to 
both male and female identity construction (Eakin 1998, Miller 1994, Parker 
2004, Peaches 2006). Since our identities are constituted through 
interactions with others (Sabat and Harr 1992), relational identity, and the 
telling of another persons life narrative, may present a reparative move to 
counter the loss of identity in dementia. Significant others, such as family 
members, are then called on to continue to tell the life story of their loved 
one (Radden and Fordyce 2006). However, relational identity is a two-way 
system. Lucy Burke points out that reading dementia narratives highlights 
the degree to which the task of sustaining anothers identity is 
problematized by the rupturing of mutual recognition (Burke 2014: 45). 
Burke questions facile recourses to intersubjectivity and narrative identity 
as a means of sustaining personhood in dementia. While she acknowledges 
the importance of telling anothers story, she nevertheless cautions that 
such a task is more complex and potentially more difficult than a simple 
evocation of intersubjectivity implies (45-6). Caregivers memoirs bear out 
the point that the caregivers own identity is significantly affected by the 
onset of dementia in a parent or spouse and that intersubjective 
understanding is no easy feat. Furthermore, narrativising the others life 
story, while serving the important function of memorialising the other, can 
never do justice entirely to the subjectivity of a person with dementia. 
Caregivers memoirs explore this complex interplay of memory, narrative 
and relational identity. 
What happens, then, when the person with dementia loses the ability to 
recognise significant others? Lucy Burke explores this breakdown of 
intersubjectivity in dementia through a close reading of a novel: Michael 
Ignatieffs Scar Tissue. Burke suggests that the narrator loses his self when 
his mother fails to recognise him. I propose that we need, instead, to attend 
more closely to how the breakdown or, alternatively, the reparative potential 
of relational and narrative identity plays out in contemporary dementia 
memoirs. Lack of recognition may severely impact on the caregivers sense 
of self, irrespective of gender or the nature of the relationship. At the same 
time, the authors of caregivers memoirs may develop new and various 
forms of intersubjective understanding in engaging with their family 
member. Their narratives bear witness to the importance not only of 
recognition of historical roles (as parent or spouse) but also of recognition 
of the evolving personality of the person with dementia, revealing the need 
for caregivers to find new ways of acknowledging the others continuing 
subjectivity.   
Gender, Genre and the Self: Rethinking Relational Identity in 
Dementia 
The question of self, or loss of self, is without doubt the central concern of 
most, if not all, discussions of dementia. Unsurprisingly then, it is also at the 
forefront of a number of memoirsas expressed in the subtitle to Judith 
Levines memoir: a Search for the Self. In these memoirs, caregivers 
explore the question of how pathology and personality interact. The authors 
also explore how their own identity is affected by their family members 
dementia and throw new light on how relational identity plays out in this 
context. They find that everyday encounters with the person with dementia 
throw up challenges to previously held beliefsboth about the disease and 
about the nature of the self. Many authors consequently work towards a new 
understanding of the disease syndrome: they trace the history of the 
biomedicalisation of dementia, integrate recent neuroscientific findings, and 
incorporate critiques of the current model of dementia. In tracking their 
authors development towards a more accepting position and a greater 
sensitivity towards the needs of people with dementia, these memoirs, in a 
sense, provide a model trajectory for the reader. Part bildungsroman, part 
advice literature (but in a more self-reflective mode), these memoirs fulfil 
important pedagogical functions. Even if their authors attitudes (and 
behaviour) are frequently less than model in the moral sense, these texts 
register conflicting attitudes towards the question of selfhood in dementia 
and may therefore spark debate about the complex nature of identity. This is 
not an insubstantial contribution in a culture where rights-based ethics 
predominate, and where cognitivist notions of personhood underpin the 
recognition of these rights. 
My Fathers Brain 
Jonathan Franzens essay My Fathers Brain (2002), provides a miniature 
case study of the effect of cultural scripts, gender and genre on questions of 
selfhood in dementia.102 It also highlights some of the ethical pitfalls of 
writing about a family member with dementia. As the title suggests, the 
essay explores the nature of the relationship between neurology, memory 
and identity. It also touches on some of the staples of dementia narratives, 
such as the history of the disease, the insidious onset of Alzheimers and the 
familys subsequent slow road toward recognition. Franzen sees his 
unwillingness to recognise his fathers dementia at least partially as a way 
of protecting the specificity of Earl Franzen from the generality of a 
nameable condition (Franzen 2002: 19). His attitude also reflects his 
scepticism of the biomedical model that turns people into patients. Franzen 
is particularly concerned about the way biomedicine currently holds 
primacy in explaining human behaviour: 
Conditions have symptoms; symptoms point to the organic basis of 
everything we are. They point to the brain as meat. And, where I ought to 
recognize that, yes, the brain is meat, I seem instead to maintain a blind 
spot across which I then interpolate stories that emphasize the more soul-
like aspects of the self. Seeing my afflicted father as a set of organic 
symptoms would invite me to understand the healthy Earl Franzen (and the 
healthy me) in symptomatic terms as well  to reduce our beloved 
personalities to finite sets of neurochemical coordinates. Who wants a 
story of life like that? (2002: 19-20)  
Franzen, instead, counters the dominant biomedical explanation of dementia 
by telling stories of his fathers life, of sections where their lives overlapped, 
102 See also Krger-Frhoff (2015). I differ from her interpretations of this text as a joint 
narration between father and son (99). Further, there is little critical reflection in her essay 
on Franzens interpretation of his fathers behaviour as a heroic act of asserting his will. 
and, significantly, by reflecting on the stories we tell about Alzheimers in 
our society. Franzen, for instance, is concerned that scientific research 
literalises and reinforces the Alzheimers patient as child metaphor. The 
disease progression mirrors in reversed order the developmental 
achievements of a child. David Shenk (2001) has suggested that there may 
be some redeeming aspects to the reversion to a state comparable with 
infancy in that it provides a release from responsibility with the concomitant 
ability to live inand potentially savourthe present. Franzen invokes the 
metaphor of second childishness, only to assert his fathers individuality 
and reclaim his identity from the homogenising effect of the disease label. 
Indeed, Franzen suggests that his fathers drive for adult independence is 
genderedpart and parcel of his male identity:  
Unlike the female inmates, who at one moment were wailing like babies 
and at the next moment glowing with pleasure while someone fed them ice 
cream, I never saw my father cry, and the pleasure he took in ice cream 
never ceased to look like an adults. (Franzen 2002: 28)103 
To Franzen, the persistence of his fathers will symbolises the continuing 
essence of his fathers personality. In his sons interpretation, Earls death 
from starvation is not a symptom of dementiain the course of the disease 
any patient who lives long enough will lose the ability to swallowbut a 
conscious decision to put an end to his life. Similarly, Franzen sees his 
fathers sudden breakdown on entering hospitala delirium comparable to 
the one Sally Magnusson describes in her mother during a stay in hospital
not as a common experience of Alzheimers patients confronted with an 
alienating and unfamiliar environment, but as an expression of his fathers 
will to crash (30). Or rather, as Franzen suggests, it is a relinquishment of 
that will, a letting-go, an embrace of madness in the face of unbearable 
emotion (30). In other words, Franzen asserts the individuality of his father 
against a neurochemical understanding of how behaviour is affected by 
neuronal breakdown.   
And yet, Franzen acknowledges that this interpretation of his fathers 
behaviour is a product of his own needs: what I want (stories of my fathers 
brain that are not about meat) is integral to what I choose to remember and 
103 Franzen here repeats long-standing gender stereotypes, which cast childish behaviour as 
female.  
retell (31). In the end, Franzen remains undecided on the question of 
selfhood in dementia. While Franzen sees his fathers will, and therefore 
essence, as persisting until the very last moment, this selfhood is always 
also dependent on the sons perceptionor even on his creation. The self 
arises from the process of seeing a whole where there are only fragments, of 
fashion[ing] stories  of a man whose will remained intact enough to avert 
his face when I tried to clear his mouth out with a moist foam swab (36). In 
a sense, Franzens view is overtly and maybe excessively social 
constructivist; his fathers identity is entirely reliant on being constructed in 
the words and eyes of his family. In response to his mothers words I see 
now  that when youre dead youre really dead, Franzen proclaims But, 
in the slow-motion way of Alzheimers, my father wasnt much deader now 
than hed been two hours or two weeks or two months ago. Wed simply 
lost the last parts out of which we could fashion a living whole (37-8).104  
However, reflecting on the commonplace trope of Alzheimers that its 
particular sadness and horror stem from the sufferers loss of his or her 
self long before the body dies  causes Franzen to wonder whether 
memory and consciousness have such secure title, after all, to the seat of 
selfhood. Franzen concludes: I cant stop looking for meaning in the two 
years that followed his loss of his supposed self, and I cant stop finding it 
(30).  
Franzen subscribes to a number of dehumanising and infantilising 
conceptualisations of Alzheimers, such as using the trope of death before 
death, invoking the image of his father as an unstrung marionette, eyes 
mad and staring, mouth sagging (28), comparing his father to a one-year 
old (28), and his state to an unwanted second childhood (35). And yet he 
recognises and celebrates lucid moments, comments on verbal and 
nonverbal forms of communication and continues to find meaning until 
the very end of his fathers life. Indeed, as in other descriptions of dementia, 
104 While Franzens view risks dehumanising people with dementia, casting them as the 
living dead, it also points to the kind of pre-death grieving many caregivers experience. 
Noyes and his collaborators (2010) make the case that the magnitude of stress caused by 
ongoing caregiver grief is equal to, or even greater than post-death grieving. Franzens 
mother, contrary to her son, makes a clear-cut distinction between the actual death and the 
metaphorical death of a person. Similarly, Sue Miller, present at her fathers death, recalls 
the feeling that he was suddenly, palpably, absent (2003: 153; original emphasis).  
the disease at times seems to make his father more like himself, as when his 
inability to communicate exacerbates his former characteristic unwillingness 
to communicate. Significantly, much of the meaning Franzen detects rests in, 
or is communicated through, the body. He speaks, for instance, of some 
bodily remnant of self-discipline (30) and recognises the importance of 
bodily identity:  
Hour after hour, my father worked his way toward death; but when he 
yawned, the yawn was his. And his body, wasted though it was, was 
likewise still radiantly his. Even as the surviving parts of his self grew 
smaller and more fragmented, I persisted in seeing a whole. I still loved, 
specifically and individually, the man who was yawning in that bed. (36) 
Somewhat ironically, while Franzen is bent on upholding an individualistic, 
self-disciplined and mature version of his fathers self, his essay bears 
witness to the fundamentally relational and interdependent aspects of 
identity. Relationships are fundamental in re-constituting and recognising 
his fathers identity. Relationality plays out negatively, in that his fathers 
confusion and memory loss impact on his mothers sense of self (25), but 
also positively, in that his father long continues to perform his role and 
loving duty as grandfather. Further, despite losing the specific knowledge of 
their relationship, Franzens father never fails to recognise his son as 
someone he was happy to see (27). 
In many ways, Franzens ambivalence about the effects of dementia on 
his fathers identity is representative of most caregivers memoirs. Many 
memoirs seem to simultaneously assert and deny the persistence of identity 
in dementia. By taking into account the autobiographical, relational and 
embodied aspects of selfhood, Franzen helps the reader understand the 
complex ways in which the self is constituted and the ways in which it may 
persist. Franzen criticises overly materialist views of identityresisting the 
view that reduce[s] our beloved personalities to finite sets of neurochemical 
coordinates (Franzen 2002: 20). That said, he oscillates between conceding 
that the brain is meat (19; my emphasis) and offering the reader stories 
that challenge neuroscientific understandings of dementia. In a sense, 
Franzens essay both enacts and reflects on the driving motivation of illness 
narratives to return the voice of the patient to the world of medicine, a 
world where that voice is too rarely heard, [by asserting] the 
phenomenological, the subjective, and the experiential side of illness 
(Hawkins 1993: 12). Franzen stresses the need to assert the personal 
dimensions of illness, not only for the person suffering from a disease, but 
also for their immediate family members.  
As already mentioned, My Fathers Brain raises serious concerns about 
the ethics of recounting events involving a person with dementia whom the 
author himself describes as intensely private (24). Is he, as Nancy K. 
Miller claims about Spiegelmans and Roths memoirs about their fathers, 
flaunting the artists power to override paternal authority (Miller 1996: 13)? 
Invariably, Miller notes, childrens right to produce these representations 
of their parents raises an ethical problem. The dead instantly lose their 
entitlement to privacy (13).105 What is more, Franzen exposes not his father, 
but also his mother by criticising her behaviour and publicly proclaiming his 
parents an unhappy marriage. He even quotes his mothers letters at length, 
in a bid to retrace his fathers decline. In doing so, he makes a private 
communication public, exposes her feelings, views and personal style to 
public scrutiny. As with other memoirs, one is tempted to ask, is there some 
ethical pay-off for this intrusion on another persons right to privacy? 
On a first reading I was tempted to answer such a question in the 
negative. The author seems to be using his fathers disease and demise 
mainly to pursue an intellectual activity: namely, exploring the link between 
memory, neurology and selfhood. Furthermore, the relative brevity of the 
essay, and consequently its focus on a small set of issues, seems to 
undermine the primary function of many other memoirs to memorialise a 
family member. Of course, this is not actually a necessary consequence of 
the essay genre per se, but a consequence of the choice of focus. There is 
too little history, too little of his fathers as well as their joint history, for 
the reader to develop more than a cursory sense of who Earl Franzen was. 
The essay cannot, therefore, provide the kind of compensation for intrusion 
105 Couser argues that death entails maximum vulnerability (Couser 2004: 16) and, rather 
than releasing authors from ethical obligations, writing about deceased subjects remains 
open to ethical scrutiny. I agree with Couser, although I believe the type of harm that can be 
caused to a person after his or her death is qualitatively different from any potential harm 
he or she may experience while alive. In the context of dementia life writing, 
representations may have the most detrimental effect, not on the particular person 
portrayed, but on people with dementia as a group. 
that the inscription of a lasting, if not permanent, account of a life and 
personality may bring (Couser 2009: 229). Unlike other caregivers 
memoirs, Franzens essay does not represent an exploration of the dilemmas 
of caregiving either. This may be a function of the authors relation to his 
father, not as primary caregiver but as a son visiting only intermittently. 
While the essay touches on his fathers unhappiness about being 
institutionalised, it lacks many of the topoi of caregivers memoirs, such as 
incontinence, worries about letting a person with dementia continue to drive 
or concern about placement in a nursing home (Couser 2009: 230). It does 
not function as either advocacy, testimony or advice literature. However, 
while essayistic narratives are typically brief, in narrowing the focus they 
may also become more accessible to a wider audience. Franzens essay is, 
no doubt, one of the more visible memoirs (Couser 2009), read also by 
memoirists who have written after Franzen. Its main pay-off may therefore 
lie in its potential to spark debate about the nature of the self, the role of 
relationships in maintaining identity and the types of stories we want and 
need to tell about dementia.   
Do You Remember Me? A Father, a Daughter, and a Search for the Self 
Judith Levines memoir Do You Remember Me? (2004) provides an 
excellent example of how the topics raised in Franzens essay may be 
elaborated in the context of a fully-fledged memoir. Levines research on 
the disease is representative of a number of recent memoirs that aim to 
investigate the social, historical, neurological and philosophical 
underpinnings of dementia. The effect is both to inform the reader and to tie 
in abstract concernsabout autonomy, the self, memory and identitywith 
the concrete experience of one family living with dementia. The 
individualised portrait of Levines family is set against the backdrop of 
dominant values and attitudes in contemporary American society. In fact, 
Levines familys reverence for the rational is entirely in line with 
contemporary American values: we value, and dread, what our whole 
culture does, Levine writes (30). Levine, who is from a secular, Jewish 
New Yorker background, describes herself and her family as hyper-
hypercognitive (36). However, by engaging with the work of the ethicist 
Stephen G. Post, she comes to reconsider her own and her cultures values. 
Levine is concerned that in todays hypercognitive society personhood, and 
with it full moral and legal consideration, is granted only to one kind of 
personthe rational autonomous kind (30). She traces how her father, Stan, 
risks losing the status of personhood and how his needs are progressively 
disregarded as he becomes de-individualised by the Alzheimers script.  
The Levine family values critical thinking above feelings and emotions 
and the members of the family pride themselves on their intellectual 
prowess. This is particularly true of Levines father himself, a former school 
psychologist, who throughout his career pretended to have a doctorate he 
hadnt earned. Prior to her fathers dementia, Levines relationship to him 
was defined by the strength of their intellectual disagreements. As her father 
begins to lose the ability to engage in verbal disputes, his dementia offers 
Levine unexpected opportunities to become closer to himto discover new, 
non-antagonistic ways of engaging with her father. In a sense, the memoir 
tells the story of the growing love of a daughter for her father, and how that 
love allows Levine to revise and repair her former relationship.106 
By contrast, Levines mothers relationship to her husband undergoes a 
converse development. As Stan loses the ability to engage in a coherent 
conversation with his wife, she, in turn, finds it harder to maintain a 
relationship with him.107 Not unsympathetic to her mothers predicament, 
Levine nevertheless finds herself turning into her fathers advocate over the 
question of whether to place him in a home. Levine believes that 
institutionalising him would lead to him decomposing, as the professional 
jargon has it, since his attention-seeking personality would not be satisfied 
in a nursing home environment. Furthermore, Levine comes to challenge 
what she calls the official Alzheimers story (119) rehearsed in support 
groups. This story casts the caregiver solely as a victim in the relationship. 
On the one hand, her mother feels that Alzheimers is exacerbating her 
husbands difficult personality traits to such an extent that she cannot deal 
106 Haugses graphic memoir (1998) similarly traces how the father-son relationship 
improves in the course of his fathers dementia as they develop new ways of being together. 
107 Noyes et al. (2010) discuss the notion of relational deprivation as a descriptive label 
for the experience of loss and grief in the caregiver. 
with him anymore. On the other hand, she takes consolation in the 
caregivers mantra that its not his fault, its his brain. Finally, based on 
this reductionist neurological view, her mother comes to claim that her 
husband is not even a human being anymore (167). Levine believes that 
the caregiver support group narrative strips people with dementia of their 
humanity, turning them into creature[s] without ordinary perception or 
emotion (167):     
I am no longer his wife. Now I am his caregiver.  to transform him from 
husband to Alzheimers patient, Mom is divesting Dad of his former self, 
even of his capacity for happiness. (Levine 2004: 168; original emphasis) 
Levines interpretation of this narrative is of course influenced by the pain 
of seeing her mother leave her father when she herself is slowly beginning 
to love him. However, her analysis does underscore that the narratives we 
tell about dementia may serve the emotional needs of caregivers, and 
society at large, better than people with dementia.108  
In her mothers case, Levine believes that stripping her father of his 
former self allows her mother, to some extent, to divest herself of her guilt 
at leaving him. Furthermore, as Levine puts it, 
The anguish described by many caregivers arises from the persistence of 
the old self and the old relationship. The new self-free identity of the 
patient can ease some of that anguish. A creature hollowed out of traits 
both beloved and reviled, the person with Alzheimers enters the 
caregivers life afresh. Historic ties to the old self dictate obligation, which 
is of course a kind of relationship. But now that relationship can be 
cleansed of the sadness of perpetual loss. The endless funeral is over. 
(168)109 
Fontana and Smith (1989), on the contrary, see caregivers as engaged in 
unduly reconstructing selfhood. In their words, which reflect the 
stereotype of people with dementia as selfless shells, 
108 See Lyman (1989). The medicalization of deviance as Herskovits notes contributes to 
the erasure of the individuals subjectivity and agency (Herskovits 1995: 152)  
109 Levines analysis resonates with the common perception that while family caregivers 
perhaps are more capable of providing individualised care, they may nonetheless not be 
ideal caregivers. Magnusson, for instance, concludes that professional caregivers at some 
point may be better able to provide competent care since they are not burdened by the same 
emotional anguish family members experience. Also, professional caregivers are not 
influenced by negative relational patterns that may make the family caregiver more 
resentful, less patient or otherwise less empathetic towards the needs of the person with 
dementia. See also Levines description of the (idealised) step family of professional 
caregivers discussed below.   
The self has slowly unravelled and unbecome a self, but the 
caregivers  assume that there is a person behind the largely unwitting 
presentation of self of the victims, albeit in reality there is less and less, 
until where once there was a unique individual there is but emptiness. 
(Fontana and Smith 1989: 45, qtd. in Herskovits 1995: 158) 
While contesting the point that there can ever be mere emptiness in a 
sentient human being, I agree with Herskovits tentative suggestion that 
perhaps by re-visioning the self in Alzheimers, in reaction to this 
dehumanising view, we (as a society and as individuals) can feel better 
about being and becoming old (Herskovits 1995: 148). The writers of 
caregivers memoirs may be partly motivated to assert their family members 
continuing identity to assuage fears about their own mortality. Indeed, my 
own reading of these memoirsforegrounding the ways selfhood persist in 
dementiamay in fact be an expression of our shared cultural unease with 
the prospect of losing ones cognitive functions and of our inability to face 
up to decline and death. Also, while welcoming the sea-change in 
conceptualising dementia that Tom Kitwoods work has brought about, I 
remain uneasy, as does Herskovits, about reconceptualising dementia as 
exemplary model of how to be human (Kitwood and Bredin 1992: 286,  
qtd. in Herskovits 1995: 157)since doing so risks obfuscating the pain and 
suffering this disease inflicts on both caregivers and people with dementia. 
In any case, in providing a detailed description of her fathers life world 
and his behaviour, Levines memoir contributes to a more nuanced 
understanding of how dementia affects the self. Snatches of dialogue bring 
home how, while not strictly rational and coherent, her fathers utterances 
are nevertheless meaningful and to the point, such as when in a struggle 
with his wife over getting dressed her father laments his loss of 
independence: I cant do anything, he yells at her. I have no boat. I have 
no money (116; original emphasis). Furthermore, Levine emphasises the 
persistence of embodied memory, and with it embodied identity: His 
personality perseveres in his body: the literally in-your-face aggression, the 
Catskills comedian shrug, the pipe-smoking intellectuals eyebrow raise 
(133). It persists in activities, such as rowing, which he continues to be able 
to do, even as his language skills disintegrate. Above all, however, Levine 
explores the potential for bodily expressions of meaning. The latter can not 
only be seen in instances of aggression, but also in his bodily response to 
music: using his fingers, arms, feet and rhythm to express the emotional 
cadences of a Beethoven sonata, from coquettish frivolity to grave sadness 
(171).110 
Levines memoir also functions as a counter-narrative to the reductionist 
neurological view of dementia. For instance, Levine challenges a nurse 
aides neurochemical view of behaviour when the latter expresses her 
surprise that Stan apologised for hitting an aide: Something in his brain 
must have done something, and he kept apologizing after that. Levine 
wryly replies, Yeah  Like anyone, he feels remorse (178). Levine attests 
to the many ways in which her father remains the same, underlining the 
persistence ofnot necessarily positiveattributes in her father that 
constitute his personal identity. And yet, she also acknowledges the many 
ways her father is changed and the emotional and practical challenges this 
transformation poses.  
Perhaps the most important contribution her narrative makes is to 
recognise the many ways relationships constitute identity. Her parents 
relationship reveals how gender may influence the ways spousal 
relationships change in dementia. Social science research suggests that 
female caregivers are more adversely affected by their partners decline; 
perhaps because the necessary prerequisites for intimacy differ between men 
and women, so that the impact of the disease on communication, for 
instance, is more likely to deter women from engaging in physical intimacy 
with their partners than men (Hayes, Boylstein, and Zimmerman 2009).111 
110 Music has impressive potential to engage people with dementia: as a therapeutic tool, as 
a means of interacting with others, and as a means to improve memory and cognitive 
functioningnot to mention as a resource for expressing the inner life-world. See the 
documentary Alive Inside (Rossato-Bennett 2014) and the charity Playlist for Life. For a 
relational memoir par excellence (a you-narrative addressed throughout to her mother) 
which explores musics potential, see Magnussons Where Memories Go (2014) discussed 
in chapter 5.  
111 A cursory comparison of male and female authored spousal caregivers memoirs seems 
to support the view that female spousal caregivers are more adversely affected; or rather, 
that the relationship is more adversely affected when the caregiver is female (Alterra 1999, 
Bayley 1999, Hadas 2011). That said, caution is necessary when making such generalising 
claims about the impact of gender configurations. In these cases, as in the sociological 
research just cited, cultural expectation may cause male caregivers to mask their distress
leading to a skewed representation. Further, in the three memoirs just cited, the age at onset 
of the spouses dementia may have had a greater impact on the ability to accept the disease 
Dementia clearly makes the difference for Mom, Levine writes. She 
cannot have relations with someone who cant have a rational conversation. 
The man in the body she knows almost as well as her own had become alien, 
infantile, an untouchable baby (149-150). His desexualisation and verbal 
impotence has the opposite effect on his daughter. Caring for her fathers 
body involves a reappraisal of Levines relationship with her father and 
allows her a new kind of physical intimacy: He feels like neither a child, 
nor a flirt, nor a threat. He feels only like a father. And I feel not like a nurse, 
a mother, a wife, or a sex object. I just feel like his daughter (147). In other 
words, although he can no longer recognise her as his daughter, his 
dementia, and the fact that she no longer feels threatened by him, allows 
Levine to comfortably inhabit, for the first time, her role as daughter. This is 
not to say, however, that Levine embraces the paternalistic ethics according 
to which dutiful daughters are to be expected to take care of their fathers 
(see Couser 2009).  
Levine not only traces how her own relationship to her father improves 
in the course of her fathers dementia, but also how new relationships 
outside the family circle develop. The professionals, hired to look after Stan 
in his own apartment, form lasting relationships with him. One of the male 
caregivers comes to assume the role of younger brother and, as Levine 
views it, her fathers nastiness toward Ernesto becomes the time-honored 
abuse of younger brothers, competitive but affectionate, even protective 
(259). The relationship to his female live-in caregiver, Nilda, not only 
approximates a spousal relationship, but, in Levines interpretation, fulfils 
her fathers need for the unconditional love that his own mother couldnt 
provide. In what amounts almost to a panegyric of the professional 
caregiver, Levine states 
Nilda answers Dads every need without needs of her own, she loves him 
openly and without judgment, she neither competes with nor criticizes him, 
is always there, and (as far as he knows) will never leave him. She lavishes 
on my father the love sought to no avail from every woman since his tight-
hearted mother  I was a little, little boy, all alone. With Nilda in his 
life, this plaint has ceased. At the age of eighty-three, as the layers of his 
adult self curl away, Dad has finally been granted his infantile wish  And 
besides Dear, Darling, and sometimes Lil, he has another name for her, 
than gender, since life course expectations are more radically challenged by early-onset 
dementia. 
which he calls out, almost without guile: Ma-ma  Finally, my father 
has a good mother. (261-2) 
Contrary to Franzen, Levine interprets her fathers seeming return to 
childhood as in line with his adult personality and his life-long, deep-seated 
need for affection. At the same time, she recognises his current state as an 
opportunity to heal childhood wounds. While making a person with 
dementia feel safe and loved is of the highest priority, the question arises 
how such seemingly selfless caregiving can be realised for everyone. The 
question arises also whether it is fair to expect low-wage professional 
female caregivers, frequently from an immigrant background, to provide 
such care without needs of their own. Levine raises these uncomfortable 
issues of social justiceor rather of gender, race and class inequality in the 
care sector (see Kittay 1999)while acknowledging her own complicity in 
the perpetuation of the current care system. 
Levines memoir also functions as a thoughtful critique of current care 
practices and the ethics of dementia care. Her discussion of nursing homes 
and of her fathers specific needs is interwoven with philosophical reflection 
on how the question of selfhood in dementia directly impacts on the ethics 
of caregiving. Caregiving dilemmas include how to adhere to advance 
directives, and the question whether or not the then-self before dementia 
can know what is in the best interest of the now-self (Francis 2001). 
Discussing the bioethical principles of autonomy, beneficence, and justice, 
Levine laments that autonomy, and the ability to recognise ones best 
interests, is not established on a case-by-case basis: Doesnt know best 
interest when standing in traffic; knows best interest when refusing to go to 
a nursing home (216; original emphasis). Levine rehearses the current 
bioethical debate over whether critical interests or experiential interests 
of a person with dementia should take precedence in determining treatment 
options at the end of life (Dresser 1995, vs. Dworkin 1993). Ronald 
Dworkin (1993) uses the distinction between critical interests related to 
ones values in life and experiential interests related to experiencing 
pleasure or avoiding pain to argue that critical interests should override 
experiential interests when making the decision on whether to act on an 
advance directive. Levine not only offers up a condensed summary of these 
difficult debates, through the lens of her reflections on her fathers situation, 
but also a narrative approach to understanding these ethical dilemmas. 
While not offering a definitive answer, the narrative of her fathers life 
suggests that not only experiential interests but also values may change. Her 
father of the past, whom she describes as strictly Cartesian and terrified of 
mental decline, appears in his dementia to be relatively contentprovided 
he receives enough attentionand, as Levine puts it, is in no hurry to leave 
this world (225).  
Levines account highlights that how we assess and recognise selfhood 
directly impacts on caregiving decisions. Relational identity can protect and 
support the identity of the person with dementia and lead to sensitive 
caregiving decisions. But it can equally lead to the denial of selfhood in the 
context of a deteriorating relationship. The burden to sustain identity, in the 
face of a myriad of substantial changes, can become too heavy: In losing 
his memory, the person with Alzheimers allows his caregiver to lose her 
memories too, Levine writes (168). Levines account, like others, calls 
attention to both the negative impact of a malignant social psychology 
(Kitwood 1997) on people with dementia, as well as the continuing positive 
potential for relationality.  
Tangles: A Story about Alzheimers, My Mother, and Me 
Sarah Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles (2010)112 is a relational memoir par 
excellence. It explores the ways that the lives and identities of mother and 
daughter are entangled. The title takes its name not only from the 
characteristic plaques and tangles that define Alzheimers disease on the 
neurological level, but also from the tangles of curly black hair that 
characterise the Leavitt family. On one level, then, tangled curly hair signals 
Leavitts ethnic roots and genetic ties to her family. In the course of the 
memoir, however, tangled hair comes to represent the emotional ties, the 
changing but persisting relationship between mother and daughter. 
Untangling her mothers hair during the later stages of the disease is an act 
112 Currently being adapted into an animated film by Giant Ant. See 
http://tanglesthefilm.com/. 
of loving care but also evokes memories of her mothers fierce 
protectiveness of her daughter as a young girl. Sarah113 later collects her 
mothers and her own hair, shelving it in boxes above her bed. The presence 
of the boxes comes to function almost as a surrogate mother, soothing her to 
sleep. Insofar as they include Sarahs own hair, the boxes also hint at the 
ways their relationship has been incorporated into her own identity and will 
help her thrive even after her mothers death. The metaphorical use of 
tangles therefore provides a guide to the key patterns of relationality in the 
text. 
While Leavitt underscores the importance of the mother-daughter bond 
in her life, she also identifies herself in opposition to others, representing 
herself as autonomous human subject  la Gusdorf. This is brought out, for 
instance, in an image that positions Leavitts individualised avatar Sarah 
against a featureless groups of others huddled in the opposite corner of the 
panel: Hannah and I werent a unit like my Mom and her sisters. In my 
mind, there was me and then there was the rest of my family, who I missed 
and felt liberated from at the same time (15). This sense of alterity or 
singularity is at least partly a function of the authors homosexuality. 
However, as in other memoirs, the very production of the text, modulated by 
the self-reflexive perspective and voice of the author, even as it includes 
others views and memories, in itself underlines the authors singular 
consciousness. Clearly, even in relational autobiographies the Gusdorfian 
notion of looking-back-over-the-personal-past (Freeman 2007: 122) to 
make sense of ones life matters. What differentiates relational memoirs 
from the Gusdorfian model, though, is their insistence on foregrounding the 
(life) story of a significant other, or rather a segment of two lives 
intertwined. While the author counts, so does the Other, and instead of 
merely bearing witness to herself, the author of relational memoirs also 
bears witness to the Other. Notably, of course, the notion of what aspects of 
lived experience are worth relating have shifted remarkably since the 1950s, 
so that narratives of caregiving, and not just the life experiences of great 
113 I use Leavitt to refer to the author and narrator while using Sarah to refer to the 
authors avatar. 
men, are nowadays considered significant to the world (Gusdorf 1980: 
To date, Leavitts graphic memoir is one of only a handful of full-length 
explorations of Alzheimers disease presented in comics format.114 It is 
situated, however, in a fairly extensive history of autographics,115 and, like 
these, Tangles bears witness to the potential of the medium to provide 
informative and moving accounts of what its like to be living with a certain 
condition (Chute 2007: 414). Though doodle-like in style, Leavitts simple 
black and white drawings attest to the effectiveness of combining word and 
image to engage with the experience of illness, whether ones own or 
anothers. The images sometimes provide evocative illustrations of the 
sparse prose. In other cases, they serve to undercut the narrative voice-over, 
adding a layer of ambiguity or irony to the narrative. Finally, the 
iconographics convey much of the emotional tone, potentially going beyond 
what can be portrayed in words, or at least opening up a larger spectrum of 
possible interpretations and emotional responses to the reader (see Figs. 6, 7, 
below, Figs. 11, 12, ch. 5: 205-6 ).116 
Leavitts memoir sits squarely within the genre of filial caregivers 
memoirs and raises similar ethical issues in relation to the politics of 
representation. Leavitt grapples with the guilt that attends her writing 
project, her sense of feeling like a vulture hovering and waiting for [her 
mother] to say or do something [she] could record and preserve (7). Leavitt 
relates how her mother at times physically resisted her daughters project, 
pulling the paper and pen away from herwhether to gain her daughters 
attention or out of an impulse expressing unease at being recorded in this 
fashion remains open to interpretation. In any case, for works written in the 
wake of critically acclaimed autographic accounts, such as Spiegelmans 
Maus and Marjane Satrapis Persepolis, the need to defend the comics 
format as an appropriate medium for such serious autobiographical writing 
114 For further autographics that deal with dementia see Chast (2014), Farmer (2010) and 
Haugse (1998). 
115 For a history of the genre of autographics see Gardner (2008). 
116 See McCloud (1994) for the argument that the less fleshed-out the drawing of a 
character, the more latitude there is for readers to project their own situations or responses 
onto that character. 
seems to have receded. However, the form does raise a number of ethical 
issues particular to its representational mode.  
Leavitt clearly wants to memorialise her mother: to remember her as 
she was before she got sick, but also to remember her as she was during her 
illness, the ways in which she was transformed and the ways in which parts 
of her endured (7). Like other memoirs, Leavitt simultaneously affirms and 
denies her mothers persisting identity. Significantly, both the introduction 
and the text as a whole bear witness to the importance of relational identity 
and the complex ways in which it is affected by dementia. As Leavitt states, 
As my mother changed, I changed too, forced to reconsider my own 
identity as a daughter and as an adult and to recreate my relationship with 
my mother (7). Even in the way the memoir is framed paratextually, the 
images insistently draw attention to the intimate nature of the mother-
daughter relationship showing mother and daughter holding hands or in 
close embrace. The first chapter underlines the strength of the mother-
daughter bond while also foreshadowing how their relationship will become 
perturbed by the disease: My mother was floating away from me, Leavitt 
writes about a dream; I woke up crying but she wasnt there (11). While 
the text never explicitly invokes the common trope of an inverted parent-
child relationship, it does highlight Leavitts continuing child-like 
dependence on her mother in adulthood, and suggests that the pattern of 
dependence and care are finally reversed by the disease.  
Other graphic memoirs are more explicit about the role reversal in 
dementia between parents and adult children. These texts frequently explore 
the difficulty of becoming ones parents caregiver since former roles, 
patterns and power relations are not easily shifted. Roz Chasts graphic 
memoir Cant We Talk About Something More Pleasant? (2014) indeed 
suggests that the role of daughter and caregiver are incompatible (see Fig. 4).  
Fig. 4 Questioning cultural expectations of filial caregiving in Chast (2014: 146). 
The memoir humorously exploits the conventions of the popular, 
educational comics genre gallant and goofusintended to teach children 
social moresto oppose the ideal daughter/caregiver (gallant) with a 
supposedly more realistic version of what the author feels about her new 
role (goofus). By drawing on a moralising and at the same time starkly 
manicheistic genre, Chast also highlights the (partially unrealistic) cultural 
and societal expectations that arise within the context of familial caregiving. 
In his graphic memoir Heavy Snow (1998), John Haugse similarly 
captures this difficult aspect of filial dementia care in the chapter title panel 
Who gets Dad? (31) (see Fig. 5). The image shows the artist interrupted in 
his work of drawing a nude, while a miniature version of his Dad that barely 
reaches the doorknob but is nevertheless dressed in formal wear, hat, glasses 
and the ubiquitous collar of a minister, steps through the door and into his 
life. The image, by returning the father to the size of a pre-schooler while 
nevertheless retaining the characteristics of adult attire, brilliantly evokes 
the fundamental conflict that may arise when parenting a parent. 
Fig. 5 The problem of inversed child-parent relations in Haugse (1999: 31). 
While Leavitt and her mother have a close and supportive relationship 
compared to what Haugse or Chast describe, Tangles nonetheless similarly 
tracks the ways dementia affects the mother-daughter dyad. On visits home, 
Leavitt finds herself becoming increasingly involved in her mothers 
personal care. This new dependence in her mother Midge impacts on 
Leavitts sense of self. Having to look after a mother, whom she finds 
bathing in her own excrement, leads Leavitt to feel a new loneliness and a 
new strength (60). The change of roles is also expressed in her momentary 
sense of herself as the calmest, most capable nurse (110). However, the 
affirmative image of Sarah, smiling in a nurses uniform, is immediately 
countered by an image of herself doubled over by nausea and her 
acknowledgment that she frequently felt unable to cope with the demands of 
caregiving. 
Furthermore, Leavitts account stresses how her mothers identity is 
affected by becoming a care-receiver. Leavitt notes, It gets hard to see 
someone as a person when theyve become a list of needs: BATH, CLOTHES, 
BRUSH TEETH, WALK, FOOD ETC. (85). The exigencies of care can, then, 
in themselves contribute to the dehumanisation of people with dementia, as 
highlighted in the work of Tom Kitwood. Kitwood invokes Martin Bubers 
philosophy of dialogue to elucidate this process of dehumanisation. The 
Jewish philosopher Buber distinguishes between two ways of relating to 
another person: the I-It and the I-Thou relationship (Buber 1958: 15). 
Relating in the I-It mode, Kitwood writes, implies coolness, detachment, 
instrumentality. It is a way of maintaining a safe distance, of avoiding risks; 
there is no danger of vulnerabilities being exposed (Kitwood 1997: 10). As 
Leavitt points out, reducing her mother to a list of needs provides her with a 
means of coping: If you just think about that list, then youre not as sad 
(85). However, Buber emphasises the cost of this attitude for both sides of 
the I-It dyad. The I, Buber maintains, does not exist outside these two 
ways of relating. And since the I is only present in its entire being in the I-
Thou encounter, arguably not only the Other but also the self is diminished 
by interacting in the I-It mode (see Buber 1958: 15-16; 52). Leavitts 
account brings out the ambivalent effects of these two modes of relating. 
She describes how her mothers behaviour, playfully pretending to be a 
monster while being given pills, prompts Sarah to snap out of her 
instrumentalised attitude towards her: And shes a person again and you 
dont only love her, you like her (85). Here Leavitt highlights not only her 
filial love, but her appreciation of her mothers personality. However, the 
disturbing images of her parents despair that conclude this section 
underline how entering into an empathetic relationship increases not only 
her sense of her parents suffering but also her own distress. 
Leavitts account also addresses one of the potentially most painful 
moments in the progression of the disease for the family member: the 
moment when her mother no longer recognises her as her daughter. Early on 
in the narrative, Leavitt establishes her mothers love of nature, animals and 
children as central to her identity. This finds expression in her undying love 
(66) for her cat. Her mothers obsession with this rather aloof pet grates on 
Sarahs nerves as she experiences a sense of injustice that the cat is so 
dearly, but undeservedly, cherished. Most importantly, Leavitt recounts, 
She recognized and talked about Lucy [the cat] even when she seemed 
confused about who I was (66). In contrast to the characteristically under-
stated plain sentences of her narrative voice-over, the graphics express the 
emotional resonances of this situation in Sarahs downcast look and 
resigned and protective pose in the first panel and in her puerile expression 
of annoyance at the cat in the second panel (66) (See Fig. 6).  
Fig. 6 Interplay of narrative voice and drawing style in the expression of emotion 
in Leavitt (2011: 66). 
Similarly, in the one instance where Midge actually asks her daughter 
who she is, the images, rather than the verbal track, come to express Sarahs 
as well as her mothers emotional reaction. With a quizzical, surprised look 
on her face Sarah replies Your daughter. Sarah. The next panel describes 
her mothers reaction, but not her own: My answer seemed to stress her out. 
She turned away and started mumbling and breathing heavily. The image 
of Sarah included in the panel, however, registers and communicates her 
pain: in the grieved expression on her face, in her deflated body posture 
with her arms cradling her stomach, and in her firmly closed eyespossibly 
expressing an attempt to block out the reality of the situation (102) (See Fig. 
Fig. 7 Facial expression and gesture indicate emotional distress in Leavitt (2011: 
102). 
Leavitt makes use of the expressive potential of the body through 
posture, gestures and facial expressions in her narrative (Eisner 2008). But 
she also exploits the potential of visual metaphors, background, typeset, 
panel size, panel boundaries and other elements of graphic narratives to 
communicate the emotional tone of her experiences. Leavitt diverges from 
the otherwise fairly realist mode of representationwithin the limitations 
of the medium and her own drawing stylein moments of intense emotions, 
such as when her anger at a homophobic attack on her and her mother turns 
Sarah into a raging monster who explodes across panel boundaries (77). 
Equally, in describing the difficult decision of placing her mother in a 
nursing home, she uses evocative surrealist imagery to underline (and 
convince both herself and the reader of) the necessity of the move (116) (see 
Fig. 12., ch.5: 206). 
Overall, then, the visual track of the graphic narrative opens up a 
number of communicative and aesthetic opportunities for the dementia 
autographer. It allows Leavitt to emphasise the importance of nonverbal 
communication in the later stages of dementia (see also Killick and Allan 
2001) and also to foreground the physical closeness that she craves and 
continues to enjoy with her mother. However, the visual form of 
representation also raises a number of ethical issues. For one thing, the 
simplification inherent in the cartoon form, while narratively effective and 
adding to the economy of the form, risks turning representation into 
dehumanising caricature. Leavitts depiction of her mother with unkempt 
hair or without eyes behind her glasses is a case in point. Leavitt uses the 
lack of eyes as metaphor for the increasing sense of her mothers absence. 
While this metaphor speaks to the authors emotions, it may enforce 
stereotypes of people with dementia as living dead and oversimplify the 
issue of (self-)awareness in Alzheimers disease. Furthermore, the risk of 
invading the privacy of the person with dementia, inherent in all caregivers 
memoirs, seems particularly pronounced in the graphic depiction (in both 
senses of the word) of her mothers nudity, body hair, and bodily 
dysfunctions. However, while graphic, the comics format ultimately 
screens her mother from more directalthough still mediatedexposure 
(as for instance in documentary film or photography) and arguably makes it 
possible for Leavitt to address the complex ethical issues that arise around 
personal care. Leavitt does not gratuitously expose her mother to public 
scrutiny but explores the risks inherent in caregiving of invading another 
persons privacya point I explore in more detail in chapter 5.  
Sarah Leavitts Tangles deals with how Alzheimers disease affects both 
the individual and the family. The narrative shares with other memoirs 
about dementia an emphasis on issues of diagnosis, treatment and 
caregiving, institutionalisation, death, and mourning. It raises the complex 
issue of selfhood in people with dementia and it addresses the painful losses 
that dementia entails. But foremost it asserts on every page the continuing 
relationship between the author and her mother, their continuing love and 
the positive influence of that loveeven beyond the grave. The memoir is a 
testament to the primary force of relationality in both shaping and 
maintaining identity.       
Conclusion 
In this chapter, I explored the effect of gender, genre and medium on the 
notion of relational identity; that is, I asked, to what extent the identity of 
the person with dementia is maintained through relationships and, on a 
different plane, through relational life writing. What aspects of identity do 
relational memoirs highlight and what conclusions do these memoirs reach 
about the persistence of selfhood in dementia? How do formal aspects 
influence the representation of dementia? And also, how is the caregivers 
identity affected by dementia in a close family member? Although dementia 
caregivers memoirs are a growing genre across different media and 
national literatures, and thus require further exploration, the present chapter 
has sought to answer questions like the ones just listed through a close 
reading of three filial dementia caregivers memoirs (and also briefer 
glosses of other relevant texts): Jonathan Franzens autobiographical essay 
My Fathers Brain, Judith Levines memoir Do You Remember Me? and 
Sarah Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles.  
In considering gender as a central feature of dementia life writing, my 
intention has not been to essentialise gender, nor indeed to use gender as an 
all-purpose hermeneutic key (Peterson 1993: 81, qtd. in Eakin 1998: 67). 
That said, although debates continue over the relationship between life and 
art in autobiography, I second Eakins view that autobiography is nothing if 
not a referential art (Eakin 1992: 2). In that sense, real-life and re-presented 
gender dynamics merit close attention when it comes to examining how 
relationality is constructed in the context of dementia caregivers memoirs. 
As previously mentioned, there are demographic as well as political reasons 
for considering gender as an important aspect of contemporary dementia 
care, and consequently caregivers life writing. At the same time, an in-
depth study of the aesthetics, or poetics (Couser 1997), of caregivers 
memoirs is crucial, since genre, medium, and other formal aspects crucially 
shape the way dementia is constructed in relational life writing. Taken as a 
genre, caregivers memoirs about dementia in fact incorporate a wide range 
of subgenres, drawing on a variety of literary conventions and media. The 
thematic focus and political force of these life narratives depends on formal 
choices, on the nature of the caregiving relationship (spousal, filial, primary 
or secondary caregiver), as well as on the authors and subjects gender and 
professional status. All these factors affect both the ethical difficulties that 
writing about dementia raises and the tentative conclusions these texts arrive 
at in relation to the question of selfhood in dementia.  
As the present chapter indicates caregivers memoirs bear witness to the 
importance of relationships. They are inspired by the writers relationship to 
a significant other and they highlight the continuing potential and need for 
relationships exhibited by people with dementia. Human beings are 
relational animals that depend on recognition by others. As these memoirs 
attest, dementia changes many things, but not this. 
In the next chapter, I continue my exploration of the ethics of caregivers 
memoirs, but with a focus on what these texts suggest about the project of 
developing a new practice of dementia care.  
Part III Narrating Dementia/Rethinking Care 
Chapter 5 Care-writing Reconsidered: Towards a New 
Practice of Dementia Care 
Given that a cure for Alzheimers remains elusive, a key question is how 
people with Alzheimers or related disorders can best be cared for and how 
their caregivers can best be supported (see World Health Organization 2012: 
68). Practitioners have developed a range of approaches to improving the 
delivery of dementia care and to helping people with dementia thrive.117 
Current research in the social sciences focuses on unpicking the factors that 
contribute to the burden of caregiving, with an aim to relieving caregiver 
stress and preventing burn out.118 Since there is an urgent need for humane 
and sustainable care, such research is timely. Nonetheless, the methods of 
social science researchsuch as questionnaires or semi-structured 
interviewsleave some vital questions unanswered. In this chapter, I argue 
that caregivers memoirs are able to complement such research, by 
addressing problems that may lie outside the scope of social science 
methodologies. Further, I argue that care-writing can be understood as a 
form of caregiving. On the one hand, care-writers are changed by the 
process of living alongside and writing about the disease in ways that may 
have strengthened their capacity to provide care locally.  On the other hand, 
by providing insight into the phenomenology of caregiving these memoirs 
can contribute to the investigation and development of dementia care 
generally. The aim of this chapter is not only to extract from these narratives 
widely applicable ways of understanding dementia care, but also to outline 
how strategies for improving such care can be developed on the basis of 
studying care-writing in a broad sense.119  
Caregivers memoirs explore the dilemmas involved in caring for 
someone with progressive cognitive impairment. They thereby provide a 
117 See, among others, Basting and Kitwood (2003), Killick and Allan (2001), Kitwood 
(1997) and Stokes (2010). 
118 See, among others, Akpnar, Kkgl, and Yener (2011), Chappell, Dujela, and 
Smith (2015), Krause, Grant, and Long (1999), Russell (2001), Wennberg et al. (2015). 
119 Published memoirs written by educated, white, middle class persons, often professional 
writers, do not provide a cross-sectionally representative description of dementia care. 
Compare Kittay (1999) for an analysis of the problems of social justice that arise within the 
care sector, especially in relation to gender and racial biases in this undervalued, underpaid 
and underfinanced service sector. See the World Health Organizations report on dementia 
(2012) for a cross-cultural exploration of the link between gender roles and care for 
dependents. 
means for readers to live through (Rosenblatt 1995)and think through
difficult issues and complex scenarios. Further, the authors of these 
memoirs imagine and develop alternative treatment and care options which 
could be adapted to other contexts. And finally, because they have lived 
alongside the person with dementia, familial caregivers are ideally placed to 
identify that persons evolving needs and to advocate for them when those 
needs are not being metwhether in the community or in institutional care. 
These authors are thus well-positioned to articulate strategies for addressing 
the needs of people with dementia, and of their caregivers, holistically (see 
also Greenhalgh and Hurwitz 1999). 
Exploring Caregivers Dilemmas 
Dementia caregivers are faced with an array of complex and, due to the 
progressive nature of the disease, constantly shifting care-decisions. Many 
of the caregiving dilemmas can be framed as problems of coercion or 
paternalism (in relation to social behaviour; in relation to practical concerns 
over personal care such as dressing, feeding, and toileting; in relation to the 
difficult decision of when, how and where to place a person in institutional 
care; and finally in relation to medical treatment, both during the course of 
the disease and when it comes to end-of-life decisions about treatment 
options). Although there may be some overlap with strategies for giving 
care to persons with other disease syndromes, the care-decisions discussed 
below are particularly salient in the context of caring for someone who is 
progressively cognitively impaired. They involve assessing the extent of the 
cognitive impairment, and the capacity for choice, agency and responsibility 
in the person with dementia. 
This section explores how the authors of caregivers memoirs encounter, 
frame and attempt to resolve some of the above-mentioned caregiving 
dilemmas. Caregivers memoirs not only provide insight into the caregivers 
predicament but may also indirectly benefit others living with or alongside 
the disease syndrome. These texts model empathetic ways of engaging with 
people with dementia and of resolving certain caregiving dilemmas, without 
necessarily representing model caregivers. Indeed, the fact that these 
caregivers frequently fall short of any ideal (or idealised) standard of care 
makes their accounts a productive tool for thinking through dementia care. 
In their failure to find resolutions or in describing the bad choices their 
authors had to face in their roles as caregivers, these memoirs have the 
potential to provoke debate about what constitutes ethically sound dementia 
care and what aspects of care urgently need to be addressed by society at 
largefrom policy makers to care managers to taxpayers helping to support 
care systems.  
The most challenging ethical dilemmas in dementia care, no doubt, arise 
out of the conflicting need to respect the persons autonomy while also 
protecting the person from harm and fulfilling his or her most basic care 
needs. In the case of parent-child relationships, the adult children of people 
with dementia frequently feel as if roles have been reversed, with the 
children becoming guardians of their own parents. And with this reversal 
they enter the quagmire of ethical decisions about the extent of autonomy in 
dementia. As Sally Magnusson succinctly puts it in her memoir, addressed 
throughout to her mother who is suffering from dementia:  
Ours was the same problem that besets every family trying to look after 
someone with dementia whom they want to allow to be themselves for as long 
as possible; how to keep your independent spirit flying and help you feel like a 
free agent capable of decision, when the decisions you made were so often 
disastrous (like insisting on walking out on a road shiny with ice) and the 
decisions you increasingly could not make (to get up, to dress, to eat) were so 
fundamental. (2014: 148) 
This section draws on a number of memoirs which represent not only 
different genres and media (print, film, and graphic memoir)120 but also 
different caregiving relations and gender configurations, to explore how the 
authors of these narratives grapple with the difficult issues of coercion and 
paternalism. David Sievekings documentary Vergiss Mein Nicht (2012) and 
John Thorndikes memoir The Last of His Mind (2009) deal with the 
question of coercion in relation to feeding and activating the person with 
120 Given that genre conventions as well as the properties of storytelling media can 
significantly shape the representation of caregiving, in my analysis I explore issues of 
(sub)genre or medium when they bear on the point the narrative makes about caregiving 
dilemmas. By paying due attention to how the narrative form shapes what these authors 
have to say about the experience of caregiving, I aim to redress the problem of previous 
approaches to illness narratives that frequently treated these narratives as a transparent 
medium for the investigation of something else (Mattingly 1998: 12, see also Woods 
2011). 
dementia. Sarah Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles (2010) elucidates 
infractions in the realm of personal care, while also hinting at aspects of 
physical coercion and addressing the difficult issue of placing a person in 
institutional care. Rachel Hadas memoir Strange Relation (2011), which 
incorporates the authors own poetry, grapples with the guilt attendant on 
moving her husband into institutional care, while also exploring the tipping 
point at which home care becomes no longer feasible.  
In Thorndikes memoir The Last of His Mind (2009) the question of 
coercion is a recurrent theme. As primary, cohabitating caregiver, 
Thorndike repeatedly finds that pressurising his father into doing things 
which he is initially disinclined to do actually helps to improve his fathers 
mood and well-being. Nevertheless, Thorndike remains undecided over 
when and whether his impulse to care for his fatherto feed him, motivate 
him to go out, get him out of bedmay represent unwarranted instances of 
overriding his fathers wishes. Thorndike explores the moral obligation to 
feed another who is seemingly unable to remember to feed himselfor who 
has, on Thorndikes alternative interpretation, consciously decided to forego 
eating. Evoking the case of an elderly lady who was tired and infirm and 
didnt care about eating, he quips that, for the caregivers around her, food 
was gospel and eating her duty (85). Thorndikes choice of words suggests 
that there is something inherently ludicrous in this demand that the younger 
and healthier generation places on the old and infirmto eat, to move, to be 
active. Thorndike wonders whether showing little interest in food might not 
be his fathers way out, a wish to crash for good (85) as he puts it.  
However, he doubts his own ability to act on such a view: I consider this, 
but I doubt it will be long before I slide another plate in front of him. Its the 
habit of care, and the assumption that everyone must eat. Though I question 
this, I am tied to the wheel myself (85-6). The ethical imperative to keep a 
dependent person alive here overrides the conflicting demand to honour this 
persons choices.  
Indeed, Thorndike here taps into the complex debate about patient 
autonomy in dementia. This debate is usually centred on the question of the 
validity of advance directives and the question of whether these still hold 
when the person affected no longer shares the same values or outlook on life 
as when these directives where formulated. Here Dworkins distinction 
between critical interests related to ones values in life and experiential 
interests related to experiencing pleasure or avoiding pain come into play. 
According to Dworkin critical interests should override experiential 
interests when making the decision on whether to act on an advance 
directive. That is, if the patient asked to have all life-sustaining measures 
(including antibiotics) to be withheld once past a certain stage in the illness, 
it does not matter whether that person still experiences pleasure and 
satisfaction in the present moment and may benefit from antibiotics, say, in 
order to sustain her (quality of) life.121 Whereas Judith Levines memoir 
reviews this debatearguing that autonomy should be assessed on a case 
by case basisThorndikes memoir offers a different tack. In the absence of 
any advance directives, Thorndike is presented with a different set of 
dilemmas: how can he reliably know what his father wants? How does he 
balance his fathers apparent wish for autonomy and his own wish to respect 
his fathers preferences with his moral duty to care for him? Can his fathers 
seeming disinterest in food be understood as a genuine choice or is he 
simply too forgetful to remember about food? In which case, would 
honouring his fathers wishes not represent an instance of inhumane care, of 
starving a dependent person? And indeed, whose needs do the practices of 
caregiving actually fulfilthe caregivers or the care-receivers?       
Thorndikes memoir offers a case study, a practical experiment centred 
on these difficult caregiving dilemmas. One day, Thorndike undertakes to 
discover his fathers wishes by letting him decide not only whether to get up 
but also whether to have food at all: all offers are coercive and for once Im 
not making any (100). The narrative then moves through the day
torturously, it seemsfor the author (and reader) while Thorndikes father 
shows no interest in getting up or taking any food. The use of mainly one 
word, end-stopped phrases for time specifications at the beginning of each 
paragraph (e.g. Noon. Three oclock. Five-thirty.) underlines the 
slowness of time passing. In addition, Thorndikes agony and insecurity are 
reflected in the number of questions he asks himself and the reader. 
121 Dresser (1995) takes the opposite view. She argues that experiential interests should 
take precedence in such cases. 
Thorndike finally aborts his plan, without having discovered what the right 
stance towards coercing a person with dementia might be:  
Should I return to my jaunty self tomorrow morning and make him take a 
shower, make him change his clothes, invite him to sit down to his breakfast 
and morning medications, urge him to walk to the mailbox, insist on driving 
him to the ocean, hound him about drinking more fluids? At what point should 
I let him do what he chose to do today: lie in bed without talking or moving. 
(102) 
Thorndike is inclined to think that coercion might be a necessary part of 
caregiving.  On the day I give him completely free rein, he winds up with 
no shower, no breakfast, no lunch, no time outdoors and no conversation. 
Hes passed what seems to me a lost and unhappy day, stretched on his bed 
(102; my emphasis). However, his phrasing is significant in that it 
introduces the possibility of doubt. It underscores that this is Thorndikes 
interpretation of the quality of the day, not his fathers, and leaves open the 
possibility that to the latter this might have been a satisfying, restful way to 
spend the day. Chillingly, the passage concludes: And I have to ask: how 
much did I do this because I wanted a break myself, a day without 
responsibilities? (102). Here and elsewhere, Thorndike repeatedly asks to 
what extent caregiving (or the absence of providing care) may fulfil the 
caregivers rather than the care-receivers needs. 
Thorndikes narrative provides a framework in which the question of 
coercion is debated, both on the story level and on the discourse level. 
While the reader is presented with intellectual arguments, the rhetorically 
arranged argument of the story has an affective impact that provides the 
reader with a sense of what its like to face the ethical quandaries of 
dementia care. What is lacking from this narrative, unfortunately, is a clear 
sense of what the person with dementia needs or prefers. As the situation is 
presented from the caregivers point of view, the reader, with Thorndike, is 
left in the dark about how his father experiences the presence, or absence, of 
coercion.  
In his documentary Vergiss Mein Nicht (2012), Sieveking similarly 
struggles with the problem that caring for his mother Gretel necessarily 
involves many instances of overriding her wishes. This issue is brought out 
in a number of scenes in which health professionals, David himself, or his 
father all try to coax Gretel into participating in activities, seemingly for her 
own good. An encounter with a physiotherapist with a Slavic accent in 
which Gretel staunchly refuses to do anything takes on an almost comic 
character. The mood is signalled by Sievekings voice-over narration: Even 
professional therapists try their luck with Gretel [15:12].122 The subsequent 
scene, in which a woman sounds a singing bowl, while Gretel lies on her 
bed, either asleep or ignoring her, takes on an almost absurd quality. 
Although the lack of comment from the narrator leaves the interpretation of 
the value of these therapeutic interventions to the viewer, Sievekings 
humorous tone in the previous scene is likely to shape viewers responses. 
The viewer is left to wonder why older people lose their right to be left 
alone when they express a wish for peace and quiet.123 And yet, as the 
quotation from Magnusson above underlines, people with dementia may 
become unable to make the fundamental decisions necessary for life, with 
the ethics of care demanding that others prompt, help or even coerce them 
into these activities. 
Although he takes a detached or humorous stance initially, as the 
narrative progresses Sieveking increasingly finds himself in the role of 
coaxer and he has to face up to the question of when coercion becomes 
unethical. The documentary puts the same question to the audience. 
Compared to verbally mediated accounts of coercion in other caregivers 
memoirs, the direct representation of Gretels expressions of disinterest, or 
even discomfort and fear, may have a stronger emotional impact on the 
viewer. Responses of this sort are perhaps most obvious in a scene where 
David takes his mother to the swimming pool in an attempt to recapture the 
joy she previously experienced while swimming. His hopes are disappointed 
as his mother refuses to enter the water. She shields her face with her hands 
and then turns to the camera, a look of fear on her face, and asks the camera 
man: Can we go sit somewhere where we dont die? [30:59].124 The 
122 Auch professionelle Therapeuten versuchen ihr Glck mit Gretel. 
123 This is not to say that alternative forms of therapy, such as music, arts or physical 
therapy are not valuable resources in dementia care (Basting 2001, Basting and Killick 
2003). Indeed, Sievekings representation risks undermining the value of such interventions 
and may contribute to the ageist notion that treatment is futile in such cases and that old 
people, especially people with dementia, no longer merit medical and therapeutic effort.  
124 Knnen wir irgendwohin setzen wo wir nicht sterben? [sic]. 
semantics of death make sense in this context and clearly express Gretels 
fear of the water. More to the point, her facial expression, gestures and 
bodily movements provide access to her current state of mind to a degree 
that cannot easily be ignoredand in contrast with the way written memoirs 
such as Thorndikes may occlude or omit the reactions of the person 
receiving care (see Fig. 8).  
Fig. 8 The question of coercion: Nonverbal communication of fear in Sieveking 
(2012: 30:14; 30:54). 
Sievekings documentary does not offer up a definitive answer to the 
question of whether coercion is a necessaryand beneficialaspect of 
caregiving, and at what point it represents an instance of disrespect or 
perhaps even potential harm to the person with dementia. The viewer is left 
to arbitrate case by case, based on the ways that Sieveking frames his 
material (by scene selection, voice-over narration, use of film music) and 
also on the bodily and verbal reactions Gretel manifestsbe they of joy, 
pleasure, fear, or annoyance.   
Both narratives confront their readers and viewers with the difficulty of 
ascertaining the limits of autonomy and the legitimacy of coercive 
caregiving in dementia. They do this by representing complex yet specific 
situations within the shared life world of caregiver and care-receiver. Both 
narratives allow a living through (Rosenblatt 1995) of the complexity of 
day-to-day caregiving decisions and practices. While Thorndikes narrative 
incorporates to a larger extent his own thoughts, reasoning and emotional 
responses to these ethical dilemmas, Sievekings narrative relies more on 
the process of showing the effects of caregiving decisions, rather than 
overt reflection or commentary. By representing his mothers disinclination 
or fear, Sieveking evokes emotions of pity and empathy in the viewer. This 
emotion, as post-performance discussions of the film highlight, also triggers 
viewers to reflect on the ethical problems of coercing a person with 
dementia, even when it is aimed at promoting their own good. 125 
Thorndikes narrative, by contrast, aligns the reader with the point of view 
of the narrator. We become privy to the caregivers conflicting thoughts and 
emotions, are invited to share his anxiety about doing right by his father, 
and speculate with him about his fathers wishes and needs. Neither 
narrative achieves a comfortable solution to the caregiving dilemmas they 
pose. But it is this lack of closure, or lack of clear instructions (in contrast to 
advice literature), that has the potential to spark debate about ethically 
sound dementia care practices. 
While Thorndike and Sieveking cover a variety of caregiving dilemmas, 
there are two areas in which they are less instructivewith regards to 
personal care and to the question of institutionalisation. The latter question 
barely arises in these narratives since the parents are cared for in their own 
homesexcept for a brief period in Gretels life. With regard to personal 
care, Sievekings narrative is extremely reticent.126 While the documentary 
only alludes to toilet issues metonymicallyby filming the father wiping 
the floor after an incident of incontinenceThorndike almost seems to revel 
in a kind of shock aesthetic in exposing his fathers bodily decline (compare 
also the depiction of incontinence in Roth 1991). Thorndike, it seems, uses 
this stark description of his fathers naked, ageing body in an attempt to 
confront his own fears of mortality and in order to desensitise himself with 
regard to his anxiety over providing intimate care for his father.  
Sarah Leavitts graphic memoir Tangles (2010), by contrast, tackles the 
question both of personal care and of institutionalisation. On her visits home, 
Leavitt finds herself taking on an increasing range of hands-on care tasks 
for her mother Midge. Leavitts graphic depiction of bodily decline, nudity, 
and problems with personal hygiene addresses a number of powerful 
cultural taboos. In the chapter Good grooming, for instance, Leavitt 
reflects on the taboo of grooming a less and less able-bodied and able-
125 See additional material on the DVD Filmgesprch mit Andreas Dresen und David 
Sieveking (Sieveking 2012). 
126 Sievekings reticence may be due to the seemingly more immediate and therefore more 
starkly exposing nature of documentary film and the worry over violating his mothers 
privacy. The medial differences in representation here hark back to my discussion, in the 
previous chapter, of the ethics of representing vulnerable subjects (Couser 2004). 
minded mother. Leavitt notices that as her mothers disease progresses, she 
becomes more docile and easily submits to being physically cared for. In an 
attempt to make it easier to keep their mother clean, Sarah and her sister 
Hannah decide to trim their mothers pubic hair (Fig. 9).127  
Fig. 9 Good grooming: Ethical issues in personal care in Leavitt (2010: 110). 
The narrative then moves on to a flashback of a similar instance earlier 
in the disease processes: It reminded me of another time, the narrative 
voice-over reads, when Dad and I tried to shave Moms armpits so she 
would smell better. She wasnt as sick then, and she got mad (111). The 
image is evocative. It represents Midges angry facial expression, but also, 
insofar as her glasses are askew, suggests a struggle, while two de-
personified hands reach out toward herone with a razor, the other 
seemingly holding her down (see Fig. 9). Leavitt clearly feels distressed by 
the event as the next panel shows her running from the scene while she 
considers how the secret intimacy between her parents had been breached 
forever. She then reflects on how, due to her own homosexual orientation, 
administering personal care to her mother takes on a particular poignancy 
and evokes concern over being accused of perversion (111). There is a 
parallel here between the culturally ingrained notion that it is inappropriate 
127 As mentioned in chapter 4, the metaphoric omission of Midges eyes, to suggest her 
increasing loss of awareness, risks contributing to dehumanising conceptualisations of 
people with dementia as living dead (see also Burke 2007b, Herskovits 1995). Although it 
may speak to Leavitts sense of losing her mother, it represents an oversimplification of 
the issue of self-awareness in Alzheimers disease.  
for men to care for women, due to concerns over sexual decency (Kittay 
1999). However, the main point is that, irrespective of the particular 
caregiving relation, instances of personal care necessarily (or sometimes 
unnecessarily) involve violations of privacy. When other family members 
judge the act of trimming their mothers pubic hair to have been superfluous, 
Sarah and her sister come to reassess the situation: We felt bad then (111). 
Moreover, the whole experience leads Leavitt to conclude: You get sick 
and your body is no longer private. Even if none of your caretakers ever 
hurts you, some basic dignity is lost (111). Despite these comments about 
the negative impact of certain acts of caregiving, however, the panel that 
follows suggests that care can also provide a means of connection. It repeats 
the image from the front cover of the memoir with Sarah and her mother 
holding hands, gently smiling at each other. Only at this point in the 
narrative does it become clear that this is an instance of Sarah providing 
personal care for her mother (Fig. 10).  
Fig. 10 Care as connection in Leavitt (2010: 111). 
Leavitts memoir, like many other caregivers accounts, also addresses a 
particularly salient dilemma; that is, the question of whether, when or where 
to place a person with dementia in institutional care. Eleanor Cooney, for 
instance, in Death in Slow Motion (2003), evocatively describes the painful 
process of moving her mother first from her own home into her daughters 
and from there into a series of institutions. Cooney describes the nightmare 
of negotiating a public health system that invariably represents a number of 
Catch-22s.  Her anguish grows out of her inability to keep caring for her 
mother at home while having to acknowledge that there is only one drug in 
the world that can keep my mother calm and centred, and I am that drug 
(174). However, in taking the reader into the nightmarish world of 
impossible choices which induce guilt, depression and alcoholism in the 
author, the narrative may leave its readers feeling overwhelmed or even 
paralysed when it comes to contemplating the prospect of looking after a 
family member with dementia. Cooneys memoir is seemingly trapped 
within the immediacy of overwhelming caregiving dilemmas. Her memoir 
then raises the question of how much re-fashioning of a life is necessary for 
a caregivers memoir to turn into care-writing.128 Although other memoirs 
do not present solutions for caregiving dilemmas, they provide a working 
through of these dilemmas, for the authors and their readers, that lead to a 
place other than despair: acceptance, on the one hand, and the will to look 
for productive, liveable solutions, on the other.  
In her graphic memoir, Leavitt mines the potential of the visual track as 
a meaning-making device when representing and reflecting on the decision-
making process involved in placing her mother in a care home. The physical 
and emotional effects of caregiving, for instance, are depicted visually 
without, necessarily, addressing the issue verbally (Fig. 11).  
Fig. 11 Figuring the effects of caregiver stress in Leavitt (2010: 116-117). 
128 See also the discussion of the politics of caregivers memoirs in chapter 4. The 
overwhelmingly negative representation of caregiving in Cooney may represent an accurate 
picture of the phenomenology of unsupported family caregivers and, as a cry for help, may 
thereby feed into the agenda of the dementia advocacy movement for increased funding and 
support. However, Cooneys account does not offer a productive approach to dementia care 
and may deter people from finding liveable solutions by suggesting that only the death of 
the care-receiver can relieve the caregiver from her excessive burden.  
Leavitt draws on the potential of facial expressions, body postures and 
gestures to evoke the emotional reactions to caring for a family member 
with dementia, while also exploiting the potential for non-realist, 
metaphorical imagery to convey the intensity of certain emotions (see Fig. 
11, rightmost panel, and Fig. 12). In recounting the difficult decision of 
placing Midge in a care home, Leavitt employs surrealist images in her 
narrative. The matter-of-fact description of how her father hurt his back 
helping his wife off the couch is accompanied by two black, tortured, 
hairless figures, reminiscent of Picassos Guernica or some of Dalis 
contorted human figures.  
Fig. 12 Drawing style as part of narrative rhetoric in Leavitt (2010: 116). 
Every element of these figures spells out the agony of their experience: 
their emaciated state, their impossible postures, and their over-sized hands 
grasping at thin air. The next panel concludes: Neither of them could live 
like this (116). While falling short of any claim to representational truth-
telling, this image transmits something of the agony of the experience. 
Importantly, it is strategically employed to justify (or possibly to persuade 
Leavitt herself of) the rightness of the decision to place Midge in a nursing 
home.   
If Leavitts artistic representation makes sense of and justifies her 
familys decision to place her mother in a care home, Rachel Hadas 
memoir, in contrast, highlights how the caregiver can struggle with a 
distinct lack of clarity about when to move a spouse into an institution. In 
Strange Relation (2011), Hadas explores the tipping point, different in every 
caregiving relation, at which home care becomes no longer feasible. In her 
case, this tipping point has to do not with the physical unmanageability of 
the disease but with the emotional cost129 of living in a near-state of 
silence: If there was one reason I decided that I could no longer live with 
George, that coordinating his care had gone from arduous and unrewarding 
routine to unbearable pain, she states, that reason was the grinding 
loneliness imposed by his silence (133). The emphasis is on how both the 
decision-making process and the consequent guilt entailed by the decision 
become a lonely burden for the caregiver to carry. At the same time, Hadas 
finds solace in poetry, myth, and Greek tragedy, which, unlike caregiving 
literature that shies away from addressing the salient truth (142) of how 
difficult placement is, offers up its own versions of unpalatable dilemmas. 
As Hadas points out, when it comes to scooping someone out of the house 
where they have lived for thirty years and inserting them [into institutional 
care]when it comes to doing this, there are no good choices (142; my 
emphasis). However, the poetry of others as well as her own helps her make 
sense of certain aspects of her experience that might otherwise remain 
incomprehensible, or at least intractable. Poems, in her words, get to eat 
their cake and have it too (24) in their ability to exploit the ambiguous and 
plurivalent nature of languageand hence describe the ambiguous and 
conflicting experience of caregiving. 
All these caregivers memoirs put the dilemmas that dementia care 
raises in the context of a particular social, cultural and familial configuration. 
By doing so the reader is immersed in the specifics of each case and can, in 
Rosenblatts terms, live through the caregiving experience. And yet, these 
case studies also offer up generalisable problemsthe conflict between 
autonomy and paternalism in making care decisions, the fine line caregivers 
must tread between neglect, safe-keeping, infantilising and nurturing. The 
narrativisation of caregiving dilemmas highlights the complexity of 
dementia care and the lack of easy solutions. But by giving meaning to 
particular cases, by making use of the affordances of particular media (be it 
the audio-visual in film, the visual in graphic memoir or the possibilities of 
the written word), caregivers memoirs structure these dilemmas for their 
129 See Burke on how the language of economics has permeated caregiving relationships 
with significant implications for those who are unable to reciprocate according to the logic 
of this contract (2015: 28). 
readers and signpost pathways towards acknowledgingand perhaps 
solvingdifficult ethical issues in dementia care.   
Imagining Alternative Approaches in Dementia Care 
Greenhalgh and Hurwitz (1999) suggest that illness narratives provide a 
framework for approaching patients difficulties holistically, and that 
attending to illness narratives may aid with diagnosis as well as with 
discovering alternative treatment options (48). Along the same lines, 
moving on from the ethical dilemmas that dementia raises, I now turn to the 
question of how caregivers memoirs may contribute to a potential 
expansion of care optionsby questioning common attitudes and care 
practices and by modelling alternative responses. Caregivers memoirs 
detail their authors own journey towards discovering new ways of seeing 
and dealing with dementia and how in the process they developed 
alternative (therapeutic) responses to the person they cared for. My 
discussion will focus on several representative questions raised by these 
accounts, including how to respond to confabulation, how to meet the 
person with dementia in their own world, and how to enhance sufferers 
well-being by using music (or other art-related interventions). However, the 
texts themselves contain a large repertoire of care practices and models. 
Contrary to care programmes where one method is made to fit all, narrative 
explorations of care underline the specificity of each persons care needs 
and describe responses that are designed to suit the situation and 
temperament of the person affected. At the same time, the memoirs gesture 
towards therapeutic interventions and everyday responses that may be 
beneficial for a large number of people with dementia. They can also play 
an important role in educating readers about what the care needs of a person 
with dementia may look like. 
While reminiscence therapy and so-called orientation exercises 
(reinforcing the day, time, season and place) may be useful in earlier stages 
of dementia, practitioners increasingly question the usefulness of such 
approaches for people with more advanced dementia. People with dementia 
often start confabulating: telling stories or making comments about a 
situation or a memory that does not align with the facts as perceived by 
others. Indeed, confabulation is a typical symptom of dementia; it can be 
defined as false narratives or statements about world and/or self due to 
some pathological mechanisms [usually memory problems], but with no 
intention of lying (rulv and Hydn 2006). Confabulation has been 
identified as a source of considerable distress to family members (rulv 
and Hydn 2006: 648) since when confabulation relates to shared 
experiences caregivers may feel threatened in their own sense of self, or 
struggle with how to respond to statements that seem fantastical. Caregivers 
are frequently driven to challenge the confabulatory statement and insist, 
instead, on their own version of a situation. This insistence may distress the 
person with dementia and lead to a communicative impasse. However, when 
caregivers try to enter the world of the person with dementia and go along 
with his or her version of events they frequently have the sense that this 
move is patronising or deceitful vis--vis the sufferer.  
In The Story of My Father (2003), Sue Miller explores the conflicting 
impulses she experienced when confronted with her fathers confabulation. 
My original impulses, she writes hadnt been to try and support my 
fathers delusional life. Id been fooled by my first few experiences with his 
hallucinations, when Id been able to talk him out of them, to reason him 
back to reality (Miller 2003: 119). As the disease advances however, Miller 
recognises that her reasoning no longer produces the desired response, and 
she comes to question the effects of her own corrective remarks: It dawned 
on me that my insistence that what he saw wasnt real, that what he heard 
was not what he thought it was, was making an insurmountable barrier 
between us, so I stopped (120). She learns to accept his version of reality, 
to think of him as having had the experiences he reported (120; original 
emphasis) and to commiserate with or be pleased for him accordingly. So 
much so, that it begins to strike her as odd when others didnt or couldnt 
(120). Miller openly criticises the nursing staff for their lack of empathy in 
this respect: 
When Dad spoke delusionally to them in my presence, they were openly 
dismissive. They reported his mistakes to me with contempt. This 
bothered me, more than a little. Had they had no training in the way these 
events seemed to occur to a delusional Alzheimers patient? I wondered. 
Could they not flex their imagination a little bit? Their compassion? (120) 
Indeed, Miller underlines how her fathers confabulations may have 
increased his sense of well-being in that they may have helped him to 
reconstitute his identity and reassert the patterns that had governed his 
scholarly life: the nursing home turns into a university, her father reports 
preparing or attending lectures, anddespite no longer being able to read
he reports on the amount of reading he has to do (121-2). She defends his 
solitary pursuits (or non-pursuits) and his unwillingness to join in the kind 
of activities offered at the nursing home, as a means of holding onto his 
personal identity. Defending her choice to lie and go along with his 
mistakes to the reader, she argues that his delusional life actually made 
him feel happy and competent in some parallel universe (123). In her view, 
supporting his confabulatory or delusional worldview constitutes a better 
approach than forcing him to take part in activities that she, at least, seems 
to perceive as mildly degrading. There is a sense, though, in which her 
acceptance of his confabulations is consoling to her own sense of what her 
father should be: I was glad when he reported hed done thingsfamiliar 
Dad-like thingsthat I knew he hadnt done (123). It could be that Millers 
father does not inhabit a parallel universe in which he feels happy and 
competent, but his daughters presence induces him to present this 
delusional faade as a means of saving face.  
In any case, Miller acknowledges that validation of her fathers 
confabulatory comments (Feil 1989, 1992, Feil and Altman 2004) is not 
without problems. When her fathers delusions become painful rather than a 
source of pleasure, Miller is no longer able to empathise with his point of 
view. Following a night-time fire drill, her father believes that there has 
been an actual fire in which children have died. Miller finds it impossible to 
validate his claim and to act as upset as would be warranted in this situation. 
Her father, in turn, cannot understand his daughters or the staffs 
unresponsiveness. He is appalled by her attempt to empathise with his 
feelings, rather than acknowledge the tragedy. In fact, the incident impacts 
on their relationship, until her father eventually forgets about it. Miller is 
left with the gnawing question of whether she should have reacted 
differently, whether there was some lesson [she] could have learned from 
this (125). Millers question is in a sense rhetorical. She does not find a 
definite, ethically sound and unambiguous solution to the question of how to 
respond to confabulation. But the fact that such a solution does not exist and 
that ones response to confabulation needs to be adapted over time and 
according to the situation and content of the confabulation is the very point 
of the narrative. Miller learns this lesson and finds a means to share this 
insight with her readers. In the process she explores how her fathers 
institutionalisation was not only damaging to him, but also had a significant 
impact on her own identity: 
He changed, and changed again. And in response, often lagging a step or 
two behind him, I changed also. Slowly, reluctantly, I learned new ways to 
behave, and I too was transformed, at least with him, as his illness 
deepened.  (119) 
While some of these changes are adaptive in the positive sense, and help 
Miller maintain her relationship with her father, others leave her feeling 
reduced in a way she feels resembles her fathers state.  
Sally Magnusson, in contrast, finds new ways of dealing with her 
mothers dementia by coming to see confabulation in a positive light. If 
confabulation is usually seen as fictitious and falseand therefore framed 
in terms of loss and deterioration on the part of the person confabulating
recent memory research stresses the extent to which all memories and 
procedures of memory recall are based in processes of narrativisation and 
confabulation (Fernyhough 2012). By engaging with this research, 
Magnusson comes to realise that her mothers confabulations are merely 
taking to excessive lengths the normal tendency of memory to reconstruct 
itself (238). Memory, according to the research Fernyhough brings together, 
is a product of the individuals present needs, created in the moment for the 
moment. In reconstructing memories, there is a conflict between coherence 
(internal and in relation to the present moment) and correspondence to 
reality: A coherent story about the past, Fernyhough writes, can 
sometimes only be won at the expense of the memorys correspondence to 
reality (Fernyhough 2012, qtd. in Magnusson 2014: 238). This helps me to 
understand, Magnusson writes, the narrative fictions you have been 
crafting: your trip to the moon, your matey relationship with Attila the Hun 
and personal discovery of the New World (238). Based on these insights 
from memory research, Magnusson comes to see her mothers confabulation 
not as a deficit but as a productive means of self-making and sense-making 
(see also rulv and Hydn 2006): 
So, you are doing what we all do, and what, as a matter of fact, I am doing 
right now. You are making sense of your experience by using narrative 
skills to stitch memory into a story. And you are doing it in the teeth of a 
strenuous assault on the delicate neural connections that make memory 
possible at all. I am, as so often, full of admiration. (239) 
In fact, Magnusson sees her mothers confabulation not primarily as a 
symptom of the disease, but as an aspect of her mothers identity. Creating 
a narrative path that makes sense of the moment  from the memories that 
do manage to hack their way through the undergrowth (223) is consistent 
with her personality:  
You are straining to take part in a conversation by appropriating whatever 
has presented itself to your imagination by way of a story once heard or a 
snippet of information absorbed. Delving into your own experience is what 
made you such an engaging conversationalist. You will not give up without 
a fight your right to keep saying, I did that, I saw that, I remember hearing, 
I was always struck by noticing, it reminds me of the time when (224) 
Magnussons interpretation of her mothers behaviour draws support from 
current research that posits confabulation as a productive means of making 
sense of the current situation (sense-making), maintaining personal 
identity in interaction with others (self-making), and organising and 
legitimising joint interaction in the world (world-making) (rulv and 
Hydn 2006: 647). Viewing confabulation in this light also allows 
Magnusson to respond positively to her mothers confabulation, to 
acknowledge its function and to recognise in it her mothers persisting 
identity (see also Crisp 1995). In the process, Magnusson shapes the way we 
as readers understand confabulation, which in turn, might perhaps lead to 
less dismissive reactions to this phenomenon in the context of interacting 
with people with dementia. 
Magnussons memoir is also instructive in that it represents a call for 
developing more music-based therapeutic interventions in dementia care, 
since drug treatments are so woefully insufficient. The use of 
pharmaceuticals, especially neuroleptics, 130  to target behavioural 
disorderssuch as wandering, excessive anxiety, lethargy or aggression
has been criticised on the grounds of the drugs limited effectiveness, 
especially considering their severe iatrogenic effects (Samson et al. 2015). 
There is a growing body of evidence that non-pharmaceutical interventions, 
including activities related to music, have a positive effect on emotional 
states and behavioural disorders in people with dementia, and that they can 
also reduce caregiver distress (Samson et al. 2015: 253). Reviewing the 
current state of research, Samson and her collaborators call attention to the 
power of music and its nonverbal nature [as a] a privileged communication 
medium when language is diminished or abolished (250). As Magnusson 
states of her mother, employing the second-person narration she uses 
throughout the memoir: Long after your own words have begun to desert 
you in droves, these familiar songs deliver an illusion of fluency (275). 
Magnussons memoir highlights the expressive and relational power of 
music. Furthermore, since music has always formed a central part of her 
mothers identity, singing familiar songs seems to bring her mother back to 
herself.131 
And its instantaneous. Like a switch. Someone starts you on one of your 
favourites and suddenly you are awake again, alive and remembering who 
you are. Music, I begin to see, is what rescues you from silence and the 
bars of the prison-house. (276) 
Being able to recognise her mother of old in itself has a positive effect on 
Magnusson.  Importantly, however, singing is also a joint activity, helping 
to strengthen their relationship as well as capable of breaking the monotony 
of a rainy Saturday afternoon (275)and as Magnusson seems to imply, 
the monotony of caregiving.132  
130 Neuroleptic agents, also known as antipsychotics, are frequently used as tranquilisers. 
While they can reduce confusion, delusions, hallucinations, and psychomotor agitation in 
psychotic patients, they are increasingly being used in major depression, anxiety, and 
insomnia. There is controversy over the widespread usage due to the adverse effects of 
these drugs (see http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/815881-overview).  
131 The documentary Alive Inside (Rossato-Bennett 2014) demonstrates impressively the 
power of music to engage people with dementia. However, the rhetoric of awakening, the 
titles allusion to a dead outer shell, and one commentator speaking specifically of people 
with dementia as living dead are detrimental to the films aim to improve dementia care. 
132 For Gordon (2007) singing remains one of the few activities she can do with her mother 
in the nursing home. In describing this beneficial interaction, Gordon also criticises 
excessive noise levels in nursing homes, emphasising the ever-present television which 
In addition, Magnussons memoir offers moving examples of how music 
can provide a therapeutic tool to lessen anxiety. In describing a particularly 
anxiety-inducing area of care, personal hygiene, Magnusson reveals how 
singing can have a soothing effect on the person with dementia: 
You emphatically did not want to get into this bath and I know for a fact 
that in a moment you wont want to get out either. You are upset and 
frightened by the transition from towel to water, this awful feeling of 
vulnerability. I start to hum Its a Lovely Day Tomorrow and in a slightly 
quavery voice you join in  You relax. The tension drains from your face. 
You shut your eyes. You let the water lap around your chin. You begin to 
smile. It really is a little bit like magic. (281) 
Although neuroscientific research supports the view that music has a strong 
potential to engage people with severe memory loss and improve cognitive 
and motor functions, a number of scholars have called for more rigorous 
scientific studies and cautioned against being misled by the exaggerated 
treatment effect (Samson et al. 2015: 250). They suggest that the social 
interaction in itself, irrespective of the activity, is likely to contribute to 
improvements in emotional well-being in people with dementia (253). As 
Magnusson puts it, quoting the chief executive of Alzheimers Scotland, 
human intervention is the chemotherapy for dementia (Magnusson 2014: 
282). In other words, while making music or listening to music may not 
work its magic on every patient with dementia, it is imperative to develop 
more ways (and make more time) to be with people with severe memory 
loss.133 
Finally, Magnussons memoir explores how in trying to protect people 
with dementia from harm, caregivers may be limiting their family members 
potential to thrive. Magnusson reflects on her mixed responses of guilt and 
shame when the address her mother gives at a funeral seems to go fatally 
wrong. A skilled conversationalist, Magnussons mother Mamie delivers the 
makes it impossible for them to sing and hear [themselves]. In peace. (Gordon 2007: 51). 
Considering that dementia leads to processing difficulties it seems ill-advised to expose 
people with dementia to numerous intrusive stimuli. Adapting nursing home environments, 
by breaking the habit of having the TV or radio run constantly, would represent a first step 
towards creating a more dementia-friendly environment. See Stokes (2010) for a range of 
illuminating case studies on how to adapt nursing home environments for people with 
dementia.  
133 In the meantime, Playlist For Life, a charity founded by Magnusson, aims to bring 
personalised music to people with dementia. For further information see 
https://www.playlistforlife.org.uk/.  
talk with conviction and style and it is well received by the funeral audience. 
However, due to her short-term memory loss, at the end of her speech 
Mamie proceeds to give the entire speech a second time. Magnusson is 
mortified for her mothers sake and worries about her own responsibility in 
leaving her mother open to such public humiliation. However, despite this 
initial assessment of the event as a failure of caring, Magnusson 
simultaneously tells another story.  She describes how her mother revel[s] 
in the attention of dozens of friendly mourners (149). The opportunity of 
giving one more public speech provides her with the the chance to be 
[herself] and feel the adrenaline of performance pumping through [her] 
veins again (149). And as the congregation erupts in most unfunereal 
applauselikely motivated by the joint relief felt at the resolution of an 
uncomfortable situationMamie looks thrilled (150). Initially, 
Magnusson reflects: 
I should have realised that embarrassment had flown to the same place as many 
of your social inhibitions. But as I steered you between these sympathetic faces, 
I felt sick with guilt. This was not how you should have left the public stage. 
(150) 
Magnusson later realises, however, that in her ideas and expectations of her 
mother, she might be holding on to the wrong set of values. In other words, 
what matters to herseeing her mother as a supremely competent public 
speaker who makes no mistakesmay no longer matter in the same way to 
her mother: Serenely unaware of gaffes and social expectations, you drank 
in only the appreciation. Perhaps it is my own embarrassment I am 
lamenting today (152). Her experience leads her to realise that the social 
environment should be such as to support people with dementia in their 
current state of abilities, allowing them to flourish, rather than secluding 
them or restricting their activities for fear of humiliation. Magnusson here 
underlines the role that the community, and not just specialised care 
professionals, plays in helping to bolster (385) the person with dementia.  
My mother was able to revel in her public self again that day because a 
community held her in its arms. Imagine the difference if communities in 
general  churches, shops, offices, buses, hospitals, banks, theatres, schools 
 were well enough educated in what it means to have dementia (and, 
crucially, what it doesnt mean) to do the same for the mentally frail in 
their midst. No pressure then to hide away. No silly shame at a loved ones 
social solecisms. No stigma to bring out the cowards in us all. (384) 
Magnusson reflects that letting go of her impulse to protect her mother from 
the risk of public humiliation proved a productive step. Indeed, caregivers 
memoirs suggest that at times it may be better to let go of ones 
responsibilities as caregivers, to lose sight of ones task-focused care agenda 
and instead follow the person with dementia in their activities. Such 
moments of being-with the person with dementia, silencing the ubiquitous 
drive in caregiving to be doing-to, may lead to shared moments of 
appreciation and joy. 
Challenging Care Practice 
Caregivers memoirsthough to varying degreesfunction as vehicles of 
patient advocacy. In criticising the current care system, they raise awareness 
about dementia as a complex and urgent health priority and may, ultimately, 
be able to contribute to improvements in the care system. By dint of their 
form as well as their content, caregivers memoirs speak not only for people 
with dementia but advocate on behalf of familial caregivers. They criticise 
the lack of support for caregivers, and the insufficiency of health care 
policies in the US and public health care in the UK. Many of the issues 
discussed so far can be seen in the light of challenging current health care 
practices. Instead of reiterating these critiques, or indeed exploring the full 
range of possible relations between these narratives and advocacy work, I 
limit my discussion to some of the details from Magnussons memoir that 
explicitly challenge current care practice. 
For one thing, Magnussons memoir provides a searing critique of the 
inability of institutions to cater to the needs of confused, elderly patients. 
The smooth running of the institution constitutes the prerogative of nurses 
and other professional caregiversoften to the detriment of the people in 
their care. If institutional care is depersonalised, inflexible, and often 
debilitating (in that patients are often discouraged from doing things they 
could well still achieve on their own), it is also hostile to intrusions from the 
outside world. Family caregivers are seen to disrupt routines, and despite 
staff shortages are made to feel unwelcome. After her mother is admitted to 
hospital due to a broken hip, Magnusson describes her familys sense of 
helplessness and outrage when they are not allowed to spend the night with 
her. Magnusson describes her mothers ordeal of waiting several days for an 
operation (all the while not being allowed to eat for long stretches in 
anticipation of surgery) and the toll this takes on her mothers grip on reality. 
In the process, Magnusson questions hospital policies in relation to frail 
elderly people:  
Leaving you to face the night alone in a strange, noisy place, frightened 
and achingly vulnerable, is like abandoning a scared child. No parent 
would do it. No parent would be expected to. Can anybody tell me the 
difference?  (162) 
Indeed, the unfamiliar environment brings on a state of delirium in her 
mother. In the rehabilitation centre she is subsequently moved to, 
Magnusson and her sisters have to fight daily to be allowed to stay with 
their mother beyond visiting hours, and are criticised by care staff for 
traipsing in all the time (175)despite the fact that the care staff itself is 
overstretched and unable to monitor the movements of a mentally fragile 
person recovering from hip surgery.134 Magnusson and her sisters defy 
institutional routines and thereby protect their mother from the worst effects 
of institutional neglect. However, her mothers temporary stay in hospital 
and a rehabilitation centre allows Magnusson to witness up close how other 
patients are treated in institutional settings. While Magnusson acknowledges 
that nursing staff work hard, she reveals how ignorance, power games and 
lack of empathy can result in dehumanising treatment of people with 
cognitive impairments and physical disabilities.  
Magnussons critique does not limit itself to the nursing staff, but also 
flags up how doctors often lack the skills needed to communicate with a 
person with dementia. She criticises a doctor for reading out all the potential 
hazards of the impending operation to her mother: There is no use 
abandoning the does-she-take-sugar approach of talking over a patients 
head, she writes if instead medics simply read the rulebook to someone 
whose speciality is missing the point (167). Furthermore, like many 
134 See http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/, a UK based campaign to make family caregivers 
more welcome in institutional settings. 
caregivers before her, she emphatically questions the rationale of the Mini-
Mental-State-Exam to assess memory impairmentgiven that the test 
entails no therapeutic benefits and given that, after it is used to establish her 
mothers mental impairment, no-one takes the slightest account of [her] 
dementia at all: 
asking questions a person is doomed to get wrong is a strangely heartless 
way to establish someones cognitive ability in an alien place when she is 
already confused and uncertain. It seems almost as mean to measure 
bafflement in this way as it would be to confirm a weak heart by giving 
someone an almighty shock. Boo Yes, as we suspected, heart failure. (173)  
Magnussons memoir is outspoken about the failings of the current care 
system. Compared to other memoirs her advocacy aims are also clearer. 
Especially in the afterword to the second edition of her memoir, she 
delineates the many ways she hopes to make an impact on dementia care. 
She outlines care paths and practices based on both her own and her readers 
experiences as caregivers. For one thing, she calls for consistent care in 
dementia, a professional care manager to support familial care workers and 
oversee all aspects of health care. Such a role, in her view, would not 
require more money but more organisation (393). She also explores 
various approaches to integrated dementia careinstitutions that imitate 
family homes and small-scale community models. And finally, she 
advocates using musicpersonalised playlists on iPods instead of 
antipsychotic drugsto engage and soothe people struggling with the 
effects of dementia. Challenging care practice in a first step, these memoirs 
also move beyond criticism to explore new ways of delivering dementia 
care. 
Conclusion  
Caregivers memoirs provide valuable resources for developing better 
dementia carethat is, care practices that fulfil the needs both of the 
caregiver and care-receiver. Indeed, the process of care-writing in itself 
frequently helped improve the level of care authors were able to provide for 
their family members. Discovering new ways of seeing dementia, through 
research and self-reflection, shaped the ways these authors responded to 
their family members and may also have enabled caregivers to cope better 
with the changes that dementia wrought. However, caregivers memoirs act 
on more than just a local level. Caregiving grows out of concern for the 
other, and the authors of caregivers memoirs frequently aim to enlarge that 
concern to include others outside the family circle by providing a powerful 
voice in dementia advocacy. They pinpoint failings in societies, 
communities and institutions. They challenge current care practices and 
current attitudes towards dementia which suggest that a person with 
dementia is already gone, has nothing to contribute, and no longer 
deserves or is likely to benefit from respectful engagement. If these texts rail 
against the multiple ways the system fails people with dementia and their 
caregivers, they do not stop simply at this criticism but also offer up 
productive new ways of thinking about and delivering dementia care. 
Caregivers memoirs differ in important ways from advice literature or 
social science reports. While much useful information can be gleaned from 
the latter, advice literature can feel overly prescriptive and fail to address the 
ethical issues inherent in dementia care. The narrativisation of lived 
experience in its complexity, through the eyes of a self-critical and 
accomplished writer, provides a number of advantages over other sources of 
information on caregiving. A significant advantage is that these memoirs 
and documentaries have an aesthetic appeal to them, and as I argue more 
fully in the next chapter, aesthetically pleasing narrative may make topics 
like dementia care more palatable. That is, readers may engage with topics 
they otherwise shy away from when they are embedded in a literary 
narrative (see also Keen 2007, Nussbaum 1990). 135  The capacity of 
literature to appeal to its readers emotions, to instruct and delight: those are 
the aspects which distinguish literary narrative (among other art forms) from 
social science reports. While these memoirs clearly share some of the 
affordances of imaginative literature, I explore in the following chapter how 
fictional narrative, free from referential (and arguably, also some moral) 
135 Keen and Nussbaum are concerned with fictional narratives. Nonetheless, Nussbaum 
does not rule out that sufficiently literary life writing that arouse[s] the relevant forms of 
imaginative activity and promote[s] identification and sympathy in the reader may 
function in a similar way as fictionespecially, she writes if [it] show[s] the effect of 
circumstances on the emotions and the inner world (1995: 5), which these caregivers 
memoirs do. 
constraints, may provide an even more radical thinking through of the 
implications of the current dementia construct for dementia care. At the 
same time, differences between literary memoir and literary fiction help 
give caregivers accounts their ethical and political force (Couser 2004). It 
is the fact that the authors of caregivers memoirs speak from a place of 
first-hand experience that makes their narratives such powerful forces in 
dementia advocacy. These memoirs are able to expand the horizon of 
current research agendas on dementia care by opening up questions that 
previous research never thought to ask. Among these is the realisation that 
although dementia creates pressing care needs, living with dementia offers 
up many opportunities for moments of joy and fulfilmentfor both 
caregivers and care-receivers. 
Indeed, contrary to Burkes analysis of current dementia life writing as 
infused by the language and logic of the market (2016: 603), in which 
authors proclaim my mothers dementia ruined my life (60), many of these 
narratives underscore the continuing relationality and positive experience of 
mutual obligation that inhere in personal relationships. Also, rather than 
focusing merely on dementia as personal tragedyalthough these narratives 
clearly function as means to work through their authors own grief and 
unresolved feelings towards their dead partners or parentsthese texts do, 
in fact, reach out to others with the aim of developing, as Burke demands, a 
collective societal framework with which to support people with dementia 
and those that provide their care (Burke 2016: 600). Pace Burke, then, the 
subjective and personal do not necessarily undermine or stand in opposition 
to collective, political action.  
Another advantage of memoir over, for instance, specialised nursing 
literature is that caregivers memoirs are likely to reach a much wider 
audience. (Sales reports suggest even that memoir has nowadays surpassed 
fiction in marketability.)136 Since dementia calls for changes on a societal 
scale, it is important that the question of dementia care is raised both within 
and outside specialised contexts. As one of Magnussons readers says, these 
136 Swinnen (2012) argues that documentary may contribute to the personhood movement 
in dementia since it reaches wider audiences than scholarly work (122). However, she 
simultaneously draws attention to the need to scrutinise the ethics of representation in films 
and documentaries used as educational tools.  
texts should constitute compulsory reading for a whole range of people, 
from the highest government minister in the land to the humblest care 
assistant (Magnusson 2014: 381). They should be read not because they 
present ideal or model caregiving, but because, in allowing readers to live 
through the complexity and ethical murkiness of dementia care, these 
memoirs stimulate profound debate about the possibilities and problems of 
looking after people with cognitive impairment. They suggest a panoply of 
treatment options and stress the importance of flexible care tailored to the 
needs of individuals, families and communities.   
For all their criticism of the current care system, these memoirs are of 
course not beyond criticism themselves. In exposing the lives of vulnerable 
subjects they may become ethically suspect. As hinted at in the examples 
above and discussed more fully in the previous chapter, the writers of 
caregivers memoirs may harm people with dementia by breaching their 
right to privacy. They may also inadvertently contribute to the stigma 
attached to the disease. As Magnusson discusses in her afterword, the 
question of misrepresentation remains complex in dementia. Advocates 
have long painted a bleak picture of the disease in order to garner more 
support. Although their aim is laudable, by perpetuating a negative 
representation of dementia they may also stoke fear of the disease. 
Conversely, while Magnusson welcomes the change in attitude towards 
people with dementiaacknowledging what people with dementia can still 
do, rather than focusing on their deficitsshe also warns that this new way 
of seeing dementia may lead to a revisionist airbrushing of the suffering 
dementia causes (385). What I have argued in this chapter is that some of 
the apparent shortcomings of caregivers memoirs can actually provide food 
for constructive thinking.  
In considering the ethical problems of life writing about vulnerable 
subjects, Couser asks whether there are any pay-offs which justify or 
balance out the ethical infractions such writing commits. I suggest that the 
ethical thinking these texts promote, the imaginative treatment options they 
develop, and the challenge they pose to current societal responses to 
dementia care represent such pay-offs. These memoirs offer up multiple 
new avenues for seeing, responding to and living with dementia. Such 
avenues are well worth exploring in light of the pressing need for humane 
and sustainable dementia care. 
Chapter 6  Making Readers Care: Bioethics and the Novel 
When we read novels we become immersed in complex storyworlds that 
may mimic as well as differ substantially from our own world. Whatever the 
precise relation between the fictional and the real, we make sense of these 
storyworlds based on our own life experiences, and, in some way or another, 
will relate our reading experiences back to our lives as embodied, embedded 
and socially positioned individuals. In the medical humanitiesvariously 
described as a discipline, field or meeting point137literary fiction has been 
called upon to play a number of perhaps surprising roles. In this chapter, I 
explore and problematize the ways in which literary fiction may intervene in 
medical or health humanities teaching and research. While the dividends of 
literary exploration are difficult to quantify or qualify since they lie in the 
encounter between particular texts and readers, I nonetheless suggest some 
ways in which dementia novels may engage their readers in considering 
bioethical questions that arise in contemporary Western care culture(s). I use 
the term bioethics as a way to describe how novels explore the question of 
how to liveincluding the question of how, when and where to die. In 
particular, I ask how fictional narratives raise questions concerning 
autonomy, quality of life, and suicide or euthanasia in dementia. Indeed, a 
reassessment of cost-benefit understandings of care which underlie 
discussions around quality of life and euthanasia is central to a number of 
the narratives I consider in this chapter. 
In the present chapter I aim to distinguish my own approach from the 
practice of narrative medicine, as developed in particular by Rita Charon 
(2006). Charons work in this area is concerned to a significant extent with 
promoting empathy and better clinical skills in health care practitioners. I 
propose to widen the scope of Charons argument in favour of an 
engagement with narrative in health care settings to include audiences 
outside the immediate doctor-patient encounter. I by no means intend to 
devalue Charons significant contribution to the medical humanities. Indeed, 
137 Medical humanities have recently also been described as a series of intersections, 
exchanges and entanglements between the biomedical sciences, the arts and humanities, 
and the social sciences (Whitehead and Woods 2016: 1). 
I find it regrettable that her work is at times held up as a straw figure to 
represent a type of simplistic or nave medical humanities approach, 
which closer study of the practice she develops does not in fact bear out. 
However, my approach differs significantly from her work in that I am 
concerned primarily with the reception of texts, and here in particular with 
the reception of literary narratives. Furthermore, I am concerned with all 
readersdoctors, care home managers, literary scholars and the general 
public alike. Of course, this does not exclude the possibility that the novels I 
discuss may speak in particular ways to health care professionals and 
(family) caregivers, or that they may be used in medical education and 
training.  
While Charons work emphasises the clinical benefits of doctors 
engaging with literary and non-literary narratives, it is imperative to assess 
whether literature necessarily plays the positive role it is frequently assigned. 
Current discussions about the medical humanities promote a view of the 
field as driven by an ethical imperative (Rees 2010, qtd. in Jones 2014). 
On such a view, there is something morally wrong with the current practice 
of health care, which needs to be redressed. The humanities and social 
sciences enter to provide a critique of the state of biomedicine and offer new, 
more ethically sound ways of providing health care. My introduction 
outlined problems inherent in the argument that the humanities may 
humanise biomedical practice. What I am concerned with here, since I 
deal with texts that raise issues about well-being and care, is the question 
whether the literary texts themselves may be seen as tools for the good or 
driven by an ethical imperative, or whether they instead enforce common 
stereotypes of dementia and thereby contribute to the stigma attached to the 
disease syndrome.  
In considering how dementia is represented in narrative fiction, my 
approach resembles critical disability studies approaches that aim to outline 
and frequently deconstruct the way that a disease or disability has been 
represented historically in a culture (see, among others, Murray 2008, 
Stirling 2010). Dementia, like other disabilities, has accrued a host of 
negative stereotypes and dehumanising tropes that circulate widely in the 
cultural imaginary (Behuniak 2011, Burke 2007b, Herskovits 1995). The 
fact that literary narratives promote these negative representations of 
dementia seriously undermines the notion that reading literary narratives 
may promote better doctors, more caring caregivers or more ethical world 
citizens. Rather than acting, necessarily, as subversive counter-narratives to 
reductionist and dehumanising biomedical and popular conceptions of 
dementia, literary narratives in such cases compound the stigma attached to 
the disease. The question, then, is how particular fictional dementia 
narratives live up to, or fail to live up to, the ethico-political standard that 
the term counter-narrative suggests. 
Rather than cataloguing numerous stereotypical representations of 
dementia in fictionof which there are manyI approach the relation of 
bioethics and the novel through four case studies. I first consider Michael 
Ignatieffs Scar Tissue (1993) and B.S. Johnsons House Mother Normal 
(2013/1971) to reflect on the ways these novels raise ethical problems vis--
vis questions of selfhood, social stigma and norms of caring. In discussing 
Ignatieffs text, I briefly touch on how literary fiction addresses the doctor-
patient encounterlong the focus of medical humanities researchas well 
as on how fictional narratives mediate the contrasting epistemologies of the 
life world approach versus biomedicine. Johnsons text, by contrast, 
addresses the question of how fiction may act both as a dangerous 
democratising forcethough the use of polyphony and dialogismand as a 
dangerous rhetorical force, in its ability to sway readers views, emotions 
and attitudes. Literature has the ability to both persuade and disturb. The 
dangerous and disturbing aspects of narrative rhetoric, I argue, may be 
productive as well as destructive when harnessed to the ethical imperative of 
a medical humanities agenda.   
In a second step, I explore what fictional dementia narratives bring to 
the table when thinking through bioethical issues concerning quality of life. 
Judgments about the quality and value of a human life are inextricably 
linked with making end-of-life decisions. In thinking about the obligations 
we hold towards more vulnerable members of our society, dementia 
narratives open up difficult questions about caregiving and withholding care. 
In the second section of this chapter, I address how different media and 
means of narrative presentation affect the process of bioethical decision-
making that these narratives simulate for and perhaps evoke in their readers. 
To this end, I return to the film and novel version of Still Alice, and also to 
Margaret Forsters novel Have the Men Had Enough? (1989). These 
narratives offer the opportunity to live through (Rosenblatt 1995: 33; 38) 
as well as think through the bioethical dilemmas attendant on dementia 
care.138 Drawing on Martha Nussbaums argument that novels provide 
means of addressing the question of how to live, I explore what type of 
ethical work (Nussbaum 1990: 47) these narratives may engender in the 
reader. How may these novels elicit certain responses, without offering pat 
solutions, to bioethical dilemmas concerning the end of a meaningful life, or 
the value of one life above, in relation to, or against another? 
Ethics and the Novel: Countering, Stereotyping and Disturbing 
While I use the term ethics as a way to describe how novels explore the 
question of how to live, I note that my discussion of ethics is never far 
from questions of morality and moral actionsince the question of how to 
live invariably involves moral codes as well as individual responses that 
draw on these codes and personal convictions. As John Guillory 
acknowledges, a clear demarcation between ethics and morality, or indeed 
related notions of the aesthetic (as ethical) and the political (as moral), is not 
possible. Instead, as Guillory proposes in his work, I explore the range of 
possible relations between the ethical/aesthetic and the political/moral 
(Guillory 2000: 37). 
Furthermore, in approaching the question of ethics from a literary angle, 
I draw on a range of literary scholars before me who have made questions of 
ethics a primary concern of their reading practice. My reading of dementia 
narratives engages most strongly with pragmatist and rhetorical ethics,139 
represented by such scholars as Martha Nussbaum, Wayne C. Booth and 
James Phelan, since this strand of narrative ethics is frequently invoked in 
medical humanities contexts. The work of moral philosopher Martha 
138 Compare also Morris (2002) on thinking with stories (196; my emphasis). 
139 See Korthals Altes (2005) for an overview of different strands of the ethical turn in the 
humanities. For further discussion of the relation between ethics and literature see Korthals 
Altes (2006, 2013, 2014). 
Nussbaum supports my thesis that novels provide means of exploring 
ethical questions and of acting as moral laboratory for the reader. However, 
I also show how the ethics of alterity and politically engaged ethics subvert 
more positivist or supposedly morally stable modes of reading, without 
however subscribing to the notion of an ethics of literature as radical 
undecidability (Korthals Altes 2005: 145), which risks making literature 
both ethically and morally moot.   
In the words of James Phelan, the very act of reading has an ethical 
dimension: reading involves doing things such as judging, desiring, emoting, 
actions that are linked to our values (Phelan 2003: 132). Phelan and Wayne 
C. Booth before him show through close rhetorical analysis how literary 
devices construct value-effects and elicit the readers ethical engagement 
(Korthals Altes 2005: 142). Such a focus on the interplay between the 
author, narrative technique, and the reader emphasises the co-constructed 
nature of ethical reading practices, referred to by Booth as coduction 
(Booth 1988: 70-75). This process of coduction, which includes discussion 
with others, is of particular value in the teaching of narrative medicine (see 
Charon 2006). It is furthermore an integral part of literary criticism in that 
professional reading, as Guillory argues, constitutes a communal practice. 
Indeed, in sharing my readings of the novels I discuss in the present chapter, 
I aim to contribute to a process of coduction which explicitly addresses the 
ethical dimensions of these texts in relation to dementia care.  
Let me turn now to the three verbs of my sub-title: countering, 
stereotyping and disturbing. In my first case study I ask to what extent 
dementia novels engage in acts of countering the dominant (negative) 
cultural construction of dementia. Second, I explore the potential of 
narrative fiction to disturb its readers, in particular by upsetting moral 
values. How do polyphony and dialogism in House, Mother, Normal act as a 
route to questioning and rethinking dementia care practices? Since this 
novel starkly foregrounds questions of alterity, I here aim to balance and 
question pragmatist and rhetorical ethics approaches to literature through a 
text that lends itself to an exploration of an ethics of alterity. 
Scar Tissue: Biomedicine and the Hermeneutics of Selfhood 
Michael Ignatieffs Scar Tissue can best be described as a fictional 
caregivers memoir. Indeed, it is stylistically and thematically so close to 
memoir to be virtually indistinguishable from it. It is therefore perhaps 
unsurprising that Lucy Burke has recently used it as a paradigm case to 
discuss relational identity, or intersubjectivity in dementia caregivers 
writing (Burke 2014). Although Ignatieff worked aspects of his own life 
experience, notably of his mothers dementia, into the story (see Arana 2003: 
153), the novel departs from the referential stance of autobiographical 
writing. This departure allows Ignatieff to take a certain licence with his 
lived experience and to explore other avenues than those derived from his 
real-life experiences. So, for instance, he is, not the son who gave up 
everything to be with his mother, like the narrator of the novel, but the 
brother at a distance (Vassilas 2003: 443).  
Writing a fictional memoir further allows Ignatieff to take certain views 
and experiences to their extremes and to explore the polarity between 
science and the arts, philosophy and lived experience. Ignatieff contrasts the 
figure of the unnamed narrator, a lecturer in philosophy and writer of this 
fictive memoir with the narrators neurologist brother. In order to explore 
the question of whether selfhood persists in dementia, Ignatieff almost 
schematically opposes different characters to show how philosophy, 
neuroscience, the arts and later religion afford different vantage points on 
the notion of self. The novel describes the breakdown of the narrators own 
identity and of his family relations, especially to his wife and children. As 
he becomes the parent to his mother (Ignatieff 1993: 96) he neglects his 
actual parental duties. Scar Tissue therefore complicates the view that 
relational identity is unequivocally reparative in the context of identity 
crises in dementia. While caregivers are frequently called upon to maintain 
the identity of their loved ones by continuing to tell their stories for them 
(Radden and Fordyce 2006),140 Scar Tissue highlights the extent to which 
the sons own identity is shattered when his mother no longer recognises 
140 Compare Davis (2004), who criticises the demand placed on family caregivers to 
maintain the identity of the person with dementia.  
him:  It was as my brother had said: if she failed to recognise you, you 
ceased to exist. No longer her son, no longer anyone. Acknowledge that I 
exist. Acknowledge your son (Ignatieff 1993: 163-4). In Lucy Burkes 
words, the narrative exposes the way in which the narrators desire to 
sustain his mothers identity is disturbed by her inability to recognise and 
thus affirm his own sense of self (Burke 2014: 45). According to Burke, the 
narrative thereby takes to their extremes the consequences of the erosion of 
reciprocal or mutual recognition upon which the concept of intersubjectivity 
is founded (45). In other words, this novel suggests that dementia affects 
the identity of close family members as well as the dementia sufferers. 
However, the threat to the narrators identity is not only of a relational 
kind, deriving from his mothers lack of recognition. Since the narrator 
believes he has a genetic predisposition to develop the diseasehe 
ironically calls it the family silver (1)he sees the threat to his own 
selfhood as emanating from the inside, from the supposed build-up of 
plaques and tangles in his brain. Indeed, the entire narrative is less a coming 
to terms with his mothers dementia than a working through of the 
narrators own fears of living with the disease. The narrator self-consciously 
grapples with ways to confront his supposed fatefor instance in 
developing a Stoic attitude rather than relying on the pervasive North-
American myth of self-help and positive thinking,141 or in trying to persuade 
himself that selflessness is in fact an enviable state. He develops the first 
view in a Rotary speech delivered in front of his parents, and the second in 
his manic treatise (179) on selflessness in the wake of grieving his 
mothers deathonly to partially reject both attitudes later. Towards the 
close of the novel, the narrator seems to be experiencing the first symptoms 
of dementia himself. There is some ambiguity, however, whether these 
symptoms are due to neurological processes or rather to his intense 
depression and partly produced by his self-willed isolation and almost 
masochistic and certainly narcissistic immersion in his own state of grief 
(see also Burke 2014: 45).   
The novel clearly challenges the perceived notion that relational identity 
141 See also Hawkins (1993) for a critical reflection on the self-help myth of healthy-
mindedness, which represents a dominant model for illness narratives in the US. 
constitutes an answer to the dismantling of identity in dementia. Apart from 
focusing on the question of selfhood and relational identity, the novel shares 
several other themes with those foregrounded by contemporary illness 
memoirs. Among these, as suggested by its character constellation, is the 
interrogation of the truth value of different master narratives: particularly, 
philosophy and contemporary biomedicine. The novel challenges the 
predominance of the biomedical paradigm while also criticising the way 
health professionals view, and consequently treat, dementia patients. So, for 
instance, the narrator contrasts the familys view of dementia with the 
clinical perspective in what is a staple of most illness narratives: the scene 
of diagnosis. Although the neurologist is not depicted entirely 
unsympathetically, the narrator clashes with her from the start. The narrator 
is ruffled by the neurologists patronising language: she uses the first-person 
plural we to ask about his mothers well-being, refers to Mother rather 
than using her name, and talks about her in the third-person in her 
presence.142 From the neurologists perspective the mothers behaviour can 
be explained through brain pathology: disinhibition begins with 
disintegration in the frontal lobes. Your mothers frontal lobes are not yet 
affected  which would explain why she is continent and why she is gentle 
(59-60). The narrator, on the contrary, insists that his mothers behaviour is 
meaningful and consistent with her personality: Shes gentle, I say, 
because thats the kind of person she is (60). Frustrated at the 
neurologists cold clinical stance, he eventually blurts out: a lot depends on 
whether people like you treat her as a human being or not (58). That is, the 
neurologists clinical perspective and distancing stance come across as both 
de-personalising and dehumanising.  
Despite the narrators attempts to recognise his mothers humanity and 
sustain her personhood, he nonetheless struggles to understand the relation 
between pathology and personality, to separate identity and disease. Later in 
the novel the narrator explores the notion of embodiment and selfhood, in 
particular in relation to his mothers continuing ability to paint, thereby 
142 Aquilina and Hughes (2006: 149) critically reflect on the fact that medical staff often 
bypass the person with dementia and speak only to caregivers, thereby denying them their 
status as authorities of their own experience and even denying their personhood. 
Caregivers memoirs suggest this is a common occurrence.   
evoking complex questions about the relations among intentionality, 
representational art, and creativity as expressions of selfhood.143 Faced 
with the biomedical narrative of inexorable decline that the neurologist 
insists on, the narrator struggles to convey his own sense in which his 
mothers identity persists in her bodily habits: 
I want to say that my mothers true self remains intact, there at the surface 
of her being, like a feather resting on the surface tension of a glass of water, 
in the way she listens, nods, rests her hand on her cheek  But I stumble 
along and just stop. (58) 
Using metaphor, the novel here develops a more complex vision of selfhood 
in dementia and opposes it to the reductionist biomedical understanding. 
The image of the self as feather suggests fragility, lightness, and 
effervescence as well as durability. But in locating this embodied form of 
selfhood at the surface, the novel also draws on entrenched notions of an 
inner and inaccessible subjectivity that is considered more valuable than 
outer or supposedly superficial manifestations. In the context of the 
clinical encounter, in any case, the narrators views on the ways his 
mothers selfhood is embodied remain unexpressed and the two ways of 
seeing dementia seem irreconcilable: 
It is pointless to go on and we both know it. The doctor looks at Mothers PET 
scans and sees a disease of memory function, with a stable name and a clear 
prognosis. I see an illness of selfhood, without a name or even a clear cause. (60) 
The narrator is at times critical of both the epistemological validity and 
the practice of biomedicine. He draws attention to conflicting 
neuropathological evidence, in which the brains of symptomatically normal 
elderly showed evidence of the plaques and tangles which are commonly 
held to be the underlying cause of dementia (54). And yet he wishfully 
envisions a future in which the fate of Alzheimers will have turned into a 
manageable disease, fully explained by medical science. Towards the end, 
the narrator seems to reject his own philosophical and narrativising attempts 
to make sense of his experience and instead endorses the biomedical 
understanding of dementia: Human identity is neurochemical (193). In a 
narcissistic reverie he imagines witnessing his own neuropathological 
143 For a related debate see Selberg (2015). 
breakdown with the help of neuroimaging techniques. In an elaborate 
conceit he (ironically) states: 
I want to be done with metaphors. I want to see the thing itself. I want to 
see deep into the hippocampus, deep into the parietal and occipital, down 
into the brainstem itself to the places where the protein deposits are 
building up, millisecond by millisecond, forming plaques and tangles, 
shutting down neurotransmitters  causing me to forget  Nothing could 
be more beautiful than to see this happen: the molecular progress of your 
dying. Lie back in the scanning room and watch your own neurons 
watching you, thinking your thoughts, being you, your own forgetting as 
digital squares of light on a video monitor. (194) 
This passage is in direct contrast to an earlier actual scene of 
neuroimaging the narrator describes: the PET scans his mother is subjected 
to in the process of diagnosis. The earlier scene is offered up as a critique of 
the humiliating and seemingly futile nature of diagnostic procedures. It also 
represents one of the moments in the narrative that hint at more basic and 
productive processes of intersubjectivity in dementia which do not depend 
on role recognitionthat is, the recognition of the other as parent/child or 
spouse, respectively. Instead, the scene foregrounds how intersubjective 
understanding depends on our own embodiment and ability to read others 
thoughts and emotions through their body language (Ratcliffe 2007). 
Strategically placed after the exposition of current scientific uncertainty 
about the neurobiological underpinnings of dementia, the passage is one in 
which the narrator questions the validity of biomedical knowledge and 
criticises inhumane medical practice: 
Mother was led, naked and uncomprehending, into a tiled room and sealed 
inside a machine ... I stood in the control room, on the other side of the 
glass, watching her terrified glances as her head was placed inside an 
instrument to measure cerebral activity.  Her legs made small, struggling 
gestures of fear and a technician flicked on the intercom and told her not 
to. I stood there beyond the glass, wanting to kill my brother for putting her 
through this. Then the sedation took hold and she lay awake but 
motionless, while a stream of images of the neurochemical activity within 
her brain flowed across the monitors in the control room  bright blue for 
the skull casing, red for the cerebral lobes, purple for the tracer. I stood 
there watching brightly coloured neural images of my Mothers fear and 
dread. (55) 
The narrators insight into his mothers feelings, based on an interpretation 
of her body language, is contrasted with the technically possible insight 
into her brain, which only produces seemingly random colour patterns. 
According to contemporary advances in neuroscience, cerebral activity 
registered by neuroimaging techniques reflects our emotions. The narrative 
emphasises, however, that the gap between understanding (and responding 
to) these emotions and interpreting coloured neural images remains 
immense. In this instance, Scar Tissue underlines how the interpretation of 
neuroimaging techniques is in itself a hermeneutic process, not a scientific 
tool that somehow holds a distinct truth valueeven if the current 
neurobiological master narrative of dementia depends on privileging such a 
view. 
What is telling about the narrators turn towards biomedical explanations 
at the end of his narrative is that he sees himself as leaving the territory of 
figural language, moving from fiction to fact, from a hermeneutic process to 
some kind of definitive form of understanding. Without going into a 
discussion of the philosophy of science (or indeed of the inevitably 
metaphoric nature of scientific language), I here want to explore how the 
narrators reflections on the purchase of metaphorical language echoes 
current debates in the health humanitiessince these debates about 
metaphor and discourse resonate, in turn, with the notion of counter-
narratives. In Illness as Metaphor (1979) Susan Sontag discusses how 
metaphors that attach to particular illnesses have pernicious effects for those 
who suffer from these diseasesparadigmatically tuberculosis, cancer and, 
later, AIDS (Sontag 1989). Sontag vehemently resists the use of illness as 
metaphor and claims that the most truthful way of regarding illnessand 
the healthiest way of being illis one most purified of, most resistant to, 
metaphoric thinking (1979: 3). She suggests that particular illnesses 
become synonymous with death. They become mystified, taboo-words that 
can no longer be uttered, and when they are attached to a person this person 
is seen to be morally, if not literally contagious, and consequently to be 
shunned (6). Arguably, although strenuous efforts to de-mystify and de-
stigmatise dementia are underway, this condition remains the dread 
disease of the century. Since dementia is referred to as a living death or 
funeral without end, it is easy to see why Sontags call for non-metaphoric 
thinking remains pertinent. Indeed, efforts to rename the disease syndrome 
due to the inherently stigmatising connotations of the term dementia are 
underway.144 In this context, critical disability scholarship, which traces and 
criticises the representation of a particular condition and the metaphoric 
meanings attached to it, presents a productive avenue of inquiry.  
However, the claim that supposedly non-metaphoric approaches to illness 
are the best means forward has by no means gone uncontested. As David 
Morris, in response to Sontag, points out, 
There is practical, therapeutic value in calming the imagination of patients 
gripped by harmful myths. Yet, in her intention to deprive it of harmful 
meaning, Sontag wants to reduce illness to a scientific, biological fact. 
Unfortunately, returning illness to science does not deprive it of meaning 
but simply leaves it in the grip of a reductive, positivist, biomedical 
narrative that focuses solely on bodily processes  the effort to cleanse 
illness of all meaning discounts the therapeutic benefit that positive myths 
and meanings can supply. It ignores the healing role that stories play  
(Morris 1998: 269-70) 
Indeed, the entire health humanities movement is to a large degree founded 
on the assumption that metaphoric thinking and narrative exploration have 
beneficial effects for the person living with serious illness. In Morris words, 
The slippery use of metaphor can be turned to good use as well as ill (270). 
The question is, then, how metaphor and narrative are used in Scar Tissue to 
counter or confirm the dominant construction of dementia as loss of self. 
And what role does narrative play in making sense of the experience of 
dementia? 
To take the last point first: the narrative project, writing a memoir about 
his experience, provides the narrator with a means of recovering his 
mothers identity from before her illness, memorialising her as well as 
others in the family who suffered from dementia (see also Vassilas 2003: 
443): Memory, the narrator claims, is the only afterlife I have ever 
believed in. But the forgetting inside us cannot be stopped (Ignatieff 1993: 
4). He accordingly writes in order to defy the betrayal his brain is 
programmed to enact (4). The fictional memoir represents the narrators 
attempts to create meaning out of his experience. As John Wiltshire holds, 
Illness is the stripping of meaning from both person and event and this 
challenge of non-meaning is perhaps most acutely represented when the 
144 See for instance Hughes call to replace dementia with acquired diffuse 
neurocognitive dysfunction (Hughes 2011).  
patient suffers  from a neurological condition such as dementia 
(Wiltshire 2000: 413). However, the narrative also registers the many 
instances in which the attempt to create coherence or master ones fate, as 
the narrator puts it, is doomed. His mothers death represents such a 
moment that defies, if not representation, then domestication: 
There is only one reason to tell you this, to present the scene. It is to say 
that what happens can never be anticipated. What happens escapes 
anything you can ever say about it. What happens cannot be redeemed. It 
can never be anything other than what it is. We tell stories as if to refuse 
the truth, as if to say that we make our fate, rather than simply endure it. 
We live, and we cannot shape life. It is much too great for us, too great for 
any words. ... there at last in her presence ... I knew that all my words 
could only be in vain, and that all I had feared and all I had anticipated 
could only be lived. (172) 
Scar Tissue, in striving to create coherence, to find redemption, follows the 
over-arching goals of most illness narratives. At the same time, the novel 
enacts the failure of such redemption. In Wiltshires view, it even comes 
close to what Arthur Frank somewhat oxymoronically terms the chaos 
narrative of illness: 
If the mothers illness has led to the loss of self, as [the narrator] 
suggests ... something of that loss is passed on, or replicated, in scenes in 
which the narrator hysterically loses control and [verbally] abuses his wife 
and brother ending in a period of complete isolation and breakdown. But as 
well as the narrator the book circles round in bafflement; it manifests a 
kind of entrapment in the crisis it seeks to understand. Indeed, if the 
breakdown of boundaries between self and other is characteristic of the 
material in illness narratives, Scar Tissue demonstrates this in pathological 
form.  (Wiltshire 2000: 419) 
Although, in my view, Ignatieffs novel is a far cry from Franks notion of 
chaos narrative, it does enact the breakdown of relationality. Importantly, 
the narrative thematises its own failure to create coherence, to provide 
satisfactory closure. The narrative strand is continuously interrupted by 
different types of discourses or genres: such as a speech delivered by the 
narrator, the beginnings of a philosophical tract, excerpts from King Lear, a 
newspaper clipping on suicide in dementia, and an exploration of De 
Koonings artwork. These narrative disruptions also represent contradictory 
viewpoints that the narrator inhabits in relation to the question of selfhood 
in dementia. In registering the difficulty of arriving at a definitive account of 
what dementia entails, both for the sufferer and her caregivers, the novel 
may offer consolation to others who, as John Skelton argues, may welcome 
the release that literature brings. They may feel that their own power to 
express themselves has failed and that there is relief in the words of others 
and the possibility of saying This is what I mean (Skelton 2003: 212)
even if in this case the meaning would be that the experience of living with 
dementia or witnessing the death of a parent or spouse cannot be adequately 
put into words. 
Scar Tissue, then, represents conflicting views about the question of 
selfhood in dementia. On the one hand, the narrator rants at his brother 
when the latter questions whether there is still any point in visiting their 
mother:  
What youre asking is is this a person or is this a vegetable?  I would 
say she is. Definitely. She has personhood. She has the habits a person has. 
If you say the word coffee, she says Cawfee, in imitation of Peg Lawson 
in Alton. Thats the habit of a person  Miranda used to say, She sure is a 
character. Do you know what that meant? It meant she hit you if you tried 
to take her sweater off without her permission.  Until her fall  she used 
to walk six hours a day ... Imagine the determination in all that walking. 
Imagine what it takes. Thats what I call a person. Thats what I call a 
character. (159) 
And yet, on the other hand, the narrator concludes his rant: She has left her 
self behind. I sit with her,  and I think: Whats so good about a self? 
(161). Further, although he feels the need to assert his mothers identity and 
acknowledge what remains, he simultaneously reverts to stereotypical 
representations of people with dementia as selfless beings, with vacant 
eyes (5) that bespeak a lack of interiority. Finally, the narrator tries to 
persuade himself that the loss of self is in fact, something worth striving for. 
However, he describes the project of countering the Western obsession 
with individualism as an errant, misguided project: using the terms lunatic 
and manic suggests that he feels embarrassed for even entertaining the idea 
that selflessness might be considered a good, a goal worth striving for. 
Importantly, the narrative disturbs the view that relational identity is 
unequivocally restorative. His mothers lack of recognition leads to his own 
pathological breakdown of identity. Conversely, the narrator pronounces his 
mothers social and spiritual death at the very moment that she fails to be 
able to recognise him:  
This time I was sure that she neither knew me nor cared who I was.  The 
eyes that do not see. The eyes that have no memory, the eyes that are dead. 
I had arrived at the moment, long foretold, hopelessly prepared for, when 
Mother took the step beyond her self and moved into the world of death 
with her eyes open. (166) 
Scar Tissue here confirms the dominant trope of dementia as living death, 
thereby undermining its status as counter-narrative. However, as suggested 
previously, counter-narratives are rarely straightforward constructs. They 
are necessarily entangled in the dominant discourses they set out to subvert. 
Indeed, seeing counter-narratives as merely oppositional counter-images 
that rely on invoking the binary opposites of any dominant representation 
short-changes their potential to question received ideas. Scar Tissue 
challenges current care practices as well as the neurobiological 
materialism (Waugh 2013: 18) which constitutes the dominant mode of 
understanding dementiaand arguably, what it means to be human. And 
yet, Scar Tissue also promotes the masterplot of dementia as loss of self, 
and compounds stigma through the use of gothic and animalistic imagery. 
The text may also be seen to reinforce the notion that dementia is a fate 
worse than death, a dismantling of self and of family relationships. Reading 
dementia narratives consequently opens up two levels of critique: 1) the 
potential of the narratives themselves to provide a means to criticise certain 
aspects of society and 2) the role of the literary critic to elucidate and 
criticise how novels engage us in ways of viewing and responding to the 
world. 
In Scar Tissues, the patchwork of discourses and the narrative trajectory 
which allows the representation of conflicting views represent a 
destabilising approach for the reader and ask the reader to join the narrator 
in his unsettling journey with (and possibly into) dementia. In the end, the 
novel allows only an imperfect sense of closure. While the narrator seems 
trapped within the dominant discourses on dementia, the novel as a whole 
reflects the difficult position dementia inhabits in our society and our minds. 
It opens up to debate the hermeneutic meansmedical, philosophical, 
artistic, religious or narrativethrough which we might approach the 
questions dementia raises about what it means to be human.   
House Mother Normal: Disturbing Care 
B. S. Johnsons House Mother Normal, previously discussed in chapter 2, 
also sheds light on the relationship between bioethics and the novel. In 
particular, the text suggests literary fictions potential to disturb its readers. 
Martha Nussbaum has suggested that novels have the power to make readers 
see things differently. Fiction is heralded for its emotive appeal, for making 
readers feel deeply about characters and plot outcomes (Nussbaum 1990, 
1995, 1997). Although Nussbaum acknowledges that fictions ability to 
arouse strong emotions entails certain risks, she largely glosses over the 
dangers inherent in fictions powerful rhetoric and emotive appeal. House 
Mother Normal can be used to explore these other, less salutary effects of 
the novels rhetoric on readers. Such a project does not deny that the 
literary imagination represents a moral good (Nussbaum 1995), but it 
more closely delimits what this good may be and contests the claim that 
reading fiction generally has the effect of morally improving the reader.   
In related fashion, Suzanne Keen challenges the argument that reading 
fiction makes people more caring individuals:  
Linking novel reading to a widely shared moral principlecaringwithout 
demanding that fiction be about caring allows broad claims about the medium 
to exist without evaluating content. This is a neat trick. Novels, by this logic, 
do not need to articulate the principle that people ought to care for one 
another.  the very action of reading fictionany fictionsupposedly trains 
people to care for one another. (Keen 2007: 20) 
Taking my cue from Keen, I suggest that both form and content need to be 
taken into account when evaluating the ethics or ethical potential of any 
given narrative, and particularly the narratives relation to promoting an 
ethics of care. 
Certain characteristics of literary fiction have been cited as doing ethical 
work, foremost among them polyphony, dialogism and ambivalence (see 
Korthals Altes 2006). So for instance, Astrid Erll (2008) describes how from 
a poststructuralist perspective the ethical value of literature is located in its 
ambiguity: the polyvalency of literary forms, she writes forces readers to 
acknowledge that reality is a construction and that different, equally valid 
perspectives on the same thing are possible (Erll 2008: n.p.). According to 
Erll this aspect of literature leads readers to learn respect for alterity (n.p.). 
When these perspectives become multiplied, as in the insistently dialogic 
and polyphonic structure of House Mother Normal, the ethical effect of 
respect for alterity may be seen to be enhanced. The representation of the 
events in a care home through the minds of eight different residents allows 
the reader to appreciate the different meanings each individual attaches to 
his or her experience. The reader is sensitised to how the house mothers 
behaviour impacts on each residents well-being and sense of self. By 
inhabiting each characters mind, one sees the world through that persons 
eyes, appreciates how memories of the past and wishes for the present 
structure that persons experience. In representing the consciousness of 
people with dementiasubjects frequently othered in contemporary 
discourseand then diversifying this representation through multiple 
individualised portraits, Johnson seems to be working within or towards an 
ethics of alterity. 
However, some problems remain with interpreting the ethical effect of 
the novels dialogic structure in such a way. For example, taking inspiration 
from branches of criticism such as feminist, post-colonial or disability 
studies, one might argue that Johnsons representation constitutes a 
misrepresentation or usurpation of the subjectivity of the other. In 
Emmanuel Levinass terms the other is never fully knowable, and 
therefore attempting to inhabit the others perspective represents an un-
ethical act of appropriation or erasure (Levinas 1979, 1961/1990). Although 
it is important to bear the complexity of the problem of (mis)representation 
in mind, Johnson partially circumvents becoming the target of such a 
critique by drawing attention to the constructed nature of his representation. 
It remains a problem, too that assigning a particular ethical value to a 
particular literary technique, does not pay due attention to how the specific 
cultural, historical and textual context of a given technique affect its 
reception. Literary forms do not carry ethical weight in themselves, but 
contribute to the ethical potential of a narrative in a specific context (see 
also Erll 2008). House Mother Normal lends itself to poststructuralist 
readings, which value disruption, undecidability, ambiguity and a resistance 
to closure. At the same time, the text also disrupts hypotheses about the 
ethical potential of certain literary structures (such as dialogism or the use of 
frame narratives). Johnsons work can be read as intensifying the inherent 
polyphonic and dialogic nature of literature and language (Bakhtin 1981, 
1984). We are not presented, as in Scar Tissue, with the relatively stable 
viewpoint of one particular consciousnessno matter how imbued by 
different discoursesbut with a multiplicity of minds which are socially 
embedded and structurally multi-layered. The patients interior monologues 
support each other (by allowing the reader to piece together the events of the 
narrative), even as they represent different and sometimes conflicting 
experiential points of view. Importantly, the various interior monologues by 
the residents are also accorded equal weight and value. So, for instance, 
despite the narrative trajectory from more cognitively able to less 
cognitively able minds, each monologue is accorded the exact same number 
of pages.  
Further, if dialogism and democracy are inherently linked, the 
democratic distribution of narrative space in this case is upset by the house 
mothers frame narrative. The house mothers story, her point of view, takes 
precedence over the other accounts on a number of levels. She is after all the 
eponymous heroine of the novel; and by framing the patients accounts, her 
narrative may be seen to determine the interpretive field of the narratives 
that follow. She is given the last word, literally and figuratively. Her 
narrative also exceeds the number of pages accorded each patient narrative, 
as stressed by a significant moment of metalepsis: And here you see, friend, 
I am about to step [page 21] outside the convention, the framework of 
twenty-one pages per person [page 22]. That said, Johnsons narrative 
suggests that her view is not meant to go uncontested. Rather than 
promoting her views on how people with dementia had best be cared for, the 
narrative is set up to disturb and shock. As mentioned in my previous 
discussion of the novel, the house mother provides a number of dubious, 
humiliating and harmful entertainments for the people in her care. She 
enlists their labour in manufacturing fraudulent medication, enforces a 
wheelchair tournament with wet mops that causes at least one of the patients 
severe pain, and conducts a game of pass the parcel in which the prize is one 
of her dogs turds. Her final act of entertainment involves pornographic acts 
with her dog, ending in the climax of her public orgasm. By progressively 
revealing the extent of the house mothers shocking behaviour, Johnson 
subverts the parameters of normalcy.  
However, even this reversal of norms and normality undergoes a further 
twist in the house mothers final address. Her discourse is full of 
contradictions. It exposes her cruelty, sardonic nature and apparent 
megalomania. And yet, in the fashion of the court jester, the fool who also 
speaks truth, Johnson makes her a mouthpiece for criticising care home 
environments that are, in other ways, worse than or at least as bad as the one 
she manages. In contrast to the house mothers theatrically and over-the-top 
immoral acts of care, the deplorable conditions in other institutions she 
describes, seem plausible, even likely. At once self-absorbed, selfish and in 
love with her dog, the house mother at times seems to show a real interest in 
her charges. It thus becomes difficult not to be at least partially persuaded 
by her argument. She draws an image of mental homes in which people are 
put away ... simply because they are old and where they are stripped of 
their spectacles, false teeth,/ everything personal to them (198). Her own 
care, by contrast, provides her patients with constant occupation, 
and/most important, a framework within which to establish/  indeed, to 
possess  their own special personalities (198). However, her means of 
allowing these personalities expression consists in nurturing petty rivalries 
among the residents, or giving them reasons to complain. If Johnson uses 
the house mother to criticise the reality of subhuman care conditions
evidenced nowadays by increasing reports of elder abusehe also uses her 
to expose the hypocrisy of a certain discourse that has evolved around care. 
Her rhetoric evokes the suave language of care home advertising, only to be 
contrasted immediately with her dismissive attitude: Here we respect their 
petty possessions, so important/to them but rubbish to us (198). By 
showing the farcical and sardonic effects of what following the rule-book of 
what person-centred care could also look like, Johnson invites us to 
reconsider the very parameters of these care discourses. 
In House Mother Normal we are confronted with immoral behaviour 
which is subsequently rationalised and justified. While the reader is unlikely 
to accept her justifications tout court, her arguments nevertheless have an 
effect on the reader. For instance, when we get to the house mothers 
account of the game of pass the parcel, the house mother defends her 
rationale for using the dog turd as prize: 
How disgusting you must be saying to yourself, 
friend, and I cannot but agree. But think a bit 
harder, friend : why do I disgust them? 
I disgust them in order that they might not be 
disgusted with themselves. I am disgusting to them 
in order to objectify their disgust, to direct it to 
something outside themselves, something harmless. (197) 
The house mother goes on to argue that her diversion is intended to prevent 
a deeper spiritual crisis in her patients. This passage reveals a key ethical 
crux of the narrative. Johnson not only shocks or disturbs the reader in 
revealing the amoral behaviour of his protagonist, but also disturbs the very 
norms of what constitutes care. We cannot easily assimilate the house 
mothers reasoning, but it is not that simple to dismiss her view, either. The 
logic of the text and the house mothers rhetoric powerfully destabilise the 
readers view of what represents morally acceptable caregiving. So, for 
instance, the patients monologues bear out the house mothers reasoning 
that her disgusting behaviour redirects the residents attention from their 
own immediate misery. Also, in portraying the differing reactions to her 
activities, from the tournament to her public masturbation, the narrative 
underlines the difficulty of pleasing all, or doing right by all. The novel 
thereby highlights the conflicts between the needs and rights of individuals. 
What causes one joy causes another pain, what may arouse one person 
causes another disgust. Balancing these needs cannot ever be simple. What 
this novel upsets, then, is discourses of care that presume that certain forms 
of caregiving are uniformly good for all care receivers. In contrast to a 
moralistic text, House Mother Normal does not suggest ideal solutions; 
rather, it shocks the reader by presenting the effects of a warped care ethic. 
In her final address to the reader, the house mother further challenges 
preconceived notions about what old people, or people with dementia may 
want for themselves: What you do not understand, I think,/friend is that 
what we imagine they want for them-/selves is not actually what they do 
want. I do/ not know what they want, either (193). Although in the next 
sentence she seems to reject summarily the humanity of the people in her 
care (But I do know/that they are certainly not as we are, and that/therefore 
by definition they do not want what we want (193)), her reflections 
nonetheless point to a distinct ethical problem: How does anyone 
know/what anyone else really wants? (193). And if we do know what 
someone wants, how do we balance these needs and wishes against those of 
others, including, in the context of care, the caregivers? On my first reading, 
the house mothers reasoning seemed only to confirm her demented state 
of mindstructurally contrasted with the supposedly dementing but 
otherwise mentally sane inmates for a particular stylistic and ethical effect: 
the novel counters the stigmatising notion that people with dementia are out 
of their minds. My sensibilities were duly shocked by her cruel behaviour 
and apparent lack of empathy. However, on my second reading I was more 
inclined to take her challenges seriously, to be partially persuaded, as I 
noted, by her logic, or rhetoric. What do we, indeed, know about the needs 
and wishes of others? How can we provide care for people with dementia? 
And how can we know which previously stated wishes to fulfil and 
proclivities to support, when, as the house mother states, these are affected 
by the diffusing effect of time (193)? Dementia raises, perhaps more than 
any other condition, ethical dilemmas about advance medical directives and 
the question of whether we can adequately assess our future selves needs 
and wishes.  
The effect of staging uncaring care and presenting unjust justifications 
may be diverse. It may lead certain readers to be shocked and outraged
which in turn may draw attention to actual power imbalances within 
caregiving environments and highlight the essential vulnerability of those 
who receive care. It may also lead readers to reconsider dominant 
humanistic care ethics, to wonder about the rationale behind certain care 
practices, either to reject them or to re-assert them. What is unlikely, though, 
is that the narrative will leave its reader untouched. Johnson develops means 
for us to imagine the phenomenology of dementia and to consider our 
shared vulnerability as humans. The narrative is perhaps most ambiguous in 
its representation of the house mother. While Johnson portrays her as a 
somewhat reprehensible character, he also indicates her isolation, the lack of 
support she receives from the authorities. Current debates about the 
chronically underfunded care sector and the woefully underpaid work of 
professional carers resonate with this text and add complexity to the house 
mothers character. Rather than seeing her as a rogue characteras Burke 
suggests frequently occurs in the context of actual cases of abuse by carers 
(Burke 2016: 596)we are invited to consider also the systemic failings 
that may lead to such atrocious care.  
Significantly, Johnson puts into the house mothers mouth a lyric and yet 
melancholy invocation of the carpe diem motif.  
Still, Ill finish off for him [the author], about the sadness, 
the need to go farther better to appreciate the 
nearer, what you have now: if you are not like 
our friends, friend, laugh now, prepare, accept, 
worse times are a-coming, nothing is more sure. (204)   
House Mother Normal functions as a memento mori for its readers. By 
evoking the complexity of care home settings, the individuality of people 
affected by dementia, the vulnerability of not only care-receivers but all 
human beings, it provides food for thought about what it may be like to 
grow old with dementia, and how we might prepare, individually and 
collectively, for the increased dependency that this stage of life inevitably 
brings.    
Exploring Bioethics: Thinking Through as Living Through 
In her introduction to Loves Knowledge (1990), Martha Nussbaum argues 
that novels provide important tools for considering the question of how to 
live. Indeed, she considers novels more productive tools for exploring 
ethical dilemmas than philosophical examples. Schematic ethical case 
studies used in bioethics textbooks, Nussbaum argues, are overdetermined 
in terms of possible interpretations: much of the ethical work is already 
done, the result cooked (Nussbaum 1990: 47). In contrast, literature is 
open-ended, ambiguous and complex. Due to the particularity, 
indeterminacy and emotive appeal of literary fiction, Nussbaum argues that 
novels engender in the reader a type of ethical work more appropriate for 
life (47). According to Nussbaum, novels both exemplify and approximate 
experiential learning, that is, learning in concrete situations: they exemplify 
it in the efforts of the characters and the author, engender it in the reader by 
setting up a similarly complex activity (44). In other words, literature 
provides not only a representation of ethical concerns, but evokes processes 
in the reader that may be considered a form of ethical deliberation in their 
own right.  
In Uses of Literature Rita Felski provides a similar account of the type 
of learning that fictional narratives promote: As a form of context-sensitive 
knowledge conveyed to readers it is more akin to connatre rather than 
savoir, seeing as rather than seeing that, learning by habituation and 
acquaintance rather than by instruction (Felski 2008: 93). Indeed, 
literatures ability to make readers see something in terms of something else, 
using metaphor and mimesis to make readers see things differently, is 
considered one of its most valuable attributes in the medical humanities (see 
Jones 2014, Charon 2006). At the same time, most commentators argue that 
the knowledge or learning that literature promotes is elusive and hard to 
formulate in discourses other than its particular aesthetic instantiation (see 
Felski 2008, Nussbaum 1990, Wood 2005). Getting a handle on how novels 
inform and transform their readersby providing access into the 
storyworlds social phenomenology145 and the protagonists minds, but also 
through the use of literary devices, content and structurerequires close 
narratological analysis.  
Lisa Genovas Still Alice (2007) and Margaret Forsters Have the Men 
Had Enough? (1989) likewise make their readers in Rosenblatts terms live 
through fictional lives affected by dementia, and thereby invite those 
readers to think through bioethical questions concerning quality of life and 
end-of-life decisions. Although this chapter focuses on the novel, I include 
here a discussion of the film version of Still Alice in order to address how 
different medial representations influence the exploration of bioethical 
145 Felski argues that the novel unfolds a social phenomenology, a rendering of the 
qualities of a life-world, that is formally distinct from either non-fiction or theoretical 
argument (89). The novel does not only represent social norms, actions and judgments, but 
enfolds readers through the inculcation of countless examples, into an experiential 
familiarity with the logic of such judgments, with what we may call a feel for the game 
(92). While I agree that this experiential familiarity is one of the striking effects of novel 
reading, one mustnt underestimate that readers do not entirely suspend their own values, 
norms and experiences and may therefore vary significantly in their response to the social 
phenomenology rendered in a novel. 
questions in fictional narratives. The comparison underscores how each 
specific narrative environment creates a particular value system in the 
context of which the readers or viewers emotional and ethical responses 
will emerge.   
Before turning to this task of ethico-aesthetic analysis, let me clarify 
however that living through does not necessarily entail a process of 
(empathetic) identification in the reader; rather, as Rosenblatt stipulates, it 
concerns the aesthetic experience of a literary work. (She argues that while 
others might satisfactorily summarise a newspaper article for us, they cannot 
summarise a poem: If there is indeed to be a poem and not simply literal 
statement, she writes the reader must experience, must live through what 
is being created during the reading (1995: 33).) Similarly, I focus here on 
what aesthetic experiences dementia narratives create and how those 
experiences pertain, in turn, to larger questions about quality of life in 
dementia. This approach involves exploring the ethos or narrative ethics the 
novel or film projects, while emphasising that the social or ethical effect in 
the reader; hence the reconstruction of a narrative ethics, depends 
primarily on the readers interpretative stance. In other words, novels 
suggest certain moral attitudes or (un)ethical solutions to caregiving 
dilemmas. They rarely, however, offer pat solutions to the reader. Due to the 
complexity and ambiguity of literary works and the diversity of their readers 
these texts function as a moral laboratory rather than a moralistic treatise. 
That said, since the implied moral attitudes and unvoiced systems of social 
values are reinforced by the persuasiveness of art, as Rosenblatt points out, 
the systems of beliefs and values that a text projects merit careful scrutiny 
(Rosenblatt 1995: 8). It is here that the detailed analysis provided by literary 
critics (and in the case of medical education the teachers explication) may 
play a particular role in exploring bioethics in and through literary fiction. 
Still Alice: (Precedent) Autonomy and Suicide in Dementia 
As noted in chapter 2, in Still Alice (2007) Lisa Genova tells the story of a 
Harvard professor of cognitive psychology with early-onset Alzheimers. 
Perhaps unsurprisinglygiven the authors background as a pharmacy 
consultant with a neuroscience degree from Harvard herselfthis novel 
largely endorses the neuroscientific understanding of dementia. Indeed, 
Genovas novel is aimed at supporting the Alzheimers advocacy movement 
and its call for sustained research into the neuropathology of the disease. 
The novel does not therefore question the validity of the Alzheimers 
disease category. Furthermore, in her choice of protagonist, Genova can be 
seen to celebrate the common virtues of contemporary Western societies: 
autonomy, self-reliance, cognitive capacity and a strong drive to achieve. 
The eponymous heroine Alice identifies herself with her academic persona 
and struggles to find a new sense of self as her cognitive capacities slowly 
disintegrate. Even Alices most intimate relationship, with her husband John, 
is based on her mental prowess and is therefore fundamentally threatened by 
the onset of the disease.  
Still Alice, then, does not represent a straightforward counter-narrative to 
the dominant discourse of biomedicine or, indeed, to the cultural norms of 
hypercognitive Western societies. What it offers is a reflection on how 
cognitivist values play out in the life course of an individual affected by 
Alzheimers disease who, in this case, virtually embodies these values. 
However, in its narrative logic the novel also offers a subtle critique of the 
value-system it endorses. The novel highlights the shortcomings of 
cognitive-skills-based tests to measure quality of life, and concomitantly 
determine the end of a meaningful life. It suggests that despite cognitive 
impairment people with dementia have the capacity to enjoy life. By 
depicting Alices development from the inside, and her changing perception 
of the world, the novel raises serious doubt about whether a person with 
dementia can adequately project herself into her future self.  It thereby 
challenges, albeit without explicitly addressing this topic, the practical and 
ethical applicability of so-called precedent autonomy and the use of living 
wills or advance directives to determine treatment options in case of 
mental incompetence.146  
The narrative logic of Still Alice is highly pertinent to bioethical 
discussions about end-of-life decisions. In tracking the development and 
146 See Davis (2009) on the problems pertaining to Precedent Autonomy, Advance 
Directives, and End-of-Life Care.  
(failed) execution of Alices suicide plan, the novel raises complex issues 
surrounding suicide and euthanasia in dementia.147 In particular, the novel 
stimulates an imaginative exploration of the question whether so-called 
advance directives still hold in the context of neurodegenerative disease 
and whether they should be considered legally and morally binding. 
Answers to these questions frequently centre on whether a person with 
dementia remains the same over the course of the disease. If not, changes to 
the affected person raise the question whether the pre-morbid self, or then-
self, can legitimately make choices that affect the now-self in later stages 
of the disease (Francis 2001). As previously noted, Ronald Dworkin (1993) 
has famously argued that the critical interests that shaped the life-course 
and values of the per-morbid self take precedence over the experiential 
interests of the person with dementia later in the disease. Still Alice, 
however, undermines this argument. Since the entire novel is focalised 
through Alice, the reader sees how her perception of the world changes over 
the course of the disease. The narrative tracks this change specifically in 
relation to Alices suicide plans. Alices previous attitude towards the value 
of a life with cognitive impairment is contrasted with her continuing 
enjoyment148 in life, despite significant cognitive disability. So, for instance, 
the novel emphasises her continuing emotional capacity and her ability to 
maintain relationships with others, even when she can no longer remember 
the exact nature of these relationships. More importantly, the novel suggests 
that the criteria Alice chooses to determine whether her life is still 
meaningfuland whether to set in motion a suicide planare ill-suited to 
their purpose. 
Immediately after receiving her diagnosis, Alice is struck by thoughts of 
suicide. However, she soon realises that there are still many things worth 
living for and that the cut-off point for a meaningful life has not yet been 
reached. In order to determine this cut-off point, she develops a test 
147 A review of the growing literature on this topic lies beyond the scope of this study. For 
some thought-provoking discussions see Dresser (1995), Hertogh et al. (2007) and Davis 
(2009). 
148 Simple enjoyment, together with the absence of pain, are usually classed welfare 
interests in contrast to investment interests such as personal dignity or religious 
commitment (Davis 2009: 350). These categories seem largely coterminous with 
Dworkins distinction between critical and experiential interests. 
involving five questions about her life. Failure to be able to answer any of 
the questions will set a suicide plan in motion. Her suicide plan is hatched 
during a moment of simple enjoymenteating ice cream on an 
unexpectedly sunny spring dayand it is therefore linked to the carpe diem 
motif that runs through the entire novel. In response to her recent visit to a 
nursing home, Alice decides that she didnt want to be here  when the 
burdens, both emotional and financial, grossly outweighed any benefit of 
sticking around (116; my emphasis). Notice how Alices reasoning 
represents a cost-benefit analysis and draws heavily on economic language. 
Her decision is influenced by an economic rationale, which weighs the 
literal fortune of keeping her alive and safe against the metaphorical or 
emotional value of her life and person (116). Alice thinks that when she can 
no longer recognise her husband, and is in the most important ways no 
longer recognisable to him, her husbands (financial) obligation to her 
should cease to exist. Or rather, her reasoning suggests that honouring this 
financial obligation constitutes a waste of resources. Alice clearly 
subscribes to a notion of love relationships as forms of exchange. The novel 
then exemplifies Lucy Burkes point that the way popular discourse about 
love and relationships is permeated by the language (and logic) of 
economics has pernicious effects on care relationships:  
 the idea that we must get something back from our love object or else 
move on to a more profitable partnership  has significant implications 
for attitudes towards care and responsibility for others who are unable to 
reciprocate according to the logic of this contract. (Burke 2015: 20) 
Alice envisions a future in which she will not be able to fulfil her side of the 
contract, to give something back, and she therefore sees no reason for her 
family members to be obliged to support heremotionally or financially. 
In fact, Still Alice might be considered symptomatic149 of the trend to 
view caring as somehow discontinuous with normative familial relations 
and  an impediment to the flourishing of those around the person with 
dementia (Burke 2015: 25; original emphasis). As Burke points out, this 
view leads to caregiving itself being perceived as a form of suffering but 
149 According to Abbott symptomatic reading refers to the reading strategy of decoding a 
text as symptomatic of the authors unconscious or unacknowledged state of mind, or of 
unacknowledged cultural conditions (2008: 242). 
crucially one that is often deemed to eclipse that of the disabled or ill person 
(28). At this stage in the novel, Alice herself endorses such a view of 
caregiving as a burden while devaluing the person receiving care. Over the 
course of her disease, however, the novel develops a different stance. Since 
the narrative is largely focalised through Alice, her experiences (her 
thoughts, feelings and responses to a situation) overshadow those of her 
caregivers. Importantly, as Alice slowly loses her cognitive abilities, they 
also seem to matter less. Instead, the narrative stresses her capacity to seize 
the day, to enjoy whatever pleasure comes her way. Her husband John, 
though, continues to adhere to their previously joint value system. He seems 
unaware of the extent to which Alice can still enjoy her life, or what matters 
to her, and instead holds on to the cognitivist values according to which 
Alice had lived in the past. The couple clashes over the extent to which John 
will accommodate Alices needs in his life, and the value accorded to each 
separate life course.  
It is worth considering how a novel that is otherwise so consonant with 
dominant Western discourses on the value of human life may invite its 
readers to reconsider some of the implications of these values. Alices entire 
self-worth is linked to her IQ. Nonetheless, when she contemplates her 
future she realises that the things she considers worth living for (holding her 
grandchild, seeing her children thrive and fall in love, spending one more 
sabbatical year with her husband) do not require intellectual brilliance 
(119). Indeed, she expresses her wish for simple pleasures, such as more 
sunny, seventy-degree days and ice cream cones (118). In view of these life 
priorities, the questions she generates in order to determine whether this cut-
off line to a meaningful life has been crossed are relatively ill-suited. The 
questions rely entirely on long-term declarative memory pertaining to 
biographical facts rather than experiences: What month is it?  Where 
do you live? Where is your office?  When is Annas birthday?  How 
many children do you have? (119). Such facts represent major co-ordinates 
of ones life. Nonetheless, this information resembles semantic memory. 
Semantic memory tests, like the mini-mental state exam, are out of touch 
with the real-life concerns and important functional capacities of people 
with dementia. What, one may ask, does it matter whether one knows the 
name of the current prime minister or president? Such questions call 
attention to gaps in semantic memory but do not reveal a persons 
continuing capacity or incapacity in other areas more (or equally) relevant to 
everyday life. In defence of such tests, they are not used in order to 
determine whether the life of the person is still worth living. In Still Alice, 
however, they are. As the novel later highlights, these questions are 
woefully inadequate as a means of assessing whether Alice can enjoy the 
presence of her grandchild or the pleasure of an ice cream.  
The temporal nature of narrative, in its ability to depict change and to 
juxtapose contrasting scenes with each other, plays a crucial role in making 
the reader consider the shortcomings of cognitivist notions of personhood 
and to see things differently. In a crucial scene, John and Alice return to 
their favourite ice cream parlour. While John is distressed that Alice can no 
longer remember what flavour ice cream she likes, Alice is seemingly 
indifferent to this change. She is enjoying her ice cream, the warmth of the 
sun and the feel of her husbands hand in hers. According to her life 
priorities, even at the stage of making her suicide plan, her life is still worth 
living. However, when John asks her a number of questions from her list, it 
becomes apparent that she can no longer answer them. (She does make a 
convincing case that knowing the location of her office is of no practical 
relevance to her.) It is unclear, here, whether John has discovered her 
suicide plan or whether he is intuitively using similar questions in order to 
assess her quality of life. In any case, the narrative suggests that he is 
trying to assess whether Alice has reached a point where she no longer 
wants to be alive: Alice, do you still want to be here? (267), he asks in a 
noticeably serious tone. Alice takes this question literally. However, like his 
question her answer takes on a double meaning: Yes. I like sitting here with 
you. And Im not done yet (268). Since the latter can be seen to refer to her 
ice cream as well as her life, Alice unwittingly answers his question with a 
confident yes. Importantly, within the logic of the narrative in which 
enjoying an ice cream was made the criterion for assessing quality of life, 
this answer is doubly significant. In contrast to Alices formerly held world-
view, this scene represents a serious challenge to the notion that cognitive 
capacity is the be-all and end-all of human life. 
I am taking some time over describing the development of this suicide 
plot to suggest how readers, in the living through of a certain aesthetic 
experience, may come to see things from various anglesparticularly since 
this element of the narrative is so strikingly different in the film version of 
Still Alice. The carpe diem ice cream moment shared with John in the book 
is immediately followed by the chapter in which Alice, by chance, stumbles 
over her suicide instructions. Although she has serious problems carrying 
out the instructions, her plan ultimately fails only because the sleeping pills 
she relied on are no longer in their designated place. The reader is left to 
wonder whether John, having found her suicide plan (or simply the pills), 
and having no strong evidence to suggest that Alice no longer wants to live, 
has quietly removed the pills. In the film, this sequence of events is inverted. 
The failed suicide attempt comes first and blends into the scene in the ice 
cream parlour. Further, the emotional undertones and the atmosphere of 
both scenes differs significantly. In the book, the preceding scene has 
primed us to believe that suicide at this stage would not in fact be in her best 
interest. In the film, Alice finds the pills and is only prevented from taking 
them because her caregiver enters the house at that very moment and the 
sudden noise causes Alice to drop the pills [1:25:00]. There is a steady build 
up in tension-creating music until the moment that she finds the pills [1: 
24:00]. As the pills are scattered on the floor the image blends with the 
image of similarly fragmentary morsels of ice cream toppings. In contrast to 
her portrayal in the book, Alice in the film is shown clinging to John. While 
he does not seem fazed by her inability to remember her favourite ice cream 
flavour, she is uncertain and in need of emotional and physical reassurance. 
Alices confident sense of enjoyment, which predominates in the novel, is 
absent in the film. The setting is also markedly different. John and Alice eat 
their ice cream indoors, in a decidedly cold, almost clinical environment. 
There is no sense of warmth or enjoyment. There are no geese that prompt 
Alice to giggle, no pink and white blossoms spread all around.   
Interestingly, in the film the ensuing conversation is less close to the 
questions Alice devised for her suicide plan. Instead, the conversation 
highlights her distance from her previous role as successful researcher and 
teacher. When John asks, Ali do you still want to be here? his facial 
expressions, his fixed gaze on Alice and tone of voice (as in the book) 
suggest the intent of this question. Here also Alice fails to understand the 
question. In contrast to her confident answer in the book (Yes I like sitting 
here with you.), Alice is instead perplexed by Johns seemingly abrupt 
suggestion to leave and responds with a troubled Im not done yet, do we 
need to go? [1:26:15]. The camera focuses on Johns face as he continues 
to gaze at Alice, herself intent on her ice cream. Tears well up in his eyes as 
he seems to realise that the moment has passed in which he might be able to 
have this conversation with his wife; and perhaps also that although she 
might not want to live anymore (as suggested by the previous scene of her 
failed suicide attempt) there is now no way out.  
These gaps in the film, as well as the sequencing of events, are 
important. We do not know whether the caregiver or John discovered the 
pills scattered on the floor, but might presume that one of them did. What is 
the viewer then led to think or feel? While I cannot determine what any 
given viewer will feel, I believe that the film does suggest that her failed 
suicide attempt is tragic. The film presents a much less confident view that 
her life is in fact still enjoyable to herself. The film also represents her 
physical deterioration to a much starker degree than the novel. Indeed the 
representation of Alice is close to that of a mindless zombie as regards her 
shuffling walk, unfocused gaze and lack of interaction with others.150 In the 
novel, on the contrary, Alice in the most important ways (and in contrast 
to Alices earlier view cognitive capacity is not paramount) is still 
functioning emotionally and socially and is still herselfas the title of the 
novel suggests. She enjoys the music of a street musician, the company of 
her daughters (despite not knowing their names) and of her grandchildren. 
One might argue that the novel represents Alzheimers in a superficial 
manner here. The impact of the disease goes beyond losing the names of 
things or people, and as accounts by caregivers suggest, such qualities as 
caring about children or animals might be drastically altered by dementia.  
But if the novel is unrealistically hopeful, the film is perhaps 
stereotypically pessimistic. What is remarkable is how, despite their 
150 This description pertains to the penultimate scene of the film. As in the novel, the final 
scene by contrast highlights Alices continuing capacity to engage with her daughter. 
inclusion of similar or even identical narrative elements, these two 
representations differ significantly in their narrative ethos. Not only the 
sequencing of eventsand the emotional reactions that the differing 
narrational choices elicitbut the sense of an ending, the closure each 
narrative provides, may lead readers and viewers to inhabit substantially 
different stances towards Alzheimers, and the question of suicide in 
dementia. Both novel and film engage readers and viewers in thinking 
through bioethical questions by making them live through an aesthetic 
experience. While the novel seems to question the predominant view that a 
person with dementia has the moral authority to decide her future life, or 
rather the end of her life, the film by contrast suggests that this moral 
authority extends into the future.151 Indeed, the film suggests that the 
tragedy of Alzheimers lies in the affected persons inability to assert her 
right to self-determination and her inability to live out her life according to 
previously held values. As these narratives bear out, ethics and aesthetics 
are inextricably intertwined and the aesthetic has a role to play in both moral 
and political spheres. 
Have the Men Had Enough? Gender and the Economies of Care 
Margaret Forsters Have the Men Had Enough? (1989) is one of the earliest 
novels which focuses on a character with dementia and the problem of 
caring for her. The novels publication coincides with the rise of the 
Alzheimers disease movement and the biomedicalisation of dementia. 
Further, as Lucy Burke points out, it appeared during the high point of 
Thatcherism and the particular form of individualism [Thatchers politics] 
fostered (Burke 2015: 37). Accordingly, Burke reads the novel as 
symptomatic of the effects of the biomedicalisation of dementia and of 
neoliberalist politics on the concept of family and in particular notions of 
familial obligation, personal choice, and the meaning of care (Burke 2015: 
25). I extend Burkes critique by focusing more squarely on the question of 
gender. In her aim to counter neoliberalist conceptualisations of caregiving, 
151 Referred to as the extension view in discussions about advance directives (see Davis 
2007: 354). 
Burke perhaps underplays the important contribution this novel makes to 
challenging pervasive gender imbalances in the context of both familial and 
professional caregiving (see also Kittay 1999). 
Forsters novel suggests that caring for a declining family member 
necessarily constitutes an unbearable burden. This view is common in both 
fictional and non-fictional representations of dementia. The caregiving son 
in Scar Tissue, for instance, rationalises placing his mother in a nursing 
home by suggesting that at some point you have to choose between 
sacrificing yourself and sacrificing somebody else (Ignatieff 1993: 97). The 
decision to institutionalise a family member with dementia therefore 
resembles an assessment of whose life matters more: the caregivers or the 
life of the person with dementia. In Have the Men Had Enough? this value 
judgment is played out through the perceptions of two family caregivers: 
Grandmas daughter-in-law, Jenny, and Jennys own daughter, Hannah. 
Their narratives provide alternating points of view on Grandmas 152 
increasing care needs and the relative involvement of different family 
members in meeting those needs. So, for instance, Hannah repeatedly 
questions why it is that she, but not her brother, is expected to be involved 
in her grandmothers care and she challenges her mothers tendency to 
shield the male family members, including Hannahs father, from becoming 
involved in hands-on care (see also Burke 2015: 35). Indeed, Grandmas 
adult son Stuart entirely washes his hands of his mother and Jennys 
husband Charlie is only persuaded to manage the financial side of his 
mothers care because his wife acts as his moral conscience. Significantly, 
although he doesnt carry the main burden of caregiving, Charlie is the 
driving force behind his mothers temporary stay in a care home which 
precipitates her rapid decline, and which in turn leads to her admission into 
a closed psychiatric wardrepresented in the novel as an abject form of 
purgatory. All this happens in the absence of Grandmas primary caregiver, 
her daughter Bridget, whose desire to care for her mother at home, but 
152 The protagonist is referred to as Grandma throughout by the narrators and as Mrs 
McKay by professional caregivers. This lack of individualisation compounds the external 
view on dementia in which Grandmas existence and care needs are primarily a problem 
for the family. Although the narrators are concerned about her well-being and are 
frequently empathetic, Grandmas perspective is not representedthat is, Foster does not 
focalise events through her.   
inability to do this without the support of the wider family, is represented as 
the main conflict within the novel. Importantly, neither Grandmas own 
perspective nor that of her primary caregiver is voiced directly. The quality 
of Grandmas life and the value of caregiving are all viewed from the 
daughter-in-laws and granddaughters point of view.  
The novel confronts the questions of Who should care? How and how 
long should we care? And, to a lesser degree, Why should we care for 
people with dementia?  With regard to the first question, Hannahs thoughts 
about the value of life in dementia are couched, from the start, within a 
discussion of gender roles in relation to caregiving. Forsters novel is not 
alone in mirroring, and arguably compounding, widespread views (and 
anxieties) about male caregiving. The husband in Still Alice essentially 
abandons his wife to the care of his daughters. In the film version of Still 
Alice, he somewhat ironically comments on his guilt at leaving his wife by 
telling his daughter, You are a better man than I am [1:27:48]. In Scar 
Tissue the sons devotion to his mother unravels his own life, suggesting 
that a male caregiver cannot retain a sense of self. In contrast, in The Story 
of Forgetting (Block 2008) neither the narrator-son nor his father seem to 
visit the mother much after admission into a home. In Andrs Barbas Ahora 
Tocad Msica de Baile (2004) the adult son nearly beats his dementing 
mother to death, and shortly afterwards causes her to get run over by a car 
(see Zimmermann 2010). And in Franzens dystopian analysis of 21st 
century American family life The Corrections (2001), it is the oldest son 
who pressurises his mother to contemplate admission into a nursing home. 
The only daughter in the family, in contrast, briefly figures as a potential 
primary caregiver. That she does not in fact have to take on this role is 
depicted as a narrow escape from the supposed drudgery and deadening 
burden of caregiving.  
What do these novels then suggest about who should care? And do they 
not enforce stereotypes about uncaring males and dutiful daughters and 
wives? Forsters novel challenges the fact that women are expected to and 
continue to undertake the largest bulk of hands-on care work. That said, 
nowadays, male family caregivers are no longer as unusual as they once 
were (Russell 2001). Cultural gender stereotypes, as Russell argues, 
frequently make male care work doubly invisible within society. Literary 
representations, such as those discussed here, may then compound the view 
of caring as naturally female activity and act out societal anxieties and 
gender stereotypes about uncaring males, even as they challenge the unjust 
distribution of care work. 
Forsters novel also addresses the question of how, and how long, one 
should care for people with dementia. It explores what different characters 
consider the cut-off line at which home care should end, or, to paraphrase 
Still Alice, the point at which the burdens, both emotional and financial, 
outweigh the benefits (for Grandma and others) of keeping Grandma at 
homeor, indeed, alive. At the outset of the novel Grandma is mildly 
confused, but still a largely functioning and contented person. The novel 
then follows a tragic downward spiral as Grandmas dementia rapidly 
progresses and all the precarious and temporary caregiving arrangements 
fall apart. Her daughter-in law Jenny is significantly involved in managing 
Grandmas day-to-day care. Unlike Bridget, she is not motivated as much 
by love as by a sense of duty. Nonetheless, she experiences satisfaction and 
even pride in looking after her mother-in-law, and she clearly voices an 
ethics of home-care. In a sense, Jenny also sees herself as repaying her 
mother-in-law for the debt of bringing up children, Jennys husband among 
them, and she tries to compensate for her mother-in-laws hard life out of a 
sense of female solidarity. Jenny realises that institutionalising Grandma 
would deprive her of all the loving attention and all that was meaningful to 
her, and she is therefore racked by guilt at the prospect: How can we put 
her away, as she would call it? How can we? (125; emphasis original).  
When her husband states that he has had enough, it is her scruples that 
prevent him, at least for a while, from placing Grandma in institutional care.  
Despite Jennys conviction that nursing home care would speed up her 
mother-in-laws decline, the latters increasing care needs eventually cause a 
care crisis in the family. The novel depicts Jennys growing stress and 
emotional anxiety, and to a lesser extent her daughters. Hannahs narrative, 
since she is at one remove from the responsibility of caring, represents a 
more detached and at times critical perspective on the familys views and 
actions. She also challenges the hypocrisy inherent in an idealised ethics of 
home care, including her own. In these cases, and others, Hannah succinctly 
pinpoints in lists of (rhetorical) questions the problems and dilemmas that 
dementia raises. Early in the narrative, Hannah begins to contemplate the 
question of suicide and euthanasia in dementia:  
What I want to know is: 
Why dont more old people kill themselves when they get old?  
Why do relatives not kill old people more?  
What is the point of keeping old people alive anyway? 
Havent the women had enough, as well as the men? (13-14) 
Since the questions are left unanswered it is up to readers to develop a 
response based on the events in the storyworld as well their own life 
experiences and convictions. While some readers might be categorically 
against suicide, or euthanasia, others may find themselves contemplating 
these questions, perhaps for the first time. It is significant that these 
questions are raised immediately after Hannahs benign description of 
Sunday lunch dinner, which highlights the many aspects of life that 
Grandma still enjoys. At this stage, Hannahs provocative questions seem 
premature. Or rather, the contrast between Grandmas apparent sense of 
enjoyment and the callous suggestion to murder family members based only 
on their advanced age provokes a sense of outrage. Nevertheless, derogatory 
views of old age predominate in contemporary Western societies, and 
readers may perhaps find that their views chime with Hannahs at times. 
The expression of such stark views then confronts readers with their own 
attitudes and may lead them to ask: Do I share this evaluation of old age? Is 
euthanasia, assisted suicide or murder an acceptable moral stance towards 
vulnerable dependents? On reflection, is seeing life with dementia as 
valueless the only way to look at things? The novel sets up such bioethical 
thought processes by drawing readers into the complexity of caregiving, as 
evoked by the storyworld, and by contrasting different, at times shocking 
points of view. 
Indeed, the question of euthanasia represents one of the main themes of 
the narrative and is reframed in the context of Grandmas continuing decline 
and the increasing pressure this puts on the family. As Nussbaum states,  
the novel  is a morally controversial form, expressing in its very shape 
and style, in its modes of interaction with its readers, a normative sense of 
life. It tells its readers to notice this and not this, to be active in these and 
not other ways. It leads them into certain postures of the mind and heart 
and not others. (Nussbaum 1995: 2) 
Here, the reader is invited to see the question of care from the point of view 
of two female family caregivers of different generations. We are asked to 
note the seeming impossibility of providing home care throughout dementia. 
Furthermore, Hannah consistently challenges the ethics of caregiving as a 
natural female dutya point I elaborate on below. While calling for female 
empowerment, Hannah also, however, represents the form of consumer-
orientated individualism that, according to Burke, neoliberalist economies 
foster. Indeed, in line with Burkes recognition that care-relationships are 
imbued with economic rationalising, the value of the person with dementia, 
as weighed against the costs of caregiving for family members, is what is 
at issue in this novel.  
Hannah eventually draws up such a cost-benefit analysis in order to 
assess Grandmas quality of life-and concomitantly the question of whether 
one should end her life. She enumerates the pains and pleasures in her 
grandmothers life while weighing them against each other and the damage 
to other peoples life (emotional, financial and other) (144-5). Only as an 
afterthought does it occur to Hannah to detail what Grandma returns for 
what she gets (146), a revealing list in itself. Entirely within this economic 
logic, Grandmas daughter Bridget then emerges as the person who both 
gives and receives most from her mother and who, subsequently, is the most 
invested in keeping her alive (Who gives most to Grandma? Bridget. Who 
gets most from Grandma? Bridget. Who would never, ever kill Grandma? 
Bridget (146)). Importantly, Bridget is also the one character who resists 
seeing her mother as a financial and emotional pit. When Grandma finally 
dies, offering an endif not a constructive solutionto the familys care 
crisis, Bridget is the only family member to truly mourn her. To Jenny, and 
a certain extent her daughter, Grandmas death represents a release from the 
anxiety and responsibility of caregiving. Indeed, by withholding the severity 
of Grandmas condition from her sister-in-law, who would have had her 
pumped full with antibiotics rather than letting nature take its course, 
Jenny can be seen to be part-responsible for her mother-in-laws death (234). 
Accordingly, she wants her sister-in-law to experience her mothers demise 
as release too, to reap some gain from her passing. Bridget, however, 
staunchly refuses: no, no gain, she asserts only loss (249). 
The novel closes with Hannahs thoughts about her own and her 
familys reaction to her grandmothers death. If she feels irked by her 
mothers expression of relief and even happiness, she nevertheless expresses 
an equal relief that, now, with no old person in our family  Theres no 
more of that hideous disintegration to watch (251). A significant part of her 
narrative indirectly quotes her mothers complex reaction to the ethical 
issues raised by Grandmas death. If Jenny felt called to look after her 
mother-in-law out of a sense of familial obligation, her sense of moral duty 
does not extend to those outside the family circle. Or rather, her guilt at 
ignoring the needs of others testifies that she may feel a moral duty but does 
not act on it:    
Mum says  that she feels lucky and glad and relieved now Grandma is 
dead. But she says she also feels a coward too because now Grandma is 
dead she can ignore the problem of all the other Grandmas and she 
shouldnt, she should be inspired to do something and she knows she isnt 
going to. She is going to dodge the issue now.  She isnt an activist and 
she cant help it. But somebody, somewhere, will have to do something 
soon. Theyll have to. (250) 
If this passage evokes the urgent need to address the challenges that 
dementia raises, it is also significantand depressingthat the solution 
Jenny suggests is to embrace the practice of euthanasia: Weve tinkered 
around enough with the start of life, weve interfered with all kinds of 
natural sequences, and now well have to tinker with the end. Mum says, 
Your generation, Hannah, will have to have pro-death marches, youll have 
to stop being scared to kill the old. Will we? (250). Note that, as usual, 
Hannah challenges her mothers view. The two words Will we? open up 
the question of whether this approach is ethical and whether there may not 
be other, better solutions. Nonetheless, Hannah does not develop any in the 
remaining space of her narrative. The novels close centres on the 
desirability of terminating ones life rather than experiencing the hideous 
disintegration dementia entailswhile underscoring the seeming 
impossibility of such self-determination in dementia: 
When my time comes Im not going to allow it. 
When my time comes I wont trust to mystery. 
When my time comes I will say I have had enough and go. 
That is, if my time comes like Grandmas time, if it is the same sort of time. 
But if it is, I wont be able to, will I? (251) 
The novel then returns us to the difficulty of developing and executing a 
suicide plan in dementia, as explored in Still Alice. However, within the 
ethics and logic of Have the Men Had Enough? the impossibility of self-
determination and individual agency is clearly considered tragic.153 Burke 
argues that the closure the novel provides through Grandmas death simply 
removes the origin of the problem but does not provide any kind of 
imaginary resolution (2015: 39). In her view, the novel cannot move 
beyond the cognitive/cultural limits of the model of aging, dependency, and 
dementia that it  at times  appears to critique (39). No doubt, the novel 
does not represent a straightforward counter-narrative to the dominant 
conceptualisation of dementia. However, I wonder whether the novel is 
indeed stuck within its own paradigm. It clearly offers material for a 
symptomatic reading of the neo-liberalist and cognitivist tendencies of its 
time. As Hannahs disgust at her grandmothers decline or Jennys 
dehumanising discourse in relation to the dementia patients in the 
psychiatric ward highlight (see also Burke 2015: 36), the narrative is 
suffused with dehumanising tropes of dementia and a valorisation, primarily, 
of the lives of cognitively functioning individuals. And yet, it is an 
interesting question whether Forster, or if one prefers, the implied author, 
here or elsewhere, consistently endorses Jennys or Hannahs views. Within 
the novel, Hannahs narrative already acts as a counter-discourse to the 
narrative her mother tells (and wants to tell) about Grandmas decline and 
death. But her own view is not left unchallenged either. Indeed, as I 
suggested above, by making Hannah express at times drastic and disturbing 
attitudes towards dementia, (and contrasting these with the quality of life 
that her grandmother actually seems to experience at different stages), 
Forster may be deliberately confronting and destabilising her readers 
received attitudes. As Nussbaum puts it, 
153 Hartung (2016: 202-3) reads this novel as promoting euthanasia. However, rather than 
advocating such a practice, the novel plays out conflicting points of views against each 
other in such a way as to challenge the reader to contemplate the problem of euthanasia. 
good literature is disturbing in a way that history and social science writing 
frequently are not. Because it summons powerful emotions, it disconcerts 
and puzzles. It inspires distrust of conventional pieties and exacts a 
frequently painful confrontation with ones own thoughts and intentions. ... 
Literary works [require] us to see and to respond to many things difficult to 
confrontand they make this process palatable by giving us pleasure in 
the very act of confrontation. (Nussbaum 1995: 5-6) 
If the use of multiple first-person narrative perspectives is indicative of a 
loss of shared values (Burke 2015: 38), the use of differing narrators can 
also be considered one of the advantages of this particular novel. It 
multiplies opportunities for inspiring distrust in conventional pieties, in 
Nussbaums words.  
The comments on the dust-jacket of the novel suggest that it is not a 
comfortable novel, but a mighty powerful one. Or, as another reviewer puts 
it, the novel ends as it begins, with questions  that spill out over the 
covers. Rather than expressing a stable, shared belief system, this novel, 
like Johnsons, represents a multiplicity of discourses, and allows the reader 
to linger over uncomfortable questions. It offers a pedagogy of discomfort 
without offering pat solutions to these difficult questions (Wear and 
Aultman 2005: 1056, qtd. in Jones 2014: 36). But if the novel is powerful, 
then in what way? Of what is it trying to persuade the reader? Due to the 
complexity of the two narrative perspectives, which in themselves 
incorporate a number of inconsistencies, there may be no simple answer to 
this question. But the text does highlight the pressing need to address 
dementia care, voicing this need from a distinctly feminist perspective. 
While the commercialisation of care is certainly regrettable, the continuing 
pressure on women to provide careto the detriment of their own health 
and well-being and with little appreciation and insufficient remuneration
urgently needs to be addressed.  
Conclusion 
In this chapter, I have shown how fiction may both counter and conform to 
dominant discourses about dementia care, how fiction may disturb its 
readers without this disturbance necessarily acting as a moral good, and how 
fiction may act as a moral laboratory to assess questions of end-of-life care 
in dementia. In situating my discussion of dementia fiction within the debate 
about the role of medical humanities research in health care practices, I am 
not proposing that such an approach to narrative supersedes current ones nor 
that it offers an exhaustive account of the complex interaction between 
illness narratives, biomedical and popular culture, and the well-being of 
individuals and communities. Instead, I have aimed to outline, in an 
exploratory fashion, some ways narratives may work on readers and may 
thereby contribute to the debate and delivery of dementia care. My aim was 
to extend the scope of literary reading from the locus of medical training, 
where Charon (2006) and others situate narrative medicine, to include a 
wider spectrum of readers. Further, I argue that the discussion of the effects 
of literary reading in medical humanities should go beyond the question of 
whether fiction induces empathy. Fiction may act as a source of (elusive) 
knowledge (Felski 2008, Nussbaum 1990, Wood 2005), as a means of 
experiential learning and quasi-Socratic thinking about how to live life 
(Nussbaum 1995, 1990), and as a challenge to dominant discourses. 
Through the processes of metaphor, mimesis and narrative rhetoric fiction 
may further engender in its readers new ways of seeing, understanding, and 
enacting care (Charon 2006).    
Stories act as a space to approach and live through (Rosenblatt 1995) 
certain dilemmas without having to take action oneself. Indeed, the 
counterfactual nature of these scenarios allows novels to probe the 
boundaries and limits of contemporary understandings of dementia or to 
follow certain conceptualisations of what it means to be human to their 
logical conclusion. In accepting reductionist conceptualisations of 
personhood, rather than necessarily challenging them, these fictions may 
confront readers with their own implicit views, and raise, as Anne 
Whitehead puts it, uncomfortable questions (Whitehead 2011: 58). I 
suggest that, in line with Whiteheads argument, rather than solving or 
resolving these ethical dilemmas for the reader, the particular value of 
certain literary representations of dementia may lie in their ability to open 
up, and to hold open, central ethical questions of responsiveness, 
interpretation, responsibility, complicity and care (59; original emphasis). 
Indeed, the value of much contemporary literature resides in the way it 
provides a space for the reader to be with uncomfortable questions. Both the 
process of identification with the non-demented others in fictional worlds 
(usually the family caregiver) and the process of empathic unsettlement 
(LaCapra 2001: 41-42, qtd. in Whitehead 2011: 58) with regard to the 
character with dementia play out in the readers appreciation, understanding 
and response to the bioethical dilemmas of end-of-life dementia care. 
Since these difficult questions are aesthetically mediated, novels have 
the potential to focus their readers attention on issues that they might 
otherwise be inclined to avoid. While most people do not seek out first-hand 
accounts about dementia care, dementia films and fiction reach wide 
audiences. It may be that literary fiction is less likely to cause empathic 
distress in its readers (Keen 2007) than newspaper reportswhich, in turn, 
might lead to a turning away from the issue at hand. The aesthetic mediation 
of counterfactual scenariosthat we nevertheless bring to bear on our own 
livesmay then confront us with ethical dilemmas we otherwise tend to 
ignore until acutely faced with a similar problem. Reading fiction, in its 
capacity to both delight and instruct, to subvert and challenge, to simulate 
and evoke feelings, to draw in as well as shock, has the potential to make 
readers care: about fictional worlds, about questions of how we live and die, 
and about what it means to be human.   
Bioethical decision-making concerning end-of-life treatment in 
dementia cannot be replaced by reading fictional narratives in which similar 
scenarios play out, in part because these narratives themselves develop an 
ethos that may be opposed to ethical action in the real-world. However, 
reading such narratives stimulates and simulates bioethical thinking. By 
emotionally engaging readers, these narratives may move readers to 
consider previously unthinkable responses and solutions. The counter-
factual scenarios may help expand the categories used for bioethical 
decision-making, and provide a kind of training field or moral laboratory for 
contemplating the diverse situational, personal, emotional and financial 
aspects involved in making difficult care decisions. These narratives do not 
necessarily present ideal solutions. Indeed, they may employ narrative 
rhetoric and dehumanising imagery to condone practices of euthanasia or 
indeed manslaughter of family members with advance dementia (see 
Zimmermann 2010). As Burke suggests vis--vis Have the Men Had 
Enough? and as I have indicated in my reading of Still Alice, these 
narratives may be trapped within the predominant logic of neoliberal and 
also cognitivist notions of the value of human life, promoting ways of 
thinking about vulnerability and interdependency that may in effect be 
counter to a responsive and responsible ethics of care which acknowledges 
the interdependency of human life. If such narratives are therefore to be 
used as tools within an ethically driven medical humanities agenda, they 
must themselves be opened up to ethical scrutiny through critical reading 
strategies. 
How do these arguments relate, then, to broader medical humanities 
agendas and the role of literary critics within them? Theresa Jones argues 
that much like fiction, the humanities help us see things differently by re-
presenting, re-describing and re-contextualizing (Jones 2014: 28). Jones, 
furthermore, points out how the humanities are frequently viewed as a 
democratizing force and a means of challenging the status quo of 
biomedical practices (28). The traditional mode of critique in the 
humanities is crucial here. I have suggested that while aspects of some 
fictional accounts act as forms of critique of current dementia care practices, 
careful literary analysis cautions us against assuming any unilateral 
democratising or ethical effect of literary fiction. It is here that I locate the 
need for literary scholars and narrative theorists to engage in debates about 
the role of narrative in the medical or health humanities. Literary scholars 
can offer a more complex account of how narratives work on their readers. 
And more generally, the tools of literary and cultural criticism can help train 
readers to become critical readers or interpreters of culture and cultural 
productions in their own right. Further, these same modes of critical 
thinking can be turned on the humanities own modes and techniques of 
producing knowledge. If good fiction opens up and keeps open difficult 
questions about our responsibility to others, then critical thinking about 
fiction can extend that process of coduction between text and reader to 
engage wider audiences in a debate about the value of life, end-of-life care 
practices and how we produce knowledge and protocols in these areas.  
A number of problems nevertheless arise in the context of considering 
literary fiction and literary criticism in the context of the health humanities. 
For instance, Michael Wood suggests that if we consider critique of hard 
science the only role of literary critics (a bit like the opposition in politics), 
then we are selling short what literary critics do, as well as the value of the 
knowledge or understanding produced via the study of literary texts 
(Wood 2005). I have suggested instead that literary analysis offers tools to 
read fictional narratives, films, and other forms of cultural expression 
critically for the effects they may have on their readers. Yet even in Woods 
account of scholarly knowledge, understanding remains problematically 
linked to the individual reader or interpreter. How can this understanding be 
communicable or relevant to others? Perhaps the product of careful literary 
analysis may communicate understanding between readers. Scholarly 
publications and conferences in themselves function as forms of coduction, 
extending beyond the context of medical humanities teaching. However, the 
crucial question remains how insights from medical humanities research of 
all kinds, whether literary, anthropological, or other, may be communicated 
to the relevant actors in health care. Just as doctors may not have the time or 
inclination to read cutting-edge medical humanities publications, so policy 
makers, bioethicists or care home designers are unlikely to turn to recent 
outputs of such journals as Literature and Medicine to inform their policies, 
planning or decision-making.  
Guillory warns against exaggerated expectations about the effects of 
critical ethical readings in the real world. In a similar vein, I suggest that 
further thinking is necessary to translate insights from literary health 
humanities into policy and practice. Public engagement, reading groups, and 
consultancy work may offer the beginnings of an attempt to make the 
reading of dementia narratives relevant to future dementia care. At the very 
least, I hope to have widened the scope of critical reading of fiction in the 
medical humanities in emphasising literary criticisms ability to make us 
reflect on the social climate we live in, reconsider the modes of knowledge 
production we use to justify certain treatment measures, and challenge the 
structures of desire that are aroused by representing dementia as the ultimate 
tragedy, shattering not only projects of self-fulfilment but the self as such. 
Conclusion and Outlook 
In this thesis, my goal has been to show how both narrative and narrative 
studies are relevant to the exploration of the phenomenology of dementia, to 
reconsidering the question of selfhood in dementia, and to the development 
of dementia care. I have delineated the potential and limitations of narrative, 
and narrative identity, in relation to challenging the current dementia 
construct and developing new ways of seeing, acting towards and caring for 
people with dementia. I contend that narrative remains both a crucial sense-
making device and significant form of representation relevant to medical 
humanities research and health care practices. At the same time, I have 
aimed to contextualise and correct unilateral arguments about the use of 
narrative in the medical humanities by paying close attention to how 
different modes, media and genres inflect the various functions narrative 
may play in the context of dementia studies and dementia care.   
Chapter 1 aimed to redress the lack of (critical) attention that has been 
given to dementia sufferers by exploring, in the spirit of first-wave medical 
humanities, the potential of illness narratives to contribute to a better, that is 
more intersubjectively grounded and less medicalised, understanding of the 
experience of living with dementia. At the same time, by including 
documentary film from the point of view of the caregiver, I highlighted the 
importance of attending to embodied selfhood and embodied 
communication in dementia, in order to refute the claim that people with 
dementia lose their self or canwhen they lose the ability to use language 
coherentlyno longer communicate their subjective experience. 
Chapter 2 continued the theme of exploring the phenomenology of 
dementia, in this case not through personal narratives but through 
imaginative literaturethat is, dementia stories presented in novels and 
films. I argued that fictional dementia narratives act as a practical 
counterpart of theoretical phenomenology (Waugh 2013: 24), while 
challenging the notion that empathetic engagement with fictional characters 
necessarily leads to pro-social action on behalf of real-life others with 
dementia. Through close analysis of a range of fictional dementia narratives, 
I aimed to provide a more nuanced account of how different local narrative 
modes (perspective and focalisation), different media (text and film), and 
different styles or genres (from realist to experimental novel) elicit various 
forms of narrative empathy, sympathy or parallel experience (Toker 1993). 
Further I suggested that a more fine-grained account of how narrative 
empathy works and a more critical analysis of the empathy-altruism 
hypothesis (Keen 2007) bear importantly on current debates about the value 
and function of empathy in medical humanities research and education.   
In the second part of the thesis, I turned from the exploration of the 
phenomenology of dementia to questions of self-presentation and 
representation. By exploring the emergent genre of collaborative life writing 
and the flourishing genre of caregivers memoirs, I aimed to bring to the 
fore a body of work that has not yet received sufficient critical attention. In 
chapter 3, by scrutinising the effects of genre conventions on the reading of 
autopathographies, I challenged the notion that illness narratives act in a 
straightforward manner as counter-narratives. Not only are masterplots and 
counter-narratives inevitably entangled in each other, but the strategy of 
counter-narratives to present a counter-image to the one they aim to 
deconstruct turns out to be problematic in the context of dementia advocacy. 
Autopathographies that present coherent, autonomous and able-minded 
selvesin order to challenge the view that people with dementia lose their 
self or no longer mattercompound the dehumanisation of people with 
dementia in later stages of the disease. Much like recent directives in the 
medical profession to speak of pregnant people rather than pregnant 
women riskin the name of political correctnesseliding the actual health 
concerns specific to the female sex, so reconceiving of people with 
dementia as more able-minded than they are risks denying their 
progressive dependency and ignoring their actual care needs. 
If autopathographies partially fail as counter-narratives in dementia, 
collaborative life writing may represent a genre of dementia life writing that 
speaks to the intersubjective nature of identity. Attending to dementia life 
writing allowed me to interrogate both the usefulness and the limits of 
narrative identity thesis for people with dementia. Drawing on 
conversational storytelling research, I showed how people with dementia 
continue to use narrative to construct identity, while arguing also that such 
narrative acts present a call on able-minded listeners (and readers) to be 
active participants in the co-construction of identity for people with 
dementia. Reflecting on my own research agenda in this context led me to 
acknowledge the role of the researcher in assessing counter-narratives in 
dementia and to question the standards, methods and underlying emotional 
needs that may have influenced my response and evaluation of current 
dementia life writing as successful (or unsuccessful) acts of claiming 
identity and countering the dominant construct of dementia. 
Chapter 4 then continued to explore the role of narrative identity in the 
context of caregivers memoirs. Here the ethical problems attendant on 
representing vulnerable subjects (Couser 2004) came to the fore. By first 
outlining a number of subgenres of caregivers memoirs, I explored the 
interrelation of the aesthetic, ethical and political in the context of dementia 
life writing as well as some of the functions of intimate life writing about a 
dying parent or spouse. Through close analysis of a range of filial dementia 
memoirs, I then tackled the question of how relational identity plays out in 
caregivers memoirs about a parent with dementia. By contrasting 
autobiographical essay, fully-fledged memoir and graphic memoir by male 
and female writers, I focused attention on the potential effects of both genre, 
medium and gender on our understanding of relational identity. Further, 
relational identity emerged as both a reparative force in dementia (a means 
of holding or reconstructing the identity of the person with dementia for 
them), as well as having nefarious effects (by erasing the subjectivity of the 
person with dementia, by affecting negatively the identity of the caregiver, 
or by leading to excess guilt and grief in caregivers who struggle to 
reconcile historical roles and relations with the changes wrought in the 
family member due to dementia). Relational identity in these memoirs, 
however, also emerged as a productive approach to people with dementia 
when it constituted not so much a re-construction of former identity as a site 
or opportunity for the person with dementia to assert her current identity and 
have it recognised by another with whom they are in an on-going 
relationship. 
Finally, although this issue surfaced in preceding discussions, the last 
part of this study addressed more squarely the role of literature and life 
writing in challenging, developing and delivering dementia care. Because of 
the way that dementia, as Aaron Alterra puts it in his caregivers memoir, is 
not usually a doctor-intensive disease (1999: 49) but one where due to 
limited treatment options and the nature of physiological decline a whole 
roster of caregivers become heavily involved, dementia narratives speak to 
current and potential future caregivers. Indeed, they speak to anyone who 
may one day be afflicted by the disease. Dementia narratives may moreover 
be valuable to a host of people involved in planning, facilitating, reviewing, 
and delivering dementia care. An imaginative engagement with the life 
world of dementia is therefore relevant to politicians, policy makers, care 
home managers and designers, occupational therapists, and advocacy groups, 
as well as those providing day-to-day care in the community and institutions. 
Chapter 5 explored how caregivers memoirs across a range of storytelling 
media and modes (from graphic memoir to you-narrative) may contribute to 
the revision and development of dementia care. Chapter 6, by contrast, 
suggested some ways in which contemporary fiction may contribute to on-
going debates about dementia care by exploring the interrelation between 
bioethics and fictional narrative.   
As is apparent from this summary, my thesis shares links both to first-
wave medical humanities methods and agendas as well as to recent 
developments in second-wave or critical medical humanities. Exploring the 
phenomenology of dementia through illness narratives represents a 
continuation of the aim to make the patients voice heard. Given the dearth 
of first-person accounts of dementia, by comparison with outside 
representations of the disease, I felt compelled to include and re-represent 
what first-hand accounts are currently available. Further, although the 
training of health care professionals has not been the focus of this thesis, 
reading dementia narratives may be beneficial to health care practitioners 
and their patients. A sustained engagement with the life world of a person 
with dementia may provide a more holistic view of the patient and her 
situation and may open up alternative therapeutic possibilitiesbeyond the 
limited scope of currently available drug treatments (see also Greenhalgh 
and Hurwitz 1999: 48). Dementia narratives may contribute, together with 
other social forces, to a growing awareness of dementia, especially of the 
prevalence of early-onset Alzheimers, which in turn may speed up what is 
still often a circuitous and drawn-out process of (mis)diagnosis. Narratives 
that place persons with dementia centre stage, focusing on their intimate 
experiences of the disease as well their continuing selfhood, may act as a 
reminder to take the person with dementia seriouslyto meet her with 
respect and include her in the clinical encounter. However, such an effect 
cannot be predicted for an engagement with any given dementia narrative, 
nor can it be measured quantitatively. As reader-response criticism 
highlights, narrative texts offer particular opportunities of engagement for 
the reader, but each individual flesh-and-blood reader will nonetheless 
respond differently to these opportunities, based on his or her psychological 
make-up, social characteristics, and place in time.  
In line, also, with first-wave medical humanities concerns, my 
discussion of illness narratives represents, to a certain extent, a criticism of 
the neurological approach to dementia and of current medical and care 
practices. And yet, the intent of this study has not been primarily to write 
against biomedicine, but to explore avenues of understanding dementia 
which complement forms of biomedical practice that have, as yet, little to 
offer to people with dementia and their caregivers. While the notion of 
criticising biomedicine prevails in mainstream medical humanities, my 
thesis also activates the notion of the critical and of critique in other ways. 
I purport a critical need to 1) re-assess the current masterplot of dementia 
and the way master and counter-narratives are entangled; 2) to recognise 
personhood in people with dementia in its numerous instantiations 
(embodied, relational, narrative); and 3) to explore through critical analysis 
the limits and possibilities of the implications of these different views of 
selfhood for people with dementia. In addition, if a central element of the 
critical humanities has been the turn away from the primal scene of 
doctor-patient encounters to new scenes and sites (Whitehead and Woods 
2016: 2), I have extended the scope of the medical humanities, by turning to 
literary narratives and the public spheres of carean area that has become 
increasingly professionalised, but remains enmeshed with private life.  
Taking my lead from Keen (2007), I have moreover questioned the 
notion that empathy leads to pro-social action as well as the notion that 
literature is necessarily a good in itself, or acts for the good when 
harnessed to a medical humanities agenda. Among other problems, empathy 
expended on fictional characters may divert our attention from the needs of 
real-life others (Keen 2007). Indeed, while narrative empathy has been 
heralded as a means to extend the moral circle to include other clans, other 
tribes, and other races such that their humanity can be acknowledged 
(Pinker 2004: 48, qtd. in Keen 2007: xix), Keen suggests that empathy 
might equally lead to the incitement of hatred. For example, the empathy 
aroused for a character with whom the reader identifies, and who has been 
harmed by a character who is perceived not to belong to the readers in-
group, may incite that reader to a hateful attitude vis--vis the target group 
in question. Given these problems, I proposed to shift the focus beyond 
empathy to other ways in which fictional texts may act in the field of the 
health humanities. I suggested how literature, and literary critics, may 
contribute to the thinking through of current dementia care. At the same 
time, I stressed the need to investigate whether the arts and humanities are 
necessarily supportive of a humanist agenda or benign in the first place 
(Whitehead and Woods 2016: 2). Instead, I suggested that fictional and non-
fictional narratives shape the way we live in a manner that may at times also 
be detrimental to individuals or groups within society. Narrativist 
approaches to medical humanities need to be developed and refined by 
using the tools of narrative studies and by paying attention to the ways 
different storytelling environments shape how we come to see and 
understand thingsand ultimately act in the world.  
Finally, my work also activates a crucial meaning of the word critical 
as it pertains to the notion of urgency or critical mass (Whitehead and 
Woods 2016: 14). Given current demographic and political developments, 
we urgently need to address the ways we, as society, want to lead and end 
our lives. Dementia care, in the community and in institutions, represents a 
topic currently under-represented in medical humanities research, perhaps 
because nursing constitutes a separate field. I would venture to maintain that 
this established discipline could benefit from some of the critical 
(re)thinking that animates the medical humanities, and in this study I have 
outlined some practical ways in which my own literary strand of medical 
humanities research might contribute to the development of dementia care.  
Work in the field of literary approaches to dementia is just beginning, 
however. The continuing influx of dementia narratives opens up ever new 
sites of inquiry that raise questions of the sort addressed in this thesis
questions that might be approached through the approach (or approaches) 
that I have sketched here. Nor does this study represent an exhaustive 
account of already extant dementia narratives, some of which might suggest 
both different questions and different preliminary answers to those proposed 
in my account. What is more, I acknowledge that many of the questions 
raised in this thesis may also be broached through creative forms of 
expression other than narrative. 
Thus dementia poetry, written by affected family members, professional 
carers and by people with dementia (see, for instance McNamara, no 
date),154 still needs to be explored in detail. A number of relevant questions 
arise in this context: how do collaborative poetry projects, such as John 
Killicks (Killick 1997, 2008, 2010, Killick and Cordonnier 2000) differ 
from collaborative life writing projects, as discussed in this thesis? 
Compared with life writing, does poetry open up other, less linear, more 
metaphoric, means of representing the phenomenology of dementia (see 
also Aadlandsvik 2008) or co-constructing selfhood? What are the ethical 
implications of refashioning the words of people with dementia into poetry?  
And does the figurative and often enigmatic language and structure of 
poetry enhance or deter the readers engagement with the subjectivity of 
people with dementia? Also, what potential is there for poetry interventions 
in dementia care (Petrescu, MacFarlane, and Ranzijn 2014, Swinnen 2016) 
as compared, for instance, with storytelling interventions (Basting 2001, 
2003b) or interventions that draw on the visual arts (see, among others 
Huebner 2011) or music (Cheong et al. 2015, Liesk, Hartogh, and Kalbe 
2015, Raglio et al. 2015, Samson et al. 2015, Unadkat, Camic, and Vella-
Burrows 2016)? In short, there is a need to explore more thoroughly how 
154 See also the blog http://alzpoetry.blogspot.co.uk/.  
aesthetic experience and practice actively enhance the well-being of people 
with dementia and their caregivers. 
Conversely, one might ask how dementia itself acts as a metaphor or 
narrative device in literary and popular genres. In a previous study, I 
discussed how dementia may function as a narrative plot device (Bitenc 
2011). Wendy Roy elaborates to what extent dementia in novels acts as 
narrative prosthesis, that is, how disability functions either as a stock 
feature of characterization or as an opportunistic metaphorical device 
(Mitchell and Snyder 2001: 47, qtd. in Roy 2009: 44). Hannah Zeilig (2013), 
similarly focuses on how dementia functions as a metaphor in poetry, plays 
and film in order to reflect on and criticise aspects of contemporary life. 
Exploring the function of dementia in literary works and the visual arts is 
worth analysing in its own rightand might feed back into discussions 
about the current conceptualisation of dementia. 
Drama and operanarrative genres not explored in this thesisraise 
new aesthetic questions due to their multimodal and performative aspects. 
Moreover, they may open up the possibility of more interdisciplinary and 
participatory research methods. For instance, the performance of dementia 
plays could be paired with pre- and post-performance questionnaires, post-
performance discussions, lectures, or any number of public engagement 
activities. Integrating social science research methods with a literary 
approach to dementia studies could yield more diverse and empirically 
sound results on the interaction, for instance, between aesthetic experience 
and ethical reflection. Such an approach could also be developed vis--vis 
reading groups with people with dementia and their caregivers, and by 
taking ones cue from the participants in these groups, literary dementia 
scholars might unearth altogether new research questions in relation to 
dementia. 
Finally, I hope to have outlined a framework for a narrativist approach 
to issues in the health humanities which might be adapted to other contexts 
and contents. Questions of identity and the problems of care arise in the 
context of any serious illness. I suggest that these issues might be 
approached through a literary medical humanities methodology. 
Simultaneously, a critical literary medical humanities delineates not only the 
potential but also the limitations of literature in the context of an ethically 
driven medical humanities agenda. 
Bibliography 
Aadlandsvik, Ragna. 2008. The Second Sight: Learning About and With 
Dementia by Means of Poetry. Dementia 7 (3): 321-339. 
Abbott, H. Porter. 2008. The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Akpnar, B., . Kkgl, and G. Yener. 2011. Effects of Gender on 
Burden Among Caregivers of Alzheimers Patients. Journal of 
Nursing Scholarship 43: 248254. 
Alber, Jan. 2013. Unnatural Spaces and Narrative Worlds. In A Poetics of 
Unnatural Narrative, edited by Jan Alber, Henrik Skov Nielsen and 
Brian Richardson, 45-66. Columbus: Ohio State Univeristy Press. 
---. 2014. Unnatural Narrative. In The Living Handbook of Narratology, 
edited by Peter Hhn, John Pier, Wolf Schmid and Jrg Schnert. 
Hamburg: Hamburg University Press. http://www.lhn.uni-
hamburg.de/article/unnatural-narrative. [last accessed: 22/03/2016]  
Albert, Trevor, and James Keach. 2014. Glen Campbell: I'll Be Me. PCH 
Films. 
Alterra, Aaron. 1999. The Caregiver: A Life with Alzheimers. South 
Royalton: Steerforth Press. 
Alzheimers Disease International. 2009. World Alzheimer Report 2009. 
Alzheimers Disease International. 
---. 2010. World Alzheimer Report 2010: The Global Economic Impact of 
Dementia. Alzheimers Disease International. 
Appignanesi, Lisa. 1999. Losing the Dead. London: Chatto & Windus. 
Aquilina, Carmelo, and Julian C. Hughes. 2006. The Return of the Living 
Dead: Agency Lost and Found?  In Dementia: Mind, Meaning and 
the Person, edited by Julian C. Hughes, Stephen J. Louw and Steven 
R. Sabat, 143-161. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Arana, R. Victoria. 2003. Michael Ignatieff. In Dictionary of Literary 
Biography: Twenty-First-Century British and Irish Novelists, edited 
by Michael R. Molino, 148-156. Detroit: Thomson Gale. 
Asai, Atsushi, Y. Sato, and M. Fukuyama. 2009. An Ethical and Social 
Examination of Dementia as Depicted in Japanese Film. Medical 
Humanities 35 (1): 39-42. 
Avrahami, Einat. 2007. The Invading Body: Reading Illness 
Autobiographies. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. 
Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Translated 
by Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: University of 
Texas Press. 
---. 1984. Problems of Dostoevskys Poetics. Translated by Caryl Emerson. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Ballenger, Jesse F. 2006. Self, Senility, and Alzheimers Disease in Modern 
America: A History. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Bamberg, Michael. 1997. Positioning between Structure and Performance. 
Journal of Narrative and Life History 7: 335-342. 
---. 2004. Considering Counter Narratives. In Considering Counter-
Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense, edited by Michael 
Bamberg and Molly Andrews, 351-371. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Bamberg, Michael, and Molly Andrews, eds. 2004. Considering Counter-
Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Barba, Andrs. 2004. Ahora Tocad Msica de Baile. Barcelona: Editorial 
Anagrama. 
Basting, Anne Davis. 2001. God is a Talking Horse: Dementia and the 
Performance of Self. The Drama Review 45 (3): 78-94. 
---. 2003a. Looking Back from Loss: Views of the Self in Alzheimers 
Disease. Journal of Aging Studies 17: 87-99. 
---. 2003b. Reading the Story Behind the Story: Context and Content in 
Stories by People with Dementia. Generations 3: 25-29. 
Basting, Anne Davis, and John Killick. 2003. The Arts and Dementia Care: 
A Resource Guide. New York: The National Center for Creative 
Aging. 
Battersby, James L. 2006. Narrativity, Self, and Self-Representation. 
Narrative 14 (1): 27-44. 
Bayley, John. 1999. Elegy for Iris. New York: Picador. 
Behuniak, Susan M. 2011. The Living Dead? The Construction of People 
with Alzheimers Disease as Zombies. Ageing and Society 31 (1): 
70-92. 
Berliner, Alan. 2012. First Cousin Once Removed. HBO. 
Bernaerts, Lars. 2014. Minds at Play: Narrative Games and Fictional Minds 
in B.S. Johnsons House Mother Normal. Style 48 (3): 294-312. 
Bernlef, J. 1988. Out of Mind. Translated by Adrienne  Dixon. London: 
Faber and Faber. Original edition, Hersenshimmen 1984. 
Bitenc, Rebecca A. 2012. Representations of Dementia in Narrative 
Fiction. In Knowledge and Pain, edited by Esther Cohen, Leona 
Toker, Manuela Consonni and Otniel E. Dror, 305-329. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. 
Block, Stefan Merrill. 2008. The Story of Forgetting. London: Faber and 
Faber. 
Booth, Wayne C. 1988. The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Brecht, Bertold. 1964. Alienation Effects in Chinese Acting. In Brecht on 
Theatre: The Development of an Aesthetic, edited by John Willett, 
91-99. New York: Hill and Wang. 
Brody, Elaine M., Morton H. Kleban, M. Powell Lawton, and Herbert A. 
Silverman. 1971. Excess Disabilities of Mentally Impaired Aged: 
Impact of Individualized Treatment. The Gerontologist 11 (2): 124-
Bruner, Jerome. 1991. The Narrative Construction of Reality. Critical 
Inquiry 18: 1-21. 
---. 2003. Making Stories: Law, Literature, Life. Cambridge, 
Massachussetts: Harvard University Press. 
---. 2004. Life as Narrative. Social Research 71 (3): 691-710. 
Bryden, Christine [formerly Boden]. 1998. Who Will I Be When I Die? East 
Melbourne: Harper Collins Religious. 
---. 2005. Dancing with Dementia: My Story of Living Positively with 
Dementia. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
Buber, Martin. 1958. I and Thou. Translated by Ronald Gregor Smith. 
Second ed. Edinburgh: T&T Clark. Original edition, 1923. 
Burke, Lucy. 2007a. Alzheimers Disease: Personhood and First Person 
Testimony. In CDSRN Cultural Disability Studies Research 
Network. http://www.cdsrn.org.uk/ICP.html.  
---. 2007b. The Poetry of Dementia: Art, Ethics, and Alzheimers Disease 
in Tony Harrisons Black Daisies for the Bride. Journal of Literary 
Disability 1 (1): 61-73. 
---. 2008. The Country of My Disease: Genes and Genealogy in 
Alzheimers Life-writing. Journal of Disability 2 (1): 63-74. 
---. 2014. Oneself as Another: Intersubjectivity and Ethics in Alzheimers 
Illness Narratives. Narrative Works 4: 28-47. 
---. 2015. The Locus of Our Dis-ease: Narratives of Family Life in the Age 
of Alzheimers. In Popularizing Dementia: Public Expressions and 
Representations of Forgetfulness, edited by Aagje Swinnen and 
Mark Schweda, 23-41. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 
---. 2016. On (not) Caring: Tracing the Meanings of Care in the 
Imaginative Literature of the Alzheimer's Epidemic  In The 
Edinburgh Companion to the Critical Medical Humanities, edited by 
Anne Whitehead and Angela Woods. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press. 
Capstick, Andrea, John Chatwin, and Katherine Ludwin. 2015. Challenging 
Representations of Dementia in Contemporary Western Fiction 
Film: From Epistemic Injustice to Social Participation.  In 
Popularizing Dementia: Public Expressions and Representations of 
Forgetfulness, edited by Aagje Swinnen and Mark Schweda. 
Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 
Carel, Havi. 2008. Illness: The Cry of the Flesh. Stocksfield: Acumen. 
Cassavetes, Nick. 2004. The Notebook. New Line Cinema. 
Chappell, N. L., C. Dujela, and A. Smith. 2015. Caregiver Well-Being: 
Intersections of Relationship and Gender. Research on Aging 37 
(6): 623-645. 
Charon, Rita. 2006. Narrative Medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Chast, Roz. 2014. Cant We Talk About Something More Pleasant? A 
Memoir. New York: Bloomsbury. 
Cheong, C., Y. Foong, H. Koh, D. Chen, A. Tan, J. Tan, C. Ng, and L. Yap. 
2015. Creative Music Therapy Improves Mood and Engagement of 
Older Patients with Delirium & Dementia in an Acute Tertiary 
Hospital. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 63: 272-272. 
Chute, Hilary. 2007. Book review of Our Cancer Year, Janet and Me: An 
Illustrated Story of Love and Loss, Cancer Vixen: A True Story, 
Moms Cancer, Blue Pills: A Positive Love Story, Epileptic, and 
Black Hole. Literature and Medicine 26 (2): 413-429. 
Clark, Andy, and David Chalmers. 1998. The Extended Mind. Analysis 58 
(1): 7-19. 
Clegg, David. 2010. Tell Mrs Mill Her Husband Is Still Dead. No place: No 
publisher. 
Cohen, David, and Carl Eisdorfer. 1986. The Loss of Self: A Family 
Resource for the Care of Alzheimers Disease and Related 
Disorders. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Cohen-Shalev, Amir, and Esther-Lee Marcus. 2012. An Insiders View of 
Alzheimers: Cinematic Portrayals of the Struggle for Personhood. 
International Journal of Ageing and Later Life 7 (2): 73-96. 
Cohn, Dorrit. 1978. Transparent Minds: Narrative Modes for Presenting 
Consciousness in Fiction. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Conway, Kathlyn. 2007. Beyond Words: Illness and the Limits of 
Expression. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 
Cooney, Eleanor. 2003. Death in Slow Motion: A Memoir of a Daughter, 
Her Mother, and the Beast Called Alzheimers. New York: Harper 
Perennial. 
Couser, G. Thomas. 1991. Autopathography: Women, Illness, and 
Lifewriting. a/b: Auto/Biography Studies 6 (1): 65-75. 
---. 1997. Recovering Bodies: Illness, Disability, and Life Writing. Madison: 
The University of Wisconsin Press. 
---. 1991. Autopathography: Women, Illness, and Lifewriting.  
---. 2004. Vulnerable Subjects: Ethics and Life Writing. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 
---. 2005. Paradigms Cost: Representing Vulnerable Subjects. Literature 
and Medicine 24 (1): 19-30. 
---. 2009. Memoir and (lack of) Memory: Filial Narratives of Paternal 
Dementia. In New Essays on Life Writing and the Body, edited by 
Christopher Stuart and Stephanie Todd, 223-240. Newcastle: 
Cambridge Scholars. 
---. 2012. Memoir: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Crawford, Paul, Brian Brown, Victoria Tischler, and Charley Baker. 2010. 
Health Humanities: The Future of Medical Humanities? Mental 
Health Review 15 (3): 4-10. 
Crisp, Jane. 1995. Making Sense of the Stories that People with 
Alzheimers Tell: A Journey with my Mother. Journal of Narrative 
and Life History 2 (3): 133-140. 
Culler, Jonathan D. 2004. Omniscience. Narrative 12 (1): 22-34. 
Damasio, Antonio R. 1994. Descartes Error. London: Vintage  
---. 2000. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making 
of Consciousness. London: W. Heinemann. 
---. 2010. Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. New 
York: Pantheon Books. 
Davis, Daniel H. J. 2004. Dementia: Sociological and Philosophical 
Constructions. Social Science & Medicine 58 (2): 369-378. 
Davis, John K. 2009. Precedent Autonomy, Advance Directives, and End-
of-Life Care. In The Oxford Handbook of Bioethics, edited by 
Bonnie Steinbock. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Davis, Robert. 1989. My Journey into Alheimers Disease: Helpful Insights 
for Family and Friends. Carol Stream: Tyndale House Publishers. 
Dawson, Paul. 2013. The Return of the Omniscient Narrator: Authorship 
and Authority in Twenty-First Century Fiction. Columbus: Ohio 
State University Press. 
DeBaggio, Thomas. 2002. Losing My Mind: An Intimate Look at Life with 
Alzheimers. New York: The Free Press. 
---. 2003. When It Gets Dark: An Enlightened Reflection on Life with 
Alzheimers. New York: Free Press. 
DeFalco, Amelia. 2010. Uncanny Subjects: Aging in Contemporary 
Narrative. Columbus: The Ohio State University Press. 
Dennett, Daniel Clement. 1993. Consciousness Explained. London: Penguin 
Books. 
Devars, Christine. 2005. Le Piano Dsaccord. Paris: Editions Anne 
Carrire. 
Dickens, Charles. 1854. Hard Times. London: Thomas Nelson and Sons. 
Dijkstra, Katinka, Michelle S. Bourgeois, Rebecca S. Allen, and Louis D. 
Burgio. 2004. Conversational Coherence: Discourse Analysis of 
Older Adults with and without Dementia. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics 17 (4): 263-283. 
Douglas, B. C. 2008. Dickens Characters on the Couch: An Example of 
Teaching Psychiatry Using Literature. Medical Humanities 34 (2): 
64-69. 
Downs, Murna. 2000. A World Without Dementia? What Do We Need To 
Do? Dementia in Scotland: Newsletter of Alzheimers Scotland - 
Action on Dementia March 6. 
Dresser, Rebecca. 1995. Dworkin on Dementia: Elegant Theory, 
Questionable Policy. The Hastings Center Report 25 (6): 32-38. 
Dworkin, Ronald. 1993. Lifes Dominion: An Argument About Abortion, 
Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Eakin, Paul John. 1992. Touching the World: Reference in Autobiography. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
---. 1998. Relational Selves, Relational Lives: The Story of the Story.  In 
True Relations: Essays on Autobiography and the Postmodern, 
edited by G. Thomas Couser and Joseph Fichtelberg. Westport: 
Greenwood. 
---. 1999. How Our Lives Become Stories: Making Selves. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 
---. 2001. Breaking Rules: The Consequences of Self-Narration. 
Biography 24: 113-27. 
---. 2006. Narrative Identity and Narrative Imperialism: A Response to 
Galen Strawson and James Phelan. Narrative 14 (2): 180-187. 
---. 2008. Living Autobiographically: How We Create Identity in Narrative. 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Eisner, Will. 2008. Comics and Sequential Art: Principles and Practices 
from the Legendary Cartoonist. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Erll, Astrid. 2008. Nave, Repetitive, or Cultural: Options of an Ethical 
Narratology. Amsterdam International Electronic Journal for 
Cultural Narratology 5. 
Ernaux, Annie. 1987. Une Femme. Paris: Gallimard. 
---. 1999. I Remain in Darkness. Translated by Tanya Leslie. New York: 
Seven Stories Press. Original edition, 1997. 
Evans, Fiona. 2013. Geordie Sinatra. 
Eyre, Richard. 2001. Iris. Miramax Films. 
Farmer, Joyce. 2010. Special Exits: A Graphic Memoir. Seattle: 
Fantagraphics. 
Faulkner, William. 1995. The Sound and The Fury. London: Vintage Books. 
Original edition, 1929. 
Feil, Naomi. 1989. Validation: An Empathetic Approach to the Care of 
Dementia. Clinical Gerontologist 8 (3): 89-94. 
---. 1992. Validation Therapy. Geriatric Nursing 13 (3): 129-33. 
Feil, Naomi, and Rita Altman. 2004. Validation Theory and the Myth of 
the Therapeutic Lie. American Journal of Alzheimer's Disease and 
Other Dementias 19 (2): 77-8. 
Felski, Rita. 2008. Uses of Literature. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Fernyhough, Charles. 2012. Pieces of Light: The New Science of Memory. 
London: Profile. 
Fludernik, Monika. 1993. The Fictions of Language and the Languages of 
Fiction: The Linguistic Representation of Speech and 
Consciousness. London: Routledge. 
---. 1996. Towards a Natural Narratology. New York: Routledge. 
Fontana, Andrea, and Ronald W. Smith. 1989. Alzheimers Disease 
Victims: The Unbecoming of Self and the Normalization of 
Competence. Sociological Perspectives 32 (1): 35-46. 
Forster, Margaret. 1989. Have the Men Had Enough? London: Penguin 
Books. 
Fox, Patrick. 1989. From Senility to Alzheimers Disease: The Rise of the 
Alzheimers Disease Movement. Millbank Quarterly 1: 58-102. 
Francis, Leslie Pickering. 2001. Decisionmaking at the End of Life: 
Patients with Alzheimers or Other Dementias. Georgia Law 
Review 35 (2): 539-92. 
Frank, Arthur W. 1995. The Wounded Storyteller: Body, Illness, and Ethics. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Franzen, Jonathan. 2001. The Corrections. New York: Picador. 
---. 2002. My Father's Brain. In How to Be Alone, 7-38. New York: 
Picador. 
Freeman, Mark. 2007. Autobiographical Understanding and Narrative 
Inquiry. In Handbook of Narrative Inquiry: Mapping a 
Methodology, edited by D. Jean Clandinin. Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
Fricker, Miranda. 2007. Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of 
Knowing. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Friedman, Susan Stanford. 1988. Womens Autobiographical Selves: 
Theory and Practice. In The Private Self: Theory and Practice of 
Womens Autobiographical Writings, edited by Shari Benstock, 34-
62. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 
Gallagher, Shaun, and Dan Zahavi. 2008. The Phenomenological Mind: An 
Introduction to Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive Science. London: 
Routledge. 
Gardner, Jared. 2008. Autographys Biography, 19722007. Biography 31 
(1): 1-26. 
Genette, Grard. 1972. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method. 
Translated by Jane E. Lewin. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Genova, Lisa. 2007. Still Alice. London: Simon and Schuster. 
Gerrig, R.J. 1993. Experiencing Narrative Worlds. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Gillies, Andrea. 2010. Keeper: A Book About Memory, Identity, Isolation, 
Wordsworth and Cake. London: Short. Original edition, 2009. 
Glatzer, Richard, and Wash Westmoreland. 2014. Still Alice. Sony Pictures 
Classics. 
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled 
Identity. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc. 
---. 1981. Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Gordon, Mary. 2007. Circling My Mother: A Memoir. New York: Anchor 
Books. 
Graham, Megan E. 2016. The Voices of Iris: Cinematic Representations of 
the Aged Woman and Alzheimers Disease in Iris. Dementia 15 (5): 
1171-1183. 
Graham, Peter. 1997. Metapathography: Three Unruly Texts. Literature 
and Medicine 16 (1): 70-87. 
Grant, Linda. 1998. Remind Me Who I Am, Again. London: Granta Books. 
Green, Melanie C. 2004. Transportation Into Narrative Worlds: The Roles 
of Prior Knowledge and Perceived Realism. Discourse Processes 
38 (2): 247-266. 
Green, Melanie C., and Timothy C. Brock. 2000. The Role of 
Transportation in the Persuasiveness of Public Narratives. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology 79 (5): 701-721. 
Green, Melanie C., Jennifer Garst, and Timothy C. Brock. 2004. The 
Power of Fiction: Determinants and Boundaries. In The Psychology 
of Entertainment Media: Blurring the Lines Between Entertainment 
and Persuasion, edited by L. J.  Shrum, 161-176. Mahwah: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
Greenhalgh, Trisha, and Brian Hurwitz. 1999. Why Study Narrative? BMJ 
318: 48-50. 
Gubrium, Jaber F. 1986. Oldtimers and Alzheimers: The Descriptive 
Organization of Senility. Greenwich: JAI Press. 
Guillory, John. 2000. The Ethical Practice of Modernity: The Example of 
Reading. In The Turn to Ethics, edited by Marjorie Garber, Beatrice 
Hanssen and Rebecca L. Walkowitz. New York: Routledge. 
Gusdorf, Georges. 1980. Conditions and Limits of Autobiography.  In 
Autobiography: Essays Theoretical and Critical, edited by James 
Olney, 28-48. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Original 
edition, 1956. 
Hacking, Ian. 1999a. Mad Travellers: Reflections on the Reality of 
Transient Mental Illnesses. London: Free Association Books. 
---. 1999b. The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press. 
Hadas, Rachel. 2011. Strange Relation: A Memoir of Marriage, Dementia, 
and Poetry. Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books. 
Hakemulder, Jmeljan. 2000. The Moral Laboratory: Experiments 
Examining the Effects of Reading Literature on Social Perception 
and Moral Self-concept. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Harrison, Tony. 1993. Black Daisies for the Bride. London: Faber and 
Faber. 
Hartung, Heike. 2016. Ageing, Gender and Illness in Anglophone 
Literature: Narrating Age in the Bildungsroman. New York: 
Routledge. 
Haugse, John. 1998. Heavy Snow: My Fathers Disappearance into 
Alzheimers. Deerfield Beach: Health Communications. 
Hawkins, Anne Hunsaker 1993. Reconstructing Illness: Studies in 
Pathography. West Lafayette: Purdue University Press. 
Hayes, Jeanne, Craig Boylstein, and Mary K. Zimmerman. 2009. Living 
and Loving With Dementia: Negotiating Spousal and Caregiver 
Identity Through Narrative. Journal of Aging Studies 23: 48-59. 
Healey, Emma. 2014. Elizabeth is Missing. St Ives: Penguin Books. 
Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie and 
E Robinson. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Henderson, Cary 1998. Partial View: An Alzheimers Journal. Dallas: 
Southern Methodist University Press. 
Henry, Peaches. 2006. A Revised Approach to Relationality in Womens 
Autobiography: The Case of Eliza Lintons The Autobiography of 
Christopher Kirkland. a/b: Auto/Biography Studies 20 (1): 18-37. 
Herman, David. 2011. The Emergence of Mind: Representations of 
Consciousness in Narrative Discourse in English. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
---. 2013. Storytelling and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
The MIT Press. 
Herman, Luc, and Bart Vervaeck. 2005. Handbook of Narrative Analysis. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
Herskovits, Elizabeth. 1995. Struggling Over Subjectivity: Debates About 
the Self and Alzheimers Disease. Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly 9 (2): 146-164. 
Hertogh, Cees M. P. M., Marike E. de Boer, Rose-Marie Dres, and Jan A. 
Eefstinga. 2007. Would We Rather Lose Our Life Than Lose Our 
Self? Lessons From the Dutch Debate on Euthanasia for Patients 
With Dementia. The American Journal of Bioethics 7 (4): 48-56. 
Heywood, Bernard. 1994. Caring For Maria: An Experience of Coping 
Successfully with Alzheimers Disease. Shaftesbury: Element. 
Hoffmann, Deborah. 1994. Complaints of  Dutiful Daughter. No distributor. 
Holstein, Martha. 1997. Alzheimers Disease and Senile Dementia, 1885-
1920: An Interpretive History of Disease Negotiation. Journal of 
Aging Studies 11 (1): 1-13. 
---. 2000. Aging, Culture, and the Framing of Alzheimers Disease.  In 
Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical, and Cultural 
Perspectives, edited by Peter J. Whitehouse, Konrad Maurer and 
Jesse F. Ballenger, 158-180. Baltimore: John Hopkins University 
Press. 
Huebner, Berna G. 2011. I Remember Better When I Paint - Art and 
Alzheimers: Opening Doors, Making Connections. Glen Echo: 
Bethesda Communications Group and New Publishing Partners. 
Hughes, Julian C. 2011. Thinking Through Dementia. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Hughes, Julian C., Stephen J. Louw, and Steven R. Sabat, eds. 2006. 
Dementia: Mind, Meaning, and the Person. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Hutto, Daniel D. 2007a. Folk Psychological Narratives: the Sociocultural 
Basis of Understanding Reasons. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press. 
---. 2007b. The Narrative Practice Hypothesis: Origins and Applications of 
Folk Psychology. In Narrative and Understanding Persons, edited 
by Daniel D. Hutto, 43-68. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hydn, Lars-Christer. 2010. Identity, Self, Narrative. In Beyond Narrative 
Coherence, edited by Matti Hyvrinen, Lars-Christer Hydn, Marja 
Saarenheimo, and Maria Tamboukou, 33-48. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
---. 2011. Narrative Collaboration and Scaffolding in Dementia. Journal of 
Aging Studies 25: 339-347. 
Hydn, Lars-Christer, and Linda rulv. 2009. Narrative and Identity in 
Alzheimers Disease: A Case Study. Journal of Aging Studies 23 
(4): 205-214. 
Hyvrinen, Matti, Lars-Christer Hydn, Marja Saarenheimo, and Maria 
Tamboukou, eds. 2010. Beyond Narrative Coherence. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.  
Iacoboni, Marco. 2008. Mirroring People: The New Science of How We 
Connect with Others. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Ignatieff, Michael. 1993. Scar Tissue. London: Vintage. 
---. 1994. All in the Mind. BBC Radio 4. 
Ishiguro, Kazuo. 1995. The Unconsoled. London: Faber and Faber. 
Iversen, Stefan. 2013. Unnatural Minds. In A Poetics of Unnatural 
Narrative, edited by Jan Aber, Henrik Skov Nielsen, and Brian 
Richardson. Columbus: Ohio State University Press. 
Jens, Tilman. 2009. Demenz: Abschied von meinem Vater. Gtersloh: 
Gtersloher Verlagshaus. 
Johnson, B.S. 2013. House Mother Normal. Basingstoke: Picador. Original 
edition, 1971. 
Johnstone, Megan-Jane. 2011. Metaphors, Stigma and the 
Alzheimerization of the Euthanasia Debate. Dementia 0(0): 1-17. 
---. 2013. Alzheimers Disease, Media Representation, and the Politics of 
Euthanasia: Constructing Risk and Selling Death in an Ageing 
Society. London: Routledge. 
Jones, Rebecca. 2004. Thats very rude, I shouldnt be telling you that: 
Older Women Talking About Sex. In Considering Counter-
Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense, edited by Michael 
Bamberg and Molly Andrews, 169-189. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Jones, Therese. 2014. Oh, the Humanit(ies) Dissent, Democracy, and 
Danger. In Medicine, Health and the Arts: Approaches to the 
Medical Humanities, edited by Victoria Bates, Alan Bleakley, and 
Sam Goodman, 27-38. New York: Routledge. 
Kll, Lisa Folkmarson. 2015. Intercorporeal Relations and Ethical 
Perception: Portrayals of Alzheimers Disease in Away from Her and 
En sng fr Martin. In Popularizing Dementia: Public Expressions 
and Representations of Forgetfulness, edited by Aagje Swinnen and 
Mark Schweda. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 
Kaufman, Sharon R. 2006. Dementia-Near-Death and Life Itself.  In 
Thinking About Dementia: Culture, Loss, and the Anthropology of 
Senility, edited by Annette Leibing and Lawrence Cohen, 23-42. 
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
Keen, Suzanne. 2007. Empathy and the Novel. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Killick, John. 1997. You Are Words: Dementia Poems. London: Hawker 
Publications.  
---. 2008. Dementia Diary: Poems and Prose. London: Hawker 
Publications.  
---, ed. 2010. The Elephant in the Room: Poems by People with Memory 
Loss in Cambridgeshire. Cambridge: Cambridgeshire County 
Council.  
Killick, John, and Kate Allan. 2001. Communication and the Care of People 
with Dementia. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Killick, John, and Carl Cordonnier. 2000. Openings: Dementia Poems and 
Photographs. London: Hawker Publications. 
Kittay, Eva Feder. 1999. Loves Labor: Essays on Women, Equality and 
Dependency. New York: Routledge. 
Kitwood, Tom. 1990. The Dialectics of Dementia: With Particular 
Reference to Alzheimers Disease. Ageing and Society 10: 177-96. 
---. 1997. Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First. Philadelphia: 
Open University Press. 
Kitwood, Tom, and Kathleen Bredin. 1992. Towards a Theory of Dementia 
Care: Personhood and Well-being. Ageing and Society 12: 269-87. 
Klein, Kitty. 2003. Narrative Construction, Cognitive Processing, and 
Health. In Narrative Theory and the Cognitive Sciences, edited by 
David Herman, 56-84. Stanford: CSLI Publications. 
Kleinman, Arthur. 1988. The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing, and the 
Human Condition: Basic Books. 
Klbl, Carlos. 2004. Blame it on Psychology? In Considering Counter-
Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense, edited by Michael 
Bamberg and Molly Andrews, 27-32. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Kontos, Pia C. 2003. The Painterly Hand: Embodied Consciousness and 
Alzheimer's Disease. Journal of Aging Studies 17: 151-170. 
---. 2004. Ethnographic Reflections on Selfhood, Embodiment and 
Alzheimers Disease. Ageing and Society 24 (6): 829-849. 
---. 2005. Embodied Selfhood in Alzheimers Disease. Dementia 4 (4): 
553-570. 
Korthals Altes, Liesbeth. 2005. Ethical Turn. In Routledge Encyclopedia 
of Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman, Manfred Jahn, and 
Marie-Laure Ryan, 142-146. New York: Routledge. 
---. 2006. Some Dilemmas of an Ethics of Literature. In Theology and 
Literature: Rethinking Reader Responsibility, edited by Gaye 
Williams Ortiz and Clara A.B. Joseph, 15-31. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
---. 2013. Narratology, Ethical Turns, Circularities, and a Meta-Ethical 
Way Out. In Narrative Ethics, edited by Jakob Lothe, Jeremy 
Hawthorn, and Leonidas Donskis, 25-40. Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
---. 2014. Ethos and Narrative Interpretation: The Negotiation of Values in 
Fiction. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
Krause, Allison M., Lynda D. Grant, and Bonita C. Long. 1999. Sources of 
Stress Reported by Daughters of Nursing Home Residents. Journal 
of Aging Studies 13 (3): 349-364. 
Krger-Frhoff, Irmela Marei. 2015. Narrating the Limits of Narration: 
Alzheimer's Disease in Contemporary Literary Texts. In 
Popularizing Dementia: Public Expressions and Representations of 
Forgetfulness, edited by Aagje Swinnen and Mark Schweda, 89-108. 
Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 
LaCapra, Dominick 2001. Writing History, Writing Trauma. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 2003. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
LaPlante, Alice. 2011. Turn of Mind. London: Harvill Secker. 
Leavitt, Sarah. 2010. Tangles: A Story About Alzheimers, My Mother and 
Me. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Lee, Jeanne L. 2003. Just Love Me: My Life Turned Upside-Down by 
Alzheimers. West Lafayette: Purdue University Press. 
Leibing, Annette, and Lawrence Cohen. 2006. Thinking About Dementia: 
Culture, Loss, and the Anthropology of Senility. New Brunswick: 
Rutgers University Press. 
Lejeune, Philippe. 1988. On Autobiography. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1990. Totalit et Infini. Dordrecht: Kluwer Aacdemic 
Publishers. Original edition, 1961. 
---. 1979. Le Temps et LAutre. Paris: Fata Morgana. 
Levine, Judith. 2004. Do You Remember Me? A Father, a Daughter, and a 
Search for the Self. New York: Free Press. 
Liesk, J., T. Hartogh, and E. Kalbe. 2015. Cognitive Stimulation and Music 
Intervention for People with Dementia in Nursing Homes. A Pilot 
Study, Problems and Perspectives. Zeitschrift fr Gerontologie und 
Geriatrie 48 (3): 275-281. 
Lloyd, Phyllida. 2011. The Iron Lady. 20th Century Fox. 
Lyman, Karen A. 1989. Bringing the Social Back In: A Critique of the 
Biomedicalization of Dementia. The Gerontologist 29 (5): 597-605. 
---. 1998. Living with Alzheimers Disease: The Creation of Meaning 
Among Persons with Dementia. The Journal of Clinical Ethics 9 
(1): 49-57. 
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1981. After Virtue. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press. 
MacRae, Hazel. 2010. Managing Identity While Living With Alzheimers 
Disease. Qualitative Health Research 20 (3): 293-305. 
Magnusson, Sally. 2014. Where Memories Go: Why Dementia Changes 
Everything. London: Two Roads. 
Margolin, Uri. 1999. Of What Is Past, Is Passing, or to Come: Temporality, 
Aspectuality, Modality, and the Nature of Literary Narrative. In 
Narratologies: New Perspectives on Narrative Analysis, edited by 
David Herman, 142-166. Columbus: Ohio State University Press. 
Marx, M. S., J. Cohen-Mansfield, N. G. Regier, M. Dakheel-Ali, A. Srihari, 
and K. Thein. 2010. The Impact of Different Dog-Related Stimuli 
on Engagement of Persons with Dementia. American Journal of 
Alzheimers Disease and Other Dementias 25 (1): 37-45. 
Mason, Mary. 1980. The Other Voice: Autobiographies of Women 
Writers. In Autobiography: Essay Theoretical and Critical, edited 
by James Olney, 207-235. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Mattingly, Cheryl. 1998. Healing Dramas and Clinical Plots: The Narrative 
Structure of Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Maxwell, Glyn, and Elena Langer. 2010. The Lions Face. London: Oberon 
Books. 
McCloud, Scott. 1994. Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New 
York: Harper Perennial. 
McGowin, Diane Friel. 1994. Living in the Labyrinth: A Personal Journey 
Through the Maze of Alzheimers. New York: Delta. Original 
edition, 1993. 
McLean, Athena Helen. 2006. Coherence without Facticity in Dementia: 
The Case of Mrs. Fine. In Thinking About Dementia: Culture, Loss, 
and the Anthropology of Senility, edited by Annette Leibing and 
Lawrence Cohen, 157-179. New Brunswick: Rutgers University 
Press. 
McNamara, Norman. No year. More Than Words. No publisher. 
Medved, Maria I., and Jens Brockmeier. 2010. Weird Stories: Brain, Mind 
and Self. In Beyond Narrative Coherence, edited by Matti 
Hyvrinen, Lars-Christer Hydn, Marja Saarenheimo and Maria 
Tamboukou, 17-32. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Miller, Nancy K. 1994. Representing Others: Gender and the Subjects of 
Autobiography. Differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 
6 (1): 1-27. 
---. 1996. Bequest and Betrayal: Memoirs of a Parents Death. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Miller, Sue. 2003. The Story of My Father. London: Bloomsbury. 
Millett, Stephan. 2011. Self and Embodiment: A Bio-Phenomenological 
Approach to Dementia. Dementia 10 (4): 509-522. 
Mitchell, David, and Sharon Snyder. 2001. Narrative Prosthesis: Disability 
and the Dependencies of Discourse. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press. 
Montgomery Hunter, Kathlyn 1993. Doctors Stories: The Narrative 
Structure of Medical Knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Morgan, Abi. 2011. 27. London: Oberon Books. 
Morris, David B. 1998. Illness and Culture in the Postmodern Age. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
---. 2002. Narrative, Ethics, and Pain: Thinking with Stories. In Stories 
Matter: The Role of Narrative in Medical Ethics, edited by Rita 
Charon and Martha Montello, 196-218. New York: Routledge. 
Murphy, Tom. 2009. Bailegangaire. In The Methuen Drama Anthology of 
Irish Plays, edited by Patrick Lonergan, 111-185. London: Methuen. 
Murray, Stuart. 2008. Representing Autism: Culture, Narrative, 
Fascination. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. What Is It Like to Be a Bat? The Philosophical 
Review 83 (4): 435-50. 
Nielsen, Henrik Skov. 2004. The Impersonal Voice in First-Person 
Narrative Fiction. Narrative 12 (2): 133-50. 
Noyes, Brigg B., Robert D. Hill, Bret L. Hicken, Marilyn Luptak, Randall 
Rupper, Nancy K. Dailey, and Byron D. Bair. 2010. Review: The 
Role of Grief in Dementia Caregiving. American Journal of 
Alzheimers Disease and Other Dementia 25 (1): 9-17. 
Nussbaum, Martha Craven. 1990. Loves Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy 
and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
---. 1995. Poetic Justice: The Literary Imagination and Public Life. Boston: 
Beacon Press. 
---. 1997. Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal 
Education. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 
Ochs, Elinor, and Lisa Capps. 2001. Living Narrative: Creating Lives in 
Everyday Storytelling. Cambridge, Massachussetts: Harvard 
University Press. 
Oksenberg Rorty, Amlie 2000. Characters, Persons, Selves, Individuals.  
In Theory of the Novel: A Historical Approach, edited by Michael 
McKeon, 537-553. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Olney, James. 1980. Autobiography and the Cultural Moment: A Thematic, 
Historical, and Bibliographical Introduction. In Autobiography: 
Essays Theoretical and Critical, edited by James Olney, 3-27. 
Princeton: Princeton Univerisity Press. 
Orr, David, and Yugin Teo. 2015. Carers Responses to Shifting Identity in 
Dementia in Iris and Away From Her: Cultivating Stability or 
Embracing Change? Medical Humanities 41 (2): 81-85. 
rulv, Linda, and Lars-Christer Hydn. 2006. Confabulation: Sense-
Making, Self-Making and World-Making in Dementia. Discourse 
Studies 8 (5): 647-673. 
Palmer, Alan. 2004. Fictional Minds. Lincoln: Univeristy of Nebraska 
Press. 
Parker, David. 2004. Narratives of Autonomy and Narratives of 
Relationality in Auto/Biography. a/b: Auto/Biography Studies 1 (2): 
137-155. 
Peterson, Linda. 1993. Institutionalizing Womens Autobiography: 
Nineteenth-Century Editors and the Shaping of an Autobiographical 
Tradition. In The Culture of Autobiography: Constructions of Self-
Representation, edited by Robert Folkenflik, 80-103. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Petrescu, Ioana, Kit MacFarlane, and Robert Ranzijn. 2014. Psychological 
Effects of Poetry Workshops with People with Early Stage 
Dementia: An Exploratory Study. Dementia 13 (2): 207-215. 
Phelan, James. 2003. Dual Focalization, Retrospective Fictional 
Autobiography, and the Ethics of Lolita. In Narrative and 
Consciousness: Literature, Psychology and the Brain edited by Gary 
D. Fireman, Ted E. McVay, and Owen J. Flanagan, 129-145. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Phinney, Alison. 2002. Fluctuating Awareness and the Breakdown of the 
Illness Narrative in Dementia. Dementia 1 (3): 329-344. 
Pier, John. 2013. Metalepsis. In The Living Handbook of Narratology, 
edited by Peter Hhn, John Pier, Wolf Schmid and Jrg Schnert. 
Hamburg: Hamburg University Press. http://www.lhn.uni-
hamburg.de/article/unnatural-narrative. [last accessed: 22/03/2016]   
Pinker, Steven. 2004. The Seed Salon: Steven Pinker and Rebecca 
Goldsmith. In Seed: 44-49, 97-99. 
Pitt, Brice. 1993. Psychiatry and the Media: Black Marks for Black 
Daisies Psychiatric Bulletin 17: 672-673. 
Polley, Sarah. 2006. Away from Her. Lionsgate Films. 
Post, Stephen G. 2000. The Moral Challenge of Alzheimer Disease: Ethical 
Issues from Diagnosis to Dying. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 
Radden, Jennifer, and Joan M. Fordyce. 2006. Into the Darkness: Losing 
Identity with Dementia. In Dementia: Mind, Meaning, and the 
Person, edited by Julian C. Hughes, Stephen Louw, and Steven R. 
Sabat. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Raglio, Alfredo, Lapo Attardo, Giulia Gontero, Silvia Rollino, Elisabetta 
Groppo, and Enrico Granieri. 2015. Effects of Music and Music 
Therapy on Mood in Neurological Patients. World Journal of 
Psychiatry 5 (1): 68-78. 
Ratcliffe, Matthew. 2007. Rethinking Commonsense Psychology: A Critique 
of Folk Psychology, Theory of Mind, and Simulation. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
---. 2008. Feelings of Being: Phenomenology, Psychiatry, and the Sense of 
Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Rees, Geoffrey. 2010. The Ethical Imperative of Medical Humanities. 
Journal of Medical Humanities 31: 267-277. 
Richardson, Brian. 2007. Drama and Narrative. In The Cambridge 
Companion to Narrative, edited by David Herman, 142-155. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Richler, Mordechai. 1997. Barneys Version. Toronto: Knopf Canada. 
Ricur, Paul. 1991a. Life in Quest of Narrative. In On Paul Ricur: 
Narrative and Interpretation, edited by David Wood, 20-33. New 
York: Routledge. 
---. 1991b. Narrative Identity. In On Paul Ricur: Narrative and 
Interpretation, edited by David Wood, 188-199. New York: 
Routledge. 
Ritivoi, Andreea Deciu. 2009. Explaining People: Narrative and the Study 
of Identity. StoryWorlds: A Journal of Narrative Studies 1: 25-41. 
Rose, Larry. 1996. Show Me the Way to Go Home. Forest Knolls: Elder 
Books. 
---. 2003. Larrys Way: Another Look at Alzheimers from the Inside. New 
York: iUniverse. 
Rosenblatt, Louise. 1995. Literature as Exploration. New York: The 
Modern Language Association. Original edition, 1965. 
Rossato-Bennett, Michael. 2014. Alive Inside. Projector Media. 
Roth, Philip. 1991. Patrimony: A True Story. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 
Roy, Wendy. 2009. The Word is Colander: Language Loss and Narrative 
Voice in Fictional Canadian Alzheimers Narratives. Canadian 
Literature 203: 41-61. 
Russell, Richard. 2001. In Sickness and in Health: A Qualitative Study of 
Elderly Men Who Care for Wives with Dementia. Journal of Aging 
Studies 15 (4): 351-367. 
Ryan, Ellen Bouchard, Karen A. Bannister, and Ann P. Anas. 2009. The 
Dementia Narrative: Writing to Reclaim Social Identity. Journal of 
Aging Studies 23 (3): 145-157. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2005. Mode. In The Routledge Encyclopedia of 
Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman, Manfred Jahn, and 
Marie-Laure Ryan, 315-316. New York: Routledge. 
Sabat, Steven R., and Rom Harr. 1992. The Construction and 
Deconstruction of Self in Alzheimers Disease. Ageing and Society 
12 (4): 443-461. 
---. 1994. The Alzheimers Disease Sufferer as a Semiotic Subject. 
Philosophy, Psychology, Psychiatry 1 (3): 145-160. 
Sacks, Oliver. 2015. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. London: 
Picador Classic. Original edition, 1985. 
Samson, Severine, Sylvain Clement, Pauline Narme, Loris Schiaratura, and 
Nathalie Ehrle. 2015. Efficacy of Musical Interventions in 
Dementia: Methodological Requirements of Nonpharmacological 
Trials. Neurosciences and Music V: Cognitive Stimulation and 
Rehabilitation 1337: 249-255. 
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1976. Ltre et le Nant. Paris: Tel Gallimard. Original 
edition, 1943. 
Sartwell, Crispin. 2000. End of Story: Toward an Annihilation of Language 
and History. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Schechtman, Marya. 1996. The Constitution of Selves. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 
---. 2007. Stories, Lives, and Basic Survival: A Refinement and Defense of 
the Narrative View. In Narrative and Understanding Persons, 
edited by Daniel D. Hutto, 155-178. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Schreier, Jake. 2012. Robot and Frank. Momentum Pictures. 
Selberg, Scott. 2015. Dementia on the Canvas: Art and the Biopolitics of 
Creativity. In Popularizing Dementia: Public Expressions and 
Representations of Forgetfulness, edited by Aagje Swinnen and 
Mark Schweda. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 
Shenk, David. 2001. The Forgetting: Understanding Alzheimers: A 
Biography of a Disease. London: Harper Collins. 
Sieveking, David. 2012. Vergiss Mein Nicht. Farbfilm home entertainment. 
Skelton, John. 2003. Death and Dying in Literature. Advances in 
Psychiatric Treatment 9: 211-220. 
Small, Helen. 2007. The Long Life. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Small, J. A., K. Geldart, G. Gutman, and M. A. C. Scott. 1998. The 
Discourse of Self in Dementia. Ageing and Society 18: 291-316. 
Smith, Sidonie, and Julia Watson. 2009. New Genres, New Subjects: 
Women, Gender and Autobiography after 2000. Revista Canaria de 
Estudios Ingleses 58: 13-40. 
---. 2010. Reading Autobiography: A Guide for Interpreting Life Narratives. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Snowdon, David A. 1997. Aging and Alzheimers Disease: Lessons from 
the Nun Study. The Gerontologist 37 (2): 150-156. 
Snyder, Lisa. 1999. Speaking Our Minds: Personal Reflections from 
Individuals with Alzheimers. New York: W. H. Freeman. 
Sontag, Susan. 1979. Illness as Metaphor. New York: Vintage. 
---. 1989. AIDS and Its Metaphors. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Spiegel, Maura. 2012. Rita Felski Uses of Literature: Book Review. 
Literature and Medicine 30 (1): 203-207. 
Stirling, Jeanette. 2010. Representing Epilepsy: Myth and Matter. 
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
Stokes, Graham. 2010. And Still the Music Plays: Stories of People with 
Dementia. London: Hawker Publications. Original edition, 2008. 
Stokes, Graham, and Fiona Goudie. 2002. The Essential Dementia Care 
Handbook: A Good Practice Guide. Bicester: Speechmark. 
Strawson, Galen. 2004. Against Narrativity. Ratio 17: 428-452. 
Suter, Martin. 1997. Small World. Zrich: Diogenes Verlag. 
Swinnen, Aagje. 2012. Dementia in Documentary Film: Mum by Adelheid 
Roosen. The Gerontologist 53 (1): 113-122. 
---. 2016. Healing Words: A Study of Poetry Interventions in Dementia 
Care. Dementia 15 (6): 1377-1404. 
Swinnen, Aagje, and Mark Schweda, eds. 2015. Popularizing Dementia: 
Public Expressions and Representations of Forgetfulness. Bielefeld: 
Transcript. 
Taylor, Richard. 2007. Alzheimers from the Inside Out. Baltimore: Health 
Professions Press. 
Thane, Pat. 2005. A History of Old Age. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Thomas, Lewis. 1983. Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahlers Ninth 
Symphony. New York: Viking. 
Thorndike, John. 2009. The Last of His Mind: A Year in the Shadow of 
Alzheimer's. Athens, Ohio: Swallow Press. 
Toker, Leona. 1993. Eloquent Reticence: Withholding Information in 
Fictional Narrative. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. 
Truscott, Marilyn. 2003. Life in the Slow Lane. Alzheimer's Care 
Quarterly 4 (1): 11-17. 
---. 2004a. Adapting Leisure and Creative Activities for People with Early 
Stage Dementias. Alzheimers Care Quarterly 5 (2): 92-102. 
---. 2004b. Looks Can Be Deceiving  Dementia, the Invisible Disease  
Alzheimers Care Quarterly 5 (4): 274-277. 
Unadkat, Shreena, Paul M. Camic, and Trish Vella-Burrows. 2016. 
Understanding the Experience of Group Singing for Couples Where 
One Partner Has a Diagnosis of Dementia. Gerontologist 0 (0): 1-
Usita, Paula M., Ira E. Hyman & Keith C. Herman 1998. Narrative 
Intentions: Listening to Life Stories in Alzheimers Disease. 
Journal of Aging Studies 12 (2): 185-197. 
Vassilas, Christopher A. 2003. Dementia and Literature. Advances in 
Psychiatric Treatment 9: 439-445. 
Viney, William, Felicity Callard, and Angela Woods. 2015. Critical 
Medical Humanities: Embracing Entanglement, Taking Risks. 
Medical Humanities 41: 2-7. 
Waugh, Patricia. 2013. The Naturalistic Turn, the Syndrome, and the Rise 
of the Neo-Phenomenological Novel. In Diseases and Disorder in 
Contemporary Fiction: The Syndrome Syndrome, edited by T.J. 
Lustig and James Peacock, 17-34. New York: Routledge. 
Wear, D., and J. M. Aultman. 2005. The Limits of Narrative: Medical 
Student Resistance to Confronting Inequality and Oppression in 
Literature and Beyond. Medical Education 39: 1056-1065. 
Wearing, Sadie. 2013. Dementia and the Biopolitics of the Biopic: From 
Iris to The Iron Lady. Dementia 12 (3): 315-325. 
Wennberg, Alexandra, Cheryl Dye, Blaiz Streetman-Loy, and Hiep Pham. 
2015. Alzheimers Patient Familial Caregivers: A Review of 
Burden and Interventions. Health & Social Work. 40 (4): 162-169. 
Wetzstein, Verena. 2005. Diagnose Alzheimer: Grundlagen einer Ethik der 
Demenz. Frankfurt a.M.: Campus Verlag. 
White, Hayden. 1984. The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of 
Reality. In On Narrative, edited by W. J. T. Mitchell. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. Original edition, 1981. 
Whitehead, Anne. 2011. Writing with Care: Kazuo Ishiguros Never Let 
Me Go. Contemporary Literature 52 (1): 54-83. 
---. 2014. The Medical Humanities: A Literary Perspective. In Medicine, 
Health and the Arts: Approaches to the Medical Humanities, edited 
by Victoria Bates, Alan Bleakley, and Sam Goodman, 107-127. 
London: Routledge. 
Whitehead, Anne, and Angela Woods, with Sarah Atkinson, Jane 
Macnaughton and Jennifer Richards, eds. 2016. The Edinburgh 
Companion to the Critical Medical Humanities. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 
Whitehouse, Peter J. 2008. The Myth of Alzheimers: What You Arent 
Being Told About Todays Most Dreaded Diagnosis. New York: 
Macmillan. 
Whitehouse, Peter J., Konrad Maurer, and Jesse F. Ballenger, eds. 2000. 
Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical, and Cultural 
Perspectives. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Wiltshire, John. 2000. Biography, Pathography, and the Recovery of 
Meaning. The Cambridge Quarterly 29 (4): 409-422. 
Wood, Michael. 2005. Literature and the Taste of Knowledge. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Woods, Angela. 2011. The Limits of Narrative: Provocations for the 
Medical Humanities. Medical Humanities 37: 73-78. 
World Health Organization. 2012. Dementia: A Public Health Priority. 
World Health Organization. 
Zahavi, Dan. 2007. Self and Other: The Limits of Narrative 
Understanding. In Narrative and Understanding Persons, edited by 
Daniel D. Hutto, 179-201. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Zeilig, Hannah. 2013. Dementia As a Cultural Metaphor. The 
Gerontologist 54 (2): 258-267. 
Zimmermann, Martina. 2010. Deliver Us from Evil: Carer Burden in 
Alzheimers Disease. Medical Humanities 36 (2): 101-107. 
