BREWIN - Thesis full_FINAL (for digital repository)
NAVIGATING NATIONAL FORM AND SOCIALIST CONTENT IN 
THE GREAT LEADERS HOMELAND: 
GEORGIAN PAINTING AND NATIONAL POLITICS  
UNDER STALIN, 1921-39 
Jennifer Ellen Brewin 
Pembroke College 
Department of History of Art 
University of Cambridge 
This dissertation is submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
30 April 2018 
Navigating National form and socialist content in the Great Leaders homeland: 
Georgian painting and national politics under Stalin, 1921-39 
Jennifer Ellen Brewin, Pembroke College 
PhD Thesis, 2018 
Abstract 
This thesis examines the interaction of Georgian painting and national politics in the 
first two decades of Soviet power in Georgia, 1921-1939, focussing in particular on the 
period following the consolidation of Stalins power at the helm of the Communist Party in 
1926-7. In the Stalin era, Georgians enjoyed special status among Soviet nations thanks to 
Georgias prestige as the place of Stalins birth. However, Georgians advanced sense of their 
national sovereignty and initial hostility towards Bolshevik control following Georgias 
Sovietisation in 1921 also resulted in Georgias uniquely fraught relationship with Soviet 
power in Moscow in the decades that followed. In light of these circumstances, this thesis 
explores how and why the experience and activities of Georgian painters between 1926 and 
1939 differed from those of other Soviet artists. One of its central arguments is that the 
experiences of Georgian artists and critics in this period not only differed significantly from 
those of artists and critics of other republics, but that the uniqueness of their experience was 
precipitated by a complex network of factors resulting from the interaction of various 
political imperatives and practical circumstances, including those relating to Soviet national 
politics. 
Chapter one of this thesis introduces the key institutions and individuals involved in 
producing, evaluating and setting the direction of Georgian painting in the 1920s and early 
1930s. Chapters two and three show that artists and critics in Georgia as well as 
commentators in Moscow in the 1920s and 30s were actively engaged in efforts to interpret 
the Partys demand for national form in Soviet culture and to suggest what that form might 
entail as regards Georgian painting. However, contradictions inherent in Soviet nationalities 
policy, which both demanded the active cultivation of cultural difference between Soviet 
nationalities and eagerly anticipated a time when national distinctions in all spheres would 
naturally disappear, made it impossible for an appropriate interpretation of national form to 
be identified. Chapter three, moreover, demonstrates how frequent shifts in Soviet cultural 
and nationalities policies presented Moscow institutions with a range of practical challenges 
which ultimately prevented them from reflecting in their exhibitions and publications the 
contemporary artistic activity taking place in the republics of the Caucasus and Central Asia. 
A key finding of chapters four and five concerns the uniquely significant role that 
Lavrenty Beria, Stalins ruthless deputy and the head of the Georgian and Transcaucasian 
Party organisations, played in differentiating Georgian painters experiences from those of 
Soviet artists of other nationalities. Beginning in 1934, Beria employed Georgian painters to 
produce an exhibition of monumental paintings, opening at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow 
in 1937, depicting episodes from his own falsified history of Stalins role in the revolutionary 
movement in Transcaucasia. As this thesis shows, the production of the exhibition introduced 
an unprecedented degree of direct Party supervision over Georgian painting as Beria 
personally critiqued works by Georgian painters produced on prescribed narrative subjects in 
a centralised collective studio. As well as representing a major contribution to Stalins 
personality cult, the exhibition, which conferred on Georgian painters special responsibility 
for representing Stalin and his activities, was also a public statement of the special status that 
the Georgians were now to enjoy, second only to that of the Russians. However, this special 
status involved both special privileges and special responsibilities. Georgians would enjoy 
special access to opportunities in Moscow and a special degree of autonomy in local 
governance, but in return they were required to lead the way in declaring allegiance to the 
Stalin regime. 
Chapter six returns to the debate about national form in Georgian painting by 
examining how the pre-Revolutionary self-taught Georgian painter, Niko Pirosmani, was 
discussed by cultural commentators in Georgia and Moscow in the 1920s and 30s as a source 
informing a Soviet or Soviet Georgian canon of painting. It shows that, in addition to 
presenting views on the suitability of Pirosmanis painting either in terms of its formal or 
class content, commentators perpetuated and developed a cult of Pirosmani steeped in 
stereotypes of a Georgian national character. Further, the establishment of this cult during 
the late 1920s and early 1930s seems to have been a primary reason for the painters 
subsequent canonisation in the second half of the 1930s as a Great Tradition of Soviet 
Georgian culture. It helped to articulate a version of Georgian national identity that was at 
once familiar and gratifying for Georgians and useful for the Soviet regime. The combined 
impression of cultural sovereignty embodied in this and other Great Traditions of Soviet 
Georgian culture and the special status articulated through the 1937 exhibition allowed 
Georgian nationalism to be aligned, for a time, with support for Stalin and the Soviet regime. 
Declaration  
This dissertation is the result of my own work and includes nothing which is the outcome of 
work done in collaboration except where specifically indicated in the text. It is not 
substantially the same as any that I have submitted or is being concurrently submitted for a 
degree or diploma or other qualification at the University of Cambridge or any other 
University or similar institution except as declared in the Preface and specified in the text. I 
further state that no substantial part of my dissertation has already been submitted, or, is 
being concurrently submitted for any such degree, diploma, or other qualification at the 
University of Cambridge or any other University of similar institution except as declared in 
the Preface and specified in the text. The dissertation does not exceed the prescribed word 
limit for the relevant Degree Committee.  
A version of chapter six of this thesis was published as The Appropriation and Adaption of 
Niko Pirosmani in Soviet Art History in the 1920s and 1930s in Pirosmani and Georgian 
Culture: Proceedings, International Interdisciplinary Conference, Tbilisi, Georgia, 5th-7th 
November 2013 (Tbilisi, s. n., 2014), pp. 42-50.  
Certain ideas presented in thesis were published in the	book	chapter	Ucha	Japaridze,	Lado	
Gudiashvili,	 and	 the	 Spiritual	 in	 Georgian	 Painting	 in	 Louise	 Hardiman	 and	 Nicola	
Kozicharow	 (eds),	Modernism	and	the	Spiritual	 in	Russian	Art	(Cambridge:	Open	Book	
Publishers,	2017),	pp.	229-63. 
The dissertation is 79,938 words in length, including footnotes, but excluding captions, 
appendices, and bibliography.  
Jennifer Ellen Brewin 
Pembroke College, Cambridge 
30 April 2018 
CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements  1 
Conventions and Abbreviations  3 
Introduction 13 
 Literature Review  
            Painting in the non-Russian Republics 16 
            National Politics in Stalins Soviet Union 26 
 Methodology  
            National Politics and National Culture 31 
            Imagining the Georgian nation 37 
 Chapter outlines 46 
Chapter 1. The Battle for Soviet Painting in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s 49 
 Soviet Painting, Socialist Realism and the Georgian Case  52 
 The Old and New Guards: In search of Georgian Proletarian Painting 61 
 Institutional Structures Before and After the April 1932 Decree 66 
 Proletkult in Georgia  69 
 Keeping up with Moscow: Georgian Arts Periodicals in the 1920s and 30s  72 
           Khelovneba (Art)  73 
           Other Periodicals 77 
Chapter 2. Representing National Art: Moscow Institutions and the Art of the Soviet East in 
the 1920s and 30s 
 (Not) Representing National Art at the Soviet Centre: The All-Soviet Scholarly 
Association of Oriental Studies (VNAV) and the Museum of Oriental Cultures 
(GMVK) 
 The Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia (AKhRR) and the Department 
for the Study of the Art of the Nationalities of the USSR at the State Academy of 
Artistic Sciences (GAKhN) 
 The Class War on National Form, 1931-32: The Case of Lazar Rempel 107 
Chapter 3. Proletarian in Form, Proletarian in Content?: Georgian Painting and the National 
Question during the Cultural Revolution 
 Georgia and the Cultural Revolution  114 
 Proletarian in Form, Proletarian in Content?: Negotiating the Theory and Practice 
of Soviet Nationalities Policy in Georgia during the Cultural Revolution 
Chapter 4. Georgian Artists, Beria and the Exhibition of Painting, Sculpture and Graphics of 
the Georgian SSR in Moscow in 1937 
 Beria and The Arts in Georgia 147 
 Producing the 1937 exhibition 149 
 The Georgian exhibition as a Stalinist Gesamtkunstwerk 154 
Chapter 5. The Great Terror and 1937 Exhibition as a Statement of Georgian Submission 
under the Friendship of the Peoples 
 Despite a Series of Substantial Insufficiencies: Reception of the Exhibition and its 
Significance 
 Controlling Georgia: the 1937 Exhibition and the Demise of Duduchava 171 
 The responsibility for depicting Stalin belongs completely to Georgian artists 180 
Chapter 6. Reinventing Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s  185 
 Representing Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s 188 
 The Cult of Pirosmani as the Personification of the Georgian Nation 199 
Conclusion 203 
Bibliography 209 
List of Illustrations 229 
Illustrations 231 
Acknowledgements 
 My principal thanks are due to my supervisor, Rosalind Polly Blakesley, who has 
provided unstinting support throughout the long process of completing this thesis. I could not 
have reached this point without her generosity, kindness and encouragement at every stage. 
Her careful advice and honest, detailed feedback have been instrumental in my development 
as a researcher and as a writer.  
 In Cambridge many individuals have been extremely helpful. In particular I would 
like to thank the examiners of my first year report, Hubertus Jahn and Luke Skrewbowski, 
whose feedback was invaluable in encouraging me to define the scope and objectives of my 
project. Their comments played a far greater role in guiding the work that followed than they 
are likely aware. I would also like to thank the staff of the University Library and especially 
Mel Bach, the Slavonic librarian, who is always generous with her time and inspiring in her 
enthusiasm for Russian and Soviet culture. My thanks are also due to Deborah Howard, 
France Davies, Nichola Tooke, Stan Finney and many others in the History of Art 
Department; to my graduate tutor at Pembroke College, Loraine Gelsthorpe, for her pastoral 
care and support during my early days in Cambridge; to Becky Coombs, registrar at 
Pembroke College, and Pat Aske, librarian at Pembroke College, who made Pembroke a 
warm and welcoming place to live and work. My fellow PhD students and the entire 
community and historians of Russian and Soviet culture in Cambridge and at the Courtauld 
Institute of Art, including all of the Cambridge Courtauld Russian Art Centre (CCRAC) 
kollektiv, have provided indispensible support and a vibrant scholarly environment. I am 
especially indebted to John Milner, Maria Mileeva, Louise Hardiman, Nicola Kozicharow, 
Galina Mardilovich, Natalia Budanova and Jordan Tobin for their advice, insights and 
friendship; to Maria Mileeva, Louise Hardiman, Nicola Kozicharow for their generously 
sharing copies of their own PhD theses with me; to Maria Mileeva for reading early drafts of 
chapters and articles, for sharing her insight and encouragement over coffee and cake and 
including me in the work in progress seminar series at the Courtauld Institute of art, which 
proved to be an invaluable place for testing ideas; and to Louise Hardiman for her constant 
support and for kindly taking the time to read and comment on later drafts of this thesis. I am 
extremely grateful to Mike OMahoney who sparked my interest in Soviet art and culture 
during my undergraduate studies at Bristol University and encouraged me to continue my 
studies further, and to John Milner and Maria Mileeva for their engaging and inspiring 
teaching during my MA at the Courtauld Institute of Art. 
Many institutions and individuals have provided support and assistance over the 
course of this project. In Moscow my thanks are due to the staff of the Russian State Archive 
of Literature and Arts, the State Archive of the Russian Federation, the State Historical 
Library, the Library and Manuscripts Department of the State Tretyakov Gallery and the 
State Museum of Oriental Art for allowing me to access the documents in their care. In 
particular I would like to thank Svetlana Khromchenko who showed me the Georgian 
paintings and works on paper in her care at the State Museum of Oriental Art and directed me 
to invaluable materials published from the Museums archive. In Georgia I would like to 
thank the staff of the Georgian National Museum; the Georgian National Picture Gallery; the 
Georgian National Museum of Fine Arts and the National Parliamentary Library of Georgia. 
Special thanks are due to Natalia Gladchenko at the Georgian National Archives who was 
incredibly generous in helping me access the documents I needed and navigate the archives 
idiosyncrasies, and to the staff of the Art and Literature section of the Archives Department 
of Modern History who provided coffee and biscuits to break up long days in the reading 
room. I would also like to thank the many colleagues in Georgia who helped me in so many 
ways, including researchers at the George Chubinashvili National Research Centre for 
Georgian Art History and Heritage Preservation, the Tbilisi State Academy of Arts and 
Tbilisi State University. Special thanks are due to the organisers of the 2012 conference 
Modernism in the Caucasus: Tbilisi, Baku, Yerevan 1900-1940, including Nana Kipiani 
and Nana Iashvili, for first welcoming me into to Georgias community of art historians. I am 
especially indebted to my fellow PhD student, Giorgi Papashvili, for introducing me to 
collections and resources in Tbilisi as well as to other scholars working in my field; to Misha 
Tsereteli for providing access to the collections of the institutions within the remit of the 
Georgian National Museum and assistance in obtaining vital permissions; and Ramaz 
Japaridze, the great nephew of Soviet Georgian Painter Ucha Japaridze and custodian of the 
Ucha Japaridze House Museum, who gave me free reign to view and photograph the works 
and other materials in the Museums collection. Although the majority of my research on 
Japaridze ultimately was not included in this thesis, that research has significantly enriched 
my understanding of painting and national politics in Soviet Georgia and was instrumental in 
helping me to reach many of the conclusions drawn here. Maia Mania and Nana Tevzaia 
welcomed me into their homes and provided wonderful food and conversation and I will be 
forever grateful for the fascinating visits that Maia arranged for us to the citys surviving 
constructivist buildings. Finally, I would like to thank Elene Grdzeladze, Pikria Aphkhaidze, 
Miriam Gabashvili and Kote Getsadze for help with translation of materials from Georgian. 
I could not have completed this project without the support of many wonderful 
friends, above all Jenny Booth, Amy Plint, Helen Plint, Belle Gallacher, Catherine Johnston, 
Claire Boston, Katie Miall, Ella Pollock, Amy Baddeley, Jon Phillips and Christine Barnes, 
whose support and confidence in my abilities has kept me going. I am endlessly grateful to 
my sister, Leonie Brewin, who has been there at the most difficult times as well as at the best 
and to my parents, Sue and Andy Brewn, my siblings, Rob Brewin and Sam Franklin and my 
inherited family, John, Susan, and Holly MacDonald, Aimee Lane and Stefan Jones for their 
unwavering support and patience even as this project has taken longer than any of us ever 
expected. My biggest thanks are due to my husband, Ben MacDonald, who has lived with the 
consequences of my decision to pursue my PhD without complaint and has read and 
commented on drafts, offered new perspectives and been a source of encouragement and fun 
at every stage. Without his love and support this thesis would never have been completed. 
Conventions and Abbreviations 
I use the Library of Congress system for transliteration from Russian, with the exception of 
proper names, which are simplified. For ease of comprehension, proper names ending in ii 
are transcribed using y (Anatoly Lunacharsky, not Anatolii Lunacharskii), and proper nouns 
beginning with soft vowels (, , , ) are rendered with a Y (Yerevan, Yuri, Yevrand). In 
the interests of providing clear, uncluttered text, soft signs and hard signs are omitted from 
transliterated words and phrases within the main text and in transliterated references, but are 
retained in the original Russian quotations, provided in footnotes. 
I also use the Library of Congress system for transliteration from Georgian, with some 
exceptions. I omit all diacritic marks and make no distinction between the Georgian letters  
and ;  and ;  and ;  and ;  and . Letters  and  are transliterated as gh and q.  
is transliterated as zh. All distinctions are retained in the original Georgian quotation, 
provided in footnotes. In rendering plurals of transliterated Georgian words I simply add s in 
place of the Georgian plural marker ebi (kintos, not kintebi). For Georgian names I 
transliterate from Georgian rather than Russian spellings (Japaridze, not Dzhaparidze, Davit, 
not David, Dimitri, not Dmitry), except for commonly russified names (e.g. Lavrenty Beria, 
not Lavrenti Beria). The same approach is applied to Armenian names. Regarding 
topographical names, I use the Georgian version, unless another rendering is much more 
widely used (Achara, not Adjaria). The capital of Georgia, known as Tiflis in the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, was renamed to use the Georgian form, Tbilisi, in 1936. I use 
these spellings when making reference to the city in each period and the Georgian spelling 
when referring to the city in general. 
Capitalisation is not used in the Georgian language. However, for consistency and ease of 
reading, proper names transliterated from Georgian are capitalised (Davit Kakabadze, not 
davit kakabadze), as are the first words of the titles of organisations, institutions, publications 
etc. (Sabchota khelovneba [Soviet Art], not sabchota khelovneba), as is conventional in 
transliteration of titles from Russian. 
For names of organisations and institutions with both Russian and Georgian names, I use the 
name and abbreviation in most common circulation (SARMA, Sakartvelos asotsiatsia 
revoliutsionur mkhatvarta, but GAPKh, Gruzinskaia assotsiatsiia proletarskikh 
khudozhnikov). 
Translations of the titles of Georgian sources are provided in square brackets in footnotes. 
Unless otherwise stated, all translations into English of Russian and Georgian quotations are 
my own. 
The following abbreviations are used for organisations, institutions and certain key 
terms: 
Academic Centre See Glavnauka. 
Agitprop Agitation and Propaganda (Agitatsiia i propaganda), government 
department by that name. 
AKhR Association of Artists of the Revolution (Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov 
revoliutsiia, 1928-1932) 
AKhRR  Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia (Assotsiatsiia 
khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii, 1922-1928) 
AO Autonomous oblast; national territory ranked below ASSR in status. 
ASSR Autonomous republic; autonomous territory within a union republic 
GAIMK State Academy of the History of Material Culture (Gosudarstvennaia 
akademiia istorii materialnoi kultury), 1926-1937. Replaced the 
Russian Academy of the History of Material Culture (Rossiiskaia 
akademiia istorii materialnoi kultury), 1919-1926. In 1937 GAIMK 
was replaced with the Institute of the History of Material Culture 
(IIMK) of the USSR Academy of Sciences. In 1943 the Institute was 
transferred to Moscow and a branch (LOIIMK) remained in Leningrad. 
In 1959 IIMK became the Institute of Archeology of the USSR 
Academy of Sciences. In 1991 it became the Institute of Archeology of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences and the Leningrad branch became 
the Institute of the History of Material Culture of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences. 
GAKhN  State Academy of Artistic Sciences (Gosudarstvennaia akademiia 
khudozhestvennykh nauk), 1921-1931. 
GAPKh Georgian Association of Proletarian Artists (Gruzinskaia assotsiatsiia 
proletarskikh khudozhnikov, 1931-1932). 
GAPP Georgian Association of Proletarian Writers (Gruzinskaia assotsiatsiia 
proletarskikh pisatelei, 1921-1932). 
Glaviskusstvo The main administration for literature and the arts under the Peoples 
Commissariat of Enlightenment (Glavnoe upravlenie iskusstv pri 
Narkomprosa), April 1928-1933. A special organ within the Peoples 
Commissariat of Enlightenment, established to provide organizational 
and ideological leadership in the fields of literature and art. Formally 
survived until 1933, although following intense criticism from 1928 it 
had little authority. From 1930 is became a soviet (council) for 
literary and art affairs, rather than an administration. 
Glavpolitprosvet Main Political Enlightenment Committee (Glavnyi politiko-
prosvetitelnyi komitet), November 1920 - June 1930. Committee 
established under Narkompros to manage adult political education. 
Reorganised as a sector for mass work under Narkompros from June 
1930. 
Glavnauka Main Administration of Scientific, Scholarly-artistic and Museum 
Institutions (Glavnoe upravlenie nauchnymi, nauchno-
khudozhestvennymi i muzeinymi uchrezhdeniiami), 1921-30. State 
body co-ordinating research in science and culture in the USSR, 
initially known as the Academic Centre of Narkompros. 
GMII  State Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts (Gosudarstvennyi muzei 
izobrazitelnykh iskusstv imena A. S. Pushkina), Moscow, 1934-present. 
Known as the Museum of Fine Arts (Muzei izobrazitelnykh iskusstv, 
MII or MIZIS) 1917-34. 
GMVK State Museum of Oriental Cultures (Gosudarstvennyi muzei 
vostochnykh kultur). Established in 1918 as Ars Asiatica. Reorganised 
and renamed as the State Museum of Oriental Cultures in 1925. 
Renamed the State Museum of the Arts of the Peoples of the East 
(Gosudarstvennyi muzei iskusstv narodov vostoka) in 1962. Since 1992 
known in English as the State Museum of Oriental Art and in Russian 
as the State Museum of the East (Gosudarstvennyi muzei vostoka), the 
State Museum of the Art of the Nations of the East (Gosudarstvennyi 
muzei iskusstva narodov vostoka) or the Museum of the East (Muzei 
vostoka). 
Gosizdat State Publishing House (Gosudarstvennoe izdatelstvo RSFSR), 1922-
30. Replaced by OGIZ. 
IZO Narkompros  Visual art department of the Commissariat of Enlightenment 
(Otdelenie izobrazitelnogo iskusstva Narkomprosa), 1918-1920. In 
1920 IZO Narkompros was liquidated and its functions divided 
between other departments of Narkompros. 
Izogiz State Publishing House, Arts section (Gosudarstvennoe izdatelstvo  
izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo). 
Komsomol  Communist Party youth organisation. 
LIZhVI  Leningrad Institute for Living Oriental Languages (Leningradskii 
institut zhivykh vostochnykh iazykov), 1920-27. In 1927 it was renamed 
the Leningrad Oriental Institute, which closed in 1938. 
MIV N. N. Narimanov Moscow Institute of Oriental studies (Moskovskii 
institut vostokovedeniia im. N. N. Narimanova), 1922-. Known as the 
Central Institute for Living Oriental Languages (Tsentralnyi institute 
zhivykh vostochnykh iazykov, TsIZhVIa), 1920-22. TsIZhVIa was 
based on the Lazarev Institute, a school of oriental languages founded 
in Moscow in 1815, known as the Lazarev Institute for the Near East 
(Lazarevskii Peredneaziatskii institut) following the Revolution. 
MOSSKh Moscow section of the Union of Soviet Artists (Moskovskoe otdelenie 
soiuza sovetskikh khudozhnikov)  
MII See GMII. 
Narkomnats Peoples Commissariat of Nationalities (Narodnyi komissariat po 
delam natsionalnostei), 1917-1924. 
Narkompros The Peoples Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narodnyi Kommissariat 
Prosveshcheniia), 1917-1946. State body managing educational and 
cultural spheres in the USSR. Transformed into the Ministry of 
Education of the USSR in 1946. Initially established in 1917 as the 
Ministry of Education of the Russian Provisional Government 
(Ministerstvo prosveshcheniia Vremennogo Pravitelstva Rossii) based 
on the Ministry of Peoples Education of the Russian Empire 
(Ministerstvo narodnogo prosveshcheniia Rossiiskoi imperii). 
NEP              New Economic Policy, 1921-1928 
NKVD Peoples Commissariat for Internal Affairs (Narodnyi komissariat 
vnutrennikh del) or Soviet political police, 1934-1946. Known as the 
Unified State Political Administration (Obedinennoe gosudarstvennoe 
politicheskoe upravlenie, OGPU) 1932-34. Before that it was the State 
Political Administration (Gosudarstvennoe politicheskoe upravlenie, 
GPU) 1922-1932, which followed the All-Russian Extraordinary 
Commission for Combating Counterrevolution and Sabotage, the 
Cheka (Vserossiiskaia chrezvychainaia komissiia po borbe s 
kontrrevoliutsiei i sabotazhem, VChK) 1919-1922.  
OGPU Soviet secret police or All-Union State Political Administration 
(Obedinennoe gosudarstvennoe politicheskoe napravlenie), 1922-
1934. 
OMAKhR Youth organisation of the Association and Artists of the Revolution 
(Obedinenie molodezhy assotsiatsii khudozhnikov revoliutsii). See 
AKhR. 
Proletkult Proletarian Cultural-Enlightenment Organisations (Proletarskie 
kulturno-prosvetitelnye organizatsii), 1917-1932. A mass network of 
cultural organisations intended to help the working class cultivate their 
own authentic proletarian culture.  
RABIS Union of Art Workers (Soiuz rabotnikov iskusstva) 
RAIMK See GAIMK. 
RAPP Russian Association of Proletarian Writers (Rossiiskaia assotsiatsiia 
proletarskikh pisatelei). Literary organisation originally known as 
VAPP, All-Russian Association of Proletarian Writers (Vserossiiskaia 
assotsiatsiia proletarskikh pisatelei). 
REVMAS Revolutionary Association of Artists (Revoliutsiis mkhatvarta 
asotsiatsia, 1928-1931). 
RSFSR Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (Rossiiskaia sovetskaia 
federativnaia sotsialisticheskaia respublika, 1917-91). 
SARMA Georgian Association of Revolutionary Artists (Sakartvelos asotsiatsia 
revoliutsionur mkhatvarta, 1928-1932). 
SSR  Full Union Republic. 
VAPP See RAPP. 
VKhUTEIN Higher State Artistic and Technical Institute (Vysshii gosudarstvennyi 
khudozhestvenno-tekhnicheskii institut), 1927-30. Replaced 
VKhUTEMAS. The Georgian Academy of Arts was also renamed 
VKhUTEIN in 1929-1931 in line with the Moscow institution. It was 
closed in 1931 and replaced with a Faculty of Fine Arts within Tbilisi 
Pedagogical Institute, and then reinstated as the Tbilisi State Academy 
of Fine Arts in February 1933. 
VKhUTEMAS Higher State Artistic and Technical Studios (Vysshie khudozhestvenno-
tekhnicheskie masterskie), 1920-26. Formed through a merger of the 
Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture and the 
Stroganov School of Applied Arts. 
VKP(b)  All-Union Communist Party.  
VNAV All-Russian Scientific Association of Orientologists (Vserossiiskaia 
nauchnaia assotsiatsiia vostokovedeniia). Established in 1921 under 
the Commissarist of Nationalities (Narkomnats) for the study of the 
East, and help inform the Soviet governments policy towards its 
peoples. 
VOAPP All-Union Union of Associations of Proletarian Writers (Vsesoiuznoe 
obedinenie assotsiatsiia proletarskikh pisatelei), 1928-1932. 
VOKS All-Union Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries 
(Vsesoiuznoe obshchestvo kulturnoi sviazi s zagranitsei), 1925-1957.  
Vsekokhudozhnik  All-Russian Cooperative Artist (Vse-rossiiskii kooperativ 
Khudozhnik). 
VSKhV/  All-Union Agricultural Exhibition (Vsesoiuznaia 
VDNKh selskokhoziastvennaia vystavka, 1939-1959) later replaced by the 
Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy (Vystavka 
dostizhenii narodnogo khodataistva, 1959-1991). VSKhV and VDNKh 
were preceded by the First All-Russian Agricultural and Cottage 
Industries Exhibition (Pervaia vserossiiskaia selskokhoziastvennaia i 
kustarno-promyshlennaia vystavka SSSR, 1923). 
ZAPP Transcaucasian Association of Proletarian Writers (Zakavkazskaia 
assotsiatsiia proletarskikh pisatelei). 
ZSFSR Transcaucasian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (Zakavkazskaia 
sovetskaia federativnaia sotsialisticheskaia respublika, 1921-36). 
The following abbreviations are used for archives, archival citations and libraries: 
GARF State Archive of the Russian Federation (Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii) 
GMINV Archive of the State Museum of the Art of the Nations of the East 
(formerly the State Museum of Oriental Cultures, GMVK) 
GNM Georgian National Museum 
GTG State Tretyakov Gallery, Manuscripts Department (Gosudarstvennaia 
tretiakovskaia galereia, otdel rukopisi) 
NAG Department of Literature and the Arts (Literaturis da khelovnebis 
ganqopileba), Central Archive of Contemporary History (Uakhlesi 
istoriis tsentraluri arkivi), National Archives of Georgia (Sakartvelos 
erovnuli arkivi). 
NPLG National Parliamentary Library of Georgia 
RGALI Russian State Archive of Literature and Art (Rossiiskii 
gosudarstvennyi arkhiv literatury i iskusstva) 
f.  fond (record group) 
op. opis (inventory)  
ed. khr.  edinitsa khraneniia (unit)  
d.  delo (file) 
l, ll.,  list (page(s) 
ob.  oborotnaia storona (verso) 
kor. korpus (building) 
Introduction 
This thesis documents the unique experience of Soviet Georgian painters during the 
first two decades of Soviet power in Georgia, 1921-1939, focusing in particular on the 
tumultuous first decade and a half of Stalins rule, between 1926-27 and 1939, and 
considering the activities of Georgian artists with particular reference to shifts in Soviet 
policies, including Soviet cultural and nationalities policies, that took place during that time. 
This period is selected for study for several reasons. 1926-27 saw the consolidation of 
Stalins political power at the helm of the Communist Party. It witnessed his victory over 
more moderate forces led by Trotsky and Zinoviev, making way for significant shifts in 
Soviet policy including the abandonment of Lenins New Economic Policy and its 
replacement with Stalins First Five-Year Plan, which emphasised Soviet economic 
development through rapid industrialisation and agricultural collectivisation and brought with 
it new imperatives for the cultural sphere. Those years also marked a significant moment in 
the sphere of Georgian artistic activity. They witnessed the return to Georgia of many of her 
leading painters following absences that had begun prior to the establishment of Soviet power 
in Georgia and had continued through the first five years of Soviet rule there, markedly 
impoverishing Georgian artistic activity and debate during that period. Equally importantly, 
they also coincided with the establishment of the first proletarian artists organisations in 
Soviet Georgia. Together, these events marked the beginning of a period of intense debate 
and competition between Georgian artists and critics over the appropriate path for the 
development of painting in Soviet Georgia that extended through the 1930s. This thesis 
documents those debates and parallel discussions taking place in Moscow and St Petersburg 
in the same period concerning artistic activity among the non-Russian peoples of the Soviet 
Union, examining as the culmination of those discussions a landmark exhibition of Georgian 
painting which premiered in Moscow in November 1937. The exhibition served as a 
definitive conclusion to battles that had taken place in the preceeding decade to define the 
appropriate form for Georgian painting. However, as this thesis demonstrates, it was also a 
grandiose expression of a new relationship between Georgia and the Soviet centre that 
crystalised at the end of the 1930s as part of a wider reconfiguration of Soviet nationalities 
policy. 1939 marks a natural chronological end point for this study in that it marks the end of 
a period of cultural activity in Georgia that was dedicated to the expression and 
embellishment of that new relationship as Soviet political and cultural priorities shifted again, 
this time in response to the outbreak of the Second World War in Europe and the growing 
threat of invasion from Nazi Germany.  
Georgia experienced Sovietisation from a perspective different to that of any other 
Soviet nation. Her status as the place of Stalins birth impacted her relationship with Soviet 
power in complex ways that are explored and elucidated throughout this thesis. At the same 
time, the combination of the Georgians longevity as a people (which had existed with a 
recognisable identity for two millennia), and the unique political circumstances that grew up 
in Georgia in the decades preceding Sovietisation, produced among Georgians a uniquely 
developed degree of national consciousness and a strong inclination for national 
independence. Unlike the majority of the national groups that eventually became constituent 
members of the Soviet Union, by the first decade of the twentieth century the Georgians had 
developed a nationalist movement with wide support across all social classes, thanks in part 
to the coalescence of national and social struggles in Georgia in that period.1 In the years 
following the Russian Revolution, moveover, Georgias nationalist socialist (Menshevik) 
leadership, which enjoyed strong support both in the countryside and in urban centres, had 
had demonstrated both its viability and its desirability in the eyes of most Georgians by the 
time that the Red Army took the Georgian capital by force in February 1921. This 
encouraged opposition to Bolshevik rule and a bitterness about a loss of national 
independence, despite independence not previously having been a priority of Georgias 
Menshevik leadership. 
The Armenians were the closest to the Georgians in the sense of their longevity as a 
people, their advanced degree of national consciousness and their established nationalist 
intelligentsia. However, while Georgia had existed as an independent state in one form 
another until Russias annexation of Georgia in the early nineteenth century, the Armenians 
had not. Instead, they had suffered invasions and occupations from the eleventh century 
onwards that deprived them of a dedicated national homeland right up until 1918 and left 
their population dispersed across various diaspora. As a result of this history, Armenian 
nationalists in the first two decades of the twentieth century were unable to mobilse popular 
support for an effort to regain an independently governed homeland. In the post-revolutionary 
period, moreover, the immediate existential threat that the Armenians saw in the possibility 
of attacks by their Muslim neighboursmade all the more pressing by the memory and 
1 See 2. National Revolutions and Civil War in Russia in Ronald Grigor Suny, The Revenge of the Past: 
Nationalism, Revolution and the Collapse of the Soviet Union (Stanford University Press: Stanford, California, 
1993), pp. 20-83. 
trauma of the Armenian genocide of 1914led them to seek Russian protection rather than 
reject it.2  
The Latvians, in fact, much more closely paralleled the Georgian situation in terms of 
their success in developing a fully-fledged mass national movement.3 A largely landless, 
ethnically Latvian peasantry objected to the centuries-long control of their land by German 
barons in much the same way as Georgian peasants and workers resented the domination of 
their cities by Armenian merchants. As such, in both cases, class and ethnic identities 
overlapped and reinforced one another to produce support for national socialist movements 
that were also directed primarily against oppressors other than the Russians so that class 
struggles ultimatitley mobilised the masses in support of national emancipation movements. 
Nevertheless, there were also fundamental differences between the Georgian and Latvian 
experiences. Rather than establishing independence, as Georgia did, and then losing it 
through Bolshevik invasion, for example, many Latvians in 1917 saw their national future 
with Russia and saw the Bolsheviks as holding the solution to both their ethnic and social 
grievances.  
Unlike the Georgians, the Latvians would likely have become willing members of the 
Soviet Union had not the German invasion of Latvia in Feburary 1918 ended a brief period of 
Bolshevik rule there and offered Latvian nationalists an opportunity for independence.4 The 
circumstances of Georgias forced Sovietisation (and the brief experience of independence 
that preceded it), however, coloured her relationship with Soviet power thereafter. Unlike in 
neighbouring Azerbaijan, which was taken by the Bolsheviks almost without resistance in 
April 1920, or in much of Central Asia, where Bolshevik control was widely welcomed, in 
Georgia hostility was widespread and resistance initially fierce. In the early years following 
the establishment of Soviet power, Georgian nationalism presented a serious threat of local 
insurgence and a real risk to the stability of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics formed in 
1922. Though this threat was largely crushed by the end of 1924 following a failed Georgian 
uprising in August of that year, Georgian nationalism continued to concern Stalin and the 
Soviet leadership and guide their attitudes to the national question in Georgia throughout the 
Stalinist era.  
The question of how to govern the Soviet Union as a multi-ethnic state, of how to 
manage the Unions constituent nationalities in order to avoid dangerous separatist 
2 Suny, The Revenge of the Past, pp. 72-76. 
3 Ibid., pp. 58-64. 
4 Ibid., pp. 57-8. At this time Latvia was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union, only to be invaded and 
occupied by Nazi Germany from 1941 and then re-taken by the Soviet Union in 1944.  
nationalism and maintain the Unions stability and progress towards socialism, was addressed 
by both Lenin and Stalin before the Revolution and remained a matter for debate throughout 
Soviet history. Indeed, it was arguably the Soviet leaderships failure to resolve that question 
that contributed to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. But the question was 
particularly pressured in relation to the Georgian case, so much so that Lenin urged special 
caution and tolerance in dealing with the Georgian people.5 However, as I show in this thesis, 
under Stalin the special circumstances of the Georgian case did not always lead to the caution 
and tolerance Lenin advised. Instead, Georgias relationship with the Soviet centre played out 
in often unexpected ways, including ways that diminished rather than granted freedoms of 
national expression. This, I argue, found expression in the management of artistic activity and 
production in Georgia and had significant consequences for Georgian painters. It shaped their 
day-to-day activities and defined the ways in which their nationhood was (or was not) 
reflected in their painting. On that basis, this thesis examines how Georgian painters 
negotiated the politics of nationality and empire in their responses to Stalinist cultural dictates 
in light of the particularities of the Georgian case. 
Painting in the Non-Russian Republics 
Several Soviet art historians and critics have offered accounts of the history of 
painting in Soviet Georgia. The first of these were published during the period of Stalins 
Cultural Revolution as contemporary commentaries on the state of artistic activity in the 
republic at that moment. Georgian critic Aleksandre Duduchavas Gruzinskaia zhivopis: opyt 
sotsialno-esteticheskoe issledovanie (1930) was the first (albeit slim) book-length study of 
the artistic climate in Soviet Georgia.6 It sought to present the history of Georgian painting, 
both ancient and recent, through the lens of a modern Marxist sociology of art. It was based 
on a methodology pioneered by Moscow art theorists such as Vladimir Friche, Ivan Matsa 
and Anatoly Lunarchsky, which attempted to explain artistic phenomena according to 
Marxist dialectical materialism.7 As such, instead of attempting a comprehensive survey of 
5 Vladimir Lenin, Polnoe sobranie sochineniia, vol. 42, p. 362, quoted in Ronald G. Suny, The Making of the 
Georgian Nation (second edition) (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1994. Original edition: 1988), pp. 
210-11.  
6 Aleksandre Duduchava, Gruzinskaia zhivopis: opyt sotsialno-esteticheskogo issledovaniia (Tiflis: Gosizdat 
Gruzii, 1930). 
7 For key works in this field, see Vladimir Friche, Sotsiologiia iskusstva (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1926); Vladimir 
Friche, Problemy iskusstvovedeniia. sbornik statei po voprosam sotsiologii, iskusstva i literatury (Moscow: 
Gosizdat, 1930); Ivan Matsa, Ocherki po teoreticheskomu iskusstvoznaniiu: stati (Moscow: 
Kommunisticheskaia akademiia, 1930); Ivan Matsa, ed, Sovetskoe iskusstvo za 15 let. Materialy i 
contemporary and recent Georgian painting, it focussed on four artists whom Duduchava 
claimed were fundamental to Georgian arts development and whom he presented as 
embodying the stages of Georgias historical progress. These were Niko Pirosmani (Nikala 
Pirosmanishvili, 1862-1918), the modernist-oriented painters Lado (Vladimir) Gudiashvili 
(1896-1980) and Davit Kakabadze (1889-1952), and Mose Toidze (1871-1953), a disciple of 
the Russian realist painters known as the Peredvizhniki.8 Duduchavas study was essentially 
an attempt to defend the relevance of its four subjects in the Soviet context by reframing their 
work through Marxist theory, though, as we will see in chapter three, by the time of its 
publication the methodology on which it was based was already facing criticism. 
Duduchavas book was closely followed by Lazar Rempels Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia 
(1932). Rempels volume provided a more systematic and methodical study, focusing on the 
twentieth-century history of Georgian as well as Armenian and Azerbaijani painting. 
However, a product of its time, it is sharply polemic in its rejection of modernist and un-
proletarian currents in Georgian art, which meant anything other than the narrative realist 
painting championed in Moscow by the Association of Artists of the Revolution (AKhR, 
1928-1932, formerly the Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia, AKhRR, 1922-
1928) and later RAPKh (the Russian Association of Proletarian Artists, 1931-1932).9 As is 
explored in more detail in chapter two of this thesis, Rempels foremost goal was to 
demonstrate AKhRs brand of painting to be the only method capable of serving a 
proletarian, socialist state and condemning artists (and the critics that supported them) who 
failed to adopt that method. As will become clear, this required creative interpretation of 
Soviet policy with respect to national cultural difference. Nevertheless, both Duduchavas 
and Rempels volumes are important sources of factual information concerning the activities 
of Georgian artists during the first decade of Soviet power and provide evidence of the 
divergent stances adopted by two influential critics concerning art in Georgia in that period. 
dokumentatsiia (Moscow: Izogiz, 1933); Ivan Matsa, Tvorcheskii metod i khodozhestvennoe nasledstvo 
(Moscow: Izogiz, 1933); M. Arkadev, I. Matsa et al., O zhivopisi, plakate i skulpture za XV let: sbornik statei 
(Moscow: Vsekokhudozhnik, 1934); Anatoly Lunacharsky, Ocherki marksistskoi teorii iskusstv (Moscow: 
AKhRR, 1926). 
8 Mose Toidzes son Irakli Toidze, also an artist, features more prominently in this thesis than his father. As 
such, where only the surname is given, reference is to Irakli. 
9 Lazar Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia (Moscow: Izogiz, 1932). Rempels account also relies on the 
testimonies of a few local artist-informants, calling further into question the reliability of its information. 
Rempel comments that the author is indebted to the artists and workers of visual art in Transcaucasia for the 
collection of material for the present work. [      
     .] He lists as informants the artists G. Grigorian, U. 
[Ucha] Japaridze, L. Lemanzhava, G. [Grigory] Mirzoev, [Korneli] Sanadze, R. [Ruben] Tovadze [sic.  
Tavadze], [Davit] Shevardnadze, Sherbabchian. Although, as will be more apparent in chapter two, this list 
reflects a group of artists holding a wide range of views, Rempel was still obliged to view his subject through 
their eyes, rather than observing local meetings, debates or exhibitions directly.  
They present a snapshot of the discourses surrounding national art (artistic activity in the 
non-Russian republics) in the years of Stalins First Five-Year Plan. Many contemporary 
commentaries published in journals, newspapers and exhibition catalogues in Moscow and 
Tbilisi constitute important primary material explored throughout this thesis. 
Several further accounts of the history of art in Soviet Georgia were published in the 
Post-War period. The first, Iskusstvo sovetskoi Gruzii: ocherki po istorii zhivopisi, skulptory i 
grafiki, was published by the USSR Academy of Sciences in 1952. This volume is a valuable 
document, providing copious factual details of artists, works, exhibitions and other key 
events in the history of Soviet Georgian art. However, appearing in the year before Stalins 
death, it is narrow and dogmatic in its conception of Soviet art, excluding or rebuking key 
artists that it accused of diverging from the proper creative path. As such, caution must be 
exercised as regards its reliability. Vakhtang Beridze and Nina Ezerskaias Iskusstvo 
sovetskoi Gruzii, 1921-70 gg.: zhivopis grafika skulptura (1975) attempted to correct the 
imbalances of the 1952 volume.10 It is especially useful in providing a factual chronology of 
the activities of Georgian artists in addition to artist biographies and lists of exhibitions, plus 
an account of the two decades that had passed since the previous publications. It also 
rehabilitates several key artists whose place in the history of Soviet Georgian art had been 
denied in the 1952 volume. The volume has significant limitations. Its vast scope means that 
it does not examine the career of any single artist or any event in the history of Georgian 
painting in detail. Restrictions related to the political climate in which it was produced, 
moreoverthe need of the authors to satisfy the Soviet censors by expressing only views and 
versions of events that were broadly in line with the Partys ownlimited the authors ability 
to broach certain subjects. However, it provides the most balanced and most comprehensive 
survey of Soviet Georgian painting to date. 
For several reasons, Beridze and Ezerskaias volume has not been surpassed in the 
forty years since its publication. Firstly, the art of the Stalin era has attracted little interest 
among art historians in post-Soviet Georgia. Georgian scholars have tended to focus instead 
on resurrecting national histories that were denied in the Soviet period, including the 
flourishing of cultural life and emergence of modernist activity in Georgia that took place in 
the first decades of the twentieth century, prior to Sovietisation. Secondly, western 
scholarship on Stalinist culture has tended to concentrate on the major Russian centres, 
neglecting artistic activity in the Southern and Eastern Soviet republics and regions. Although 
10 Vakhtang Beridze and Nina Ezerskaia, Iskusstvo sovetskoi Gruzii, 1921-70 gg.: zhivopis grafika skulptura 
(Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 1975). 
reference to Georgian examples can be found within the existing scholarship, and some work 
has been carried out in recent years on art in certain of the other Soviet national republics and 
regions of the Caucasus and Central Asia, no dedicated study of art and politics in Soviet 
Georgia has been attempted.11 Indeed, in addition to the Soviet sources discussed above, only 
a handful of scholarly articles concerning Soviet art published since the collapse of the Soviet 
Union in 1991 have paid more than cursory attention to artistic activity in Georgia and all of 
these appeared between 1992 and 1994.12 None of them, moreover, examines Georgian art in 
detail, and all look at art in Soviet Georgia as part of a wider overview of art in the Soviet 
non-Russian republics collectively. As a result, they tend to present a sweeping view of the 
development of Soviet art in the non-Russian republics as lagging behind that in the main 
Russian centres and generalise about comparatively greater artistic freedoms enjoyed in the 
non-Russian republics compared with in Moscow and Leningrad.13 Matthew Cullerne-Bown, 
for example, writing in 1992, explained that in the inter-War period, the republics most 
distant from Moscow retained a degree of cultural autonomy that could not exist in Russia. 
In relation to Georgia specifically, he noted that a number of painters working in Tbilisi
namely Gudiashvili and Kakabadzenot only managed to conserve precious freedoms of 
style, but also openly rejected the socialist content officially required in the work of all Soviet 
11 Jeremy Howards East European art, 1650-1950 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), for example, 
includes reference to twentieth-century Georgian painters including Elene Akhvlediani and Davit Kakabadze. 
There exists a small but growing body of scholarship concerned with art in the former socialist countries of 
Eastern and Central Europe in the second half of the twentieth century. For a useful introduction to this field 
see: East Art Map: Contemporary Art and Eastern Europe, ed. by Slovenian artists group IRWIN (London: 
Afterall, 2006). For recent scholarship on art in the Soviet Unions Southern and Eastern republics, see: Aliya 
Nurtaevna Abykayeva de Tiesenhausen, Socialist Realist Orientalism?: Depictions of Soviet Central Asia 
1930s-1950s, Thesis (Ph.D), University of London, Courtauld Institute of Art, 2010); Clo Drieu, Fictions 
nationales: cinma, empire et nation en Ouzbkistan (1919-1937) (Paris: ditions Karthala, 2013); Vardan 
Azatyan, On the Ruins of the Soviet Past: Some Thoughts on Religion, Nationalism and Artistic Avant-Gardes 
in Armenia, ARTMargins, 1 (2012); Vardan Azatyan, Disintegrating Progress: Bolshevism, National 
Modernism, and the Emergence of Contemporary Art Practices in Armenia, ARTMargins, 1 (2012) and Boris 
Chukhovich, Sub rosa: ot mikroistorii k natsionalnomu iskusstvu Uzbekistana, Ab imperio, 3 (2017) 
12 See: Musya Glants, From the Southern Mountains to the Northern Seas: Painting in the Republics in the 
Early Soviet Period and Milka Bliznakov, International Modernism or Socialist Realism: Soviet Architecture 
in the Eastern Republics in John Norman, ed, New perspectives on Russian and Soviet artistic culture: 4th 
World congress for Soviet and East European Studies: Selected papers (New York: St Martins Press, 1994), 
pp. 95-111 and 112-130; Matthew Cullerne-Bown, How Is The Empire? Painting in the Non-Russian 
Republics, in Matthew Cullerne-Bown et al., Soviet Socialist Realist Painting 1930s-1960s: Paintings from 
Russia, the Ukraine, Belorussia, Uzbekistan, Kirgizia, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Moldova selected in 
the USSR (Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1992); Matthew Cullerne-Bown, Painting in the non-Russian 
Republics in Matthew Cullerne-Bown and Brandon Taylor, eds, Art of the Soviets: Painting, sculpture and 
architecture in a one-Party state, 1917-1992 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993), pp. 140-53; 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown, Art under Stalin (Oxford: Phaidon, 1991). 
13 See Cullerne-Bown, How Is The Empire?, p. 22; Glants, From the Southern Mountains to the Northern 
Seas, p. 109; Bliznakov, International Modernism or Socialist Realism, p. 127. 
artists.14 This, he implies, could not have happened in Moscow. The farther from the Soviet 
centre that an artist worked, the greater artistic freedom he or she enjoyed. 
Few scholars now would agree with Cullerne-Bowns assessment of greater artistic 
freedoms experienced outside of the main Russian centres. It is well documented, for 
example, that terror waged against non-proletarian class elements during the Cultural 
Revolution (1928-31) disproportionately targeted national (non-Russian) intelligentsias. 
Indeed, Cullerne-Bowns comments are misleading in a number of respects, as regards the 
Georgian case. Firstly, with regard to Gudiashvili and Kakabadze, it is true that each 
continued to produce work in the Soviet period that reflected the formal stylistic 
experimentation of their work in the 1910s and 20s, and which was sometimes without 
socialist or ideological content. However, this was not unique to them as Georgians. 
Moreover, they did not do so exclusively, without interruption, or without consequence. Both 
Gudiashvili and Kakabadze faced constant criticism in the press and among Far Left artists 
and critics in Georgia throughout the late 1920s and 1930s. Furthermore, Kakabadze and 
especially Gudiashvili did not openly reject socialist content, at least not fully or easily. 
Kakabadze, for example, stopped producing paintings entirely during the Cultural Revolution 
and in doing so avoided some of the increased pressure facing artists in that period to make 
works on themes associated with the First Five-Year Plan (such as agricultural 
collectivisation and industrialisation). He produced only a handful of paintings in the 1930s, 
mainly landscapes without explicit socialist content. But this was possible primarily 
because he took on work designing for theatre and stage as a way of avoiding the constraints 
placed on painters. Between 1933 and 39, moreover, he was compelled to produce works 
documenting Georgian industrialisation, including a series of studies of the construction of 
Rionges (Georgias new hydroelectric power station) (figures 1 and 2). In the 1940s he made 
several works attempting to demonstrate his compliance with the requirements of socialist 
realism. In some, he made only token allusion to socialist content. His painting, Meeting in 
Imereti (1942, figure 3), for example, is typical of the trademark semi-abstract landscapes 
Kakabadze was painting before the Sovietisation of Georgia except for the crowd of people 
gathered in its foreground bearing red flags and vast banners with the portraits of Lenin, 
Stalin and Engels. Despite these concessions, however, Kakabadze faced repercussions for 
his reluctance to adjust his painting, as well as for his continued advocation of European 
models of painting through his teaching at the Academy, including being fired from his job at 
14 Cullerne-Bown, How Is The Empire?, p. 23. 
the Academy in 1948.15  After that, desperate for a means to support his family, he produced 
a number of canvases that complied with the demands of socialist realism in both style and 
content. These included Mining at Kazbegi (1949, figure 4), Grain Elevator in Poti (1949, 
figure 5) and The Processing of Gumbrine in the Vicinity of Kutaisi (1951, figure 6). 
However, he never regained his post at the Academy. He died in 1952.  
Gudiashvili, meanwhile, participated much more fully in the life of Georgias 
community of painters, including during the Cultural Revolution. Although he never adopted 
a convincingly realist style of painting, he produced works on themes of class war, industry 
and collective agriculture (see Eviction of the Kulaks, 1931, and Zestafoni Works, 1934 
(figures 7 and 8). He also repeatedly claimed throughout the 1920s and 30s to be striving to 
correct his ideological and formal mistakes. As the following chapters will demonstrate, 
Gudiashvilis survival and prominence throughout the Stalin era and later was owed to a 
series of factors specific to his case and to Georgia that were far more complex than the 
simple calculation of his distance from Moscow. These included Gudiashvilis professed 
efforts to adapt and willingness to participate in state-prescribed cultural initiatives as well as 
the dearth of preferable, proletarian artists with sufficient skill who could take his place in 
representing Soviet Georgian painting. But they also related to the Soviet leaderships (albeit 
intermittently) cautious treatment of Georgias old bourgeois intelligentsia in light of the 
particularities of Georgias relationship to Soviet power. 
The specificity of Georgian artists experience of artistic life in the Soviet Union was 
dictated by a range of factors relating to Georgias specific relationship to the Soviet centre. 
Georgia approached Sovietisation as a nation with a developed sense of national identity and 
a proud history of defending their cultural and religious autonomy and national sovereignty. 
It experienced Stalins First Five-Year Plan and Cultural Revolution and the associated drives 
for agricultural collectivisation and industrialisation as a republic even more peasant and 
agricultural than Russia. And its relationship to Moscow and Soviet power was defined by 
Georgias initial hostility to Bolshevik rule and by the Soviet leaderships policies in relation 
to Georgia in light of those circumstances. The experience and activities of Georgian artists 
were impacted by the special status that Georgian enjoyed, in part as a result of the political 
challenges that the republic represented in the eyes of the Soviet leadership.16 Unlike their 
15 Ketevan Kintsurashvili, David Kakabadze: klassik XX veka (St Petersburg: Arbat, 2002), pp. 137-38. 
16 On Georgias special status see Timothy K. Blauvelt, Status Shift and Ethnic Mobilisation in the March 1956 
Events in Georgia, Europe-Asia Studies, 61:4 (June 2009), pp. 651-68 (p. 654) and Timothy K. Blauvelt, 
Resistance, Discourse and Nationalism in the March 1956 Events in Georgia in Timothy K. Blauvelt and 
counterparts elsewhere in the Soviet Union, moreover, they contributed to the cultivation of 
Stalins personality cult in the 1930s and 1940s both as representatives of Stalins homeland 
and as a nation recently hostile to Soviet rule. Uniquely, they also operated under the 
supervision of Stalins right-hand man, the head of the Transcaucasian secret police and later, 
of the Georgian and Transcaucasian Communist Party, Lavrenty Beria (1899-1953). Berias 
interest in harnessing Georgias cultural sphere as a means of shoring up his own position 
within Stalins inner circle had an enormous impact on the day-to-day lives of Georgian 
painters. For these reasons, as well as Georgias unique cultural history, ethnic makeup, and 
cultural climate immediately prior to Sovietisation, artistic activity in Soviet Georgia 
developed according to a different chronology to that seen in Russia and should be studied 
with reference to these specific circumstances accordingly. 
In recent decades, western and Russian scholars have produced a rich body of 
research concerning Soviet artists working in Moscow and Leningrad and about important 
events and exhibitions and the workings of museums and educational institutions there. Huge 
advances have also been made in building theoretical frameworks through which Stalinist 
culture can be better understood.17 Thanks to these contributions, Soviet cultural production 
Jeremy Smith, eds, Georgia after Stalin: Nationalism and Soviet Power (London: BASEES/Routledge Series of 
Russian and East European Studies, 2015), pp. 116-128. 
17 Important contributions include Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2000. Original edition 1981); Katerina Clark, Petersburg, Crucible of Cultural Revolution 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995); Katerina Clark, Moscow, the Fourth Rome: Stalinism, 
Cosmopolitanism and the Evolution of Soviet Culture, 1931-1941 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2011); Evgeny Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism (trans. by Jesse M. Savage) (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2007); Evgeny Dobrenko, Stalinist Cinema and The Production of History: Museum of 
the Revolution (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008); Evgeny Dobrenko and Eric Naiman, eds, The 
landscape of Stalinism: the art and ideology of Soviet space (Seattle: Combined Academic, 2003); Andrew 
Ellis, ed, Socialist realisms: Soviet painting 1920-1970 (ex. cat.) (trans. Mario Chianese and Jesse M. Savage) 
(Milan: Skira, 2012); Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front. Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992); Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 19281931 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978); Igor Golomstock, Totalitarian Art: In the Soviet Union, the 
Third Reich, Fascist Italy and the People's Republic of China (New York: Harper Collins Icon Editions, 1990); 
Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-Garde, Aesthetic Dictatorship, and Beyond (trans. Charles 
Rougle) (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988); Boris Groys and Max Hollein, eds, Traumfabrik 
Kommunismus: die visuelle Kultur der Stalinzeit (ex. cat.) (Ostfildern-Ruit: Hatje Cantz, c.2003); Hans Gnther, 
ed., The Culture of the Stalin Period (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1990); Hans Gnther and Evgeny 
Dobrenko, eds, Sotrealisticheskii kanon (St Petersburg: Akademicheskii proekt, 2000); Irina Gutkin, The 
Cultural Origins of the Socialist Realist Aesthetic, 1890-1934 (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1999); 
Peter Kenez, Cinema and Soviet Society, 1917-1953 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992); Christina 
Kiaer, Lyrical Socialist Realism, October, 147 (winter 2014), pp. 56-77; Thomas Lahusen and Evgeny 
Dobrenko, eds, Socialist Realism Without Shores (London: Duke University Press, 1995); Christina Lodder, 
Maria Kokkori and Maria Mileeva, eds, Utopian reality: reconstructing culture in revolutionary Russia and 
beyond (Leiden: Brill, 2013); Jamie Miller, Soviet Cinema: Politics and Persuasion under Stalin (New York: I. 
B. Taurus, 2010); Vladimir Paperny, Architecture in the Age of Stalin: Culture Two (trans. John Hill and Roann 
Barris), Cambridge Studies in New Art History and Criticism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002) 
(first edition: 1981); Rgine Robin, Socialist Realism: An Impossible Aesthetic, trans. Catherine Porter, 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992); Richard Taylor and Derek Spring, eds, Stalinism and Soviet 
of the Stalin era is no longer dismissed as the kitsch and monolithic state-prescribed 
propaganda art of a totalitarian state, either devoid of interest due to the perceived absence 
of artistic freedom under that state or morally insupportable as a subject of study due to the 
violence of the regime that it served. We now understand much more than we did about  its 
sources, genesis and evolution. Vladimir Paperny, Boris Groys and others, for example, shed 
early light on the dialogue between so-called avant-garde culture of the 1910s and 20s and 
Stalinist culture. Groys groundbreaking volume The Total Art of Stalinism proposed a new 
understanding of the latter as in many ways the heir to the former, of Stalinist culture as the 
realisation of the demiurgic ambitions of the avant-garde for a totalising art that reconfigured 
reality itself. 18  These works, as well as Sheila Fitzpatricks groundbreaking studies 
illuminating the activities of key Soviet cultural institutions, laid the foundations for a host of 
more recent histories and theoretical studies.19 Evgeny Dobrenko, in particular, has helped to 
explain how Stalinist culture operated in the service of the state as a vehicle through which 
Soviet reality itself was created.20 Dobrenko, Katerina Clark and others have offered new 
means for decoding Stalinist cultures complex symbolic and iconographic schemes. Several 
scholars, including Christina Kiaer and Angelina Lucento, have examined the activities of a 
variety of artists and artists organisations in Moscow in the late 1920s and early 1930s and 
both highlighted the role of artists and intellectuals in moulding the development of Stalinist 
culture and suggested ways in which it might have turned out differently.21 Clark, moreover, 
has demonstrated the surprisingly cosmopolitan roots of Stalinist culture.22 She has decisively 
challenged previously popular totalitarian models of Soviet culture in which socialist realism 
was understood as the product of the Partys (and, personally, Stalins) absolute control over 
all spheres, demonstrating the complicated relationship between the state (Stalin, the Party 
leadership, and various Party organs) and intellectuals in its evolution. For example, she has 
shown how even when pronouncements issued from the highest echelons of the Party 
appeared to resolve the direction of Soviet cultures development, these pronouncements 
were often grounded in existing trends and appeared in response to ideas circulating among 
Cinema (New York: Routledge, 1993); Emma Widdis, Visions of a New Land: Soviet Film from the Revolution 
to the Second World War (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003). 
18 Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism. 
19 Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment. Soviet Organization of Education and the Arts under 
Lunacharsky, 19171921 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970); Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front; Fitzpatrick, 
ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 19281931. 
20 Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism. 
21 Kiaer, Lyrical Socialist Realism; Angelina Lucento, Painting for the Collective: Art, Politics, and 
Communication in Russia, 1918-1932, thesis (PhD), Department of Art History, Northwestern University, 
2014.  
22 Clark, Moscow. 
Soviet intellectuals.23 Even after the establishment of socialist realism as the official model of 
all Soviet cultural production following the First Congress of the Soviet Writers Union in 
1934, a diverse range of positions about what that culture should entail continued to be 
expressed and debated by intellectuals throughout the 1930s. Though these voices did not 
necessarly represent outright dissidence or direct challenges to the Partys position, 
intellectuals retained a degree of independence and agency throughout the 1930s and actively 
contributed to the evolution of Stalinist culture. Though the Party had the final word, Stalinist 
culture evolved as the product of symbiotic relationship between the Party and intellectuals, 
rather than simply as a reflection of intellectuals capitulation to cultural policies dreamt up 
by the Party leadership in isolation from contemporary intellectual trends.24 
Despite these major advances, however, scholarship on Soviet culture in the 1920s 
and 30s has continued to focus primarily on Moscow and Leningrad as the two major centres 
of cultural activity. It remains for greater scrutiny to be applied to cultural activity taking 
place in the Soviet regions and republics and for this activity to be examined in light of recent 
advances in the study of Stalinist culture and national politics. This is true of Georgias case 
especially in light of both the limited scholarship about art in the republic and Georgias 
peculiarity as the place of Stalins birth. Contributing to this embryonic field of scholarship, 
and with a view to bridging part of the gap in the study of Stalinist culture at the Soviet 
periphery, this thesis examines the activities of all those concerned with the production and 
critique of painting in Georgia in the Stalin era, including artists, critics, Party and 
government bureaucrats, the Party leadership in Georgia and in Moscow as well as the 
institutions through which each operated. It documents the various ways in which these 
figures encountered, engaged with, embodied or responded to the politics of nationhood and 
empire in the context of Stalinist Georgia at different historical moments with various results 
for Soviet Georgian painting. In doing so it offers a major new step in updating and 
expanding the few existing accounts of painting in Soviet Georgia.  
Specifically, the combination in this thesis of focused case studies concerning key 
artists, critics, events and institutions and analysis taking into account recent scholarship on 
Soviet national politics and Stalinist culture facilitates a re-contextualisation of better-known 
Georgian artists of the period such as Gudiashvili and Kakabadze. At the same time, it brings 
to light events, institutions and individuals who are more central to the story of Soviet 
Georgian painting than any of the best-known Georgian artists and yet have been overlooked. 
23 Ibid., p. 29; Clark, Petersburg, pp. 279 and 296-7. 
24 Clark, Moscow, p. 6. 
It documents for the first time the ways in which Beria moulded the experience of painters in 
Soviet Georgia in the 1930s, shaping both their artistic production and ultimately Georgias 
place within the Soviet Union. It also highlights the activities of previously unknown critics 
including Duduchava and Rempel, as well as Vladimir Chepelev, a leading commentator on 
contemporary Georgian painting in Moscow in the second half of the 1930s. In doing so it 
provides the first account of debates that took place about non-Russian Soviet art, including 
Georgian art, in the 1920s and 30s. Perhaps the most important single event in the history of 
painting in Georgia under Stalin, the vast Exhibition of Painting, Sculpture and Graphics of 
the Georgian SSR that opened at the State Tretyakov Gallery (hereafter, the Tretyakov 
Gallery) in Moscow on 17 November 1937 is here examined for the first time. Meanwhile, 
examinations of the activities of the key institutions involved in representing Georgian art in 
Moscowincluding the State Museum of Oriental Cultures (Gosudarstvennyi muzei 
vostochnykh kultur, GMVK) and the State Academy of Artistic Sciences (Gosudarstvennaia 
akademiia khudozhestvennykh nauk, GAKhN)offer a new picture of how Georgian 
painting was discussed and understood by contemporary commentators. So too do the main 
periodicals pertaining to artistic activity in Georgia appearing in Tbilisi and Moscow in the 
1920s and 30s, most of which are explored here for the first time. 
This thesis draws on a vast array of primary sources amassed through extensive 
research in the archives and libraries of Moscow and Tbilisi including both Russian and 
Georgian language sources, almost all of which have never been studied before. In addition 
to material drawn from the contemporary periodical press, sources include the archives of 
artists organisations such as the Georgian Association of Revolutionary Artists (SARMA, 
1928-32), Georgias branch of the Association of Revolutionary Artists (REVMAS, 1928-31) 
as well as AKhR/AKhRR in Moscow. The archives of museums and state institutions from 
the Tretyakov Gallery to the Museum of Oriental Cultures have also enabled unique insight 
into the context in which Georgian artists were operating. Materials consulted include 
exhibition catalogues and reviews as well as documentation concerning displays, 
acquisitions, exhibitions, research, publicity, inter-institutional collaborations and the 
planning of exhibitions, lectures and guided exhibition tours. Collectively, this extensive 
primary research allows new light to be shed on defining moments in the history of Soviet 
Georgian painting which have hitherto remained obscure. 
National Politics in Stalins Soviet Union 
The evidence examined in this thesis makes clear the degree to which artists and 
critics in Georgia in the Stalin era were concerned with questions of national politics. This 
was particularly true from 1930, when artists and critics were compelled to interpret Stalins 
famous formulation, made at the Sixteenth Communist Party Congress in 1930, describing 
Soviet culture as national in form, socialist in content.25 This national question was an 
important issue for the Bolsheviks from the outset. Marxism declared nationalism to be 
detrimental to the progress of socialism and both Lenin and Stalin considered it a threat to the 
progress of the international proletariat towards socialism and sought ways to control and 
limit that risk. By trumpeting slogans pronouncing Soviet nations right to self-determination 
(and even, theoretically, secession from the Union) they sought to secure ethnic support for 
their revolution and differentiate themselves from the oppression and exploitation of subject 
nations under the Russian Empire and other colonial powers. As Terry Martin notes in his 
important book on Soviet policy, however, once the revolution was achieved, the Bolsheviks 
needed a model for governing the new multi-ethnic state that dealt with the national question 
on a practical level.26 This was provided in the form of a nationalities policy, which was first 
set out formally in two resolutions passed at a special Central Committee conference in June 
1923. 
As the policy outlined, instead of attempting to suppress nationalist sentiment by 
force, the Bolsheviks unprecedented approach would be to promote systematically the 
national consciousness of its subject nationalities and, in particular, its ethnic minorities. By 
encouraging the development of national consciousness among those communities, actively 
promoting the expression of national cultural difference and providing them with clearly 
delineated national territories as well as local government bureaucracies, schools and 
newspapers operating in the local language, the Soviet leadership believed they would satisfy 
nationalist impulses and avoid the development of more radical separatist nationalisms. At 
the same time, it was argued, the bolstering of ethnic minorities through these measures 
would reduce power inequalities between ethnic groups and so reduce the likelihood of 
25 I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia, vol. 7 (Moscow: Politizdat, 194652), p. 138; I. V. Stalin, Voprosy leninizma (11th 
ed.) (Moscow: Politizdat, 1953.), pp. 545-73.  
26 Terry Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923-1939 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), p. 2.  For another useful account of nationalities policy in this period, 
see Yuri Slezkine The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic 
Particularism, Slavic Review, 53:2 (Summer 1994), pp. 414-52. 
interethnic conflict. On this basis, the Soviet leadership introduced a policy of celebrating and 
encouraging cultural difference among its constituent nationalities. 
As Commissar of Nationalities between 1917 and 1923, as well as later, Stalin 
developed several theses concerning nationalism and the best means of governing the Soviet 
Union as a multi-nation state. A nation, according to his definition, could be called a nation 
only when it had certain features. These included a shared national language, culture and 
psychology but also, crucially, a shared national territory (Jewish and other diaspora 
nationalities, therefore, were excluded).27 Accordingly, within the new Soviet state even the 
smallest of ethnically divided communities were given autonomous national territories. When 
it was established on 30 December 1922, the population of the Soviet Union was thus 
organised into a system of ethnically defined national units. These extended downwards in 
size and status from large national groups allocated the status of full Soviet Socialist 
Republics (SSRs) to Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics (ASSRs) and into smaller and 
smaller national territories (autonomous oblasts, national districts, village soviets, collective 
farms) until the system merged seamlessly with the personal nationality of each Soviet 
citizen.28 The use of local languages was encouraged in local education and governance, and 
administrative powers were devolved to local governments and village soviets.29 The Soviet 
state thus established many of the characteristic institutional forms of the nation-state, 
sometimes for national communities of only a few thousand people. It even financed the 
production of books, films, newspapers, museums, operas and folk ensembles in their 
national languages.30 This process, known as korenizatsiia (indigenisation) or nativizatsiia 
(nativisation) was implemented among dominant national groups and minority communities 
alike, with the intention that each community would be satisfied that its national concerns 
would be best fulfilled under Soviet rule. This programme of active, systematic cultivation of 
national cultures and of the national consciousness of Soviet national groups, which Martin 
has termed the Soviet Affirmative Action Empire, represented a radical approach to 
managing diverse peoples within a large multi-ethnic state, a new professedly post-colonial 
model of empire consolidated through a systematic programme of nation-affirming actions. 
Although Soviet nationalities policy applied to all nationalities of the Soviet Union, in 
practice its implementation differed significantly both at distinct historical moments and with 
27 Joseph Stalin, Marksizm i natsionalnyi vopros, (1913) in Marksizm i natsionalno-kolonialnyi vopros 
(Moscow: Partizdat, 1934), p. 4. 
28 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 10. 
29 Ibid., p. 1.  
30 Ibid., p. 1.  
respect to individual nationalities. Korenizatsiia was instigated across all of the non-Russian 
nationalities throughout the Stalin era and later. However, it progressed more rapidly among 
different national groups at different times.31 Broadly speaking, in Soviet policy of the 1920s, 
nationalities belonged to one of two categories. A nation was either western and 
developed or eastern and backward. Western nations were not only those geographically 
situated in the west, such as Russia and Ukraine, but also nationalities situated elsewhere 
which were deemed to have a developed degree of national consciousness, including Georgia 
and Armenia. 32  In the years immediately following the 1923 formalisation of Soviet 
nationalities policy, under the NEP (New Economic Policy, 1923-8), korenizatsiia progressed 
more quickly among western nationalities while little progress was made among eastern 
nationalities. Among eastern nationalities, the creation of thousands of new national 
territories brought inter-ethnic conflict between neighbouring groups as each sought to avoid 
becoming national minorities within another groups territory. Financial problems, moreover, 
stalled the costly process of setting up new governmental institutions, schools and 
newspapers in local languages. By contrast, among the developed western nationalities such 
as Georgia, which already had strong educated national elites and institutions, the emphasis 
was on linguistic korenizatsiia and the re-introduction of the use of local national languages 
in government, schools and the press, which progressed quickly.  
In the late 1920s, however, the tables turned. During the Cultural Revolution of 1928-
31, terror waged against non-proletarian class elements disproportionately targeted national 
(non-Russian) intelligentsias, compounding expectations that the Cultural Revolutions 
emphasis on accelerating progress towards socialism and developing proletarian class-
consciousness would make national differences irrelevant. This caused some of those 
implementing korenizatsiia in western national territories to pause their efforts. By the end 
of the Cultural Revolution, moreover, the central authorities were also becoming increasingly 
concerned that korenizatsiia in Ukraine in particular (ukrainizatsiia) was encouraging rather 
than disarming nationalism there. The centralisation of administrative control that 
accompanied the First Five-Year Plan and Cultural Revolution, moreover, had bolstered 
resistance within all-Union-level institutions to linguistic korenizatsiia on logistical grounds: 
the more local government institutions operated in local languages, the harder it was for 
central institutions to communicate with them and supervise their activities. In December 
31 Ibid., pp. 23-24. 
32 The majority were categorised as culturally backward. Only the Russians, Ukrainians, Georgians, Armenians, 
Jews, and Germans were declared to be advanced and categorised as Western nationalities. See Ibid., p 23. 
1932, factors including disproportionate resistance to collectivisation among non-Russian 
nationals and moves in Ukraine to annex majority-Ukrainian territories of the RSFSR 
(Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic) led the Politburo to issue two decrees 
criticising Ukrainianisation. These were followed by a wave of terror against Ukrainian and 
Belorussian nationals accused of counter-revolutionary bourgeois nationalism, initiating a 
retreat from korenizatsiia across the western national republics, including Georgia.33 By 
contrast, eastern nationalities benefited from a spike in financial support from the centre 
and korenizatsiia accelerated as Stalins leadership made their administrative development a 
priority of the Cultural Revolution, facilitating the industrialisation and agricultural 
modernisation of those territories and therefore the success of the First Five-Year Plan.34 
The two Politburo decrees and subsequent terror campaign initiated major revisions in 
Soviet nationalities policy, one of the most significant of which was the return to Russians of 
their right to national self-expression. Until then Lenins Greatest Danger principle, which 
declared Great Power (Russian) Chauvinism to pose a greater threat to Soviet power than 
local nationalism, had dictated that Russians be denied that right in order to avoid provoking 
distrust towards Russia felt among the nations formerly oppressed under Tsarist rule.35 
From the early 1930s onwards, not only was the Russian nations right to national self-
expression no longer to be denied, the Russians would become the unifying force in a newly 
imagined Friendship of the Peoples.36 The rehabilitation of Russian culture did not mean an 
end of korenizatsiia among the other Soviet nationalities but it was accompanied by a change 
in the way nations and national cultures were defined and managed. By the second half of the 
1930s it had become clear to the Soviet leadership that governing the 192 nations it had 
established was neither viable nor desirable.37 As a result, nationalities and national territories 
were consolidated to a more manageable number. Most ethnically divided soviets, villages 
and districts were disbanded and several autonomous republics were abandoned, as were 
most national minority schools and institutions (schools and institutions of minority national 
groups within another national groups territory).38 Conversely, larger ethnic groups, those 
with the most developed government bureaucracies and the most developed degrees of 
33 Ibid., p. 26. For more on this see chapter six, The Politics of National Communism, 1923-1930 in Martin, 
The Affirmative Action Empire, pp. 211-69. 
34 Ibid., pp. 25-26. 
35 In practice, with the onslaught of the Great Terror in 1937-8, repressions targeted local nationalisms to a far 
greater degree than they did Great Power Chauvinism. 
36 Stalin, quoted in Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 27.  
37 Slezkine, The USSR as a Communal Apartment, p. 445. 
38 Ibid., p. 445. 
national consciousness, saw their sovereignty and status strengthened, and were instructed to 
redouble, not reverse, efforts in building distinct national cultures.39 Nations were defined by 
their size and longevity and allocated rights and privileges accordingly. Larger, older nations 
were allocated their own territories and right to self-governance in certain spheres, including 
the cultural sphere, and political representation in the Soviet centre. Its members had the right 
to work and be educated in their national language and had greater access to jobs in the 
government and Party apparatuses both in their own republics and in others. This incentivised 
each nationality to promote aspects of its cultural identity that demonstrated its longevity and 
therefore its right to those privileges. Each of the surviving Soviet nations, including 
Georgia, was expected to establish, nurture and celebrate its own nationally-defined culture 
centred around approved Great Traditions, giving the central leadership tighter control over 
expressions of national culture. Under the new slogan of the Friendship of the Peoples 
(Druzhba narodov), moreover, all Soviet nationalities were now required to be familiar with 
and moved by the national cultures of each of their brother nationalities.40 They were 
required to acknowledge and celebrate their own national culture and that of the remaining 
Soviet nationalities in conjunction with a shared Soviet cultural identity that was invariably 
represented through re-appropriated classics of Russian cultural heritage.  
Aside from the broader changes in Soviet nationalities policy over time and the 
differences in its implementation among western and eastern nations, its enactment with 
respect to individual nations reflected the nature of that nations relationship with the Soviet 
centre and the opportunities and challenges it represented for the Soviet leadership. In 
Georgias case, there was no comparable Party-led backlash against korenizatsiia like the one 
that took place in Ukraine. Georgia did not present the same political and military concerns 
since it did not border the Soviet Unions Western European enemies. It therefore did not fuel 
the leaderships paranoia about foreign agents seeking to encourage local nationalism and 
organise nationalist resistance as a means of destabilising the Soviet Union. Instead, in 
Georgia, the nationalist threat was home grown. As such, and as this thesis documents, the 
means of controlling it was different. In the 1930s those means included especially stringent 
control over Georgian expressions of nationhood and by extension over Georgias entire 
39 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 432 and Slezkine, The USSR as a Communal Apartment, p. 445. 
40 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 432 and Slezkine, The USSR as a Communal Apartment, p. 447. 
The phrase imagined community refers to Benedict Andersons field-defining book on nations and nationalism 
in which he defines nations as communities constructed in the minds of the people who consider themselves to 
be members. See Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of 
Nationalism (London: Verso, 2006. First edition: 1983). 
cultural sphere. It is in this light that this thesis considers Berias involvement in the arts (and 
painting in particular) in Georgia in the 1930s as well as the selection of Pirosmani as one of 
a handful of Georgias Great Traditions.  
National politics and national culture 
Since this thesis is concerned with the intersection of national politics and culture in 
Georgia from the dual perspectives of both the Soviet centre and peripheryof both the 
political leadership in Moscow and of Georgian artists and critics in Tbilisi as the articulators 
of their own Soviet national identityit takes a necessarily two-pronged approach. Firstly, it 
examines how Georgian painters and critics defined their national culture, how they 
interpreted Stalins demand for national form, and how they were able to respond and adapt 
when the parameters of national form in Soviet art shifted. Secondly, it considers how 
Georgian art and the Georgian nation were represented by cultural institutions and 
commentators in Moscow. Of course, not all artists and critics in all contexts are driven by 
questions of nationality. Nevertheless, the emphasis placed on nationality under the Soviet 
Affirmative Action Empire and specific directives concerning national form in Soviet art 
ensured that questions of nationhood were prominent in the minds of Soviet citizens, 
especially artists. The evidence examined throughout this thesis, moreover, confirms this fact.  
Each chapter in this thesis considers how Georgian nationhood and Georgian national 
culture were represented by artists, critics, politicians and other commentators at different 
moments in the Stalin era. Chapter one introduces the artists, critics, institutions and 
publications central to the story of painting in Soviet Georgia in the 1920s and 30s and offers 
a review of the art periodicals appearing in Tbilisi in those years. In doing so it provides a 
vital chronological framework for the investigations presented in the subsequent chapters. 
Chapter two explores how individual critics and influential organisations in Moscow 
understood the issue of national art, including Georgian art, and represented it to the Soviet 
public in the 1920s and early 1930s both in written commentaries and exhibition displays.  
Chapter three shows artists and critics debating the same questions in Georgia over the same 
period. Chapters four and five then explain how the resolution of these questions evolved in 
the second half of the 1930s. Finally, chapter six documents how critics represented 
Pirosmanis legacy and significance in the 1920s and 30s and how Pirosmani became one of 
the foremost symbols of Georgian nationhood and national culture in the Stalinist period 
despite his primitive painterly style and connections to the pre-Revolutionary Russian avant-
garde. 
Each of the individuals and organisations discussed was grappling with an impossible 
conundrum due to contradictions inherent in Soviet nationalities policy. Korenizatsiiathe 
cultivation and celebration of distinct national administrations and cultural identitieswas 
only a means to an end, not the ultimate goal. In fact, the ultimate goal was the exact 
opposite: the eventual drawing together (sblizhenie) and merging (sliianie) of Soviet national 
cultures into a single unified Soviet socialist national culture without national distinctions. 
The difficulty was that it was not clear when that sblizhenie and sliianie should take place, 
when korenizatsiia would cease to be desirable. Korenizatsiia was meant to satisfy the non-
Russian peoples desire for administrative autonomy and national cultural expression, to 
provide them with an impression of their agency as partners in a new kind of federation of 
nations. Members of each nationality (excluding the Russian people until 1934) had the right 
to national cultural expression and were actively encouraged to celebrate their national 
distinctiveness. However, the most enlightened and commited socialists, whether 
representatives of the Soviet centre of the distant periphery, were presumably ready to 
embrace the idea of the eventual merger of Soviet nations and creation of a unified Soviet 
culture that transcended national difference. In that case, did they not became a representative 
of the Soviet centre, leaving behind that national concerns still occupying the less advanced, 
backward looking periphery? Similarly, commentators representing the Soviet centre such as 
Rempel, not belonging to formerly oppressed nations, had no reason to or justification for 
harbouring attachment to their or others national cultural difference. Yet Soviet nationalities 
policy nevertheless obliged representatives of the centre to encourage the celebration of 
national cultural difference by non-Russians.41 
An aim of this thesis, then, is to examine how Soviet policy, including nationalities 
policy, was implemented and enforced in practice with respect to Georgian artistic activity 
and cultural heritage. How was theory played out in practice? Were the goals of the policy 
achieved, and if so, how? And how did this impact on Georgian artists lives and works. This 
line of enquiry is pursued throughout the thesis, but in particular in chapters two, four and 
five, all of which primarily deal with the activities of Moscow institutions in representing 
Georgian culture to the Soviet public through their displays and publications. Chapter two 
41 Rempel was actually from Simferopol on the Crimena peninsula, but represented the Soviet centre in the 
position his took and the institutions he worked for. V. E. Voitov, Materialy po istorii Gosudarstvennogo 
muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, veshchi, dela (Moscow: Skanrus, 2003), p. 151. 
sheds light on the challenges that arose in the practical implementation of Soviet nationalities 
policy in Moscow in particular with reference to the display and representation of the art and 
culture of the non-Russian peoples of the Soviet Union in Moscow. Chapters four and five 
give an account of the personal interventions of the Soviet leadership including especially 
Beria, in the activities of Georgian artists during the mid-1930s. They offer a candid snapshot 
of the Soviet leaderships attitudes toward both Georgia and the question of national form in 
Soviet painting at that moment and provide a fresh picture of their hands-on involvement in 
managing national art as well as the image of Soviet Georgian nationhood. The 1937 
Moscow Exhibition of Works of Painting, Sculpture and Graphics of the Georgian SSR, 
examined in these two chapters, stands as evidence of the successes and failures of their 
efforts.  
 In examining these questions, this research has built on and responded to a body of 
scholarship addressing several distinct questions related to the intersection of national politics 
and national cultures in Stalins Soviet Union. Several scholars, for example, have examined 
how state cultural institutions and state-initiated cultural events in Moscow helped 
disseminate the Soviet leaderships position concerning the relationships of Soviet 
nationalities to Soviet power. They explore how nationalities were represented, the extent to 
which such institutions and initiatives were responding to Soviet nationalities policy or other 
priorities of the Soviet leadership, and how successful they were in presenting their intended 
narratives. Francine Hirsch, for example, has shown how the academics of the ethnographic 
department of Leningrads State Russian Museum (hereafter, Russian Museum) struggled 
with contradictory, seemingly incompatible demands placed on them in representing the 
Soviet nationalities in their displays. They were expected to represent both the distinctiveness 
of individual Soviet nationalities while also reflecting official Party narratives of those 
nationalities modernisation under Soviet governance, particularly in the context of the 
transformations of Stalins First Five-Year Plan.42 The museums task was impossible, since 
exhibits capable of distinguishing one ethnic group from another, such as examples of folk 
crafts, embroidery, agricultural tools, or national dress, often also carried connotations of the 
groups perceived cultural backwardness. Equally, evidence of a nationalitys 
modernisation tended in turn to obscure the groups national cultural distinctions.43 Hirschs 
study provides an important model, and the ethnographic department a useful point of 
42 Francine Hirsch, Getting to Know The Peoples of the USSR: Ethnographic Exhibits as Soviet Virtual 
Tourism 1923-1934, Slavic Review, 62:4 (Winter, 2003), pp. 683-709. 
43 Ibid., p. 690. 
comparison, for my examinations of the operations of Moscows Museum of Oriental 
Cultures and of the 1937 exhibition of Georgian art in Moscow. As in Hirschs study, my 
findings are based on extensive archival material concerning the acquisition of exhibits, the 
planning of displays, guided tours, accompanying lectures, debates and openings, together 
with visitors books, publicity material and contemporary exhibition reviews. Moreover, as 
with Hirschs study, my conclusions show how museum staff and exhibition committees 
struggled to resolve the practical problems raised by the contradictions and ambiguities at the 
heart of Soviet nationalities policy. 
 Greg Castillos account of the representation of Soviet nationalities at all-Union 
architectural exhibits in Moscow in the Stalin era provides another important precedent for 
the research presented in chapters two, four and five of this thesis. He shows how fairs and 
exhibitions, including Moscows First Agricultural and Cottage Industries Exhibition in 
1923, and the All-Union Agricultural Exhibition (VSKhV) which opened in Moscow in 1939 
and was remodelled and re-opened following World War II in 1954, were designed to reflect 
the central tenets of Soviet nationalities policy.44 Castillos observation that the construction 
of Soviet national identities by the Soviet centre was, in a literal sense, an exhibitionistic 
pursuit is the starting point from which I examine the activities of the Museum of Oriental 
Cultures and the 1937 Moscow exhibition.45 
In any project examining the representation of one ethnic or national group by 
another, one must consider the relevance of the study of Orientalism, and the applicability of 
the model of colonial governance set out by Edward Said in his controversial field-defining 
thesis on the subject.46 Several scholars have debated the relevance of Saids thesis to the 
study of both Imperial and Soviet Russias relationship with the non-Russian nationalities 
under its control, reaching varying conclusions. Nathaniel Knight has argued against the 
utility of applying Saids thesis to the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union, insisting that the 
relationship of Russia to her colonial subjects or constituent nationalities was profoundly 
different to those of Western Europe. He maintains that, unlike nineteenth-century European 
colonial empires, Russia did not view Central Asia and the Caucasus as an emphatically 
inferior oriental other, irrevocably separate from and subordinate to civilised Russia, nor 
did Russians conquer and dominate those lands primarily through an orientalist discourse as 
set out by Said. Instead, the colonised subject was an (albeit backward) member of the 
44 Greg Castillo, Peoples at an Exhibition: Soviet Architecture and the National Question in Lahusen and 
Dobrenko, eds, Socialist Realism Without Shores, pp. 91-119 (p. 92). 
45 Ibid., p. 92. 
46 Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978). 
empires community of peoples, with the capacity to become civilised and even to 
contribute to the study of the orient itself.47  
Others, such as Adeeb Khalid, however, have defended the usefulness of Orientalist 
theory to the Russian context, warning that by emphasising the uniqueness of Russias 
situation as Knight does, we are in danger of impeding meaningful cross-regional 
comparative studies of orientalism.48 Similarly, David Schimmelpenninck van der Oye 
concludes that even if Edward Saids work is not wholly relevant to Russian orientalism, it 
[nevertheless] raise[s] some interesting questions about the relationships between knowledge 
and power which are useful in the Russian context.49 Maria Todorova, meanwhile, agrees 
with some of Knights objections.50 However, she also defends Khalids argument for the 
utility of Orientalism in the Russian case insofar as it describes power relations in a concrete 
imperial/colonial context, and that, furthermore, it helps elucidate the specific ambivalence 
of Russia as both the subject and object of orientalism.51 The Soviet leadership, of course, 
sought to distance itself from the colonialism either of Tsarist Russia or Western Europe, 
presenting the Soviet Union instead as a post-colonial multi-national state that benefited the 
nations and nationalities belonging to it, the larger of which at least theoretically maintained 
the right to secede. True, non-Russian peoples experience of Soviet rule often had little to do 
with the narratives presented by the Soviet centre. And (particularly, early) representations of 
non-Slavic Soviet nationalities at the Soviet centre sometimes borrowed from Western 
colonial models of representation that effectively othered Southern and Eastern Soviet 
nationalities, stressing their difference and backwardness and denying them the right to self-
representation (such as at the 1923 Agricultural and Cottage Industries Exhibition). 
Nevertheless, most scholars agree that the Soviet centres relationship with its non-Russian 
peoples departed dramatically from the colonial empires of the nineteenth century.  
Terry Martins assessment of the workings of the Soviet Union as a multi-national 
state and of the implementation of Soviet nationalities policy in the 1920s and 30s stresses 
the differences between the Soviet Union and the nineteenth-century European colonial 
47 Nathaniel Knight, Grigorev in Orenburg, 1851-1862: Russian Orientalism in the Service of Empire?, Slavic 
Review, 59 (2000), pp. 74-100 (p. 96). 
48 Adeeb Khalid, Russian History and the Debate over Orientalism, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and 
European History, 1:4 (2000), pp. 691-99.  
49 David Schimmelpenninck van der Oye, Russian orientalism: Asia in the Russian mind from Peter the Great to 
the Emigration (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010), p. 9. 
50 Maria Todorova, Does Russian Orientalism Have a Russian Soul? A Contribution to the Debate between 
Nathaniel Knight and Adeeb Khalid, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and European History, 1:4 (2000), pp. 
717-27 (p. 721). 
51 Maria Todorova, Does Russian Orientalism Have a Russian Soul?, p. 720. 
empires. In his use of the label empire in the context of the Soviet Affirmative Action 
Empire, Martin asserts that he does not intend to present the Soviet Union as a traditional 
type of empire, insisting instead that he is emphasising its novelty.52 No other empire, after 
all, actively cultivated the national cultural distinctiveness of its subject nationalities in the 
way that the Soviet leadership elected to. Vera Tolzs study of the activities of Russian 
Imperial orientologists in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries highlighted 
continuities in the way non-Russian ethnic groups (especially smaller communities) were 
represented before and after the Russian Revolution. It showed how the same Imperial 
Russian orientologists who wrote about and represented the non-Slavic peoples of the 
Russian Empire and influenced Imperial Russias policies towards those communities before 
the Revolution continued to speak for those groups and influence policy affected them under 
Soviet rule.53 However, as Tolz and others have shown, these academics also operated with 
significant freedom from State direction.54 They were empire savers who nevertheless 
strongly supported the demands for self-determination.55 As Tolz notes, key features of 
Saids concept of Orientalism are reflected in the pronouncements of these scholars, who 
insisted on their right and ability to speak on behalf of the peoples of the Orient.56 
However, the Russian orientologists consistently worked side by side with researchers 
belonging to the very cultures they were studying. As such, as Tolz concludes, the central 
tenet of Orientalism, defined by Said as a style of thought based upon an ontological and 
epistemological distinction made between the Orient and (most of the time) the 
Occident, is not readily applicable to their work.57  
I am in agreement with these scholars that a more complex political and cultural 
dialogue between Soviet centre and periphery was at play than can be profitably explained 
through reference to Saids model of colonial Orientalism, despite instances (like those which 
Castillo highlights) in which the power relationship this model embodies resonated with the 
Soviet experience. Instead, as this thesis documents, political and cultural actors at both the 
centre and periphery of the Soviet Union were involved in presenting a changing picture of 
the dynamics of power between the central Soviet authorities and the Unions constituent 
52 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 19. 
53 Vera Tolz, Russias own Orient: the politics of identity and Oriental studies in the late Imperial and early 
Soviet periods (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), p. 4.  
54 See, for example, Bruce Grant, Empire and Savagery: The Politics of Primitivism in Late Imperial Russia in 
Daniel R. Brower and Edward J. Lazzerini, eds, Russias Orient: Imperial Borderlands and Peoples, 17001917 
(Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1997), pp. 292-310 (p. 307). 
55 Tolz, Russias Own Orient, p. 6. 
56 Ibid., p. 21. 
57 Ibid., p. 21. 
nationalities. Soviet nationalities policy and its implementation was guided by a continual 
negotiation between the Soviet leaderships shifting political priorities and peoples 
responses to them.  
Imagining the Georgian Nation 
Several scholars have considered how Georgian intellectuals conceived of and 
articulated their nationhood in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and what circumstances 
and influences fed or motivated particular conceptualisations. Nino Nanavas 2005 doctoral 
thesis, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation: the Modern Intellectual Discourse of Georgian 
Identity broaches precisely this subject. There are serious problems with Nanavas text, 
however, leading one to question the reliability of many of her conclusions. In her chapter on 
Georgian Nation and Nationalism during the Stalin Era, for example, she sets out to 
demonstrate how the dynamics and inter-relationship between Georgian nationalism and 
Soviet state nationalism developed during the Stalin era.58 However, she fails to define what 
is meant by Soviet state nationalism, or to situate her discussion in relation to useful 
existing accounts of Soviet nationalisms and nationalities policies, such as those offered by 
Martin, Yuri Slezkine and others. She also makes a series of surprising assertions that 
directly contradict those accounts. In contradiction of Martins account, for example, she 
claims that the assimilation of smaller nationalities into the mainstream of larger nations was 
seen as something desirable, though she does not say who desired this or when, or offer any 
evidence in support of this claim.59 She declares, moreover, that the Soviet leadership, instead 
of seeking to satisfy national sentiment by encouraging expressions of national culture, re-
directed the nationalistic grievances of smaller national groups towards the dominant 
nationality of a given region, exacerbating inter-ethnic tensions.60A series of confusing, 
pseudo-psychological explanations for what she views as Stalins particular victimisation of 
Georgia are then presented in support of her position. She declares, for example, that Stalins 
rejection of his Georgianness stemmed from a feeling of inadequacy, during his formative 
years in Georgia, though she does not elaborate on the sources of this feeling or its specific 
58 Nino Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation: The Modern Intellectual Discourse of Georgian 
Identity, thesis (Ph.D), University of London, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2005, p. 
59 Ibid., p. 133. In the same vein, Nanava declares that Stalin favoured the old methods and ruled the Soviet 
State in the spirit of his Tsarist predecessors. Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation, p. 146. 
60 Ibid., p. 131.  
relevance to Stalins rejection of his Georgian nationhood or to his policies with respect to 
Georgia.61  
These statements point to the fact that the chapter (and the thesis) is not really 
concerned with the dynamics of Georgian nationalism and Soviet state nationalism in the 
Soviet period. Instead, it is interested in demonstrating the negative impact of Stalinist 
nationalities policy on Georgias relations with her neighbours in the post-Stalin and post-
Soviet eras and, in particular, on her contemporary ability to establish her rightful territorial 
unity (extending to Abkhazia and Ossetia).62  Meanwhile, rather than elucidating how 
Georgian intellectuals conceived of their nationhood under Stalin, Nanava offers unsurprising 
and vague conclusions that both Lenin and Stalin left their own mark on the nationalities 
question in Georgia, that exiled Georgian Mensheviks in Paris were in favour of Georgias 
independence from the Soviet Union, and that outspoken separatist nationalists inside Soviet 
Georgia faced persecution.63  
Nevertheless, despite these problems, the premise of Nanavas thesisthat Georgian 
intellectuals in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries actively constructed conceptions of 
Georgian national identity and that one should look to their commentaries in order to better 
understand how nationhood was discussed and conceived of in a given periodis an 
important point of departure for my own thesis. So too is her hypothesis that they articulated 
these conceptions by drawing on myths and symbols of Georgias primordial past and that 
these myths and symbols then gradually filtered into a popular mythology of Georgian 
culture.64 Nanava offers this hypothesis based on her application of an ethno-symbolist 
approach to the study of nationalism, after theorists such as John A. Armstrong, Anthony D. 
Smith and John Hutchinson. This approach acknowledges the modern process of nation 
formation, yet it also posits the important role of collective memories in creating nations, 
which are understood, again to use Andersons phrase, as imagined communities, built in 
the minds of their members, based on the image of their communion.65 These collective 
memories might encompass anything from wars and their heroes to architects, painters, 
sculptors, poets, musicians and their works, but include, above all, idealised memories of a 
golden age, or golden ages, of virtue, heroism, beauty, learning, holiness, power and 
61 Ibid., p. 133.  
62 Ibid., p. 148. 
63 Ibid., pp. 15 and 155-63.  
64 See the introduction to Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation, pp. 8-16. 
65 Ibid., p. 9; Anderson, Imagined Communities, p. 6. 
wealth, an era distinguished for its collective dignity and external prestige.66 Nanava argues 
that pre-modern myths and symbols related, for example, to Georgias twelfth-century 
Golden Age, and the mythologies of Queen Tamar (who reigned 1184-1213), Rustaveli, 
Georgias fourth-century Christianiser, St Nino, and others played a central role in 
conceptualisation of the Georgian nation.67  
Regardless of the evidence Nanava herself supplies, her hypothesis is played out in 
the work of other scholars of Georgian history and culture. Harsha Ram, for example, has 
shown recently how the committedly nationalist Georgian literary modernists of the Blue 
Horns group (Tsisperi qantselebi, 1915-1930) consciously constructed Georgian national 
identity in the early twentieth century. They did so by rhetorically aligning themselves with 
Western European Decadence, Italian Futurism and the mystical cognition of the Russian 
Symbolists theurgically oriented symbolism.68 In doing so they distanced the Georgian 
literary tradition from the Russian one, insisting that the influence of Russian traditions of 
thought and literature could only be detrimental to Georgias development. More importantly 
here though, in relation to Nanavas hypothesis, Ram explains that Tabidzes vindication of 
the Georgian national ethos was essentially mythicgrounded in a primordially conceived 
mythology of Georgian nationhood. Tabidzes account of Georgian culture rested in a 
timeless set of cultural and aesthetic traits, which history could hamper or obscure but never 
generate. 69  My examination of Georgian artists and critics discussion of Georgian 
nationhood and national culture in the 1920s and 30s and in particular in their reflections on 
the Georgian national character through their commentaries on Pirosmanis career, provides 
further evidence in support of Nanavas contention, although I strive, like Ram, to situate that 
new data within the concrete historical context of Soviet national politics and the realities of 
its impact in Georgia. 
A major drawback of Nanavas proposed ethno-symbolist approach is that it does not 
take sufficient account of the impact of specific socio-political events and shifts in Stalinist 
policy, including nationalities policy, on Georgian intellectuals conceptualisation of their 
nationhood. Viktor Shnirelmans research is more successful in that respect in that it explores 
how Soviet nationalities policy encouraged national intellectuals in the Caucasus to 
deliberately keep alive artistic traditions that would otherwise naturally have disappeared in 
66 Anthony D. Smith, The Myths and Memories of the Nation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999) cited in 
Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation, p. 9. 
67 Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation, p. 11. 
68 Harsha Ram, Decadent Nationalism, Peripheral Modernism: The Georgian Literary Manifesto between 
Symbolism and the Avant-garde, Modernism/modernity, 21:1 (January, 2014), pp. 334-59. 
69 Ibid., p. 350. 
order to validate their own nationalitys indigenous status. The policys privileging of groups 
demonstrated to be authentically indigenous, he shows, encouraged nationalist intellectuals to 
artificially conserve and retain those folk traditions, which, under different conditions, 
would have failed to survive in the industrial and post-industrial environment. 70 
Nevertheless, Shnirelmans thesis does not appear to take into account the active, systematic 
top-down promotion and cultivation of such cultural traditions as markers of national identity 
that took place under Soviet nationalities policy in the Stalin era. The korenizatsiia that took 
place throughout the Stalin era and (albeit to a lesser degree) in the post-Stalin years, 
including before Soviet nationalities policys shift in the mid-1930s towards a more 
primordialist definition of nations, clearly also drove the artificial preservation of national 
cultural and folk traditions. National cultural producers were not only incentivised to preserve 
such traditions by the prospect of demonstrating the nations indigenous status. They were 
also systematically provided with funding and administrative assistance to develop cultural 
and educational institutions through which people were paid to preserve those traditions. 
Moreover, as I have explored elsewhere, the resultant preservation and celebration of these 
traditions meant that they remained (or became) a part of peoples national self-conception.71 
In agreement with Nanava and Shnirelmen, this thesis argues that Georgian painters and 
other commentators consciously constructed formulae of Georgian national culture and 
delineated their own version of Soviet Georgian nationhood. The ways in which they did so 
responded to various socio-political pressures and motivations, including those connected to 
changing Soviet nationalities policy. However, Georgian artists and other commentators also 
had agency in how they interpreted the official version of their nationhood dictated by Soviet 
policy, and how they used and sometimes re-appropriated national symbols to offer their own 
vision of nationhood in the Soviet context, particularly before and after the height of Stalinist 
state control over the arts. 
A final, important point of departure for this thesis is the small body of recent 
scholarship highlighting the complexities implicit in the study of empire, nationalism and 
national identity in the Russian Imperial and Soviet contexts in light of the non-binary 
network of orients and occidents that such a study must involve. While Georgia may have 
been part of Russias own Orient, for example, she can also bear the status (and 
70 Victor A. Shnirelman, The value of the past: myths, identity and politics in Transcaucasia (Osaka: National 
Museum of Ethnology, 2001), p. 4. 
71 See Jennifer Brewin, Ucha  Japaridze, Lado Gudiashvili, and the Spiritual in Georgian Painting in Louise 
Hardiman and Nicola Kozicharow (eds), Modernism and the Spiritual in Russian Art (Cambridge: Open Book 
Publishers, 2017), pp. 229-63. 
responsibility) of the occident in her relationship with neighbours considered to be more 
oriental. In the Soviet context, though Georgia may have been orientalised and othered in 
discourse emanating from institutions in the Soviet centre, Georgia remained a western, 
developed people under Soviet nationalities policy while the Islamic peoples of Central 
Asia or even of Georgias mountainous north were eastern and backward. Furthermore, 
one relationship between one east and west could be used to adjust another. Mark Bassin, 
for example, has written about the importance that Tsarist Russia placed on its oriental 
frontier in the Caucasus as a place where her relationship with Western Europe could be 
reconfigured. Through Russias introduction of European enlightenment and civilisation in 
the region she showed her to be civilised and European.72 Conversely, Jane Sharp has shown 
how members of Russias early twentieth-century artistic avant-garde redefined their identity 
vis--vis the West by aligning themselves with their construction of the art of the East, 
selecting Pirosmani as a representative of that East.73 By presenting his painting as an 
example of a non-European modernism that was, like theirs, rooted in the primitive directness 
they discerned in the art of the East, they sought to redefine themselves as the architects of an 
alternative to Western European modernism. These examples of how the Russian state and 
Russian painters respectively sought to shift their identity between East and West constitute 
useful precedents for this thesiss exploration of how Georgian artists and critics and 
representatives of the Soviet centre formulated Georgian nationhood between East and West, 
in particular, in relation to my investigation of the representation of Georgian and other 
national cultures in Moscow by the Museum of Oriental Cultures and other institutions.  
Finally, several further studies offer models for considering how the relationship 
between Moscow and Georgia were formulated to different ends in the Stalin era. Susan 
Layton, Harsha Ram and Zaza Shatrishvili, for example, have demonstrated how Russian 
Romantic writers in the nineteenth century and Georgian writers under their influence 
reimagined Georgias position between East and West by constructing visions of empire 
based on a three-way dynamic involving Russia, Georgia, and the Islamic mountain-dwelling 
peoples of the North Caucasus.74 Furthermore, Bruce Grants study of how narratives in 
72 Mark Bassin, Russia Between Europe and Asia: The Ideological Construction of Geographic Space, Slavic 
Review, 50:1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 1-17. See also Brower and Lazzerini, Russias Orient and Jane Burbank and 
David L. Russel, eds, Imperial Russia: New Histories for the Empire (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 
1998).   
73 Jane A. Sharp, Beyond Orientalism: Russian and Soviet Modernism on the Periphery of Empire, in Rosalind 
P. Blakesley & Susan E. Reid, eds, Russian Art and the West: A Century of Dialogue in Painting, Architecture, 
and the Decorative Arts (DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 2007), pp. 112-33. 
74 Harsha Ram and Zaza Shatrishvili, Romantic Topography and the Dilemma of Empire: The Caucasus in the 
Dialogue of Georgian and Russian Poetry, Russian Review, 63:1 (2004), pp. 1-25; Harsha Ram, The Imperial 
Imperial Russian and Soviet literature presented the conquest of the Caucasus as a civilising 
mission, a gift of civilisation, protection, supervision and assistance given by the Imperial or 
Soviet centre to its periphery, constitutes an important point of reference for analysing 
representations of Georgias relationship to Soviet power.75 Grant shows how these narratives 
of gift giving allowed Russian and Soviet colonisers to bind the Caucasus in their debt and 
thereby to legitimise their claims of sovereignty over the region and to demand reciprocity, 
compliance, and even gratitude in return.76 This dynamic is particularly relevant to my study 
of the 1937 Moscow exhibition of Georgian art since the exhibition required Georgian artists 
both to show their gratitude for Stalins role in the revolutionary process in Transcaucasia 
and to demonstrate their artistic and political compliance with the new order. 
As the above review of scholarship on Soviet national politics and the expression of 
national identities in the Soviet context makes clear, nationhood, national identity and 
national heritage should not be understood as inevitably and naturally occurring phenomena. 
Instead, they represent categories that are consciously constructed by individual actors, 
including intellectuals and politicians, to serve particular agendas. Indeed, the articulation of 
these identities, the delineation of the heritage claimed as belonging to a particular 
national group, and the nationalistic interpretation of the significance of that heritage in 
helping to define those identities, often contribute to the process of construction of nations 
themselves.77 Nations, similarly, are not primordially existing entities, but are formed, at least 
in part, as the product of the articulation of consciously constructed national identities by 
intellectuals and others actors. They also come into being only in the context of specific 
conditions and are defined by specific features. 
This thesis subscribes to the definition of nations set forth by Benedict Anderson, who 
describes them as imagined communities built in the minds of their members, based on the 
image of their communion. 78 They are communities united based on their members 
perception of ties between themselves and the remaining members of their community, often 
grounded in shared language, culture, history, religion or myths of descent. As Anderson 
clarifies, however, such communities can be considered nations only when they share certain 
Sublime: A Russian Poetics of Empire (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2003); Susan Layton, Russian 
Literature and Empire: Conquest of the Caucasus from Pushkin to Tolstoy (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1994). 
75 Bruce Grant, The Captive and the Gift: Cultural Histories of Sovereignty in Russia and the Caucasus (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 2009). 
76 Ibid. 
77 On this process, see 1. Rethinking Social Identities: Class and Nationality, in Suny, Revenge of the Past, pp. 
1-19. 
78 Ibid., p. 9; Anderson, Imagined Communities, p. 6. 
necessary features. As he argues, moreover, they are a necessarily modern phenomenon since 
they rely on a degree of social communication that only appeared in the modern age with the 
development of what Anderson calls print-capitalism (a phenomenon whereby the 
popularisation of the printing press combined with the development of capitalist markets 
encouraged the mass circulation of printed materials in vernacular languages, which 
facilitated the development of common national discourses). 79  Modern nations, thus, 
sometimes grow out of already existing pre-Modern ethnic communities, proto-nationalities, 
or what Anthony D. Smith calls ethnies.80 However, they are not the same entity. As Ronald 
Suny puts it, modern nationalities are usually larger, territorially more dispersed 
communities than the ethnies out of which they may have grown.81 Crucially, they are also 
communities that have been successfully organised and mobilised by the work of 
intellectuals and politicians so that they can put forth cultural and political demands that 
may include autonomy, sovereignty, and independence.82 Nations, or nationalities (Suny 
uses the terms interchangeably), then, are modern entities, brought into being with the help of 
intellectuals and other actors who articulate and disseminate particular constructions of 
nationhood and national identity. But in order for them to constitute a nation, the identities 
articulated must be adopted and internalised by the broad masses, who can in turn be 
mobilised in support of shared national concerns. The resulting nation may or may not be 
based on a previously existing, pre-modern proto-nationality or ethnie. However, it is distinct 
from its pre-modern counterpart in that its imagined community is a different one. It is not 
based on the same image of communion, does not comprise the same group of people, and is 
not able to mobilise its members in the same way as the imagined community constituting 
the modern nation. 
As noted earlier in this thesis, following the Revolution, the Soviet leadership, led by 
Stalin as Commissar of Nationalities, issued a definition of the nation that differed 
significantly from that set out above. It also later remodelled its definition to reflect its 
changing political priorities and changing approach to the governance of the Soviet Union as 
a multi-nation state. Its early definition specified only a shared language, culture and 
psychology, as well as, importantly, a shared national territory, as necessary attributes. 
Crucially, this implied that ethnic groups with a shared language, culture and psychology 
could become a nationwith all of the priveleges and rights that that status might affordif 
79 Anderson, Imagined Communities, p. 224. 
80 Anthony D. Smith, Theories of Nationalism (second edition) (London: Duckworth, 1983), p. 21. 
81 Suny, Revenge of the Past, p. 13. 
82 Ibid. 
given their own national territory and supported in the development of national institutions. It 
therefore allowed the Soviet leadership to forward its model of a post-colonial multi-nation 
state in which even small ethnic communities enjoyed national status. In the mid-1930s, 
however, as Soviet policy shifted towards the consolidation of its numerous national groups 
into a much smaller number of Soviet nations, the Soviet leadership adopted a primordial 
conception of nations. Under this new model, national status relied on the ability of a national 
group to demonstrate its longevity, based on the assumption of continuity between the 
modern nation and its historical ancestors (ethnies).  
The Soviet leadership thus promoted different conceptions of nationhood at different 
times to serve its changing goals. In its nationalities policy, moreover, it also set out the 
implications of those conceptions in terms of the status and rights (to territory, degrees of 
self-governance, for example) of Soviet national groups within the Union. In doing so, it 
established boundaries within which those groups (including their cultural property and 
identity) could be discussed and conceived of by intellectuals (even if the policies that it set 
out were also often informed, in turn, by the positions put forward by intellectuals).  
In creating new nations (as it defined them), and redefining conceptual and 
territorial boundaries between nations (both those newly and previously recognised), the 
Bolsheviks politicised ethnicity by attaching to it particular rights and priveleges. As Vera 
Tolz and Svetlana Gorshenina have shown, among certain Central Asian nationalities, the 
national boundaries (conceptual and territorial) demarcated by the Bolsheviks following the 
Revolution and again with the beginning of the national demarcation of Central Asia in 1924, 
led to disagreements over the attribution of national cultural identities as well as the rights of 
those nationalities to claim ownership of monuments of cultural heritage.83 The delineation of 
those identities and rights of ownership was actively undertaken by a range of actors 
including, at different times, the central Soviet authorities, local actors, and imperial Russian 
orientologists (who continued to study those communities and cultures after the Revolution). 
Each of these parties had their own agenda and their own views on how those identities and 
rights of ownership should be delineated, leading to different definitions at different times. 
Before 1924, no clear position was agreed on as to whether monuments should be considered 
the property of the local population, the Soviet people, or of the whole world; for local actors 
83 Svetlana Gorshenina and Vera Tolz, Constructing Heritage in Early Soviet Central Asia: The Politics of 
Memory in a Revolutionary Context*, Ab Imperio (4), 2016, pp. 77-115. The national delimitation of 
Turkestan, which eventually resulted in the creation of five republics in Central Asia, began in 1924 with the 
creation of the Uzbek and Turkmen SSRs, the Tajik ASSR within the Uzbek SSR and the Kara-Kirghiz 
Autonomous Oblast within the Russian Federation, although it was a complex and prolonged process that was 
completed only in 1936. Gorshenina and Tolz, Constructing Heritage, p. 103. 
its was largely clear that they belonged to the local population, but for Russians the question 
was more ambiguous.84 However, somewhat surprisingly, in the first four years following the 
1924 delimitation, monument preservation in the region continued to be the responsibility of 
the same joint preservation committee (Sredazkomstaris) that had operated before 1924, 
rather than being divided between independent committees for each new territory.85 This 
arrangement was primarily promoted by Russian orientologists, as well as by 
Sredazkomstaris. As such, it partly reflected Sredazkomstariss desire to maintain the 
authority that it already held, as well as Russian orientologists belief that dividing the 
committees would lead to a dearth of local specialists able to conduct the necessary 
preservation work. However, it also reflected a particular vision of a national culture as, 
inevitably, a multiethnic endeavour, not a discrete, insulated entity, but a product of complex 
transnational communications.86 It was only in the early 1930s that independent republican 
preservation comittees were established in Central Asia and a more narrow, ethno-centric 
definition of national cultures came to be articulated.87 
Importantly for this thesis, however, the situation was different in the Caucasus. As 
Tolz and Gorshenina have pointed out, in the first decades of the twentieth century the 
influential Russian orientologist and linguist Nikolai Marr proposed a vision of the pan-
Caucasian culture analogous to the shared culture envisaged by others for Central Asia.88 
However, unlike in Central Asia, this vision was immediately opposed by representatives of 
the Georgian and Armenian intellectual elites, who articulated instead narrow, ethnocentric 
definitions of national communities and cultures and suggested instead the appropriation of 
specific historical monuments for the production of separate Armenian and Georgian 
national histories.89 As will be evident in chapters two and three of this thesis, moreover, 
artists and critics in Georgia in the 1920 and 30s, as well as many of those commenting on 
Georgian art in Moscow in the same period, largely adopted this narrow ethno-centric 
conception of nations and national cultural heritage without question, as naturally and 
inevitably existing facts. Indeed, there is no evidence of any artist, critic or other 
commentator in this period having attempted to define what Georgian national culture or 
cultural heritage did or did not include. Instead, these figures concerned themselves with 
84 Ibid., p. 103. 
85 Ibid., p. 97. In 1924, the committee, Turkomstaris (the Turkmen Committee), was simply renamed 
Sredazkomstaris (the Central Asian Committee). 
86 Ibid., p. 105. 
87 Ibid., p. 109. 
88 Ibid., p. 106. 
89 Ibid., p. 106. 
offering an interpretation of national form of Soviet art, which they automatically based on 
the same ethno-centric conception of the national. It was only in the late 1930s when Soviet 
nationalities policy shifted towards a more primordialist conception of nations based around 
Great Traditions of national cultures that the bounds (or at least the key foci) of Georgian 
national culture and national cultural heritage were explicitly articulated. For that reason, 
in tracing debates that took place concerning national form in Soviet art, I reproduce the 
terminology of nationhood, national culture and national cultural heritage as it was used 
by the figures studied while acknowledging that these terms refer to concepts that are 
consciously constructed, even if those using them do not acknowledge or understand them to 
be so. 
Chapter outlines 
Chapter one provides a fresh account of the artists, critics, and cultural and 
governmental institutions involved in producing, criticising and moulding visual art in 
Georgia in the first two decades following Sovietisation, tracing in particular the appearance 
of proletarian currents in Georgian painting and art criticism in that period. The first 
comprehensive review of the major artistic and literary journals published in Georgia in the 
period, it provides a vital chronology for the case studies presented in the subsequent 
chapters. Chapter two explores the politics and challenges of displaying and discussing 
national artthe art of the non-Russian peoples of the USSRin Moscow in the Stalin era. 
It considers the attempts of a series of individuals and institutions to present national art 
including contemporary Georgian painting to the Moscow public, either through museum and 
exhibition displays or published commentaries. It shows how different institutions struggled 
to interpret Stalins formulation of Soviet art national in form, socialist in content as they 
grappled with the inherent contradictions of Soviet nationalities policy. Chapter three 
examines the debates that took place between competing artistic factions in Tiflis during 
Stalins Cultural Revolution of 1928-1931, and considers Georgian artists responses to the 
upheavals of the period. It considers in particular the ways in which these debates 
corresponded to, responded to or departed from those taking place in Moscow in the same 
period. Chapter four examines how a path for Georgian art was formulated after 1934 in light 
of the advent of socialist realism and in response to Stalins formulation of Soviet culture as 
national in form, socialist in content. This question dominated debates among Georgian 
artists in this period, including the public meeting of the Georgian Union of Artists held in 
1934 in connection with the exhibition Soviet Visual Art of Georgia Over 13 Years. It 
examines the landmark exhibition of Georgian art at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow in 
1937. At the exhibition monumental paintings by Georgian artists illustrated on a grand scale 
Lavrenty Berias 1935 pamphlet On the History of Bolshevik Organisations in 
Transcaucasia. The chapter considers the political significance of this exhibition as a 
demonstration by Beria of Georgias alignment with the Soviet centre in the context of the 
Great Terror (1937-1939). Chapter six, then, analyses commentaries appearing in the late 
1920s and 30s concerning Pirosmanis legacy and his significance for the development of 
Soviet Georgian painting, and considers the selection of Pirosmani as a Great Tradition of 
Soviet Georgian culture. 
Together, these chapters break completely new ground in the study of Soviet art.  
They present a vast quantity of previously unstudied primary material concerning important 
but little known Soviet artists, exhibitions and institutions. They contribute new data to the 
study of Soviet nations and nationalism and to scholarship on Stalinist culture. More 
importantly, this research introduces and elucidates for the first time a context that still 
remains wholly unfamiliar to most scholars of Soviet art and culture. It provides the first 
dedicated study of the activities of artists and critics working in Soviet Georgia in the 1920s 
and 30s. But it also contributes to a reconfiguration of the study of Soviet art itself by 
shedding new light on the activities of artists and critics beyond the main Russian centres and 
the lines of communication that existed between Moscow and Tbilisi as the Soviet centre and 
periphery. It does not view the Soviet periphery from the point of view of the centre looking 
out, considering, for example, how Russian artists in Moscow imagined and presented 
Georgia through their work. Rather, it examines a single Soviet periphery and the experience 
of the artists and critics belonging to it. By examining Georgian artists and critics 
experience as well as the experiences of the Moscow institutions charged with representing 
Georgian art in Moscow, it contributes to a better understanding of Stalinist culture as an 
entity that extended beyond the main Russian centres, transfiguring itself in response to its 
multifarious contexts.  
Chapter 1: The Battle for Soviet Painting in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s 
This chapter traces the appearance of proletarian currents in Georgian painting during 
the first decade of Soviet rule and sets out the political and institutional contexts in which 
they appeared. Over the course of the Stalin era, these currents would gradually evolve into 
the nationally specific traditions of Soviet Georgian painting whose relationship to wider 
Stalinist culture and Soviet socialist realism is a focus of this thesis. As such, the history of 
proletarian cultural organisations in Georgia in the 1920s represents the first stage in the 
genesis of Georgian Soviet socialist realist painting under Stalin.  
In the 1920s, Georgian artists saw their country and the political climate in which they 
operated dramatically transformed. Some, especially older artists and painters who had 
trained at the Imperial Academy of Arts in St Petersburg before the revolution, largely 
ignored Sovietisation, initially continuing to work in the same idiom as they had before the 
Bolsheviks arrived. Many, however, followed with keen interest the polemics arising in 
Moscow concerning the appropriate role of the arts under the new Soviet state. Some began 
to align themselves with particular movements in Moscow and organised themselves into 
groups according to those positions. Others attempted to create new aesthetic visions that 
drew on both European modernism and the rich visual culture of Georgia and the East, and 
argued for the utility of their approaches in the Soviet context. Still others united in artistic 
organisations that deliberately eschewed both radical experimentation and political 
engagement.  
As in Moscow, the struggle between these groups for Party and government approval 
and patronage in the 1920s and the dominance achieved by proletarian elements by the end of 
that decade moulded the foundations from which Georgias particular tradition of Soviet 
painting developed. However, these struggles took place in Georgia according to a different 
chronology to that in Moscow and were rooted in a different balance of socio-political 
concerns. In Georgia specific priorities came into play, particularly as regards the question of 
the Georgians cultural automony, the delineation and assertion of what some conceived as a 
uniquely Georgian aesthetic sensibility, and the issue of the appropriate role of Georgian 
aesthetic sensibilities or of Georgian national cultural heritage in informing Soviet Georgian 
cultural production. For many Georgian intellectuals, including artists, national concerns 
eclipsed class ones, particularly in the 1920s. In that period, concern for the preservation of 
Georgian national cultural heritage and the assertion of Georgias cultural autonomy took 
precedence in the context of the forcible and generally unwelcome occupation by the 
Bolsheviks. Following the Revolution, Moscow and Petrograd/Leningrad were sites of 
unprecedentedly vibrant debate among artists and intellectuals about the role of art under the 
new social and political order. Entire research institutes were set up in these centres dedicated 
to defining a comprehensive theory of art and to producing models of art history and criticism 
appropriate to the new context.90 Members of the cultural elite championed various cultural 
and intellectual projects and competed for patronage for their activities from within the 
Party.91  In the Georgian capital, Tiflis, however, the years between 1921 and 1926 saw 
relatively diminished cultural actitvity. As we will see later in this chapter, several of the 
cultural and artistic organisations operating in the city prior to Sovietisation continued to be 
active after 1921. However, the months leading up to the Bolsheviks arrival in Georgia also 
saw a signifiacant exodus of artists and intellectuals leaving Georgia for the West. There 
were still Georgian painters working in Tiflis, just as there was other cultural and intellectual 
activity (including that of the Futurists associated with the journal H2SO4). However, there is 
no evidence that painters in Georgia at this time were engaged in wide-ranging debates about 
art and culture comparable to those taking place in Moscow and Petrograd/Leningrad. Many 
of Georgias leading painters, moreover, and particularly those associated with European 
modernist currents, were absent during those years, returning to Georgia only in 1926-7 
following stints working and studying in Western Europe. As such, it is only from 1926-27
which also coincided with the appearance of the first proletarian artists organisations in 
Tiflisthat there is evidence of serious debates among Georgian artists and critics about the 
appropriate form for Georgian painting and role of Georgian painters in the new Soviet 
context. 
Despite their integral role in the history of painting in Soviet Georgia, the activities of 
proletarian artistic organisations in Georgia in the 1920s received little attention in Soviet 
histories, which skim over their existence, providing only brief factual informationlists of 
90 These organisations included the Russian (later, State) Academy of Artistic Sciences (RAKhN/GAKhN) and 
the Art History Department of the Russian Association of Scientific Research Institutes in the Social Sciences 
(RANION), which were established in Moscow in 1921 and 1924 respectively. For an account of the 
establishment of these organisations and their efforts to this end, see Chapter One: Soviet Art History: 
Historical Narratives in the Making in Maria Mileeva, Import and Reception of Western Art in Soviet Russia 
in the 1920s and 1930s: Selected Exhibitions and Their Role, thesis (Ph.D), University of London, Courtauld 
Institute of Art, 2011, pp. 44-89, especially pp. 55-62. See also RAKhN - The Russian Academy of Artistic 
Sciences  a special issue of Eksperiment/Experiment, 3 (1997) and Aleksandr Dobrokhotov, GAKhN: An 
Aesthetics of Ruins, or Aleksej Losevs Failed Project, Studies in East European Thought, 63 (February, 2011), 
pp. 31-42. A recent Russian-German research project has also published research, primary materials and an 
extensive bibliography on GAKhN. See http://dbs.rub.de/gachn/. 
91 For an account of cultural activity in the 1920s in Petrograd/Leningradwhich until the early 1930s remained 
the main center of the politics of culture in the Soviet stateand of dynamics between Moscow and 
Petrograd/Leningrad as the two main (and competing) centres of cultural activity in Soviet Russia in this period, 
see Clark, Petersburg.  
members, dates and so onwhile post-Soviet Georgian scholarship has tended to focus on 
the activities of individual modernist artists to the exclusion of proletarian organisations and 
their activities. Accounts of these organisations, as well as the institutional context 
surrounding Georgian artistic activity in the 1920s, are therefore scant. Almost nothing has 
been written, for example, of the institutional affiliations of proletarian artistic organisations 
in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s, or these groups aesthetic and ideological positions. Equally, 
there is to date no written account of the state and Party institutions involved in the arts in 
Georgia in that period, the debates that took place between artistic factions, or the 
publications though which they presented their positions. 
In light of the pioneering nature of this research and the new ground that it charts, this 
chapter provides the reader with a basic chronology of these organisations and institutions 
and their activities, a necessary first step before arguments can be made about the centrality 
of national or other concerns in Soviet Georgian painting. It introduces the most influential 
individuals and most important government and Party institutions, artists organisations and 
periodicals appearing in Georgia in the 1920s and early 1930s. While this inevitably 
constitutes, in places, a slightly dry chronology, it also breaks new ground, introducing the 
reader to swathes of previously untapped art historical resources and often difficult to access 
materials. But it also analyses these materials to produce the first properly evidenced 
chronological account of artistic activity in Georgia in that period. It demonstrates for the 
first time the breadth of that activity and offers a first opportunity to compare chronologies of 
artistic activity taking place in Georgia and in Moscow and Leningrad. It constitutes the basis 
of a contemporary historiography of Georgian painting in the 1920s and 30s that not only 
provides a framework for subsequent chapters of this thesis but also sets the foundations for 
future research in this much neglected field. This chapter (like this thesis in general) does not 
claim to provide a comprehensive account of all of the cultural organisations in Georgia, 
Moscow and Leningrad that were involved in the administration or regulation of cultural 
activity in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s. There is much more work to be done, for example, 
on the workings of Narkompros in Georgia in this period in relation to the administration of 
artistic activity, and on the operations of the Georgian Academy of Arts and National Gallery 
for example, as well as on other fields of cultural activity taking place in Georgia in the same 
period. Nevertheless, this chapter sets out to introduce the leading organisations of visual 
artists (most of which also happened to present themselves as proletarian organisations) 
active in Georgia in the late 1920s and early 1930s and the journals in which they set out and 
debated their positions. In doing so, it sets the scene for the account offered in chapter 3 of 
this thesis concerning the struggles for power and patronage that took place between these 
groups during the Cultural Revolution. This account is offered as a vital (though not the only) 
part of the story of Georgian cultural activity in the Stalin era, and as an important prelude to 
my examination in chapters 4 and 5 of Georgian painting in the Stalinist 1930s.  
Soviet Painting, Socialist Realism and the Georgian Case 
The Bolshevik Revolution transformed the circumstances in which artists operated 
across the expanding territories under Bolshevik and later Soviet control. With the exception 
of the NEP, under which a market economy was temporarily revived, the Soviet system of 
governance removed old systems of private patronage and ownership. The state became the 
arts sole patron. Doctrines of art for arts sake, which had been championed in Russia 
before the Revolution by groups such as the World of Art (Mir iskusstva), were rejected, and 
artists were encouraged to work for the state in the service of the newly established 
dictatorship of the proletariat, educating and inspiring the working classes in their progress 
towards socialism. Indeed, many artists welcomed the Revolution and did not need 
encouragement to present their views on the role of art under the new Bolshevik state. In 
Moscow and Leningrad during the 1920s and 30s, artists and intellectuals presented a variety 
of visions of the new Soviet culture. The Bolshevik leadership, moreover, despite the 
scepticism of many of its members regarding the more radical undertakings of some of the 
modernist avant-garde, was keen to gain the broadest possible support among artists, 
including those belonging to the old bourgeois intelligentsia. For the majority of the 1920s, 
moreover, the Party was far from monolithic in terms of its cultural patronage. Cultural issues 
were fiercely debated within the Party, just as were economic and political issues. As 
Katerina Clark has observed, the Party was virtually a mirror of the cultural intelligentsia 
inasmuch as most factions in the intelligentsias debates could find sympathisers somewhere 
in the Party hierarchy.92 Under the new state, the arts were initially to be organised under the 
Peoples Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros), headed by Anatoly Lunacharsky, 
who gave his support to a broad range of artistic endeavours until 1929, when he was forced 
to tender his resignation.93 However, the highest organs of the Party, including the Politburo 
and the Central Committee, also concerned themselves with cultural matters, especially 
92 Clark, Petersburg, p. 195. 
93 On this period, see Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Emergence of Glaviskusstvo. Class War on the Cultural Front, 
Moscow, 1928-29, Soviet Studies, 23:2 (Oct. 1971), pp. 236-53. 
following the consolidation of Stalins power in 1926-7. Indeed, cultural questions were 
given attention within these organs even at the most critical moments of struggle within the 
Party, as well as during periods of terror and waran indication of the Party leaderships 
understanding of the importance of culture as a means of legitimising its regime.94  
Traditionally, the years of the First Five-Year Plan and corresponding Cultural 
Revolution have been seen as the period in which the Partys natural choice of model for 
Soviet cultural production ascended to dominance as the Party leadership abandoned its 
formerly pluralistic approach to the arts. Militant proletarian organisations such as AKhR and 
subsequently RAPKh in visual artalongside RAPP (Russian Association of Proletarian 
Writers) and RAPM (Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians) in literature and music 
respectivelychampioned a culture that was meant to foreground the proletariat both as its 
primary subject matter and as its primary producers. In visual art, this movement was 
increasingly characterised by a mode of painting with stylistic roots in the nineteenth-century 
Russian realist tradition of the Peredvizhniki and a privileging of such proletarian subject 
matter as the industrialisation and collectivisation drives of the First Five-Year Plan. In the 
context of the First-Five Year Plan, with its rhetoric of class struggle, these proletarian 
organisations came temporarily to dominate the cultural sphere. With the accompanying anti-
Formalist campaign of 1929-1931, artists and other intellectuals holding any position outside 
of these most militantly proletarian organisations were accused of failing the proletariat and 
sympathising with the bourgeois West. Intellectuals were expected to make way for artists, 
writers and musicians or proletarian origin who, despite their lack of training, were 
considered more able to produce a genuinely proletarian culture thanks to their proximity to 
the labour process.95 
As recent scholarship has shown, these organisations were not necessarily the 
inevitable forerunners to the Stalinist culture established in 1930s. Nor were they as 
aesthetically homogeneous as the above description suggests. Stalinist culture of the 1930s 
and beyond shared certain characteristics of the militant proletarian culture of the Cultural 
Revolution period. Points of correspondence, for example, include Stalinist cultures 
realismin the sense that it had as its central subject matter a version of everyday Soviet 
life, which was represented through a legible narrative format that rejected the formalist 
experimentation of the 1910s and 20s. In visual art this meant a version of figurative realist 
painting (although the styles and subject matters treated under that umbrella were in fact 
94 Clark, Moscow, p. 81. 
95 Clark, Petersburg, p. 262.  
extremely heterogeneous and evolved over time). However, as recent scholarship has made 
clear, Stalinist cultural production of the 1930s and later evolved based on a much wider 
range of sources and was much more complex in the way it functioned than its affinities with 
the culture of the Cultural Revolution would suggest. The Party vastly increased its control 
over the cultural sphere in the 1930s, and its overwhelmingly powerful role in determining 
the shape of Soviet culture from that time is undeniable. The resolutions that it issued on 
cultural matters in this period were decisive in shaping Soviet cultural activity thereafter, and 
produced a canon of culture that had unprecedent power in shaping the perceptions of Soviet 
citizens. Nevertheless, the directives that the Party issued were not the product of the will or 
tastes of the Party leadership (or of Stalin personally) in isolation from existing intellectual 
trends. Rather, the Party was often acting out existing models suggested in the work of 
intellectuals, and the directions that they followed often responded as much to popular taste 
as to other ideological considerations.96  
 From 1927-28, the Party had begun to intensify its battle against alien class 
elementssections of Soviet society it considered to be harmful to the proletariats 
development. Class enemies included supposedly rich peasants (kulaks), who were accused 
of sabotaging the Soviet leaderships programme of agricultural collectivisation, and non-
proletarian, bourgeois forces within the urban intelligentsia. In response to the threat posed 
by the latter of these two enemies it was resolved that the Party and Narkompros could no 
longer maintain their neutrality in their patronage of the arts. Narkompros, through its 
recently established central arts administration, Glaviskusstvo (1928-1933), must now 
support only socialist, revolutionary art.97 In the visual arts, this increasingly meant support 
for proletarian organisations such as AKhR. Although the Party had not explicitly granted 
militant proletarian artists the right to a monopoly over visual art, they nevertheless 
established a position of dominance that prevented other artists and organisations from 
competing. In May 1931, a group of young artists from AKhR formed the more militatantly 
proletarian RAPKh, which quickly took control of Vsekokhudozhnik, the cooperative 
established in 1929 to control the distribution of funds and commissions to artists at that time. 
96 Clark, Moscow, p. 6; Clark, Petersburg, p. X (in Preface) and p. 196. 
97 Narkompros decree published in Pravda, 24 November 1928, p. 4 cited in Fitzpatrick, The Emergence of 
Glaviskusstvo, p. 251. In practice, Glaviskusstvo was primarily concerned with theatrical administration. This 
was partly because the other arts, by their nature, involved individualsartists, writers, musiciansrather than 
entire troupes, so required less organisational supervision and government funding and therefore had less 
contact with Glaviskusstvo. However, the lesser role of Glaviskusstvo in these spheres also related to the 
readiness of existing Proletarian art organisations to fill Glaviskusstvos managerial position in a given 
discipline. 
In doing so, they made it impossible for their competitors to access commissions and 
opportunities.98 Although debate about the exact form that Soviet culture (including visual 
art) should take continued both within the Party and among artists, critics and other 
intellectuals through the 1930s, the events of the Cultural Revolution and the rise of RAPKh 
dramatically limited the range of models of painting that were considered permissible. The 
landmark jubilee exhibition Fifteen Years of Artists of the RSFSR that opened first at the 
Russian Museum in Leningrad in November 1932 before reopening in considerably modified 
form in Moscow in June 1933 spelled out the shift that had taken place in the Partys stance 
on visual art.99 Although at the time of its initial conception in January 1932, the exhibition 
was conceived as a survey of the entire breadth of Soviet artistic activity since the 
Revolution, by the time it opened in Leningrad most of the artists who represented Russias 
radical modernist avant-garde were excluded. Those that were exhibited, such as Kazimir 
Malevich and Pavel Filonov, were given exhibition galleries that were set apart from the 
main exhibition spaces so that they were effectively removed from the exhibitions narrative 
of Soviet arts evolution.100 As a result, moreover, painters advocating an experimental but 
nevertheless figurative style of painting, including many of the painters associated with the 
Society of Easel Painters (OSt), were repositioned as the radical, far-left of Soviet painting, 
leading to attacks in the months following the exhibitions opening on the formalism of 
their approach.101 When the exhibition re-opened in Moscow, Malevich and the other 
representatives on the modernist avant-garde were even more marginalised. Their works were 
consigned to a dimly lit corridor and captioned with a quote, stencilled on the wall, in which 
Lenin explained that he did not consider works of expressionism, futurism, cubism, and 
other -isms as the highest manifestation of artistic genius. I dont understand them. They 
give me no joy whatsoever.102 While the Leningrad exhibition had been conceived as an 
opportunity for the public to familiarise themselves with Soviet art and express their own 
conclusions about the art that they preferred, the Moscow exhibition clearly set out two 
98  On these events, see Charlotte Douglas, Terms of Transition: The First Discussional Exibition and the 
Society of Easel Painters, in The Great utopia: the Russian and Soviet avant-garde, 1915-1932 (ex. cat) (New 
York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1992). 
99 On this exhibition, see Douglas, Terms of Transition, p. 460; Kiaer, Lyrical Socialist Realism, p. 58; 
Masha Chlenova, Staging Soviet Art: 15 Years of Artists of the RSFSR, 193233, October, 147 (winter 2014), 
pp. 3855 and Masha Chlenova, On Display: Transformations of the Avant-Garde in Soviet Public Culture, 
19281932 (PhD thesis), Columbia University, New York, 2010. For a Soviet account of the exhibition, see A. 
Morozov, K istorii vystavki Khudozhniki RSFSR za 15 let, Sovetskoe iskusstvoznanie 1 (1982), pp. 12067. 
100 Chlenova, Staging Soviet Art, p. 47. 
101 Ibid. p. 46. 
102 Ibid. p. 51 
current and competing directions in Soviet art, both of which are best associated with 
AKhR/RAPKh. These two poles were represented firstly by painters drawing on the 
nineteenth-century Russian realist model of the Peredvizhniki and secondly by those, 
exemplified by Petr Konchalovsky, who were characterised as followers of Czanne.103 As 
painters at either extreme of this spectrum were encouraged to avoid cold, unprocessed 
naturalism and an excessive preoccuptation with form and colour (formalism) respectively, 
the range of permissible artistic styles was narrowed decisively. 
 Famously, the struggle between opposing artistic factions in Soviet art was brought 
to an end on 23 April 1932, when the Central Committee of the USSR Communist Party 
issued its decree On the Reconstruction of Literary-Artistic Organisations. The resolution 
disbanded all literary and artistic groups in favour of single All-Soviet artists, writers and 
other art workers unions, which were to be organised as soon as practically possible. Most 
artists and critics at the time welcomed the decree, which they hoped would bring an end to 
the bitter infighting and factionalism of the Cultural Revolution.104 However, as the case of 
the Fifteen Years exhibition shows, competition over which style of painting represented 
the correct direction for the subsequent development of Soviet painting continued. A USSR-
wide Union of Soviet Artists, moreover, would not be realised in until as late as 1957. 
Nevertheless, the Moscow branch of the union (MOSSKh) was established in 1932, as was 
an Organisational Committee responsible for helping to organise sister unions across the 
RSFSR and other union republics. Local unions were established in the main Soviet centres 
within a few years. A Georgian branch was under organisation in 1932, as were branches in 
Odessa, Yerevan, Baku and Kazakhstan.105 Further branches followed across the Soviet 
Union throughout the 1930s.106  
Then, between 1932 and 1934, in a further move towards the consolidation and 
centralisation of the Partys control over Soviet cultural activity in all spheres, socialist 
103 Ibid. pp. 52-53. 
104 Ibid. p. 42. 
105 These dates represent the year that either the leadership board (pravlenie) or organisational committee 
(orgkomitet) responsible for the organisation of a new branch was established, as recorded in the documents of 
MOSSKhs central office in charge of republican and regional branches of the union. Branches may then have 
taken several months to be fully operational after that point. For example, one Soviet monograph dates the 
establishment of the Georgian branch to 1933. See: Beridze and Ezerskaia, Iskusstvo sovetskoi Gruzii, p. 46. 
RGALI, f. 1943, op. 1. d. 193, ll. 150-55.   
106 Many national republics had secondary unions or branches representing artists in autonomous regions and 
republics within the SSRs. A document from MOSSKhs archive (undated, but no earlier than 1940) lists twelve 
branches established in the Ukrainian SSR, twelve in the Kazakh SSR, six in the Belorussian SSR, three in the 
Azerbaijani SSR, seven in the Uzbek SSR and one each in the Armenian, Turkestan, Tajik, and Kyrgyz SSRs.  
The creation of the Georgian union of artists in 1932 was also followed by the establishment of a branch of the 
Georgian union in the South Ossetian autonomous oblast in 1934, in the Achar ASSR in 1935 and in the 
Abkhaz ASSR in 1939. RGALI, f. 1943, op. 1. d. 193, ll. 150-55.   
realism was devised as a universal formula for the production of Soviet culture. In 1934, at 
the First Congress of the Union of Soviet Writers, socialist realism was presented as the only 
officially sanctioned method for literature and the arts in the Soviet Union. Speeches 
presented at the congress by Maksim Gorky, the Unions first secretary, and Andrei Zhdanov, 
the chief representative of the Partys Central Committee, were followed up with articles in 
the press. Formulated initially in relation to literature, the principles of socialist realism were 
thus disseminated as guidelines for the production of Soviet culture. According to the new 
doctrine, Soviet art was now required to fulfil certain specific, though often rather opaque 
and deliberately vague criteria. Although it was not a tightly prescriptive aesthetic doctrine, 
and discussions and debates over how it should be implemented in practice continued through 
the 1930s, it was governed by a series of concepts to which writers, artists and musicians 
were expected to adhere.  
Above all, they were required to present Soviet reality to the working masses through 
a realist medium that the proletariat could understand. However, the realism of socialist 
realism did not envisage a simple, unfiltered, objective reflection of Soviet reality. Such a 
passive reflection, commonly referred to in the Soviet Union by the negative epithet, 
naturalism, was not realism; as Gorky explained, a fact is still not the whole truth; it is 
merely the raw material from which the real truth of art must be smelted and extracted.107 
Instead, to use Zhdanovs now famous formulation, socialist realism should present reality 
in its revolutionary development.108 In other words, in visualizing Soviet reality, writers and 
artists would present a glimpse of tomorrows bright future under socialism as if it had 
already been achieved in the present. This vision, it was proposed, would facilitate the 
ideological remolding and education of the toiling people in the spirit of socialism. Writers 
were thus to become engineers of the human soul.109  
The method of socialist realism was based on several key principles, including 
partiinost (Party-mindedness), ideinost (ideologically-correct content), klassovost (class-
content) and pravdivost (truthfulness). Together these principles dictated that the reality 
presented in socialist realist cultural production should embody Party doctrine, 
communicating a clear class position aligned with the interests of the working people of the 
USSR. The principles of pravdivost and tipichnost (typicalness), however, are equally vital to 
107 Maxim Gorky, Sobrannye sochinenii v 30 tomakh, 27 (Moscow: GIKhL, 1954) cited in Groys, The Total Art 
of Stalinism, p. 54. 
108   . Rech sekretaria TsK VKP(b) A. A. Zhdanov, I. K. Luppol, M. M. 
Rozental et al., eds, Sezd pisatelei SSSR: Pervyi vsesoiuznyi sezd sovetskikh pisatelei (1934): 
stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 1990), pp. 2-5.  
109     . Ibid. 
understanding mature socialist realism. In 1952 Georgy Malenkov, a member of Stalins 
innermost circle, defined tipichnost as not that which is encountered most often, but that 
which most persuasively expresses the essence of a given social force.110 In other words, it 
was not the observable facts characterising everyday reality, but the essential truths that could 
be distilled (or which the Party insisted should be distilled) from observing the transformation 
of reality under socialism. This, claimed Malenkov, is the vital sphere in which is manifested 
the Party spirit of realistic art.111 The typical, then, was what the Party declared to be the 
essence of Soviet life, whether that be revolutionary fervour or heroic rates of productivity. 
This principle was related to Stalins formulation that what is more important to the 
dialectical method [in Soviet art and culture] is not that which is stable at present but is 
already beginning to die, but rather that which is emerging and developing, even if at present 
it does not appear stable.112 As Boris Groys has pointed out, if we consider that what is 
dialectically emerging and developing under socialism corresponds to the latest Party 
policies, it is clear that the portrayal of the typical refers to the visual realisation of still-
emerging Party objectives, the ability to intuit new currents among the Party leadership, to 
sense which way the wind is blowing. More precisely, it is the ability to anticipate the will of 
Stalin, who is the real creator of reality.113 Thus, the truth or reality that socialist realism 
presented was not an objective reflection of Soviet reality or a generalised view of a happy 
socialist future, but a projection of the reality that Stalin and the Party were in the process of 
formulating. A successful socialist realist artist or writer was one who demonstrated the 
alignment of her or his vision of the socialist near future with Stalins own.  
Several scholars, among them Evgeny Dobrenko and Irina Gutkin, have explored the 
idea that the version of reality created by socialist realist cultural producers was so pervasive 
that it formed the lens through which citizens perceived and experienced Soviet reality, or 
even that it was a means of producing reality itself. Gutkin has argued that although socialist 
realism was not prescriptive in terms of the specific style and subject matter an artist treated, 
socialist realist language (literary and visual) constructed a vision of Soviet reality through a 
nevertheless rigidly controlled vocabulary of myths and symbols. This vocabulary was made 
up of a limited menu of positive and negative epithets, depending on whether it signified 
110 Georgy Malenkov, Otchetnyi doklad XIX sezdu partii rabote tsentralnogo komiteta VKP(b): 5 oktiabria 
1952 g. (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1952). 
111 Ibid. 
112 I. V. Stalin, Rech na XIX sezde partii, 14 oktiabria 1952 g. (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1951). 
113 Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism, p. 51-52.  
something belonging to the Soviet future-like world or the old, capitalist world. 114 
According to Gutkins model, these were established by Party ideologues in speeches and in 
the press and were expected to be picked up and adopted by cultural producers. Every word 
of a text, every mark, colour, object, sign and symbol in a painting and every element of 
every shot in a film was bonded together into a rigid system of politically correct 
correspondences [] coded to officially sanctioned mythologems. 115  Through their 
continual repetition in political rhetoric, literature and visual culture, the peoples cognition 
of them was automated, such that they served as grids of perception through which [] so-
called reality was perceived.116 As Dobrenko argues, moreover, since Soviet reality could 
not exist without socialist realist cultural production, socialist realism, and its tightly 
controlled vocabulary of myths and symbols, was the material from which socialist reality 
was not only represented, but also produced.117 The reality produced by socialist realism 
was so pervasive that it was more real than the everyday experiences of Soviet citizens.  
As others have noted, the totalising rigidity of socialist realist language (literarary or 
visual) clearly was not absolute. It was possible for symbols to have several meanings, even 
at the same time, and for socialist realist language to be used ambiguously. Artists and writers 
could and frequently did harness the multivalence of literatures [and visual cultures] iconic 
signs in order to convey meanings that served their own agenda.118 The relatively liberal 
climate of the post-Stalin years in particular allowed for a looser definition of socialist 
realism that drew on an increasingly broad range of art historical sources and therefore a 
more extensive, less controlled vocabulary, offering greater possibility for ambiguity of 
interpretation. Under Nikita Khrushchevs government (1953-64), and even more so under 
Leonid Brezhnev (1964-82), artists could increasingly inhabit a space between artistic 
conformity and dissent, expanding the boundaries of what official Soviet art could be.119 As I 
have argued elsewhere, for example, in Georgia, the socialist realist painter Ucha Japaridze 
was able to construct a vision of life in Soviet Georgia that played on ambiguities afforded by 
the collision of symbolic systems related to Soviet and Georgian national myths. In doing so, 
he produced a portrait of Georgia whose closest analogy might be found in the Soviet Village 
114 Gutkin, The Cultural Origins, p. 68-69. 
115 Ibid., p. 68-69. 
116 Ibid., p. 72. 
117 Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism.  
118 Clark, The Soviet Novel, p. 12.  
119 Susan Reid, 10. The Art of Memory: Retrospectivism in Soviet Painting of the Brezhnev Era, in Matthew 
Cullerne-Bown and Brandon Taylor, Art of the Soviets: painting, sculpture, and architecture in a one-party 
state, 1917-1992 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993), pp. 161-87. 
Prose movement in literature during the same period: produced and permitted under the 
banner of official Soviet culture, his painting appears to gently criticise certain Soviet 
realities even as it presents a nostalgic and sentimental vision of life in Georgia.120  
However, even in the most tightly culturally repressive years of high Stalinism, 
beginning with the Great Terror in 1937 and ending with Stalins death in 1953, a degree of 
ambiguity was possible. Moreover, as Clark and others have shown, Party ideology and 
cultural policy did not appear in isolation, but as a result of a dialogue between the Party 
leadership and dominant intellectual trends and in response to other factors, including shifting 
political priorities and public taste: Stalin, and the Party cultural apparatus, were 
indisputably extraordinarily powerful and as the decade [the 1930s] wore on began more and 
more to actually commission and monitor cultural products  and to implement their pet 
schemes, but they were not extrasystemic figures, figures from outside the culture system, but 
rather picked up and mediated, selectively, some of the dominant currents in the thinking of 
the time.121 Despite the repressive nature of the regime and its cultural policies, artists did 
retain some degree of autonomy and independence (if not scope for outright dissidence) in 
the production of their work, albeit, at times, of a very limited kind. Not only that, they 
played a role in both the genesis and evolution of Soviet socialist realist culture at every 
stage. 
There is a body of opinion that opposes the Stalinist subjectivity argument presented 
by Dobrenko and others on the grounds that it absolves those complicit in the crimes of the 
Stalinist state of responsibility for their actions, on the basis that those living under Stalinism 
were not able to see beyond the lies that the State perpetuated, beyond the reality that 
socialist realism produced.122 Nevertheless, Dobrenko offers compelling evidence in support 
of his understanding of socialist realist culture as the material of Soviet reality, albeit with 
certain limitations, and his work is important in this thesis in informing discussion of the 
personality cult of Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s and the ways in which that discussion 
120 Jennifer Brewin, Ucha Japaridze, Lado Gudiashvili, and the Spiritual in Georgian Painting in Louise 
Hardiman and Nicola Kozicharow, eds, Modernism and the Spiritual in Russian Art (Cambridge: Open Book 
Publishers, 2017), pp. 229-63. On Village Prose, see Kathleen F. Parth, Russian Village Prose: The Radiant 
Past (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992). 
121 Clark, Moscow, pp. 6-7. 
122 In favour of the Stalinist subjectivity thesis, see Lynne Viola, Contending with Stalinism: Soviet Power and 
Popular Resistance in the 1930s (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002) and Jochen Hellbeck, Speaking Out: 
Languages of Affirmation and Dissent, in Michael David-Fox, Peter Holquist and Marshall Poe, eds, The 
Resistance Debate in Russian and Soviet History (Bloomington: Slavica, 2003), pp. 103-37. For opposition to 
this thesis, see Sheila Fitzpatrick, Tear off the Masks Identity and Imposture in Twentieth-Century Russia 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005), pp. 8-9. 
helped to reconfigure Georgias national identity in the minds of Georgian citizens to suit 
Stalinist political objectives. 
The Old and New Guards: In search of Georgian Proletarian Painting 
Painting in Soviet Georgia developed according to a different, though connected, 
chronology to that in Russia, in response to Georgias particular relationship to Soviet power, 
and Georgias unique cultural history and identity. Georgia, and Tbilisi in particular, being 
situated geographically at the crossroads between Europe and Asia, has been home to an 
extraordinarily diverse multi-ethnic population throughout its long history. For centuries prior 
to the arrival of the Bolsheviks its demographic had incorporated large communities of 
Persians, Armenians and Russians as well as Georgians and other national groups. The 
presence of these communities, as well as invasions and occupations of Georgia by powerful 
neighbours including the Persian, Ottoman and Russian Empires, had inevitably led aspects 
of neighbouring and occupying powers cultural traditions (in the arts, literature, religion and 
politics) to be absorbed and integrated into modern Georgian culture.  
Contemporary Russian and European cultural and political movements were 
introduced to Georgian society as a result of Imperial Russias annexation of Georgia. From 
the 1830s, Georgian writers such as Aleksandr Chavchavadze (1786-1846) and Nikoloz 
Baratashvili (1817-45) produced Romantic visions of a lost golden age of the Georgian 
nation influenced by Russian Romantic writers from Pushkin and Mikhail Lermontov to 
Tolstoy. 123  In the middle of the century a socially and politically engaged Georgian 
intelligentsia also began to emerge, influenced by the ideas of Russian social reformist 
thinkers such as Aleksandr Herzen (1812-1870), Vissarion Belinsky (1811-1848), Nikolai 
Chernyshevsky (1828-1889) and Nikolai Dobroliubov (1836-1861). Social reforms 
implemented in Russia in the 1860s under Tsar Aleksandr II, including the abolition of 
serfdom, as well as news of liberation movements in Hungary and Italy, encouraged 
Georgias young intelligentsia to re-evaluate political and social questions at home, including 
that of Georgias relationship to her Imperial coloniser.124 From these roots modern Georgian 
social thought and modern Georgian nationalism emerged and a community of Georgian 
123 Georgia and the Caucasus also became an important subject of and setting for Russian Romantic Writers. On 
this subject see Layton, Russian Literature and Empire. Georgian Romantic writers, however, differed from 
their Russian mentors in various ways, including in their conceptualisation of Georgias relationship with her 
Imperial coloniser. See Ram and Shatrishvili, Romantic Topography and the Dilemma of Empire. 
124 Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 126. 
nationalist thinkers from Ilia Chavchavadze to Niko Nikoladze offered competing visions for 
Georgias future development. 
Around the turn of the twentieth century, Georgias ties with Russia also facilitated 
the arrival in Georgia of Russian and European intellectual movements, including European 
and Russian Symbolist and Decadent movements and the various modernist currents that 
appeared in their wake. In the 1910s in particular, Tiflis suddenly became a sanctuary for 
Russian and European artists, writers and intellectuals seeking refuge from the ravages of 
revolution and war to the north and west. New arrivals joined Georgians and Armenians in 
forming a newly bustling community of artists, writers and intellectuals, many of whom 
grouped together in like-minded communities of Futurists, Acmeists and Symbolists, 
founding journals, holding events and opening taverns where they could meet to discuss the 
latest movements in European, Russian and Georgian art, literature and philosophy. Well-
known Russian artists, writers and intellectuals including Aleksei Kruchenykh, Vasily 
Kamensky, Igor Terentiev, Yuri Degen, Sergei Gorodetsky and Vera and Sergei Sudeikin all 
became visitors or temporary residents of this fantastic city, helping it to become a hub of 
cultural activity.125  
With respect to painting specifically, artistic activity in Georgia in the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth century was characterised by several distinct schools. A group of 
Georgian painters, some of whom had studied at the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts in St 
Petersburg (and in some cases the academies of Munich and Paris) in the latter part of the 
nineteenth century, painted in styles ranging from crisp academicism (Aleksandre 
Mrevlishvili) to the looser, more painterly realism of the Peredvizhniki (Mose Toidze and 
Gigo Gabashvili). The main centre for artistic training in Georgia at that time was the private 
art school of the Caucasian Society for the Promotion of the Fine Arts, where teaching was 
eclectic. Instructors included the painters Gabashvili and Ilia Zankovsky (Georgian and 
Russian respectively), German illustrators Oskar Schmerling and Richard Zommer, and the 
Georgian sculptor Yakob Nikoladze, student of Auguste Rodin.126  
125 On cultural activity in 1910s Tiflis, see Tatiana Nikolskaia, Fantasticheskii gorod: russkaia kulturnaia zhizn 
Tbilisi (1917-1921) (Moscow: Fifth Country, 2000); Luigi Magarotto et al., LAvanguardia a Tiflis: studi, 
ricerche, cronache, testimonianze, documenti (Venice: University of Venice, 1982) and Harsha Ram, 
Modernism on the Periphery: Literary Life in Post-revolutionary Tbilisi, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and 
Eurasian History, 5:2 (2004), pp. 367-82. See also John E. Bowlt, ed, The Salon Album of Vera Sudeikin-
Stravinsky (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995). 
126 For short biographies of Schmerling, Zommer and Zanovsky, see Roy Bolton, Russian Orientalism: Central 
Asia & the Caucasus (London: Sphinx books, 2009), pp. 72, 100 and 108. 
In addition to the school, the Society of Georgian Artists was founded in 1916 on the 
initiative of painter Dimitri Shevardnadze, who had recently returned from studying at the 
Munich Academy of Arts. Shevardnadze was a competent painter, mainly of portraits and 
still life and had experimented while in Munich with various modernist modes, including 
still-lifes in the style of Paul Czanne and Claude Monet, nudes after Henri Matisse and 
portraits recalling Vincent Van Gogh and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (figures 9 and 10). 
However, his primary contribution to Georgian art was in research, conservation and 
education. Through the Society of Georgian Artists he organised scholarships supporting 
Georgian artists, including modernists such as Gudiashvili and Kakabadze, to study and work 
in Europe. He also arranged expeditions to study and preserve Georgias cultural heritage 
including conducting archaeological digs as well as studying and making copies of Georgias 
ecclesiastical wall painting and architecture. Shevardnadze went on to found the Georgian 
National Gallery in 1922 and continued to work to protect and preserve Georgian cultural 
heritage until his death at Berias hands in 1937. Despite its name, the Societys membership 
was not limited to ethnic Georgians. Instead it was pluralist both in terms of its members 
nationality and their artistic inclinations. At its exhibitions, young artists associated with 
modernist activity, such as Gudiashvili, Kirill Zdanevich and Elene Akhvlediani exhibited 
alongside Georgian followers of the Russian academic school including Mose Toidze and 
Gabashvili and Tiflis-born Armenians including academic painter Amaiak Akopian and 
modernist painter and sculptor Yevrand Kocharian (Kochar).127  
The organisation continued to exist after Sovietisation, supporting a broad spectrum 
of artists including modernist painters, many of whom were returning from several years 
studying and working in Europe thanks to the societys support. These artists, including 
Gudiashvili, Kakabadze, Akhvlediani and Ketevan Maghalashvili, gradually returned to 
Georgia in the mid 1920s, tempted back to their homeland by the promise of personal 
exhibitions and teaching positions at the newly founded Georgian Academy of Arts (1922-
present). They were faced with adapting to a Georgia vastly different to the country that they 
127 Alongside the Society of Georgian Artists a Union of Armenian Artists was established in Tiflis in 1916. The 
Armenian union, more so than the Georgian society, was delineated along ethnic lines and primarily represented 
artists belonging to Tiflis still dominant Armenian bourgeoisie. Its artists for the most part were conservative 
painters who gathered around established masters of the Russian academic school, although its membership also 
included such figures as Matiros Sarian, the Armenian painter who was successful in the Soviet period despite 
his admiration for and continued debts to French modernism. However, as the organisation representing 
Armenian artists, whose relationship with the Soviet centre was governed by a different set of circumstances, 
detailed study of activities necessarily falls outside of the scope of this thesis. In 1921 the Union of Armenian 
Artists became the House of Armenian Artists (AIARTUN). It continued under that name until the 
organisation was disbanded in 1930. 
had left behind, and returned to a mixed reception.128 Though celebrated and defended by 
some, they faced criticism from other commentators who favoured AKhRRs model. This 
criticism only increased as the First Five-Year Plan began to be implemented and Party 
policy started to prioritise class war as a vital factor in the industrialisation and economic 
modernisation of the Soviet Union. 
By 1927-28 AKhRR was achieving dominance in Moscow and its ethos was 
spreading to the further reaches of the Soviet Union, including Georgia. The first attempt was 
made to organise a proletarian artists organisation in Georgia broadly sharing AKhRRs 
outlook in 1926.129  The Bureau of Young Proletarian Artists of Georgia (an independent 
organisation, but close to AKhRR in spirit) failed to get off the ground. However, the 
dominance of AKhRR in Moscow was encouraging Georgian artists to follow suit. In 1928 
AKhRR, having reorganised as a Union-wide organisation (AKhR), began consolidating an 
extensive network of branches across the Soviet Union.130 A Georgian (later, Tiflis) branch of 
AKhR, known as REVMAS was established that year under the leadership of Georgian 
artists Mose and Irakli Toidze (father and son), who had joined AKhR in Moscow the 
previous year. Then, at the end of 1928, SARMA was founded when a group of young artists 
defected from the Society of Georgian Artists. Though the association was not formally 
affiliated with AKhR, its manifesto, published in the local press early in 1930, declared 
SARMAs allegiance with AKhRs cause. It also denounced the Georgia Society of Artists as 
a distinctly un-modern organisation  detrimental to the development of Soviet art.131 
Despite REVMASs affiliation with AKhR, it was SARMA that did the most to forward 
AKhRs mission in Georgia. In June 1931 REVMAS was disbanded and absorbed by 
SARMA. 
The Society of Georgian Artists survived until 1929, when it was dissolved in 
response to criticism, levelled first and foremost by SARMAs leadership, accusing the 
Society of providing a haven for bourgeois artists whose activities failed to serve the 
128 Gudiashvili and Maghalasvhili returned in 1926, followed by Kakabadze and Akhvlediani in 1927. 
129 Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia, p. 21. 
130 For an account of the expansion of AKhRRs network between 1924 and 1926, see F. S. Bogorodsky, 
Filialy AKhRR i OMAKhR in I. M. Gronsky and V. N. Perelman, eds, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov 
revoliutsionnoi Rossii: sbornik vospominanii, statei, dokumentov (Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 
127-29. 
131   ;    . Sakartvelos 
revolutsionur mkhatvarta deklaratsia: sakartvelos revolutsiur mkhatvarta asotsiatsiis daarsebis shesakheb [The 
declaration of Georgian revolutionary artists: About the establishment of the Association of Georgian 
Revolutionary Artists], Kommunisti, 167 (14 February), p. 6; Deklaratsiia revoliutsionnykh khudozhnikov 
Gruzii, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 1930, pp. 117-18; Rev. mkhatvarta asotsiatsia SARMA suratebis gamopena / 
Vystavka kartin Assotsiiatsii Rev. Khud. Gruzii SARMA (ex. cat.) (Tiflis: National Picture Gallery of Georgia, 
1930.)  
proletariat. 132  Following its dissolution, its members initially sought the protection of 
Georgias branch of the Union of Art Workers (RABIS), supporting themselves on their 
salaries at the Academy, through teaching in schools or commissions for theatre, film or the 
press. Facing growing financial and ideological pressure, however, many of those artists, 
including Gudiashvili (but not Kakabadze), were soon compelled to join SARMA. 
In 1931 SARMA split into moderate and militant wings. A militant faction, led by 
SARMAs former chairman Grigory Mirzoev (1903-1993, figure 9), formed GAPKh (a 
Georgian branch of the Moscow-based Russian Association of Proletarian Artists, RAPKh), 
which existed alongside SARMA until the April 1932 decree. Mirzoev was a mediocre 
graphic artist whose own creative output, as well as his output as a critic, was meagre. 
Nevertheless, he appears to have been adept in political manoeuvring and wielded enormous 
power. As well as leading SARMA and GAPKh, in 1931 he was signing resolutions as an 
Inspector for Georgias branch of IZO Narkompros (the visual art section of the Peoples 
Commissariat of Enlightenment), suggesting his authority as the Partys supervisor of 
Georgian artistic activity.133 Speaking at a SARMA meeting in January 1932, moreover, 
Mirzoev refers to a previous tenure as a deputy head of Glaviskusstvo.134 This appears to 
have been a role of some seniority, since he claims to have led work there and to have had 
the right to make decisions concerning which artists to send on field trips.135 Due to his 
limited productivity (and skill) as an illustrator, Mirzoev barely features in the existing 
literature about painting in Soviet Georgia. Nevertheless, no other artist or critic appears to 
have wielded comparable administrative power over the activities of Georgian artists in the 
Cultural Revolution period.  
 Things were different for Mirzoev following the April 1932 decree. With the 
establishment of the Georgian Union of Soviet Artists in 1932 he was elected as its chairman. 
However, the situation for artists and art organisers had changed. The replacement of 
disparate artists groups with a network of national and regional unions organised artistic 
activity into a system that facilitated more consistent and standardised Party supervision. 
Within the network, decisions and directions adopted by MOSSKh under the supervision of 
132 Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia, p.20.  
133 Mirzoev was signing Narkompros resolutions under this title in 1931, although it is not clear how long he 
held this position or what exactly it entailed. NAG f. 10 , op. 1, d. 16, l. 174. 
134 NAG f. 10, op. 1, d. 25, l. 72. 
135   . NAG f. 10, op. 1, d. 25, l. 72. Other than archival records highlighting Mirzoevs roles in 
these organisations, his wider biography is obscure. He published only a handful of articles, all between 1930 
and 1932, and only a small number of his works, those reproduced in the contemporary press, can now be 
identified. 
the Party could be disseminated easily and evenly to the local unions. This meant a reduction 
of power for local administrators such as Mirzoev. Within the next two years, moreover, the 
advent of socialist realism gave artists across the Soviet Union specific instructions 
delineating the appropriate method for the production of Soviet art. The power belonging to 
Mirzoev and other members and leaders of the Georgian Union of Soviet Artists, then, was in 
interpreting socialist realisms theoretical guidelines, particularly in light of Stalins 
declaration that Soviet art should be national in form, socialist in content. Even this 
interpretation, though, was ultimately subject to Party supervision. This was especially true in 
Georgia, where Beria had recently come to power. Beria, who had been employed by 
Bolshevik state security since 1919 and was deputy head and then head of the Georgian 
branch of the Soviet secret police (OGPU) since 1922 and 1926 respectively, was elected as 
Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party in 1931, and Party Secretary of the whole 
Transcaucasian region in 1932. From 1931, Beria cultivated close relationships with 
Georgias cultural elite, which he used over the course of the 1930s to intervene in and 
control their activities. As has been documented by others, for example he coerced certain 
Soviet Georgian writers (in particular, members of the Blue Horns association) into 
incriminating themselves by making alliances with Western visitors whom Beria would later 
declare to be enemies of the Soviet people.136 Beria also supervised the Georgian Writers 
Union so closely that by the mid 1930s its journal, Literaturuli sakartevelo (Literary Georgia) 
became Berias personal mouthpiece for the reformation of Soviet Georgian literature.137 
More pertinently to this thesis, Beria personally supervised the activities of Georgian 
painters. This, as I document in more detail in chapters four and five, was perhaps the single 
biggest factor determining the specificity of Georgian artists experience, and of Georgian 
artistic production for the remainder of that decade. 
Institutional Structures Before and After the April 1932 Decree 
Georgia came under Bolshevik control at a moment when government administration 
of the arts was changing. Since the October Revolution, responsibility for managing Soviet 
artistic activity had belonged to Narkompros, and in particular its visual art division (IZO). 
While the Bolshevik leadership was occupied with the more pressing matter of the Russian 
Civil War, Narkompros and its leader, Lunacharsky, enjoyed relatively free reign from Party 
136 Donald Rayfield, The Literature of Georgia: A History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994), pp. 265-66. 
137 Ibid., p. 266. 
supervision. Following the end of the Russian Civil War, however, the Party leadership 
began to pay greater attention to other things. At that time, Narkompros and Lunacharsky 
suddenly came under fire. They were accused of paying too much attention to the arts at the 
expense of general education, schools and adult technical and vocational training. In the 
resulting re-organisation of Narkompros in 1920-21, the arts division was abolished. Its 
functions were split between Narkompros other departments dealing with political education 
(Glavpolitprosvet), technical education (Glavprofobr) and science (Glavnauka). Funding for 
the arts was also dramatically diminished.138 
At the same time, the Party was seeking to make greater use of Narkompros in its 
agitational and propaganda (agitprop) work. The Party needed a large government 
administration to implement this work, and Glavpolitprosvet, Narkompros new political 
education division, was mandated to fulfil this function. It expanded quickly as a result, 
absorbing more and more government departments and extra-governmental organisations. 
Through this process, an increasing proportion of artistic activity was subordinated to direct 
Party supervision. Like other government institutions and commissariats (as well as the 
Communist Party itself, and organisations like AKhR and MOSSKh), Narkompros was 
organised as a network of republican and regional offices, which were subordinate to a 
central administration. Regional and republican branches mirrored the structure of the central 
organisation. As such, the 1920-21 reorganisation of Narkompros was implemented in unison 
across each of the Soviet republics and regions. In Georgia, this occurred within months of 
Sovietisation, and set the context in which artists operated in Georgia almost from day one.  
A meeting concerning the local reorganisation of Narkompros was held in Tiflis in the 
spring of 1921 and attended by the heads of interested sections of the Georgian and 
Transcaucasian Narkompros administrations, including Glavpolitprosvet and local art 
divisions, agitation divisions and theatre and fine art sub-departments.139 A report, published 
138 Fitzpatrick, The Emergence of Glaviskusstvo, p. 238. For more on the re-organisation of Narkompros, see 
Towards reorganization of Narkompros in Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment: Soviet 
Organization of Education and the Arts Under Lunacharsky, October 1917-1921 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1970). 
139 In Stalinist Transcaucasia, where, between 1921 and 1936, the Georgian, Armenian and Azerbaijani 
republics were united and governed under the Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic (ZSFSR) 
there was a level of government and Party bureaucracy additional to that elsewhere in the Soviet Union. All 
administrations operated at Union, ZSFSR and republican levels. The distinctions between them, however, were 
fluid. The division of responsibility between republican and ZSFSR level government and Party institutions 
shifted constantly as republican-level communists fought to retain as much local autonomy as they could. At the 
same time, the distinction between republican and ZSFSR level institutions was blurred by the fact that their 
representatives and leaders often held posts at both levels.  
in the local journal Khelovneba (Art), set out the new distribution of administrative control 
sector by sector.140 In each sphere of the arts a proportion of institutions and administrative 
functions was transferred to the care of Glavpolitprosvet (or, in the case of educational 
institutions, to Glavprofobr), while others would remain as they were. Except for education 
and cinema (which was given its own section), each field was split broadly in two. 
Traditional, academic and theoretical work was to be supervised by a Central State 
Committee, while practical and agitational functions were transferred to the control of 
Glavpolitprosvet.141 In visual art, for example, competitions, special resolutions  [and]  
theoretical work were to remain in the hands of a stripped down IZO department, while 
work of an agitational character was transferred to Glavpolitprosvet.142 The same was true 
of theatre and literature. Traditional theatres (such as the opera, drama and chamber theatres) 
remained under the State Committee, while revolutionary and proletarian theatres moved to 
Glavpolitprosvet. Similarly, theoretical work in literature remained in the hands of a literary 
department, but agitational work as well as the technical side of the state publishing house 
would be controlled by Glavpolitprosvet.143 Though the looseness of these distinctions 
appears to have left room for some ambiguity in practical terms, they broadly meant that 
Glavpolitprosvet controlled all institutions with any political position or power to control and 
harness particular media for the dissemination of its message. The reorganisation of 
Narkompros thus amounted to both a reduction in the States financial support for the arts 
and, simultaneously, a movement to bring the arts more decidedly into the service of the 
Party. As in Moscow, artistic activity in Georgia that was not explicitly proletarian or 
revolutionary was allowed to continue, since, as Lunacharsky and others insisted, no single 
form for proletarian art had yet been settled on. However, priority would be given to the 
institutions serving the Party under Glavpolitprosvets umbrella. Georgian artists benefited 
from relative freedom in terms of the style and content of their painting in the 1920s, but 
there was little financial support for their work. The ambiguity with which Glavpolitprosvets 
jurisdiction was defined in each sphere, moreover, meant that its reach could be readily 
extended to absorb additional functions and institutions at the whim of the Party. The new 
priorities of Narkompros were reflected in the selection of Davit Kandelaki as Georgias first 
140 Tskhovreba da khelovneba: khelovnebis ganqopilebis reorganizatsia [Art and life: Reorganisation of the 
Art Department], Khelovneba, 2, 1921, pp. 14-16. 
141 Ibid., pp. 15-16. 
142 Ibid., p. 15. 
143 Ibid., pp. 15-16. 
Commissar of Enlightenment in 1921-30. An economist and specialist in education, 
Kandelaki appears to have had little if any involvement in the arts. 144 
Proletkult in Georgia  
One of the first organisations in Soviet Georgia to seek to cultivate specifically 
proletarian cultural activity, including in the visual arts, was Proletkult. Founded in Russia in 
1917 by Aleksandr Bogdanov, Proletkult (a contraction of Proletarskaia kultura - Proletarian 
Culture) was established with the goal of supporting the growing proletariat under Bolshevik 
rule in cultivating and developing its own cultural forms. This, Proletkults leaders believed, 
was the only way to encourage a truly authentic proletarian culture. Unlike the theorists of 
AKhR and its allies, who would prescribe a model of proletarian art devised by artists and 
ideologues on the basis of what they believed would be comprehensible to the masses, 
Bogdanov and his followers sought to enable the working masses to develop their own 
cultural forms. The organisation grew rapidly between 1917 and 1920, gaining thousands of 
members over this short period. Through a network of schools and workshops (referred to as 
studios) organised by Proletkult circles across Russia and the territories under Bolshevik 
control, workers were taught to read, write poetry, novels and plays, act and produce visual 
art.145 During that time Proletkult benefitted from state funding for its operation, while being 
allowed to insist on complete autonomy from the Bolshevik government in its activities. 
When the Civil War began to draw to a close, however, Proletkult, like Narkompros, came 
under greater government scrutiny. Lenin in particularly was alarmed by its insistence on its 
autonomy, particular in light of the size of its following among the workers. Measures were 
taken, initially to make Proletkult answerable to the government, via Narkompros, and 
eventually to discredit it, both in terms of its practical organisation and its vision for a 
144 Kandelaki studied in Germany before returning to Georgia in Autumn 1921. He was also Commissar of 
Enlightenment at Transcaucasian level for at least a part of the same period, and, for a time, also head of the 
Academic Centre under Narkompros in the 1920s. (The Academic Centre was the department of Narkompros 
that would later become Glavnauka, the Main Administration of Scientific, Scholarly-artistic and Museum 
Institutions responsible for co-ordinating research in science and culture in the USSR.) See Saavaldebulo 
dadgenileba: revkomis dadgenilebis shesakheb qvela teatris politikuri ganatlebis mtavri sammartvelos 
gamgeblobashi gadasvlis shesakheb garda akademiuri da sanakhaobiti teatrebisa [Decree Resolution: Revkom 
resolution about the transition of all political theatre departments to the main division of government except 
academic theatres and shows] Komunisti, 130, 9 August 1921, p. 2.  
145 For more on Proletkult in Russia, see Lynn Mally, Culture of the Future: The Proletkult Movement in 
Revolutionary Russia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990). 
proletarian culture.146 By 1921 Glavpolitprosvet was taking charge of all spheres of political 
education and was eager to gain control of Proletkults network as well. Meanwhile, the 
reduction in available funding that accompanied the reorganisation of Narkompros that year 
(as well as the introduction of NEP) was financially disastrous for Proletkult. In February 
1922 it was forced to implement a radical purge of its network, leaving only 38 local centres 
intact.147  
Nevertheless, Proletkult continued to operate, albeit in diminished form, right up until 
the 23 April 1932 decree. Indeed, though it was seriously downsizing in 1922, several new 
strategic centres were also being organised, including one in Georgia.148 An Organisational 
Committee was set up in Tiflis in early 1922 and began work immediately. Members 
included the Georgian proletarian writers Razhdan Kaladze and Sandro Kuridze, who were 
later active in the Georgian Association of Proletarian Writers (GAPP, 1921-32) and 
subsequently in the Georgian Union of Soviet writers, and Russian Proletkultist Vasily 
Ignatov, who was invited by the Georgian members to help them establish the organisation in 
Georgia.149 From 1922, literary and theatre studios met several times a week, including 
sessions in Russian and Georgian. A Georgian branch of Proletkult was formally established 
in July 1923.150 Its presidium had then been elected at a meeting of 321 delegates of 
Georgian, Armenian, Russian, Ossetian, Turkish, Jewish and other origin in Tiflis on 7 
February 1924 and a supervisory committee had also been put in place, chaired by 
Kaladze.151  The number of delegates attending the February meeting suggests that it had a 
significant following. In spring 1924 the local Georgian-language journal Khelovnebis drosha 
(Art Banner), edited by Kuridze, then published a series of articles announcing Proletkults 
achievements in Georgia. A Proletkult Tekhnikum (technical training college) had been 
146 In 1919, the first measures were taken to bring Proletkult under Narkompros control. Despite Lunacharskys 
efforts to defend Proletkults autonomy, on 1 December 1920, a Central Committee resolution On the 
Proletkultists was published in Pravda, discrediting Proletkults leadership, organisational practice and cultural 
mission. Mally, Culture of the Future, 204. 
147 Ibid., 218. 
148 Ibid., 218. 
149 Other members included V. Medzhanov, N. Dubensky, P. Kobakhidze, A. Chkheidze and V. Sutyrin. 
Kuridze was elected as acting head of the artistic-creative part of the organisation, and Medzhanov as acting 
head of organisational activity. Ignatov was initially invited to assist as a kind of consultant in the capacity of a 
lecturer-organiser of the creative section, and later became the executive organiser of the organisations 
creative studios. NAG, f. 25, op. 1, d. 8, ll. 1 and 6. Kuridze, born Aleksandr Kishvardovich Kuridze, also went 
by the nickname Sandro Euli (Sandro the lonely - in reference to his solitary character) or was referred to 
using both names together, Sandro Euli-Kuridze. 
150 Sakartvelos proletkulti [Georgian Proletkult], Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924, p. 25. 
151 Members included Georgias Commissar of Enlightenment, Davit Kandelaki as well as Ignatov and the 
Armenian poet Akop Akopian (Hakob Hakobian, 1866-1937). Sakartvelos proletkulti, Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 
1924, p. 25. 
established, it announced, in which 150 students of mainly worker and peasant origin were 
enrolled, as had a Red Theatre and literary and visual art studios, all of which were operating 
successfully in Tiflis, training workers in various cultural practices. 152 A short article 
concerning the visual art studio confirmed the alignment of Georgias Proletkult organisation 
with the artistic sympathies of Proletkult in Moscow, which from 1924 had adopted a more 
defined artistic agenda, aligning itself more explicitly with the artistic left and, in particular, 
with the Lef group.153  
In Moscow by the mid 1920s Proletkult, though still active, existed in the margins of 
cultural life. It found itself unable to recover from the criticism that had been levelled at it at 
the beginning of the decade.154 Its position was weakened further by new attacks by 
proletarian organisations such as AKhRR, RAPP and VOAPP (the All-Union Union of 
Associations of Proletarian Writers), which expended significant energy in differentiating 
their conception of proletarian culture from Proletkults.155 In Georgia, however, opposition 
between these groups was less clear-cut. As a much smaller cultural centre, local branches of 
Party and government bodies as well as independent non-government cultural organisations 
in Tiflis existed on a far smaller scale than their counterparts in the central administration. As 
a result, there was more overlap and cooperation between groups that were in opposition in 
Moscow, and individuals held powerful positions in several government administrations and 
independent organisations simultaneously. Proletkults Kuridze was one such figure. Kuridze 
was a Bolshevik Party member from 1917 and involved in the revolutionary movement in 
Transcaucasia. He edited the illegal Bolshevik newspaper Komunisti (Communist, 1920-45) 
in Georgia during Menshevik rule, wrote revolutionary poetry and was instrumental in 1922 
in establishing both the Georgian Proletkult organisation and the Georgian Association of 
Proletarian Writers. However, he also had several government positions. He was the first 
head of IZO Narkompros in Georgia in 1921, and was employed by the Union of Art 
Workers in Georgia as editor of its art journal in 1924-5. Although he appears not to have 
retained these positions through the Cultural Revolution period, in the mid-1920s, at least, his 
152 Sakartvelo proletkultis tekhnikumi [Georgian Proletkult Tekhnikum]; D. Konstantinov, Proletkultis 
sakhviti studia [Proletkult visual studio], Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924, p. 27-28. The need to organise a visual 
art studio was raised by the committee as early as October 1922. Members initially proposed that 
Glavpolitprosvet undertake its organisation on their behalf. In November it was noted that a visual art section of 
Proletkult had been formed, but that it was hampered by the absence of premises from which to work. It is 
unclear exactly how quickly art studios began after this. NAG, f. 25, op. 1, d. 10, ll. 1 ob. and 3. 
153 D. Konstantinov, Proletkultis sakhviti studia [Proletkult visual studio], Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924, p. 
27-8. 
154 See 8. The Proletkult as Postscript, 1923-1932 in Mally, Culture of the Future, pp. 229-52. 
155 Mally, Culture of the Future, 232. 
various positions of authority must have made Proletkult more visible and relevant than it 
was in the same period in Moscow (particularly given his ability as editor of Khelovnebis 
drosha to publish swathes of articles in Proletkults praise).  
Kuridzes multiple positions, however, also meant that he was responsible for 
defending the interests of artistic organisations outside of Proletkult, including those that had 
little to connect them to the proletariat or the service of its interests. Indeed, Kuridze seems to 
have supported freedom and heterogeneity of artistic experimentation of Georgia above all, 
regardless of class concernsor rather, as the best means of developing proletarian culture. 
In a report Kuridze gave at the Sixth Congress of the All-Georgian Art Workers Union 
(RABIS) in 1926, for example, he petitioned the Unions leadership on behalf of both the 
Academy of Arts and the Society of Georgian Artists, complaining that government 
management and investment in the arts was insufficient for their proper development.156 He 
commented on the fact that neither the Main State Council for the Arts, nor Glaviskusstvo, 
had a budget of its own. Both were subject to the whim of Narkompros general leadership.157 
He condemned the especially great hardship faced by the Society, noting that it had no access 
to suitable exhibition space.158 The situation was so dire, he explained, that the Society had 
rented the gardens of the opera house as a temporary summer space and its members were 
working outside. It had no material resources, no one to buy the works being produced and 
not even the minimum satisfactory conditions for work. As a result, young artists with 
undoubted talent and bright futures were starved of the resources they needed.159  
Keeping up with Moscow: Georgian Arts Periodicals in the 1920s and 30s 
The following pages introduce the main periodicals reporting on contemporary 
developments in the arts in Georgia during the 1920s and 30s and construct through them a 
chronology of the major political events affecting Georgian artists in that period, and of the 
contemporary discourses arising in relation to Soviet Georgian art and identity. These 
periodicals reflect the proximity of art producers and critics in Georgia to shifts in cultural 
156 GARF, f. P5508, op.1, d. 695. 
157 Within the Presidium of Glaviskusstvo only two members were paid as permanent staffthe chair of the 
presidium and the head of the music division. In the visual arts section, the only permanent budget belonged to 
the Academy of Arts, and even then the funds were only enough to cover teaching salaries and necessary 
technical personnel. Despite eighty per cent of the Academys students being of proletarian origin, the absence 
of financial support meant that they were dragging out a half-starved existence.   
. GARF, f. P5508, op.1, d. 695, l. 137. 
158 GARF, f. P5508, op.1, d. 695, ll. 50-51. 
159 GARF, f. P5508, op.1, d. 695, l. 147. 
policy in Moscow, but also shed light on the specificity of the environment in which 
Georgian artists found themselves. 
Khelovneba (Art)  
The most important Georgian-language art journal published in Tbilisi during the 1920s and 
30s changed its name, editorship and affiliation several times, reflecting shifts in the 
organisation of the arts over that period. First appearing in 1921 as Khelovneba, the social-
political literary-artistic and scientific-theoretical journal of the Georgian Ministry of 
Culture, it endured, albeit erratically and under a range of titles, throughout the 1920s and 
30s. It therefore offers a vital record of artistic activity in Georgia during that time.160 Its first 
incarnation, which appeared only twice in 1921 before publication was temporarily halted, 
was mainly concerned with theatre and literature.161 Following a gap in 1922-3 Khelovneba 
was replaced in June 1924 with Khelovnebis drosha. Under Kuridzes editorship, and now as 
an organ of RABIS, Khelovnebis drosha and is successor, Khelovneba (1925-6) were broader 
in scope than the earlier journal, although the weighting of its content continued to reflect 
that of its membership, who were mostly theatre, film and music performers and personnel, 
rather than painters.162 Under Kuridze, Khelovnebis drosha and Khelovneba reported not only 
about Proletkults and RABIS achievements in Georgia, but also on the activities of 
Proletkults allies in Georgia and Moscow, including Lunacharsky and the Russian theatre 
actor and producer Vsevolod Meyerhold.163  
In 1927, however, Khelovneba was replaced by Sabchota khelovneba (Soviet Art). 
Publication changed hands from RABIS to the arts section of Narkompros in Georgia and 
160  The journals initial title, Khelovneba (Art), was given to several journals in Georgia in the 1910s and 20s. 
Khelovneba: almanaki [Art: almanac] was published briefly in Tiflis in 1910. Ilia Chavchavadzes Society for 
the Propagation of Literacy in Georgia also printed several issues of a journal titled Khelovneba in 1919-1921. 
These were concerned primarily with new Georgian theatre and literature and published writing by associates of 
the Blue Horns modernist literary association. Narkompros replaced Georgias Ministry of Culture soon after 
Sovietisation. 
161 Regular contributors included the Georgian theatre director Akaki Paghava and the writer, playwright, actor 
and director, Shalva Dadiani. Paghava founded the Akaki Paghava theatre studio (which became the Rustaveli 
Theatre Institute in 1923). 
162 A graphic published in 1926 put the collective number of fine artists and artist-decorators belonging to 
RABIS at 141, compared with 585 actors, 300 orchestral performers, 249 technical stage personnel, 219 
technical film personnel, 205 teachers, 189 administrative personnel, 137 financial personnel, 123 folk 
performers, plus a whole section of performers and other personal working in opera, ballet and circuses. 
Khelovneba, 25, 1926, p. 22. 
163 As well as articles explaining and commending their work, for example, translations of some of 
Lunacharskys writings and lectures were provided as appendices. Kuridze also gave space to the activities of 
experimental theatre directors Kote Marjanishvili and Sandro Akhmeteli and to the Georgian Futurists 
associated with the journal H2SO4. See especially Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924.  
editorship was taken over by Aleksandre Duduchava, who was then also the rector of the 
Georgian Academy of Arts. Unsurprisingly, given Duduchavas interest in Georgian painting, 
the change produced a significant shift in the publications focus towards issues of visual art, 
as the journal began to report on the activities and achievements of the Academy of Arts and 
debate the Academys role and responsibilities. 
From the end of 1927 until 1931for the duration of the Cultural Revolutionthere 
was a further gap in publication. During this neither RABIS, IZO Narkompros, REVMAS 
nor SARMA appears to have had a regular publication in Georgia. This changed only with 
the appearance of Proletaruli khelovnebisatvis (For Proletarian Art, after AKhRs journal, 
Za proletarskoe iskusstvo), which finally represented the far left wing of painting in Georgia 
in print.164 Still published by the arts section of Narkompros in Georgia and during its brief 
existence (one issue was published in 1931 followed by a further three in 1932) its pages 
were dominated by far left critics and writers belonging to GAPP and the Transcaucasian 
Association of Proletarian Writers (ZAPP) and reflected the militant proletarianism of those 
organisations.165  In line with the interests and outlook of its editors, the bulk of its content 
was dedicated to proletarian theatre, music, film and literature. Little room was given to the 
visual arts. Nevertheless, Mirzoev also contributed several articles, which he used to set out 
his views on the correct path for the visual arts in Soviet Georgia and criticise those outside 
of his own militantly proletarian faction within SARMA and, subsequently, GAPKh.166  
The final issue of Proletaruli khelovnebisatvis appeared in May 1932, following soon 
after the Central Committees decree On the Reconstruction of Literary and Artistic 
Organisations. Already in 1931, both in Moscow and in Georgia, the Party and the 
government bodies responsible for the arts had begun to step back from the militant 
proletarianism of the preceding years following Stalins rehabilitation of bourgeois 
specialists. Georgian artists and commentators followed Moscows lead. At SARMAs first 
plenum meeting in January 1932, for example, artists and critics increasingly reassessed and 
164 In this period, commentary concerning visual art appeared elsewhere, including in the journals of the 
Transcaucasian and Georgian Associations of Proletarian Writers (ZAPP and GAPP). 
165 Among its editors were the actor and theatre critic Grigol Shavgulidze (chief editor), the secretary of the 
Georgian Association of Proletarian Writers, Shalva Radiani, the writer and literary and theatre critic Shalva 
Duduchava, and the prominent theatre critic G. Bukhnikashvili.  
166 G. Mirzoevi, SARMA, Proletaruli khelovnebisatsvis, 1-2, 1931, p. 5; G. Mirzoevi, Tsru damkvrelobis 
tsinaaghmdeg (Sak. khelovn. mushakebis kavshiri oportunizmis chaobshi [Against false shock-work (The 
Georgian Art Workers Union in a Swamp of Opportunism)], Proletaruli khelovnebisatsvis, 3-4, 1932, p. 29; 
G. Mirzoevi, Sotsialisturi rekonstruktsia da plakati [Socialist reconstruction and the poster], Proletaruli 
khelovnebisatsvis, 5-6, 1932, pp. 4-5. The first issue also contains a notice of SARMAs second exhibition at the 
Georgian National Gallery. It claims that the exhibition will tour to Armenia and Moscow, although no evidence 
has been found in the course of this research to confirm that this tour took place. 
renounced the militancy of previous years. 167  When Proletaruli khelovnebisatvis was 
replaced by Sabchota khelovneba, its first issue appearing in February 1932, its editorship 
and content reflected the changes and continuities resulting from the April 23 decree. 
Shavgulidze initially continued as editor and many of the regular contributors of the Cultural 
Revolution period continued to feature on its pages, but their content was markedly more 
moderate.   
There was another gap in publication through 1933-4, after which printing began 
again in 1935, first, for a single issue, as Khelovneba, and then, again, as Sabchota 
khelovneba, which was issued regularly up to 1941.168 Duduchava resumed editorship 
between 1935 and 1937 and, as a result, the visual arts began again to receive greater 
attention.169  Through 1935-41, Sabchota khelovneba responded to the major events in 
Stalinist culture and politics and reflected their implications for the cultural sphere in 
Georgia. Beginning in 1935 a series of articles attempted to characterise the new goals for the 
arts in Georgia following the advent of socialist realism. In 1936, articles covered the 
campaign against formalism in the arts, which began at the end of 1935 under the recently 
established Committee for Art Affairs. The Committee oversaw a tightening of central Party 
control over all spheres of the arts, and the further delineation of socialist realist doctrine 
resulting in a narrowing of the scope of acceptable artistic activity. Articles in Sabchota 
khelovneba, including Duduchavas twenty-page Against Formalism and Simplification, 
and a further piece Against formalism in music penned by the head of Georgias new 
department for the administration of the arts outlined the principles of the new doctrine and 
its applicability in Georgia.170 In 1937, the journal dedicated a special issue to the celebration 
167 NAG, f. 10, op. 1, d. 25.  
168 The single issue of Khelovneba was edited by Davit Demetradze, a literary critic and prominent member of 
the Georgia Writers Union, whom Beria would employ two years later to lead the trials of dozens of members 
of the Writers Union, leading to the arrest and execution of many. Following the trials Beria also had 
Demetradze arrested and executed. See Rayfield, The Literature of Georgia, p. 270. Unsurprisingly, under 
Demetradzes leadership the journal was dominated by the contributions of prominent figures within the 
Writers Union at that time, including Davit Rondeli and Bessarion (Beso) Zhgenti, writing on film and theatre. 
Publication halted in 1941 and resumed only in 1954.  
169 Duduchava continued as editor up until his arrest and execution during the Terror of 1937. At that time 
editorship was transferred to B. Gagua, who continued in the role until 1941.  
170 Aleksandre Duduchava, Pormalizmisa da gaubralebis tsinaaghmdeg and Er. Gordeladze, Pormalizmis 
tsinaaghmdeg musikashi Sabchota khelovneba, 3, 1936. This new cultural climate was also reflected visually in 
Sabchota khelovneba. While 1935 issues were heavily illustrated with works that could (and soon would) attract 
accusations of formalism among critics in Georgia and Moscow, the 1936 issues were now also augmented with 
colour reproductions of new works being produced for Berias exhibition. Of five issues published under 
Duduchavas editorship in 1935, the covers of two feature a brightly coloured works by Korneli Sanadze whose 
laconic, brightly-coloured illustrations are indebted to Kakabadze and recall Russian painter David 
Shterenbergs paintings of the same period. Other frontispiece illustrations included one by Severian 
Maisashvili (a student of Lado Gudiashvili), a colourful painting by Kristepore Giorgadze, Subtropical 
of Pushkin, reflecting the enormous Union-wide festivities surrounding the centennial of the 
poets death and the new status of Pushkin as an emblem of the Great Tradition of Soviet 
cultural heritage. In this respect, the content of Sabchota khelovneba indicates that political 
and cultural developments in the Soviet capital impacted upon artistic life in Georgia almost 
as immediately as they did in Moscow.  
As the content of Sabchota khelovneba and other periodicals contests, differences 
between the experience and creative output of artists and critics in Georgia and in Moscow 
arose not from any delay in transmitting or imposing Soviet political and artistic doctrine 
outside of the main Russian centres. Instead they were driven largely by the different 
implementation of and implications of Soviet policies (collectively and in various spheres of 
governance) in Georgia vis--vis other Soviet regions and republics. 1936, for example, was 
a watershed year in Soviet political and cultural life for a series of interconnected reasons 
related to the introduction of the new Soviet constitution (the Stalin Constitution). The 
constitution was intended to satisfy public desire for civil freedoms by purporting to give 
Soviet citizens greater political and civil rights. It was an important element of Stalins cult of 
personality, presented as evidence of his genius and of his paternal concern for the rights and 
interests of the Soviet people. It was part of a marked stepping up of the Stalin personality 
cult at that time. In practice, however, the constitution actually facilitated a dramatic increase 
in the Partys and Stalins personal control over all spheres of Soviet life. The new 
Committee for Art Affairs and the anti-formalist campaign were just two of its products. 
Another was the overhaul of the territorial delineation of the Soviet Union in line with 
revised Soviet nationalities policy. As the introduction to this thesis explained, the revised 
policy meant increased central Party control over the forms of national cultural expression 
available to the remaining Soviet nations and the resurrection of the Russian peoples right to 
national cultural expression. It was a fundamental reconfiguration of the relationship between 
the constituent Soviet nations, with the Russian people increasingly taking the role of senior 
brother within the newly conceptualised Friendship of the Peoples.  
The implementation of these dramatic changes and their implications were different 
for Georgia and for Georgian artists than they were for Russia and Russian artists in Moscow. 
In Moscow, Russian cultural producers were newly allowed and encouraged to express a 
specifically Russian national cultural identity (albeit one that was expressed through 
prescribed cultural forms and which in many ways overlapped with a Soviet one). They also 
landscape, which is closely aligned with Sanadzes painting, and finally Gudiashvilis Portrait of Niko 
Pirosmanishvili, a work that inspired much debate among Georgian artists, as we will be seen in chapter two.  
went from having their nationhood denied to being acknowledged as the senior and superior 
partner in their relations with the Unions other members. By contrast, cultural producers in 
Georgia saw their ability to express a national cultural identity limited and controlled and 
their cultural status diminished vis--vis that of Russians. Georgia went from being one of the 
Unions most culturally advanced nations (compared with the multitude of small ethnic 
groups that became nations with the establishment of the Soviet Union) to being a member of 
a more homogenous periphery, inextricably separate from the Soviet centre. The new 
primordialist conceptualisations of nationhood in Soviet policy and the associated focus on 
celebrating nations folk traditions emphasised less modern aspects of Georgian culture while 
the ultimate cultural modernity, measured in mastery of socialist realism, belonged to the 
Soviet centre. As I demonstrate throughout this thesis, the differences between Georgian 
artists experience and that of other Soviet artists are complex but did not reflect any lag in 
the implementation of Soviet policy or reduction in Party supervision. Rather, the pages of 
Sabchota khelovneba show the latest policies being disseminated and discussed in Georgia as 
they appeared in Moscow. In Duduchavas first issue in 1935, two articles were quick to 
address the question of national art and its relationship with classic heritage.171 Berias 
commentary on the Stalin Constitution and its specific implications for the Caucasus region 
appeared on its pages in 1936.172  
 Other Periodicals 
In addition to Sabchota khelovneba and its earlier incarnations, several other 
periodicals published in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s provide important documents of the 
state of artistic activity there and inform subsequent chapters of this thesis. One of the most 
informative is Na rubezhe vostoka (At the Frontier of the East), the literary and artistic 
journal of the Transcaucasian Association of Proletarian Writers, which first appeared in 
1928. It was issued monthly or bi-monthly until the end of 1931, making it especially 
valuable in providing a record of the artistic environment in Georgia in the years when 
Sabchota khelovneba was not in print. After the April 1932 decree it became the organ of the 
newly founded Union of Soviet Writers of Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, and was 
replaced with a larger-format local fortnightly newspaper of literature, criticism and art 
171 See for example Gr. Khevtasi, Sotsialisturi realizmi da klassikuri momkvidreobis problema [Socialist 
realism and the problem of classical heritage], Sabchota khelovneba, 2, 1935, pp. 11-12.  
172 L. Beria, ssr kavshiris axali konstitutsia da amier-kavkasiis pederatsia [The New Constitution of the USSR 
and the Transcaucasian Federation], Sabchota khelovneba, 1936, pp. 1-5.  
appearing between 1933 and 1936. It began primarily as a literary publication but included an 
art section from 1929. This concentrated on music, film and theatre, articles concerning the 
visual arts and the state of art criticism as well as exhibition reviews. Reproductions of new 
Georgian painting began to appear from the middle of 1929 and continued throughout the 
years of its publication. They included articles by leading Georgian art critics including 
Duduchava and Vladimir Sokol debating the goals of Soviet painting in Georgia in the 
Cultural Revolution period and assessing the contributions and relevance of Georgian arts 
most famous representatives.173 The 1933-6 issues of Na rubezhe are incompletethe larger 
newspaper format and slimmer fortnightly editions led them to be less well preserved than 
copies of the earlier journal so that even the main repositories such as the National 
Parliamentary Library of Georgia and Georgias National Archives hold only partial runs. 
However, these materials, plus the full runs for 1928-31, represent a vast and hitherto wholly 
untapped resource for historians of Soviet art.  In parallel with Sabchota khelovneba, articles 
in Na rubezhe charted the changing tides in public discourse about the new Soviet art in 
Georgia, from the proletarian militancy of the Cultural Revolution period through the advent 
of socialist realism and the onslaught of the campaign against Formalism in the arts in 
1936.  
 A number of other periodicals appearing in Georgia in the 1920s and 30s also 
reported on the visual arts. From 1931 the Georgian Association of Proletarian Writers (and 
then, from 1932, the Georgian Union of Soviet Writers) published a journal, appearing under 
various titlesSaliterturo gazeti (Literary Newspaper) from 1931 to 1934, Literaturli 
gazeti (Literary Newspaper) from late 1934 to 1936, and Literaturuli Sakartvelo (Literary 
Georgia) from 1936 to 1943.174 By comparison with Sabchota khelovneba and Na rubezhe, 
Saliterturo gazeti and its later incarnations were much more narrowly focused on literary 
matters, music and theatre, and gave less space to visual art. Nevertheless, it did publish 
occasional exhibition reviews and contributions on Georgian visual artists. Much more 
regular coverage of the visual arts appeared in main, non-specialist, local newspapers, which 
published frequent exhibition reviews, artist interviews and biographies, and articles and 
173 Na rubezhes editors and regular contributors in the Cultural Revolution period included the militant leftist 
critic Benito Buachidze (chief editor between 1928 and 1931) and Georgian, Armenian and Azerbaijani writers, 
playwrights and critics belonging to ZAPP, including Rondeli (between 1928 and 1929), Azerbaijani poet and 
playright Suleiman Rustam-Zade (between 1928 and 1929), and later, Radiani (1931-32). For a full list of 
editors for the period 1928-1932, see K. D. Muratov, Periodika literatury i iskusstva za gody revoliutsii 
(Leningrad: USSR Academy of Sciences, 1933), p. 166. 
174 It was edited by Radiani and Zhgenti from 1932, as part of a board of editors belonging to the Georgian 
Writers Union.  
notifications concerning visual art in Georgia. These included the Russian-language 
newspaper of the Communist Party in Transcaucasia, Zaria vostoka (Dawn of the East, 
1922-91), and the Georgian-language Komunisti. Komunisti included a literary-artistic 
supplement, Drosha (Flag), between 1923 and 1929, after which it appeared as an 
independent artistic and literary journal until 1935. The komsomol newspaper Akhalgazrda 
kommunisti (Young Communist, 1925-90) and the daily evening newspaper of the Georgian 
Council of Trade Unions, Musha (Worker, 1922-39), also published articles on art matters, 
although less frequently. 
These periodicals constitute a vital record of the genesis of Soviet Georgian painting 
through the Cultural Revolution and in light of the advent of socialist realism. In the 
following chapters these records inform detailed studies of pivotal events in the history of 
painting in Soviet Georgia. The overview presented in this chapter of their content and 
chronologies and of the organisations who produced them or published in them, however, has 
already broken new ground. It has demonstrated that Georgian cultural producers, including 
painters, were responding to the same whims of the Party leadership, the same overhauls of 
Soviet policy, at the same time as were artists in Moscow. The difference in the Georgian 
case was that in some respects the implementation and implications of those events were 
different for artists in Georgia and at the Soviet centre. The impact on artists in Georgia of 
the Cultural Revolution, the rehabilitation of bourgeois specialists, the advent of socialist 
realism or the introduction of the Stalin Constitution was as immediate as it was in Moscow, 
but the consequences of those events were different. Clearly, shifts in Soviet nationalities 
policy had a different impact on Georgian artists than on artists representing the Soviet 
centre. But so too did the Cultural Revolutions class war, which had complicated 
ramifications for the question of national art. Similarly, the Stalin Constitution affected 
Georgias status in the Soviet Unions hierarchy of nations. However, it also signalled a 
stepping up of work on Stalins cult of personality, which had different implications for 
Georgian artists than for artists of other Soviet nationalities. Additionally, this chapter has 
highlighted for the first time the extraordinary degree of influence that a handful of figures 
held over the working lives of Georgian painters in the 1920s and 30s, above all Mirzoev 
during the Cultural Revolution and Beria throughout the 1930s. It has introduced the main 
individuals, organisations, government bodies, and policies involved in defining Georgian 
artists experience in the 1920s and 30s, as well as the printed media through which ideas and 
policies were disseminated, formalised, and consolidated. In doing so it has provided 
essential context for the case studies that follow and lays the foundations for future research 
concerning Georgian painting in this period. 
Chapter 2. Representing National Art: Moscow Institutions and the Art of the Soviet 
East in the 1920s and 30s 
This chapter documents how institutions and individual commentators discussed and 
displayed the art and culture of the non-Russian peoples of the Soviet Union, including 
Georgia, in Moscow in the 1920s and 30s. It considers the challenges they faced as they 
attempted to understand and interpret Soviet policy concerning the non-Russian nationalities 
including, in particular, Stalins declaration that Soviet art should be national in form, 
socialist in content. There was significant room for a range of interpretations of what would 
constitute national form and for how long it ought to be cultivated. In the 1920s and early 
1930s at least, there were no guidelines as to what national form in Soviet art should look 
like or which national traits should or should not be encouraged. The only fixed 
requirement was that form should not interfere with socialist content.  
Korenizatsiia (discussed in the introduction to this thesis) and Stalins formula for a 
socialist culture, national in form and socialist in content, remained a feature of Soviet policy 
throughout the Stalin era. However, the ways in which those policies were interpreted and 
implemented altered in response to changes in the Soviet leaderships other priorities. As 
Terry Martin describes, Soviet policies can be understood as belonging to one of two 
categories, hard-line or soft-line: Hard-line policies were the core Bolshevik tasks, whereas 
soft-line policies were designed to make those policies palatable to the larger population.175 
Military and economic concerns were thus hard-line priorities, while korenizatsiia was a 
quintessentially soft-line policy which meant that it was to be implemented only to the 
extent it did not conflict with hard-line policy goals.176 In painting, accordingly, national 
form was a priority only when the demand for strictly proletarian content was less urgent 
(before 1928 and after 1931), and was appropriate only where it did not interfere with a 
paintings ability to serve the needs of the proletariat. Equally, the task of encouraging, 
promoting and displaying national art was only a priority for institutions and individual 
commentators in Moscow in periods when they were not required to dedicate their time and 
resources to more pressing class, social or economic concerns. The shifts between periods 
when nationalities policy was and was not prioritised therefore had complicated implications 
for how national art and culture were approached, discussed and presented to the public in 
Moscow. They affected the types of material collected by museums and displayed to the 
175 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 21. 
176 Ibid., p. 21 
public as well as the manner in which that material was displayed and written about. In doing 
so they affected the narratives those institutions were able to present concerning the Soviet 
Unions non-Russian peoples, sometimes even inadvertently making it more difficult for 
institutions to present the vision that the Party desired. 
To complicate matters further, contradictory hard- and soft-line policies were 
sometimes implemented simultaneously. Korenizatsiia was carried out by soft-line 
institutions at the same time as hard-line institutions were moving against it. In Ukraine, for 
example, korenizatsiia (or ukrainizatsiia, Ukrainianisation) continued to be implemented in 
accordance with nationalities policy even as many of those responsible for its implementation 
were being accused of and arrested for counter-revolutionary bourgeois nationalism.177 
Under such circumstances, the task of commentators on national art in Moscow was to 
present their interpretation of Stalins formula honouring the principles of korenizatsiia but 
also appearing to prioritise hard-line policies over korenizatsiia whenever necessary. This 
was not always easy to achieve.  
(Not) Representing National Art at the Soviet Centre: The All-Soviet Scholarly 
Association of Oriental Studies (VNAV) and the Museum of Oriental Cultures (GMVK) 
Some of the most prolific organisations and institutions contributing to public 
discussion in Moscow concerning the art and culture of the non-Russian peoples of the 
Southern and Eastern territories of the USSR in the 1920s belonged to the field of Soviet 
oriental studies. The most influential of these were the All-Russian (All-Soviet from 1922) 
Scholarly Association of Oriental Studies (VNAV, 1921-30) and Moscows museum of 
oriental art, Ars Asiatica (1917-24), which in 1925 was reorganised as the State Museum of 
Oriental Cultures.178 
Conceived as the foremost Party organ for Soviet oriental studies, VNAV represented 
a new school of Bolshevik oriental studies. In contrast to the Imperial Russian school of 
orientologists still active in the USSR, VNAV sought to apply the methodology of Marxist 
177 On Ukrainianisation and the backlash against it, see 3. Lingistic Ukrainianization, 1923-32 in Martin, The 
Affirmative Action Empire, pp. 75-124. 
178 Ars Asiatica was administered under the museums division of Narkompros from its establishment in 1917 up 
until 1924. From late 1924 to mid 1925 it briefly became a department of the Museum of Fine Arts (Muzei 
izobrazitelnykh iskusstv, MII), before being restored as an independent institution under Glavnauka and renamed 
the State Museum of Oriental Cultures (GMVK). In 1936 it was brought under the recently established 
Committee for Art Affairs of the USSR. Though there were other oriental studies institutions involved in work 
concerning the cultures of those nationalities, VNAV and GMVK were the most active in terms of formal 
academic research. 
dialectical materialism to oriental studies.179 According to this method the history of nations 
social, cultural and economic development would be explained according to the stages of 
economic and social development identified by Marx. For this reason, despite being 
established under Stalins Commissariat of Nationalities (Narkomnats), the commissariat 
responsible for domestic national groups, rather than the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs 
(Narkomindel), VNAV was initially concerned primarily with studying the foreign (non-
Soviet) East. It was founded with the primary purpose of providing the Soviet leadership with 
data on the East that could help it to monitor and facilitate revolutionary progress there.180 A 
Marxist dialectical materialist method, it was intended, would allow VNAVs scholars to 
provide revolutionary forces in the East with a narrative of their own political and economic 
progress that would encourage further revolutionary development.181 This narrative was to be 
disseminated through an extensive programme of publishing, propaganda tours, lectures and 
exhibitions, and through cooperation with local revolutionary forces on the ground.182  
Despite the Associations initial focus on the East beyond the USSR, VNAV also 
devoted attention to the Soviet East, especially in the latter half of the 1920s.183 It was 
179 Other schools of orientology existed alongside VNAV in the 1920s, the most significant of which was 
centred around the Asiatic Museum, a department of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Petrograd/Leningrad. 
Rather than adopting VNAVs Marxist methodology, members of this school largely continued in the research 
they had pursued before the Revolution. They published a small amount of research on the art and culture of the 
peoples of the East in a dedicated journal, Vostok: zhurnal literatury, nauki i iskusstva, five large volumes (150-
300 pages each) of which were published between 1922 and 1925. However, content was dominated by 
translations of literary works. Writing on fine art focussed on cultures that particularly interested the Leningrad 
orientologists, including especially Buddhist cultures, and on historic and applied arts, not contemporary 
painting. See, for example, S. Dudin, Kirgizskii ornament and V. Krachkovskaia, Tatarskoe iskusstvo i byt v 
Krymu, Vostok, 5, 1925, pp. 164-83 and 213-16. On the activities of the Leningrad orientologists, see Chapter 
6: Imagining Minorities and Nations in the 1920s in Tolz, Russias Own Orient, pp. 134-167; Francine Hirsch, 
Empire of Nations: Ethnographic Knowledge and the Making of the Soviet Union, Culture and Society after 
Socialism (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2005) and Adeeb Khalid, The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: 
Jadidism in Central Asia (Berkeley: University of California Press, c1998). On other oriental studies 
institutions, and Soviet orientology in general, see Michael Kemper, Red Orientalism: Mikhail Pavlovich and 
Marxist Oriental Studies in Early Soviet Russia Die Welt des Islams, 50:3/4 (2010), pp. 435-76 and Michael 
Kemper and Stephan Conermann, eds, The Heritage of Soviet Oriental Studies (London: Routledge 
Contemporary Russia and Eastern Europe, 2011). 
180 Kemper, Red Orientalism, pp. 435-76 (pp. 467-68). Most Soviet scholars refer to VNAV as Lenins 
initiative. However, as Michael Kemper has shown, the fact that the organisation was administered under 
Stalins Narkomnats, despite the focus of its work being on the Orient outside of the USSR, adds weight to the 
idea that VNAV was in fact initiated by Stalin in his role as Commissar of Nationalities. On Pavlovich and 
VNAV, see also Taline Ter Minassian, Colporteurs du Comintern: LUnion sovitique et les minorits au 
Moyen-Orient (Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, 1997). On Narkomnats, see 
Stephen Black, The Apprentice as Sorcerer: Stalin as Commissar of Nationalities, 1917-1924 (Westport: 
Greenwood Press, 1994) and V. G. Chebotareva, Narkomnats RSFSR: svet i teni natsionalnoi politiki 1917-
1924 gg. (Moscow: Obshchestvennaia akademiia, 2003). 
181 Soviet historical materialism as a methodology refers to the application of Marxist dialectical materialism to 
historical processes. It was developed over the course of the 1920s and 30s and formalised by Joseph Stalin in 
his Dialectical and Historical Marxism, published in 1938. 
182 Kemper, Red Orientalism, p. 457. 
183 Ibid., p. 473. 
responsible for producing its own research concerning the Soviet East, which included 
primarily Soviet nationalities classified as eastern under Soviet nationalities policy but also 
(to a lesser extent, and in certain periods), the western, developed nations of the Caucasus, 
namely Georgia and Armenia.  It produced research concerning social, economic and cultural 
subjects, all of which it explained according to a Marxist-Leninist dialectical materialist 
methodology. But it was also responsible for coordinating the work of all Soviet institutions 
contributing to the field of Marxist oriental studies. It collaborated with institutions, both in a 
supervisory role and in order to share resources and expertise and it was primarily in its 
collaboration with the Museum of Oriental Cultures that it contributed to public discourse 
about the art and culture of the Soviet Unions non-Russian nationalities.   
Ars Asiatica came into being in October 1918 and opened to visitors on 22 September 
1919.184 For the first few years of its existence, its collection consisted primarily of works of 
decorative and applied art from beyond the borders of the Soviet Union.185 From the mid 
1920s, however, that changed. After several years of financial precariousness, problems with 
obtaining and retaining suitable premises and facing repeated external proposals for its 
liquidation, in 1924 the museums leadership reached out to VNAV for support.186 VNAV 
intervened on the museums behalf, appealing to the head of Glavnauka, Fedor Petrov, who 
agreed to support it. With Petrov and VNAVs protection, it was saved from liquidation. 
However, its profile and responsibilities were altered significantly in the process. Though the 
museum remained formally independent, VNAV became closely involved in all aspects of its 
activity. In July 1924 a meeting to discuss the museums future development was held by 
VNAVs historical-ethnologic department, which also organised a special commission for the 
study of the art of the East, responsible for its work with the museum.187 In January 1925 the 
184 Voitov, Materialy, pp. 14-16; 20. The museums archive is currently closed to external researchers. 
However, much of the material held in the museums archive pertaining to the years 1918-50 is published either 
in full or in part in Voitovs volume. See also V. E. Voitov, Materialy po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia 
Vostoka: 1951-1970 (Moscow: Skanrus, 2006); V. E. Voitov, Iz istorii archeologicheskikh ekspeditsii Muzeia 
vostochnykh kultur v Starom Termeze. 1926-1928 Gg. (Po arkhivnym dannym i publikatsiiam) (Moscow: 
Gosudarstvennyi muzei vostoka, 2001); V. E. Strelkova, Ekspozitsionno-vystavochnaia deiatelnost Muzeia 
vostochnykh kultur v 1926-1932 gg. (Publikatsiia dokumentov iz arkhiva GMINV) (Moscow: Gosudarstvennyi 
muzei vostoka, 1996); N. S.  Nikolaeva et al., Muzei vostochnykh kultur (Moscow: [s. n.], 1957); N. S. Sycheva, 
Iz istorii izucheniia vostochnykh muzeev v SSSR (Moscow: 1978).  
185 The museums collection, like those of the other new state museums, was made up of objects confiscated 
from various nationalised state and private collections. See Voitov, Materialy, pp. 14-27. 
186 Ibid., p. 41. 
187 Ibid., p. 46. VNAV had two main departmentsa political-economic department and a historical-ethnologic 
department. The latter was less politically oriented than the former, and included scholars working in the fields 
of archeology, ethnography and history. The meeting was also attended by representatives of other oriental 
studies institutions including the N. N. Narimanov Moscow Institute of Oriental studies (MIV), the Leningrad 
Institute of Living Oriental Languages (LIZhVI), the department of nationalities under the Central Executive 
Committee of the RSFSR and the Scientific Research Institute for Archaeology and Natural History. 
commission included members of VNAVs presidium, professors Ilia Borozdin and Vladimir 
Gurko-Kriazhin as well as Leningrad orientologists Sergei Oldenburg and Nikolai Marr.188 
Then, in November, they, together with other VNAV scholars, became part of the museums 
provisional research council.189 When, in December 1925, a new management team was 
finally announced, it included Borozdin and Gurko-Kriazhin alongside the museums 
director, Fedor Gogel, plus Boris Denike, an orientologist from Moscow State University.190 
With the museums reorganisation, the parameters of its work became closely aligned with 
those of VNAV. There were to be six departments in place of its original two. Departments 
of the Near and Far East were to be joined by departments for the Middle East and the Soviet 
East in addition to a library and archive and a Cabinet of the History of Revolutionary and 
National Emancipatory Movements in the East (KRD). The Cabinet, led by Gurko-Kriazhin 
(who was also the head of VNAVs political-economic department), was essentially an organ 
of VNAV within the museum. Both a research department and an exhibition department, it 
was housed in several rooms at the museum where its displays were designed to present the 
history of revolutionary movements in the East to the Moscow public according to the 
Marxist dialectical model.  The departments display materials, which initially came from 
VNAVs collection, consisted largely of ethnographic objects and auxiliary materials (texts, 
graphs and photographs) explaining the historical narrative that VNAVs scholars intended to 
communicate. The department was also meant to include art objects in its exhibitions but in 
practice these were swamped by other exhibits. The KRD was beneficial to both VNAV and 
the museum. It provided the association with a means of presenting its particular narrative on 
the revolutionary movements of the East to the Moscow public and it helped the museum to 
demonstrate its adoption of Marxist dialectical materialism in its work.  
In 1925, then, the museums activity was brought broadly in line with VNAVs 
political objectives, serving the Partys agenda in both the foreign and Soviet East. From 
1926, however, things changed again. In response to failed communist revolutions in Europe 
during 1917-21, the Bolshevik leadership gradually abandoned its aspirations towards 
international global communism, and turned instead to a policy of Socialism in One 
188 Oldenberg was the secretary of the Russian Academy of Sciences at that time. Marr, a Georgian-born 
orientologist now famed for his controversial Japhetic theory connecting the Kartvelian languages of the 
Caucasus with the Semitic languages of the Middle East, was the head of RAIMK (the Russian Academy of the 
History of Material Culture). Despite being listed as members of the research council, however, they do not 
appear to have been closely involved in the museums work. Ibid., p. 48. 
189 Ibid., p. 48. VNAV scholars B. Zasypkin, F. I Schmidt and A. Bashkirov were also on the new research 
council. 
190 Ibid., p. 46-48.  
Country. With this, the priorities of VNAVs and the museums work shifted towards the 
nationalities of the Soviet East. The Soviet East department that had been initiated the year 
before had so far remained largely theoretical. In December 1926, however, new research 
councils were organised by department. Suddenly there were more researchers attached to the 
department of the Soviet East than to any other section.191 There was a flurry of research 
activity. Denike, who by then had taken over as the museums director, announced in 
Izvestiia that research expeditions were being planned for that year to Uzbekistan, 
Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, the Tatar ASSR, Azerbaijan and Armenia.192 Borozdin, Denike and 
Gogel all published articles on artistic culture in the Soviet East and Borozdin even read a 
series of lectures on Union-wide radio on the subject of The cultural achievements of the 
Soviet East.193 From this time onwards the Soviet Eastwhich, as I mention above, was 
conceived of as including a different range of peoples and cultures at different timeswas 
consolidated as the primary focus of the museums work. Between 1926 and 1928 
representatives of VNAVs collaboration with the Museum of Oriental Cultures published 
research on art and culture of the Soviet East, gave lectures and organised a handful of 
exhibitions.194  
However, the research of VNAVs and the museums scholars on the art of the Soviet 
East in this period examined almost exclusively ancient architectural monuments. The most 
significant research expeditions undertaken by them in 1926 and 1927 focused on studying 
ancient Central Asian architecture, including first and foremost the ancient city of Termez in 
the Uzbek SSR. Objects from Termez accounted for a significant portion of the Soviet East 
departments acquisitions for those years, and absorbed much of the departments 
attention.195 Even where the departments research touched on contemporary artistic culture, 
it looked primarily at decorative and folk artdecorative carpets and other textiles, wood 
carving, metalwork and ceramics.196 At this time, moreover, in line with the definition of 
Soviet eastern nationalities under Soviet nationalities policy in the 1920s, the majority of 
attention was given to those nationalities considered to be least culturally and politically 
developedminority nationalities living within another nationalitys republics, minor 
191 Ibid., p. 68 and 70. 
192 B. P. Denike, Muzei vostochnykh kultur, Izvestiia, 13 June 1926, p. 5 cited in Voitov, Materialy, p. 66. 
193 Voitov, Materialy, pp. 70-71. 
194 New research on the Soviet East was published in VNAVs journal, Novyi vostok (The New East), the 
museums journal, Kultura vostoka (The Culture of the East) and other newspapers, journals and collected 
volumes. For a list of publications, see Ibid., pp. 418-28. 
195 Ibid., pp. 103. 
196 On the departments activities and collections at that time, see ibid., pp. 63-98.  
nationalities with ASSR or AO (autonomous republic) rather than full SSR status, and the 
nationalities of the Muslim Central Asian SSRs. Expeditions to the Soviet Caucasus, for 
example, and the resulting publications, lectures and exhibitions, tended to be concerned with 
the Kurdish peoples living in Azerbaijan or the peoples of mountainous Tushetia, Ingushetia, 
Abkhazia and Dagestan rather than major developed nationalities such as the Georgians or 
Armenians.197 This may not seem suprising, given that Georgia and Armenia were classified 
under Soviet nationalities policy as western nationalities. However, Georgia and Armenia 
were not actually explicitly excluded from the departments purview, as is evidenced by at 
least one field trip undertaken to examine Georgian church architecture in 1926. 198 
Nevertheless, the limited attention that they received meant that contemporary painting, and 
especially the painting of Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, remained overlooked. Moreover, 
despite the museums representatives claiming to have adopted a Marxist methodology, in 
practice this often meant only superficial reference to Marxist theory in writing that otherwise 
maintained a more traditional ethnographic approach. In 1929, for example, VNAV scholars 
based at the museum published a volume of essays on the artistic culture of the Soviet East 
(which here, extended to developed nationalities such as the Georgians and Armenians, 
although they were not the volumes main focus).199 Borozdin, who edited the volume, 
contributed an introductory essay summarising recent achievements in the study of the art of 
the Soviet East, as well as the artistic achievements of the Soviet East itself. He paid lip 
service to Marxist sociological methodologies, declaring, for example, a need to approach the 
study of the artistic culture of the Soviet East armed with a sociological scalpel, claiming 
that research was already being established on a Marxist base and that Soviet orientology 
already stood definitely and decisively on new rails.200 However, as a reviewer of the book 
justly complained, there is little evidence of Borozdins sociological scalpel anywhere in 
the volume.201  
Certainly, there was also no attempt to apply such methodologies to contemporary 
painting in the Soviet East, whether belonging to minority, smaller, or Muslim Central 
197 In 1927 plans for a Caucasian exhibition included objects and photographs from Ingushetia, Abkhazia, 
Khevsureti and Dagestan. Ibid., p. 88. 
198 Voitov, Materialy, p. 72. 
199 Ilia Borozdin, ed., Khudozhestvennaia kultura sovetskogo vostoka: sbornik statei A. Bashkirova, B. Denike, 
P. Dulskogo, B. Zasypkina, V. Zummera pod obshchei redaktsiei I. Borozdina (Moscow: Akademia, 1931).  
200 Ilia Borozdin, Problemy izucheniia in Borozdin, ed., Khudozhestvennaia kultura sovetskogo vostoka, pp. 7-
18 (pp. 9 and 18).  
201 Za razvertyvanie diskussii po voprosam natsionalnogo iskusstva, Brigada khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 30. 
The article was published anonymously, but it seems likely that the author was Lazar Rempel, whose 
contribution to the discussion of national art is discussed later in this chapter. 
Asian nationalities or developed nations such as Georgia and Armenia. In the closing 
paragraphs of his introduction, Borozdin made brief reference to contemporary painting, 
name checking the brilliant canvases of Gudiashvili, Kakabadze, Pirosmani and the 
Armenian painter, Matiros Sarian.202 However, in discussing the artistic achievements of the 
Soviet East in more detail he referred exclusively to examples of folk and applied arts and 
architecture.203 Reference to contemporary painters appears to be made only in order to make 
the remaining writing about ancient architecture and applied arts appear more pertinent. 
Mentioning contemporary painters claimed for the authors an awareness of the artistic 
achievements of the Soviet period and of the modernity of socialist culture. Yet Borozdin did 
not express a coherent position with respect to contemporary painting. He does not declare 
support for any particular style of painting or artists organisation. The contemporary painters 
mentioned were not discussed in terms of their place in the history of the proletariats 
development, or in terms of their class identity and social contribution. There is no mention 
of either the socio-political context to which Gudiashvili, Kakabadze, Pirosmani and Sarians 
painting might have belonged or to the treatment of class themes in their work. These 
painters are highlighted as evidence of the great interest that contemporary painters in the 
republics of Soviet Transcaucasia presented, and Borozdin asserts that their works could 
serve as decoration in any world art gallery, reminding us of the East even as it is 
acknowledged that the East is presented in their works through a prism of Europeanism.204 
They are praised for their attainment of a degree of professional artistic mastery, which is 
gauged by Borozdin according to the values of Western European painting. Even while 
reference to Europeanism in Borozdins text tentatively acknowledges the criticism those 
artists were facing at that time for their association with Western European Modernism, they 
are not evaluated in terms of their narrative clarity and class content, or assessed with 
reference to their class origins or their place in the progression of history.205  
Despite the progressive nature of the Bolsheviks professed goals in relation to its 
East, and of VNAVs purportedly Marxist methodology in serving those goals by 
supporting the nationalities of the Soviet East in their development towards socialism, the 
almost wholesale exclusion of contemporary painting from these scholars writing reflected 
an exoticising approach to the Soviet East that aligns it with colonial, Orientalist models for 
202 Ibid., pp. 17-18. 
203 Ibid., p. 8. 
204 Ilia Borozdin, Problemy izucheniia in Borozdin, ed., Khudozhestvennaia kultura sovetskogo vostoka, pp. 7-
18 (p. 17). 
205 Ibid. 
representing the East. Moscow, as the Soviet centre, was the model for modernity and 
culturedness in the Soviet Union, even if Russian national cultural expression was 
suppressed, and easel painting, whether that retaining links with European Modernism or 
AkhRs brand of figurative painting, was the model of modernity in Soviet art. The negligible 
attention contemporary painting received in discussion of the art of the Soviet East by the 
scholars of Borozdins circle reflected an orientalising impulse: it implied that the 
nationalities being represented were less culturally developed, more primitive, than those of 
European Russia. By focusing on examples of folk and decorative arts, which often were not 
clearly distinguishable from ethnographic objects, the scholarship of Borozdins circle at the 
Museum stressed the Soviet Easts and its peoples otherness. Artistic culture was part of a 
body of material that demonstrated difference: exotic decorative carpets, national dress and 
musical instruments combined with information about local folk customs and photographs of 
people with different facial features and darker skin (figure 10) showed how the people of the 
Soviet East and their way of life differed from those in European Russia.  
As Greg Castillo has noted, though it may appear counterintuitive, this perception of 
the East as primitive and under-developed, was not, in fact, at odds with Soviet nationalities 
policy. Indeed, the assumption of Russias developmental superiority and of its civilising 
duty in the East was a fundamental premise of the policy.206 As such, it does not follow that 
VNAVs scholars set out deliberately to contribute to a narrative that diminished the 
developmental and cultural achievements of the Soviet East. Rather, like other central Soviet 
institutions involved in representing the Soviet East in the 1920s, the starting point of their 
research and exhibition activity was initially indebted to the colonial academic and exhibition 
practices of the past. This meant that despite scholars and curators intention to reflect the 
Soviet leaderships theoretical conceptualisation of the USSR as a post-colonial multi-
national state in which all nationalities were equal in and benefited from their union, the 
Soviet East still found itself exoticised. This reality was not unique to the Museum of 
Oriental Cultures. As Castillo has documented, for example, the Ethnographic Department of 
the Russian Museum in the same period aspired to provide a complete picture of everyday 
life in the USSRto offer an image of the peoples of the USSR through which Leningraders 
and visitors from elsewhere could learn about and feel closer to their fellow Soviet citizens, 
not further away.207 Yet in reality they inadvertently produced a portrait of strange others 
206 Castillo, Peoples at an Exhibition, p. 95. 
207 Hirsch, Getting to Know The Peoples of the USSR, p. 689. 
from distant lands. 208  Similarly, Moscows First Agricultural and Cottage Industries 
Exhibition in 1923 was explicitly designed to embody the central tenets of the recently 
formalised Soviet nationalities policy in its representation of the achievements of each of the 
Soviet nationalities, to present the USSR as a post-colonial state in which, though some 
nationalities were developmentally more advanced than others, all were actively in the 
process of modernisation, developing cultural and politically.209 Nevertheless, in the absence 
of other models its exhibits were borrowed from western colonial precedents, with results 
similar to those at the Russian Museum.210 Borrowing from the layout of the 1889 Paris 
Exposition Universelle, exhibits demonstrating Soviet Russian modernity were separated 
from those representing the nationalities of the Soviet East, which were gathered in a 
fairground-like foreign section in which those nationalities were portrayed as exotic and 
primitive.211 The representation of Russia as developmentally separate and superior to those 
nationalities was not in itself at odds with Soviet nationalities policy. However, the 
continuation of colonial practices of representation and of nineteenth-century modes of 
thinking about the East was responsible for an exoticising and othering of them that failed to 
honour the policys stated principles. 
To some extent, the split between the Bolsheviks goals in the Soviet East according 
to Soviet nationalities policy and the exoticising, orientalising aspects of the GMVKs and 
other institutions activities also reflected a fundamental disjuncture between the wider 
objectives of Bolshevism and biases inherent in the discipline of ethnography.212 While the 
Soviet leadership was concerned with fighting manifestations of backwardness among its 
peoples, ethnographic research and displays were tied up with the traditions, customs and 
artefacts of the past. Exhibits reflecting national cultural distinctivenesslocal traditional 
handicrafts, agricultural tools, national costumewere also markers of developmental 
backwardness. As such, there was a direct conflict between the objective of presenting the 
modernisation of the Soviet non-Russian nationalities on the one hand and reflecting their 
national cultural distinctiveness on the other. As the director of the Russian Museums 
Ethnographic Department lamented, in the process of modernisation, Soviet nationalities lost 
their distinguishing ethnographic particularities and the museum lost its means of 
208 Ibid., p. 689. 
209 Castillo, Peoples at an Exhibition.  
210 Ibid., p. 93. 
211 Ibid., p. 93. 
212 This was observed in relation to the Ethnographic Department of the Russian Museum in Hirsch, Getting to 
Know The Peoples of the USSR, p. 686. 
representing them.213 The ethnographic discipline itself thus encouraged institutions to focus 
on elements of their subject cultures that stressed their backwardness and otherness. Even 
while they sought to differentiate themselves from their predecessors, VNAVs orientologists 
and the Russian Museums ethnographers were educated under and heavily influenced by 
scholars of the previous generation. Moreover, the focus of their research interests on the 
smaller and least developed Soviet nationalities, and on traditional ways of life, represented 
a natural continuation of Imperial Russian ethnography and orientologys focus as much as it 
was a product of the priorities of the Soviet leadership. 214  
From the end of 1928, the radicalisation of the political sphere under the Cultural 
Revolution brought about dramatic changes at the Museum of Oriental Cultures affecting the 
way it represented the peoples of the Soviet East. At this time, in light of the new 
challenges of the First Five-Year Plan, the Party leadership moved to take much tighter 
control of cultural institutions, placing Party bureaucrats at their helm to ensure that they best 
served the Partys objectives. In October 1928 Yan Lidak, a Party member and former 
NKVD agent, was brought in as deputy director of the administrative-accounting department 
of the Museum of Oriental Cultures before being promoted to acting director the following 
February and permanently replacing Denike as the museums director in April 1929.215 
Nikolai Tolonsky, another Party member, was also brought in to supervise the museums 
political enlightenment (propaganda) work.216 Lidak immediately denounced the previous 
leadership and set about implementing sweeping personnel changes. Within the next three 
years almost the entire academic staff, until then dominated by VNAVs scholars, was 
replaced.217 Reasons for dismissal invariably cited failure to adopt a sufficiently Marxist 
stance in their work.218 At this moment a new generation of academics, many still students, 
were vigorously attacking the old generation of Marxist scholars in all disciplines, including 
art history and orientology. At the same time as VNAVs scholars were being silenced at, and 
213 From the late 1920s it was proposed to resolve this quandary by representing each of the Soviet nationalities 
according to their achievements as a result of the revolutionary process. However, the museums limited 
resources meant that this plan was not realised. Ibid., pp. 690; 696-702.  
214 This almost inadvertently orientalising representation of the Soviet East is also aligned with that observed by 
Yuri Slezkine in relation to the representation of the peoples of Soviet Unions northern peripheries by writers at 
the Soviet centre in Primitive Communism and the Other Way Around in Lahusen and Dobrenko, eds, 
Socialist Realism Without Shores, pp. 310-36. 
215 Voitov, Materialy, pp. 99 and 430. 
216 Ibid., p. 123 
217 Borozdin and Denike were removed from their positions as head of the departments for the Soviet and 
Middle East respectively in early February 1930, and Borozdin had resigned from the museum completely by 
the end of the month. In spring of 1930, Gurko-Kriazhin and Denike were both also purged from the museums 
staff. Zasypkin left in July 1930 and Gogel was removed in April the following year. Ibid., pp. 140 and 150. 
218 Ibid., p. 140. 
expelled from, the Museum of Oriental Cultures, VNAV itself was under attack. By March 
1929 it was absorbed into the Communist Academy and, in 1930, a new Institute of Oriental 
Studies was founded at the USSR Academy of Sciences headed by Sergei Oldenberg, leader 
of the Leningrad school of oriental studies. The Institute became the centre of Soviet Oriental 
Studies, and VNAVs scholars were silenced. 
Under Lidaks directorship, the task of communicating the Cultural Revolutions 
narrative of class struggle became the foremost priority, taking precedence over even the 
most fundamental of the museums former objectives, including the display of art.219 A 
central task in this respect was in redesigning the museums exhibition displays. In December 
1930, several of the museums representatives, including Lidak, attended the First All-
Russian Museums Congress where almost all of the forty papers presented were concerned 
with the application of the theory of dialectical materialism to museum display practice.220 
The conference concluded that museum curators should aim to create exhibitions in which 
their subject would be illuminated through the prism of Marxs theory of class struggle and 
dialectical materialism, and aligned to the interests of the Five-Year plan in all its aspects.221 
Most agreed that this should be achieved by employing a combination of art objects 
augmented with diagrams, political slogans, photographs and text.222 Under VNAVs reign, 
such measures were implemented only in the museums Cabinet of the History of 
Revolutionary and National Emancipatory Movements in the East (KRD). 
Following the congress Lidak and his team set about implementing the conclusions of 
the conference at the Museum of Oriental Cultures. Early in 1931 they employed an artist to 
produce designs for new displays.223 The finished displays opened in October and combined 
works of art with photographs, text and slogans in comprehensively designed exhibits. 
Display boards in various geometric shapes were arranged in dynamic compositions with 
219 Other museums involved in representing the peoples of the Soviet East to the Russian metropolitan public 
faced similar political pressure, Party intervention and challenges in meeting the new obligations placed on them 
in the Cultural Revolution period. The Ethnographic Department of the Russian Museum in Leningrad faced 
criticism for failing to reflect the transformation of life in the outlying republics and regions of the Soviet 
Union. In 1930 its director, Sergei Rudenko, was replaced by Party-member N. G. Talanov and in 1931 a 
campaign denouncing the former managements bourgeois museum methodology was launched. See Hirsch, 
Getting to Know The Peoples of the USSR. 
220 Maria Kokkori, Exhibiting Malevich Under Stalin, in Lodder, Kokkori and Mileeva, eds, Utopian reality, 
pp. 133-151 (p. 139). 
221 Ivan. Luppol, ed, Trudy pervogo vserossiiskogo muzeinogo sezda, protokoly plenarnykh zasedanii 15 
dekabria 1930 (Moscow: Uchgiz-narkompros, 1931), vol. 1, p. 241 cited in Kokkori, Exhibiting Malevich, p. 
222 Kokkori, Exhibiting Malevich, p. 139. 
223 The museum was closed to visitors at the time following eviction from its former premises in 1929. It 
reopened with displays based on the artist, N. I. Simons designs in October 1931. Voitov, Materialy, pp. 151 
and 163.  
headings giving context to each section. Painted murals and blown-up photographs of people 
in national costume helped to integrate different sections together (figure 11). Displays were 
clearly related to the central priorities of the Cultural Revolution, the industrialisation and 
collectivisation drives, class struggle and battle against religion.224  
Notably, during this period, as well as transforming the content and style of the 
museums displays, its leadership reiterated repeatedly that the department of the Soviet East 
and in particular, contemporary artistic activity in the Soviet East, was now the museums 
first priority.225 In the plan for the new displays the department was given double the amount 
of space as any of the others.226 This was a complete reversal of previous policies and should 
have meant dramatic changes for the way contemporary Soviet national painting was 
represented in Moscow. However, for a series of reasons, the museum failed to produce 
either displays or significant publications presenting or analysing contemporary artistic 
activity from any region within the Soviet East for the rest of the Cultural Revolution 
period.  One problem was that it suffered from a dearth of suitable exhibits. The focus of 
earlier collecting activities had been elsewhereprimarily older objects, works of applied art 
and architectures, and ethnographic objects.227 The disruption in the museums work brought 
about by its comprehensive change of leadership and the dramatic reduction in its research 
personnel from the beginning of 1929, moreover, exacerbated and prolonged this problem. So 
too did the leaderships prioritisation in 1931 of redesigning its displays, which took already 
limited resources away from the pressing issue of acquiring new works for display. As a 
result, in 1930, eight out of ten publications issued by the museums research staff related to 
the Soviet East, but none dealt with contemporary painting (or any other contemporary 
artistic activity). Nor did any of the publications for 1931.228  
224 In 1931 displays included, for example, The Work and Art of the Women of the Soviet East; Tsarist 
RussiaPrison of Nations and The Class Role of Religion in the art of the Far East. Records of discussions 
taking place during the planning of the displays confirm the managements single-minded concern with the 
clarity of the exhibitions ideological message above all else. See ibid., pp. 158-60. 
225 Following a report given by Lidak, a meeting of the collegium of Glavnauka resolved to charge the 
leadership of the museum together with the museums department of Glavnauka with reworking the museums 
objectives based on a resolution stating that the department of the Soviet East and its political, economic and 
cultural influence on the foreign East should be at the centre of the museums work. In March 1930, Tolonsky 
repeated the proposal to re-write the museums objectives. A report from 1931, most likely written by Chepelev 
as head of the Soviet East department (although the name of the author is not stated in Voitovs citation), 
confirms this intention. Ibid., pp. 155; 133 and 138.  
226 Ibid., p. 153. 
227 Later, in 1932, Lidaks successor explained that the shortage of examples of contemporary fine art in the 
museums collection was the reason for its decision to create a display on womens art, in which the art objects 
shown were primarily works of applied art including rugs, costumes and other textiles. Similarly, an exhibition 
Contemporary Artists of Transcaucasia was planned for 1931, but never opened, presumably due to the 
shortage of exhibits. Ibid., pp. 138 and 168.  
228 Ibid., pp. 423-24.  
In November 1930 the museum began in earnest to work towards resolving the gaps 
in its collections by contacting local artists associations, museums and other education 
institutions in the Soviet Unions Southern and Eastern republics and regions, requesting their 
participation in the museums exhibitions.229 In 1931 an expedition was undertaken to the 
Dagestani republic and each of the main centres of the ZSFSR with a view to building links 
with local organisations and negotiating further acquisitions for the museums collection.230 
The expedition resulted in numerous acquisitions of objects intended for the displays of the 
department of the Soviet East. However, for reasons that are unclear, the expeditions 
organisers struggled to acquire suitable examples of contemporary painting during the trip.231 
They managed to acquire a handful of paintings and drawings by contemporary Azerbaijani 
artists, which formed the basis of several exhibitions in the coming years.232 In Georgia, 
however, they were able to acquire only photographic reproductions of works by Pirosmani 
plus some other photographs and agitational materials (presumably posters and banners).233 
This limited the museums ability to present an accurate picture of contemporary art in the 
Soviet East (either of less developed nationalities of Central Asia and minority 
nationalities or of developed nations such as Georgia and Armenia), or one that reflected 
fairly its full breadth. Only towards the end of the Cultural Revolution period, in 1932, 
following further expeditions and negotiations, did the department open a permanent 
exhibition including a significant quota of contemporary painting from the Soviet East, and 
even then many nationalities were represented poorly or not at all.234 As a result, in this 
period discussion in Moscow concerning national art came for a time to be dominated by 
commentators outside of the museum. 
The Association of Artists of Revolutionary Russia (AKhRR) and the Department for 
the Study of the Art of the Nationalities of the USSR at the State Academy of Artistic 
Sciences (GAKhN)  
229 Ibid., p. 138. 
230 Ibid., p. 170. 
231 Ibid., pp. 168-69. 
232 Ibid., p. 171. 
233 Ibid., p. 171. 
234 The exhibition, Socialist Construction and National Art opened on 3 November 1932 and included painting 
from the Georgian, Azerbaijani, Armenian, Turkmen and Uzbek republics. However, the museum struggled to 
acquire a representative collection of the contemporary art of the Soviet East throughout the 1930s and 40s. 
Finally, in 1949 a resolution was passed obliging the Councils of Ministers of each republic to send works for 
the museums displays, though even then only some republics complied, and many sent only minor works. Ibid., 
pp. 194, 388-89. 
While, in the second half of the 1920s, VNAV and the Museum of Oriental Cultures 
struggled to offer a satisfactory representation of contemporary artistic activity in the Soviet 
East, a handful of other organisations, institutions and individual commentators came to 
contribute to the discussion of national art in Moscow. One of those was the Association of 
Artists of Revolutionary Russia and its later incarnation, the Association of Artists of the 
Revolution (AKhR).  
Its predecessor, AKhRR had ambitions beyond the RSFSRand therefore an interest 
in contemporary artistic activity in the non-Russian Soviet national republics and regions
from the first years of its existence. From its establishment in Moscow in 1922 it expanded 
quickly outside the capital, so that there were sixteen additional branches of AKhRR active in 
the Soviet Union by October 1925, two of which were outside of the RSFSR, in Kiev and 
Tashkent respectively.235 By the summer of 1926 that number rose to 34, with a total 
membership of 650 artists, excluding those in Moscow.236 Most of its branches were started 
independently, on the initiative of local artists.237 However, the central AKhRR organisation 
in Moscow took care to ensure that those branches activities were aligned with its ethos. In 
October 1925 a Central Office of the Branches of AKhRR was set up to supervise and 
coordinate the branches activities. 
In 1928, when AKhRR became AKhR, its Union-wide reach was consolidated further 
as more and more branches were brought into being and the organisation focused even 
greater attention on formalising the parameters within which its branches were expected to 
operate. Its declaration, published that year, spoke of the appearance of a diverse but united 
current of revolutionary, realistic art of all republics and autonomous provinces of the 
USSR.238 However, AKhR did little to encourage diversity among its national and regional 
outfits. Instead, in 1928, a comprehensive programme of measures was designed to 
strengthen and homogenise the network as far as possible. Plans were made for disseminating 
the central organisations ideology and delivering news of its activities to the branches. This 
was to be done though the dissemination of journals that would be sent to each branch, in 
addition to bulletins and reports from the central organisations meetings. Branches were also 
encouraged to account for the alignment of their activities with AKhRs principles by sending 
235 RGALI f. 2941, op. 1, ed. khr. 197, l. 1.   
236 F. S. Bogorodsky, Filialy AKhRR i OMAKhR, p. 127. 
237 Ibid., p. 127. 
238 ,          
  . Deklaratsiia assotsiatsii khudozhnikov revoliutsii (AKhR) in Gronsky and 
Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii, pp. 320-21 (p. 320). 
the central organisation regular reports on their activities.239 From its first issue in 1929, for 
example, AKhRs journal, Iskusstvo v massy (Art to the Masses), included a section 
providing news of artistic activity across the Soviet Union, with reports on local branches 
exhibitions and events.  
Clearer rules according to which local organisations were expected to work were also 
distributed to each branch in the form of a circular.240 As well as aligning itself broadly with 
the aims of AKhR in the context of the Cultural Revolution, each branch was expected to 
meet certain criteria, including realising one annual exhibition, organising its work according 
to the structure employed in Moscow, establishing and developing youth organisations and 
working to increase the level of technical mastery among its members. Touring exhibitions 
arranged by the central organisation were then to be sent to various locations to serve as an 
example of correct exhibition practice.241 These, it was planned, would be sent as a priority to 
areas where AKhRs movement was weakest, ensuring that the network expanded as evenly 
as possible.242 At the same time AKhR reserved the right to liquidate local branches or 
constrict their activities if they failed to conform to meet the central organisations approval, 
and established measures for supervising the details of local organisations work.243  
As the Cultural Revolutions class war intensified in the winter of 1929-30, so too did 
AKhRs demand for proletarian hegemony and its disregard for national cultural 
distinctiveness. In 1929, for example, the Uzbek branch of the organisation in Tashkent was 
liquidated when an inspection by the central organisation confirmed reports that members of 
the branch were acting in contravention of AKhRs principles.244 But the events in Tashkent 
were also then used to justify the central organisations ever more vigilant control over the 
remaining branches.245 When artists in Georgia proposed to establish a Tiflis branch of 
AKhR in early 1930, for example, they were subjected to stringent regulation by the central 
organisation.246 The central organisation demanded that each of the proposed members 
239 P. Kiselis, Tsirkuliarnoe pismo tsentralnogo soveta AKhR filialam, vsem chlenam i kandidatam AKhR: 
biulleten informatsionnogo biuro AKhR, posviashchennogo i Vsesoiuznomu sezdu AKhR, 1928 in Gronsky 
and Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii, pp. 306-309 (p. 306). 
240 See: Kiselis, Tsirkuliarnoe pismo.  
241 Ibid., p. 308 
242 Ibid., p. 308 
243 AKhRRs charter, approved in 1925, set out the right of the organisations central presidium to liquidate 
local branches and confiscate any property and monetary assets, subject to approval at a congress. See: Ustav 
Assotsiatsii khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii in Gronsky and Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov 
revoliutsionnoi Rossii, pp. 290-300 (p. 297). 
244 See O. Tatevosians entry for Uzbekistan in a set of reports of the activity of AKhRs branches, in Iskusstvo 
natsionalnykh sovetskikh sotsialisticheskikh respublik, Za proletarskoe iskusstvo, 6, 1931, pp. 22-27 (p. 24). 
245  Ibid. 
246 RGALI, f. 2941, op. 1, ed. khr. 197, l. 3. 
complete a questionnaire detailing their background, education, and contributions to 
proletarian artistic activity and cultural-enlightenment (propaganda) work to date before they 
could be approved.247 Several were refused unless further evidence could be provided in 
support of their suitability.248 Rather than encouraging national and regional variation, then, 
AKhR largely ignored the question of national difference and worked actively to minimise 
local variation. 
AKhRRs eighth annual exhibition, in 1926, entitled The Life Customs of the 
Nations of the USSR (Zhizn i byt narodov SSSR), was in many ways emblematic of both the 
organisations and widely held attitudes to the Unions non-Russian nationalities at that 
time.249 It consisted of paintings, graphic works and sculptures made by AKhRR artists, 
researched and completed during field trips to various towns and industrial and agricultural 
regions across the USSR. It shared the goals of other AKhRR exhibitions, to showcase the 
talents and achievements of AKhRRs artists and reflect the organisations commitment to 
structured thematic exhibitions that carried educational value for the working masses and 
engaged as closely as possible with their day to day lives and labour activities. However, like 
the Ethnographic Department of the Russian Museum, it was also intended to provide a 
portrait through which visitors could be better acquainted with the lands and peoples of the 
Soviet Union. 250  Notably, however, those lands and peoples were represented almost 
exclusively by artists belonging to the Soviet centreto AKhRRs central organisation in 
Moscow. Although AKhRR did circulate an invitation for local artists organisations in the 
non-Russian republics and regions to participate, the works finally displayed in the exhibition 
were overwhelmingly by artists based in Moscow. There is more research to be done on this 
exhibition to understand exactly how this came about, and why more artists from outside of 
247 Ibid., l. 5. 
248 Ibid., ll. 14-14 ob.. In April the office provided the Tiflis branch with a final list of approved candidates and a 
list of those that would not be approved. Ibid., l. 16. In addition to restrictions placed on the branchs 
membership, the Central Office also denied a request submitted by the Tiflis branch for the right to publish 
independently, citing the risk that things of an ideologically and artistically doubtful nature could be 
published. Such rights could only be granted to branches, such as the one in Leningrad, which had 
demonstrated a sufficiently strong ideological position. Branches outside of Moscow and Leningrad, including 
Tiflis, remained ideologically weak. It was suggested that members of the Tiflis branch should instead send 
reproductions of their works to the AKhRs central publishing department, which would consider them for 
future publications. RGALI, f. 2941, op. 1, ed. khr. 197, p. 25. 
249 Vosmaia vystavka kartin i skulptury AKhRR: Zhizn i byt narodov SSSR (ex. cat.) (Moscow: AKhRR, 1926). 
250 Lunacharsky declared this to be an objective of the exhibition in a speech at the exhibitions opening. See A. 
V. Lunacharsky, VIII vystavka AKhRR (Privetstvennaia rech na torzhestvennom otkrytii vystavki zhizn i byt 
narodov SSSR 3 Maia 1926 g.) in Gronsky and Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii, 
pp. 224-27 (p. 225-6). 
Moscow were not exhibited.251 However, several contemporary reviews of the exhibition by 
influential figures including the Commissar of Enlightenment, Lunacharsky, and the Soviet 
critic, painter and head of the visual art department of Glavpolitprosvet, Yakob Tugenkhold, 
suggest an intuitive acceptance of the practice of representing the non-Russian nationalities 
of the Soviet East through the eyes of the Soviet centre. 
In his review of the exhibition, for example, Lunacharsky does not comment on the 
absence in the exhibition of works by artists from the regions, suggesting an implicit 
acceptance of the centres right to speak for the periphery. Tugenkhold criticised the absence 
of authentically national and authentically exotic artists noting the absence of [Matiros] 
Sarian for the Caucasus, P. [Pavel] Kuznetsov for Turkestan, [Konstantin] Bogaevsky for 
Crimea, [Mikhailo] Boichuk for Soviet Ukraine, stating that those artists had no 
opportunities to exhibit elsewhere.252 However, the selection of artists Tugenkhold cites as 
missing from the exhibition are only the most internationally well-known representatives of 
artists from each of the republics they represent, or, in Kuztnetsovs case, the republics most 
famous visiting (rather than native) artist. In calling for authentically national artists, 
Tugenkhold does not have in mind the breadth of artistic activity taking place in the non-
Russian regions and republics of the Soviet Union or the development of proletarian art 
movements. He is not so much concerned with giving national artists the opportunity to 
represent their nation, national territory and national artistic culture, as with promoting 
artists whom he particularly esteemed. His paradoxical phrase, authentically national and 
authentically exotic, is indicative of this. He wanted a more authentic vision of the East, 
produced by artists who had a more developed sense of the places, peoples and cultures they 
presented, but he continued intuitively to view the Soviet East as an exotic other and sought 
the exotic in its representation. This was more important than the question of whether that 
image of the East was provided by an artist belonging to the national territory they depicted 
251 Most of the artists exhibited were from Moscow, Leningrad or from AKhRR branches in Russian towns. 
Three artists based in Tiflis were included, but all were Russian originally. The exhibition was divided by 
geographic region represented, except for a social-political section and 'section of formal experimentation. 
Despite the huge number of works in the exhibition (1719 in total), coverage of individual nationalities was 
uneven. Some nationalities were not represented at all. The majority of works exhibited were sketches, mostly 
landscapes and portraits of local people. Some presented their subjects as modern Soviet citizens dressed in 
simple practical clothes and engaged in labour activities. Others, however, had an ethnographic quality and 
presented the local peoples as primitive, gazing in awe at a newly opened canal or sitting barefoot in traditional 
dress to watch a bride and groom perform a traditional dance. See: Vosmaia vystavka kartin i skulptury AKhRR. 
252 Tugenkhold quoted in Anatoly Lunacharsky, Diskussiia ob AKhRR in Gronsky and Perelman, Assotsiatsiia 
khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii, pp. 229-39 (p. 235). Lunacharskys essay was originally published in 1926 
in the catalogue accompanying the exhibition when it toured to Leningrad. 
or presented accurately either the regions contemporary industrial, economic, cultural or 
political development, or its own contemporary artistic development.  
Both AKhRRs choice to represent the non-Russian lands and peoples of the Soviet 
Union through the eyes of the artists of the centre, and Lunacharskys and Tugenkholds 
broad acceptance of this approach, indicate the survival in 1926 of an approach to the non-
Russian peoples of the Union that treats them primarily as an object of interest and exotica, 
rather than as partners in an equal union, able to speak on their own behalf. However, from 
1926, Lunacharsky and Tugenkhold were both involved in a new initiative aimed at 
popularising the art and cultures of the Soviet Unions non-Russian nationalities in Moscow. 
This initiative was the new Department for the Study of the Art of the Nationalities of the 
USSR established at Moscows State Academy of Artistic Sciences (GAKhN) on 20 October 
that year.253At a meeting marking the departments establishment, the main individuals 
involved in its organisation gave speeches setting out the aims of the new department. 
Lunacharsky and Tugenkhold as well as Fedor Petrov and the president of GAKhN, Petr 
Kogan, all spoke. Together they set out the departments objectives in studying the art and 
culture of the non-Russian nationalities of the Soviet Union, its vision for how that art should 
develop, how it could best be supported, and why the art of non-Russian nationalities of the 
Soviet Unionand the study of it in the Soviet centrewas important. Together, their 
speeches, published the following year along with a selection of articles by other specialists 
in the new department, provided something like an extended manifesto for the department, 
from the methodological approaches it intended to employ to the potential practical 
applications of its research. A further collection of essays published in 1930 then 
consolidated the positions outlined in 1927, with a few updates and details of the 
departments achievements in the intervening three years. 
Although the department ultimately produced less research on the art of the 
nationalities of the Soviet East than VNAV and the Museum of Oriental Cultures, and was 
less active than either those organisations or AKhRR and AKhR in collaborating with artists 
and other organisations in the non-Russian republics and regions of the Union, it set out a far 
253 The department published details of its achievements and plans in the journal Pechat i revoliutsiia. See: 
Pechat i revoliutsiia, 4, 1927, pp. 228-29 and Pechat i revoliutsiia, 3, 1928, p. 227. It was announced that the 
department had forty research staff and four sub-departments for the study of ethnography, literature, material 
culture and history respectively. See: Pechat i revoliutsiia, 4, 1927, p. 228. However, it was acknowledged 
separately that little research work had been undertaken by this stage, and that the majority of the departments 
work to date had been organisational. See: B. S. Chernyshev, Iz deiatelnosti otdela po izucheniiu iskusstva 
narodov SSSR, in Ya. Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (Vypusk pervyi) (Moscow: GAKhN, 1927), 
pp. 74-80 (p. 75).  
more comprehensively theorised position in relation to that study and a more cohesively 
designed programme of work than any of the other organisations. The position it articulated, 
moreover, implicitly rejected both the homogenising effect of AKhRRs advance and the 
Imperial survivals in the museums and VNAVs highly ethnographic studies and inattention 
to contemporary fine art. As a result, in 1927 the department was able to organise the only 
significant exhibition of contemporary art from across the non-Russian republics and regions 
of the Soviet Union to open in Moscow in the 1920s. Though there were deficiencies in the 
exhibition in terms of the completeness of its representation of the art of all non-Russian 
nationalities, it was a more comprehensive display than was achieved by the Museum of 
Oriental Cultures even in the 1930s.254 
One of the central tenets set out by the department was its fundamental support for a 
diversity of artistic forms in the art of the Soviet nationalities. In this respect, its position was 
aligned with the foundational principles of Soviet nationalities policy. Throughout the 1927 
and 1930 collections of essays, as well as various articles published elsewhere, the 
departments representatives consistently used this point to draw sharp distinction between 
the Soviet governments approach to the nationalities under its sway and that of the Russian 
empire and of western colonial powers. The approach of those powers was characterised as 
bringing about a forcible levelling out (nivelirovka) of national cultures with a view to 
creating a homogenous empire-wide culture. The Soviet approach, by contrast, encouraged 
the development of the richly diverse cultures of the nationalities it united in a glorious 
bouquet, a harmonious symphony of endlessly diverse cultures. Lunacharsky, for 
example, refers to diversity as the fundamental principle of beauty.255 Two main rationales 
are provided for the importance of maintaining this cultural diversity. One was the belief, 
enshrined in Soviet nationalities policy, that by encouraging national cultural expression the 
Soviet leadership would encourage each nationality to embrace its ties with the Soviet centre 
and with other nationalities in the Union. The second, however, related to the potential of a 
diversity of national cultures as sources informing the cultivation of the new culture of the 
proletariat. The proletariat, Lunacharsky argued in 1927, did not have its own proletarian 
254 For the catalogue, see: Yakob Tugenkhold, Katalog yubileinoi vystavki iskusstva narodov SSSR (Moscow: 
GAKhN, 1927). The exhibition opened in GAKhNs rooms in the building of Central Ethnographic Museum in 
Moscow. An accompanying exhibition of Soviet folk arts opened at around the same time in the Furniture 
Museum (Muzei mebeli, 19181928), a section of the Consolidated Museum of Decorative Arts (Obedinennyi 
muzei dekorativnogo iskusstva, 1924-29), formerly and latterly the State Armory Museum (Oruzheinaia palata, 
1815-present).  
255 Anatoly Lunacharsky, Khudozhestvennoe tvorchestvo natsionalnostei SSSR in Ya. Tugenkhold et al., 
Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (Vypusk pervyi), pp. 9-24 (p. 16). 
cultural heritage. A richer and more diverse well of national cultural traditions could provide 
it with more material from which to draw.256 Lunacharsky and other representatives of the 
department repeatedly referred to the 1926 census, which had counted a total of 189 Soviet 
nationalities, to underscore the diversity of national cultures available to enrich the new 
proletarian culture.257 
Various practical measures for maintaining and encouraging that diversity were 
proposed. In 1927 Tugenkhold stressed the need to oppose the centralising pull of the greater 
opportunities available to artists in Moscow by improving conditions for them elsewhere, 
developing local education institutions and increasing opportunities for work within artists 
own national territories.258 Writing in 1930 he celebrated successes he observed in this 
regard, citing examples of artists who were returning to work in their home republics and 
regions following periods working in Moscow and Paris, as well as the growth of local artists 
organisations: Do we need more proof of the awakening of the USSR to artistic life?259  
The departments representatives also criticised past researchers exclusive focus on 
the historical artistic traditions and folk and applied arts. Tugenkhold decried its implicit 
denial of the existence of skilled professional artists outside of the USSR and the inference of 
non-Russian nationalities primitive level of cultural development. He lamented the lack of 
knowledge of the cultures of the Soviet peripheries at the Soviet centre, regretting that those 
at the Soviet centre did not know that the creativity of the USSR is already growing beyond 
the stage of ethnography, that it is already preparing to enter the path of qualified art.260 
He expressed disappointment that previous exhibitions had followed our old line, paying 
attention to folk craftscarpets, daggers, and toysbut failing to acknowledge the sprouts 
of new individual art.261 Similarly, Lunacharsky cited a recent argument made by Soviet 
musicians that folk music was not only not of value for the proletariat, due to its association 
with peasant and kulak classes, but that its continued practice was actively harmful to the 
proletariat, dragging it back into the rural past.262 Although Lunacharsky defended the 
256 Ibid., p. 21. 
257 The number is quoted twice in Yakob Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov 
(Moscow: Gosizdat, 1930), pp. 8 and 19. 
258 Ya. Tugenkhold, K izucheniiu izobrazitelnogo iskusstva SSSR in Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov 
SSSR (1927), pp. 43-57 (p. 54). 
259    - ,     
 ? Ya. Tugenkhold, Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo narodov SSSR, in Tugenkhold et al., 
Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (1930), pp. 32-53 (p. 34-5).  
260   ,       ,     
    . Ibid., p. 35. 
261    ;      Ibid., p. 35.  
262 Lunacharsky, Khudozhestvennoe tvorchestvo natsionalnostei SSSR, p. 20-21. 
importance of folk and applied arts (including music) as sources on which proletarian art 
could draw, he did not dispute the validity of their concern, suggesting he was at least 
sympathetic to it.263 Contemporary and historical applied and folk arts should be studied, and 
should be supported practically by taking measures to ensure that craftsmen were supplied 
with proper access to domestic and international consumer markets, but as Lunacharsky and 
the departments other representatives made clear, contemporary professional national 
proletariat art was the priority.  
The department proposed its own explicitly formulated (though perhaps deliberately 
malleable and inclusive) methodology for studying and discussing national art. It proposed 
what might best be referred to as an integrative approach, combining formal aesthetic 
analysis with a Marxist sociological approach in order that the art of the Soviet nationalities 
be understood with reference to both its formal qualities and content and the social and class 
conditions in which it arose. But this dual model of enquiry was frequently expanded to 
encompass the personal background, psychology, biography, interests and influences of a 
given artist as well as of the artists natural environment, the local climate, living conditions 
and even natural resources. In Tugenkholds words: 
At the base of this study should be placed two parallel methodologies: formal-
stylistic, revealing the fundamental national-artistic forms of one or another 
nationality, and a sociological method exposing the conditionality of those forms on a 
given objective environment (climate, natural resources, living conditions, social 
groupings etc.).264 
The question of interpreting Stalins formulation of Soviet art, national in form, 
socialist in content was at the centre of the departments discussion of the art of the Soviet 
nationalities. An iteration of this slogan was even painted on either side of the entrance to the 
1927 exhibition, providing the lens through which the exhibition should be viewed.265 But the 
department still had to explain its interpretation of Stalins words. 
263 Ibid. 
264          :  
,   -     , 
  ,       (,  
,  ,    . .). Tugenkhold, K izucheniiu izobrazitelnogo 
iskusstva SSSR, p. 48. 
265 D. F., Iskusstvo. Te kotorykh my ne znali (K vystavke Iskusstvo narodov SSSR) Izvestiia, 16 November 
1927, p. 5. 
Representatives of the department attempted to do so throughout the late 1920s. 
Speeches and articles published in 1927 were initially vague. Kogan, for example, writing in 
1927, referred to the departments intention to study the ethnic particularities in the artistic 
traditions and contemporary artistic practice of individual nationalities, but he did not expand 
on the form or sources of those particularities.266 Similarly, Tugenkhold talked of the 
regional uniqueness of Soviet art without expanding on what that might entail.267 His 
reference to conditions of climate, natural resources, living conditions and social groupings 
as contributing to a vital geography of national creativity hinted that the particularities of 
the natural and social environment in which an artist found himself would be manifested in 
some way in his work, informing regional peculiarities.268 However, it was not clear whether 
these would be manifested in formal stylistic particularities, narrative content, or through 
other traits and relationships.  
 By 1930, the departments representatives had begun to be more explicit in presenting 
their interpretation of Stalins formula. Like the methodology they proposed for studying 
national art, their interpretation of national form and proletarian content in Soviet art was 
notably broad and inclusive. National form, it was explained, was not to be identified solely 
in the formal aesthetic characteristics of an individual work or artists works. It could be 
discerned in a broad range of characteristics, including nationally specific narrative content, 
as well as in colour palettes or decorative motifs drawn from national traditions of folk and 
applied arts. But it could also be observed through evidence of a particular nationalitys 
characteristic attitude to its national cultural heritage, its degree of cultural homogeny or 
heterogeneity, its degree of cultural originality, independence or sophistication. One of the 
departments representatives, for example, spoke of the appearance of national styles of art 
that could be distinguished by a commonality of artistic form among artists of a single 
nationality, but also of shared trends of narrative and composition.269 So national form was 
any visual characteristic or content or any marker or temperament, character or shared 
experience that appeared to unite painters belonging to a given nationality. 
266  . Petr Kogan, Ocherednaia zadacha Akademii, in Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo 
narodov SSSR (1927), pp. 5-8 (pp. 5-6). 
267  . Tugenkhold, K izucheniiu izobrazitelnogo iskusstva SSSR, p. 47. 
268   . Tugenkhold, K izucheniiu izobrazitelnogo iskusstva SSSR, p. 
269  . Yu. Samarin, Sovremennye problemy izucheniia iskusstva natsionalnostei, in 
Yakob Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1930), pp. 
19-31 (p. 26). 
 Representatives of the department as well as several reviewers of the 1927 exhibition 
identified a host of features characterising particular nationalities, which attest to the breadth 
of sources and features in which evidence of national form could be discovered. 
Tugenkhold, for example, writing in 1930, identified a series of traits observable in the art of 
particular Soviet nationalities. Among some nationalities he notes a receptiveness to certain 
contemporary artistic styles and ideologies. In the artists of the Belorussian SSR, for 
example, he observes an attraction to the artistic styles popular at Moscows VKhUTEMAS 
(Higher State Artistic and Technical Studios) and to Moscow Czannismthe circle of 
artists associated with Russias Knave of Diamonds (Bubnovyi valet) and the artists Petr 
Konchalovsky and Ilia Mashkov.270 In other cases he points to the influence of climatic 
conditions on national styles of painting, alluding, for example, to the sunny palette of 
Armenian artists.271 He identifies contemporary Ukrainian art as reflecting a unique breadth 
of artistic styles and remarks on Ukrainian and Georgian artists particular debt to their 
nations artistic heritage. As evidence he points to Ukrainian artists stylistic dues to 
Ukrainian ecclesiastical painting and the severe and sharp expressiveness of Georgian 
painting, which he attributes to an attraction to the historical influence of Byzantine and 
Persian artistic traditions upon Georgian art. 272  Tugenkhold and others, moreover, 
distinguished between nationalities with more and less sophisticated artistic practices, and 
those at different stages of development. The Chuvash people (a Turkic ethnic group in the 
Volga region of Siberia) had not progressed beyond AKhRR-provincialism as a first stage 
in their development of national art, where the Ukrainian artistic youth could not and cannot 
satisfy itself with that first phase of national art.273  
Two reviewers of the 1927 exhibition agreed that it was possible to discern 
distinguishing national traits and characteristics (although they each found evidence in 
different places). One, writing in Pravda, the main Party newspaper, observed that the work 
of national artists had developed along various paths and usually carried marks of the 
character of its country, its own particularities.274 The predominance of national colour 
(kolorit), moreover, is described as the most valuable of all features of national art, 
indicating that the writer saw national difference as something to be commended and 
270 Tugenkhold, Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo narodov SSSR, p. 37. 
271 Ibid. 
272    . Ibid., p. 37-38 and 50.  
273  ;        
   . Ibid., p. 46. 
274   . F. D., Iskusstvo. Te kotorykh my ne znali.  
encouraged.275 Frida Roginskaia, an influential Marxist critic, advocate of realist painting and 
future member of AKhRs art history section, noted the appearance in the exhibition of the 
first fundamental lines and ties characterising one or another country.276 However, she 
primarily characterises national artistic canons according to common formal, aesthetic 
qualities and degrees of sophistication, noting, for example, the great level of culture and 
even refinement of Georgian art and of Ukraine, the bold, somewhat carpet-like 
decorativeness of Turkmenistan, the naturalism of Belarus.277 The reviewer in Pravda, by 
contrast, paid greater attention to narrative content and its reflection of the particularities of 
national life. He notes, for example, that the canvases of the Armenian Society of Artists are 
saturated with the mighty fertility of a free working country. Huge stacks of bread. 
Blooming fruit gardens drenched in heat, red, pink, like alloys of precious gems, peaches, 
apricots, almonds, while the canvases of Georgia are saturated with the pathos of 
construction and work.278  
Some observations, then, played into orientalising stereotypes, even if they had some 
basis in fact, while others were more grounded in the contemporary themes treated by artists 
as a reflection of contemporary life under Soviet rule. Each of these commentators appears to 
view the nationally specific characteristics they observe broadly as spontaneously occurring 
phenomena dictated either by primordial national identities or socio-economic processes 
undergone by particular nationalities in their development.279 However, in 1928, Tugenkhold 
also indicated a need to moderate certain national traits in order to attain the proper national 
form of contemporary Soviet art.280 For example, he observes that Georgias cultural heritage 
is so rich and complex that it overloads Gudiashvilis painting, making it excessively 
refined and ornate.281 Georgian art, he concluded, must unravel this whole tangle of layers 
and influences in order to clarify its modern face.282 He therefore urged national artists to be 
selective in taking only what was useful and appropriate from their own and others national 
cultural heritage, and to be cautious in adopting features of historical national cultural forms, 
275     , ,   . Ibid. 
276          ,     
. F. Roginskaia, Smotr iskusstva narodov SSSR (Miasnitskaia, 21, Vkhutemas.) Pravda, 11 November 
1927, p. 5.  
277         , , 
   ,    . . Ibid.  
278 Ibid.; F. D., Iskusstvo. Te kotorykh my ne znali 
279 Ibid. 
280 Tugenkhold died in 1928. His essay in the 1930 volume was written in 1928 and published posthumously. 
281 . Tugenkhold, Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo narodov SSSR, p. 41 
282         ,      
 . Tugenkhold, Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo narodov SSSR, p. 41.  
because of the risk that in drawing on the cultural forms of the bourgeois classes of the past, 
they would invoke the ideologies of those classes. 283  
 So within the definition that the GAKhN department put forward, national form in 
Soviet art could be any common feature of the art of a single nationality collectively, or any 
feature in the art of a single artist in which the influence of either national artistic heritage or 
nationally specific historical or contemporary contexts could be discerned. It was identified in 
the art of both the proletarian organisations and national artists associated with modernist 
movements, as well as in traditional folk arts, applied art and architecture. To begin with they 
viewed evidence of national difference uncritically, as a positive trait demonstrating the 
wisdom and success of the Soviet leaderships treatment of the Unions non-Russian 
nationalities. However, from the beginning of the Cultural Revolution period, as class 
concerns intensified, national form increasingly became something an artist selected, and 
could and should choose not to select when it carried associations of the ideology of enemy 
classes or obstructed proletarian class content. 
Even before the departments 1930 volume of essays was published, GAKhN was 
disbanded and absorbed into a new State Academy of Art History (GAIS). Responsibility for 
studying the art of the Soviet nationalities was transferred to the All-Union Communist 
Academy.284 During its three years of existence, however, the department presented the 
contemporary art of the Soviet nationalities to the Moscow public more comprehensively 
than did any other organisation in the 1920s, and provided a first comprehensively theorised 
interpretation of Stalins formulation of Soviet art, national in form, socialist in content. 
With the transition into the Cultural Revolution period, class concerns began to shift the 
interpretation proposed by the department away from an all-encompassing definition of 
national form to one in which only certain national characteristics were compatible with 
national arts class priorities. As the Cultural Revolutions class war intensified, however, 
even this more measured approach to national form was opposed by another, more radical 
definition.  
283 Ibid.,pp. 50 and 52. 
284 B. Sokolov, Iskusstvo narodov SSSR i sovetskaia kultura, in Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR 
(1930), pp. 3-18 (p. 17). 
The Class War on National Form, 1931-32: The Case of Lazar Rempel 
 In October 1930, a young scholar and komsomolets from Crimea joined the research 
staff of the Museum of Oriental Cultures in the department of the Soviet East.285 Lazar 
Rempel had served as the head of the Crimean Museum of the Revolution under the Central 
Museum of Tavrida (the Crimean peninsula) between 1924 and 1928 at the same time as 
serving as Secretary of the Communist Partys Crimean Regional Committee, and then 
moved to Moscow in 1928 to pursue further academic training.286 He graduated from the 
museums department of Moscow State Universitys history faculty at around the same time 
as he joined the Museum of Oriental Cultures. Rempel remained at the museum until 1932. 
He was not the most senior researcher working in the Soviet East department at that time. 
However, he was the only researcher to publish significant research on contemporary 
painting in the Soviet East (under which umbrella, in line with the shift in emphasis within 
Soviet nationalities policy, he included developed nations such as Georgia and Armenia). 
With VNAV and the GAKhN department both recently having been disbanded, and AKhR 
all but ignoring questions of national difference in the art of the Soviet nationalities, 
Rempels was the loudest voice in the production of new theory concerning national art.  
Rempel belonged to a generation of Marxist scholars who were militant in their 
application of Marxist-Leninist theory to their subject. Unlike VNAV and GAKhN, who 
claimed to analyse the art of the nationalities of the Soviet East as a product of the socio-
political (class) context to which it belonged, but rarely did, Rempel discussed the 
development of national art strictly in terms of the stages of socio-economic historical 
development described in Marxist theory. Rempel demanded that national specificity be 
acknowledged in the discussion of the contemporary and historical art of the Soviet East, 
denouncing AKhRs homogenising approach to the non-Russian artists and branches within 
the organisations network. Though he approved of AKhRs brand of narrative realism and 
supported the organisations work in helping national artists to consolidate their proletarian 
base and to clarify their ideological position, he insisted that it should not try to draw local 
organisations towards itself, ignoring differences in national conditions.287 However, his 
reasons were not grounded in a wish to celebrate the types of national traits identified by 
Tugenkhold, Lunacharsky, and the researchers at GAKhN. Instead, Rempel proposed a 
285 Voitov, Materialy, p. 464. 
286 Ibid. 
287 Lazar Rempel O natsionalnom iskusstve, Brigada khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 2.  
completely new understanding of national form. Rather than identifying common motifs 
and characteristics and viewing them as somehow naturally inherent in a nations culture, 
Rempel explained national variation in art (and in the path of development of Soviet 
proletarian art) as resulting instead from the nationally specific nature of the proletariats 
struggle against its particular class oppressors. Broadly speaking, if the main enemy of the 
proletariat of a Soviet nationality was a European-oriented bourgeoisie (as Rempel would 
argue was the case in Georgia), then the national form of its struggle against that enemy 
was different to that of a national proletariat whose primary class enemy was in the formerly 
dominant classes of a feudal society (such as in Central Asia): the main content of all 
proletarian art should be proletarian class struggle; its form should vary only in so far the 
challenges of class struggle varied between national contexts. As he explained: 
The content of the national art of the proletariat is the construction of socialism  [it] 
is directed against the different reactionary types of content of national cultures, 
against different national forms, which express the content of those cultures  The 
concrete specificity of class directionsthe struggle against capitalist tendencies in 
some cases, against feudal in others, petty-bourgeois in a third etc.has a huge 
influence on the variation of creative methods and the particularity of national 
features in the practice of the national artists of the proletariat.288 
In defining national form in this way, Rempel expressly condemned earlier 
interpretations (such as those expressed by GAKhNs scholars and the reviewers of the 1927 
exhibition) that had sought to identify national distinctiveness or national spirit through 
aesthetic qualities, artistic traditions, qualities of light, or thematic content that could be 
associated with a given nationality. He criticised such formulae of national form as racial 
theory, alluding to the approachs implicit assumption of an apparently biologically 
programmed, inherently existing difference between the cultural sensibilities of one 
ethnically defined national group and another.289 He also explained how such conceptions of 
national form actively served bourgeois nationalist interests and damaged proletarian 
288         [] 
      ,   
 ,        
       ,  
  ,     .      
      . Ibid., p. 2. 
289 Ibid., p. 1.  
interests. In Rempels view, national cultural traditions and artistic heritage had to be 
approached with caution because that heritage embodied the ideology of the proletariats 
enemies and former oppressors: it was the manifestation of the specific ideologies that a 
national proletariat needed to combat. To celebrate those national forms was to celebrate 
the cultural forms of the proletariats oppressor and potentially even to empower and 
encourage resurgence among surviving members of the oppressing classes. To do so, 
moreover, was culturally to isolate the proletariat of one nation from another. In Rempels 
view, bourgeois nationalists, the surviving representatives of the dominant class of formerly 
oppressed nations, were propagating the notion of distinct national cultures with a view to 
resurrecting the national boundedness and insularity of national culture within narrow 
ethnographic frames, in order to divide the proletariat and damage its progress. 290  
Rempels criticism of AKhRs efforts to force local branches of its organisation to 
more closely mirror its own activities and output was thus not grounded in any desire to 
defend or encourage national form as it was defined by earlier commentators. Instead, he 
criticised AKhRs insensitivity in this matter only on the basis of the Greatest Danger 
Principle, which set out the need to avoid Great Power (Russian) Chauvinism (in the form of 
forced Russification of non-Russian Soviet cultures) at all costs. AKhR should present a 
tolerant attitude to national variation in contemporary proletarian art, but only with a view to 
limiting national artists desire to expand that variation. 
While Rempel explains the socio-political roots of the phenomena of national 
variation in art and clarifies in Marxist-Leninist class theoretical terms how Stalins reference 
to national form should be understood, what is less clear is how this interpretation of 
national form would manifest itself in practice. In his book, Zhivopis sovetskogo 
Zakavkazia (Painting of Soviet Transcaucasia), Rempel takes virtually all cases that previous 
commentators might have identified as positive illustrations of national form and explains 
them instead as examples of bourgeois-nationalist divergence from the proper path of 
proletarian art. Traits in the work of a painter such as Gudiashvili, for example, which might 
have been identified by other commentators as indicative of Georgian national forma 
highly stylised mode of illustration reflecting the influence of Persian artistic forms on 
Georgian art, or a mystical mood and deep palette reflecting the proliferation of modern 
European and Russian artistic and intellectual movements in Georgian culturewere for 
290          -
 . Ibid., p.1. Rempel also repeated these arguments elsewhere. See, for example: 
Lazar Rempel and Vladimir Chepelev, Natsionalnaia arkhitektura v Srednei Azii, Iskusstvo v massy, 8, 1930, 
pp. 10-11.  
Rempel indicative of class ideologies alien to the proletariat. The formal aesthetic 
particularities of Georgian painting of the 1920s were thus irrevocably aligned class 
ideologies harmful to the proletariat: 
The whole practice of [] Georgian Menshevism of 1920 provides rich material for 
characterising the class face of bourgeois nationalism also in material art []. 
Mysticism, Symbolism, Decadence, decay and pornography were dressed up in 
national clothes. National fascist patriots, the Mensheviks poeticised all that was 
reactionary, decadent [and] conservative in the heritage of the feudal and bourgeois 
classes of Georgia. Journals were flooded with Symbolist and Decadent literature, 
praying to the mystical elements of Baudelaire [and] Mallarm.  In paintingthe 
reactionary aesthetic of the Russian World of Art and Blue Rose, Karachokh 
(Georgian bohemia)the national-democratic culture of taverns, wine and cocaine, 
the aesthetic of deformity and mysticism, the eclectic bouquet of Russian modernism 
and stylisation, the feudal lexicon of images of abstract futurist quests. It was the 
period of the final creative agony of the artist of the ideas of the outgoing classes, 
Vano Khodzhbegov, of the last bloodless petty-bourgeois illusions of the famous 
artist Niko Pirosmanishvili and the sickly expressiveness of the artist of typical 
national-bourgeois aristocratism and decadence, Lado Gudiashvili, so well known to 
us by his not so long abandoned national democratic practice.291 
Thus, the permissibility of any kind of nationally specific aesthetic was effectively 
denied.  
Rempel does not deny the value of national artistic heritage per se, at least in theory. 
Instead, he invokes Lenins theory of two cultures to advocate the critical and selective use 
291   []   1920 .,     ,    
       [] , 
, ,       . 
- ,    , , 
,           .   
    ,     
, .           
,  ( )    ,   ,  
  ,      ,  
      .      
      ,   
        
  -     
,          . Rempel, Zhivopis 
sovetskogo Zakavkaze, p. 39. 
of the worlds cultural heritage.292  Rempel was in favour of the appropriation of all 
progressive social democratic elements of any national culture. However, because of his 
almost wholesale and impassioned rejection in practice of all formal aesthetic and stylistic 
deviations from AKhR style narrative realism, it was difficult to see how these elements 
would constitute any kind of recognisable national form. Rather, national form was really 
national content: it was to be found in nationally-specific socialist and proletarian narrative 
content, in depictions of episodes from the revolutionary history of the nationality in 
question, or the representation of the particular political, social, economic and cultural 
achievements brought to that nation by the Revolution. Moreover, as Rempel explains, the 
proletarian content of national art is defined not simply by [its] narrative but by a 
relationship to reality, which the artist expresses as a representative of class ideology. Those 
relationships are expressed in art in the unity of content and form.293 Thus, since it seems 
clear that for Rempel the appropriate form for the expression of proletarian content (and 
therefore for the unity of content and form) was AKhR-style narrative realism, national 
form was in fact the universal proletarian form of AKhR.294 Notably, as is explored in the 
following four chapters of this thesis, this question of the unity of content and form remained 
292 Lenin argued that two distinct class cultures exist side by side within each national culture. The first is that of 
the ruling, oppressing classthe bourgeoisie in capitalist society or feudal lords, imperial tsars and other 
nobility in a feudal society. This is the dominant culture. The second is the progressive social democratic culture 
of the oppressed classes within those societies, the proletariat in capitalist society or the progressive bourgeoisie 
under feudalism. These are not manifested as separate and opposing cultures. Rather, progressive social 
democratic cultural elements exist within the dominant culture of the ruling class. Artists under the dictatorship 
of the proletariat should select from all world culture only progressive social democratic elements. See: V. I. 
Lenin, On Literature and Art (Critical Remarks on the National Question) (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 
1967), p. 84, cited in Rempel O natsionalnom iskusstve, p. 1. 
293        ,   
 ,   ,    .   
       ,     
   ,    . Rempel O natsionalnom 
iskusstve, p. 2. 
294 In other articles critiquing contemporary artistic activity in individual republics, Rempel praised the local 
artists and artists organisations adopting AKhRs model and eschewing national difference. He mentioned 
national peculiarities only in terms of nationally-specific challenges related to either social and economic 
conditions or the negative effect of a nations pre-revolutionary artistic traditions on contemporary practice. See: 
Lazar Rempel, K sozdaniiu gruzinskogo APKh, Za proletarskoe iskusstvo, 6, 1932, p. 15 and Lazar Rempel, 
Na azerbaidzhanskom izo-fronte, Brigada khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 25. Other commentators reported on and 
evaluated contemporary national art in the same period, but assessed artistic activity primarily in practical 
termshow many artist organisations, training colleges and museums had been established, how many 
members they had, and how many exhibitions they had produced. They did not present theories for the 
delineation of national form. However, their silence on national characteristics in contemporary proletarian art 
suggests that national distinctiveness was not a priority. See: M. Rivkin, Izo-iskusstvo na severnom kavkaze 
Iskusstvo v massy, 9, 1930, p. 26; N. Turkestansky, Izofront Srednei Azii  na proletarskie relsy, Za 
proletarskoe iskusstvo, 4, 1932, p. 14. An exception to this rule is one author, writing in 1930, who maintained 
that contemporary Uzbek proletarian art should retain links to traditional Uzbek folk art. See: S. Malt, Na grani 
rastsveta: puti razvitiia revoliutsionnogo izo-iskusstva Uzbekistana, Iskusstvo v massy, 8, 1930, p. 12. 
a central point of discussion and disagreement among Georgian artists and critics throughout 
the 1930s. 
This chapter has traced the evolution of discourses arising in the Soviet centre 
surrounding the art and culture of the non-Russian nationalities of the Soviet Unionthe 
question of national art in the 1920s and through the Cultural Revolution. Despite being two 
of the foremost institutions charged by the Soviet leadership with studying, reporting on, 
representing and influencing activity (including cultural activity) in the Soviet East, the 
scholars of VNAV and the Museum of Oriental Cultures failed to offer a position on 
contemporary proletarian national art. This was in part due to individual scholars research 
interests, which were often born out of their training in Imperial Russian ethnographic and 
Russian orientological practices. It was partly due to the survival of certain ways of 
representing the East adopted unconsciously from examples in the colonial past. This led 
curators and researchers to acquire, display and write about examples of historical folk and 
applied art and to neglect contemporary artistic activity in the Soviet East. This, if anything, 
indicated to the Moscow public that no significant professional artistic activity was taking 
place elsewhere in the Soviet Union. Soviet nationalities policys division of eastern and 
western nationalities based on their political and cultural development, and its prioritisation 
of minority and culturally backward nationalities, also meant that the achievements of 
larger, developed Soviet nationalities in the cultivation of contemporary national proletarian 
art were overlooked. When the museum attempted to rectify this problem from around 1930 
they found that they lacked the necessary exhibits to be able to fairly represent contemporary 
paintings from the Soviet Eastthen conceived to include developed, western nations 
such as Georgia and Armeniain its displays. Artists and artists organisations in the Soviet 
East, moreover, were not inclined to send the best examples of their work to Moscow, 
diminishing the quality of their own local museums displays.  
In 1927-8 commentators in the field of art criticism, including Lunacharsky, 
Tugenkhold and their colleagues at GAKhN, made the first significant progress in presenting 
contemporary painting from the non-Russian republics to the Moscow public and attempting 
to offer an interpretation of Stalins formula for Soviet art national in form, socialist in 
content. Soon though, the militant proletarianism of the Cultural Revolution gave rise to 
Rempels rewriting of the discussion of national art, rejecting the types of national 
specificity identified by GAKhNs critics and condemning the examples of national form 
that they had highlighted as evidence of harmful nationalist sentiment obstructing the 
progress of the proletarian class. 
Chapter 3: Proletarian in Form, Proletarian in Content?: Georgian Painting and the 
National Question during the Cultural Revolution 
This chapter documents debates that took place among artists and critics in Georgia 
leading up to and during the Cultural Revolution concerning the path of Georgian painting in 
Stalins Soviet Union. It investigates Georgian artists and critics interpretation of the 
question of national form in Soviet Georgian art including discussions occuring in Georgia 
about the appropriate role of Georgias national cultural heritage in informing Soviet 
Georgian cultural production. The ways in which artists and critics in Georgia conceived of 
and concepualised their national difference in the 1920s and 30s are explored, as is the 
question of how those ideas found reflection in Georgian painting. As in Moscow, artists, 
critics and other commentators in Georgia presented divergent views concerning the 
relevance of nationhood and national form for the production of painting during the NEP and 
Cultural Revolution. Some, like AKhR in Moscow, ignored these issues completely, either 
envisaging Georgian artistic production as one part of a homogenous body of Soviet artistic 
production in which national difference was irrelevant or simply prioritising class or other 
concerns. However, arguments positing the existence of innate and undeniable Georgian 
national aesthetic sensibilities were also presented. These were used by artists and critics 
including Gudiashvili and Duduchava to justify characteristics in their own and others work 
that attracted criticism from Far Left camps. On the other side of the coin, Rempels 
interpretation of national form in Soviet art as the expression of the challenges facing a nation 
due to its particular social and political conditions gained traction with other practitioners.  In 
order to trace the evolution of these ideas from the late 1920s through the Cultural 
Revolution, this chapter sets out to answer a series of related questions. The first of these 
concerns the extent to which issues of nationhood and national form featured in discussions 
about Georgian art taking place in Georgia leading up to and during the Cultural Revolution. 
If a range of views were offered, were those perspectives a prominent feature of discussion 
about the progress of Soviet Georgian painting? What main approaches to the question can be 
identified? How did they correspond to a given artist or commentators stance with respect to 
other political, ideological, social or aesthetic concerns? How did the views expressed change 
during the period in question, and why? And how did they respond to changing political 
conditions in this period, including the shifting status of national politics? How did they 
relate to the positions put forward by critics and commentators in Moscow or, more 
particularly, how did the position of Georgian artists and critics as representatives of a 
western but also non-Russian Soviet nation affect the views they expressed. Finally, to what 
degree were these discussions borne out in the painting produced in Georgia?  
The research presented in this chapter relies on extensive primary evidence, the 
majority of which is examined here for the first time. Archival materials including the 
transcripts and minutes of meetings held by organisations such as SARMA provide unique 
insight into the discourses that evolved among artists and critics and the antagonisms that 
sometimes arose between opposing camps. Commentaries in the local periodical press as well 
as other contemporary published materials (including monographs, exhibition reviews and 
catalogue essays) enrich this picture further. Together, this material comprises a first detailed 
examination of the theoretical debates that took place in Georgia in this period about 
Georgian painting, based on analysis of published and unpublished primary documentary 
materials. The chapter presents analysis, above all, of textual sources, as the most instructive 
evidence for illuminating the theoretical dialogues shaping how national form in Soviet art 
was treated in Georgia during the Cultural Revolution. Special attention is paid to the efforts 
of Duduchava to grapple with these issues, since his labours were the most extensive, but also 
the most troubled in terms of the difficulty he faced in reconciling his position with the 
political pressures of the age. Painting, by contrast, offers relatively little insight into these 
debates. The painting produced in Georgia in this period was diverse, and trying to draw 
conclusions about how Georgian painters collectively envisaged the national character and 
fate of painting in Soviet Georgia could only lead to oversimplification and to the same 
impasses that Georgian critics themselves reached at the time. Analysis of visual evidence is 
therefore reserved for later chapters, where a more valuable and instructive analysis of the 
chronological evolution of Georgian painting (chapters four and five) is offered. The present 
chapter reveals the obstacles that Georgian artists and critics faced in attempting to negotiate 
the political upheavals of the Cultural Revolution and the uniqueness of the Georgian case. 
Georgia and the Cultural Revolution 
The political context of Georgia in the second half of the 1920s was the product of 
continuous negotiation between the concerns and priorities of the central Soviet government, 
the will of the local communists in Georgia and Transcaucasia and the attitudes of the local 
population. The actions of the local leadership provoked responses and interventions on the 
part of the Moscow leadership. The policies implemented induced a particular response 
among the Georgian peasantry, working class and intelligentsia. That response then moulded 
subsequent policies as local and central leaderships worked to minimise resistance while 
ensuring that their wider priorities were served, creating a continuous loop of cause and effect 
playing out between the central, Transcaucasian and Georgian Party and government 
bureaucracies and the Georgian people. 295  In 1926-27, large numbers of Georgian 
Communists opposed the consolidation of Stalins leadership in the Politburo, giving their 
support to Trotsky and Zinovievs opposition.296 After Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled 
from the Communist Party in November 1927 and the Fifteenth Party Congress in December 
made opposition to Stalins leadership incompatible with Party membership, many of the 
Georgian Communists who had supported Trotsky gave up their positions. From that time, 
Georgias political autonomy was vastly reduced. The Georgian Communist Party broadly 
followed the Stalinist line. The new ruling elite held dual commitments to serving local 
concerns and maintaining a strong centralised Union, though those who placed the latter 
ahead of the former increasingly prevailed.297 The ensuring economic integration of Georgia 
first into the ZSFSR and then into the wider Soviet economy left little control at republican 
level, and this effect was magnified by 1929, when remaining moderates were purged from 
the Transcaucasian Communist Party and the Sovnarkom ordered the strengthening of the 
ZSFSR government apparatus at the expense of republican bureaucracies.298  
As mentioned in the introduction to this thesis, Georgia and Georgians enjoyed 
special status in the hierarchy of Soviet nationalities in the Stalin era. Georgians enjoyed 
unusual access to opportunities both in their own republics and in the Soviet centre and were 
accorded special prestige. They were continually lauded as one of the most advanced and 
cultured nationalities of the Union. This special status, and many of the privileges and 
concessions that it brought, continued through the Cultural Revolution period. Nevertheless, 
national politics, and the implementation of Soviet nationalities policy in Georgia, as 
elsewhere in the Union, were not unaffected by the political upheavals and changing political 
priorities of the period.  
The privileges that Georgians enjoyed have been explained as the consequence of 
Stalins own Georgian nationality, which brought Georgia prestige by association. The 
powerful positions of Georgians such as Beria and Sergo Orjonikidze in the central Party 
administration are taken both as evidence of the favour Georgians received and as reasons for 
295 On this process see chapters 9-12 in Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, pp. 185-291. 
296 Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 234. 
297 Ibid., p 235. 
298 Ibid., p 242. 
the status they leant to Georgia by association.299 However, as I argue throughout this thesis, 
the concessions Georgia enjoyed were also driven by the threat that the Soviet leadership 
perceived in Georgia as a result of Georgians strong nationalist impulses and their initial 
resistance to Bolshevik rule. In the Revolutionary period, that threat led Lenin to urge special 
caution with respect to the Georgians in the hope of avoiding provoking further resistance. 
Similarly, in 1925, Sergo Orjonikidze, the head of the Georgian Communist Partys regional 
committee, proposed a plan of special concessions to the Georgian peasantry, including 
granting peasants the right to buy and sell land.300 Though the central leadership ultimately 
rejected Orjonikidzes plan, the fact that he proposed it, despite being himself a committed 
centraliser, indicates that even those pushing to fortify centralised power thought that special 
sensitivity was necessary in heading off unrest among the Georgian peasantry.  
Special concessions for Georgia continued into the Cultural Revolution period. The 
implementation of Soviet language policy at that time, for example, confirms Georgias 
special position. In 1929-30, the scripts of 36 Soviet languages were Latinised. Even Russian 
was tabled for Latinisation. Georgian is the only script in respect of which there is no 
evidence of any intention to Latinise.301 Where for other Soviet nationalities key national 
markers such as language and script were subject to negotiation, in Georgia they were 
considered sacrosanct. Nevertheless, Georgias continued favoured status did not make the 
republic immune to the consequence of the First Five-Year Plan and Cultural Revolution for 
national politics across the Soviet Union. Moderates in the Georgian and Transcaucasian 
leadership had been reluctant to pursue policies of coercion in the collectivisation drives 
implemented in Georgia in the mid-1920s. However, once those forces had largely been 
expelled from the Georgian and Transcaucasian leaderships, by 1928-29, the remaining 
ruling elite were committed to pursuing the Cultural Revolutions priorities of 
industrialisation, agricultural collectivisation and Class War through whatever means 
necessary, including by force.302 Indeed, during the Velikii perelom the Georgian and 
Transcaucasian bureaucracies responsible for enforcing collectivisation and eliminating so-
called kulaks fulfilled their objectives with zeal, acting even beyond Moscows orders. 
299 Blauvelt, Status Shift and Ethnic Mobilisation, p. 654. 
300 Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 229. 
301 This trend continued at the end of the 1930s. By then, linguistic korenizatsiia was becoming a lesser priority. 
As a result the Russian language assumed a dominant position in all of the non-Russian republics. Georgia and 
Armenia were the only exceptions. Ibid., pp. 199 and 393.  
302 Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 239. 
Moreover, when Stalins Dizzy with Success article signalled that the collectivisation and 
anti-kulak campaigns should be slowed, local bureaucracies were initially reluctant.303  
 The new economic and political priorities of the First Five-Year Plan and Cultural 
Revolution had a marked impact on the implementation of Soviet nationalities policy. The 
principles of Soviet nationalities policy remained unchanged. National cultural autonomy was 
still to be supported and promoted as a means of disarming more dangerous manifestations of 
nationalism. Indeed, though many expected that the new priorities of the First Five-Year Plan 
would lead to the reversal or abandonment of Soviet nationalities policy, Stalin insisted that 
the Cultural Revolution should bring about a flourishing of nations. The logic was that 
concessions to national culture were all the more necessary in the new context in order to 
ease resistance to enormous upheavals in all other aspects of national life. As a result, 
korenizatsiia was to be accelerated. In practice, however, this only happened among certain 
nationalities. Among the Soviet Unions eastern nationalities, affirmative action 
korenizatsiia programmes benefited from the additional financial investment that came with 
the First Five-Year Plan. However, among western nationalities such as Georgia, which 
already had established government and other institutional infrastructure in place, the focus 
was on linguistic korenizatsiia, which was negatively affected by the conditions brought 
about by the Five-Year Plan. In practice, the economic goals of the First Five-Year Plan and 
the Cultural Revolutions class war took priority over all other matters, including the 
implementation of Soviet nationalities policy, particularly where conflict arose between 
different priorities. The collectivisation of agriculture, which in turn would facilitate 
industrial and economic development (and therefore also defensive capability) was prioritised 
at the expense of certain aspects of the less pressing and more speculative korenizatsiia 
initiative. For example, ambitious production targets led several central Soviet departments to 
oppose local linguistic korenizatsiia in Ukraine on the grounds that it hindered centre-
republican communication and therefore diminished both productivity and control. At the 
same time, growing concerns that korenizatsiia might actually have been encouraging rather 
than limiting local nationalism among developed western nationalities such as Ukraine and 
Georgia led to a further reduction in korenizatsiia in those republics.304 As Martin and others 
have shown, while Soviet nationalities policy remained unchanged and official rhetoric spoke 
of a continuation of korenizatsiia, attacks launched in Ukraine in particular against those who 
were employed to implement korenizatsiia, many of whom were purged from their positions 
303 Ibid., p. 249. 
304 Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire, p. 178. 
and arrested and even executed, signalled that korenizatsiia should be slowed. Two Politburo 
decrees criticising Ukrainianisation in December 1932 formalised this position, and 
comments made by Stalin the following year confirmed that the criticism applied to other 
Soviet nationalities, leading to the wholesale revision of Soviet nationalities policy in 1933-
Broadly speaking then, for most of the Cultural Revolution period, there was a 
contradiction between the theoretical continuation of the principles of Soviet nationalities 
policy on the one hand and the space available for national cultural expression and autonomy 
on the other. Despite the continuation of Soviet nationalities policy in theory, the activities of 
Stalins Politburo, in particular its terror campaigns against the implementers of korenizatsiia 
initiatives, and its disproportionate attacks against national (non-Russian) bourgeoisies, 
precipitated a gradual shift away from korenizatsiia that was reflected in a revised Soviet 
nationalities policy from 1933. 
It was against this backdrop that discussions about national art and the role of national 
artistic heritage in the production of Soviet art took place in Georgia. As chapter two of this 
thesis demonstrated, these discussions were shaped not only from above, via the policies and 
signals emanating from the Politburo and central and local government. They were also 
moulded by individual actors and organisations in the cultural sphere, both in Moscow and 
Tiflis. From the end of the 1920s, the growing dominance of proletarian cultural 
organisations and their supporters in Moscow increasingly came to be mirrored in Georgia. 
AKhRs influence, together with its network or organisations, was quickly expanding outside 
of the RSFSR. Prioritising the promotion of what it viewed as proletarian cultural forms, it 
paid little attention to questions of national artistic tradition, or national form in Soviet art. 
Local proletarian organisations, such as SARMA, broadly followed suit. Thus, cultural 
organisations gaining dominance even at the start of the Cultural Revolution were straying 
from the officially held principles of Soviet nationalities policy in their attitudes to local 
artistic activity long before the government itself begin to signal a retreat from the policy. 
What this amounted to was a fundamental contradiction between the theoretical position held 
by the Soviet leadership and that promoted and accepted by the most powerful forces in the 
cultural sphere in Georgia. Georgian artists and critics sought to negotiate these 
contradictions in a range of ways. 
Proletarian in Form, Proletarian in Content?: Negotiating the Theory and Practice of 
Soviet Nationalities Policy in Georgia during the Cultural Revolution 
One of a handful of critics active in Georgia in the late 1920s, Duduchava was the 
first to pay serious attention to contemporary Georgian painting.305 As the rector of the 
Georgian Academy of Arts in 1927-30 and the editor of Sabchota khelovneba for 1927, he 
was respected among artists in Georgia as the transformations of the Cultural Revolution and 
First Five-Year Plan began to be implemented.306 He set out his views on the correct path 
for painting in Soviet Georgia, as well as on the appropriate approach for Georgian (and, 
more broadly, Soviet) art criticism, in his book on Georgian painting, Gruzinskaia zhivopis, 
and in a number of articles published in local periodicals. In his first article as the editor of 
Sabchota khelovneba in 1927, he summarised the tasks standing before Georgian art critics 
and cultural commentators. Ostensibly, he argued for the wholesale adoption of a more 
Marxist approach in Soviet art criticism, including in Georgia.307 In this he was responding to 
a growing intolerance for non-Marxist approaches in all spheres of cultural and scholarly 
activity. However, Duduchava proposed a particular application of Marxist theory. A 
member of the old intelligentsia and supporter of experimental modernist-oriented painters 
such as Gudiashvili and Kakabadze, he belonged instinctively to the formalist school of 
criticism. However, facing increasing pressure to assume a more Marxist position, he, like 
many formalist critics in Russia, sought a way to reconcile Marxist and formalist criticism.308 
He claimed Russian art historians such as Friche, Matsa and Luncharsky and the sociological 
approach to art history and criticism developed by Friche in particular as important influences 
on his thinking. However, at the same time he rejected aspects of their work, arguing that 
305 Other art historians such as Georgy Chubinashvili (1885-1973), who is widely referred to as the father of 
modern Georgian art history, were active at that time. However, their research was concerned primarily with 
medieval Georgian art and architecture. 
306 The Academy was in a state of flux in this period, undergoing several reorganisations and changes of name 
in the space of a few years. Established in 1922 as the Georgian Academy of Arts, in 1929-31 it became the 
Higher Art and Technical Institute, based on Moscows art institute of the same name - Vysshii 
khudozhestvenno-tekhnicheskii institut (VKhUTEIN), 1926-29, formerly VKhUTEMAS, the Higher Art and 
Technical Studios - Vysshiie khudozhestvenno-tekhnicheskiie masterskiie, 1920-26. In 1931 it was closed and 
replaced with a Faculty of Fine Arts within Tbilisi Pedagogical Institute, but was reinstated as the independent 
Tbilisi State Academy of Fine Arts in February 1933. The institutions current full title is the Apollon 
Kutateladze Tbilisi State Academy of Arts after its Rector of 1959-72, the painter Apollon Kutateladze. 
307 Aleksandre Duduchava, Sabchota sazogadoebrioba da chveni zhurnalis amotsenebi [Soviet Society and the 
Tasks of Our Journal], Sabchota khelovneba, 1, 1927, p. 1.  
308 Duduchavas synthesis of sociological and formal methods of analysis was not without recent precedents. 
Maria Mileeva has noted the existence of a tendency for Russian formalist art historians in the 1920s to attempt 
to reconcile their approach with Marxist theory in light of ideological pressure, citing as an example Boris 
Arvatov, O formalno-sotsiologicheskom metode, Sotsiologicheskaia poetika (Moscow, 1928), pp. 29-32. 
Mileeva, Import and Reception of Western Art in Soviet Russia, p. 68. 
Friches sociology of art, in which problems of visual art are analysed with reference to the 
socio-political context to which they relate, should make up only part of the correct art 
historical methodology. This part, he contended, was valuable only in combination with 
analysis of the empirical facts of art, which he maintained were to be explored by means of 
formal analysisthe analysis of painting in terms of its fundamental aesthetic components, 
including line, colour, tone, volume, materiality. He termed this approach socio-aesthetic, a 
marriage of Friches sociology of art and formalist aesthetics.309  
By combining a Marxist view of the historical development of Georgian painting with 
formalist analysis of works of art, Duduchava hoped to demonstrate his alignment with 
Marxist theory while retaining a model of art criticism that continued to evaluate painting in 
terms of its aesthetic qualities, not simply as historical document. In doing so, he aimed to 
maintain the primary importance of artistic quality, which he found in high technical skill 
combined with painterly experimentation and innovation. He saw experienced painters such 
as Kakabadze, Gudiashvili and Mose Toidze as Georgias most valuable force in painting and 
hoped to provide a theoretical framework through which they could be defended against the 
attacks of the far-left militant proletarian organisations that sought to discredit them. 
Nevertheless, a series of inconsistencies, contradictions and logical dead ends in the 
arguments he presented, some of which resulted from the challenges posed by his attempt to 
reconcile Marxist and formalist theory, undermined his ability to discuss those artists, or the 
development of Georgian painting, coherently. At the same time, they caused him to broach 
central issues of national form in painting and the role of national artistic heritage in Soviet 
art in particular ways. 
Duduchavas monograph, in which he presented these arguments in detail, was 
divided into seven chapters, plus an authors preface. Chapters one and two set out the books 
two main theses. The remaining five chapters were then devoted to what Duduchava viewed 
as the key figures or moments in the recent history of Georgian painting. Pirosmani was 
examined in chapter three, followed by Gudiashvili, Kakabadze and Toidze in chapters four 
to six, and a final chapter examined recent developments in Georgian stage design. The idea 
appears to have been that the hypotheses set out in the earlier sections of the book would be 
applied to and proven through these examples. In practice, however, weaknesses in the links 
Duduchava drew between social context and aesthetic values as well as inevitable challenges 
309 Duduchava, Gruzinskaia zhivopis, p. 3. 
arising from his attempt to reconcile two fundamentally opposing worldviews ultimately 
undermined his arguments and invited his critics to dismiss them.  
 The first two chapters of Duduchavas monograph dealt with fundamentally different 
problems, and in doing so revealed much about Duduchavas vision for Soviet painting and 
the question of national art and artistic heritage. In the opening chapter, Duduchava presented 
his evaluation of the tasks of Soviet painting under the Cultural Revolution and his view of 
the characteristics and qualities that Soviet painting needed to foster in order to fulfil those 
tasks. He discussed Soviet art in general terms, without reference to national specificity. In 
that chapter he stressed the importance of maintaining diversity in painting, in both the 
subjects treated by artists and the formal artistic styles considered appropriate.310 What was 
of primary importance in Soviet painting, he contended, was the expressiveness of an artists 
workthe ability of an artist to produce something convincing, compelling, and able to incite 
an emotional reaction in the viewer. He acknowledged the duty of artists in the Cultural 
Revolution period in organising the thoughts of the masses, and of artistically formulating a 
new way of life toward which the proletariat could strive.311 However, only by focusing on 
paintings expressivity and emotional impact could artists hope to achieve that goal. For that 
reason, he insisted, it was necessary to support diverse forms of painting in terms of both 
subject matter and style. This would facilitate the production of art with enough expressive 
power to fulfil these duties. By extension of this position, Duduchava warned of the danger of 
subjugating all art to the industrial goals of the First Five-Year Plan and of limiting subject 
matter to the depiction of industrialisation. Acknowledging arts importance in reflecting the 
progress of the periods rapid industrialisation, he insisted on the need for painting to show a 
range of aspects of Soviet life.312 In the same vein he warned against prioritising ideological 
narrative over artistic mastery and technical quality. He criticised AKhRRs painters for 
ignoring these issues, the result of which was the dry documentation of reality limiting any 
ability for inculcation and impact.313 While Duduchava acknowledged the importance of 
ideological narrative he insisted that narrative would be ineffective without the artistic means 
sufficiently expressive to have a tangible emotional impact on the viewer. Without that, 
310 Ibid., p. 13. 
311 Ibid., p. 12. 
312 Ibid., p. 13. 
313      . Ibid., pp. 19-20. 
there is a lack of compellingness and expressiveness, the progressive possibilities of our 
reality are not revealed, the class substance of the thing depicted is not revealed.314 
Importantly, Duduchava located the source of arts expressiveness specifically in the 
basic components of painting identified by formalist critics, paintings elemental vocabulary 
of colour and line. He described, moreover, the way in which those elements affected the 
viewer in terms of an emotional response rather than a rational, intellectual one: 
Soviet painting, whether it be a portrait, poster [or] popular print, in the Cultural 
Revolution pursues the task of deepening the social character of our feeling, of 
strengthening human will towards revolutionary activity and widening our 
understanding of reality. That task is resolved in painting with its specific weapon: the 
play of colour and dynamic line.315 
Duduchava went on to clarify that colour and line fulfil a social function only in 
combination with narrative content. However, his reference here to the potential of colour 
and line as arts main weapon in arousing an emotional response in its viewers, in deepening 
their feeling and strengthening their will, clearly implied that Duduchava saw colour and line 
as acting directly on the viewer, at a deeper, direct emotional level. It suggests that emotional 
impact was achieved, at least in part, through paintings formal makeup, independent of 
narrative content. Narrative or symbolic content was secondarya means of channelling the 
emotional power of colour and line into a concrete message, into the creation of pathos.  
In this first chapter, Duduchava spoke in general terms about Soviet art as a whole. 
However, by foregrounding expressivity as a vital feature of Soviet art, and relating it 
directly to painters mastery of formal aesthetic means, he developed a position that he could 
use to defend experimental modernist-oriented painters such as Kakabadze and Gudiashvili. 
These painters were indisputably more experienced, more knowledgeable and more 
comprehensively educated than the artists of the younger generation. As such, he could 
position them as experienced innovators whose painterly mastery could offer solutions for 
producing the emotional impact that Soviet art needed in order to captivate and inspire the 
Soviet masses. As he spoke in this chapter only in general terms, Duduchava refrained from 
314    ,      
,     . Ibid., p. 21. 
315    , ,      
    ,     
      .    
   :     . Ibid., pp. 25-26. 
directly juxtaposing those artists wealth of experience against the younger, less experienced 
and less skilled proletarian painters attached to SARMA. However, his criticism of AKhRR 
applied implicitly to SARMAs younger, Far Left painters. Moreover, the absence of those 
younger artists from Duduchavas book attests to the lesser importance Duduchava attached 
to those artists, particularly since the volume claimed to examine the highlights (osnovnye 
momenty) in the history of Georgian painting. 
Having made his case for variety and quality in Soviet painting, Duduchava moved on 
in the second chapter of his book to the discussion of Georgian painting in particular. The 
chapter, which is twice as long as most of the others, was dedicated to the historical 
development of Georgian art from the medieval period up to Russias annexation of Georgia 
at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Duduchavas devotion of so many words to 
historical Georgian painting reflected the importance in his view of national artistic heritage 
in the production of Soviet Georgian painting. Significantly, it also underlined an absolute 
separation in his thinking between Georgian and Russian painting and between Soviet 
Georgian painting and Soviet painting elsewhere in the Union. Soviet Georgian painting, 
Duduchava contended, could be understood and supported only with reference to the history 
of Georgian painting. As he declared, the contemporary visual art of Georgia cannot be 
sufficiently well understood without a retrospective view on its past, on its historical 
roots.316 There is nothing particularly exceptional about Duduchavas stance in this respect. 
Indeed, that ancient and medieval architecture and art constituted the main component in a 
nations historical and cultural heritage was a standard view in the 1920s.317 However, 
notably, Soviet Georgian painting was presented not first and foremost as Soviet painting, 
differentiated by nation as a secondary consideration, but instead as the most recent stage in 
the development of a Georgian national tradition. 
 It was in this chapter, using examples from medieval Georgian painting and also 
Byzantine art (as an important influence on the Georgian tradition), that Duduchava set out to 
explain and justify his proposed socio-aesthetic methodology. His aim was to demonstrate the 
existence of direct causal relationships between socio-political contextdefined and 
described in terms of Marxist-Leninist theoryand the appearance of formal aesthetic traits 
in painting. One might expect that by demonstrating such a connection Duduchava hoped to 
be able to explain and justify characteristics in the work of contemporary painters such as 
316       ,   
   ,    . Ibid., p. 33. 
317 On the conception of national cultures in this period, see Jeremy Smith, The Bolsheviks and the National 
Question, 1917-23 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999), p. 168-69. 
Kakabadze and Gudiashvili as the inevitable result of their socio-political environment. If 
aesthetic form was directly dictated by socio-political context, then the artist could 
presumably be freed from some of the responsibility for the formal resolution of their work. 
However, inconsistencies and contradictions in the ways he described those relationships, as 
well as a tendency towards over-simplification, undermined both Duduchavas thesis about 
the relationship between socio-political context and aesthetic form, and its application to 
contemporary Georgian painting. This in turn moulded the way he broached issues of 
nationhood and national difference in their work and practice and the way in which 
Duduchavas arguments were received and critiqued by his contemporaries. 
In his discussion of medieval Georgian and Byzantine painting, Duduchava argued 
for the impact of socio-political conditions on formal aesthetic characteristics as direct, one-
directional and occurring at societal level. Social conditions dictated form automatically, 
inevitably and directly. He negated the agency of the individual artist to respond to social 
conditions in diverse, consciously constructed ways. For example, he explained the defining 
quality of colourfulness (krasochnost) that he perceived in Byzantine art as the visual 
manifestation of the Byzantine Empires extensive contacts with Persia and other 
neighbouring eastern states. Those powers, he explained, doused the Byzantine court and 
clergy in such luxury and richness that it inevitably found its way into the art produced in that 
context.318 He explained the quality of stillness, the numbness and stupor he perceived in 
the human figure in Byzantine art as the result of the socio-political nature of feudal society. 
Economic stagnation under those conditions, he reasoned, prevented the free growth of 
industrial forces and delayed the economic progress of the empire. The feudal nobility was 
not industrially productive. It was a consumer-only class of inner complacency and outer 
greatness. Thus, Duduchava concluded, that whole atmosphere of the inner economic 
stagnation of the country and the external glitter of the feudal nobility resolved the 
thematic of the art of the Byzantines in tones of stillness.319 The qualities of Byzantine art 
Duduchava identified were the inevitable and direct product of the socio-political conditions 
under which they appeared. 
Duduchava drew similar connections with regard to medieval Georgian painting. 
Georgian ecclesiastical fresco painting to a significant degree imitated the Byzantine 
tradition, diverging from it only in certain particularities of style and content. As such, one 
might expect Duduchava to have acknowledged the cross pollination of artistic influence that 
318 Ibid., p. 46. 
319 Ibid., pp. 48-49. 
came about as a result of the Byzantine Empires influence in the kingdom of Iberia (also 
called Kartli, present day west Georgia). However, after highlighting formal characteristics 
uniting medieval Georgian and Byzantine painting, those characteristicsits static quality, 
two-dimensionality and mathematical exactnesswere instead explained in Georgias case 
principally as the result of socio-economic conditions. Not only that, the same formal 
characteristics were explained as arising from a different set of circumstances to those they 
were said to have arisen from in the Byzantine tradition. The static quality Duduchava 
discerned in Georgian painting was explained as the result of economic and cultural 
stagnation. Duduchava did acknowledge that Byzantine artistic traditions, and in particular 
the frontalness of Byzantine art, its rejection of depth and illusionistic perspective, were 
important influences on Georgian painters. However, he went on to attribute the 
mathematical exactness and stillness he observed in Georgian painting not to Georgian 
painters artistic debts to Byzantine painting as an aesthetic model, but to a limitation on 
artistic freedoms caused by the requirement placed on Georgian fresco painters to conform to 
Byzantine artistic formulae.320 What Duduchava presented was not a simple cross-pollination 
of artistic styles, nor was it a consistent relationship between socio-political conditions and 
their aesthetic manifestations. In both Byzantine and medieval Georgian art, economic 
stagnation was said to dictate formal stillness. But in Georgia, formal stillness was also the 
visual manifestation of a constriction of artistic freedoms. Whether this constriction arose 
from socio-economic conditions or not, this relationship does not embody the same direct and 
inevitable causation between socio-political context and formal aesthetic features that 
Duduchava had described in relation to Byzantine art. 
When Duduchava came to discuss nineteenth- and twentieth-century Georgian 
painting, inconsistences in his argument became clearer still. He proposed, for example, a 
connection between the use of tone in painting and bourgeois society. He observed that tone 
began to appear for the first time in Georgian painting in the nineteenth century. He hailed 
this as the great conquest of the bourgeois period since tone, he argued, was a valuable tool 
in creating expressivity in painting.321 He explained its appearance as the result of the 
development of capitalist trade in Georgia. He reasoned that trade capitalism facilitated the 
development of industrial forces, which in turn created new lines of patronage beyond the 
Georgian nobility. This encouraged the greater proliferation of easel painting as a medium 
that was both better suited to the new class of patrons (it was small, portable, suitable for 
320 Ibid., pp. 74-75. 
321     . Ibid., p. 82.  
middle class interiors) and better able to exploit the possibilities of tonality, including in 
achieving greater depths of emotional expression. 322  
The relationship that Duduchava discerned between social conditions and formal 
aesthetic means here departs from the direct and inevitable causal relationship observed with 
respect to Byzantine and to some extent medieval Georgian art. Duduchava explains tonality 
in painting produced in bourgeois societies not as the natural and inevitable manifestation of 
socio-political circumstances, but instead as the result of a protracted sequence of causes and 
effects. With reference to Byzantine or medieval Georgian art, social and economic 
conditions had directly corresponding aesthetic markers. In relation to the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, by contrast, social conditions dictated aesthetic traits through a chain of 
historical events and their consequences. The disparity between these two models 
demonstrated the vagueness of the logic on which both are based, but also undermined the 
universal pretensions of Duduchavas thesis, and its potential authority in explaining and 
evaluating contemporary Georgian painters. Moreover, Duduchava and Friche, as two critics 
attempting to apply a similar methodology in the analysis of art, presented wholly divergent 
interpretations of the significance of certain formal characteristics. This demonstrated the 
flimsiness of Duduchavas method and the ease with which it could be employed to produce 
a variety of conflicting conclusions. While Duduchava positioned tone as an inherent 
characteristic of bourgeois painting, Friche interpreted it entirely differently, as a reflection of 
opposition and conflict arising between any two classes within the society in which the 
painting was produced.323 Duduchava firmly refuted Friches stance. Yet the dispute only 
served to highlight that neither offered scientific or systematic means of demonstrating the 
relationship they identified. Instead, Duduchava contradicted Friches interpretation simply 
by insisting: 
Tone appears in a peaceful environment as a result of an intimate perception of things 
as a result of a need for the decorativeness of bourgeois apartments and salons and 
therefore does not reflect the social essence of the contrast of the third estate and 
feudal nobility. That form of perception dialectically harmonises with the anarchical-
individualistic socio-economic way of life of the bourgeoisie.324 
322 Ibid., p.82. 
323 Vladimir Friche, Sotsiologia iskusstva, cited in Duduchava, Gruzinskaia zhivopis, p. 85.  
324          ,   
            
     .       
As well as diverging from the interpretation proposed by Friche, Duduchava himself 
offered more than one explanation for the appearance of tonality in bourgeois painting and 
drew a range of disparate conclusions about its significance and implications, each of which 
called into question the validity of the last. For example, Duduchava attributed its appearance 
to social and industrial developments that facilitated the democratisation of patronage and 
thus the market for easel painting at a practical level. However, he also alluded to a 
relationship between the appearance of tone in bourgeois painting and the characteristics of 
the physical environment in which bourgeois artists worked. As he explained, the intimate 
corners inhabited by bourgeois artistsdomestic interiors, studios and salonsdictated the 
greater proliferation of easel painting because of the mediums suitability for bourgeois 
interior decoration. At the same time, he argued that those environments encouraged a new 
emphasis on tone in painting because of the play of light that is produced by such interior 
spaces. Such effects lead artists to use light and shade to communicate the spatial distance of 
objects depicted in painting rather than resorting to more linear means.325 In all of these 
cases, tonal painting arises hand in hand with easel painting itself. But was it by creating 
conditions for the growth of a market that socio-political conditions facilitated the rise of 
easel painting, and tonal painting? Did the domestic environment of those new patrons 
contribute to the market for easel painting and therefore greater tonality because easel 
painting naturally leant itself to greater tonality? Or did the new physical environment in 
which painters found themselves encourage both greater tonality and the greater proliferation 
of easel painting due to the effects of the light they produced and the scale of the spaces 
respectively?  
These questions were further complicated by an additional argument Duduchava 
made about tonality in painting and its appearance under the conditions of bourgeois society. 
Duduchava posited that tonality as a formal quality in painting was especially effective in 
the transmission of human expression.326 In discussing this idea, Duduchava clearly had in 
mind European Romantic painting of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with its 
emphasis on exploring the emotional and psychological depths of the human condition and its 
use of small dark spaces, directional lighting and heavy chiaroscuro to generate psychological 
drama. He referred by name to the dark, brooding portraits of Rembrandt, a source of 
-, -  . Gruzinskaia zhivopis, p. 
325 Ibid., p. 85. 
326   . Ibid., p. 113. 
reverence and inspiration for painters in the Romantic era. Such discussion leads one to ask, 
did the practical circumstances of new bourgeois patrons, their tastes and lifestyle, bring 
about the rise of easel painting, which, as a medium, happened to lend itself to the use of tone 
and thus naturally encouraged artists to gravitate towards more emotionally expressive and 
psychologically intense imagery? Or did the brooding, reflective mood of the age in the 
Romantic era as well as in Georgia at the fin de sicle bring artists to easel paining, and to the 
use of tone, as a medium suited to expressing emotional and psychological intensity? The 
range of relationships Duduchava observed thus drew him inevitably into cyclical arguments 
whereby the explanations offered for the proliferation of easel painting or for the appearance 
of particular formal characteristics in painting were also offered as evidence of the very 
social circumstances from which they were said to have resulted.  
These issues affected not only the effectiveness of Duduchavas thesis in the abstract, 
but also its strengths when applied to the discussion of contemporary Georgian painters, the 
question of the national form of Soviet painting, and the role of national artistic heritage. 
With respect to Gudiashvili, for example, Duduchava proposed that the socio-political 
conditions in which the painter had worked in the Menshevik Georgia of 1918-21 dictated the 
social contexts that he depicted, which in turn determined the formal stylistic means he 
deployed. For Gudiashvili, Duduchava claimed, the formal stylistic debts apparent in his 
painting, in particular, to Byzantine and Persian traditions, were selected in response to the 
demands of the subject matter he treated. He explained: 
The methods of Byzantine-Persian art [employed in Gudiashvilis painting] were 
dictated by a need for the comprehensive elicitation of the expression of the classless 
kinto. The structure of that expression, as a conglomeration of psychological 
phenomenawill, character, moodwas in substance alogical and therefore, for its 
physical manifestation, demanded the logical destruction of proportions of the 
physical organism [] The Byzantine fresco and the graphic zigzags of the Persian 
miniaturists in formal terms fully answered the bohemian character of the expression 
of the kinto. In that way, the character of the theme also defined the formal means.327 
327  -      
   .   ,   
 , , ,--       
          
.    ,       
    []  ,     
  . Ibid., pp. 126 and 129. 
The themes that Gudiashvili treated were thus taken to justify the formal means that he 
employed. However, Duduchava also made the same argument in reverseGudiashvilis 
preference for particular formal aesthetic means, he said, dictated the subject matter he chose 
to treat: 
The artists inclination towards the idealisation of the past, [his] withdrawal into that 
past, is explained exclusively by Gudiashvilis wish to find the appropriate theme to 
which he could apply and justify the [artistic] means of Georgian wall painting, under 
the influence of which the artist Gudiashvili grew.328 
Gudiashvilis interest in the Persian and Byzantine traditions and his appropriation of formal 
stylistic features from those traditions were said by Duduchava to be the reason for 
Gudiashvilis interest in choosing bourgeois, bohemian Tiflis as his primary subject matter. 
Yet at the same time those same social conditions were presented as the source of the formal 
stylistic characteristics of his work.  
 In discussing the work of Gudiashvili and other Georgian painters in the period since 
the Sovietisation of Georgia, a completely new set of assumptions again were applied.  The 
apparently inevitable relationships Duduchava had discerned between socio-political 
conditions and artistic styles in earlier periods did not apply to contemporary Georgian 
painters. Painterly form was not dictated by socio-political context, but consciously selected 
by artists irrespective of their environment. For example, despite Duduchavas 
characterisation of tone as a natural feature of bourgeois painting, he also insisted that those 
class origins should not prevent contemporary Soviet painters from exploiting its expressive 
potential.329  There could be no discussion of the kind proposed by Friche about the social 
contrasts and oppositions that tonal contrasts might represent, since under the dictatorship of 
the proletariat, he reasoned, such social contrasts had been eradicated under socialism.330 As 
such, tone was thus cleansed of any negative social associations when employed in the Soviet 
context, and was transformed into a valuable weapon in Soviet artists arsenal. Duduchava 
328     ,    ,   
    ,        
   ,      . 
Ibid., pp. 130 and 133. 
329 Ibid., p. 86. 
330 Ibid., p. 86. 
amended or abandoned his thesis where necessary, manipulating the argument to serve his 
particular agenda. This allowed him to preserve tonal painting for Soviet art.  
 Nonetheless, Duduchava maintained the principles of his thesis where possible. In his 
evaluation of Gudiashvilis painting he was able to defend the painters formal means as 
appropriate to the subject matter that he treated, without making the more contentious claim 
that those means were also appropriate to the Soviet context. In this way Gudiashvili could be 
praised and validated for his work to date, produced primarily in the context of a capitalist 
society, and excused from blame, even while Duduchava aligned himself with dominant far-
left voices calling for new formal means and content to suit the new Soviet context. However, 
the new social conditions under the dictatorship of the proletariat required a renewal of both 
thematic content and formal artistic means. And contemporary themes, based on 
contemporary social conditions, would dictate the new creative means.331  
It is here that Duduchava referred directly for the only time in his book to the question 
of a Georgian national form of Soviet painting. Rather than describing this form in positive 
terms, he noted instead that Gudiashvilis existing formal painterly means could not 
constitute a Soviet Georgian national style. Instead, he predicted, the appearance of new 
thematic content and new creative means in the painters work would unravel the tangle of 
oriental influences in the atmosphere of which the work of Gudiashvili grew.332 In this way 
Gudiashvili would attain the appropriate formal means for Georgian painting in the Soviet 
context. Gudiashvilis art would have to rid itself from what was often viewed in Moscow in 
the 1920s as markers of Georgian national formfrom the tangle of oriental influences in his 
paintingin order to arrive at a true Soviet national style. 
Despite Duduchavas defense of modernist-oriented Georgian artists such as 
Gudiashvili, the above prediction aligned him with arguments that would be made by Rempel 
two years later, locating national form not in positive aesthetic traits but in the specific social 
(and the related artistic) challenges facing proletarian artists of a given nationality. This was 
confirmed by Duduchavas contrasting characterisations of bourgeois and proletarian art. He 
described proletarian painting as logical, mathematical, linear, ascribing to bourgeois art, by 
distinction, a passive, sensitive, hedonistic and emotional worldview. 333  Such 
descriptors, attached to bourgeois painting, evoke the particular strands of European 
modernism that had taken root in Georgia in the 1910s and early 1920s. They alluded to the 
331 Ibid., p. 134. 
332 Ibid., p. 134. 
333 Ibid., pp. 61-62. 
Symbolist and Decadent currents that claimed a prominent place in Gudiashvilis painting 
and in the poetry and prose of the Blue Horns literary society. If it was by eliminating those 
qualities that Gudiashvilis painting would become appropriate to the new Soviet context, 
then Duduchava appeared to agree with Rempel: Soviet national painting would achieve its 
correct form by eradicating characteristics previously viewed by other commentators as 
constituting its national form, since such markers were both hangovers of earlier feudal and 
capitalist societies and evidence of excessive and harmful nationalism. 
On the same grounds, Duduchava hesitated to endorse the suitability of Kakabadzes 
painting in the Soviet context. He lauded Kakabadze as a master, and attached great 
importance to his work as an innovator of new painterly means. He discerned originality in 
Kakabadzes representation of spatial depth, for example, observing Kakabadzes ability to 
communicate volume and depth not through any kind of perspectival device, or with an 
illusionistic reduction of detail in the receding distance, but instead by using a patchwork of 
saturated colour fields. This, Duduchava concluded, was a first in landscape painting, and 
secured Kakabadzes status as an innovator. Nevertheless, he criticised Kakabadzes 
disinterest in applying or adapting his formal aesthetic experiments to industrial themes and 
historical events.334 As a result, it was yet unclear whether Kakabadzes work had useful 
application in the Soviet context.335 Duduchava hinted at the possible industrial applications 
of Kakabadzes painting, for example in the production of textiles. In this respect, he declares 
that thanks to Kakabadzes experimentation, completely new paths are opening up in 
ornamental art.336 However, his search for alternative uses for Kakabadzes painting clearly 
suggested that its value as easel painting remained under question.337 It was only by reverting 
to a formalist model of assessment that he was able to reserve judgement as to whether such 
a combination of colour and line as found in Kakabadzes painting could ultimately be 
employed to help reveal the inner psychological world of the Soviet person.338 
Duduchava was attempting to reconcile the irreconcilable in his effort both to 
synthesise Marxist theory and formalist aesthetics and to negotiate the diverging theory and 
practice of Soviet nationalities policy in the context of the Cultural Revolution. As Rempel 
would in 1932, Duduchava searched for a way to maintain the theoretical position established 
by Soviet nationalities policy, even while the political imperatives of the Cultural Revolution 
334 Ibid., p. 153-54. 
335 Ibid., p. 154. 
336       . Ibid., p. 157 
337 Ibid., p. 157. 
338            . 
Ibid., p. 153. 
were limiting tolerance for national concerns (including a right to diverge from the artistic 
canons promoted by organisations from the Soviet centre), especially where they were seen 
to conflict with class objectives. Inevitably any such attempt could have little success.339  
Responses to Duduchava 
Various commentators were quick to critique Duduchavas book and the stances he 
set out. Vladimir Sokol, the only other prominent Georgian critic contributing to discussion 
about contemporary Georgian painting at that time, bluntly dismissed Duduchavas attempt 
to reconcile Marxist theory and formalist aesthetics as to put it mildly, completely 
unsuccessful.340 In early 1931, at the time of reviewing Duduchavas book, Sokol supported 
realist painting of the kind proposed by AKhR in Moscow, which treated proletarian subjects, 
industry, agriculture and scenes from modern Soviet life. His assessments of the activities of 
SARMA and REVMAS, published in two reviews in late 1930, attest to his commitment to 
that position. He described the contents of REVMASs 1930 exhibition as well as recent 
AKhR exhibitions as alien-to-us, petty-bourgeois art, and criticised individual contributors 
to REVMASs exhibition for various failings.341 His primary criticism was that their works 
lacked the correct (or any) ideological content, or that they failed to deliver that content in 
comprehensive and compelling ways.342 He was much more approving of SARMAs efforts, 
commending the organisation for the content of the works its members produced. He was 
pleased to find that in SARMA there were no neutral or apolitical artists chaining 
themselves in our days to still life, landscape and non-representationalism. 343  The 
organisation was achieving the goal it had set out in its declaration earlier that year of 
becoming an organiser of the proletarian psyche and active participant in socialist 
construction. 344  
339    -   . Duduchava was well 
aware of the problems with his own thesis, asking repeatedly in his authors preface that it be evaluated only as 
a first attempt at a socio-aesthetic analysis of Georgian art. Ibid. p. 10.  
340  ,   . Vladimir Sokol, Zhivopis: Melkoburzhuaznye tendentsii 
v gruzinskom iskusstvoznanii: v diskussionnom poriadke, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 1931, pp. 95-102.  
341    . Vladimir Sokol, AKhR i OMAKhR, Na rubezhe 
vostoka, 9-10, 1930, p. 120.  
342 Sokol, AKhR i OMAKhR, p. 120.  
343  ,  ,     -, 
  . Vladimir Sokol, SARMA, Na rubezhe vostoka, 9-10, 1930, pp. 118-
19 (p. 119).  
344   ;    . 
Ibid., p. 119.  
Sokols position was clear. Soviet painting should educate and inspire the Soviet 
people by delivering a clear and compelling vision of the socialist transformation of Soviet 
society using a narrative realist mode of painting. And Soviet critics should assess painting 
based on those criteria, considering paintings historical development in light of Marxist 
theory. As such, he commended Duduchava for attempting to move Georgian art criticism 
towards a more Marxist methodology but nevertheless condemned Duduchavas approach as 
materialism from abovea failed attempt to superimpose a Marxist narrative on to what 
remained essentially formalist criticism.345 Sokol highlighted many of the inconsistencies and 
contradictions in Duduchavas text that I have discussed here. He scorned Duduchavas 
argument connecting socio-economic stillness, or stagnation with stillness as an aesthetic 
feature of Byzantine and medieval Georgian frescoes, complaining that one could continue 
noting similar material forever.346 What Sokols comments amounted to was a rejection of 
the utility of formalist analysis. He praised Duduchavas endeavour to leave behind a purely 
formalist method and to attempt to embrace Marxist theory, but concluded that it was 
impossible to reconcile the two endeavours.347 He described Duduchavas attempt to do so as 
a perversion of Marxism.348  
A Marxist art historian must not blindly use the material of art historian-formalists. A 
sociologist-Marxist compares, analyses, substantiates, clarifies and explains the 
origins not of separate parts, or features, or sides, or elements in painted works of the 
order of line and colour, but looks at a work of art as a whole, as a concrete oneness, 
and as the result of the defined class-conditioned reality of a defined class in a defined 
stage of its historical development. Implacable hostility to formalism should become a 
device of a sociologist-Marxist in Georgian art.349 
 By January 1932, when SARMA held its first and only official public meeting to 
assess recent developments and achievements in Soviet Georgian art, a more generous and 
345 . Sokol, Zhivopis: Melkoburzhuaznye tendentsii, p. 97.  
346        . Ibid., p. 100.  
347 Ibid., p. 99. 
348  . Ibid., p. 101.  
349  -    -. 
- , , ,      
 ,  ,  ,     ,     
,       ,      
  -      
   . Ibid., p. 99.  
forgiving evaluation of Duduchava had begun to emerge. Many took issue with the same 
aspects of Duduchavas criticism that Sokol questioned earlier, including what was viewed as 
his excessively generous treatment of and attention to old generation painters such as 
Gudiashvili and Kakabadze.350 Some artists reproached Duduchava for paying insufficient 
attention to young Georgian painters, and sculptors complained that by addressing only 
painting he had unjustly neglected their discipline.351 Mirzoev, who was outspoken in 
expressing his disapproval of Kakabadzes painting during the 1932 plenum, was critical of 
Duduchavas evaluation of Kakabadze. He disagreed with Duduchavas readiness even to 
contemplate any applicability of Kakabadzes painting to the Soviet context.352 However, 
there was a general sense among Georgian artists of Duduchavas authority and contribution 
to Georgian art, which seems to have countered the seriousness of the errors identified. With 
the exception of his opposition to Duduchavas assessment of Kakabadze, Mirzoev was 
strikingly complimentary and conciliatory in his approach to Duduchava. Rather than 
highlighting the methodological inconsistencies in Duduchavas monograph, Mirzoev 
ignored them, picking out instead only the aspects of Duduchavas criticism with which he 
could agree. He praised Duduchavas account of SARMAs appearance for its accuracy, 
despite the brevity of Duduchavas attention to the organisation. He even refuted the charges 
of formalism levelled at Duduchava, despite Duduchava himself referring to his own 
approach as a synthesis of Marxist and formalist methodologies. He wrote: 
Perhaps for some comrades, as unfortunately became apparent particularly at the last 
plenum of proletarian writers, comrade Duduchava is not an authority. Perhaps 
Duduchava is accused of formalism, but I know that he took active part in the battle 
against formalists, against ideologues of all inclinations in questions of the art of 
painting in our Georgian reality and battled actively against them. We also have a 
battle on our theoretical front and comrade Duduchava, who is one of those 
theoreticians, one of those writers who systematically stands for our work and helps 
350 NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 25, l. 174. 
351 Ibid. 
352 He reminded the meeting that since a central feature of Soviet painting according to a recent Central 
Committee resolution was in figuration (obraznost) the formal achievements of Kakabadzes imperial, 
bourgeois art could have no application in the context of the Cultural Revolution. NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 25, 
l. 65. 
us, has waged that battle. We repeat again that to accuse comrade Duduchava of 
formalism is wrong, since he waged an active struggle against formalism.353 
Duduchava was not a formalist, but a committed Marxist dedicated to supporting the type of 
proletarian painting Mirzoev, SARMA and AKhR promoted. This, Mirzoev insisted, was the 
case, regardless of how Duduchava represented his own position, and irrespective of the 
marriage of formalist and Marxist analysis that Duduchava had, by his own admission, 
promoted. 
Mirzoevs uncharacteristic defence of Duduchava was symptomatic of a general shift 
evident throughout the SARMA plenum away from the denunciation and recrimination of 
bourgeois or un-Marxist practices observed in Sokols criticism of Duduchavas 
monograph, towards a policy of reconciliation, transformation and redemption. It was 
inspired by the central Soviet leaderships wider retreat from the policies of the Cultural 
Revolution from the middle of 1931. By that time it had become clear that the Cultural 
Revolutions attack on bourgeois specialists and the promotion in their place of often under-
qualified Communist intellectuals had created a desperate shortage of even partially qualified 
workers.354 In light of this reality, in July 1931 Stalin gave a speech reversing the previous 
policies and rehabilitating the bourgeois specialists.355 For artists and critics in Georgia, this 
meant that bourgeois artists such as Gudiashvili but also critics such as Duduchava, rather 
than being dismissed or rebuked, were to be assisted in taking an appropriate Marxist 
position. In this way former enemies and deviants could be brought into the service of the 
Soviet apparatus. By the same measure, in defending and redeeming Duduchava, Mirzoev 
could protect himself from criticism concerning his own previous attacks on the bourgeois 
intelligentsia. As a result, even Rempel, who declared in his own monograph that he 
disagreed with much of Duduchavas analysis, nonetheless respectfully expressed surprise 
353  ,   . ., .   ,       
     .   .    
,   ,         ,   
             
.             . ,  
    ,    ,       
  .   ,   .    , ..   
   . Ibid., ll. 67-68. 
354 Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 257.  
355 On the halting of the Cultural Revolution and rehabilitation of the bourgeois specialists, see, for example: 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, 10. The Restoration of Order: new policies in education, 1931-1934 in Education and 
Social Mobility in the Soviet Union 1921-1934 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), pp. 212-34. For 
Stalins speech, see I. V. Stalin, Novaia obstanovkanovye zadachi khoziaistvennikov na stroitelstvakh. Rech 
na soveshchanii khoziaistvennikov, 23 iunia, 1931 in I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia, vol. 12 (Moscow: Gosizdat, 
1951), pp. 55-59. 
that even Duduchava, a comrade far from chauvinism, should be susceptible to the 
theoretical and ideological mistakes that Rempel had identified.356 Rempel, like Mirzoev, 
took pains to present Duduchava as a committed communist aligned with the struggle for 
proletarian art, ignoring evidence to the contrary.357 
When one turns to questions of national form in Soviet art, of national cultural 
expression and artistic heritage, the positions expressed by most Georgian artists and critics 
departed from those expressed by Duduchava in 1930 or Rempel in 1932. Theoreticians such 
as Rempel and Duduchava found it necessary to acknowledge the official stance set out in 
Soviet nationalities policy, which insisted that national cultural forms were still to be 
celebrated and supported, even while they comprehensively reformulated what national 
cultural form would constitute. However, for the most part, Georgian artists and artists 
organisations either avoided the subject or presented stances that were actively at odds with 
Soviet nationalities policy. Although REVMAS was officially affiliated with AKhR, it was 
SARMA that most closely emulated AKhRs positions. Its declaration followed AKhRs 
faithfully. It demanded that art should become the organiser of the minds and will of the 
masses and that artists should integrate themselves into the new Soviet life, visiting 
collective farms and factories and working hand in hand with the Soviet people.358 It paid 
little attention to national difference, referring to Georgian art in broad terms applicable to 
Soviet art in general and focussing discussion on Soviet arts universal class objectives in the 
service of the proletariat. This was surely encouraged by AKhRs own disregard for national 
differentiation in its management of its network of national outposts. Issues of national 
difference were a distraction from more pressing class priorities. 
However, SARMAs declaration also set out the organisations explicit opposition to 
the principle of Soviet arts national specificity. It criticised what it called the national 
isolationism of the Georgian Society of Artists, declaring that SARMA, by contrast, would 
356 Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia, p. 76. 
357 The authority that Duduchava and, to a lesser extent, Sokol thus maintained was something of a double-
edged sword. It meant that responsibility for guiding Georgian artists in their theoretical understanding of the 
tasks of Soviet art was placed on their shoulders and, accordingly, they could easily be blamed for Georgian 
artists theoretical and ideological failings. One artist complained, for example, that during the SARMA plenum 
that Duduchava spoke only later in the meeting and not at the start. Duduchava, he felt, should have set out the 
theoretical groundwork on which the rest of the debate could be based. The same responsibility placed on 
Duduchava, however, led another artist to argue that Duduchava should have been expelled from the SARMAs 
presidium for failing to direct young artists appropriately. Sakartvelos revolutsiur mkhatvarta asotsiatsiis 1 
plenumis stenografiuli angarishi [Transcript of the First Plenum of the Association of Revolutionary Artists of 
Georgia (SARMA)], NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 25 ll. 1-200 (ll. 112, 174 and 179). 
358       . Deklaratsiia revoliutsionnykh khudozhnikov Gruzii 
Na rubezhe vostoka, 1 1930 pp. 117-18 (p 117).  
unite artists of all nationalities working in Georgia.359 For SARMAs leadership, nationality 
was immaterial in Soviet art. Certain statements in the declaration seemed to acknowledge 
some degree of difference in national contexts, but this was not deliberate. For example, it 
stated: 
We know that for the creation of new forms, above all, new creative material and the 
use of old forms are necessary. Critical analysis and the reworking of past culture are 
vital. We will fight against slavish submission to the forms of the old culture, of their 
adoption without criticism, and imitation of them, and copying. A critical attitude 
towards the culture of the past and the use of it does not mean further imitation of 
it.360 
A critical adoption of appropriate aspects of historical artistic forms was a largely 
undisputed principle of Soviet art practice, grounded in Leninist theory. However, reference 
here to a slavish submission to old forms and past culture hinted at specifically national 
forms and national cultural heritage, rather than the old forms of world culture. The idea 
that an artist would be inclined towards slavish submission to a past culture implied a specific 
well of cultural forms towards which an artist might instinctively gravitatenamely, his or 
her own national cultural heritage. The attachment many Georgian artists, including 
Gudiashvili, expressed towards their national cultural heritage, made reference to it here 
clearly implicit. Georgians attachment to notions of that heritage, and of their national 
identity in general, had been strengthened by the long history of challenges to Georgian 
sovereignty, unity and cultural identity. This attachment was then bolstered by the 
politicisation of nationality and the formalisation of distinct national cultural identities under 
Soviet nationalities policy. And it was this attachment that was viewed by Far Left forces as 
the source of objectionable elements in many artists work. Often what was classed as 
formalism in their paintingany stylistic means that diverged from a commentators vision 
of painterly realismwas conflated with national influences and attributed to national 
sources. Whether it was Gudiashvilis debt to Persian miniature painting or to various 
European modernists, both influences had contributed to a tradition of painting that had 
359 Ibid., p. 118. 
360  ,     ,  ,      
  .       .  
       ,     , 
   .          
   . Deklaratsiia revoliutsionnykh khudozhnikov Gruzii, pp. 117-18.  
flourished in independent Menshevik Georgia, of which Gudiashvili was a representative. 
Gudiashvilis painting in that period, and the collection of influences bound together in it, 
were all part of the old culture that SARMA charged Georgian artists to approach with 
caution. By warning in their manifesto of the risks of paying excessive attention to such past 
cultural forms, SARMAs leadership sought to minimise the significance of its artists 
nationhood, their national cultural heritage or the national socio-political conditions in which 
they existed. This helped to justify reduced tolerance for such deviations from their vision of 
a universal Soviet proletarian realism, though, paradoxically, the same comments betrayed 
their authors awareness of the particularity of the Georgian case.  
The only alternative perspective on the question of national form and national 
heritage in Soviet Georgian painting was offered by Sokol, in an article he published in early 
1930 discussing thematic content in contemporary Georgian painting.361 His attention to this 
question did not feature prominently in the article: neither the question of national form nor 
any formulation of national artistic characteristics was discussed explicitly. However, the 
author did acknowledge the particularity of the socio-political conditions in which Georgian 
artists were working and, importantly, considered their implications. In doing so, he offered a 
conceptualisation of national form that differed not only from Duduchava and Rempels 
efforts to negotiate the contradictions of Soviet nationalities policy during the Cultural 
Revolution but also from AKhRs and SARMAs ultimate rejection of the policys principles. 
It also anticipated ideas about national form in Georgian painting that gained currency in later 
years.  
Sokol began his article by stating emphatically, as did his colleagues in SARMA and 
AKhR, that the central narrative of Soviet art must begin and end with the revolutionary 
struggle and achievements of the Soviet proletariat.362 As was clear from his reviews of 
SARMA and REVMASs achievements, he saw little value in works not specifically treating 
socialist subjects. From those reviews it was also clear that he opposed the kind of national 
form in Georgian painting that entailed the incorporation of stylistic features from traditions 
that had historically influenced Georgian painting. He disdainfully described the work of one 
painter contributing to the REVMAS exhibition as some kind of brown sauce with Bengali 
illuminations.363 However, he also specified that artists must take into account existing 
variations in the lives of workers and peasants that they portrayed and from whom the works 
361 V. Sokol, Tematika sovetskoi zhivopisi, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 1930, pp. 109-114. 
362 Ibid., p. 109. 
363  -     . Sokol, AKhR i OMAKhR, p. 20.  
were made.364 This, he explained, was vital if an artist was to ensure that the works produced 
were comprehensible, relevant and therefore of interest to those people.365 The explanation 
Sokol gave regarding the particular conditions to which a worker or peasant might respond 
emphasised the diversity of workers and peasants experiences of life in the Soviet Union: to 
be effective, artists should reflect the particularities of life in the given industry, location or, 
implicitly, of a given nation. Georgian artists must produce a vision of Soviet life to which 
the Georgian masses could relate. Additionally, and importantly, Sokol hinted at the 
relevance of cultural traditions and national popular mythologies in moulding the prism 
through which people of a given nationality viewed and understood painting, and therefore in 
determining how artists should work.  
An artist should take into account all shades in the ideology of the worker-peasant 
masses, all the remnants of the traditional representations about honour, comfort, 
heroism, duty, love etc., so that the theme of his picture is not a blind incursion into 
the ideology of the masses.366 
Soviet art, he believed, should be adjusted to reflect the particularities of Soviet life in 
different regions of the Union. What is striking, however, is Sokols reference to the 
representation of honour, comfort, heroism, duty and love. In referencing these qualities, 
Sokol was drawing on a powerful and pervasive mythology of the Georgian nationa vision 
of Georgia and Georgians held firmly in the minds of Georgians themselves. As others have 
demonstrated, the clear sense of national identity that Georgians held in the early twentieth 
century was built to a significant degree on the nations rich literary tradition. Both medieval 
chronicles of Georgian history, such as The Life of St. Nino, and certain celebrated works 
of fiction, notably Shota Rustavelis epic poem, The Knight in the Panthers Skin 
(Vepkhistkaosani), are great wells from which Georgians have historically drawn ideas about 
their character as a people.367 Importantly, values of honour, heroism, duty, love were 
prominent qualities celebrated in the protagonists of those tales, which were full of 
chivalrous, brave, honourable knights and beautiful but also resolute and loyal queens and 
princesses. They embodied a very specific set of qualities and values that were inseparable in 
364 Sokol, Tematika sovetskoi zhivopisi, p. 114. 
365 Ibid., p. 111. 
366        - ,   
   , , , ,   . .,     
      . Ibid., p. 114.  
367 See Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation. 
the minds of most Georgians from Rustavelis poem (a text so entwined with Georgians self 
image that it has been described as a moral codex of Feudal Georgia) and so with a firmly 
held popular mythology of the nation.368 Sokols insistence that Georgian artists should take 
into account these images suggests that he was beginning to think about a national form of 
Soviet Georgian painting that was based not on geographic, climatic or social conditions, but 
on a particular conceptualisation of the character of the Georgian nation itself. This was a 
new idea, which explains why it was presented as tentatively as Duduchava presented his 
own thesis, with the caveat that this was not the final word in the discussion, and an invitation 
for artists to offer their response.369 However, as we will see in the following chapter, it was 
an approach to the question of national form that, for a number of reasons, gained currency 
over the course of the 1930s and later. 
In following the commentaries of Georgian artists and critics from the end of the 
NEP, when the first serious attempts were made in Georgia to broach theoretical questions 
about the nature of Soviet Georgian art, through the upheavals of the Cultural Revolution, 
several things are apparent. Firstly, it is clear that Georgian critics found it necessary to adjust 
their commentaries in light of the shifting political contexts of the Cultural Revolution. 
Critics dealt with these challenges in a range of sometimes unexpected ways, with varying 
degrees of success. Duduchava, a member and defender of the old intelligentsia, followed in 
the footsteps of colleagues in Moscow in struggling to find a way to defend his allies in the 
face of the increasing dominance of AKhR and SARMA, but failed to find a convincing way 
to reconcile his own values with Marxist theory.  
Secondly, though Soviet nationalities policy and its korenizatsiia programmes were 
continued throughout the Cultural Revolution, at its height this constituted little more than a 
theoretical obstacle that commentators representing the Soviet centre had to navigate. It was 
necessary to find a way to support national cultural autonomy in theory while simultaneously 
demanding that national artists submitted to an increasingly homogenous vision of Soviet art 
in practice. Within Georgian artists organisations such as SARMA and REVMAS, questions 
of national difference were either avoided or condemned as actively harmful to Soviet art, as 
the periods all-consuming class war necessitated that class concerns were prioritised above 
368 N. Berdzenishvili, Sakartvelos istoriis sakitkhebi [Questions of Georgian History], Vol. V, (Tbilisi, 1966) 
cited in Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation, p. 45. 
369 The title of Sokols article was qualified with a footnote reading: By way of discussion. The editorial board 
invite artists to have their say on the merits of the authors position. In Russian:   . 
       . 
all else and that artists of all nationalities were united in that pursuit. The periods combative 
atmosphere of accusations and recriminations prevented serious theoretical discussions about 
the nature of painting in Soviet Georgia with the exception of the efforts of a handful of 
commentators, who fully expected their tentative solutions to be rebuked. Before any 
consensus could be reached, the Party leadership in Moscow signalled that the bourgeois 
intelligentsia were to be rehabilitated, and the field of play shifted. Excessive nationalism was 
still to be opposed, but the old specialists were to be supported and encouraged to adapt 
rather than censured and dismissed, and this meant greater acceptance for formal artistic 
means that were tied to a particular national cultural identity or rooted in national cultural 
traditions.  
Chapter 4: Georgian Artists, Beria and the Exhibition of Painting, Sculpture and 
Graphics of the Georgian SSR in Moscow in 1937  
 Artists across the Soviet Union experienced a dramatic change in their political and 
professional environment at the beginning of the 1930s.  The transition from the First to the 
Second Five-Year Plan at the end of 1932 and beginning of 1933 brought new political 
imperatives affecting Soviet artists. The April 1932 Central Committee decree disbanding all 
artistic and literary organisations changed the way artists could access commissions, 
exhibition opportunities, materials, accommodation and studios at the same time as 
increasing the Partys control over their activity. MoSSKh, the Moscow section of the future 
USSR Union of Artists, was established in 1932 to facilitate the organisation and supervision 
of artists activities. Sister unions were then established in the Soviet regions and republics 
over the course of the 1930s, providing a centralised network for supervising and directing 
Soviet artists activities. The vast majority of Soviet artists joined the new unions since they 
offered the only means of accessing opportunities for work. The advent of socialist realism in 
1934 formalised a new set of boundaries within which all Soviet artists were required to 
work. Speeches and reports explaining the new doctrine were published and disseminated 
throughout the Soviet Union and lectures and debates were organised by local artists unions 
and art education institutions. This ensured that artists and critics throughout the Soviet 
Unions regions and republics understood the new doctrine.  
However, situations varied not only between centre and periphery but from one region 
or republic to another and for many reasons the Georgian case was unique within this 
diversity. And the specificity of the Georgian case was at no time more pronounced than it 
was in the 1930s, thanks to Berias rise to power in Georgia and Transcaucasia. Berias 
ascent to power in the region in the early 1930s dramatically differentiated the experiences of 
Georgian artists from those of their colleagues elsewhere in the Soviet Union. Indeed, as this 
chapter contends, it was by far and away the single most significant factor distinguishing 
Georgian artists experience and their production in the 1930s. The following pages explore 
how Berias activities and interactions with Georgian artists defined their experience and 
production in that period, and consider how and why those interactions and their 
consequences were specific to Georgia, despite Berias responsibility for the entire 
Transcaucasian region.  
The most fundamental point to consider in understanding the impact of Berias 
activities on Georgian artists is the matter of the means through which he gained and 
maintained his power  namely, through the committed and energetic cultivation of Stalins 
favour and of his own indispensability. Unlike Stalin, Beria was not a life-long devotee of the 
Bolshevik cause. He did not give over his teenage years to fighting for the establishment of 
Bolshevik power in the Caucasus region. Indeed, he began his career in the 1910s working in 
state security not for the Bolsheviks but for the Mussavat government, which was opposing 
the Bolsheviks in Baku. He joined the Bolsheviks only following the Red Armys capture of 
Baku on 28 April 1920, when he managed to avoid arrest to become an agent of their secret 
police organisation, the Cheka. Nevertheless, upon joining the Cheka, Beria rose quickly 
through the ranks. By 1926 he headed the Georgian successor to the Cheka, the OGPU, and 
he was in charge of both Georgian and Transcaucasian secret police organisations by spring 
1931.370  
Berias extraordinary assent to these positions was not the result simply of 
exceptional good fortune or talent (though the ruthlessness he demonstrated in his work for 
the secret police certainly recommended him to Stalin). Instead, his acquisition of power was 
aided by a personal relationship with Stalin that went far beyond Stalins appreciation of 
Berias voracity in eliminating sources of possible counterrevolution and suppressing voices 
of nationalist dissent. Beria expended great effort in cultivating this relationship throughout 
the 1920s, recommending himself to Stalin as a devoted advisor and even, at certain times, 
bodyguard.371 His closeness to Stalin allowed him to bypass his competitors and superiors in 
the secret police by enabling him to convince Stalin to distrust them and promote him in their 
place. It was the foundation of Berias success in the secret police.  
In the 1930s, Stalins patronage continued to be vital to Berias success and survival. 
It facilitated his ascent to power, first as Georgian and then also as Transcaucasian Party 
Secretary in the early 1930s, and allowed him to retain that power until his further promotion 
as the head of the NKVD (the Peoples Commissariat for Internal Affairs or Soviet secret 
police) in Moscow in 1938. In this period, one of the primary ways in which he reaffirmed 
his loyalty and worth to Stalin was through his contribution to the development of the 
leaders Cult of Personality. It was in this endeavour that Berias activities most greatly 
370 After joining the Cheka in Baku, Beria became involved in the Bolshevik revolts taking place in Menshevik 
controlled Georgia. By 1922 he was deputy head of the Georgian branch of the Chekas successor, the OGPU. 
He led the brutal suppression of the Georgian nationalist uprising in 1924, after which his ruthlessness in 
dealing with the Georgian situation led to his appointment as head of the secret police division of the 
Transcaucasian branch of the OGPU. Through skilled manoeuvring, he then succeeded in ousting each of his 
superiors in the Georgian OGPU to become its head in 1926, at the age of just 27. In April 1931 he also 
succeeded in persuading Stalin to make him head of the Transcaucasian OGPU, in place of Stanislav Redens. 
He then headed both the Georgian and Transcaucasian organisations simultaneously. 
371 Knight, Beria: Stalins First lieutenant, p. 45. 
affected Georgian artists. Berias contributions to the cult were so grandiose that they co-
opted all sections of Georgias literary and artistic intelligentsia (including actors, musicians, 
dancers and other performers), as well as historians, archivists, veterans of the Civil War and 
members of the public. Under Berias direction, the production of the cult came to occupy the 
overwhelming majority of these communities time and professional activity. It was to be 
their first priority, and compliance in this regard was ensured through close and constant 
supervision.  
Maximising Georgias cultural resources, Beria sponsored a wide variety of major 
contributions to the cult in Georgia. He presided over the establishment of Stalins birthplace 
museum, which opened in Gori in 1935. Then, in the second half of the 1930s, he 
commissioned and supervised Georgian writers in the publication of several volumes of 
poems and reminiscences in Stalins praise. And in the late 1930s and 1940s he oversaw a 
series of biographical films about the leader from Mikhail Romm and Dmitry Vasilevs Lenin 
in October (1937) to Mikheil Chiaurelis The Great Dawn (1938) and later The Vow (1946) 
and The Fall of Berlin (1949).372 Arguably his greatest contribution to the cult, however
and certainly that which had the greatest direct impact of Georgian painterswas his text, 
published in 1935, On the History of Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia. The 
manuscript, which re-wrote the history of the revolutionary period in the Caucasus to 
exaggerate Stalins role in bringing about the Bolshevik victory, immediately became a 
central text of the Stalin cult. It was first presented by Beria in a two-day-long lecture read at 
a meeting of the Transcaucasian Party organisation in July 1935 and was immediately 
serialised in Zaria vostoka and Pravda and published as a slim, stand-alone volume. It was 
372 The Museum of Stalins Birthplace opened in Stalins hometown of Gori in 1935 at Berias behest. It became 
a site of pilgrimage for thousands of workers from all over the Soviet Union in the late 1930s. The same year a 
collection of supposedly spontaneous reminiscences of workers who remembered Stalin from his activities in 
the revolutionary period were published in Zaria vostoka on Berias instruction, before being published as a 
book in several collected editions. They appeared in 1935 and 1936 as Velikii vozhd i ichitel: rasskazy starykh 
rabochikh o rabote t. Stalina v Zakavkazi (Tbilisi: ZKK VKP, 1936), reissued as a luxury edition in Tbilisi in 
1937 and published in Moscow as Rasskazy starykh rabochykh Zakavkazia o velikom vozhde (Moscow: 
Molodaia gvardiia, 1937). Another volume, Georgian Verses and Songs about Stalin, published in Tbilisi in 
1937, was the product of an instruction to the Georgian Writers Union obliging every Georgian writer to 
contribute. See N. Mitsishvili et al., Gruzinskie stikhi i pesni o Staline (Tbilisi: Zaria vostoka, 1937). Beria also 
carefully supported Georgian filmmaker Mikheil Chiaureli in making many of the most important films of the 
Stalin cult in the late 1920s and 1930s. Judith Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult in 
Geoffrey Roberts (ed.), Annual of the Irish Association for Russian and East European Studies (special edition: 
Stalin: His Time and Ours), 1, 2005, pp. 26-48 (pp. 35-36 and 39). It has also been suggested that he 
coordinated the collection of material for the publication of Stalins Collected Works in the late 1930s. Bertram 
Wolfe, Three who made a Revolution: A Biographical History (London: Penguin, 1966), pp. 512, cited in 
Knight, Beria: Stalins First Lieutenant, pp. 55-57 and Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult, 
p. 33. 
printed and distributed in several large editions and translated into dozens of languages for 
consumption inside and outside of the Soviet Union.  
As Beria later admitted, the text was actually ghost written by a team of historians 
under his supervision, despite being presented as his own work at the time of publication. It 
was the first product of a larger initiative for the production of the cult, which began with 
Berias establishment of what was initially known as the Stalin Institute, but which from 
1934 was rebranded as the Tbilisi branch of the Institute of Marx-Engels-Lenin, IMEL. The 
Institute, which was established in February 1932, employed a staff who were tasked with 
researchingor rather inventing or embellishingan official history of the Bolshevik 
movement in Transcaucasia, and of Stalins personal career and achievements there.373 It was 
a major operation, to which significant resources were dedicated. According to one source, 
by autumn 1934 as many as 47 historians and archivists were employed full-time at the 
Institute, of whom many were dedicated specifically to producing Berias On The History.374 
On the History was significant for Georgian artists because it would become the focus 
of their activities in the 1930s. The text, though a sizeable project demanding considerable 
resources in its own right, was just a first stage in a more ambitious endeavour. It was only 
the raw material, the bare narrative for the Partys official version of Stalins role in the 
history of Bolshevik organisations in the region. As other scholars have shown, in Stalinism, 
ideology was not simply theorised and history not simply written. It had to be assimilated by 
its target audience as representing their reality. And this was accomplished using culture. 
Cultural production visualised the reality constructed by the regime and brought it into 
material existence. For this reason, Soviet reality, and history, could not exist without it. 
Socialist realism not only depicted Soviet reality (and Soviet historical reality), but created 
it.375 For Berias text to be absorbed and assimilated as fact by ordinary Soviet people, for its 
narrative to become their historical reality, it needed to be translated into and disseminated 
through the appropriate media.  
In general, the appropriate medium for the production of reality in Stalins Soviet 
Union was in the maximal synthesis of all available media. Socialist realism co-opted all 
373 David Brandenberger, Stalin as Symbol: a case study of the personality cult and its construction in Sarah 
Davies and James Harris, eds, Stalin: A New History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 249-
70 (p. 256-57). Beria was not without competitors in his efforts to produce a biography of the Soviet leader, but 
he succeeded where others failed. See Brandenberger, Stalin as Symbol.  
374 In a bitter letter to Orakhelishvili in September 1934, one of Berias competitors in the production of Stalins 
biography, Ivan Tovstukha, gave the number of people engaged in research at the Tiflis Institute as 47. See 
Miklos Kun, Stalin: An Unknown Portrait (Budapest: Central European University Press, 2003), p. 52. 
375 See Chapter 1: Socialism as Will and Representation in Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism, 
pp. 1-74. 
media in broadcasting the Partys vision of Soviet life (and Soviet history) to the Soviet 
people in order to saturate cultural life and thereby displace the peoples lived experiences 
with that vision.376 The mass media together with painting, sculpture, architecture, cinema, 
theatre and music all presented and reaffirmed the same vision until that vision was 
assimilated as reality. Nevertheless, individual aspects of Party ideology, including initiatives 
contributing to Stalins personality cult, relied more heavily on some media than others.  
In the case of Berias text, many media were involved in translating its content into 
reality. Endless poems, novels and artistic biographies penned by Georgian writers 
throughout the 1930s repeated the narrative of Berias text as well as its rendering of Stalins 
excellent character.377 However, all of the media employed were organised around a single 
central focal pointthe Exhibition of Painting, Sculpture and Graphics of the Georgian SSR 
that opened at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow in November 1937. More precisely, they 
were focused around a single section of that exhibition (occupying four halls out of a total of 
eight). This section was titled On The History of Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia 
after Berias text and comprised as a series of large narrative history paintings relating 
episodes from Berias history. This display provided a centrepiece around which other media 
pivoted. Guided tours, press coverage in newspapers, journals and stand alone publications 
(catalogues, albums, commemorative books), as well as radio programming and public 
lectures were all called on to repeat, embellish and distributeand thereby to make 
materialthe ideology presented in Berias text and visualised in Georgian artists paintings. 
Beria and The Arts in Georgia 
Berias interactions with Georgias painters (like the activities of Georgian painters in 
general) are much less well documented than are his dealings with other sectors of Georgias 
artistic intelligentsia.378 Georgian and Anglophone scholars have preferred to focus attention 
on Soviet writers more often than Soviet painters, while Soviet scholars could never have the 
distance or freedoms necessary to explore Berias interventions in the arts with any 
376 As I discuss in chapter one, there were limits to the totalising purview of socialist realist culture. The Partys 
vision of Soviet reality was not invented by Party leaders without the involvement of intellectuals and those in 
the cultural sphere. The statement above is therefore a characterisation of how socialist realist culture was 
intended to operate in theory, not of its absolute achievement of these goals in practice. 
377 Rayfield, The Literature of Georgia, p. 267. 
378 For an account of Berias dealings with Georgian writers, see Rayfield, The Literature of Georgia and 
Donald Rayfield, The Death of Paolo Iashvili, The Slavonic and East European Review, 68:4 (1990), pp. 631-
seriousness or critical perspective. As such, only one scholar has given more than passing 
attention to the Georgian exhibition in Moscow in 1937. Judith Devlins article on Berias 
contributions to the Stalin cult devotes several pages to the exhibition and its organisation. It 
is extremely valuable in gathering together the basic details of the exhibition, and assesses 
some evidence of the official Party response to the exhibition in Moscow.379 However, 
Devlins analysis of the exhibition is limited by both the length of the piece and the primary 
evidence on which it relies. Devlin characterises the exhibition as an unparalleled success, 
pointing to a range of evidence in support of this conclusion. She highlights the existence of a 
copy of the elaborate three-volume celebratory album of reproductions from the exhibition in 
Stalins personal archive as a confirmation of the leaders approval.380 Praise for the 
exhibition expressed by Moscow artists and by the Tretyakov Gallerys Party Secretary is 
held up as further evidence of success, as is the exhibitions effectiveness, as perceived by 
Devlin, in launching the careers of Georgian artists.381  
However, these conclusions are based primarily on records from the Tretyakov 
Gallerys archives and on material from the Moscow press. They do not take into account 
more complicated realities that Georgian sources reveal. Planning documents and transcripts 
of meetings of the Georgian Artists Union between 1934 and 1938 expose a more detailed 
picture of the negotiations that went on behind the scenes in bringing the exhibition to 
fruition. In doing so they contribute to a more ambivalent impression concerning the success 
of the exhibition and its impact on Georgian artists. They provide the means through which to 
broach questions that have yet to be given the proper attention. For example, why did Beria 
draw only on Georgian artists in the production of the exhibition when he might also have co-
opted artists from the other Caucasian republics? Why did other republics not attempt 
exhibitions comparable to the Georgian one? And what did the Georgian exhibition signify 
when considered in terms of Soviet national politics? What did the production of the 
exhibition and the finished result, including the vast coverage it received in the press and 
other media, express with regard to Georgias place in the Soviet hierarchy of nationalities? 
How did it embody or reflect Georgias relationship with Stalin and Soviet power? What 
were the consequences of Berias interventions in Georgian artists activities when 
379 See Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult, pp. 37-39. 
380 Ibid., p. 38. Jan Plamper notes that in the 1920s and 30s Stalin only visited the 1929 AKhR exhibition and 
possibly the 1933 exhibition dedicated to the fifteenth anniversary of the Red Army. Jan Plamper, Georgian 
Koba or Soviet Father of the Peoples? The Stalin Cult and Ethnicity in Balzs Apor et al, The Leader Cult in 
Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and the Eastern Bloc (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan), pp. 123-40 (p. 129).  
381 Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult, pp. 38-39. 
considered with respect to the principles of national form and socialist content that were 
meant to govern socialist realist cultural production?  
A more detailed look at the exhibition, drawing evidence from the archives of the 
institutions responsible for its realisation, including the Georgian Artists Union and the 
Tretyakov Gallery, makes clear that Berias project had several interrelated but distinct 
objectives. It was responding to a demand not for just any contribution to the Stalin cult, but 
for one responding to priorities that were continually evolving, and to shifting relationships 
between Georgia and Moscow, between Georgia and Stalin and between Stalin and Beria.  
Producing the 1937 exhibition 
Officially, Georgian painters were involved in the project from early in 1934, almost 
eighteen months before Berias On the History was presented to the public. A decree was 
issued by the Central Commission of Narkompros in Georgia on 3 February 1934 setting out 
details of a future exhibition of Georgian painting in Moscow and delineating what needed to 
be done. By that time, however, work had already begun on preparing works for the show 
and designating responsibility for its realisation. A commission had been set up for the 
purpose of organising the exhibition.382 As chairman and deputy chairman of the Georgian 
Artists Union, Duduchava and Mirzoev were put in charge of organising Georgian artists in 
the production of work to be shown.383 They were charged with developing a thematic plan 
for the exhibition, creating a concrete plan for the production of works, and communicating 
the plan to the remaining membership of the Artists Union. Each was required to speak at a 
special meeting of the Union, to explain to artists the themes and objectives of the exhibition 
and the arrangements for producing works and receiving payment. Then, once work was 
underway, they, and a commission under their leadership, were to provide artists with 
consultation on ideological-creative questions.384 The Narkompros decree set out the basic 
expectations for the exhibition. It specified that it would be large: 350 works (250 paintings, 
50 sculptures and 50 graphic works) would be needed. 60 existing works, it noted, had 
already been accepted for the exhibition, and a further 25 would be acceptable following a 
382 NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 43, l. 44.  
383 Ibid., l. 43. 
384 Ibid., l. 43.  
degree of re-working. This left a deficit of 265. With a view to producing the required works 
it named 89 Georgian artists who were to be sent on research fieldtrips around Georgia.385  
Notably, the February 1934 decree did not make Berias history the central focus of 
preparations for the exhibition. Instead, it detailed two tranches of fieldtrips to be planned for 
winter-spring and summer periods for the production of works on broader themes, from 
industry, defense, culture and education to agriculture, tourism and construction. Specific 
fieldtrips for the preparation of works related to Berias history went unmentioned. Perhaps 
this was because Berias text was yet to be finalised, or perhaps it was felt Georgian artists 
should develop their skill in producing other works for the wider exhibition before focusing 
on the more important and complex historical paintings required to illustrate Berias history. 
It might have been that the works relating to Berias text were to be researched as part of 
other trips (many of the locations of key episodes from Berias text took place in what, in 
1934, were important centres of industry, agriculture and trade, and so the destinations for 
fieldtrips on those themes). Or perhaps the greater quantity of works required on the broader 
themes of socialist construction, compared with the smaller number of more complex works 
required for the section of the exhibition illustrating Berias text, dictated the way the 
fieldtrips were organised: in the final exhibition, Berias On the History display constituted 
only 65 of the 300 works making up the exhibition as a whole.  
Whichever the case, the February 1934 Narkompros decree and other planning 
documents did, however, make clear the special import of paintings pertaining to Berias text. 
The decree, for example, mentioned a special bonus fund that would be allocated for works 
on the subject of Stalins role in the revolutionary movement in Transcaucasia, reflecting the 
themes special importance.386 A draft thematic plan for the exhibition listed Stalins role in 
the revolutionary movement in Transcaucasia as the subject of the first of five talks to be 
given at the first plenum of the Artists Union and as the first of four thematic divisions in the 
exhibition (the others being socialist construction, cultural construction, and military defence 
in Georgia).387 
By the summer of 1934, a significant collection of works depicting episodes from 
Berias text had been produced, of which many were shown as part of the exhibition, Soviet 
Visual Art of Georgia for 13 Years, which opened at the Georgian National Picture Gallery in 
Tiflis in May 1934. The exhibition, which was the first of its size to be produced since the 
385 Ibid., ll. 40-1. 
386 Ibid., l. 43. 
387 Ibid., l. 32. 
establishment of the Georgian Artists Union the previous year, was presented as a 
retrospective account of Georgian painting since 1921 (although in reality few if any works 
exhibited predated the Cultural Revolution).388 The majority treated staple themes of the First 
Five-Year Plancollective farms, kulaks, tea plantations and Georgias two new 
hydroelectric power stations, ZAGES and RIONGES. Several, however, were dedicated to 
the Revolutionary and Civil War era, and, in particular, to Stalins activities in Transcaucasia. 
Some even depicted episodes that would appear in Berias text the following year, and many 
were early iterations of canvases ultimately shown in the Moscow exhibition in 1937.389   
At the time of the 1934 exhibitions opening, it is clear that Berias project had yet to 
consume Georgian artists attention in the way that it would between 1935 and 1937. During 
a public debate hosted by the Artists Union in connection with the exhibition, several works 
on what came to be referred to as the Stalin theme (meaning works illustrating Berias 
history of Stalins activities in Transcaucasia) were discussed. However, they were evaluated 
only in terms of their general merit. There was no specific discussion of Berias history, or of 
any systematic project to create a body of paintings illustrating his text. Some time between 
then and the spring of 1935, however, work on Berias project began to crystalise. At some 
stage in 1934 Beria held a first official meeting with Georgian artists and representatives 
from the Stalin Institute to discuss the production of works depicting episodes from his text. 
This meeting appears to have been the stimulus for an acceleration of work on the Stalin 
theme.390 Several artists, speaking following a second meeting in April 1935, described how 
the two gatherings transformed their working practice so that they were focused fully on 
producing works on that theme.391 Around this time, on 4-6 April 1935, the First Plenum of 
the Georgian Artists Union was held in Tiflis.392 Unlike at the debate held in connection 
with the 1934 exhibition, at the plenum Berias project was the central point of discussion. It 
was the first general meeting of the Georgian Artists Union since the Unions establishment, 
388 See NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 35, and Al. P.  Khudozhniki Gruzii za 13 let, Zaria vostoka, 6 May 1934, p. 
389 Mose Toidzes Stalin at Tskhaltubo and The Speech of Comrade Stalin at the Funeral of S. Tsulukidze and 
Apollon Kutateladzes The Shooting of a Bolshevik Demonstration at the Aleksandrovsky Palace were early 
incarnations of works that would appear in the 1937 exhibition. Other works on the Stalin theme in the 1934 
exhibition included V. A. Krotkov, Comrade Stalin: Leader of the Chiaturi Uprising and From the 
Revolutionary History of Comrade Stalin; E. I. Berdzenishvili, The Illegal Work of Comrades Stalin, Enukidze 
and Ketskhoveli, Kh. Giorgadze, The House in Gori Where Stalin was Born and Lived. See Sakartvelos 
sabchota sakhviti khelovnebis tsameti (13) tseli - katalogi: Sovetskoe izoiskusstvo Gruzii za trinadtsat (13) let  
katalog (ex. cat.) (Soiuz sovetskikh khudozhnikov Gruzii, Tiflis, 1934). 
390 Mose Toidze noted the transformation that had taken place in his work following this first meeting with 
Beria. Tov. L. P. Beria u khudozhnikov, Na rubezhe vostoka, 20 April, 1935, p. 1. 
391 It is not clear exactly which artists attended the first meeting. A select group, including Toidze, Mirzoev, 
Krotkov, Kutateladze, and Tavadze attended the second. See Tov. L. P. Beria u khudozhnikov. 
392 For the full transcript of the plenum, see NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 54. 
and since introduction of socialist realism the previous year. Yet far more attention was paid 
to Georgian artists new responsibility for producing work on the Stalin theme than to the 
more general theoretical formulation of socialist realism. Duduchava, as the newly elected 
chairman of the Union, gave the plenums opening address.393 He offered brief discussion of 
the theoretical bases of socialist realism and its meaning for Soviet artists. However, the 
emphasis of his report made it clear that Berias project would now define Georgian artists 
activities.394 Artists were not formally or explicitly obliged to take on the Stalin theme. 
However, the great honour and responsibility attached to the task was impressed upon them, 
as were the material advantages of doing so. The Stalin theme, it was stressed, was given to 
Georgian artists not as a directive, but as an honour and privilege. 395  Nevertheless, 
Duduchava also referred to it as a political and artistic examination, making clear that 
Georgian artists would be judged (both individually and collectively) according to their 
contribution to Berias project. His entreaty to artists to think deeply about how they will 
depict the life and work of our great leader, moreover, sounded like a warning.396 By the 
middle of 1935 it appears to have been clear to all that working on the Stalin theme was 
advisable, if not obligatory. Almost all practisng Georgian artistsnotable exceptions 
including Kakabadze and Gudiashviliproduced works for the exhibition, or for Berias 
section of the exhibition.397 As demonstrated by the chorus of gratitude that poured from 
artists during the meeting and in the press for the honour of being allowed to take on the 
Stalin theme in their work, artists were either genuinely inspired to produce works illustrating 
Berias history or knew that it was advisable to appear to be. 
If fear of the negative consequences of failing to fulfil Berias demands was the stick 
driving Georgian artists to take up the Stalin theme, it was accompanied with a myriad of 
393 Yakob, Nikoladze, who chaired the meeting, spoke before Duduchava, but only briefly. Ibid., ll. 1-46. 
394 Ibid., ll. 7-46. 
395 This sentiment was repeated by both Duduchava and Bukhnikashvili (the rector of the Academy of Arts in 
1932-36 and head of the art history section of the Artists Union). Ibid., ll. 40 and 78. 
396  []  ,         . 
Ibid., l. 46.  
397 Although Kakabadze was not included in the exhibition, he was compelled to begin painting again following 
six years of working in other spheres after his return to Georgia in 1927, producing works on industrial themes 
including of the construction of RIONGES, a new hydroelectric powerstation, in 1933-34. He was also included 
in lists of artists to be sent on fieldtrips to prepare works for the exhibition and was made part a commission 
representing the cultural-propaganda division of the Georgian Communist Partys Central Committee for the 
organisation of the 1937 exhibition. NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 43, ll. 40 and 45. Gudiashvili was even more 
closely involved in the exhibitions organisation. He was on the same commission as Kakabadze but was also 
made responsible for the exhibitions artistic formulation, although he does not appear to have produced works 
on the Stalin theme. Instead, he retained favour though a combination of pronouncements of his admiration for 
Beria and Stalin, cooperation in administrative and official roles (he was among the delegation of art workers 
received at the Kremlin in January 1937). 
carrots. The most obvious of these was the opportunity for paid work. Closing his remarks at 
the 1935 plenum, Duduchava directed those ready to take up work on the Stalin theme to 
report at the Stalin Institute the following day, where they could conclude an agreement 
with the institute and received an advance for their work. Outside of this opportunity, 
commissions and materials were scarce. In such an environment, it is easy to imagine that the 
chance to obtain immediate advance payment, apparently without any competition or 
stipulation regarding experience, would have been an attractive prospect. The amounts paid 
as advances for commissions and fieldtrips, moreover, were far beyond what Georgian artists 
could expect for other work. For example, the 1934 Narkompros decree set out that advances 
would be paid at a rate of 1,500, 1,000, 750 and 500 roubles depending on the status and skill 
of the artist in question. A further 1,000 roubles were allocated per artist for fieldtrips.398 And 
this was just the initial remuneration. At a meeting of the Artists Union in 1938 artists 
discussed individual commissions of as much as 9,000 roubles that had been paid for works 
prepared for the Moscow exhibition.399 The sums paid to Georgian artists for works on the 
Stalin theme remained lower than those paid to artists in Moscow: in 1937, two parallel 
competitions launched in Moscow for portraits of Stalin offered 15,000 and 20,000 roubles 
respectively to the winning painter.400 However, those invited to participate in the Moscow 
competitions were among the Soviet Unions most experienced artists, and were significantly 
more skilled than the majority of Georgian painters at that time (some Georgian realist 
painters, such as Japaridze, acquired comparable skill, but not until the 1950s and 60s). The 
sums available to Georgian artists for works contributed to Berias project were many times 
greater than those that they were used to competing for. For comparison, the majority of the 
works acquired by Narkompros from the 1930 SARMA exhibition were valued at between 
100 and 200 roubles.401 For those tasked with coordinating the exhibitions organisation, the 
exhibition had the potential to be even more lucrative. Mirzoev, for example, was paid 
160,000 roubles for in a single yeara sum so vast relative to Georgian artists usual 
remuneration that he donated a quarter of it to the Georgian Artists Unions ceramics factory 
in an attempt to justify the figure.402  
398 NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 43, l. 42. 
399 These figures were quoted by artists during a meeting of the Georgian Artists Union in 1938. See NAG f. 
10, op. .1, ed. khr. 100, ll. 195 and 136. In 1938 canvases produced for the exhibition and acquired by the 
Georgian National Picture Gallery were valued by the gallery at figures ranging from a few hundred roubles to 
around 5,000 roubles. NAG f. 10, op. .1, ed. khr.144, ll. 1-13. 
400Jan Plamper, The Stalin Cult: A Study in the Alchemy of Power (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012), 
pp. 172-74. 
401 NAG f. 10, op. .1, ed. khr. 13, l. 126. 
402 NAG f. 10, op. .1, ed. khr. 100, l. 100.  
In addition to the monetary rewards available, Berias project was attractive as an 
opportunity to exhibit in Moscow, to gain recognition and access to further opportunities in 
the Soviet capital. Other material benefits were also promised to artists working on Berias 
project. Those artists working on the project, it was promised, were to be prioritised in the 
allocation of apartments, studios and materials.403 Although some evidence suggests that not 
all such promises were fulfilled, many benefitted from the provision of additional workspace. 
In 1935 the Georgian National Gallery was even closed for this purpose. It was temporarily 
transformed into communal studios for artists working on the Stalin theme.404  
Beria made a series of gestures aimed at demonstrating his personal concern and 
appreciation for Georgian artists. For example, he gave over the citys former Persian 
consulate building to be made into a house of artists, where members of Georgias artistic 
intelligentsia would be able to go to meet, work and socialise.405 Artists contributing to 
Berias project were celebrated in the local press. In autumn 1935 a double-page spread in 
Sabchota khelovneba presented the passport-style photographs of artists who had taken up 
commissions on the Stalin theme under a heading reading Artists working on the theme of 
How the Leader Evolved (figure 12).406  There was no accompanying article about 
individual artists or works. It was simply a roll call of the artists that had pledged their 
involvement in the project. Artists were honoured just for committing to take part. Reports on 
their progress, interviews and reproductions of their works followed in subsequent issues.407  
The Georgian exhibition as a Stalinist Gesamtkunstwerk 
The four halls of the exhibition dedicated to Berias text were only one part of a larger 
exhibition. Four further halls presented contemporary and pre-Soviet Georgian paintings, 
sculpture and works on paper. Portraits of Stalin and scenes from his life also hung in these 
rooms, but the display here was distinct and separate from the more cohesive scheme of the 
403 Artists took every opportunity to praise Beria publically for improving their living and working conditions. 
See, for example: L. Gudiashvili, Ovladet Metodom Sotsialisticheskogo Realizma. Na rubezhe vostoka, 1 
May 1935, p. 4. 
404 Vl. A. Keshelava, Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii - k predstoiashchei vystavke gruzinskogo iskusstva, 
Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 11 November 1937, p. 4. 
405 NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 54, l. 202.  
406 Mkhatvrebi romlebits mushaoben temaz: rogor qaligdeboda gelada, Sabchota khelovneba, 5, 1935, [n. p.] 
407 Reproductions of Mose Toidzes Stalin talking with peasants in Tskhaltubo and Irakli Toidzes Comrade 
Stalin at RIONGES appeared in Sabchota khelovneba, 1-2, 1936, n. p.  
Beria section. Portraits were hung alongside literary illustrations and works presenting 
contemporary life, industry and agriculture in Soviet Georgia.408  
The Beria display was the real focus of the exhibition. It occupied almost the entirety 
of the overall attention given to the exhibition in the press.409 Works reproduced in the 
printed volumes accompanying the exhibitionthe  catalogue and an additional album 
appearing in 1938came almost exclusively from its halls.410 At the most basic level, the 
displays primary objective was the same as that of all Stalinist culture: it was designed to 
make material the reality that the Party declared to be real. In its specific case, it was to make 
material the history and the image of Stalin that Berias text presented. The methods and 
media used to accomplish these goals, however, shed light on the breadth and complexity of 
Berias goals in producing it, on its implications for Georgian artists careers and its role as a 
reflection of Georgias place in Stalins Soviet Union.  
 Berias display opened by introducing visitors to the main protagonists of his story. 
The first hall was hung with portraits of revolutionary leaders. Sculptures (full length and 
busts) of Stalin and a bust of Lenin set the two leaders apart from the rest. From there, 
visitors progressed through the next three galleries, hung with paintings presenting episodes 
from Berias history. These were arranged in chronological order and were accompanied by 
further busts of Stalin appearing in each hall. The exhibition then concluded with more 
painted and sculptural portraits, this time of members of the current Politburo, including 
Stalin, Beria, Orjonikidze, Kaganovich, Kirov and Kuibyshev. Visitors were met with 
successive episodes of heroism purportedly having taken place in Stalins dramatic early 
revolutionary career, framed by portraits of Bolshevik leaders then and now. Works 
depicting Stalin as the leader of illegal activism in Transcaucasia of the 1890s and 1900s 
were followed by canvases presenting Stalins attendance with Lenin at the April Conference 
(the first open conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party) in April 1917. One 
showed Stalin in 1931, visiting the construction site of RIONGES (the hydro-electric power 
station built on the Rioni river in North West Georgia between 1928 and 1934) while a final 
408 For further details concerning the contents of that part of the exhibition, as well as the Beria display, see 
Vystavka proizvedenii zhivopisi, grafiki i skulptury gruzinskoi SSR: katalog (ex. cat.) (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 
1937). 
409 E. Melikadze referred to this part of the exhibition as themain part ( ) in his album 
dedicated to the exhibition. See E. S. Melikadze, Iskusstvo gruzinskoi SSR (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1938). It was 
referred to in the same way repeatedly in the press. See Boris Ioganson, Khoroshee nachalo Pravda, 22 
December 1937, p. 3 and L. Agonov, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 23 November 
1937, p. 2. 
410 36 of the 46 works reproduced in Melikadzes 1938 album dedicated to the exhibition were of works from 
the Beria display. Similarly, only three of the works reproduced in the exhibitions catalogue were from other 
halls of the exhibition. In both cases works from the Beria display were list first. 
work showed the leader in 1937, welcoming a delegation of happy Soviet Georgian citizens 
to the Kremlin. 
 The choice of paintingand specifically of a large-scale exhibition of narrative 
history paintingas the medium through which to produce the reality woven in Berias text 
was telling. For most of the 1930s oil painting was the master medium of the Stalin cult, the 
medium through which the key images of Stalin were primarily formulated and gradually 
canonised.411 By the time of the exhibitions realisation in 1937, the preferred means for the 
creation of Stalins image had begun to shift from painting to cinema. Films by Chiaureli and 
others created the images of Stalin that fixed themselves in the minds of Soviet citizens above 
all others. Stalin (and earlier, Lenin) famously pronounced cinema to be the most important 
of the arts. It corresponded more fully than any other medium with the concept of the 
Stalinist gesamtkunstwerk due to its ability to synthesise literature, theatres, music and the 
visual image in a single medium.412 Cinema communicates through all of these means, acting 
on all of our senses, to immerse us in its reality. This made it more convincing, compelling 
and effective for the production of reality than any other medium. Arguably a close second, 
however, were the Stalinist thematic exhibitions of the late 1930s, and Berias Georgian 
exhibition in particular. Others have discussed the Georgian exhibition as alike and 
conforming to the format of other major thematic exhibitions of that era. In fact, however, 
Berias exhibition was among the first of its genre.413 Most comparable exhibitions took 
place after it. As such, I would argue, it is important as a model for, rather than a sister to 
similar exhibitions of the period. This is particularly true in terms of its conception as a total 
work of art. Unlike other exhibitions, the Georgian exhibition was based around a particular 
narrative text. It followed a specific and finite period of Stalins revolutionary career. For this 
reason, the Georgian exhibition, more than any other exhibition of the period, exemplified a 
new genre of thematic biographical-historical exhibition. This had particular advantages for 
the way the exhibition operated, and for its value as a contribution to the Stalin cult. The 
biographical-historical narrative that ran through the exhibition tied the individual works in it 
together more cohesively than in other thematic exhibitions since visitors followed the story 
of a single character at the centre of the exhibitionStalinfrom the beginning to the end of 
411 Ibid. 
412 For discussion of cinemas synthesis of the arts, see Evgeny Dobrenko, Stalinist Cinema and The Production 
of History: Museum of the Revolution (trans. Sarah Young)  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), p. 4. 
413 Devlin, for example, notes that the subject matter of the Georgian paintings was allocated to artists by higher 
Party authorities (in this case by Beria, via IMEL) as was customary in the big exhibitions of the late 1930s in 
Moscow, although Berias exhibition was among the first of such exhibitions, and likely contributed to the 
establishment of that custom. Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult, p. 37. 
the exhibition.  Because each work followed on chronologically from the one preceding it, 
individual canvases were linked by the overarching historical progression that they traced. 
Passing through the exhibition was like turning the pages of a history book. The narrative 
progression that they followed transformed individual works showing discrete episodes into a 
much larger, more impressive, and more effective story. 
In this way the exhibition behaved in a similar way to the new wave of biographical-
historical film that appeared in Soviet cinema in the 1930s, and would come to dominate in 
the post-War years. This genre included films in which, as in Berias display, Stalin was the 
main protagonist, but also films about historical and even quasi-mythic leaders such as 
Aleksandr Nevsky. As Dobrenko has argued, whether they followed Stalins career or those 
of other historical leaders, they were designed to legitimise the leaders they portrayed. In 
doing so, by association, they legitimised Stalins leadership. As such, the biographical film 
is a true machine for the distillation of myth into history and history into myth.414  The 
Stalinist biographical film made fictional leaders into concrete historical figures and 
mythologised historical figures so that they became allegories of a generalised idea of a 
legitimate leader. That legitimacy could be transposed onto Stalin through analogy.  
The section of the Georgian exhibition dedicated to Berias text belonged to the same 
genre. It, like these films, was not strictly biographical, in the sense that it was not concerned 
with personal or spiritual aspects of Stalins experience as a person. Instead, the Stalin in 
Berias textand so, in the exhibitionis the generalised embodiment of qualities and 
relationships that legitimised his leadership. The exhibition then made this mythologised, 
part-fictional Stalin real by not only disseminating and visualizing the messages of Berias 
text, but by saturating the publics consciousness with those messages through continual 
repetition both inside the exhibition itself and in the publicity surrounding it.  
The exhibition was also similar to these filmsand to cinema in generalin its 
synthesis of media, and the resulting way in which visitors experienced it.  For example, a 
series of measures were designed to make visitors experience of the exhibition as immersive 
and interactive as possible. Some of these measures related to the display itselfthe scale, 
arrangement and composition of the works shown. All of the works in the Beria display were 
large, many in excess of six square metres. They filled the field of vision of those standing 
before them. In doing so they were better able to immerse visitors in the reality that they 
presented. Yet it was not only through the works scale that visitors were drawn into the 
414 Dobrenko, Stalinist Cinema and The Production of History, p. 67. 
action in the scenes presented. Of the works that survive for us to examine, either in original 
or in reproduction (and this is the vast majority since large numbers of works from this 
section of the exhibition were widely reproduced at the time), all share striking compositional 
commonalities.415 As in almost all Stalin cult images, Stalin, unsurprisingly, is the focal point 
of every composition, usually occupying a space at the very centre of the composition. 
Almost without exception, he is delivering a speech, either to a large crowd of workers or 
peasants or to a close circle of fellow revolutionaries. All faces are turned towards him, 
listening attentively to their leader and mentor. More notable in terms of the viewers 
experience though, is that in almost every case the viewer finds him or herself at eye-level 
with the figures in the scene, standing shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the crowd. The 
frequent inclusion of figures standing and sitting with their backs to the viewer in the 
foreground of these canvases added to the sense that the viewer was standing among them, 
listening to Stalin in person.  
This compositional conceit is commonplace in Stalin cult images of the 1930s. 
However, it is striking to find it employed in every single one of the surviving canvases from 
Berias display. In K. Gzelsivhilis Stalin in his Young Years (figure 13), an adolescent Stalin 
even makes direct eye contact with the viewer looking in, as if inviting us to join in his 
conversation. In Japaridzes Comrade Stalin, L. Ketskhoveli, and A. Tsulukidze (figure 14), 
each of the three men faces out towards the viewer, as if acknowledging the viewers 
presence. An empty seat pulled out at the nearside of the table around which they are 
gathered invites us to join them.416  Similarly, in Irakli Toidzes Comrade Stalin at RIONGES 
(1931) (figure 15), Stalin is shown talking with peasants in front of the construction site of 
the new power station. One peasant gestures behind himself and appears to be directing 
Stalins attention towards the viewer. The others look out at us with warm, familiar smiles. 
The implication appears to be that we, the viewer, are their friend and colleague. Faced with 
Toidzes canvas, we are not only standing among Stalins immediate audience: we are being 
invited to step forward to greet the benevolent-looking leader and receive his gratitude for 
our contributions to the construction of socialism.  
415 The vast majority of the works presented in the Beria display can be found in either Melikadzes, Iskusstvo 
gruzinskoi SSR or the exhibitions catalogue.  
416 The same devices appear in I. Vepkhvadzes Comrade Stalin Gives a Speech at the Funeral of A. Tsulukidze 
(1905) (figure 17), Vepkhvadzes Comrade Stalin with his Comrades in Arms, Valerian Sidamon-Eristavis 
Comrade Stalin at the Demontration of Baku Oil Workers (1908), Apollon Kutateladzes Conversation of 
Comrade Stalin with Achar Peasants (1902), V. Krotkovs Georgian Delegation at a Reception at the Kremlin 
(1937) and S. Nadereishvilis Comrade Stalin unmasks Mensheviks at a Demonstration in Chiaturi (1905). (If 
not stated, dates unknown, although all c. 1934-37) 
It is obvious from the consistency with which this device was employed that 
individual artists did not elect to use it spontaneously. Instead, they were clearly encouraged 
to do so. Indeed, we know that artists were closely supervised in their work for the exhibition. 
From the earliest stages of production commissions were initially agreed in consultation with 
the team of historians responsible for producing Berias history at IMEL. The degree of detail 
included in the guidance given to artists at this stage is unclear, but it is possible that it 
included instructions on composition. Once preliminary sketches had been completed, they 
were then presented to Beria and the IMEL researchers in private viewings. Artists were 
given feedback on all details of their work.417 The scale of the works in the exhibition was 
undoubtedly also prescribed. In interviews in the press and during meetings of the Artists 
Union several artists commented that they were instructed to make their works bigger, or 
cited the required size of the works as the source of challenges to completing them.418 
Long, minutely scripted guided tours, conducted in large groups as well as in more 
intimate parties of 3-5 visitors, made the experience still more immersive. They were a huge 
component of the exhibition, as vital as the paintings hanging in it.419 They lasted between 
one and a half and two hours and followed a prescribed route around the exhibition, pausing 
over particular works. Guides then introduced the works and explained their narrative and 
significance based on pre-prepared information. The length and number of the tours 
conducted, as well as the number of guides employed and the extensiveness of their training, 
confirm the importance attached to them by the organisers. Planning documents, for example, 
tell us that as many as 60-70 guides were employed for the Georgian exhibition alone, plus a 
further 10 instructors whose specific role is not detailed but who may have been 
responsbible for training the other guides.420 Their training included as many as 12 lectures, 
10 excursions and 190 hours of seminars, and thousands of tours were given. One guide 
417 Several Georgian artists are quoted in the press describing Berias feedback and instructions for the 
improvement of their works, including Apollon Kutateladze, who noted that Berias feedback on one of his 
sketches included detailed analysis of the whole composition of my sketch. See Tov. L. P. Beria u 
khudozhnikov. 
418 Speaking in 1935, Duduchava noted, for example, that Krotkov had already re-painted one of his works on 
the Stalin theme on a larger scale in response to instructions given by Apollon Kutateladze, (who was then a 
member of the presidium of the Artists Unions and one of the first to begin working on the Stalin theme). 
NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 54, l. 107. In 1937, just before the Georgian exhibition opened in Moscow, painter 
and secretary of the Georgian Artists Union Vladimir Keshelava noted that many Georgian artists had never 
painted such large-scale works as those commissioned for Berias exhibition. The task of re-working initial 
sketches, he wrote, occupied Georgian artists for a full year. Vl. A. Keshelava, Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii. 
419 State Tretyakov Gallery, Manuscript Department (hereafter, GTG), f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 641, l. 1. See also Na 
vystavke gruzinskogo iskusstva,Izvestiia, 21 November 1937, p. 4. 
420 GTG, f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 144, l. 66.   
counted 838 excursions conducted in the first five weeks of the exhibition opening.421 Long 
daily opening hours, from 10am until 9pm, allowed them to fit them all in.  
The instructions and scripts given to the guides are preserved in the archives of the 
Tretyakov Gallery. Thanks to their degree of detail and frankness as internal planning 
documents (as opposed to publicity materials), they reveal the political objectives of the 
exhibition more clearly (and more reliably) than any other document of the exhibition. The 
instructions given to guides began by listing the tours dual objectives. The first was to make 
concrete the knowledge of the viewer about the life and revolutionary work of comrade 
Stalin, about the history of the Party [and] the revolutionary struggle of the Bolshevik 
organisations in Transcaucasia in connection with the general revolutionary struggle in 
Russia.422 A primary goal of the tours was to solidify Berias history in the minds of the 
exhibitions visitors. A second objective was then to demonstrate the growth of the culture 
and art of the Georgian nation, on the basis of the brotherhood of the peoples of the Soviet 
Union, facilitated by Leninist-Stalinist politics in the national question.423  
As the content of the scripts demonstrates, the order in which these objectives were 
listed reflected their relative import in the eyes of the exhibitions organisers. The exhibition 
was a demonstration of the achievements of Georgian artists; acknowledging this aspect of it 
had several advantages. It satisfied Georgian artists desire for recognition and encouraged 
them to seek to develop their skill. It appeased Georgians national pride by singling Georgia 
out for a unique honour and by giving Georgian artists opportunities in Moscow that were 
denied to those of other nationalities. At the same time, a grand display of Georgian artists 
progress and success was valuable to the Party leadership as it could be presented as evidence 
of correct nationalities policy. Yet both of these advantages were secondary considerations. 
The primary objective was in communicating the content of Berias text, of embedding 
Berias fictionalised biography of Stalin as fact in the minds of the exhibitions visitors. The 
description of the exhibition offered in the concluding section of each tour as a first attempt 
to give the people of the USSR a biography of the beloved leader in works of art, gave the 
fundamental truth of what the exhibition was.424 It was, first and foremost, biography, made 
materialmade realin art. It was valuable as evidence of the correctness of Leninist-
421 Vystavka iskusstva gruzinskoi SSR, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3. 
422            
        . GTG f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 641, l. 1.  
423             
,  -    . Ibid., l. 1.  
424           . Ibid., 
l. 42.  
Stalinist nationalities policy. However, the greater priority was in presenting Berias account 
of Stalins leading role in the revolutionary struggle in Transcaucasia and, in doing so, 
maintaining and embellishing Stalins legitimacy as leader. 
Several aspects of the content, style and structure of the tours confirm these priorities. 
For example, one is struck by the dearth of analysis of the works of art present in their 
scripts, relative to the quantity of biographical and historical information and ideological 
doctrine offered by the guides. Within the tours, the works presented functioned as points of 
stimulus from which the guide would narrate the historical episode they depicted.  These 
narratives were often lengthy, involving protracted digressions praising Stalin or celebrating 
Soviet achievements. Sometimes they stayed close to the narrative of the picture. However, 
they were frequently only loosely connected to the pictures subject and made little reference 
to the works displayed beyond the identification of their basic subject matter. Paintings were 
little more than visual aids accompanying guides dramatic re-telling of the historical episode 
they depicted, or points of stimulus from which to speak about the success of particular 
policies or to enthuse about Stalins excellent character. On occasions where the scripts did 
refer to specific features of or devices employed in a canvas, they did so almost exclusively 
to serve one of three main objectives: first, to emphasise features that helped stress the drama 
of the episode depicted and spotlight the heroism of Stalins activities; second, to highlight 
features that could be interpreted (however tenuously) as evidence of Stalins personal virtues 
(and of the Soviet peoples adoration of Stalin in light of those virtues); or third, to showcase 
features that provided an opportunity for the speaker to repeat other messages of the Stalin 
cult.  
The fact that the tours were designed to highlight the messages of the cult is not 
surprising: Berias text and the exhibition were major contributions to the Stalin cult. 
However, the extent of the tours contribution to the visitors overall experience of the 
exhibition highlights their important functionequal to that of the paintings themselvesas 
one component of the exhibition as a Stalinist total work of art. The guides drew out the 
messages of the Stalin cult present in the works themselves. But they also implanted into the 
exhibition (and into the works) ideological content that was arguably otherwise absent. The 
guides provided the visitors with a correct interpretation of the exhibition, and of specific 
works, whether that interpretation was genuinely drawn from the works (and intended by the 
artist) or not. For example, presenting V. Krotkovs painting, Comrade Stalin  Organiser 
and Leader of Workers Social Democratic Circles in Tbilisi (1898) (figure 16), guides were 
instructed to explain that: 
Krotkovs picture immediately makes us sense the illegal character of the meeting. In 
contrast to M. Toidzes picture, where the movements of the people are broad [and] 
light is streaming everywhere, the artists very brushstrokes create the impression of 
movement; in Krotkovs picture everything creates an impression of closedness and 
caution. Dark colours; the dark walls of the room, the fire, the figure sitting with his 
back to and concealed from the viewer and the illuminated faces of the group 
gathered around the table, at the same time as the whole room drowns in gloom; the 
composed, calm poses of those seated; the composition constructed around a circle  
all this strengthens the impression of closedness and conspiracy. In the depth of the 
room near a window stands a lookout making sure that no one can sneak up on the 
meeting.425 
 The observations made here were accurate. The guides description drew out the 
drama that was present in the picture. However, this description also contributed its own 
dramatisation, through the theatricality of the language used, as in the repetition of 
closedness alongside words such as caution and conspiracy and the evocative nature of 
phrases such as drowning in darkness. The narrations gothic imagery embellished a 
mystical, nightmarish quality in the work, bringing to life the danger inherent in the 
revolutionaries illegal activities and in doing so implicitly highlighting their heroism in the 
face of that danger. The visual image was made more compelling through its combination 
with the performance of oral story telling. If the exhibition display was like a vast, walk-
through textbook, the tours transformed its pages into scenes of a film, brought to life through 
dramatic narration. Quotes from the main protagonists even provided the dialogue. 
The guides narration not only highlighted that which was explicitly present in the 
work. It generated additional ideological content and told visitors that it was already there. In 
Krotkovs painting, for example, guides were instructed to observe that the simplicity and 
persuasiveness of his [Stalins] speech is well felt in the simplicity and persuasiveness of his 
425         .  
  .        ,   
   ;          
.  ;   , ,      
       ,         ; 
,   ; ,      
   .         , 
 ,         . GTG f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 641, l. 14. 
image.426 The assertion claimed to draw evidence from Stalins pose and dress about the 
content of the speech he was delivering, and instructed viewers that they were also observing 
that evidence. 
 The guides instructions in relation to Krotkovs Georgian Delegation at a Reception 
at the Kremlin (figure 18) went beyond the drawing out ideological content that could be 
inferred from the work presented. Rather, guides deliberately misrepresented the content of 
Krotkovs painting to give it greater ideological currency. Krotkov was not explicit about 
precisely which Georgian delegation and which Kremlin reception it depicted. This allowed 
guides license to offer their own interpretation. They explained to visitors that the delegation 
depicted in Krotkovs work was made up of those who fought in the struggle for Soviet 
power in Transcaucasia. 427  This designation allowed the picture to serve neatly the 
objectives of the exhibition and of the Stalin cult in general. As an image of a Kremlin 
reception, it aligned the work with the exhibitions celebration of the history of Bolshevik 
revolutionary activity in Transcaucasia. It affirmed a line of continuity between the 
contemporary Party leadership and those who actively fought for the establishment of 
Bolshevik power in Transcaucasia, echoing a continuity between Stalin the revolutionary and 
Stalin the leader that the exhibition was intended to cement. At the same time, by showing 
members of the contemporary Politburo applauding the revolutionaries and vice versa, 
Krotkovs work followed the pattern of the legitimisation of the leader through the 
representation of the peoples attachment to him, and his dedication to them. However, for 
several reasons it seems unlikely that Krotkovs painting was indeed intended to represent the 
delegation identified in the tours script. Among the delegation presented in Krotkovs work, 
all appear to be youngno older than 40. This would have made them no older than 20 at the 
time of the October Revolution. This fact in itself does not exclude them from having been 
involved in the Civil War in Transcaucasia. Beria, after all, was only 18 in October 1917 and 
was involved in the Civil War as a state security agent (though not for the Bolsheviks until 
after 1920). However, the apparent age of the delegates does make them too young to have 
been involved in Bolshevik agitation much before 1917, or to have attended many of the 
demonstrations depicted in the Georgian exhibition, the majority of which took place 
between 1895 and 1908. Around half of those depicted, moreover, are women. If one 
compares the delegation in Krotkovs picture to works in the exhibition depicting the 
426            
  . Ibid., l. 15. 
427 ,         . Ibid., l. 41. 
demonstrations of 18951908, those in attendance at the demonstrations are almost 
exclusively men, and appear at least as old in 18951908 as those in the Kremlin delegation 
do in 1937. The men and women in the Kremlin delegation, moreover, are particularly 
smartly presented. The men have stylish, neatly quaffed hairstyles and the women are 
glamorously dressed, some with delicate neckties, blouses and fitted skirts. Although smart 
attire is of course to be expected at such an occasion, the delegation is particularly glamorous. 
The man and woman standing nearest to the viewer, for example, boast such striking good 
looks that they could easily be stars of the cinema or stage. All of this suggests that Krotkov 
more likely intended to represent the delegation of art workersartists, musicians, 
performers and directorswho were welcomed to the Kremlin on 14 January 1937, not a 
delegation of Georgian revolutionaries.428 The art workers delegation was the only Georgian 
delegation to have received significant attention in the press at the time of its taking place. It 
also made sense as a subject for the exhibition given the exhibitions second stated objective 
of demonstrating the flourishing of Georgian national art and the correctness of Soviet 
nationalities policy. The reception marked the end of the Dekada festival of Georgian 
culture in Moscow, whose aim was to do exactly that. And although it is not possible to 
definitively identify individual artists and performers within Krotkovs delegation, the group 
broadly resembles those pictured in a photograph of the art workers delegation that was 
published in Izvestiia to mark the occasion (figure 19). If Krotkov did intend to depict the art 
workers delegation, the tours went beyond highlighting pertinent content in his work. They 
presented to visitors content different to that which the painter intended.  
428 The delegation depicted do not look dissimilar from the Georgian art workers delegation, whose photograph 
taken during their visit to the Kremlin was published with the article Talanty sotsialisticheskoi Gruzii in 
Izvestiia, 14 January 1937, p. 1. 
Chapter 5: The Great Terror and 1937 exhibition as a statement of Georgian 
submission under the Friendship of the Peoples 
 Chapter four highlighted several of Berias objectives in producing the exhibition. 
This chapter considers the reach of the exhibition beyond the gallery. The first looks at 
coverage of the exhibition in the press and across other media, considering how this coverage 
functioned as an extension of the exhibition itself. It explores analysis of the exhibition that 
appeared in print and was expressed during meetings between Georgian artists and their hosts 
in Moscow, and proposes a re-evaluation of the way in which we understand and gauge its 
success. Subsequent sections interpret the exhibition as a grand statement in refiguring 
relations between Georgia and Moscow, and consider it as a reflection of the violence of the 
Great Terror in Georgia. Based on these investigations, they offer a first thorough and 
evidence-based explanation for Berias decision to use only Georgian artists in the production 
of his exhibition, and why the Georgian exhibition was the only Stalin cult exhibition of its 
scale and cohesion to represent artists belonging to a single Soviet nationality. 
Despite a Series of Substantial Insufficiencies: Reception of the exhibition and its 
significance 
Coverage of the exhibition in the periodical press, in related radio programmes, public 
lectures and in several dedicated publications, disseminated the messages embedded in the 
exhibition to a far wider audience than the 20,000 who visited it in person. In the context of 
Stalins Soviet Union (and in particular at the height of the Great Terror), the coverage of the 
exhibition through each of these media, including formal exhibition reviews, did not 
represent a personal, individual, unmediated response to or evaluation of the exhibition on the 
part of a particular writer or speaker. Instead, they were part of an institutionalised 
reception, mediated by the Party and government. Responses to the exhibition such as 
reviews, interviews and other press notices were penned by and attributed to individual actors 
(visitors, artists, critics and the general public), but managed by the Party and government via 
the organs disseminating them. 429 In that respect they are better understood as an extension 
429 For discussion of reception in the Soviet context, see Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Reader: 
Social and Aesthetic Contexts of the Reception of Soviet Literature (Stanford University Press: Stanford, 1997) 
and Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Writer: Social and Aesthetic Origins of Soviet Literary Culture 
(Stanford University Press: Stanford, 2001). 
of the exhibition itself. They represent additional media through which the intended messages 
of the exhibition were communicated.  
Testament to that is the remarkable fact that most of the coverage of the exhibition in 
the press and in dedicated publications repeated the structure and content of the tours, 
prioritising the same key messages and even delivering them using the same set phrases. For 
example, the exhibitions catalogue and a series of reviews in the press uniformly echoed the 
tours in dedicating the majority of their space to summarising Berias history. Like the tours, 
they make only brief reference to the works shown in the exhibition and claim the Georgian 
exhibition as evidence of correct nationalities policy only as an aside, usually appearing after 
more pressing points. Longer pieces related Berias history in greater detail, taking all 
opportunities to inject other messages of the Stalin cult, declaring the unparalleled social 
justice of the Stalin Constitution or celebrating the flourishing of friendship between the 
peoples of the USSR under Stalins leadership. These responses to the exhibition were in 
fact extensions of it. In that sense, they can be used as a gauge of the success of the exhibition 
only in so far as their positive evaluations of the exhibition suggested that the messages that 
the Party had earlier approved to be delivered through the exhibition remained the party line 
by the time it opened.  
Indeed, Berias involvement in the production of the exhibition made criticism of it 
all but impossiblecertainly dangerouswhile Beria retained Stalins favour.430 This meant 
that only one aspect of the exhibition could be legitimately criticised, and that was Georgian 
artists individual and collective successes and failings in fulfilling Berias task and realising 
his vision. It is this part of the coverage of the exhibition, and themes that recur in it, that can 
shed new light on aspects of the exhibition and its objectives that have yet to be understood. 
In particular, they reveal the significance of the exhibition as a reflection of a shift in 
relations between Moscow and Georgia.  
A number of messages concerning Georgian artists successes, failures and duties in 
producing the exhibitionand producing Stalins image more generallyappeared 
consistently throughout coverage of the exhibition. One such message was the repeated 
430 Of course it may be that those publicly commenting on the exhibition genuinely held Beria and his 
contributions to the exhibition in the high regard that their commentaries expressed. As Clark and others have 
shown, even in this period, at the height of the Great Terror, intellectuals found ways to retain a degree of 
independence of expression, however small. However, as we will see, the reviews of the exhibition were so 
uniform in their representation of both the exhibition and Berias role in it that they appear to reflect close 
adherence to the Party line. Moreover, the repression in 1937 of members of the Georgian cultural sphere who 
came into opposition with Beria, including Duduchava, Dimitri Shevardnadze, and the Georgian theatre 
designer Petre Otskheli, attests to the danger associated with such activities. 
declaration of the joy and honour that Georgian artists felt at being given the opportunity to 
take on a theme of such greatness as that of Stalins life and career. Another was the assertion 
that the adoption of that theme had produced a natural elevation of the quality of Georgian 
artists work: Georgian artists were so inspired by Stalins work that their technical mastery 
had been instantly advanced. A kind of divine inspiration was implied, even as Berias 
generous guidance was also acknowledged as a source of the same improvement and that 
improvement was broadly defined as closer alignment with socialist realist principles. These 
claims were quickly followed by the recommendation that all other Soviet artists follow the 
Georgians example. In his review of the exhibition in Izvestiia, for example, critic Evgeny 
Kriger wrote that: 
One must welcome the bold plan of the Georgian artists, attempting in their recent 
works to approach the reflection of the image of the great leader of the revolution. 
With this they have infinitely expanded the bounds of their work and it is necessary to 
say that many of them, in the process of that responsible and complex work, have 
grown internally, become mature masters [and] have enriched their artistic means and 
possibilities.431 
Georgian painter and secretary of the Georgian Artists Union, Vladimir Keshelava, writing 
in Sovetskoe iskusstvo just before the exhibition opened, noted that one could recount 
numerous comments made by artists about their work on the greatest of all themes. They all 
talk about the high creative growth.432  
Moscow painter Boris Iogansson also noted that the theme of Stalins life elevated, 
inspired and excited the painters of Georgia, commenting that: 
The wonderful initiative of the Georgian masters inspires the passionate wish to 
continue their work. It is for the first time in visual art that the great importance of the 
historical theme has been so broadly and fully revealed [] You feel the necessity of 
still more fully portraying the activity of comrade Stalin right up to our time. It is also 
431      ,     
       .     
    ,   ,        
     ,   ,   
   . Evgeny Kriger, Pervye vpechatleniia, Izvestiia, 18 November 
1937, p. 4.  
432 Vl. A. Keshelava, Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii. 
vital in the near time to raise the question about the organisation of a whole series of 
exhibitions dedicated to the history of the Bolshevik Party, dedicated to the life and 
struggle of the great Lenin [and] his outstanding studentsKirov, Ordjonikidze, 
Dzerzhinsky, Sverdlova [and] Frunze. In these exhibitions the heroic history of the 
Party of Bolsheviks will be revealed in living, concrete, moving images.433 
An album published by E. Melikadze, the organiser of the Georgian exhibition at the 
Tretyakov Gallery, celebrating the Georgian exhibition echoed this sentiment: 
Georgian artists have implemented a wonderful initiativein this is their huge merit. 
Soviet artists of all nationalities should seize that initiative and create Bolshevik art, 
reflecting the great battle for socialism. Georgian artists have laid a wonderful 
beginning. Despite a series of substantial insufficiencies, defined for the most part by 
their past enthusiasm for formalist art, their pictures have benefited working people 
and above all Soviet art. In that is the great merit of Georgian artists. Soviet artists of 
all nationalities should seize the initiative of the artists of Georgian and create 
Bolshevik art reflecting our great Stalinist epoch.434  
 The belief that Georgian artists example should be taken up by all Soviet artists was 
repeated throughout the coverage of the exhibition.435 However, as is immediately evident 
from Melikadzes comments, although coverage was full of praise for the exhibition and 
talked of its huge artistic and, especially, political significance, this did not preclude 
criticismsometimes outright disparagementof Georgian artists technical proficiency or 
433          .   
          .  
        ,   
 ,      ,   
, , , , .      
      , ,  . Ioganson, Khoroshee 
nachalo.  
434         .  
          
,     .     
.      ,      
  ,        
   .      .  
          
 ,     . Melikadze, Iskusstvo 
gruzinskoi SSR, p. 15.  
435 Indeed the sentiment was repeated at least three times in a single full-page spread dedicated to the exhibition, 
titled Vystavka iskusstva gruzinskoi SSR, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3. 
mastery of socialist realism. Even Melikadze, who was in charge of the exhibitions 
organisation at the Tretyakov Gallery, was writing about the exhibitions success in spite of 
Georgian artists substantial insufficiencies, not because of their skill. And this sentiment was 
widely echoed elsewhere. Chepelev, who gave a series of public lectures at the gallery and 
published several articles on Georgian art in connection with the exhibition, described the 
Georgian artists represented as various in terms of their talent.436 One Moscow artist, Pavel 
Sokolov-Skalia, moreover, spoke to the exhibitions success despite the varied artistic level 
of individual works, and expressed the hope that Georgian comrades study nature more and 
more closely, as it appears today. They should make their painterly language more accessible 
and appropriate for a mass audience. 437  
Critic and soon-to-be director of the Tretyakov Gallery, Vladimir Kemenov, was 
more critical still. He lamented that Georgian artists had not made better use of advantages 
that he claimed they enjoyed over classical European history painters, for example, thanks to 
the teachings of Marx, Lenin and Stalin and in light of the advent of socialist realism.438 He 
named a series of Georgian artists in whose work he discerned the heritage of formalism, 
conceived of as any departure from a realist treatment of subject, and complained that 
Georgian artists should have made greater efforts to emulate the famous nineteenth-century 
Russian history painter Vasily Surikov.439 He repeated the sentiment expressed by others, that 
Georgian artists had taken an important step in laying the foundations for further work on the 
development of Soviet history painting, and Soviet painting specifically on the history of the 
Party and revolutionary and Party leaders. For that reason, he insisted, criticism of the works 
of Georgian painters does not in any way diminish their merit.440 Following extensive and 
specific criticism of Georgian artists work, he concludedechoing Melikadzes phrase 
almost exactlythat it was in taking those first steps that Georgian artists great [and] 
serious merit was to be found.441 
 The narrative of the grand success of the exhibition presented through all media, then, 
was not dependent on and did not signify a positive assessment of Georgian painters skill, 
436      . V. Chepelev, O peizazhe sotsialisticheskoi Gruzii, Iskusstvo, 1, 
1938, pp. 21-34 (p. 21.) 
437       ;   
            . 
          P. Sokolov-Skalia, Kartiny 
geroicheskoi borby Bolshevistskikh organizatsii Zakavkaze, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3.  
438 Kemenov, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstvo i sovetskaia istoricheskaia zhivopis. 
439  . Ibid.  
440         . Ibid.  
441 ,  . Ibid.  
technical mastery, or alignment with the principles of socialist realism. The exhibitions 
absolute success could stand side by side with Georgian artists significant failings, and with 
their accepted inferiority to the artists of the Soviet centre. The two things were not seen to be 
at odds with one another. Indeed, although Devlin has noted the exhibitions role in 
launching the careers of Georgian artists beyond the borders of their own republic, in fact the 
vast majority of praise given to artists and works in the Georgian exhibition was enjoyed by a 
handful of recipients. Apollon Kutateladzes Political Demonstration of Batumi Workers 
under the Leadership of comrade Stalin (in 1902), for example, and Toidzes Comrade Stalin 
at RIONGES were picked out as highlights in almost all public assessments of the 
exhibition.442 A handful of works, including these two, were discussed and reproduced by 
reviewers and commentators with great frequency while others were barely mentioned. While 
most canvases drew little attention, Toidzes Comrade Stalin at RIONGES was reproduced in 
tens of thousands of postcards and posters. Not only that, it was further popularised as the 
adornment of various consumer paraphernalia, including a line of metal cigarette cases into 
which a version of Toidzes composition was embossed.443  
Despite Devlins suggestion that the exhibition helped to launch artists careers, 
moreover, the Georgian artists who stood to benefit from positive coverage of it were for the 
most part already relatively well established. Toidze and Kutateladze, for example, were 
already living in Moscow when the exhibition opened. Kutateladze had been there on and off 
since 1930, leading the construction of the Caucasian display at the citys Ethnographic 
Museum, the Museum of the Peoples of the USSR, from 1933.444 He had been a member of 
MOSSKh since 1933.445  And Toidze was sufficiently well known in Moscow to be accepted 
to the membership of AKhRR as early as 1927. It was in that year that he painted the first 
version of his famous and much-celebrated canvas, Ilychs Lamp.446 At the same time, 
Georgian-born Armenian painter Dmitry Nalbandian enjoyed enormous success as one of the 
442 See, for example, Evgeny Kriger, Istoriia, voploshchennaia v zhivopisi, Iskusstvo, 1, 1938, pp. 3-18 (p. 18) 
and Duduchava, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva v Moskve, Izvestiia, 17 October 1937, p. 3. 
443 A. Gabuniia, Sovremennoe gruzinskoe narodnoe tvorchestvo, Iskusstvo, 1, 1938, p 39. 
444 The museum (Muzei narodov SSSR) existed between 1931 and 1948. Before that it was known as the Central 
Museum of Ethnology (Tsentralnyi muzei narodovedeniia), 1923-31. In 1948 the museum was absorbed into the 
State Ethnographic Museum (Gosudarstvennyi Etnograficheskii Muzei), which was renamed The State 
Ethnographic Museum of the Peoples of the USSR. The State Ethnographic Museum had been founded in 1923 
based on the collection of the Ethnographic Department of the Russian Museum. On Kutateladzes movements, 
see N. Gudiashvili, Apollon Kutateladze (Tbilisi: Zaria vostoka, 1957), p. 15. It is noted that Kutateladze was 
working at the Museum of the Peoples of the East in 1933 in Igor Urushadze, Ucha Dzhaparidze (Tbilisi: Zaria 
vostoka, 1958), p.  27. 
445 Gudiashvili, Apollon Kutateladze, p. 22. 
446 Both artists also had works in major collections in Moscow long before 1937. For example, GMVK acquired 
three of Toidzes works on historical-revolutionary themes in 1934. See Voitov, Materialy po istorii 
Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950, p. 231.  
Stalins first court portraitists, despite having only one work in the Georgian exhibition and 
receiving little attention in connection with it.  
Controlling Georgia: The 1937 Exhibition and the Demise of Duduchava 
The absence of correlation between the success of the exhibition and the success of 
individual contributing artists was in part a reflection of the exhibitions priorities. The 
dissemination of the content of Berias text and the other messages of the Stalin cult was a 
more pressing objective than the demonstration of Georgian artists development, even as 
evidence of the success of Leninist-Stalinist Nationalities Policy. However, it also reflected a 
further objective of the exhibition with regard to Georgia and Georgian artists: it embodied 
the exhibitions contribution to the reconfiguration of Soviet nationalities policy in the late 
1930s, and in particular the reconfiguration of Georgias relationship with the Soviet centre. 
Berias project, and the practical process of producing the exhibition, brought an 
unprecedented degree of central Party control over cultural activity in Georgia, via both 
Berias personal interventions and the consultation organised through IMEL. Georgian artists 
were not only provided with a limited choice of subject matter from which to choose in the 
production of their works. Those subjects they could select contributed to a cohesive scheme 
of works. This meant the Party organisation, through Beria, had control over not only the 
content of individual works, but also over an image of Georgian art, and Georgia, 
collectively. The transformation of the Georgian National Picture Gallery into a collective 
studio for artists working on the project, moreover, ensured unmatched efficiency and 
convenience in facilitating constant supervision. 
However, as the tragic fate of Duduchava, the much besieged chairman of the Artists 
Union, demonstrates, it was not only through this supervision that Beria tightened controls 
over Georgian artists activities. Others have shown how, from the early 1930s, Beria gave 
power and positions of authority to Georgian writers of whom he did not approve. He did so 
in order to allow those writers to incriminate themselves, either by producing work that could 
later be deemed to be anti-Bolshevik, or by accepting jobs that led them to associate with 
those that Beria would later condemn as enemies of the people. This allowed Beria to 
accumulate evidence that was later used to justify their repression in the Great Terror.447 
Sadly, this was also Duduchavas fate.  
Duduchavas writing on Georgian art, including that presented in his monograph, 
Gruzinskaia zhivopis, attracted much criticism in the Cultural Revolution period for its 
defence of painters such as Gudiashvili and Kakabadze, whose work continued to defy the 
demands of increasingly powerful artists organisations to adopt a more conservative, realist 
approach. After 1934, Duduchava published a series of articles explaining and endorsing 
socialist realism as the new method for the arts in the Soviet Union.448 However, in those 
endorsements he also maintained positions that left him out of step with (or that did not 
anticipate) shifts in policy that would take place over the course of the 1930s. These included 
changes in the implementation of nationalities policy as well as the intensification of hostility 
towards evidence of communion with European modernism in Soviet art. Although his 
pronouncements about the role of national cultural heritage in the progress of Soviet 
Georgian painting, for example, did not contradict Soviet nationalities policy in word, in 
practice they made Duduchava vulnerable to accusations of excessive and dangerous 
nationalism. Moreover, they left him exposed to accusations of bourgeois nationalism since, 
as we saw in chapter three, in the Cultural Revolution period national form in Georgian art 
came to be frequently synonymous with European modernist deviations. In addition to this, 
throughout the 1930s Duduchava continued to defend the Georgian artists who were most 
closely associated with European modernism in Georgia, and continued to give these artists 
attention at the expense of younger Georgian artists. In a review of the 1934 exhibition, for 
example, though he acknowledged complaints of the remnants of formalism in 
Gudiashvilis work, he reserved particular praise for artists associated with more 
experimental approaches to painting, such as Irina Shtenberg or Akhvlediani, while many 
younger and leftist painters were named only in passing, as having been represented in the 
exhibition.449 
Positions of authority and responsibility given to Duduchava in the mid-1930s not 
only made it possible for him to continue to express his views on Georgian painting, but 
obliged him to do so. Despite the controversial views he expressed in his writing, he was 
made chairman of the Georgian Artists Union in 1935, and reinstated as editor of the unions 
447 See Rayfield, 29: Berias Holocaust in The Literature of Georgia, pp. 261-270, and Rayfield, The Death of 
Paolo Iashvili. 
448 See, for example, A. Duduchava, Sotsialisturi realizmi da klasikuri memkvidreobis problema [Socialist 
realism and the problem of classical heritage], Sabchota khelovneba, 2, 1935, pp. 13-32.  
449 A. Duduchava, Novye temynovye kraski: vystavka Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii za 13 let, Sovetskoe 
iskusstvo, 17 September 1934, p. 1. 
journal, Sabchota khelovneba, the same year. In addition, he was made deputy head of the 
Georgian Administration for Art Affairs, the government body responsible for all of the arts 
in the republic.450 These positions necessitated that Duduchava express himself publicly on 
the subject of Georgian art, both in print and during lectures and public meetingsall of 
which were routinely transcribed and recorded for later reference. Several other posts, 
moreover, compelled him to address specific issues. As well as his chairmanship of the 
Artists Union, for example, he was put in charge of a section of the union dedicated 
specifically to classical heritage.451 This position was surely the reason for the comments 
and even dedicated articles on the subject that appeared under Duduchavas name in the mid-
late 1930s.452  
These roles and their obligations made it almost impossible for Duduchava to avoid 
incriminating himself. Yet his further selection to head the commission for the organisation 
of the 1937 exhibition raised the stakes to a far higher level. Despite the proclamations of the 
exhibitions great success across all major organs of the press Duduchava was arrested within 
a few days of its opening and shot on trumped up charges soon afterwards.453 On 28 
November, less than two weeks after the opening, a special plenum of the Georgian Artists 
Union was held at which artists took turns to condemn Duduchavas leadership of the Union 
as well as the theoretical positions he had expressed. Moris Talakvadze, Duduchavas former 
boss at the Georgian Administration of Art Affairs, declared that Duduchava had approached 
the study of classical heritage in a hostile way and condemned his irresponsible leadership 
of the Artists Union, and anti-Leninist and anti-Stalinist views.454 A further fifteen artists 
and administrators then spoke to distance themselves from Duduchava and denounce him on 
any grounds that they could think of. A series of artists spoke of Duduchavas lack of 
compassion and unwillingness to hear or attend to their concerns, cooking up stories about 
how Duduchava would hide away in his office and refuse to receive them.455 Others declared 
that he held secret meetings to which they were not admitted, allocated funds and 
opportunities in contravention of Sovnarkom resolutions and refused support to young and 
450 This role is alluded to in A. Duduchava, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva v Moskve. p. 3. 
451 V soiuze sovetskikh khudozhnikov Gruzii, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1 June 1935, p. 10. 
452 See Duduchava, Kartiny khudozhnikov Sovetskoi Gruzii and Sotsialisturi realizmi da klasikuri 
memkvidreobis problema. 
453 Duduchava is on a list of people in the Georgian SSR being tried in the court of the military collegiate of the 
Supreme Court of the Soviet Union, dated 22 November 1937. Archive of the President of the Russian 
Federation, 24.413.19. http://stalin.memo.ru/names/index.htm, accessed 16/7/2013. 
454       . NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 100, l. 
455 Ibid., ll. 41-42 and 65.  
struggling artists whose confidence he destroyed with excessively severe criticism.456 One 
accused him of reneging on promises to provide artists with opportunities for respite, 
including visits to sanatoria, and failing to offer financial transparency with regard to the 
running of the union.457 There is no evidence in any of the earlier transcripts, to suggest that 
any of these accusations were just. Indeed, there is also no definitive proof that they were not. 
However, up until his arrest, Duduchava had been treated with great respect by most 
members of the Artists Union. As such, these sudden recriminations represent a dramatic 
volte-face on the part of Duduchavas former colleagues that appears to indicate either their 
absolute faith in the justness of the Partys repression of Duduchava and eagerness to share 
their own evidence of Duduchavas guilt, or their fear of the consequences of failing to do 
so.458  
The repression of Duduchava served several functions for Beria. It eliminated a voice 
that was often at odds with (and so could challenge or compromise) the position of the Party 
and it worked as a warning to the Georgian artists that remained, limiting any risk of dissent. 
Perhaps more importantly, it also allowed Duduchava to become the perfect scapegoat, to 
whom both the failings and hardships of Georgian artists could be attributed. This made it 
easier to acknowledge failings in the exhibition and its planning and organisation and allowed 
artists to voice complaints about their own experiences while maintaining absolute reverence 
for Beria and his involvement in the exhibition, regardless of whether the approval for Beria 
expressed was genuine or appeared under duress. All failings were Duduchavas and all 
successes were Berias. A whole series of artists offered comments and stories to this end. 
Mose Toidze, for example, speaking at the 1937 plenum, claimed that he had appealed to 
Duduchava about the need for better studios for artists working on the exhibition, but that 
Duduchava had chosen not to communicate this need to Beria. This, he was sure, was in spite 
of the fact that Beria would undoubtedly have met the artists needs without hesitation, had 
he been properly informed.459 Musing over why Duduchava had failed to inform Beria of this 
need, Toidze concluded that perhaps he deliberately didnt do it, or in this his character was 
to blame.460 Duduchava was either indifferent to Georgian artists efforts or had been 
456 Ibid., ll. 42, 47 and 65. 
457 Ibid., l. 8. 
458 As Clark and others have shown, not all Soviet intellectuals who contributed to Stalinist culture in the 1930s 
should be understood as simply capitulating to pressure placed on them by the Party leadership. However, the 
stark reversal of the positions expressed by Georgian artists and critics concerning Duduchava between the 
SARMA plenum of 1932 and the Artists Union meetings of 1937 and 1938 seems to indicate that in this case, 
capitulation to Party pressure played a role. 
459 Ibid., l. 18. 
460     . (sic.)       . Ibid., l. 18.  
actively sabotaging them. Despite Berias generous encouragement, Toidze declared, 
Georgian artists progress had inevitably been hindered by the fact that our former chairman 
was not only an enemy, but also ungifted, and [was] the most spineless person, who did not 
take a single question to its conclusion.461   
Others took a similar tack. Mirzoev, for example, blamed Duduchava for challenges 
Georgian artists had faced in preparing the exhibition. He related how a generous and 
benevolent Beria had acknowledged that history painting required long periods to produce 
and demanded that Georgian artists be allowed plenty of time to create such works. 
According to Mirzoev, Beria had declared that a month or two could not be sufficient to 
produce an adequate history painting, suggesting instead that artists first took month-long 
fieldtrips to prepare preliminary materials from nature and citing Russian history painters 
who frequently spent three years on a single canvas.462 Flouting Berias directions, however, 
the leadership of the Artists Union had given artists only three months to complete their 
commissions, and threatened them with having to return advances paid to them if they failed 
to finish on time. 463  Duduchava had needlessly and deliberately placed unreasonable 
demands on Georgian artists that had limited the quality of the works they could produce, and 
he had done so in contravention of Berias will.464   
This version of events avoided blame being directed at Beria, while also discrediting 
Duduchava. At the same time, it allowed artists whose works had been criticised to be 
redeemed. Where there were objectionable elements in certain artists canvases, they could 
be blamed at least in part on Duduchavas improper ideological and artistic leadership, as 
well as on his poor (and even deliberately disruptive) management of preparations for the 
exhibition. Following the elimination of Duduchava, freed from his influence, artists would 
naturally correct earlier errors. By joining in the denouncement of Duduchava they could 
distance themselves from those errors and demonstrate that they were already on the path to 
redemption. 
461       ,       
,        . Ibid., l. 17.  
462 Ibid., l. 96. 
463 Ibid., l. 96. 
464 Duduchavas misdeeds continued to be contrasted against Berias benevolence throughout the meeting. 
Another artist, for example, complained that Duduchava had come to him in the middle of the night and 
demanded that he increase the size of his canvas from 1.2 to 2.2 metres and that the work be completed within 
ten days, only for the size stipulation to be lowered later. The artist in question, by the name of Kirakazov, 
claimed that Duduchava had been deliberately trying to exclude him from the exhibition and had refused to 
allow him to appeal directly to Beria on the matter. Ibid., l. 109.  
Other aspects of the exhibition, and the events and press coverage surrounding it, also 
embodied, and contributed to, a reconfiguration of relations between Georgia and the Soviet 
centre, and between Georgian, Russian and Soviet culture. For example, stars of the 
exhibition such as Apollon Kutateladze and Toidze were showered with praise. Yet even they 
did not escape criticism. Moreover, the praise they enjoyed was restricted by certain caveats 
and qualifications, including implicit assumptions about Georgian artists inferiority to their 
more experienced and skilled Russian counterparts. Georgian artists were junior partners in 
that relationship, on whom Moscow artists could impart their greater wisdom. This was 
broadly in line with the shift in Soviet nationalities policy in the latter half of the 1930s 
towards the notion of a brotherhood, and later friendship of the peoples of the USSR, in 
which the Russian people was a senior partner. The scale of the Georgian exhibition and the 
press attention and events surrounding it, however, was a louder, more determined and more 
explicit expression of that reconfiguration than that experienced by other national groups.  
A reception and creative discussion hosted by Moscow artists at the Tretyakov 
Gallery and attended by Georgian artists on 2 April 1938, for example, expressed the 
formalisation of those new relationships.465 The meeting was attended by senior members of 
MOSSKh as well as key figures from the Tretyakov Gallery, including Melikadze, Kemenov, 
Iogansson and Sergei and Aleksandr Gerasimov. Representing Georgian artists were 
Kutateladze and Toidze.466  The meeting had a generally congenial, even celebratory tone, 
with a continual flow of pleasantries between Russian and Georgian parties. However, while 
Melikadze and Kemenov, who spoke first, were positive about the exhibition itself, they were 
critical, even condescending, in their evaluation of Georgian artists, including Kutateladze 
and Toidze. Melikadze began by pondering the reasons for the exhibitions popularity, 
particularly since, he observed, not all the works exhibited were genial (genialnye).467  In 
light of that observation he concluded that the exhibitions popularity stemmed from the fact 
465 The meeting was organised to mark the closing of the exhibition in Moscow before it moved to the Russian 
Museum in Leningrad, where it opened on 30 May 1938. For the full transcript of the meeting, see RGALI, f. 
2943, op. 1., ed. khr. 172. The transcript is undated. However, several articles in the press confirm that date and 
surrounding events. See Gruzinskie khudozhniki v Moskve, Izvestiia, 1 April 1938, p. 4; Gruzinskie 
khudozhniki v Moskve, Pravda, 1 April 1938, p. 4  and Vystavka khudozhnikov Gruzii, Pravda, 31 May 
1938, p. 6. 
466 The records of the meeting do not specify whether it was Mose or Irakli Toidze that attended the meeting, 
nor did the discussion definitively indicate that it was one or the other. However, since Irakli Toidze and 
Kutateladze were widely heralded as the two stars of the exhibition and both were living in Moscow, it can be 
assumed that it was Irakli that attended.  
467 RGALI, f. 2943, op. 1., ed. khr. 172, l. 5. 
that our people thirst to see their leader, [and] their revolutionary past, in visual art.468 The 
exhibition was popular, then, not because of the special talents of Georgian artists but in spite 
of their deficiencies.  
Similarly critical evaluations flowed from Melikadze, who observed matter-of-factly 
that there are insufficiencies in the exhibition. Our press has already pointed them out and 
[they are] known to all comrades. 469  Georgian artists themselves, he noted, had 
acknowledged repeatedly that work on the exhibition had helped them to curb certain 
formalist mistakes.470 Yet, in spite of this apparent progress, Melikadze chose to use his 
speech to highlight the Georgian artists whose works were rejected from the exhibition for 
embodying those same mistakes.471 As a whole, he concluded, Georgian artists had overcome 
many shortcomings, but nevertheless, there are still mistakes, there are still defects.472 He 
goes on to lament that some pictures are weak in the drawing and complain that one could 
give many examples where an artist has not finished [his or her painting, and] has not created 
an individual, typical, collectivised image.473 
Following Melikadze, Kemenov praised Toidze and Kutateladzes works as worthy of 
being considered among the best works of Soviet art. However, his assurances that he offered 
this praise not [just] because they are present here introduced the idea that this was exactly 
the reason for his comment.474 Moreover, his observation that there are also other comrades 
whose works could be considered not bad damned with the faintest of praise.475 Kemenov 
then concluded his shorter address by condemning the older generation of [Georgian] artists 
who were seconded overseasmeaning, implicitly, artists such as Gudiashvili, Kakabadze 
and Akhvledianias irredeemable in the contemporary context.476 Those names are not here 
[in the exhibition], and could not be here.477 He made this claim despite the fact that 
Akhvlediani and Gudiashvili, both of whom belonged to that group of artists, had several 
468         ,   
. Ibid., l. 5.  
469    .       . Ibid., l. 7.  
470  . Ibid., l. 7.  
471 Ibid., l. 8.  
472   ,   ,  . Ibid., l. 9.  
473      and         
,   , ,  . Ibid., l. 10.  
474  ,   . Ibid., l. 11.  
475    ,       . Ibid., l. 11.  
476    ,     . Ibid., l. 11.  
477         . Ibid., l. 11.  
works in the exhibition.478 Kemenovs comments, in their vagueness, were a warning for all 
those belonging to or connected with the older generation of Georgian artists, which 
euphemistically encompassed all whose painting strayed from the narrowest definition of 
realism. In a final address, Igor Grabar cemented the critical and condescending tone of the 
meeting by offering advice to Kutateladze on improving his work. After acknowledging that 
the artist had produced interesting things, Grabar criticised a degree of artificiality, 
decorativeness and lack of consciousness that he claimed weakened Kutateladzes 
painting.479   
In their responses, Kutateladze and Toidze then confirmed the dynamic of superiority 
that the previous speakers comments embodied, talking with self-effacing reverence for 
Russian artists and the Russian artistic tradition. Beginning his address, for example, 
Kutateladze delicately explained that he knew not to take all of his Russian colleagues praise 
at face value, since he understood that comradely politeness bound them to be kind.480 This 
proposition, moreover, was not refuted by his Russian colleagues but met with laughter that 
gently acknowledged that what Kutateladze said was true. Following that introduction, 
Kutateladze went on to declare the deficiencies of the Georgian artistic tradition, relative to 
the Russian one. He lamented that Georgia had no tradition of realist painting comparable to 
Russias.481 For that reason, he explained, close relations with Russian artists (and implicitly, 
Russian artists mentorship), was vitally important for Georgian artists success. Thanks to 
his interactions with Moscows artists, Kutateladze enthused, he was now able to view his 
own work from the point of view of Gerasimov, Iogansson and others.482 He concluded by 
thanking his Russian colleagues, and the Tretyakov Gallery, for their support. 
The repetition in the press and elsewhere of the same condescension on the part of 
Russian artists and critics and the same self-effacing reverence from Georgian artists makes it 
clear that these were standardised expressions of a new Russo-Georgian relationship, 
articulated from the time of the exhibitions opening. As a glut of articles talked about the 
exhibitions success in spite of Georgian artists failings, Georgian artists were wheeled out 
478 Indeed, the only prominent member of that group missing was Kakabadze, although, as discussed earlier in 
this thesis, this was not due to the Partys or Berias unwillingness to include Kakabadze in the exhibition. See 
NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 43, ll. 40 and 45.  
479   and   Ibid., l. 33.  
480 Ibid., l. 49. 
481 Ibid., l. 51.  
482    ,   . Ibid., l. 52.  
to confirm their own inferiority and submission.483 Further comments offered by Kutateladze 
and published in Pravda summed up the position in which Georgian artists found themselves: 
Talent and political conviction, devotion to the Bolshevik Party, that is what an artist 
needs in order that his painting is just. That I have understood. It often came to me to 
turn to com. Beria for the clarification of political questions, and he never once 
refused to help.484 
 Kutateladze had understood that submission to the Partys ideological agenda was the only 
real factor determining the approval that they could expect.  
 To add insult to injury, Georgian artists did not receive many of the honours and 
benefits that they were promised during preparations for the exhibition. At the meeting of the 
Artists Union in November 1937 and at another in March 1938, artists complained that they 
were never given the studios and accommodation they had been promised and that they were 
yet to receive payment for commissions.485 They also grumbled that since work on the 
exhibition had finished, funding for their work was again scarce.486 Several artists even 
protested that they still did not know whether or not the works that they had sent to Moscow 
had been included in the exhibition.487  However, by the time of the November meeting 
absolute reverence for the Party leadership in Moscow had been established. The meeting 
even opened with one artists suggestion to elect an honorary presidium of the Georgian 
Artists Union comprising Stalin, Beria, Voroshilov and other members of the Politburo.488 
The suggestion was met with a standing ovation and the entire congregations wild 
applause.489  Georgian artists, then, did not see themselves as beneficiaries of the exhibition, 
but felt compelled, whether through genuine admiration or fear of reprisal, to express their 
absolute support for the leadership in Moscow.  
483 Comments about artists shortcomings fill the pages of many of the reviews, despite a generally positive 
evaluation of the exhibition itself. See, for example, Kriger, Istoriia.  
484    ,      
,    .   .      . 
    ,       . A. Kutateladze, 
Bolshaia tema, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3.  
485 Artists made similar complaints throughout the meeting. Toidze, for example, complained that work 
opportunities and funds for commissions had not been shared with artists, and that Duduchava had prevented 
him from collecting an honour that had been awarded to him. See NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 133, l. 92. 
486 For example, Mirzoev attempts to defend the treasurys work, but complains that they were not able to set up 
new studios because Duduchava had misspent the Unions money. Ibid, ll. 195-6. 
487 NAG f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 100, ll. 53 and 80. 
488 Ibid., l. 2. 
489  . Ibid., l. 2.  
The responsibility for depicting Stalin belongs completely to Georgian artists490 
These revelations help to explain why Beria elected to use only Georgian artists in the 
production of his exhibition, and why the Georgian exhibition was the only Stalin cult 
exhibition of its scale, planning, thematic cohesion and political significance to present works 
by artists belonging to a single Soviet nationality.491 It is fair to conclude, as Sarah Davies 
does, that it is not surprising, given Stalins Georgian birth, that in the 1930s and 40s the 
Georgians were particularly active suppliers of cult material concerning Stalins childhood 
and youth, particularly since the cult was a potentially useful way of boosting the republics 
status and that of Beria.492 It seems sensible and natural that Georgian artists might be the 
primary producers of painted images of Stalin in his youth, simply because much of that 
period of Stalins life was spent in Georgia. Georgian artists might well be expected to have 
felt a particular right to portray Stalin because of their national kinship, and were well placed 
to do so because of their access to locations that witnessed momentous moments in the 
leaders life and career. They might well have relished Stalins Georgian birth as a reason for 
them to expect and seek greater opportunities and recognition in Moscow. 
 Nevertheless, this does not explain why Beria did not draw on the resources of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan in the production of his exhibition, which after all was about Stalins 
activities not only in Georgia but in Transcaucasia, or why other republics did not attempt 
similar feats in the late 1930s and 1940s. It does not attempt to consider these questions in the 
context of Soviet national politics, including the changing relations between Georgia and the 
Soviet centre in the 1930s, or to examine them with reference to the representation of Stalins 
nationality in the context of the personality cult.  
There are several possible simple explanations for the choice, including matters of 
practicality and logistics. One might conjecture that the Georgians were selected with a view 
491 The closest equivalent to the Georgian exhibition in terms of exhibitions of national art was a smaller 
exhibition of works by Azerbaijani artists that opened in Baku in November 1937. In preparation for the 
exhibition, Pravda reported that forty-four Azerbaijani artists were working on the theme of The Work of 
Comrade Stalin and His Allies in Azerbaijan, although a later notice of the exhibitions opening didnt mention 
the theme as a feature of the exhibition. The exhibition did not travel to Moscow, and received only a fraction of 
the publicity given to the Georgian exhibition. Vystavka kartin v Baku, Pravda, 2 October 1937, p. 3; 
Vystavka kartin khudozhnikov Azerbaidzhana, Pravda, 1 December 1937, p. 6. There was also a large 
exhibition of Armenian art in Moscow in 1939, but it was not based around a single unifying text, as in 
Georgian case. See Vystavka izobrazitelnogo iskusstva Armianskoi SSR (ex. cat.) (Moscow: Iskusstvo, 1939.) 
492 Sarah Davies, Stalin and the Making of the Leader Cult in the 1930s in Apor et al., The Leader Cult in 
Communist Dictatorships, pp. 29-46 (p. 40). 
to developing a more personal and relatable vision of the leader. Through the Georgian 
peoples connection to Stalins early roots, Georgian artists might offer tantalising cultural 
insights or personal recollections about his childhood character. As we know from 
contemporary culture, it is the personal that most immediately captures our attention and 
invests us in a celebrity figure, which must have been among Berias goals. Alternatively, 
Georgian artists may have been chosen for logistical reasons, because Berias residence in 
Tiflis made them easier to supervise than artists based in Yerevan or Baku. It might have 
been concluded that Georgian artists would find it easier to travel around Georgia to visit the 
locations in which Berias history was played out and to converse with local people. Given 
that Georgia was part of the ZSFSR at the point at which the exhibition was conceived, it 
might have been considered appropriate to draw on artists from Tiflis as the Transcaucasian 
regions cultural capital, particularly considering that many Russian and Armenian artists 
were also based in the city. While the overwhelming majority of the contributing artists were 
of Georgian nationality, a handful of artists of non-Georgian descent, such as Nalbandian, 
also featured. 
The question is also complicated by the fact that signs of Stalins Georgian nationality 
were generally absent from his personality cult. Instead, as Jan Plamper and others have 
shown, Stalins ethnicity was represented as supra national due to his identity as the father of 
the Soviet peoples (otets narodov).493 The representation of Stalins nationality in the 
personality cult did evolve over the course of the 1930s, 40s and 50s. In film, for example, 
the Jewish actor Semen Goldshatb played Stalin several times in 1937-8, before being 
replaced by Mikheil Gelovani, a Georgian, from 1938.494 Later, in the late 1940s, Gelovani, 
who spoke with a strong Georgian accent like that of Stalin himself, was replaced at Stalins 
behest by the ethnic Russian Aleksei Dikya shift that has been connected with Stalins 
quest to Russify his image at the height of the anti-Cosmopolitanism campaign. 495 
However, in spite of these shifts, Stalin was consistently presented as existing above ethno-
territorial national divisions, belonging to all Soviet nationalities equally and at once: 
Georgia, when appearing in representations of Stalin, only did so as locally coloured 
background, as folkloric wallpaper in one of the many rooms of the USSR as a communal 
apartment.496 Indeed, as other Soviet nationalities developed their own canons of art on the 
493 Plamper, Georgian Koba or Soviet Father of the Peoples?, pp. 123-40. 
494 Ibid., p. 126. 
495 Ibid., pp. 126-27. 
496 Ibid., p. 124. In referring to the USSR as a communal apartment, Plamper is citing Slezkine The USSR as 
a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism. 
Stalin theme, local vernaculars were even established, so that Central Asian representations 
of Stalin the leader frequently bore Asiatic features and distinctly Polish, German, or 
Romanian Stalins emerged.497  
The separation of Stalin from his Georgian ethnicity in the context of the personality 
cult requires us to acknowledge that more was at play in the choice of Georgian artists for 
Berias exhibition than the fact of Stalins Georgian birth. A more convincing explanation, 
taking into account the evidence offered by the detailed examination of the exhibition 
undertaken in this chapter, is that the choice was less about convenience, or about Stalins 
ethnicity. Instead, it was about configuring and announcing Georgias place in the Soviet 
Union in light of evolving political imperatives and changing nationalities policy. Georgians 
were given special status in Stalins Soviet Union. They enjoyed greater access to 
opportunities both inside the Georgian SSR and elsewhere in the Soviet Union, including in 
Moscow, than Soviet citizens belonging to another national group, excepting only the 
Russians.498  
As I have argued elsewhere in this thesis, the concessions Georgia enjoyed were 
driven in part by the threat that the Soviet leadership perceived in Georgia as a result of 
Georgians strong nationalist impulses and their instinctive resistance to centralised control 
from Moscow. As such, the Georgian exhibition of 1937, and the particularly fervent 
production of the Stalin cult in all spheres of cultural life in Georgia under Berias 
supervision, is best understood as an initiative intended to control as well as appease 
Georgian exceptionalism. In the Soviet Union, under Soviet nationalities policy, the 
expression of nationhood and national identity was limited to the sphere of culture. The 
Georgian exhibition encouraged the expression of a kind of Georgian cultural identity. It 
provided a platform for the display and dissemination of painting and sculpture from the 
Georgian SSR. However, the type of identity that was expressed through the exhibition was 
carefully and meticulously prescribed, firstly via Berias text, and secondly through his close 
supervision of the exhibitions planning and production. The type of painting demanded from 
artists left no room for the expression of an idea of national identity reflected in any 
distinguishable national form. Artists were expected to produce works of history painting 
that followed from the Russian tradition and painters such as Surikov. Instead, the only 
perceptible expression of national feeling was in an implied sense of the special affection 
that the Georgian people, including Georgian artists, held for the Soviet leader. Georgian 
497 Plamper, The Stalin Cult, p. 180. 
498 Blauvelt, Status Shift and Ethnic Mobilisation, p. 654. 
artists affection was expressed through the continual repetition of Georgian artists raptures 
at being given the honour of producing the works for the exhibition. The Georgian peoples 
adoration was then reflected in the sheer volume of material the Georgian nation collectively 
contributed to the Stalin cult, including the exhibition. However, it was also represented in 
the exhibition symbolically. Since the crowds that appeared in many of the canvases, 
listening attentively to Stalins speeches, were comprised of the leaders Georgian kinsmen, 
they symbolised not just the Soviet peoples love for Stalin, but that of the Georgian nation in 
particular. 
At the same time, the exhibitions expression of Georgias place in the Soviet Union, 
and Georgias relationship with central Soviet power, was also carefully dictated from above. 
Making the exhibition one of Georgian national art allowed it to appear to confirm Georgias 
privileged status and to appease Georgian national pride. The Georgians would be the first to 
take on this honoured task. However, the exhibition was also an expression of central control 
over Georgian life, politics and all forms of expression, including in the cultural sphere. The 
heavy handed supervision of the preparations for the exhibition, moreover, including constant 
supervision by Beria and representatives at IMEL, and the consolidation of Georgian artists 
studios into the building of the Georgian National Gallery where they could be more easily 
monitored, confirmed this message. The highly public last-minute rejection of works from 
the exhibition that did not demonstrate a sufficient degree of conformity with socialist realist 
orthodoxies, moreover, sent the same message. It made clear the newly stringent controls to 
which Georgian artists (and by symbolic extension the Georgian people) would now be 
required to submit. Finally, the repression of Duduchava and several other senior 
administrators of the arts in Georgia confirmed that divergence from this path would not be 
tolerated. 
This chapter has shed new light on the complicated political objectives of the 
Georgian exhibition of 1937 and examined its consequences and implications for Georgian 
artists. It has demonstrated that while the exhibition served several political functions 
simultaneously, some goals were prioritised. The exhibition was presented as a demonstration 
of the success of Soviet nationalities policy, which, the Party claimed, had facilitated a 
flourishing of the arts and of national culture in Georgia. However, the exhibition reflected 
(and signaled) a shift in nationalities policy, both in general and with respect to Georgia in 
particular. While the exhibition was offered as evidence of a flourishing of Georgian national 
culture, all evidence of a specific national form in Georgian painting was stripped from the 
works presented. Georgian national form was reconfigured and reduced to a notion of the 
Georgian peoples special affection of Stalin as the greatest son of their homeland. This 
narrative was useful in flattering the Georgian people with the idea of their special closeness 
to the leader, and thereby further encouraging their loyalty to him. It was also valuable in 
disguising the confiscation of cultural freedoms that non-Russian Soviet nationalities, 
including the Georgians, had previously enjoyed. At the same time, denigration of Georgian 
artists technical mastery in the press asserted the superiority of Russias national culture to 
the cultures of the remaining Soviet nationalities, including the Georgians. The evaluation of 
Georgian paintings using the Russian realist tradition as the only metric confirmed that 
success for Georgian and other national artists would come through emulating their Russian 
colleagues. A central task of the exhibition was the materialisation of Berias history of 
Stalins early careerthe transformation of ideology into reality. However, Berias decision 
to enlist only Georgian artists in the project ensured that it fulfilled many political aims 
beyond this one. These included subjugating Georgia and the Georgians, both symbolically 
and in practical terms, to Moscows willor at least providing Georgian artists with the 
opportunity to publicly declare their own and the Georgian peoples willing allegiance to the 
central Soviet authorities. For Georgian artists, the project meant dramaticically increased 
central Party supervision that was not matched elsewhere.  
Chapter 6: Reinventing Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s 
This chapter continues investigations presented earlier in this thesis concerning the 
attempts of artists, critics and other commentators in the 1920s and 30s to interpret Soviet 
policy calling for national form in Soviet culture. It does so, however, through a specific 
lens. Examining commentaries that appeared from the mid-1920s through to the end of the 
1930s concerning the pre-Revolutionary self-taught Georgian painter Niko Pirosmani, it 
considers Pirosmanis place in discussions about the national form of Soviet Georgian 
painting. It explores his role in the delineation of a Georgian national canon of Soviet art 
both before and after his canonisation as a Great Tradition of Georgian culture in the second 
half of the 1930s.   
As discussed earlier in this thesis, in the mid 1930s, in connection with the 
establishment of the new Soviet Constitution in 1936, Soviet nationalities policy was 
reconstructed based on a newly primordial conception of nations and national cultures. 
This new conception privileged nations shown to be more developed and of greater 
longevity, helping the Party to justify the consolidation (assimilation) of nearly two hundred 
national groups into a much smaller number of Soviet nations. This newly primordial 
construction of nations, however, also consolidated assumptions about nations and national 
cultural heritage that, as observed in chapters two and three of this thesis, were already held 
by many Soviet cultural commentators in the 1920s and early-1930s. Many of those 
commentators already expressed conceptions of nations and national cultures that reflected 
a primordial understanding of nations as naturally and inevitably existing entities, and which 
drew no distinction, for example, between contemporary nations and their pre-modern 
ancestors. Commentators seeking to interpret the slogan of national form in Soviet culture 
presented divergent ideas about what that form might constitute (ranging from national 
aesthetic traits to national climatic or socio-political conditions). However, they tended not 
to articulate any particular definition of the nation in question, or of what should or should 
not be included within the canon of its national cultural heritage. Instead, the definitions of 
these terms were taken to be self-evident. With the shift in Soviet nationalities policy that 
took place in the mid-1930s, though, these assumptions were formalised in an approach to 
nations as primordially existing units and whereby classics or Great Traditions of Soviet 
national cultures were identified, often in examples of cultural heritage that pre-dated the 
Soviet era by centuries. 
In this context, Pirosmanis painting was selected as a Great Tradition of Georgian 
national culture. In celebration of this fact and to mark the twentieth anniversary of the 
painters death, he was honoured with a personal exhibition of 110 works held at the Metekhi 
Museum (Georgias main art museum, formerly and presently the National Picture Gallery of 
Georgia) in Tbilisi in 1938. However, throughout the late-1920s and 1930s, Pirosmani was 
already the subject of considerable attention. In the early 1920s, following the establishment 
of Soviet power in Georgia, Dimitri Shevardnadze, assisted by Kirill Zdanevich and others, 
devoted considerable energy to locating and acquiring as many of Pirosmanis paintings as he 
could to be preserved in the collection of the Georgian National Picture Gallery. Pirosmanis 
works were also acquired by Glaviskusstvo for state collections in Moscow in 1928.499 And 
in 1930 a personal exhibition of 60 of Pirosmanis paintings opened at the Museum of Fine 
Arts in Moscow. This exhibition subsequently toured to other Soviet centres including 
Leningrad, Kiev, Kharkov and Odessa, after which it was intended to travel on to several 
European cities. Pirosmanis paintings were also featured in GAKhNs Art of the Nations of 
the USSR exhibition in Moscow in 1927 as well as in the 1937 exhibition of Georgian art in 
Moscow.  
In addition to these exhibitions, commentaries on Pirosmani by some of the most 
prominent Georgian and Russian art historians and critics writing on Georgian art, including 
Duduchava, Rempel, Shevardnadze and Chepelev, also appeared throughout this period with 
notable frequency.500 These commentaries, moreover, are striking not only in their quantity 
but in their consistently positive appraisals of Pirosmania circumstance that may seem 
surprising when one considers the widespread denunciation in the Soviet press of Pirosmanis 
pre-revolutionary associates, and the sustained criticism of painters, such as Gudiashvili, who 
considered themselves Pirosmanis students.  
It should be noted, of course, that the selection of unlikely sources as positive models 
for the Soviet cultural canon is far from unique to Pirosmani. In general, the accepted model 
for the establishment of a Soviet cultural canon was based on Lenins theory of two 
499 See Katalog priobretenii gosudarstvennoi kommissii no priobreteniiam proizvedenii rabotnikov 
izobrazitelnykh iskusstv (Moscow: Glaviskusstvo, 1928). 
500 See Aleksandr Alf, Niko Pirosmanishvili, Iskusstvo, 3-4, 1929, pp. 106-113; Duduchava, Gruzinkaia 
zhivopis, pp. 90-113; Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia, pp. 62-73; Aleksandr Gen, Niko 
Pirosmanishvili and Konstantin Paustovsky, Niko Pirosmanishvili: zhizn na kleenke, Brigada khudozhnikov, 
1, 1931, pp. 27-29; Dimitri Shevardnadze and M. Zubar, Niko Pirosmanishvili: iliustrovanii katalog vistavki: 
Kharkiv; KyivOdesa. Sichen-liutii 1931 (ex. cat.) (Kharkov: Sektor mistetstv NKO USRR, 1931) and 
Vystavka Kartin Niko Pirosmanishvili (Tbilisi: Metekhi Museum, 1938). A collection of essays in Russian and 
Georgian published in 1926 and including first hand accounts of several Georgian artists and writers 
encounters with Pirosmani in the 1910s provided an important source for the above commentaries. See Titsian 
Tabidze et al., Pirosmanishvili (Tiflis: Gosizdat, 1926). 
cultures, which stated that the culture of every society was made up of two partsthe 
dominant culture of the ruling class and the progressive culture of the oppressed class. The 
Soviet cultural canon, then, was to be built on the principle that all world culture could and 
should be mined for its progressive features. Those elements, cleansed of any features of the 
oppressive class culture, would be the material from which the new Soviet culture was built. 
As Katerina Clark articulates, many Soviet intellectuals in the 1920s and 30s hoped that in 
mining this wealth of world culture, Soviet culture would become a beacon of progressive 
culture that would guide the progressive forces of rest of the world.501 As such, the idea that 
Pirosmanis painting might be mined for its progressive features, in spite of probable 
questions over the suitability of other elements of his legacy, is not surprising in itself. The 
same principles, moreover, applied in the delineation of the Great Traditions of Soviet 
culture in the second half of the 1930s. The Pushkin established in this period as the official 
progenitor of a Russian national tradition, for example, was a highly edited version of the 
poet as he had really existed. Cleansed of any former associations as an irreverent, 
irrepressible, and even bawdy poet, he was transformed into the official guarantor / emblem 
of [that traditions] linguistic and aesthetic norms.502 Pirosmani could likewise be cleansed 
of negative associations.  
Rather than proposing the selection of Pirosmani as somehow an anomaly in this 
process, then, the goal of this chapter is to examine the range of representations of Pirosmani 
that appeared in 1920s and 30s, both before and after his establishment as a Great Tradition, 
and to consider how discussion of Pirosmani in that period related to wider debates, traced in 
chapters two and three of this thesis, about the national form of Soviet art. The chapter is 
concerned with investigating how Pirosmanis art was characterised in the 1920s and 30s. 
What features were selected at different moments as evidence of its value in instructing the 
Soviet cultural canon? And was it more often presented as valuable in informing Soviet 
culture in general, or as a source of a specifically Georgian national canon of Soviet art? As 
we will see, commentators spoke from a range of viewpoints, for different readerships and 
editorial boards, each with their own methodologies and motivations. Some focussed on 
deconstructing the artists moral character and social conscience while others concerned 
themselves primarily with assessing formal qualities in his painting. Even those sharing 
similar approaches drew divergent conclusions, though all, for different reasons, and to 
differing degrees, agreed on Pirosmanis relevance for the construction of Soviet painting. 
501 Clark, Moscow, p. 11. 
502 Clark, Petersburg, p. 289. 
This chapter, then, analyses commentaries appearing on Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s with 
a view to offering a new lens through which to examine attempts to interpret demands for 
national form in Soviet art. In addition, it hopes to offer some tentative suggestions as to the 
reasons for the selection of Pirosmani as a Great Tradition of Georgian culture in the second 
half of the 1930s, especially in the context of Berias reconfigurement of Georgias 
relationship with the Soviet centre through the 1937 exhibition of Georgian art in Moscow. 
Representing Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s 
Of the commentaries appearing on Pirosmani in the 1920s and 30s, an article by 
Aleksandr Alf published in Iskusstvo in 1929 was among the most rapturous. While 
expressing indignation that (as the author believed) Pirosmani was almost unknown outside 
of Georgia, it presented him unambiguously as a shining model for contemporary Georgian 
painters as well as for Soviet painters in general.503 It described Pirosmani as the first and 
most significant Georgian national artist, whose painting was fertilising the young art of the 
national republics, and who deserved to be known by all those who hold the fate of the 
young Soviet art near and dear.504  
In support of this assessment, Alf highlighted a range of features of Pirosmanis 
painting as well as aspects of his biography, including evidence he identified of Pirosmanis 
class identity and personal and moral character. Certain facts of Pirosmanis biography were 
available to commentators thanks to a collection of essays and personal recollections of 
encounters with Pirosmani written by several of his contemporaries and published in Georgia 
in 1926. These included details of a humble and often chaotic life (whereby Pirosmani tried 
his hand at a series of trades before turning to alcohol and scratching a living as a painter of 
signboards), and of his death in poverty and destitution in Menshevik Tiflis in 1918. 
However, Alf did not present Pirosmani as others subsequently would, as a class victim of the 
injustices of pre-revolutionary societya member of the lower classes unable to thrive under 
capitalist conditions. Instead, he nominated Pirosmani a member of the proletariat, a 
proletarian artist who was successful in spite of the injustices of capitalist societyone of the 
rare victors in a struggle with the almost insurmountable obstacles that stood before the 
503 Alf, Niko Pirosmanishvili, p. 106. 
504      ;    
; ,        . Ibid., p. 112. 
artist-proletarian on his path to culture and art in the pre-Revolutionary era.505 He claimed 
for Pirosmani an understanding of the artistic mission standing before all artists 
collectively, of the benefits of collaborative effort and collective will, and of a 
brotherhood of artists in which artists support each other in their creativity.506 He identified 
in Pirosmanis painting, moreover, a social accusatory bias and craving to depict various 
industrial items that he presented as evidence of the painters investment in proletarian 
concerns.507 In this way, Alf insisted on Pirosmanis validity as a model for Soviet proletarian 
painting. 
The assessment Alf offered of the formal and thematic content of Pirosmanis 
painting was also overwhelmingly positive. He praised Pirosmanis wonderful works of art, 
his laconic, expressive and idiosyncratic colour palette and ceaseless artistic growth.508 
His declaration that among the national artists of the Union who have shown us the path of 
primitivism, the first and most honourable place belongs to Pirosmanishvili, moreover, and 
his description of Pirosmanis painting as healthy, organic primitivism, coloured with the 
taste of national originality, both validated primitivism as a model for Soviet painting and 
positioned Pirosmani as a model for both Soviet and Georgian national art. 509 Indeed, it 
seemed to imply that Pirosmani had not only established a useful model for Soviet painting, 
but also belonged directly to the Soviet cultural canon, despite his death having preceded the 
arrival of Soviet power in Georgia. He compared Pirosmanis primitive painting to that of 
Western European contemporaries including Paul Gauguin and the French primitivist Henri 
Rousseau, distinguishing what he described as Pirosmanis organic primitivism from 
Western European painters pursuit of primitivism as a means of escaping the contradictions 
of Western bourgeois life.510 However, he also attributed the superiority he claimed for 
Pirosmani to a richer representation of contemporary life, proposing a better analogy for 
Pirosmanis painting in the Mexican painter Diego Riveras nationally, socially bright and 
colourful art, which plays an active role in the life, everyday existence and the revolutionary 
505  ;         
-       . Ibid., p. 106.  
506   ,      ; 
    ;  . Ibid., p. 108. 
507   ;      . 
Ibid., pp. 110 and 112. 
508   ;      
;   . Ibid., pp. 106 and 110. 
509    ,     ,  
     ;   ,  
  . Ibid., p. 112. 
510    . Ibid., p. 112. 
struggle of his nation.511 Had Pirosmani lived to see the Sovietisation of Georgia, he 
suggested, we should suppose his painting would have reflected the revolutionary struggle 
and the new life of Soviet Georgia with the same immediacy and truth [found in Riveras 
painting].512  
As if to support the case he made for Pirosmanis proletarian credentials and for the 
applicability of Pirosmani as a model for Soviet painters, Alf also offered an evocative 
account of Pirosmanis life and of his personal character. Based largely on the 1926 memoirs, 
he united a tale of the depravation and misfortunes suffered by the artist with a portrait of his 
good character in a dramatic narrative in which Pirosmani was both hero and victim. In this 
highly sentimental and romanticising account of the artists life and character, he presented a 
colourful, strong-willed, proud and volatile but also good-natured and morally righteous 
character, child-like in his stubborn creative self-assurance and in his propensity to reject the 
society and assistance offered him by Tiflis cultural community. The main tropes of Alfs 
account of Pirosmanis life, then, were of a proletarian steadfastness in spite of adversity. 
Yet they also built on popular stereotypes of a Georgian national character. Alf spoke, for 
example, of Pirosmanis martyr-like exploit of fighting for his art, describing how he 
retained a full cup of creative enthusiasm despite the oppressive socio-economic conditions 
of the capitalist society in which he livedthe heroic effort and superhuman fortitude of a 
truly dedicated proletarian artist.513 But colourful anecdotes also added to a romantic portrait 
that drew on orientalising stereotypes of Georgianness, including a street-wise wiliness that 
was mixed with resignation and resoluteness in adversity, self-sufficient pride, emotional 
sentimentality and a fondness for alcohol. Alf related, for example, the recollections of a 
tavern owner for whom Pirosmani had worked, who described the painter as a very honest 
man, homeless, ill and poor who dressed in rags, sat alone at the table and wouldnt accept 
refreshments from anyone.514 Yet the Pirosmani described was also a good person who 
was fond of poetry, knew Georgian literature, loved Vazha Pshavela, drank a lot of 
511      ,     ,   
   . Ibid., p. 112. 
512      ;      
   . Ibid., p. 112. Alfs choice of Rivera for comparison was perhaps a little 
imprudent considering that the painter had recently cut short a working visit to the Soviet Union (in 1927-8) 
under threat of arrest for anti-Stalinist activities and would be expelled from the Mexican Communist Party in 
1929 for criticising Stalins regime. Nevertheless, it helped Alf to stress Pirosmanis social consciousness and 
sympathy with the proletariats struggle. 
513       ;     
. Ibid., p. 106. 
514   , , , ;    ;     
 . Ibid., p. 108. 
vodka and loved Georgians but did not like the authorities.515 Alf presented Pirosmani as 
a proletarian hero, but one whose character was based on prevalent affectionate but 
nevertheless orientalising stereotypes of Georgianness. In doing so, he contributed to the 
development of a cult of Pirosmani, versions of which, as we will see, continued to appear in 
commentaries published in Moscow and Georgia throughout the 1930s. Although those 
commentaries often identified divergent class identities for Pirosmani and conflicted in their 
evaluation of various qualities of his painting, they drew consistently on these same 
stereotypes of character, which largely corresponded with popular notions of a Georgian 
national character. Through their repetition of the same motifs, commentators on Pirosmani 
contributed, whether consciously or otherwise, to the establishment of a cult of Pirosmani 
that very likely precipitated (and afterwards validated) the selection of Pirosmani as a Great 
Tradition of Soviet Georgian national culture in the second half of the 1930s. 
Following Alfs article, Duduchavas Gruzinskaia zhivopis dedicated a whole chapter 
to Pirosmani. Like Alfs article, it combined an evaluation of Pirosmanis painting and his 
class profile while developing a particular image of the painters character and life. His 
positive appraisal of Pirosmanis painting and affectionate character portrait echoed much of 
the sentiment of Alfs writing. Like Alf, he praised the simplicity and expressive quality of 
Pirosmanis primitive style and distinguished what he presented as Pirosmanis authentic 
primitiveness from the studied primitivism of Western European primitivists such as 
Rousseau.516 However, Duduchava diverged from Alf in his representation of Pirosmanis 
class identity. Rather than celebrating Pirosmani as a star of the proletarian class, he instead 
ascribed Pirosmani to what Marx termed the lumpenproletariat, a class of drunkards, 
criminals and vagabonds incapable of social consciousness.517 He agreed that Pirosmani 
instinctively sensed the social disorder in his bohemian society. 518  However, he 
nevertheless committed the painter as a member of the petty bourgeoisie, who, due to his 
class status, had not been equipped to effect any improvement to the social situation that he 
observed.519 He represented Pirosmani much as he represented Gudiashvili, as an artist who 
515   ;   ;   ,   ; 
   ;  ,     .  Ibid., p. 108. 
516 He actually refers to Jean-Jacques Rousseau but presumably intended to cite the French painter and 
Pirosmanis contemporary, Henri Rousseau (1844-1910). See ibid., p. 98. 
517 Ibid., p. 98. 
518    -       . 
Ibid., p. 112. 
519   . Ibid., p. 113.  
had sadly been prevented by circumstance from adopting a more socially revolutionary 
position, despite his natural social conscience. Indeed, rather than stressing Pirosmanis class 
credentials, Duduchava emphasised his national ones, crediting Pirosmanis primitive 
painting with having singlehandedly revitalised a Georgian national canon of painting that, he 
argued, had lost its individuality in the nineteenth century due to the imported influence of 
Russian realist painting.520 He presented Pirosmani not as a representative of proletarian 
painting but as the embodiment and model of a Georgian national culture that he implicitly 
suggested should be preserved and cultivated. 
Despite differences of emphasis, Alfs and Duduchavas accounts were united in their 
positive appraisaland evocative portrayalof Pirosmanis personal character. Indeed, 
Duduchavas portrait of Pirosmani echoed many of the tropes observed in Alfs, suggesting 
the already ubiquitous nature of the cult of Pirosmani appearing in this period. Like Alf, for 
example, Duduchava repeatedly painted a picture of Pirosmani as child-like in his natural 
gentleness. He described him, for example, as viewing the world with child-like sincerity 
and creative lovea view he corroborated with observations about the love of animals 
apparent in his paintings and his sensitive reflection of the psychology of his sitters.521 
Duduchava contradicted Alfs account of Pirosmani as a tortured, bitter and lonely soul, as 
the suffering inhabitant of Tiflis bohemian underworld (as an incarnation of capitalist social 
dysfunction). Instead, he represented him as an integral character in a specifically Georgian 
worldthat of the joyously rowdy, carousing Georgian petty tradesmen (kintos) presented 
in his paintings. As Duduchava told it, Pirosmani loved the bohemia of Tiflis.522 He loved 
carousing, hospitable friends, eating houses, and ashugi (singing kintos).523 He was 
fond of alcohol, unable to live without vodka and wine, but this fact related to his unbridled 
enjoyment of bohemian life in Tiflis, not to any desire to escape it.524  
Duduchava, then, offered an appraisal of Pirosmanis qualities as a painter that was 
comparable to Alfs but contradicted Alfs evaluation of Pirosmanis class identity and his 
representation of some aspects of Pirosmanis character. In doing so, he tied Pirosmani more 
definitely than Alf had to stereotypes of Georgian identity that had been perpetuated and 
developed in Georgia over the course of the preceding decades by a variety of intellectuals, 
not least by members of the Georgian modernist literary organisation known as the Blue 
520 Ibid., p. 93. 
521   ,  . Ibid., p. 106. 
522   . Ibid., p. 101. 
523  . Ibid., p. 101. 
524       . Ibid., p. 100. 
Horns.525 In associating Pirosmani with a child-like gentleness and purity of character as well 
as with a romanticised, carnivalesque vision of pre-revolutionary Tiflis, Duduchava built on 
and consolidated Pirosmanis place within that tradition. While Alf emphasised in Pirosmani 
an appropriate model for Soviet proletarian culture, Duduchava stressed Pirosmanis 
significance in belonging toand personally revivinga national tradition, which 
Duduchava considered vital in informing contemporary Soviet Georgian painting. 
Nevertheless, whether positioning him primarily as the source of a proletarian or national 
tradition, both commentators presented his painting as significant, and both contributed to a 
cult of Pirosmani that inevitably moulded the way that he was viewed and presented later in 
the 1930s.Two articles published together in Brigada khudozhnikov in 1931 continued Alfs 
and Duduchavas highly complimentary tack, despite also sharply contradicting one another 
in both their approach to representing Pirosmani and in their evaluation of his significance. 
The first, by Aleksandr Gen, was aligned in particular with Alfs in that is emphasised what it 
identified as Pirosmanis attraction to themes of class struggle and industrialisation. It 
claimed that Pirosmani noticed the tragedy of social contradictions and the class struggle 
veiled behind the tinselled life of pre-revolutionary Tiflis, while a series of scenes of 
working life and social portraits were infused with social pathos.526 It also shared Alfs 
and Duduchavas positive appraisal of various formal characteristcs of his painting, including 
the expressiveness and sharpness of his palette and his mastery of composition, and 
continued their impulse to distinguish Pirosmanis painting from contemporary Western 
European tradition.527 Nevertheless, in notable contrast to the preceding commentaries, Gen 
not only foregrounded social themes over discussion of Pirosmanis representation of a 
national tradition but explicitly pushed back against what he saw as other commentators 
excessive emphasis on Pirosmanis embodiment of national traditions. He declared that it 
would be a great mistake to consider the work of Niko Pirosmanishvili only as a vivid 
expression of patriarchal national and cultural traditions and criticised tendencies to 
romanticise the story of poor Niko the eternal vagabond.528 Gen, then, was concerned 
with recognising Pirosmani as a valuable source in the development of a Soviet cultural 
525 On this, see Ram, Decadent Nationalism. 
526      ;  ;   ; 
 ;   . Gen, Niko Pirosmanishvili, p. 27. 
527   ;   . Ibid. 
528        ,    
  - ;  ,  . 
Ibid. 
canon, but rejected what he saw as excessive emphasis on his role at the head of a 
specifically Georgian national canon within it.  
Konstantin Paustovskys article, meanwhile, published alongside Gens, was guilty of 
exactly the romanticisation of Pirosmanis legend that Gen derided. It took a creative 
approach to its subject, attempting to establish, in Paustovskys words, a biography of the 
artist according to his use of colour, the materiality of his objects, and lastly, by the themes of 
his picturesalthough what his text actually established was more like the illustration of his 
character.529 Paustovsky sought to present formal qualities identified in Pirosmanis painting 
as reflections of Pirosmanis character and biography. He began, for example, by painting for 
the reader an evocative vision of a backward but romantic Tiflis, describing the scene, for 
example, when he first saw Pirosmanis work in 1923 by the light of a high kerosene lamp 
that cast sharp shadows over the quiet room while a clock ticked softly on the wall.530 He 
then explained how this dingy environment, as well as the tragedy of Pirosmanis destitute 
existence, found reflection in both Pirosmanis painting and his demeanour. He interpreted 
Pirosmanis dark palette and the absence of shadows in his paintings, for example, as proof 
that he was often working at first light, which Paustovsky took as evidence either that he slept 
poorlyperhaps due to his poor living conditionsthat he was exceptionally committed to 
his art, or exceptionally desperate for the meagre living it could afford him.531 The poverty 
of Pirosmanis materials (his use of oilcloth in place of canvas) is offered as a reminder of the 
impoverished conditions in which the artist lived and implicitly of Pirosmanis forbearance in 
enduring them.532 Unlike his predecessors, however, Paustovsky does not appear to have 
been concerned with presenting Pirosmani as a model either for contemporary proletarian 
painting or as the figurehead of a Georgian national tradition. Instead, he demanded 
recognition of Pirosmani simply as one of the best artists of the twentieth century, albeit 
one whose story he associated with a wistful nostalgia for a backward and humble pre-
industrial (and pre-Revolutionary, capitalist) Tiflis of artists studios lit with oil lamps and 
adorned with softly ticking clocks.533  
Shevardnadzes essay for the catalogue accompanying Pirosmanis exhibition in 
Kharkov in 1931, by contrast, gave a somewhat more restrained, factual, primarily biographic 
account of Pirosmani, less emotional in tone than Alfs, Duduchavas or Paustovskys. 
529     ,         -    
. Paustovsky, Zhizn na kleenke, p. 28.  
530      ;    . Ibid., p. 28.  
531 Ibid., p. 28. 
532 Ibid., p. 28. 
533       . Ibid., p. 29. 
However, the illustration of Pirosmanis character and class identity as well as the tragic story 
of his life were still at its centre, and many of the same tropes were emphasised. Echoing 
Duduchava, Shevardnadze characterised Pirosmani as a true lumpen proletarian painter.534 
Like those before him, he emphasised Pirosmanis strength of character and commitment to 
his art, referring to his steadfastness and courage despite suffering complete physical and 
moral disaster.535 He did not foreground to the same degree as earlier commentators the 
illustration of Pirosmanis character as embodying either proletarian resilience or stereotypes 
of a Georgian national character. However, he repeated many of the same clichs, for 
example, about Pirosmanis honesty, kindness to people, pride, and selflessness and 
extraordinary ability for and love of painting, and reproduced sympathetic comments about 
Pirosmanis misfortunes.536 His references to a figure who wandered from one place to 
another, drank in order to paint and painted in order to drink, was easily irritated by 
members of the the public commenting on his work, and found himself completely incapable 
of practical life, moreover, repeated the same stereotypes of Georgian bohemia found in 
Alfs and Duduchavas commentaries.537  
Shevardnadze did not address directly the suitability of Pirosmanis painting as a 
model for contemporary Soviet culture, or for a specifically Georgian canon within it. 
However, his declarations that Pirosmani viewed his subjects through the eyes of the 
Georgian people and depicted life as the Georgian people see themselves, while his 
painting was deeply imbued with the customs of old Georgia clearly evoked a particular 
Georgian national cultural tradition and situated Pirosmani within it.538 Specifically, it 
positioned Pirosmani as embodying the voice of a Georgian nation distinguished by a unique 
set of customs and values. The implication, then, like that found in Duduchavas 
commentary, was that such a tradition was something to be valued and respected, whether as 
a model for contemporary Soviet culture or simply as a feature of a Georgian national 
history. The cult of Pirosmani that Shevardnadze perpetuated, moreover, served to confirm 
Pirosmanis importance within that cultural tradition at the same time as it articulated the 
character of the nation that produced it. 
534  --. Shevardnadze, Niko Pirosmanishvili: (Zhittya maistera), in 
Shevardnadze and Zubar, Niko Pirosmanishvili, pp. 6-7. 
535   ;      . Ibid., pp. 5 and 7. 
536      ,   ,   , , 
. Ibid., p. 5. 
537      ;  ,  ,  ,  ;   
    . Ibid., pp. 6-7. 
538    ;  ,      ;  
   . Ibid., p. 7. 
Unsurprisingly Rempels account of Pirosmanis legacy, appearing in Zhivopis 
sovetskogo Zakavkazia a year later, was markedly less passionate in its approval for 
Pirosmani than accounts that came before it. Addressing other critics positioning of 
Gudiashvili as an heir to Pirosmanis artistic legacy, for example, Rempel disputed any such 
honoured lineage, declaring the two artists to be linked instead only by their shared 
pessimism, mysticism and national romanticism and mystical-erotic, decadent distortion of 
reality.539 Indeed, in line with his wider methodology, Rempel was interested in Pirosmani 
primarily as an opportunity to dissect the class standpoints that he embodied, although he 
ultimately struggles to reach a conclusion as to the painters mixed and shifting class 
affiliations.540 By devoting so many pages to the discussion of Pirosmani (fifteen pages of a 
153-page text purportedly dealing with contemporary Soviet painting in three republics, plus 
13 of a total of 98 illustrations), however, Rempel implicitly confirmed Pirosmanis 
significance in the history of Georgian painting. His ambivalence towards Pirosmani, 
moreover, is notable in light of the vehemence of his disdain for the artists of Larionovs 
circle who, in the process of their decay arrived at neo-primitivism, the typical product of the 
collapse of urban petty-bourgeois culture. 541  Even Rempel, then, amid the militant 
proletarianism of the Cultural Revolution, did not dismiss Pirosmani entirely. Instead, he 
appears, for whatever reason, to have been motivated to seek progressive features in 
Pirosmanis painting with a view to justifying Pirosmanis place in the Soviet culture canon.  
There was an absence of writing about Pirosmani between 1933 and 1936, which 
corresponds with (and can be attributed to) the artistic reconstruction taking place in those 
years under Berias supervision, when Georgian artists and critics were occupied almost 
entirely with the production of Georgias contributions to Stalins personality cult, including 
the Moscow exhibition in 1937. In the late 1930s, however, following the establishment of 
the new Soviet constitution and the shift in Soviet nationalities policy that accompanied it, 
the official formulation of Soviet culture, and of the role of national cultures within it, had 
changed. Pirosmani was now to be held up as an embodiment of a newly-imagined Georgian 
national culture.542 However, under the banner of the Friendship of the Peoples the 
539   ,    ; -, , 
  . Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo Zakavkazia, p. 77. 
540 Ibid., pp. 64 and 66-67. 
541 ,    -      
    . Ibid., p. 62. 
542 There is more work to be done to clarify exactly when and how Pirosmani was singled out for the honour. 
The question remains of whether the choice of Pirosmani was imposed from above or evolved as a result of 
other factors, including Pirosmanis public popularity and the commentaries presented by intellectuals over the 
course of the 1920s and 30s. 
delineation of the characteristics of the national culture that he embodied needed also to be 
compatible with narratives about the place of Georgian culture and cultural heritage 
within the greater pantheon of Soviet culture and its heritage. In particular, it had to be 
compatible with narratives about the role of the Russian nation in guiding the cultural 
development of her less-advanced brother nations. 
In 1937, Vladimir Chepelev, then the head of the department of the Soviet East at the 
Museum of Oriental Cultures, discussed Pirosmani in the series of lectures that he delivered 
at the Tretyakov Gallery to coincide with its exhibition of Georgian art.543 Yet, perhaps 
surprisingly, in light of the recent establishment of Pirosmani as a Great Tradition of 
Georgian national culture, the focus of his argument that Pirosmanis importance in the 
history of Georgian painting had been hitherto overplayed. The logic behind this argument 
becomes clear when we consider Chepelevs further complaint, that representations of 
Pirosmanis singular importance had led to the neglect of nineteenth-century Georgian realist 
painters such as Gabashvili and Mrevlishvili.544 Chepelev, then, set out in his lectures to 
refute the contention (which he ascribes more or less fairly to Shevardnadze and Duduchava) 
that realist painting lacked historical roots in Georgias cultural traditions, and that the 
influence of Russian realist painting had harmed the development of Georgian culture.545 In 
opposition to this idea, Chepelev presents the influence of Russian realist painting in Georgia 
as contributing to the development of an inclination towards realism already existing in 
Georgian painting, declaring that the entire history of Georgian art had been characterised by 
the pervasiveness of narratives from simple human life that were analogous to such 
traditions.546 Despite challenges that Chepelev perceived in formal characteristics of his 
painting, Pirosmani was declared to be a talented artist who was commendable for having 
worked on such class-oriented themes as the national liberation struggle in Dagestan.547 His 
painting was not set apart from or in opposition to the development of realist painting in 
Georgia but presented as naturally compatible with it, especially in its supposed treatment of 
contemporary life and class struggle. Chepelevs account thus allowed both Pirosmani and 
the influence of European and Russian realist traditions on the development of Georgian 
painting to be reframed in accordance with the new metaphor of the Friendship of the 
Peoples. The Russian realist tradition, as a progressive precursor to a contemporary Soviet 
543 Vladimir Chepelev, O gruzinskom iskusstve [lecture given at the Tretyakov Gallery, 27 October, 1937], 
GTG, Department of Manuscripts, f. 8, op. 3, d. 366, ll. 1-10.  
544 Ibid., ll. 3-8 
545 Ibid., l. 4. 
546     . Ibid., l. 1. 
547 ;  . Ibid., ll. 7 and 14.  
Russian national culture, was not to be viewed as the culture of Georgias former oppressor. 
Instead, it represented the nourishing culture of a Soviet brother nation, helping to guide 
Soviet Georgian painting on a path of development that was both appropriate to the Soviet 
context and had shared roots in centuries of both Georgian and Russian  culture. 
Chepelevs sentiments were repeated by writer and journalist Evgeny Kriger in two 
reviews of the 1937 exhibition of Georgian art in Moscow and also by Bukhnikashvili, who 
wrote an essay for the catalogue accompanying the personal exhibition of Pirosmanis 
painting that opened in Tbilisi in 1938. Kriger, for example, commented on the esteem for 
Pirosmani that he had witnessed among young Georgian painters during a visit to Tbilisi the 
previous year, explaining that Georgian painters had expressed admiration in particular for 
his warm, deeply humanist treatment of his subjects and empathy for the lower classes.548 
Echoing Chepelev, he expressed reservations about the childlike quality of Pirosmanis 
painting, but he also celebrated the immediacy of his impressions, suggesting Pirosmanis 
interest in representing contemporary life. 549  Bukhnikashvili, meanwhile, positioned 
Pirosmani not only, as others had done, as a painter concerned with social and class themes, 
but as the foreteller of the bright socialist future to come: presenting a proposal allegedly 
made by Pirosmani to the Society of Georgian Artists to open a communal house for artists in 
the centre of Tiflis as a vision of the socialist world that would soon appear, he noted that 
Pirosmanis dream had been realised  in the amazing scale of the development of the 
creative life of Soviet artists.550  
With the establishment of the Friendship of the Peoples metaphor and of a network 
of Great Traditions of Soviet and national cultures under it, certain parameters defining 
the ways in which Pirosmanis significance was represented were set. Although individual 
commentators retained a degree of agency in the features of Pirosmanis oeuvre that they 
stressed or celebrated, the Friendship of the Peoples metaphor made it desirable to represent 
Pirosmanis painting as complimenting, if not contributing to a shared, longstanding and 
naturally coninciding Georgian and Russian tradition of socially-committed realist art. 
Despite the status of Great Tradition newly accorded to Pirosmani, commentaries appearing 
in this period seem to suggest a concomitant reduction in the absolute status of Pirosmanis 
painting as a source of the Georgian national canon of Soviet art. Notably, however, the 
548 Kriger, Istoriia. 
549 Kriger, Istoriia. Ibid., p. 4. 
550             
  . V. Bukhnikashvili, Niko Pirosmanashvili in Shevardnadze et al., Vystavka 
kartin Niko Pirosmanishvili, pp. 25-30 (p. 30).  
impulse to romanticise Pirosmanis legend and his character in this period was retained. 
Chepelev, for example, spoke wistfully of how Pirosmani died tragically in need while his 
art was mangled by Larionovs circle.551 Bukhnikasvhili described a photograph from 
Pirosmanis youth in which a young man looks out with a beautiful, intelligent face and 
expressive, cheerful eyes while Kriger referred to Pirosmani simply as an artist whom it is 
really impossible not to love.552 In the late 1930s, moreover, celebration of his character was 
foregrounded often in place of explicit approval for his painting, suggesting that as a Great 
Tradition of national culture, his function was not so much as a model for Soviet Georgian 
painters but as an avatar of a constructed myth of Georgian national identity that could be 
manipulated and moulded to serve difference purposes at different times.  
The Cult of Pirosmani as the Personification of the Georgian Nation 
The diversity as well as the striking positivity of appraisals of Pirosmani throughout 
the late 1920s and 1930s raises the question of what made Pirosmanis legacy so enduring 
and adaptable, and what made him suitable in the late 1930s for selection as a Great 
Tradition of Soviet Georgian culture.  
Before those questions can be fully answered, there is more research to be done 
concerning the process of establishment of Great Traditions of national culture in the late 
1930s in general, including about the extent to which these traditions were masterminded 
within the Party leadership and imposed from above, and about the role of artists, critics and 
other commentators as well as of public taste in precipitating their selection. Further research, 
moreover, is necessary to shed light on the range of the Soviet leaderships intentions and 
goals in establishing these traditions and on the process through which the legacies of the 
cultural figures selected as Great Traditions were edited and amended to serve particular 
goals. As others have discussed, the new Great Traditions were partly used to articulate new 
Soviet cultural orthodoxies. Pushkin, for example, as the representative of a Great Tradition 
of Russian literature, became a yardstick for defining the linguistic and aesthetic norms of a 
rapidly crystalising canon of Soviet socialist realist literature.553 The establishment of Great 
Traditions thus facilitated increased central Party control over the Soviet cultural canon by 
helping it to define its characteristic features. However, as is apparent in the case of 
551 ;    . Chepelev, O gruzinskom iskusstve, l. 7. 
552    ,  ; ,  . 
Bukhnikashvili, Niko Pirosmanashvili, p. 25; Kriger, Pervye vpechatleniia. 
553 Clark, Petersburg, p. 289. 
Pirosmani, the system of Great Traditions also allowed the central authorities increased 
control over the articulation of particular Soviet and national identities and over the 
articulation of new relationships established between the Russian and non-Russian nations 
of the Soviet Union and the central Soviet authorities under the new rubric of the Friendship 
of the People.  
Over the course of the late 1920s and 1930s, commentaries appearing on Pirosmani, 
in addition to debating the value of his painting in the Soviet context, consistently connected 
Pirosmani with stereotypes of a Georgian national character that had been consciously 
constructed by intellectuals over the course of the preceding century. As others have shown, 
Russian and Georgian Romantic writers such as Lermontov and Pushkin as well as Aleksandr 
Chavchavadze and Nikoloz Baratashvili articulated particular visions of Georgian nationhood 
in the nineteenth century.554 Georgian nationalist thinkers in the late nineteenth century such 
as Ilia Chavchavadze and Niko Nikoladze presented others, and in the early twentieth 
century, writers associated with the Blue Horns literary organisation offered others still.555 
Each of these constructions of Georgianness, however, built to some degree on those that 
preceded it, so that, regardless of the nationality of their authors, each, in different ways, 
developed on a romantic and orientalising vision of Georgia and a Georgian national 
character. When the avant-garde figures of Larionovs circle discovered Pirosmani in the 
1910s, they set out to reconfigure their own position between East and West by presenting 
their art as akin to Pirosmanis, and Pirosmani as a true primitivea category that they 
attributed to the art of the East, and placed in opposition to the studied primitivism of 
Western European modernism.556 In doing so, they first tied Pirosmani to a romantic and 
orientalising vision of Georgia and Georgianness. These ties were then canonised in the 
volume of essays and memoirs published about Pirosmani in 1926 and, as we have seen, were 
subsequently drawn on by commentators in the late 1920s and 1930s to construct a cult of 
Pirosmani built on those stereotypes.  
As regards the question of the reasons for the positivity of appraisals of Pirosmani 
throughout the late 1920s and 1930s and for the selection of Pirosmani as a Great Tradition 
of Georgian national culture, one answer might be found in the unique malleability of his 
legacythe particular scope for Pirosmanis story to be adapted, appropriated and 
reinvented. One of the factors that made this scope so great in Pirosmanis case, I would 
554 Layton, Russian Literature and Empire; Ram and Shatrishvili, Romantic Topography and the Dilemma of 
Empire. 
555 Ram, Decadent Nationalism. 
556 Sharp, Beyond Orientalism. 
suggest, was the shortage of primary evidence illuminating the reality of his life, activities or 
views. He left no memoirs and, as a self-taught artist without any formal education, published 
no theoretical texts or other commentaries confirming his support for a particular social, 
national, class or ideological stance. The notebook that his contemporaries claimed he carried 
religiously, as well as his regular correspondence with his sister, might have contributed 
valuable further evidence, but both were apparently lost.557 Thus, the 1926 volume of essays 
and recollections became the principal source of Pirosmanis biography. The fragmentary 
nature of these sources introduced extraordinary scope for its embellishment and 
manipulation, ultimately leading the artists foremost Soviet biographer to conclude that one 
must come to terms with the fact that everything written about Pirosmanishvili in the past, the 
present and the future will inevitably contain at least an element of fiction.558 The absence of 
concrete evidence confirming Pirosmanis social and political outlook, as well as the range of 
social strata to which he objectively belonged over the course of his life, made it easy for 
commentators to hypothesise about the views Pirosmani held and to adapt Pirosmanis legacy 
to new political and cultural imperatives.  
Arguably, though, the most important factor making Pirosmani appropriate as a 
Great Tradition in the second half of the 1930s was the fact that a cult of Pirosmani had 
already been established, and that it already connected Pirosmani with existing stereotypes of 
a Georgian national character. This cult, moreover, continued tropes of Georgianness that 
were familiar and popular among Georgian intellectuals (and perhaps also within the wider 
Georgian population), from representations of Georgia and Georgians that had been 
offereded by intellectuals over the course of the preceding century. Whether Pirosmanis 
painting truly offered an appropriate model for Soviet and Soviet Georgian painting in the 
late 1930s, his cult offered the Soviet leadership a pre-established and highly adaptable 
vehicle for articulating a particular vision of the Georgian nation. Based on pre-existing 
national cultural stereotypes, it was appealing to intellectuals who were already attached to 
romantic conceptualisations of Georgian nationhood. It fed into it a narrative of Georgianness 
that was gratifying to the Georgian people, inspiring both national pride and contentment 
with a political system that gave the impression of supporting national cultural difference. In 
this way, it seems to have followed the logic of the korenizatsiia drives in that it offered the 
impression of support for expressions of national sovereignty, but for a kind of sovereignty 
557 Erast Kuznetsov, Pirosmani (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, 1975), p. 10. 
558    ,       ,    
       .Ibid., p. 8. 
that in practice was limited and controlled by the Soviet centre. It also fitted neatly within the 
new hierarchy of cultural forms set out under the banner of the Friendship of the Peoples 
since, as we saw in Chepelevs commentary, Pirosmanis painting could be presented as 
evidence both of concurrent trends in historical Georgian and Russian art and of the Russian 
nations superior cultural progress. The evolution of Pirosmanis cult over the course of the 
late 1920s and 1930s, moreover, had cleansed the romantic conceptualisations of Georgian 
nationhood that it was built on of any association with Tsarist imperialist roots by abstracting 
those notions from their original sources.  
The failure of cultural commentators in the late 1920s and 1930s to agree on specific 
characteristics of Pirosmanis painting that would enrich a nationally-specific canon of Soviet 
Georgian painting mirrored the failure of artists and critics in the same period to identify an 
appropriate national form for that canon. Both circumstances were products of the inherent 
contradictions of a Soviet nationalities policy that simultaneously demanded national form 
and promoted cultural homogeny. In the late 1930s, moreover, the continued foregrounding 
of the cult of Pirosmani established over the course of the preceding decade rather than the 
content of his painting echoed conclusions about the national form of Georgian culture 
suggested in the 1937 exhibition. National difference in the context of the 1937 exhibition 
was to be found in Georgian artists special responsibility in representing and glorifying 
Stalins achievements and in their special attachment to the leader in light of his own 
Georgian nationality, not in any particularity of style. Similarly, stylistic particularities of 
Pirosmanis painting that had earlier been associated by some with national stylistic traits 
were either ignored by commentators in the late 1930s or explicitly declared to be 
problematic. The focus was on Pirosmani as the embodiment of a conceptualisation of 
Georgian national character that was appealing and familiar to Georgians and offered them 
an impression of cultural sovereignty while also helping to corroborate the new Soviet 
cultural hierarchy. At the same time, the establishment of Pirosmani as a Great Tradition of 
Georgian national culture created in Pirosmani a prototype of Georgianness that had the 
potential to be manipulated and amended as necessary at a later date. 
Conclusion 
This thesis makes several important contributions to both to the study of Stalinism 
and Stalinist culture in general, to scholarship on the Georgian experience of Stalinism, and 
to the advancement of knowledge concerning the politics of Soviet culture and nationality.  
It has introduced extensive, previously unstudied primary evidence pertaining to the 
history of Georgian painting and art criticism in the 1920s and 30s. These materials include 
periodicals and archival documents relating to the workings of artists organisations in 
Georgia such as the Society of Georgian Artists, Proletkult, SARMA, REVMAS and the 
Georgian Artists Union as well as institutions in Moscow contributing to discussions about 
national form in Soviet art such as the Museum of Oriental Cultures and GAKhNs 
Department for the Study of the Art of the Nationalities of the USSR. Further archival 
documents and excerpts from the contemporary periodical press, moreover, have illuminated 
the planning, design and reception of important exhibitions including the Art of the Nations 
of the USSR exhibition 1927 and the Georgian exhibition in Moscow in 1937. Through these 
materials, institutions and individuals (including important critics such as Duduchava, 
Rempel, Chepelev and Mirzoev) whose activities were central to the story of Georgian 
painting in the Stalin era and yet whose activities have hitherto remained obscure in the 
scholarship on Stalinist culture have also been introduced for the first time. They have also 
facilitated the first detailed examination of discussions that took place in Georgia and 
Moscow in the 1920s and 30s concerning Georgian painting and the question of national 
form in Soviet culture, as well as of the single most important event in the history of 
painting in Georgia under Stalin, the 1937 exhibition of Georgian art in Moscow. 
Based on the analysis of these materials, this thesis has also presented a series of 
conclusions about the specificity of the Georgian experience of Stalinism. It has established 
that the experiences and activities of Georgian artists and critics in the first decade and a half 
of the Stalin era not only differed significantly from those of artists and critics of other 
republics, but that they did so in diverse and evolving ways in response to a complex network 
of influencing factors. These factors were connected with the realities and practicalities of 
implementing Soviet nationalities policy in that period. However, they also reflected the 
complex ways in which wider Stalinist discourse and political and cultural imperatives 
interacted with the imperatives of Stalinist national politics. Existing scholarship on Soviet 
national politics has highlighted some of the factors contributing to the uniqueness of the 
Georgian experience of Stalinism. These include the role of Stalins Georgian nationality, the 
developed degree of Georgian national consciousness, and the Georgians initial resistance to 
Bolshevik rule. However, there are still many questions to be answered regarding the degree 
to which these and other factors affected the Georgian experience in practice. There is more 
work to be done, for example, on how these factors affected (and ultimately benefitted or 
disadvantaged) Georgians experiences, as well as on the degree of influence that one factor 
may have had relative to another. Through what mechanisms, for example, did Stalins 
Georgian nationhood affect Georgians experience of Stalinism? How did it ultimately 
impact the activities of Georgian painters on a practical level? And in what ways did it 
constitute an advantage or a disadvantage? Equally, how did the Georgians developed 
degree of national consciousness and early hostility to Bolshevik rule affect the Soviet 
leaderships attitudes to Georgia? And how did those attitudes play out in Soviet policy? This 
thesis has made several significant steps towards answering these questions and advancing 
our understanding of the politics of culture and nationality in the Soviet Union.  
Others have observed, for example, the special status among Soviet nationalities that 
the Georgians enjoyed in the Stalin era. This status has been attributed largely to the 
advantageous associations of Stalins Georgian nationality. Benefits of this status for the 
Georgians, moreover, have also been identified as including increased access to opportunities 
for work and positions of political authority in Moscow and special degrees of autonomy in 
local governance in Georgia. This thesis, however, extends existing knowledge about 
Georgias special status in several ways. Firstly, it has helped to provide a chronology for 
the establishment of Georgias special statusat least as it affected Georgian painters. 
Secondly, it has shed light on the practical implications of that status. My examination of the 
1937 exhibition of Georgian art in Moscow, for example, has demonstrated that it was only in 
the mid-1930s, when a major shift in Soviet nationalities policy coincided with the stepping 
up of work on Stalins personality cult, that an honoured role for Soviet Georgian painters 
emerged. It was then, for the first time, that Georgian painters were singled out, alongside 
their Russian colleagues, as providing a model that painters of other Soviet nationalities 
should follow.  
It has also shown that the special status conferred on the Georgians at this time had a 
range of implications for the Georgians. It entailed a special honour, but also special 
responsibilities and restrictions. The honour that in entailed, moreover, was also limited, 
especially as regards the relative status of the Georgian and Russian peoples (and Georgian 
and Russian painters). Georgian painters were given special responsibility for depicting 
Stalins early career, and for providing Soviet painters of other nationalities with a model for 
depicting Stalins activities. Yet this honour was accompanied, as we have seen, by extensive 
reductions in the autonomy that Georgian painters could claim. Their efforts in producing the 
exhibition were subject to an unprecedented degree of central Party supervision. And the 
fruits of those efforts were then presented through a carefully controlled programme of 
guided tours, lectures and reviews that explained to the public how both the exhibition and 
Georgian artists achievements in it were to be understood. The prestige of their special 
responsibility, moreover, did not immunise Georgian painters against critical evaluations of 
their artistic achievements. Indeed, the high profile nature of their task if anything placed a 
spotlight on their deficiencies and, although the honour of the task that had been given to 
them was declared to be great, evaluations of their skill in performing it were mixed. At the 
same time, reviews of the exhibition as well as meetings held between Georgian and Russian 
artists in connection with it made clear that although the Georgians had been marked out by 
this special task, their status was still below that of their Russian counterparts. Accordingly, 
in the press and in person, Russian painters condescendingly offered Georgian painters 
advice for their improvement and the Georgians received this advice with graceful deference 
while acknowledging the Russians superiority. In the same way, the assignment of special 
responsibility to the Georgian painters symbolically embodied the honoured status that the 
Georgian people were now to enjoy within the Soviet hierarchy of nations. Yet it also 
conferred on the Georgian people a special duty to lead the way in declaring their love and 
appreciation for Stalin and their support for his leadership. This both conferred on Georgians 
a gratifying privileged status and placed pressure on Georgians who had previously been 
reticent in declaring their support for the regime to now spell out their alignment with it. 
There is no conclusive evidence confirming whether Georgian artists and critics were 
genuine in the love and appreciation they expressed for Stalin and Beria in the late 1930s, 
both through their production of the 1937 exhibition and in their pronouncements during 
meetings of the Artists Union and in the contemporary press. The sudden volte face made by 
so many artists and critics between 1935 and 1937 in their assessment of Duduchava, 
however, seems to suggest that there was at least a degree of capitulation to Party pressure 
involved in precipitating Georgian artists rapturous praise for Stalin and Beria and for the 
educational value that they claimed to find in working on the Stalin theme. The circumstance 
of several leading Georgian painters, including Kakabadze, failing to contribute works for the 
1937 exhibition, also suggests that enthusiasm for it was at least not universal. Moreover, if 
Georgian painters were not motivated to participate by their appreciation of Stalin, the 
significant monetary and other rewards offered for participation in the exhibition gave them 
plenty of alternative incentives to do so.  
Regardless of whether Georgian artists in the late 1930s were genuinely inspired and 
motivated by their admiration for Stalin, others have demonstrated that, at least by the end of 
the Stalin era, many Georgians did develop an authentic and powerful attachment to Stalin 
and genuinely supported the Soviet leadership in Moscow. Indeed, the strength of that 
attachment was exemplified in the impassioned protests that took place (and were brutally 
repressed) in Tbilisi in 1956 in response to Khrushchevs initiation of de-Stalinisation.559 On 
this basis, Timothy Blauvelt has identified the appearance of a Stalinist Georgian 
nationalism (or Georgian national Stalinism) according to which, for a time, Georgian 
nationalism, the honouring of Stalins memory [and, before 1953, of Stalin] and the Soviet 
system were all aligned together.560 As the Soviet leader, Stalin brought honour to the 
Georgian nation, as well as a host of special privileges, both of which encouraged Georgians 
support for him.  
There is some question over whether evidence of the genuine support for Stalin and 
the central Soviet authorities that the 1956 demonstrations suggests extended to the majority 
of Georgians (and more especially, to the majority of Georgian painters) in the late and post-
Stalin eras. Blauvelt notes, for example, that a large proportion of those taking part in the 
1956 protests were young Party and Komsomol members, suggesting that they might have 
been more likely to feel attachment to Stalin and the Stalinist regime than the wider 
population.561 Their youth, moreover, meant that they had grown up under Stalinism, and 
were thus less likely to be able to view the regime (and its violence, for example) objectively, 
and therefore more likely to support it. By contrast, many of the leading Georgian painters of 
the 1950s and 60s were those with strong ties to the pre-Soviet world. As I have shown 
elsewhere, even the work of leading proponents of socialist realist painting in Georgia at that 
time appears to reflect ambivalence if not outright hostility towards the Soviet regime (or at 
least certain of its policies).562 During the post-Stalin cultural liberalisation of the Khrushchev 
era, moreover, Gudiashvili, Akhvlediani and other painters formerly associated with the pre-
Revolutionary transnational modernist avant-garde found themselves again at the centre of 
the Georgian artistic establishment. However, the fact that they never really adopted a style 
of painting compatible with Soviet socialist realism, and had for the most part avoided 
559 See Blauvelt, Status Shift and Ethnic Mobilisation and Blauvelt, Resistance, Discourse and Nationalism. 
560 Blauvelt, Resistance, Discourse and Nationalism. 
561 Ibid. 
562 Brewin, Ucha Japaridze. 
contributing to the production of the Stalin cult in the 1930s, suggests that they never truly 
aligned themselves with the Stalinist cause. 
There is more work to be done on the impact of Georgias special status on the 
experience of Georgian painters in the later years of the Stalin era and following Stalins 
death. The question remains of whether the special responsibilities conferred on Georgian 
painters in 1937 saw any continuation after that date, even if the Georgians in general 
continued to enjoy the benefits of their special status in the Soviet hierarchy of nations until 
long after Stalins death. What is clear, however, is that the 1937 exhibition together with the 
establishment of several Great Traditions of Georgian national culture, appears to have 
successfully served the Stalinist regime in establishing a version of a Soviet Georgian 
national identity and an understanding of Georgias privileged status that encouraged 
Georgian support for the regime. The 1937 exhibition, as well as representing a major 
contribution to Stalins personality cult, symbolically declared Georgias privileged status 
within the Union. Meanwhile, the simultaneous canonisation of an already existing cult of 
Pirosmani helped to establish a version of Georgian national identity that was at once 
gratifying for Georgians and useful for the Soviet regime. The combined impression of 
cultural sovereignty and special status allowed that officially sanctioned version of national 
identity to become deeply enmeshed in peoples mindset with the aspirations of the regime, 
encouraging, if not absolute and universal support for the regime, then a significant increase 
in that support compared with the 1920s.563 
As chapters two and three of this thesis showed, in the 1920s and early 1930s issues 
of practicality and logistics as well as of inherent theoretical contradictions in Soviet 
nationalities policy meant that its theory was frequently not translated into practice. Efforts to 
interpret the Partys demand for national form in Soviet culture occupied artists and critics 
in Georgia as well as those responsible of representing, displaying and theorizing on national 
art in Moscow. However, the competing imperatives ingrained in Soviet nationalities policy 
for the active cultivation but also anticipated transcendence of cultural difference between 
Soviet nationalities, as well as the soft-line nature of korenizatsiia (necessitating its 
abandonment in cases where it conflicted with more important political priorities), made it 
impossible to construct a viable formula for the national form of Soviet culture in that 
period.  Practical constraints, moreover, such as the time, money and negotiations necessary 
to re-construct museum collections and displays, made it difficult for institutions to keep up 
563 Blauvelt, Resistance, Discourse and Nationalism. 
with the shifting priorities of Soviet nationalities policy, even when they had settled on a 
model of describing and displaying national art. The contradictions and challenges 
presented by the demand for national form in Soviet culture were resolved only with the 
reconfiguration of Soviet nationalities policy in the mid-1930s. At that time, efforts to 
delineate a satisfactory national form for contemporary Soviet culture were replaced with 
the articulation of Party-sanctioned national identities that were symbolically constructed, 
partly through the appropriation of carefully selected and edited versions of cultural 
monuments claimed as each Soviet nations national cultural heritage. In Georgias case, 
the editing of these Great Traditions and the national identity that they articulated (at least 
as regards Pirosmani) was built at least partially on constructions of Georgian nationhood 
evolved by intellectuals both before Sovietisation and since. 
Bibliography 
Archival Materials 
1. State Archive of the Russian Federation (GARF) 
f. P5508, op. 1, ed. khr. 2198  
2. Department of Literature and the Arts (Literaturis da khelovnebis ganqopileba), Central 
Archive of Contemporary History (Uakhlesi istoriis tsentraluri arkivi), National Archives of 
Georgia (Sakartvelos erovnuli arkivi) (NAG) 
f. 2. op. 1, ed. khr. 2  
f. 2.  op. 1, ed. khr. 9 
f. 2. op. 1, ed. khr. 14 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 48 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 81 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 250 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 307 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 308 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 310 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 384 
f. 2. op. 2, ed. khr. 385 
f. 2. op. 3, ed. khr. 1 
f. 2, op. 2, ed. khr, 1035 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 3 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 6  
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 10 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 11 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 13 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 14  
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 16 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 17 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 21 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 22 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 23 
f. 10, op. 1, ed. khr. 25 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 31 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 35 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 39 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 43 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 53 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 54 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 55 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 62  
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 86 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 91 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 98 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 99 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 100 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 101 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 104 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 107 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 111 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 118 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 119 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 120 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 121 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 123 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 133 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 141 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 143 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 144 
f. 10. op. 1, ed. khr. 166 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 8 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 10 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 12 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 18 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 25 
f. 25. op. 1, ed. khr. 50 
f. 87, op. 1, ed. khr. 27 
f. 87, op. 3, ed. khr. 139   
f. 87, op. 3, ed. khr. 337 
f. 87, op. 3, ed. khr. 476 
f. 87, op. 6, ed. khr. 423 
f. 87, op. 6, ed. khr. 516 
f. 87, op. 6, ed. khr. 635 
f. 141, op. 1, ed. khr. 27 
f. 141, op. 1, ed. khr. 144 
f. 141, op. 1, ed. khr. 1018 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 6 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 140 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 82 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 104 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 109 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 187 
f. 181, op. 1, ed. khr. 234 
f. 1422, op. 2, ed. khr 50 
f. 1549, op. 1, ed. khr. 2  
3. Russian State Archive of Literature and Art (Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv literatury i 
iskusstva) (RGALI) 
f. 2941, op. 1, ed. khr. 197 
f. 2941, op. 1, ed. khr. 198 
f. 2309, op. 1, ed. khr. 20 
f. 2309, op. 1, ed. khr. 49 
f. 2309, op. 1, ed. khr. 55 
f. 2309, op.1, ed. khr. 71 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 136  
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr.147 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 172 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 193 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 220 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 225 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 1140 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 1156 
f. 2943, op. 1, ed. khr. 1497 
f. 962, op. 19, ed. khr. 295  
f. 962, op. 19, ed. khr. 317  
5. State Tretyakov Gallery, Manuscripts Department (GTG) 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 144 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 342 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 366 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 617 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 633 
f. 8, op. 3, ed. khr. 641 
Primary Sources 
Russian Journals and Newspapers 
Brigada khudozhnikov 
Iskusstvo 
Iskusstvo v massy 
Izvestiia 
Kultura vostoka 
Pechat i revoliutsiia 
Pravda 
Tvorchestvo 
Novyi vostok 
Revoliutsionnyi vostoka 
Za proletarskoe iskusstvo 
Vostok: zhurnal literatury, nauki i iskusstva 
Georgian and Transcaucasian Journals and Newspapers (in Georgian and Russian language) 
Feniks (Phoenix) 
Kommunisti (The Communist) 
Khelovneba (Art, Tiflis) 
Khelovneba (Art, Kutaisi) 
Khelovnebis drosha (Art Banner) 
Proletaruli khelovnebisatvis (For Proletarian Art) 
Na rubezhe vostoka (At the Frontier of the East) 
Musha (Worker) 
Pravda vostoka (Truth of the East) 
Zaria vostoka (Dawn of the East) 
Sotsiologicheskaia poetika (Sociological Poetics) 
Newspaper and Journal Articles 
L. Agonov, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 23 November 1937, p. 2. 
A. Alf, Niko Pirosmanishvili, Iskusstvo, 3-4, 1929, pp. 106-113. 
B. Arvatov, O formalno-sotsiologicheskom metode, Sotsiologicheskaia poetika (Moscow, 
1928), pp. 29-32. 
L. Beria, ssr kavshiris axali konstitutsia da amier-kavkasiis pederatsia [The New 
Constitution of the USSR and the Transcaucasian Federation], Sabchota khelovneba, 
1936, pp. 1-5. 
F. S. Bogorodsky, Filialy AKhRR i OMAKhR in I. M. Gronsky and V. N. Perelman, 
Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii: sbornik vospominanii, statei, 
dokumnetov (Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 127-29.  
V. Chepelev, O peizazhe sotsialisticheskoi Gruzii, Iskusstvo, 1, 1938, pp. 21-34. 
V. Chepelev and E. Zhuravleva,Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva v Mosvke, Izvestiia, 27 
October 1937, p. 4.  
B. S. Chernyshev, Iz deiatelnosti otdela po izucheniiu iskusstva narodov SSSR, in Yakob 
Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (Vypusk pervyi) (Moscow: GAKhN, 
1927), pp. 74-80. 
F. D., Iskusstvo. Te kotorykh my ne znali (K vystavke Iskusstvo narodov SSSR) 
Izvestiia, 15 November 1927, p. 5. 
B. P. Denike, Muzei vostochnykh kultur, Izvestiia, 13 June 1926, p. 5. 
S. Dudin, Kirgizskii ornament, Vostok, 5, 1925, pp. 164-83. 
A. Duduchava, Kartiny khudozhnikov Sovetskoi Gruzii, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 5 August 
1936, p. 1. 
A. Duduchava, Novye temynovye kraski: vystavka Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii za 13 
let, Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 17 September 1934, p. 1. 
A. Duduchava, Sotsialisturi realizmi da klasikuri memkvidreobis problema [Socialist 
realism and the problem of classical heritage], Sabchota khelovneba, 2, 1935, pp. 13-
A. Duduchava, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstva v Moskve, Izvestiia, 17 October 1937, p. 3. 
A. Duduchava, Sabchota sazogadoebrioba da chveni zhurnalis amotsenebi [Soviet Society 
and the Tasks of Our Journal], Sabchota khelovneba, 1, 1927, p. 1. 
A. Duduchava, Pormalizmisa da gaubralebis tsinaaghmdeg, Sabchota khelovneba, 3, 1936. 
A. Gabuniia, Sovremennoe gruzinskoe narodnoe tvorchestva, Iskusstvo, 1, 1938, p 39. 
A. Gen, Niko Pirosmanishvili, Brigada khudozhnikov, 1, 1931, p. 29. 
Er. Gordeladze, Pormalizmis tsinaaghmdeg musikashi [Against Formalism in Music], 
Sabchota khelovneba, 3, 1936. 
L. Gudiashvili, Ovladet metodom sotsialisticheskogo realizma, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1 May 
1935, p. 4. 
B. Ioganson, Khoroshee nachalo, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3. 
V. Kemenov, Vystavka gruzinskogo iskusstvo i sovetskaia istoricheskaia zhivopis, Pravda, 
22 December 1937, p. 3. 
Vl. A. Keshelava, 'Khudozhniki sovetskoi Gruzii - k predstoiashchei vystavke gruzinskogo 
iskusstva,' Sovetskoe iskusstvo, 11 November 1937, p. 4. 
Gr. Khevtasi, Sotsialisturi realizmi da klassikuri momkvidreobis problema [Socialist 
realism and the problem of classical heritage], Sabchota khelovneba, 2, 1935, pp. 11-
P. Kiselis, Tsirkuliarnoe pismo tsentralnogo soveta AKhR filialam, vsem chlenam i 
kandidatam AKhR: biulleten informatsionnogo biuro AKhR, posviashchennogo i 
Vsesoiuznomu sezdu AKhR, 1928 in I. M. Gronsky and V. N. Perelman, 
Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii: sbornik vospominanii, statei, 
dokumnetov (Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 306-09. 
P. Kogan, Ocherednaia zadacha Akademii, in Yakob Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov 
SSSR (Vypusk pervyi), (Moscow: GAKhN, 1927), pp. 5-8. 
D. Konstantinov, Proletkultis sakhviti studia [Proletkult visual studio], Khelovnebis 
drosha, 2, 1924, p. 27. 
V. Krachkovskaia, Tatarskoe iskusstvo i byt v Krymu, Vostok, 5, 1925, pp. 213-16. 
E. Kriger, Istoriia, voploshchennaia v zhivopisi, Iskusstvo, 1, 1938, pp. 3-18. 
E. Kriger, Pervye vpechatleniia, Izvestiia, 17 November 1937, p. 4. 
A. Kutateladze, Bolshaia tema, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3. 
A. Lunacharsky, Diskussiia ob AKhRR in I. M. Gronsky and V. N. Perelman, Assotsiatsiia 
khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii: sbornik vospominanii, statei, dokumnetov 
(Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 229-39. 
A. Lunacharsky, Khudozhestvennoe tvorchestvo natsionalnostei SSSR in Yakob 
Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (Vypusk pervyi), (Moscow: GAKhN, 
1927), pp. 9-24. 
A. Lunacharsky, VIII vystavka AKhRR (Privetstvennaia rech na torzhestvennom otkrytii 
vystavki zhizn i byt narodov SSSR 3 Maia 1926 g.) in I. M. Gronsky and V. N. 
Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi Rossii: sbornik vospominanii, 
statei, dokumnetov (Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973), pp. 224-27. 
S. Malt, Na grani rastsveta: puti razvitiia revoliutsionnogo izo-iskusstva Uzbekistana, 
Iskusstvo v massy, 8, 1930, p. 12. 
G. Mirzoevi, SARMA, Proletaruli khelovnebisatsvis, 1-2, 1931, p. 5. 
G. Mirzoevi, Sotsialisturi rekonstruktsia da plakati [Socialist reconstruction and the 
poster], Proletaruli khelovnebisatsvis, 5-6, 1932, pp. 4-5. 
G. Mirzoevi, Tsru damkvrelobis tsinaaghmdeg (Sak. khelovn. mushakebis kavshiri 
oportunizmis chaobshi [Against false shock-work (The Georgian Art Workers 
Union in a Swamp of Opportunism)], Proletaruli khelovnebisatsvis, 3-4, 1932, p. 29. 
Al. P., Khudozhniki Gruzii za 13 let, Zaria vostoka, 6 May 1934, p. 4. 
K. Paustovsky, Niko Pirosmanishvili: zhizn na kleenke, Brigada khudozhnikov, 1, 1931, pp. 
28-29. 
L. Rempel, O natsionalnom iskusstve, Brigada khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 2. 
L. Rempel and V. Chepelev, Natsionalnaia arkhitektura v srednei azii, Iskusstvo v massy, 8, 
1930, pp. 10-11. 
L. Rempel, K sozdaniiu gruzinskogo APKh, Za proletarskoe iskusstvo, 6, 1932, p. 15. 
L. Rempel, Na azerbaidzhanskom izo-fronte, Brigada khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 25. 
M. Rivkin, Izo-iskusstvo na severnom kavkaze, Iskusstvo v massy, 9, 1930, p. 26. 
F. Roginskaia, Smotr iskusstva narodov SSSR (Miasnitskaia, 21, Vkhutemas.), Pravda, 11 
November 1927, p. 5. 
Yu. Samarin, Sovremennye problemy izucheniia iskusstva natsionalnostei, in Yakob 
Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov (Moscow: 
Gosizdat, 1930), pp. 19-31. 
V. Sokol, AKhR i OMAKhR, Na rubezhe vostoka, 9-10, 1930, p. 120. 
V. Sokol, SARMA, Na rubezhe vostoka, 9-10, 1930, p. 119. 
V. Sokol, Tematika sovetskoi zhivopisi, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 1930, pp. 109-14. 
V. Sokol, Zhivopis: Melkoburzhuaznye tendentsii v gruzinskom iskusstvoznanii: v 
diskussionnom poriadke, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 1931, pp. 95-102.  
B. Sokolov, Iskusstvo narodov SSSR i sovetskaia kultura, in Yakob Tugenkhold et al., 
Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1930), pp. 3-
P. Sokolov-Skalia, Kartiny geroicheskoi borby Bolshevistskikh organizatsii Zakavkaze, 
Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3. 
I. V. Stalin, Novaia obstanovkanovye zadachi khoziaistvennikov na stroitelstvakh. Rech 
na soveshchanii khoziaistvennikov, 23 iunia, 1931 in Sochineniia, vol. 12 (Moscow: 
Gosizdat, 1951).  
O. Tatevosian et al., Iskusstvo natsionalnykh sovetskikh sotsialisticheskikh respublik, Za 
proletarskoe iskusstvo, 6, 1931, pp. 22-27. 
Ya. Tugenkhold, Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo narodov SSSR, in Yakob Tugenkhold et al., 
Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1930), pp. 
32-53. 
N. Turkestansky, Izofront Srednei Azii  na proletarskie relsy, Za proletarskoe iskusstvo, 4, 
1932, p. 14. 
__________, Deklaratsiia revoliutsionnykh khudozhnikov Gruzii, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1, 
1930, pp. 117-18. 
__________, Gruzinskie khudozhniki v Moskve, Izvestiia, 1 April 1938, p. 4 
__________, Gruzinskie khudozhniki v Moskve, Pravda, 1 April 1938, p. 4. 
__________, Mkhatvrebi, romlebits mushaoben temaze: rogor qaligdeboda geladi [Artists 
working on the theme of How the Leader Evolved], Sabchota khelovneba, 5, 1935, 
[n. p]. 
__________, Na vystavke gruzinskogo iskusstva,Izvestiia, 21 November 1937, p. 4. 
__________, Saavaldebulo dadgenileba: revkomis dadgenilebis shesakheb qvela teatris 
politikuri ganatlebis mtavri sammartvelos gamgeblobashi gadasvlis shesakheb garda 
akademiuri da sanakhaobiti teatrebisa [Decree Resolution: Revkom resolution about 
the transition of all political theatre departments to the main division of government 
except academic theatres and shows] Komunisti, 130, 9 August 1921, p. 2. 
__________, Sakartvelos proletkulti [Georgian Proletkult], Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924, 
p. 25. 
__________, Sakartvelo proletkultis tekhnikumi [Georgian Proletkult Tekhnikum], 
Khelovnebis drosha, 2, 1924, pp. 27-8. 
__________, Sakartvelos revolutsionur mkhatvarta deklaratsia: sakartvelos revolutsiur 
mkhatvarta asotsiatsiis daarsebis shesakheb [The declaration of Georgian 
revolutionary artists: About the establishment of the Association of Georgian 
Revolutionary Artists], Kommunisti, 167 (14 February), p. 6. 
__________, Talanty sotsialisticheskoi Gruzii, Izvestiia, 14 January 1937, p. 1. 
__________, Tov. L. P. Beria u khudozhnikov, Na rubezhe vostoka, 20 April, 1935, p. 1. 
__________, Tskhovreba da khelovneba: khelovnebis ganqopilebis reorganizatsia [Art and 
life: Reorganisation of the Art Department], Khelovneba, 2, 1921, pp. 14-16. 
__________, V soiuze sovetskikh khudozhnikov Gruzii, Na rubezhe vostoka, 1 June 1935, 
p. 10. 
__________, Vystavka iskusstva gruzinskoi SSR, Pravda, 21 December 1937, p. 3. 
__________, Vystavka iskusstva gruzinskoi SSR, Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3.  
__________, Vystavka kartin khudozhnikov Azerbaidzhana, Pravda, 1 December 1937, p. 
__________, Vystavka kartin v Baku, Pravda, 2 October 1937, p. 3 
__________, Vystavka khudozhnikov Gruzii, Pravda, 31 May 1938, p. 6. 
__________, Za razvertyvanie diskussii po voprosam natsionalnogo iskusstva, Brigada 
khudozhnikov, 7, 1931, p. 30. 
__________, Zriteli o vystavke (Iz knigi vpechatelenii), Pravda, 22 December 1937, p. 3.  
Books 
M. M. Arkadev, I. Matsa et al., O zhivopisi, plakate i skulpture za XV let: sbornik statei 
(Moscow: Vsekokhudozhnik. 1934). 
N. Berdzenishvili, Sakartvelos istoriis sakitkhebi [Questions of Georgian History], Vol. V 
(Tbilisi, 1966). 
L. Beria, K voprosu ob istorii bolshevistskikh organizatsii v Zakavkaze: doklad na sobranii 
Tbilisskogo partaktiva, 21-22 iulia 1935 g. (Moscow: OGIZ, 1948). 
I. Borozdin, ed., Khudozhestvennaia kultura sovetskogo vostoka: sbornik statei A. 
Bashkirova, B. Denike, P. Dulskogo, B. Zasypkina, V. Zummera pod obshchei 
redaktsiei I. Borozdina (Moscow: Akademia, 1931). 
I. Borozdin, Problemy izucheniia in Borozdin, ed., Khudozhestvennaia kultura sovetskogo 
vostoka, pp. 7-18. 
B. P. Denike et al., Kultura vostoka: sbornik muzeia vostochnykh kultur (Moscow: Glavlit, 
1927). 
Aleksandre Duduchava, Gruzinskaia zhivopis; opyt sotisialno-esteticheskogo issledovaniia 
(Tiflis: Gosizdat Gruzii, 1930). 
Vladimir Friche, Problemy iskusstvovedeniia. sbornik statei po voprosam sotsiologii, 
iskusstva i literatury (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1930). 
Vladimir Friche, Sotsiologiia iskusstva (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1926). 
Maxim Gorky, Sobrannye sochinenii v 30 tomakh, 27 (Moscow: GIKhL, 1954). 
I. M. Gronsky and V. N. Perelman, Assotsiatsiia khudozhnikov revoliutsionnoi rossii: sbornik 
vospominanii, statei, dokumnetov (Moscow: Izobrazitelnoe iskusstvo, 1973). 
V. I. Lenin, On Literature and Art (Critical Remarks on the National Question) (Moscow: 
Progress Publishers, 1967). 
Anatoly Lunacharsky, Ocherki marksistskoi teorii iskusstv (Moscow: AKhRR, 1926). 
I. K. Luppol, M. M. Rozental et al., eds, Sezd pisatelei SSSR: Pervyi vsesoiuznyi sezd 
sovetskikh pisatelei (1934): stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 
1990). 
I. Luppol, ed, Trudy pervogo vserossiiskogo muzeinogo sezda, protokoly plenarnykh 
zasedanii 15 dekabria 1930 (Moscow: Uchgiz-narkompros, 1931). 
Ivan Matsa, Ocherki po teoreticheskomu iskusstvoznaniiu: stati (Moscow: 
Kommunisticheskaia akademia, 1930). 
Ivan Matsa, ed, Sovetskoe iskusstvo za 15 let. Materialy i dokumentatsiia (Moscow: Izogiz, 
1933). 
Ivan Matsa, Tvorcheskii metod i khodozhestvennoe nasledstvo (Moscow: 
Kommunisticheskaia akademia, 1933). 
Georgy Malenkov, Otchetnyi doklad XIX sezdu partii rabote tsentralnogo komiteta VKP(b): 
5 oktiabria 1952 g. (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1952). 
E. S. Melikadze, Iskusstvo gruzinskoi SSR (Moscow: Gosizdat, 1938). 
N. Mitsishvili et al., Gruzinskie stikhi i pesni o Staline (Tbilisi: Zaria vostoka, 1937). 
K. D. Muratov, Periodika literature i iskusstvu za gody revoliutsii (Leningrad: Akademiia 
nauk, 1933) 
N. S.  Nikolaeva et al., Muzei vostochnykh kultur (Moscow: [s. n.], 1957). 
Lazar Rempel, Zhivopis sovetskogo zakavkazia: iskusstvo narodov SSSR: Azerbiadzhan, 
Armeniia, Gruziia (Moscow; Leningrad: OGIZ-IZOGIZ, 1932). 
Shota Rustaveli, The Knight in the Panthers Skin (trans. V. Urushadze) (Tbilisi: Sabchota 
khelovneba, 1971). 
I. V. Stalin, O dialekticheskom i istoricheskom materializme (1938) (Moscow: Politizdat, 
1950). 
I. V. Stalin, Marksizm i natsionalnyi vopros (1913) in I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia, vol. 2 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1946), pp. 290-367. 
I. V. Stalin, Sochineniia (12 vols.) (Moscow: Politizdat, 194652). 
I. V. Stalin, Voprosy leninizma (11th ed.) (Moscow: Politizdat, 1953). 
V. E. Strelkova, Ekspozitsionno-vystavochnaia deiatelnost Muzeia vostochnykh kultur v 
1926-1932 gg. (Publikatsiia dokumentov iz arkhiva GMINV) (Moscow: 
Gosudarstvennyi muzei vostoka, 1996). 
N. S. Sycheva, Iz istorii izucheniia vostochnykh muzeev v SSSR (Moscow: [s. n.], 1978). 
Titsian Tabidze et al., Pirosmanishvili (Tiflis: Gosizdat Gruzii, 1926). 
Yakob Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR (Vypusk pervyi) (Moscow: GAKhN, 
1927). 
Yakob Tugenkhold et al., Iskusstvo narodov SSSR: sbornik statei i materialov (Moscow: 
Gosizdat, 1930). 
Kirill Zdanevich, Niko Pirosmanishvili in Titsian Tabidze et al., Pirosmanishvili (Tiflis: 
Gosizdat Gruzii, 1926). 
____________, Rasskazy starykh rabochykh Zakavkazia o velikom vozhde (Moscow: 
Molodaia gvardiia, 1937). 
____________, Rech sekretaria TsK VKP(b) A. A. Zhdanov, I. K. Luppol, M. M. Rozental 
et al., eds, Sezd pisatelei SSSR: Pervyi vsesoiuznyi sezd sovetskikh pisatelei (1934): 
stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 1990), pp. 2-5. 
____________, Velikii vozhd i uchitel: rasskazy starykh rabochikh o rabote t. Stalina v 
Zakavkaze (Tbilisi: ZKK VKP, 1936). 
Exhibition Catalogues 
Dimitri Shevardnadze et al., Niko Pirosmanishvili: iliustrovanii katalog vistavki; Vystavka 
Kartin Niko Pirosmanishvili (ex. cat.) (Tbilisi: Metekhi Museum, 1938). 
Dimitri Shevardnadze et al., Vystavka Kartin Niko Pirosmanishvili (ex. cat.) (Tbilisi: Metekhi 
Museum, 1938). 
Yakob Tugenkhold, Katalog yubileinoi vystavki iskusstva narodov SSSR (ex. cat.) (Moscow: 
GAKhN, 1927). 
Nikoloz Vacheishvili et al., Pirosmani (ex. cat.) (Tbilisi: Sakartvelos erovnuli museumi, 
2012).  
____________, Rev. mkhatvarta asotsiatsia SARMA suratebis gamopena / Vystavka kartin 
Assotsiiatsii Rev. Khud. Gruzii SARMA (ex. cat.) (Sakartvelos erovnuli gallereia, 
November 1930).  
____________, Vosmaia vystavka kartin i skulptury AKhRR: Zhizn i byt narodov (ex. cat.) 
(Moscow: AKhRR, 1926). 
____________, Vystavka izobrazitelnogo iskusstva Armianskoi SSR (ex. cat.) (Moscow: 
Iskusstvo, 1939).  
____________, Vystavka proizvedenii zhivopisi, grafiki i skultptury gruzinskoi SSR (ex. cat.) 
(Moscow: IZOGIZ, 1937).  
Secondary Sources 
Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of 
Nationalism (London: Verso, 2006. First edition: 1983). 
Balzs Apor et al, The Leader Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and the Eastern Bloc 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004). 
Irina Arsensihvili et al., Pirosmani (Tbilisi: Bakur Sulakauri Publishing, 2012). 
Vardan Azatyan, 'On the Ruins of the Soviet Past: Some Thoughts on Religion, Nationalism 
and Artistic Avant-Gardes in Armenia', ARTMargins, 1 (2012). 
Vardan Azatyan, 'Disintegrating Progress: Bolshevism, National Modernism, and the 
Emergence of Contemporary Art Practices in Armenia, ARTMargins, 1 (2012). 
Mark Bassin, Russia Between Europe and Asia: The Ideological Construction of Geographic 
Space, Slavic Review, 50:1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 1-17.  
Bettina Baron and Helga Kotthoff, eds, Gender in Interaction: Perspectives on Femininity 
and Masculinity in Ethnography and Discourse (Philadelphia: John Benjamins 
Publishing, 2001). 
Vakhtang Beridze and Nina Ezerskaia, Iskusstvo sovetskoi Gruzii, 1921-70 gg.: zhivopis 
grafika skulptura (Moscow: Akademia khudozhestv, 1975). 
Stephen Black, The Apprentice as Sorcerer: Stalin as Commissar of Nationalities, 1917-1924 
(London: Greenwood Press, 1994). 
Rosalind P. Blakesley and Susan E. Reid, eds, Russian Art and the West: A Century of 
Dialogue in Painting, Architecture, and the Decorative Arts (DeKalb: Northern 
Illinois University Press, 2007). 
Timothy K. Blauvelt, Resistance, Discourse and Nationalism in the March 1956 Events in 
Georgia in Timothy K. Blauvelt and Jeremy Smith, eds, Georgia after Stalin: 
Nationalism and Soviet Power (London: BASEES/Routledge Series of Russian and 
East European Studies, 2015), pp. 116-128. 
Timothy K. Blauvelt, Status Shift and Ethnic Mobilisation in the March 1956 Events in 
Georgia, Europe-Asia Studies, 61:4 (June 2009), pp. 651-68. 
Timothy K. Blauvelt and Jeremy Smith, eds, Georgia after Stalin: Nationalism and Soviet 
Power (London: BASEES/Routledge Series of Russian and East European Studies, 
2015). 
Milka Bliznakov, International Modernism or Socialist Realism: Soviet Architecture in the 
Eastern Republics in John Norman, ed, New perspectives on Russian and Soviet 
artistic culture: 4th World congress for Soviet and East European Studies: Selected 
papers (New York: St Martins Press, 1994), pp. 112-30.Roy Bolton, Russian 
Orientalism: Central Asia & the Caucasus (London: Sphinx books, 2009). 
John E. Bowlt, Lado Gudiashvili in Luigi Magarotto et al., LAvanguardia a Tiflis: studi, 
ricerche, cronache, testimonianze, documenti (Venice: University of Venice, 1982). 
John E. Bowlt, ed and trans, The Salon Album of Vera Sudeikin-Stravinsky (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1995). 
David Brandenberger, Stalin as Symbol: a case study of the personality cult and its 
construction in Sarah Davies and James Harris, eds, Stalin: A New History 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 249-70. 
Daniel R. Brower and Edward J. Lazzerini, Russia's Orient: Imperial Borderlands and 
Peoples, 1700-1917 (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1997). 
Jennifer Brewin, Ucha Japaridze, Lado Gudiashvili, and the Spiritual in Georgian Painting 
in Louise Hardiman and Nicola Kozicharow, eds, Modernism and the Spiritual in 
Russian Art (Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, 2017), pp. 229-63.  
Jane Burbank and David L. Russel, eds, Imperial Russia: New Histories for the Empire 
(Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1998).   
Greg Castillo, Peoples at an Exhibition: Soviet Architecture and the National Question in 
Thomas Lahusen and Evgeny Dobrenko, eds, Socialist Realism Without Shores 
(London: Duke University Press, 1995), pp. 91-119. 
V. G. Chebotareva, Narkomnats RSFSR: svet i teni natsionalnoi politiki 1917-1924 gg. 
(Moscow: Obshchestvennaia akademiia, 2003). 
Masha Chlenova, Staging Soviet Art: 15 Years of Artists of the RSFSR, 193233, October, 
147 (winter 2014), pp. 3855. 
Masha Chlenova, On Display: Transformations of the Avant-Garde in Soviet Public Culture, 
19281932 thesis (PhD), Columbia University, New York, 2010.  
Boris Chukhovich, Sub rosa: ot mikroistorii k natsionalnomu iskusstvu Uzbekistana, Ab 
imperio, 3 (2017). 
Katerina Clark, Moscow, the Fourth Rome: Stalinism, Cosmopolitanism and the Evolution of 
Soviet Culture, 1931-1941 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011). 
Katerina Clark, Petersburg, Crucible of Cultural Revolution (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1995). 
Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
2000. Original edition 1981). 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown and Brandon Taylor, eds, Art of the Soviets: Painting, sculpture and 
architecture in a one-Party state, 1917-1992 (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1993). 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown, Art under Stalin (Oxford: Phaidon, 1991). 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown, How Is The Empire? Painting in the Non-Russian Republics in 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown et al., Soviet Socialist Realist Painting 1930s-1960s: 
Paintings from Russia, the Ukraine, Belorussia, Uzbekistan, Kirgizia, Georgia, 
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Moldova selected in the USSR (Oxford: Museum of Modern 
Art, 1992). 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown, Painting in the non-Russian Republics in Matthew Cullerne-
Bown and Brandon Taylor, eds, Art of the Soviets: Painting, sculpture and 
architecture in a one-Party state, 1917-1992 (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1993), pp. 140-53. 
Michael David-Fox, Peter Holquist and Marshall Poe, eds, The Resistance Debate in Russian 
and Soviet History (Bloomington: Slavica, 2003). 
Sarah Davies, Stalin and the Making of the Leader Cult in the 1930s in Balzs Apor et al., 
The Leader Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and the Eastern Bloc 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), pp. 29-46. 
Sarah Davies and James Harris, eds, Stalin: A New History (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005). 
Aliya Nurtaevna Abykayeva de Tiesenhausen, Socialist Realist Orientalism?: Depictions of 
Soviet Central Asia 1930s-1950s, thesis (Ph.D), University of London, Courtauld 
Institute of Art, 2010. 
Judith Devlin, Beria and the Development of the Stalin Cult in Geoffrey Roberts, ed, 
Annual of the Irish Association for Russian and East European Studies (special 
edition: Stalin: His Time and Ours), 1, 2005, pp. 26-48. 
Evgeny Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism (trans. by Jesse M. Savage) (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2007). 
Evgeny Dobrenko and Eric Naiman, eds, The landscape of Stalinism: the art and ideology of 
Soviet space (Seattle: Combined Academic, 2003). 
Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Reader: Social and Aesthetic Contexts of the 
Reception of Soviet Literature (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997). 
Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Writer: Social and Aesthetic Origins of Soviet 
Literary Culture (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001). 
Evgeny Dobrenko, Stalinist Cinema and The Production of History: Museum of the 
Revolution, (trans. Sarah Young) (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008). 
Aleksandr Dobrokhotov, GAKhN: An Aesthetics of Ruins, or Aleksej Losevs Failed 
Project, Studies in East European Thought, 63 (February, 2011), pp. 31-42. 
Ilia Dorontchenkov, Russian and Soviet views of modern Western art: 1890s to mid-1930s 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009). 
Charlotte Douglas, Terms of Transition: The First Discussional Exibition and the Society of 
Easel Painters, in The Great utopia: the Russian and Soviet avant-garde, 1915-1932 
(ex. cat) (New York: Rizzoli International Publications, 1992). 
Clo Drieu, Fictions nationales: cinma, empire et nation en Ouzbkistan (1919-1937) 
(Paris: ditions Karthala, 2013) 
Irina Dzutsova, Pirosmani. Pirosmani (Tbilisi: [s. n.], 2013). 
Matthew Cullerne-Bown et al., Soviet Socialist Realist Painting 1930s-1960s: Paintings from 
Russia, the Ukraine, Belorussia, Uzbekistan, Kirgizia, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan 
and Moldova selected in the USSR (Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1992). 
Andrew Ellis, ed, Socialist realisms: Soviet painting 1920-1970 (ex. cat.) (trans. Mario 
Chianese and Jesse M. Savage) (Milan: Skira, 2012). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Cultural Revolution in Russia, 19281931 (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1978). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union 1921-1934 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, Tear off the Masks Identity and Imposture in Twentieth-Century Russia 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Commissariat of Enlightenment: Soviet Organization of Education 
and the Arts Under Lunacharsky, October 1917-1921 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1970). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front. Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1992). 
Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Emergence of Glaviskusstvo. Class War on the Cultural Front, 
Moscow, 1928-29, Soviet Studies, 23:2 (Oct. 1971), pp. 236-53. 
Mariam Gachechiladze, Ucha Japaridze  tsignis mkhatvara [Ucha Japaridze - Book 
Illumination] in Mtsignobari 06, [Scribe 06] (Tbilisi, 2006.), pp. 169-84. 
L. Sh. Gagua, ed, Lado Gudiashvili: kniga vospominani; stati; iz perepiski; sovremenniki o 
khudozhnike (Moscow: Sovetskii khudozhnik, 1987). 
Musya Glants, From the Southern Mountains to the Northern Seas: Painting in the 
Republics in the Early Soviet Period in John Norman, ed, New perspectives on 
Russian and Soviet artistic culture: 4th World congress for Soviet and East European 
Studies: Selected papers (New York: St Martins Press, 1994), pp. 95-111. 
Igor Golomstock, Totalitarian Art: In the Soviet Union, the Third Reich, Fascist Italy and the 
People's Republic of China (New York: Harper Collins Icon Editions, 1990). 
Svetlana Gorshenina and Vera Tolz, Constructing Heritage in Early Soviet Central Asia: The 
Politics of Memory in a Revolutionary Context*, Ab Imperio (4), 2016, pp. 77-115. 
Bruce Grant, Empire and Savagery: The Politics of Primitivism in Late Imperial Russia in 
Daniel R. Brower and Edward J. Lazzerini, eds, Russias Orient: Imperial 
Borderlands and Peoples, 17001917 (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1997), 
pp. 292-310. 
Bruce Grant, The Captive and the Gift: Cultural Histories of Sovereignty in Russia and the 
Caucasus (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009). 
Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-Garde, Aesthetic Dictatorship, and Beyond 
(trans. Charles Rougle) (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988).  
Boris Groys and Max Hollein, eds, Traumfabrik Kommunismus: die visuelle Kultur der 
Stalinzeit (ex. cat.) (Ostfildern-Ruit: Hatje Cantz, c.2003). 
N. Gudiashvili, Apollon Kutateladze (Tbilisi: Zaria vostoka, 1957). 
Irina Gutkin, The Cultural Origins of the Socialist Realist Aesthetic, 1890-1934 (Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1999). 
Hans Gnther, ed, The Culture of the Stalin Period (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1990). 
Hans Gnther and Evgeny Dobrenko, eds, Sotsrealisticheskii kanon (St Petersburg: 
Akademicheskii proekt, 2000). 
Jochen Hellbeck, Speaking Out: Languages of Affirmation and Dissent, in Michael David-
Fox, Peter Holquist and Marshall Poe, eds, The Resistance Debate in Russian and 
Soviet History (Bloomington: Slavica, 2003), pp. 103-37.  
Francine Hirsch, Empire of Nations: Ethnographic Knowledge and the Making of the Soviet 
Union, Culture and Society after Socialism (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2005). 
Francine Hirsch, Getting to Know The Peoples of the USSR: Ethnographic Exhibits as 
Soviet Virtual Tourism 1923-1934, Slavic Review, 62:4 (Winter, 2003), pp. 683-709. 
Jeremy Howard, East European art, 1650-1950 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
Slovenian artists group IRWIN, ed, East Art Map: Contemporary Art and Eastern Europe 
(London: Afterall, 2006). 
Michael Kemper, Red Orientalism: Mikhail Pavlovich and Marxist Oriental Studies in Early 
Soviet Russia Die Welt des Islams, 50:3/4, A Muslim Interwar Soviet Union (2010), 
pp. 435-76. 
Michael Kemper and Stephan Conermann, eds, The Heritage of Soviet Oriental Studies 
(London: Routledge Contemporary Russia and Eastern Europe, 2011). 
Peter Kenez, Cinema and Soviet Society, 1917-1953 (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992). 
Adeeb Khalid, Russian History and the Debate over Orientalism, Kritika: Explorations in 
Russian and European History, 1:4 (2000), pp. 691-99. 
Adeeb Khalid, The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: Jadidism in Central Asia (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1998). 
Christina Kiaer, Lyrical Socialist Realism, October, 147 (winter 2014), pp. 56-77. 
Ketevan Kintsurashvili, David Kakabadze: klassik XX veka, (St Petersburg: Arbat, 2002). 
Amy Knight, Beria: Stalins First Lieutenant (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).  
Nathaniel Knight, Grigorev in Orenburg, 1851-1862: Russian Orientalism in the Service of 
Empire? Slavic Review, 59 (2000), pp. 74-100. 
Maria Kokkori, Exhibiting Malevich Under Stalin, in Christina Lodder, Maria Kokkori and 
Maria Mileeva, eds, Utopian reality: reconstructing culture in revolutionary Russia 
and beyond (Leiden: Brill, 2013), p. 133-51. 
Miklos Kun, Stalin: An Unknown Portrait (Budapest: Central European University Press, 
2003). 
Erast Kuznetsov, Pirosmani (Leningrad: Iskusstvo, Leningradskoe otdelenie, 1975). 
Erast Kuznetsov, Pirosmani (St Petersburg, Vita Nova, 2012). 
Thomas Lahusen and Evgeny Dobrenko, eds, Socialist Realism Without Shores (London: 
Duke University Press, 1995). 
Susan Layton, Russian Literature and Empire: Conquest of the Caucasus from Pushkin to 
Tolstoy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994). 
Christina Lodder, Maria Kokkori and Maria Mileeva, eds, Utopian reality: reconstructing 
culture in revolutionary Russia and beyond (Leiden: Brill, 2013). 
Angelina Lucento, Painting for the Collective: Art, Politics, and Communication in Russia, 
1918-1932, thesis (PhD), Department of Art History, Northwestern University, 2014. 
Luigi Magarotto et al., LAvanguardia a Tiflis: studi, ricerche, cronache, testimonianze, 
documenti (Venice: University of Venice, 1982). 
Lynn Mally, Culture of the Future: The Proletkult Movement in Revolutionary Russia 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990). 
Terry Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 
1923-1939 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001). 
Maria Mileeva, Import and Reception of Western Art in Soviet Russia in the 1920s and 
1930s: Selected Exhibitions and Their Role, thesis (Ph.D), University of London, 
Courtauld Institute of Art, 2011. 
Jamie Miller, Soviet Cinema: Politics and Persuasion under Stalin (New York: I. B. Taurus, 
2010). 
Taline Ter Minassian, Colporteurs du Comintern: LUnion sovitique et les minorits au 
Moyen-Orient (Paris: Presses de la Fondation nationale des sciences politiques, 1997).  
Tengiz Mirzashvili, Pirosmani (Tbilisi: GAT Group, 2013).  
A. Morozov, K istorii vystavki Khudozhniki RSFSR za 15 let, Sovetskoe iskusstvoznanie 
1 (1982), pp. 12067. 
Nino Nanava, Conceptualising the Georgian Nation: The Modern Intellectual Discourse of 
Georgian Identity, thesis (Ph.D), University of London, London School of 
Economics and Political Science, 2005. 
Tatiana Nikolskaia, Fantasticheskii gorod: russkaia kulturnaia zhizn Tbilisi (1917-1921) 
(Moscow: Fifth Country, 2000). 
Lauran Ninoshvili, Wailing in the Cities: Media, Modernity, and the Metamorphosis of 
Georgian Womens Expressive Labor, Music & Politics, 6:1 (Summer 2012). 
https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/mp/9460447.0006.202/--wailing-in-the-cities-media-
modernity-and-the-metamorphosis?rgn=main;view=fulltext accessed 27 April 2018.  
John Norman, ed, New perspectives on Russian and Soviet artistic culture: 4th World 
congress for Soviet and East European Studies: Selected papers (New York: St 
Martins Press, 1994). 
Vladimir Paperny, Architecture in the Age of Stalin: Culture Two (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2011). 
Kathleen F. Parth, Russian Village Prose: The Radiant Past (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1992). 
Christiana Payne and William Vaughan, eds, English Accents: Interactions with British Art c. 
1776-1855 (Aldershot: Ashgate Press, 2004). 
Moniek Peters, Op zoek naar: In Search of Pirosmani (ex. cat.) (Dordrecht: Dordrechts 
Museum, 2012). 
Jan Plamper, Georgian Koba or Soviet Father of the Peoples? The Stalin Cult and 
Ethnicity in Balzs Apor et al, The Leader Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin 
and the Eastern Bloc (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), pp. 123-40. 
Jan Plamper, The Stalin Cult: A Study in the Alchemy of Power (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2012). 
Harsha Ram, Decadent Nationalism, Peripheral Modernism: The Georgian Literary 
Manifesto between Symbolism and the Avant-garde, Modernism/modernity, 21:1 
(January 2014), pp. 334-59. 
Harsha Ram, Modernism on the Periphery: Literary Life in Post-revolutionary Tbilisi, 
Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, 5:2 (2004), pp. 367-82. 
Harsha Ram, The Imperial Sublime: A Russian Poetics of Empire (Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press, 2003). 
Harsha Ram and Zaza Shatrishvili, Romantic Topography and the Dilemma of Empire: The 
Caucasus in the Dialogue of Georgian and Russian Poetry, Russian Review, 63:1 
(2004), pp. 1-25. 
Donald Rayfield, Edge of Empires: A History of Georgia (London: Reaktion Books, 2012). 
Donald Rayfield,  The Death of Paolo Iashvili, The Slavonic and East European Review, 
68:4 (1990), pp. 631-64. 
Donald Rayfield, The Literature of Georgia: A History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994). 
Donald Rayfield, 29: Berias Holocaust in The Literature of Georgia: A History (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1994), pp. 261-70. 
Susan Reid, 10. The Art of Memory: Retrospectivism in Soviet Painting of the Brezhnev 
Era, in Matthew Cullerne-Bown and Brandon Taylor, Art of the Soviets: painting, 
sculpture, and architecture in a one-party state, 1917-1992 (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 1993), pp. 161-87. 
Geoffrey Roberts (ed.), Annual of the Irish Association for Russian and East European 
Studies (special edition: Stalin: His Time and Ours), 1, 2005. 
Rgine Robin, Socialist Realism: An Impossible Aesthetic, trans. Catherine Porter (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1992). 
David Schimmelpenninck van der Oye, Russian orientalism: Asia in the Russian mind from 
Peter the Great to the emigration (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010). 
Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978). 
Jane A. Sharp, Beyond Orientalism: Russian and Soviet Modernism on the Periphery of 
Empire, in Rosalind P. Blakesley and Susan E. Reid, eds, Russian Art and the West: 
A Century of Dialogue in Painting, Architecture, and the Decorative Arts (DeKalb: 
Northern Illinois University Press, 2007), pp. 112-33. 
Victor A. Shnirelman, The value of the past: myths, identity and politics in Transcaucasia 
(Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology, 2001). 
Yuri Slezkine, Primitive Communism and the Other Way Around, in Thomas Lahusen and 
Evgeny Dobrenko, eds, Socialist Realism Without Shores (London: Duke University 
Press, 1995), pp. 310-36. 
Yuri Slezkine, The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted 
Ethnic Particularism, Slavic Review, 53:2 (Summer 1994), pp. 414-52. 
Anthony D. Smith, The Myths and Memories of the Nation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999). 
Jeremy Smith, The Bolsheviks and the National Question, 1917-23 (Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 1999). 
Ronald G. Suny, The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution and the Collapse of the 
Soviet Union (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1993). 
Ronald G. Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation (second edition) (Indianapolis: Indiana 
University Press, 1994. Original edition: 1988). 
Richard Taylor and Derek Spring, eds, Stalinism and Soviet Cinema (New York: Routledge, 
1993). 
Maria Todorova, Does Russian Orientalism Have a Russian Soul? A Contribution to the 
Debate between Nathaniel Knight and Adeeb Khalid, Kritika: Explorations in 
Russian and European History, 1:4 (2000), pp. 717-27. 
Vera Tolz, Russias own Orient: the politics of identity and Oriental studies in the late 
Imperial and early Soviet periods (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011). 
Dimitri Tumanishvili et al., eds, International Interdisciplinary Conference Pirosmani and 
Georgian Culture, Tbilisi, 5th-7th November 2013: Proceedings (Tbilisi: George 
Chubinashvili National Research Centre for Georgian Art History and Heritage 
Preservation, 2014). 
Lynne Viola, Contending with Stalinism: Soviet Power and Popular Resistance in the 1930s 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002). 
V. E. Voitov, Iz istorii archeologicheskikh ekspeditsii Muzeia vostochnykh kultur v Starom 
Termeze. 1926-1928 gg. (Po arkhivnym dannym i publikatsiiam) (Moscow: 
Gosudarstvennyi muzei vostoka, 2001). 
V. E. Voitov, Materialy po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, 
veshchi, dela (Moscow: Skanrus, 2003). 
V. E. Voitov, Materialy po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka: 1951-1970 (Moscow: 
Skanrus, 2006). 
Emma Widdis, Visions of a New Land: Soviet Film from the Revolution to the Second World 
War (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003). 
Bertram Wolfe, Three who made a Revolution: A Biographical History (London: Penguin, 
1966). 
___________, Eksperiment/Experiment. A Journal of Russian Culture (special issue: 
RAKhN - The Russian Academy of Artistic Sciences), 3 (1997). 
List of Illustrations 
Figure 1. Davit Kakabadze, Meeting in Imereti, 1942, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 2. Davit Kakabadze, Rionges, 1933, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 3. Davit Kakabadze, Rionges, 1939, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 4. Davit Kakabadze, Mining at Kazbegi, 1949. GNM. 
Figure 5. Davit Kakabadze, Grain Elevator in Poti, 1949, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 6. Davit Kakabadze, The Processing of Gumbrine in the Vicinity of Kutaisi, 1951, oil 
on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 7. Lado Gudiashvili, Eviction of the Kulaks, 1931, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 8. Lado Gudiashvili, Zestafoni Works, 1934 , oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 9. Photograph. Grigory Mirzoev. Detail from double page spread: Mkhatvrebi 
romlebits mushaoben temaz: rogor qaligdeboda gelada [Artists working on the theme of 
How the Leader Evolved], Sabchota khelovneba, 5, 1935, [n. p.].  
Figure 10. Installation photograph showing new displays at Museum of Oriental Cultures: 
Display, Labour and Art of Women of the Soviet East,1931. From V. E. Voitov, Materialy 
po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, veshchi, dela (Moscow: 
Skanrus, 2003), p. 159. 
Figure 11. Installation photograph showing new displays at Museum of Oriental Cultures: 
Display, Labour and Art of Women of the Soviet East,1931. From V. E. Voitov, Materialy 
po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, veshchi, dela (Moscow: 
Skanrus, 2003), p. 162. 
Figure 12. Double page spread: Mkhatvrebi romlebits mushaoben temaz: rogor qaligdeboda 
gelada [Artists working on the theme of How the Leader Evolved], Sabchota khelovneba, 
5, 1935, [n. p.].  
Figure 13. K. Gzelsivhilis Stalin in his Young Years, c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 14. U. Japaridzes Comrade Stalin, L. Ketskhoveli, and A. Tsulukidze, oil on canvas. 
Figure 15. Irakli Toidze, Comrade Stalin at RIONGES (1931), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. 
Figure 16. V. Krotkov, Comrade Stalin  Organiser and Leader of Workers Social 
Democratic Circles in Tbilisi (1898), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 17. Vepkhvadze, Comrade Stalin Gives a Speech at the Funeral of A. Tsulukidze 
(1905), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 18. Krotkov, Georgian Delegation at a Reception at the Kremlin (1937), 1937, oil on 
canvas. GNM. 
Figure 19. Photograph: Art workers delegation at the Kremlin. Talanty sotsialisticheskoi 
Gruzii, Izvestiia, 14 January 1937, p. 1. 
Illustrations 
Figure 1. Davit Kakabadze, Meeting in Imereti, 1942, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 2. Davit Kakabadze, Rionges, 1933, gouache on paper. GNM. 
Figure 3. Davit Kakabadze, Rionges, 1939, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 4. Davit Kakabadze, Mining at Kazbegi, 1949, oil on canvas.  GNM. 
Figure 5. Davit Kakabadze, Grain Elevator in Poti, 1949, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 6. Davit Kakabadze, The Processing of Gumbrine in the Vicinity of Kutaisi, 1951, oil 
on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 7. Lado Gudiashvili, Eviction of the Kulaks, 1931, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 8. Lado Gudiashvili, Zestafoni Works, 1934, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 9. Photograph. Grigory Mirzoev. Detail from double page spread: Mkhatvrebi 
romlebits mushaoben temaz: rogor qaligdeboda gelada [Artists working on the theme of 
How the Leader Evolved], Sabchota khelovneba, 5, 1935, [n. p.].  
Figure 10. Installation photograph showing new displays at Museum of Oriental Cultures: 
Display, Labour and Art of Women of the Soviet East,1931. From V. E. Voitov, Materialy 
po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, veshchi, dela (Moscow: 
Skanrus, 2003), p. 159. 
Figure 11. Installation photograph showing new displays at Museum of Oriental Cultures: 
Display, Labour and Art of Women of the Soviet East,1931. From V. E. Voitov, Materialy 
po istorii Gosudarstvennogo muzeia Vostoka 1918-1950: liudi, veshchi, dela (Moscow: 
Skanrus, 2003), p. 162. 
Figure 12. Double page spread: Mkhatvrebi romlebits mushaoben temaz: rogor qaligdeboda 
gelada [Artists working on the theme of How the Leader Evolved], Sabchota khelovneba, 
5, 1935, [n. p.].  
Figure 13. K. Gzelishvilis Stalin in his Young Years, c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 14. U. Japaridzes Comrade Stalin, L. Ketskhoveli, and A. Tsulukidze, oil on canvas. 
Figure 15. Irakli Toidze, Comrade Stalin at RIONGES (1931), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. 
Figure 16. V. Krotkov, Comrade Stalin  Organiser and Leader of Workers Social 
Democratic Circles in Tbilisi (1898), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 17. Vepkhvadze, Comrade Stalin Gives a Speech at the Funeral of A. Tsulukidze 
(1905), c. 1934-6, oil on canvas. GNM. 
Figure 18. Krotkov, Georgian Delegation at a Reception at the Kremlin (1937), 1937, oil on 
canvas. GNM. 
Figure 19. Photograph: Art workers delegation at the Kremlin. Talanty sotsialisticheskoi 
Gruzii, Izvestiia, 14 January 1937, p. 1. 
