Why Parades are Peaceful 
A Study of Mobilisation, Segregation and Authority in Northern 
Ireland, 2006-2016 
By Adam Brodie 
Word Count: 38,461 
Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of DPhil in Politics in the Department of Politics and International 
Relations at the University of Oxford. 
Lady Margaret Hall, University of Oxford 
January 2020  
Abstract 
Across the world, from India to Israel, it is common for parades to trigger 
episodes of ethnic violence. In Northern Ireland, Catholics and Protestants have 
sometimes come to blows over parades, however the number of parades-related 
riots is small. This is puzzling, because between 2006-2016 over 30,000 parades 
associated with Northern Irelands Protestant & Catholic populations took place. 
If parades are indeed a spur to ethnic enmity, we should expect Northern 
Ireland to experience far more violence than it does. This thesis seeks to explain 
why this is not the case. 
First, I demonstrate that there is indeed a link between ethnic conflict and 
the desire to parade. I show that threats to the status of ones ethnic group 
correlate with increased participation in parades. 
Second, I find that PUL parades that march in the vicinity of borders 
between majority-Catholic and majority-Protestant areas, are more likely to be 
protested. The fact that such borders are rare in Northern Ireland constitutes 
one explanation for the absence of parades-related violence. 
Third, I assess the role played by local leaders in preventing violence. By 
examining Belfasts Crumlin Road parade dispute, I show that peace activists can 
prevent violence under certain conditions. These conditions prove to be far more 
common outside of Belfast. This offers another explanation for why parades-
related violence is unexpectedly rare in Northern Ireland. 
In making this argument I draw upon both quantitative and qualitative 
sources. My study of parade motivation and protests depends upon a previously-
unused dataset obtained from the Parades Commission of Northern Ireland. My 
study of the Crumlin Road parades dispute uses a combination of interviews and 
analysis of newspapers and archival material. In summary, I use this evidence to 
argue that parades in Northern Ireland should trigger more ethnic violence, but 
the absence of hard borders and the presence of peace activists ensures they do 
Acknowledgements 
It is a bit basic for a student of British politics to sum up their work with a quote 
from Yes Minister. However, I cannot think of a better summation of my PhD 
experience than the following warning delivered by Sir Humphrey: If you're 
going to do this damn silly thing, don't do it in this damn silly way. 
That warning, I know now, would have been very useful for me back in 2015, 
the year I began my PhD at Oxford. Knowing what I was like at the time though, 
I would probably have ignored it. 
PhDs are fundamentally silly things. Spending three to four years (or in my case, 
four and half years) writing a book that very few people will want to buy is not 
necessarily the best thing to do with ones limited lifespan. Equally, it does not 
seem particularly sensible to spend that amount of time in an apprenticeship for 
a trade that pays little, is increasingly insecure, and demands that you be 
constantly inventive, entrepreneurial, and empathic, possess a wide-ranging 
intellectual and technical skillset, and have the mental fortitude to deal with 
constant rejection. 
And yet, despite all of this, the choice to spend four and a half years studying 
ambulating Protestants in Northern Ireland is absolutely the best decision I have 
ever made. The fact of the matter is that in producing my readerless book, and 
realising that I had neither the grit nor masochism to become a fully-fledged 
academic, I ended up, rather by accident, becoming a well-rounded human 
being. I learned to do complex things in three separate computer programs. I 
interviewed politicians and civil servants and kindly old men who used to be 
terrorists. I presented my research to senior academics on multiple occasions, 
and they often had very kind things to say about it. As a tutor, I figured out the 
traits of effective arguments, and I managed to show students how to 
incorporate those traits into their own writing. Doing all this showed me that the 
terror I often feel when faced with new challenges, is just my brain telling lies 
about the future. I know now where my limits actually lie, and how to safely 
extend them. This knowledge is priceless. I could not have obtained it without 
completing my PhD, and I could not have done that without the support of my 
friends and family. So, here and now, I would like to give them some overdue 
thanks. 
First and foremost, my parents. The fact of the matter is, without their support, 
both financial and emotional, I could not have finished my PhD. They gave me a 
place of safety in which I could recover from the anxiety and depression that 
dogged my first year, and the poverty that characterised my fourth. When I 
needed them to lend a hand with moving house, to give evidence in getting 
tested for autism, and to care for me when my appendix burst, they were there 
immediately. I am utterly grateful to them for their comforting presence, their 
relentless encouragement, and for the way that they call me on my bullshit. 
They prodded me to see myself more honestly. This was sometimes 
discomfiting, but also always exactly what I needed. 
I would also like to thank my ex-girlfriend Helena. Safe to say, our relationship 
did not end well. But all the stress and sadness does not erase the happiness we 
did have. You sat by my side in the hospital. You led me on a pilgrimage through 
Italy, that transformed and deepened my love for that country. We drank some 
excellent cocktails, played fun games, and discovered some great music. You 
brought some joy into my life when I needed it, and I will always be grateful for 
that. 
And then, my friends.  
To Will. To survive a PhD, you need people who also intimately know just how 
exciting and how awful academia is. So, thank goodness for you, for the drinks 
you bought me, your job recommendations, and your encouragement. You 
helped me to see the value of my work, and to believe I should keep going until 
the end. Thank you. 
Hannah. You got me semi-regular paid work, allowing me to buy things without 
totally depending on my parents, and giving me a modicum of independence. 
Whats more, while I do think you should get more rest, the way that you are 
always on the lookout for fresh challenges, juggling work, study, and intensive 
practice of art all at once, makes you an inspiration to me. Plus, you get that the 
only way to live in a neurotypical world with a neurodivergent brain, is to laugh 
at the ridiculousness every day brings. I am so lucky to have you to laugh with. 
And, finally, my Favourite Birds: Jake, Zhana, Christian, and Pete. The thing I 
find most amazing about our friendship is how it has grown to fit the way we 
have changed as people. We retain the mutual delight in off-the-wall movies 
that originally united us, while adding more shared loves as we encounter them: 
design, writing, role-playing, even home-decor When I am with you, I do not 
have to explain why exactly I am so hype for the latest Fast and Furious, the 
next chapter of One Piece, or whatever Keanu Reeves is doing - you guys just 
get it. However, it is your total acceptance, indeed your celebration, of me and 
my oddness, that makes you all so special to me. With you, being a bumbly 
scarecrow with the wrong food who can't coherently describe any artistic 
experience hes ever had, feels like the best possible thing to be, and during my 
PhD, I needed to feel that more than ever. You guys are a gift. I love you all.  
Table of Contents 
Abstract          002 
List of Charts, Maps & Tables       005 
Chapter One: Introduction        
 1.1: Setting the Stage       007 
 1.2: What are Parades?       011 
 1.3: Parading Groups: A History      017 
 1.4: The Shape of the Thesis      027 
Chapter Two: Literature Review        
 2.1: Ethnic Protest in the USA      031 
 2.2: Causes of Conflict, Causes of Peace    039  
Chapter Three: The Motives behind Parade Participation 
 3.1: Introduction        045 
3.2: The Parades Commission Dataset     046 
3.3: Dependent Variable & Unit of Analysis    052 
3.4: Results         065 
3.5: Discussion        068 
3.6: Conclusion        077  
Chapter Four: Ethnic Borders & Parades-Related Protest 
 4.1: Introduction        081 
 4.2: CNR Counter-Protest       084 
 4.3: Flashpoints        087 
 4.4: Controls & Method       092 
4.5: Findings & Their Implications     096 
4.6: Conclusion        103 
Chapter Five: Peace is Possible 
 5.1: Introduction        106 
 5.2: North Belfast        110 
 5.3: From Riots to Peaceful Protest (2004  2008)   117 
 5.4: Peace Activists Lose Control (2009  2016)   123 
 5.5: Exclusion, Coercion & Peace (2016)    131 
 5.6: Conclusion        140 
Chapter Six: Final Conclusion       143 
Appendix A: The Parades Commission Dataset 
 A.1: The Original Dataset       152 
 A.2: Locating Parades       154 
 A.3: Identifying Parades       156 
 A.4: Data Cleaning        161 
Appendix B: Interviewees        165 
Bibliography          167 
List of Charts, Maps & Tables 
1.1) Percent of CNR Parades (2006-2016), by Organising Group  014 
1.2) Percent of PUL Parades (2006-2016), by Organising Group  014 
3.1) PUL Parade Participation - Descriptive Statistics   049 
3.2) CNR Parade Participation  Descriptive Statistics   049 
3.3) Correlates of PUL Parade Participation (Regression Table)  061 
3.4) Correlates of CNR Parade Participation (Regression Table)  062 
4.1) Map of Hard Border (Crumlin Road)     089 
4.2) Map of Soft Border (Castlederg)      089 
4.3) Protest - Descriptive Statistics      093 
4.4) Correlates of CNR Protest (Regression Table)    093 
4.5) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (NI)    099 
4.6) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Sparsely-Inhabited Area) 099 
4.7) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Soft Border)   100 
4.8) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Hard Borders in Belfast) 100 
5.1) Map of the Crumlin Road Wards with Troubles Deaths   107 
Chapter One: Introduction 
1.1: Setting the Stage 
Every week of every year in Northern Ireland, and all across the province, men, 
women and even children leave their homes, form into groups  some 
numbering no more than 10, some several-thousand strong  for the purpose of 
walking from one place to another place.  
In doing so the marchers adopt a uniform appearance, marching in step, 
and often wearing uniforms. They will carry flags or banners bearing the insignia 
of their bands or organisation chapters, as well as the flags of their nations. 
They are accompanied by drummers, pipers and sometimes full brass bands, 
playing from a standardised set list of tunes associated with their groups. 
Crowds will watch and cheer the marchers on, and often join in singing the 
chorus of the songs. At the end of their march the people, and sometimes their 
audience, usually perform some sort of ceremony, such as laying a wreath, or 
listening to a speech or sermon. Once that is done, the event is over. The group 
may dissipate, or go on to dinner together, or head to the pub, but in general, 
they go back to the lives of individuals. For the last few hours though, they 
performed the existence of something larger  sometimes a class, sometimes a 
city, and sometimes a nation. In this thesis, I name these events parades. 
Most parades pass without incident. But, for a minority (0.6% of 
Catholic/Nationalist/Republican (CNR) parades and 1% of 
Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist (PUL) parades between 2006-2016) this is not the 
case.1 When some groups march down certain streets, they will encounter an 
1 Figures obtained from the Parades Commission Dataset 
audience of a very different character. These crowds do not clap or cheer. 
Indeed, they will watch the parades pass in stony silence, hurl insults, and even 
throw bottles and golf balls at the marchers. The risk of this violence escalating 
forces the state to intervene, so oftentimes the parade  if the state does not 
decide to forbid its passage  must walk behind protective walls of police 
officers. In the face of this audience, the parade is no longer exuberant. The 
music stops  usually again at the behest of the state  and the parade grimly 
passes by to the beat of a single time-keeping drumbeat. Such confrontations 
leave bitterness in their wake, and, sometimes, riots.  
Here we see the two sides of parading in Northern Ireland. Parades are, 
the vast majority of the time, little more than days out, which are puzzling 
mostly for how popular they are. But they are also, and have been in the past, 
important triggers of ethnic conflict, especially between the Protestants and 
Catholics of Northern Ireland.  
Both the popularity and the contentiousness of parades have snared the 
attention of many academics. Most of them have focused their studies on the 
Orange Order, it being the largest and most influential parading organisation in 
Northern Ireland. Multiple books and articles have analysed the history of the 
Orange Order, the changing demographics and politics of its membership, the 
symbols they employ, the intra-group political conflicts that play out within its 
parades, and the reasons why Protestants choose to participate in them.2 Other 
aspects of Northern Irelands parading traditions, such as the history and politics 
of Nationalist and Republican parades, have also received attention, though less 
in depth analysis, as have the parades-related protests.3 Given the extent of the 
2 Bryan (2000), p.6-7; Kaufmann (2007), McAuley et al. (2009), p.1; Blake (2019), p.6 
3 Caldwell (2001), p.2-3; Jarman & Bryan (2000), p.95-96; Browne (2016), p.102-103 
scrutiny brought to bear on the practice, it might reasonably be asked: why do 
we need another study of Northern Irish parades?  
To answer this question, I must broaden our view. There is an increasing 
awareness that parades play important roles in the politics of multiple countries. 
It is in fact startling how common the practice of parading by subnational groups 
is. In explicitly global events, such as LGBT Pride, International Womens Day 
and May Day, and in single-nation and sometimes single-city parades, such as 
those held by the Portuguese in Toronto, Sufis in New York and Filipinos in Italy, 
identity groups the world over are using parades to celebrate and define their 
communities. Viewed through a global lens, the parade calendar of Northern 
Ireland differs from that of other countries only in quantity, not kind. It is this 
fact that demands our interest. Even though we know that parading is a very 
common practice, we know comparatively little about it. In particular, which is 
startling in the light of the ubiquity of parading, we know very little about the 
relationship between ethnic parades and ethnic conflict. 
In The Deadly Ethnic Riot (2002) Horowitz asserts that Processions, 
demonstrations and mass meetings precipitate violence in perhaps one-third to 
one-half of all ethnic riots.4 The list of examples he provides to back this up is 
extensive, and includes violence between Hindus and Muslims in India, Chinese 
and Malay in Malaysia and Kurds and Turkomen in Iraq. Returning focus to 
Northern Ireland, we can see that parades have also played a role in triggering 
ethnic riots in Northern Ireland from the 1830s to the 2010s.5 Yet, even if a 
large number of ethnic riots are associated with parades, very few parades 
trigger riots. Taking Northern Ireland again as an example, between 2006 and 
4 Horowitz (2002), p.272 
5 Budge & OLeary (1973), p.89; Bryan (2000), p.37-38; Blake (2019), p.48-49 
2016 there were over 30,000 parades held by Protestant and Catholic 
organisations. Over the same period there were less than 10 parades-related 
riots. This discrepancy prompts the following two-part question:  
(1a) Given the rarity of parades-related riots, is there actually a relationship 
between parades and ethnic conflict?  
-and, if so- 
(1b) Why is parades-related conflict so rare? 
In this introductory chapter, I will lay out how I will answer this question. In the 
next section I will further define the global phenomenon of the parade as a 
distinct type of event. Following that, I describe the case in more detail, by 
presenting a potted history of Northern Irelands parading organisations. The 
final section 10avo then lay out the structure of the ensuing thesis, describing 
the chapters and the contributions they make. 
1.2: What are Parades? 
I define parades as proactive, identarian demonstrations. Establishing this 
definition from the outset is vital because, as pointed out in the previous section, 
the puzzle of parading takes on new urgency once you can see how global the 
practice is. In this section, I justify that assertion. Here, I will define the features 
shared by events employed by a vast and heterogeneous array of identities. One 
cannot lightly say that the Easter Rising commemorations of various IRA 
factions, and the 12th July marches of the Orange Order are, at root, the same 
type of thing. This statement needs justifying, and this section does that work. 
I will first break down what the two important, qualifying descriptors. 
First, proactive. Tilly (1978) distinguishes between proactive and reactive 
collective actions, based on whether they assert new group claims, or, reassert 
established claims.6 This distinction between proactive and reactive is the 
genesis of the distinction I adopt, but I choose to adjust it somewhat. I argue 
that what distinguishes a proactive parade from a reactive parade is not the 
relative newness of the claims they make, but rather lies in where the motive of 
the action comes from.  
To clarify this distinction, I turn to Northern Ireland. A comparison of the 
12th July Orange marches, and the Flag Protests which broke out in the winter of 
2012-2013 show the difference. The inspiration for holding the 12th July parade 
is endogenous to the parade itself. 12th July parades are occur in order to 
commemorate the Battle of the Boyne, celebrating the United Kingdom and 
representing Ulster Protestantism. The purpose of the Flag Protests was, by 
comparison, exogenous to the demonstration. They occurred in response to a 
6 Tilly (1978), p.145-147 
policy change  the decision by Belfast City Council to restrict flying the Union 
Jack flag on City Hall to designated days.7  
The significance of this difference in origin is indicated by Inclan & 
Almeida (2017). They found that prior political interest and experience was a 
more powerful motivator for participation in reactive protests, than for a set of 
(proactive) ritual demonstrations, whose participants tended to be more 
motivated by personal ties.8 In distinguishing between proactive and reactive 
demonstrations then, I ask the question: does attending the demonstration 
make sense if the participant does not have specific information about current 
events? For the Flag Protests the answer is no: flag protesters had to know that 
Belfast City Council was taking down the flag, else, why would they be 
protesting? For the 12th July parade, the answer is yes: 12th July participants do 
not have to know about any current events to participate in the 12th 
celebrations. The parade occurs with or without them. The presence or absence 
of requisite and specific current-events knowledge is what distinguishes a 
reactive from a proactive protest. 
The second descriptor needing definition is identarian. Where the first 
descriptor distinguished proactive demonstrations by the origin of their 
inspiration  endogenous or exogenous  the second sets demonstrations apart 
by their purpose. To illustrate this difference, I compare the aforementioned 12th 
July march with the Rally for Life, an annual demonstration held in Belfast for 
the purpose of celebrating the pro-life message.9  
7 Nolan et al. (2014), p.34 & 42-43 
8 Inclan & Almeida (2017), p.67-68 
9 Get Involved section of the Rally for Life website. Accessible here: https://rallyforlife.net/get-involved/. 
Accessed 20/09/2019. 
https://rallyforlife.net/get-involved/
These demonstrations are both proactive. Rally For Life, though it is an 
event organised by a movement oriented around opposing abortion, was not 
begun as a reaction to any specific pro-abortion legislation adopted in Ireland. 
Indeed, some of the Rallys messaging suggests that it was Irelands distinctive 
lack of legalised abortion that led to the establishment of the Rally (we felt it 
only right and proper, that as one of the few countries in the western world that 
protects human life from conception, that people [in Ireland] were also able to 
express their pro-life sentiments publicly).10 The two demonstrations are 
however differentiated by their strategic intent.  
The question that allows us to see the difference between Orange march 
and Rally for Life is: what would you have to remove from reality, to cause the 
demonstration to lose its raison detre? For the Rally for Life, the answer is legal 
abortion. The core purposes of the Rally for Life are to raise awareness about 
the (purported) negative consequences of abortion, and bring together those 
who to seek to bring the practice to an end.11 Thus the Rally for Life is policy-
oriented. By contrast, the thing that would need to be removed from reality to 
make the 12th July pointless, is an identity group: Unionist Protestants. The 
identarian parade is thus defined as a proactive definition that exists for an 
identity group, rather than, in the case of the Rally for Life, a political cause. 
When we talk about a parade existing for an identity group though, the 
immediate follow-up question should be: what is the parade doing for the group? 
There are a number of potential answers to this. At the most basic level, 
parades give people the opportunity to be openly themselves, through public 
10 Previous Rallies section of the Rally for Life website. Accessible here: https://rallyforlife.net/previous-rallies/ 
Accessed 20/09/2019. 
11 Get Involved section of the Rally for Life website. Accessible here: https://rallyforlife.net/get-involved/. 
Accessed 20/09/2019. 
https://rallyforlife.net/previous-rallies/
https://rallyforlife.net/get-involved/
display of their membership in a valued social group. Participants in LGBT Pride, 
May Day and Orange Order parades, when asked why they participate, describe 
how much they value and enjoy being public members of an identity group.12  
Parades also have a communicative function, as described by Bernstein 
(1997) and McFarland Bruce (2016). They can both claim that an identity group 
belongs as part of a wider society, by demonstrating very visibly how present 
they are, and, challenge negative stereotypes about the group that society 
holds.13 This goal of defining the group is shared by Irish, Sufi, Persian, Filipino 
and Portuguese parades in the USA, Canada, UK and Italy.14  
Finally, parades may be a means, not just of defining the group, but of 
bringing the group into existence. I was unable to find direct measurement of 
parades having this effect. The closest any analyst has come is Zepeda-Millan & 
Wallace (2013), who that Latinos were more likely to answer yes to the 
question Do you feel that Latinos make up a distinct racial group in America? if 
asked during or after a wave of majority-Latino protests, than they were before 
the protests began.15 Yet, three studies of the effect of participation in national 
ceremonies on strength of national identification found no relationship between 
participation and identification.16  
The question of whether parades cause people to become attached to 
identity groups, or are simply expressions of pre-existing attachment, remains 
without firm answer. Nor has the ability of parades to change public perceptions 
been thoroughly tested. However, it is certainly the case that across multiple 
12 Peterson et al. (2018), p.199-200; Wahlstrom (2016), p.232-3; Blake (2019), p.89-97. 
13 Bernstein (1997), p.536-537; McFarland Bruce (2016), p.106-107 
14 Moss (1995), p.137-140; Abdullah (2009), p.219; Malek (2011), p.394-395; Saint-Blancat & Cancellieri (2014), 
p.655; Leal (2014), p.206-207 
15 Zepeda-Millan & Wallace (2013), p.514 & 521 
16 Ariely (2017), p.2605; Ariely (2019), p.1400; De Regt (2018), p.1720 
different contexts organisers believe that parades can help those beyond the 
group see the group differently. Thus, regardless of actual empirical effect, 
parades are definable as acts undertaken for the purpose of making identities 
visible, and defining them. 
In summary, in this section I have defined parade as, a demonstration 
with endogenous origins, organised by members of a collective identity, that 
provides an outlet for celebratory desires, and potentially increases the visibility 
of the group and defines its public image. This work has been done in order to 
show why it is worth producing another study of parades in Northern Ireland. 
This section shows that asking whether Northern Irish parades do actually have 
a relationship with ethnic conflict, and if so, why violence is so rarely triggered 
by them, the answers do not relate to Northern Ireland alone. With a study of 
Northern Irish parades, we shed light on the relationship between ethnic conflict, 
and a practice common across the world. However, to achieve this aim, we do 
need to focus in on our case. That will be the goal of the following section, in 
which, I will introduce and describe the parading groups of Northern Ireland. 
Fig. 1.1) Percent of CNR Parades (2006-2016), by Organising Group. 
Fig. 1.2) Percent of PUL Parades (2006-2016), by Organising Group. 
1.3: Parading Groups: A History 
In this section I will briefly describe the history of Northern Irelands CNR and 
PUL parading groups, as well as their politics and the identities they represent. 
As can be seen from Fig. 1.1 and 1.2, there are several different parading 
groups within the broader PUL and CNR mega-identities.17 PUL and CNR are 
commonly-used acronyms in Northern Irish scholarship, meaning Protestant-
Unionist-Loyalist and Catholic-Nationalist-Republic respectively. I prefer to use 
these acronyms than the simpler Protestant and Catholic descriptors, on the 
basis that these terms foreground both, that these identities are political and 
national as well as religious, and, that they are at once separate units and 
internally divided. That latter point regarding internal diversity is particularly 
important to keep in mind, as the ensuing description of PUL and CNR parading 
groups shall demonstrate. 
PUL: Loyal Orders and Others 
The vast majority of PUL parades  73% of them to be exact  that took place 
from 2006 to 2016 were organised by the three Loyal Orders  the Orange 
Order, the Royal Black Preceptory and the Apprentice Boys of Derry. This is not 
surprising. The Loyal Orders have been central to the everyday life and politics 
of Northern Ireland since the 19th century, with the Orange founded in 1795, the 
Black in 1797 and the Apprentice Boys in 1835.18  
17 The term mega-identity is taken from Mason (2018), where it is used to refer to a grouping of multiple 
different social identities, under a single title. 
18 Jarman & Bryan (1996), p.7-9; Fraser (2000), p.175 
The stated function of these groups was, and is, to commemorate key 
victories in the Glorious Revolution, a war between the Protestant (and future 
King) William of Orange and his Catholic predecessor James II, in particular the 
Battle of the Boyne and the Relief of the Siege of Derry.19 At their time of 
founding, celebrations of Williamite victories were common in Ireland, but these 
tended to be highly-orchestrated ceremonies organised by the state for the 
purpose of celebrating religious liberty and parliamentary democracy.20 The 
Loyal Orders by contrast owed their existence to popular enthusiasm for hard-
won Protestant ascendancy, at a time of increasingly-violent Protestant-Catholic 
conflict.21  
When Irish revolutionaries threatened British rule, such enthusiasm could 
be quite useful to the British State. Members of the Orange volunteered to fight 
for the British during the Rising of the United Irishmen (1798), and during the 
Troubles.22 However, absent such existential threat, Order parades were less 
welcomed by British governments, due to the risk they posed to public order. 
The Loyal Orders therefore have a complex relationship with the British state, 
being at times its most loyal defenders, and at others, undermining the peace 
that state fought to build. 
In some ways, the Loyal Orders have barely changed since the 19th 
Century. They still celebrate the same events, and the most important dates in 
the parading calendar  the 12th July Battle of the Boyne commemoration, the 
12th August Relief of Derry march and Black Saturday (or Last Saturday, so-
named for taking place on the last Saturday of August)  have remained the 
19 Jarman & Bryan (1996), p.10; Bryan (2000), p.33-34 
20 Bryan (2000), p.31 
21 Ibid, p.34-35 
22 Bryan (2000), p.35; Kaufmann (2007), p.75-76 
same for 200 years.23 However, there has been some change amidst this 
continuity.  
The most notable shift has been in the Loyal Orders political connections 
and allegiances. After the partition of Ireland in 1921, the new devolved 
government of Northern Ireland was controlled without interruption by the Ulster 
Unionist Party until 1972. The Orange Order had helped to found the UUP in 
1905, and during this period of Unionist control, it enjoyed strong connections 
with the governing Party: [a]ll Northern Irelands Prime Ministers were 
Orangemen and only three members of the cabinet during that time were not in 
the Orange Order.24 Their power was made even more visible, by how the two 
solitary attempts to restrict Orange parades in the Stormont period resulted in 
senior politicians losing their jobs.25 The Orange experience has however 
changed markedly since 1973.  
Orange membership has consistently fallen since the 1970s.26 The Good 
Friday Agreement passed against the wishes of the majority of the Orders 
membership, and in the following years the Order was twice defeated in its 
attempts to parade against the wishes of the state: at Drumcree in 1998, and 
Springfield Road in 2005.27 Finally, the split in Unionist politics between UUP and 
DUP led to the withdrawal of the Order from the UUPs governance structures: a 
firm acknowledgement of the end of the Orders formal political power.28 
That said, the modern Order is hardly without influence. The Northern 
Ireland General Election Survey found in 2015 that 14% of a total 687 surveyed 
23 Jarman & Bryan (1996), p.14 
24 Bryan (2000), p.60 
25 Ibid, p.76 
26 Kaufmann (2007), p.277 
27 McAuley & Tonge (2007), p.41 
28 Hennessey et al. (2019), p.176-178 
self-identified Unionists were members of the Orange Order, while in 2017 10% 
of the 456 Unionists surveyed were Orangemen. By way of comparison, 0.6% 
and 2% of Unionists were members of political parties in 2015 and 2017 
respectively. Even more significantly, many Unionist politicians are still members 
of the Loyal Orders. During the 2011-2016 NI Assembly, 61.7% of DUP MLAs 
and 60% of its MPs, as well as 20% of UUP MLAs were members of the Orange 
Order.29  
Whats more, while the Orange Order is no longer able to play the role of 
the popular base for a Protestant hegemony, it has adapted well to post-GFA 
Northern Ireland. By depoliticising itself, and rebranding itself as a organisation 
for the promotion of Protestant culture, the Order has adapted to and benefited 
from the new multicultural politics of the 1990s and 2000s.30 This culturisation 
is, as Blake (2019) argues, a useful strategy, giving the Loyal Orders leadership 
and members a rhetorical foundation with which to protect themselves against 
Republican opposition, as well as access to state funding.31   
Over the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries then the Loyal Orders have shifted in 
character, from the grassroots opponents of Irish Nationalism and 
Republicanism, to the officially-sanctioned mass movement on which Protestant 
hegemony was built in Ulster, to a cultural-preservation pressure group in the 
modern, Northern Irish, multiculture. However, the Orders are not the sole PUL 
parading organisation in Northern Ireland.  
More prolific than both the Apprentice Boys and the Royal Black 
Preceptory are the Unionist Bands. Between 2006-2016 bands organised 19% of 
PUL parades. During the 19th and early-20th centuries bands paraded as part of 
29 Hennessey et al. (2019), p.180 
30 Kaufmann (2007), p.300-305 
31 Blake (2019), p.128-129, 134-135 & 152; Kaufmann (2007), p. 
the Loyal Orders. Since the 1970s however, they have become increasingly 
independent.32 Many band parades have nothing to do with commemoration, 
being instead displays of musical prowess intended to raise funds to meet the 
costs of uniforms and instruments.33 The independence of the bands is not just 
financial though  it is also cultural. Where the Loyal Orders leadership tends to 
seek respectability, and is often (if not always) disapproving of members 
antisocial behaviour, the bands have a reputation for enthusiastic confrontation 
with Catholics (though as Witherow (2016) makes clear, this is hardly true of all 
bands).34  
Central to this reputation are the Blood and Thunder bands, which are 
both aurally (the aim of many of these bands is to play as loudly as possible) 
and symbolically disruptive, thanks to their use of military and sometimes 
paramilitary insignia in their uniforms and banners.35 The bands therefore 
present a different picture of the PUL identity bloc to the world, than that offered 
by the Loyal Orders: one more militant and confrontational than respectable. 
More entertaining than commemorative, and more combative than respectable, 
the emergence of the bands gave Northern Irelands PUL an alternative face, 
happily worn by some within the mega-identity, and thoroughly rejected by 
others. 
32 Jarman (2000), p.165; Witherow (2016), p.388 
33 Witherow (2016), p.388-389 
34 Ibid, p.392-393 
35 Witherow (2016), p.390; Jarman (2000), p.166 
CNR: Traditional Nationalists and Divided Republicans 
There are far fewer CNR parades than PUL parades. Between 2006-2016, just 
1937 CNR parades took place, compared with over 29,000 PUL parades. Though 
they march less often, the history of CNR parading is no less storied.  
Jarman & Bryan (1998) argue the first parades to combine Catholicism 
with Irish Nationalism were the St. Patricks Day parades organised by the 
Ribbonmen in the early 19th Century.36 According to the definition established in 
the previous section, this activity may not even be rightly called parading, 
given how linked it was with the political campaign to establish Home Rule in 
Ireland.37 It was not until the late 19th Century that true CNR parading 
organisations began to emerge, and many of the organisations currently 
operating in Northern Ireland were not founded until the 20th Century. This is the 
clearest difference between PUL and CNR parading. While the significant events 
of the PUL parading calendar have persisted without change since 1800, the 
current CNR parading calendar has had multiple dates added to it from the 19th 
Century onwards, in line with the changing shape of Irish Nationalism. 
The first of the modern movements to emerge were the Ancient Order of 
Hibernians and the Irish Foresters. The AOH are an explicitly Irish Nationalist 
organisation, and had a relationship to the C19th Irish Parliamentary Party that 
resembled the Orange Orders link to the Ulster Unionist Party.38 They also held 
an important social function in Ireland, operating the national insurance 
schemes that were introduced by [UK Prime Minister] Lloyd George.39  
36 Jarman & Bryan (1998), p.9 
37 Ibid, p.20-21 
38 Ibid, p.22-23 
39 Ibid 
The Foresters were not linked to any particular Party, but they held a 
similar social function, also being involved in the provision of social welfare and 
insurance schemes.40 The primary days of celebration for these groups were St. 
Patricks Day (17th March) and Our Ladys Day (15th August, also known as 
Assumption Day), and they continue to hold the bulk of their parades on these 
dates.41 These parades combined the religious significance of the holiday, with 
explicit support for Irish Home Rule.42  
As the 20th Century wore on, the AOH and the Forestors lost their pre-
eminent position in CNR parading. Between 2006-2016 they were responsible for 
organising only 21% of CNR parades. Their decline in importance mirrors the 
decline in the popular energy that surrounded their more reformist and religious 
brand of Irish Nationalism. During the C20th that energy was redirected into the 
Republican movement, who between 2006-2016 were responsible for 37% of 
CNR parades, and whose activity I will now describe. 
The main events in the modern Republican parading calendar are the 
Easter Rising; Bloody Sunday (30 January 1972), marked by an annual parade 
in Derry; the Hunger Strikes, commemorated by parades in early May; and the 
anniversary of Internment, commemorated on the second Sunday of August.43 
Northern Irish Republicans have paraded in commemoration of the Rising since 
the 1920s, while the three latter parades were commemorations of previous, 
reactive demonstrations against the relevant British policies.44  
Many of these initial mobilisations and commemorations were organised 
by the various manifestations of Sinn Fein and the IRA, and the parties (or their 
40 Ibid, p.23 
41 Ibid 
42 Ibid, p.30 
43 Ibid, p.55 
44 Ibid, p.34 & 55-57 
proxies, eg. The Sinn Fein-dominated Belfast National Graves Association) 
remain the principal organisers.45 Republican parties see such commemorative 
activity as vital, with Gerry Adams (President of Sinn Fein 1983-2018) describing 
it in the following terms: 
Nations are built through sharing experiences, memories and a common 
history. That is why the British Government and others have frequently tried to 
destroy our history, our language, our memoriesall the things that give us our 
unique identity as a people. But we will remain unbowed and unbroken. More 
than that we refuse to let our memories to be taken from us, to be reshaped or 
twisted. To be deemed illegitimate . . .46 
Commemoration does not only offer opportunity for resistance though. 
Brown & Grant (2016) note that Sinn Fein use events commemorating the 
Troubles to deliver orations that feed into the Sinn Fein peace strategy 
narrative47 and Brown & Viggiani (2010) describe how at a Hunger Strike 
commemoration Adams employed the words of Bobby Sands to underline the 
need for [his groups] strategic compromises.48 Viggiani (2014) shows this 
working on a local scale, with the Clonard Martyrs Memorial Parade being used 
to maintain an explicitly PIRA Republican community in West Belfast.49 Nor are 
the Provisionals the only Republican group to use these events in this manner.  
45 Browne (2016), p.110 
46 Gerry Adams, quoted in McDowell (2007), p.733-734 
47 Brown & Grant (2016), p.154 
48 Brown & Viggiani (2010), Kindle Location 4008. 
49 Viggiani (2014), p.106 
Six Republican groups hold separate commemorations of the Easter Rising 
every year over Easter Sunday and Monday, and from some activists 
perspectives this is entirely necessary.50 As one put it: 
This (segregated) approach to the commemorations is about giving us proper 
recognition after 36 years, we are a sovereign organisation, we are not 
nationalists, we have our own agenda People say they are republicans, but they 
are nationalists and right wing nationalists at that . . . we will always march on 
Easter Sunday as a separate republican socialist movement, if not, then where 
would we join in and who with? The people we have split from, the constitutional 
nationalists? (IRSP, interview date, 2 May 2011)51  
Parties are not the only organisations present at Republican 
commemorations. Just as with PUL marches, CNR parades are often 
accompanied by bands.  
According to Rollins (2018) most bands came into existence in the 1980s, 
with the goal of adding music and colour to the commemorations of 
Republican dead.52 Much like PUL bands, CNR bands often maintain 
independence from the dominant organisations in their movement. Some bands 
align themselves with Sinn Fein but others do not, and, much like the Blood and 
Thunder bands, this difference is made concrete by the adoption of 
controversially militant imagery.53 Unlike PUL bands though, CNR bands are few 
in number, and may in fact be a movement in decline. One bandsman, quoted in 
50 Browne (2016), p.109-110 
51 Browne (2016), p.112 
52 Rollins (2018), p.64 
53 Ibid, p.66 
Rollins (2018), stated that between the 1990s and early 2000s the number of 
CNR bands in Belfast decreased from 20 to just two.54 Yet, even if the 
organisations are declining in number, they retain high levels of activity, as 
shown by CNR bands accounting for 28% of CNR parades. 
In Section 2 of this Chapter I defined the term parade. In this Section 3, 
I described the groups in Northern Ireland that organise parades. These sections 
are intended to introduce the phenomenon and the case that are the subject of 
this thesis. They have shown that throughout the world, and throughout the 
history of Northern Ireland, various identity-groups have used parades to 
establish, maintain and define their identities, sometimes in a way that resists 
attempts to stereotype or even destroy them. Parades are clearly conceived by 
those organising them as a tool for both perpetuating and subverting existing 
ethnic hierarchies. Questions that are still to be resolved however include 
whether the mass motivation to parade is accentuated by factors associated with 
ethnic conflict, and if that is the case, why it is that parades trigger conflict so 
infrequently. In the following, and final, section of this Introduction, I explain 
how this thesis will go about answering those questions, by describing what it is 
that Chapters Two to Five hope to achieve, and how they intend to achieve it. 
54 Ibid, p.67 
1.4: The Shape of the Thesis 
In this Section, I describe the Chapters of my thesis. These descriptions 
introduce the tasks of each Chapter, and the means by which each Chapter 
pursues their task. I start at the top, with Chapter Two. This Chapter is a 
literature review, split into two halves to better deal with the two-part puzzle of 
the thesis. In the first half I review the literature on ethnic protest, to find a way 
to demonstrate that the group-status-based anxieties that fuel ethnic conflict are 
linked with parading. In the second, I use the literature on ethnic conflict to 
identify subnationally-variant factors that may explain why parades tend not to 
trigger violence.    
In the ethnic conflict portion of Chapter Two, I seek information on 
anxieties by examining publications on ethnic/racial social movements in the 
United States. I chose this literature because, unlike the literature on civil wars 
or ethnic riots, it mostly examines nonviolent or small-scale violent forms of 
protest. This activity is more similar to parading  indeed, some of it may be 
parading  than wars or riots, but is still recognisably conflict, in the sense that 
these protests involve ethnic groups battling against laws or practices that they 
see as oppressive. This similarity between parades and protests means that the 
literature on the latter can indicate variables that measure or proxy the kind of 
beliefs or feelings about the world that are associated with ethnic conflict. I can 
then use these variables to demonstrate that parading is related to ethnic 
conflict. 
In the second half of the literature review, I seek factors that can explain 
a surprising absence of conflict. I therefore review two literatures which try to 
explain fine-grained, subnational variation in the incidence of violence. The first 
of these examines whether where different ethnic groups live is associated with 
higher degrees of conflict. The second looks at the effect of local leadership on 
the presence and absence of ethnic violence. These literatures offer a guide to 
understand why parades-related violence is so rare in Northern Ireland, by 
introducing the factors that might be preventing it. 
The purpose of Chapter Three is to answer the question of whether there 
is a relationship between parading and factors associated with ethnic conflict. 
This answer is produced by studying the causes of parade participation, using a 
large panel dataset obtained from the Parades Commission, a public body in 
Northern Ireland tasked with monitoring parades. This Chapter is most 
interested in discovering whether parade participation correlates positively with 
the ethnic-conflict-motive variables identified by the literature review. The 
results will let us know whether we should indeed expect CNR and PUL parades 
in Northern Ireland to spark ethnic conflict. 
Chapter Four shifts perspective from the existence of ethnic conflict, to 
examining reasons for its absence. The study examines the causes of CNR 
counter-protest against PUL parades, a major example of parades-related ethnic 
conflict. Of particular interest to this study are the ethnic residence patterns 
found in the vicinity of areas deemed by the Parades Commission as at-risk of 
protest. The goal of this chapter is to ask whether places that protest are 
marked by different residence patterns, such as segregation. Through this 
examination I can answer the question of why parades do not often result in 
ethnic conflict, by showing what makes particularly contentious spaces 
distinctive, and therefore, uncommon. 
Chapter Five shares Chapter Fours goal  explaining the absence of 
ethnic conflict. The means by which it pursues this goal however is very 
different. In this Chapter I seek to discover why the area most associated with 
parades-related violence in Northern Ireland  the Crumlin Road flashpoint  
experienced regular riots in 2004-2005 and 2009-2012, but not in 2006-2008, 
and, how it was that antagonism over the parade was resolved in 2016. Using a 
wide range of data sources, including interviews, newspapers and reports by civil 
society and government groups, I tell the story of why violence waxed and 
waned on the Crumlin Road, with particular focus on those trying to build peace. 
In doing so it reveals another reason why parades are so rarely associated with 
violence. Even when socio-economic conditions most incentivise ethnic conflict, 
human agency remains capable of preventing violence.  
To conclude, in this Introduction, I have done three things. First, I 
outlined the puzzle that drives this thesis  the fact that parades, which are to 
all appearances acts of ethnic conflict, do not in the vast majority of cases end 
up provoking mass violence. Second, I sought to provide explainers both of what 
a parade is, and, of what the parading organisations of Northern Ireland are. 
Third, and finally, I have outlined the structure of the ensuing thesis, to show 
how this dissertation moves from justifying the claim that parades are related to 
ethnic conflict, to asking why they so rarely result in violence. These tasks now 
complete, I move on to my literature review, and the causes of ethnic protest. 
Chapter Two: Literature Review 
2.1: Ethnic Protest in the USA 
I begin Chapter 2 with a review of the literature on ethnic protest in the United 
States. The purpose of this review is to establish a means by which we can 
prove that the desire to parade is connected with the underlying motives of 
ethnic conflict. To accomplish this end, I will review the literature on minority 
and majority-ethnic protest in the United States. This literature covers a wide 
variety of mobilisations, including reactive, proactive, law-oriented and identity-
oriented demonstrations. Thus, the events under analysis here are not perfect 
matches for the ones I wish to study  namely, proactive identarian 
demonstrations alone  but they are the most similar available.  
I chose to focus on protest in just the USA for two reasons. First, the USA 
was the only country I could find where protests by both ethnic majority and 
ethnic minority groups were studied both separately, and quantitatively. Other 
regions, for example South America, have seen studies conducted on specific 
ethnic groups, but these have focused almost entirely on ethnic minorities. 
Second, holding the country context constant helps ensure that when I compare 
findings regarding different movements of different ethnicities, I am at least 
holding background variables constant. In this review I also choose to focus on 
studies that employ quantitative methods. I do this because this review is 
intended to provide guidance for Chapter Three, which is also a quantitative 
study, and is therefore bound by restrictions in what correlations it can test for. 
Having now introduced this review, I will identify the causal factor the literature 
associates most with the motives of ethnic conflict: threat. 
The social movements literature identifies four primary causes of protest 
mobilisation: grievances/strains, resources, political opportunities and threats.55 
Grievances and threats have not always been treated separately, with Snow et 
al. (2005) identifying both dire social conditions and rapidly changing 
conditions and trends as strains, while Almeida (2019) identifies them as 
threats.56 Academics have however begun to distinguish between these 
phenomena.  
Van Dyke (2013) illustrates this difference using Cunningham & Phillips 
(2007) study of Ku Klux Klan mobilisation in North Carolina. This showed that, 
while the long-standing presence of an NAACP chapter was not associated with 
Klan presence, new NAACP chapters were.57 To put this exemplary difference 
into theoretical terminology, long-standing and negatively-perceived social 
conditions are grievances, whereas threats are events which either serve to 
make society noticeably worse in the short term, or, throw how bad things 
already are into sharp relief. These threats come in a variety of different forms, 
which I will now delineate and discuss. 
Almeida (2019) establishes four distinct types of threat.58 Economic 
threat involves sudden declines in absolute economic wellbeing, such as mass 
increases in unemployment. Public health and environmental threat includes 
actions that destroy or disrupt local environments, and/or negatively impact 
peoples health. Erosion of rights is a form of threat generated when 
governments, or other social actors, formally or implicitly abolish valued rights 
and/or privileges. Almeida (2019)s principle example of this is election fraud, 
55 Tarrow (2011), p.22-23 & 160; Staggenborg (2012), p.14; McCarthy & Zald (1977), p.1220; Snow et al. (2005), 
p.1095; Edwards & McCarthy (2004), p.125-128 
56 Almeida (2019), p.44; Snow et al. (2005), p.1187 
57 Van Dyke (2013), p.2 
58 Almeida (2019), p.52 
which implicitly abolishes the right to political representation. In my analysis 
here, I identify racial or ethnic discrimination as another form of rights erosion, 
given that discrimination constitutes an erosion of the right to equal treatment 
(or at least, treatment on the basis of merit). Finally, government repression 
occurs when states coerce, harass, and repress citizens under their 
jurisdiction.59  
Almeidas typology captures many dimensions of threat. However, it fails 
to incorporate into the discussion the extensive work on threat done by studies 
on white supremacy, which has resulted in the ethnic competition and power 
devaluation theories.60 To incorporate these insights, I add a new form of threat 
to Almeidas typology. Status threat is generated when individuals believe a 
group they belong to is set to lose power and standing relative to other groups 
in society. Such beliefs can be triggered by economic and demographic shifts, 
and, are associated with increased antagonism towards the increasingly-
powerful out-group. For example, a growing literature in social psychology has 
shown that Americans, upon learning that the USA is set to become a majority-
minority country, express greater preference for racial homophily in their social 
settings and interpersonal interactions, and have more negative evaluations of 
racial minority groups.61  
Given this association between status threat and ethnic antagonism, and 
the more direct relationship between discrimination and ethnic antagonism, the 
review below will focus on findings relating to these forms of threat. By showing 
that these threats have an impact on ethnic protest, and identifying the 
59 Ibid, p.51 
60 Boutcher et al. (2017), p.691-692 
61 Craig et al. (2018), p.206-207 
variables used to proxy them, I will find a means to demonstrate that parading 
and ethnic conflict are linked. 
I begin this analysis with minority protest. I here summarise the results of 
15 articles on ethnic minority protest, of which, seven focus on Latinx, six on 
African Americans and one each on Arab Americans and immigrants in general. 
These articles employ a mix of survey and event analysis methodologies, which 
creates significant variation in what variables each study measures. 
Nevertheless, if the variables are grouped according to the broad social 
phenomena they are supposed to capture, three consistent, positive findings 
hove into view. We see that the presence of organisational support (captured by, 
for example, NAACP membership rates, a count of Latino civic organisations, and 
membership of a politically active church) for the most part increases the 
likelihood of protest.62 Similarly, most of the studies show that education has a 
positive impact on protest participation.63 The final variable/s of interest relate to 
threat. 
The studies I examine here measure two main types of threat: the erosion 
of rights, measured via ethnic economic disparities and other forms of 
discrimination, and status threat, measured through counts of counter-
movement mobilisation.64 Regarding status threat, Ebert & Okamoto (2013) find 
that anti-immigrant events at t-1 had a strong, positive correlation with 
immigrant collective civic events at t65. Maher et al. (2019) however found that 
62 Jenkins et al. (2003), p.291-292; Martinez (2008), p.198; Coddou (2016), p.140; Beyerlein et al. (2019), p.177 
& 181. Maher et al. (2019), p.13, using an updated dataset on African American protest from that employed by 
Jenkins et al. (2003) qualifies their finding re: NAACP membership, in that it only has a significant, positive 
effect on protests that occurred in 1960-1968. 
63 Biggs (2006), p.328; Harris et al. (2006), p.36; Martinez (2008), p.198; Coddou (2016), p.140; Albarracin et al 
(2017), p.308; Williamson et al. (2018), p.407 
64 Jenkins et al. (2003), p.291-292; McCann (2016), p.183; Maher et al. (2019), p.12 
65 Ebert & Okamoto (2013), p.1284-1285 
counter-movements were negatively associated with African American protest 
between 1960-1968, while Biggs (2006) found that if African American students 
believed more whites to be in favour of segregation, they were less likely to 
participate in protest.66  
Experiencing discrimination has a more consistently positive effect on 
minority protest participation, though it does not affect all groups at all times.67 
McCann et al. (2016) found that discrimination motivated Latino protest in 2008 
but there was no significant relationship in 2015.68 Beyerlein et al. (2019) found 
that discrimination incentivised Latinx with US citizenship to protest, but had no 
effect on non-citizens.69 This variation however is not surprising.  
The citizen/noncitizen difference is explicable because the threat of 
discrimination is that it erodes rights, and non-citizens are less likely to perceive 
themselves as having much rights within the USA. Time difference requires a 
more qualitative understanding of the case to explain thoroughly than I possess, 
but, speaking generally, it also makes sense. As argued above, the distinction 
between threat and grievance is that the latter is experienced as continuity, the 
former as change. Even if, as McCann et al. (2016) find, actual levels of 
discrimination appear constant, the context of particular times may recast these 
experiences as either further proof of escalating disaster, or, just another 
manifestation of the grinding status quo. 
I turn now from examining ethnic minority collective action, to collective 
action by white supremacist and nativist groups. Before I delve into the causes 
of this form of activism however, it should be noted that these movements are 
66 Maher et al. (2019), p.12 
67 Jenkins et al. (2003), p.291-292; Coddou (2016), p.140; McCann et al. (2016), p.183; Azab & Santoro (2017), 
p.483; Williamson et al. (2018), p.407; Beyerlein et al. (2019), p.180-18 
68 McCann et al. (2016), p.183; Maher et al. (2019), p.13 
69 Beyerlein et al. (2019), p.176-183 
very different from both the minority protest movements listed above, and from 
the PUL organisations I listed in Northern Ireland. As recounted by Blee (2017), 
the vast majority of white supremacist groups are highly disordered, lacking 
fixed memberships, formal hierarchies or coherent ideologies.70 In this they 
differ markedly from the Loyal Orders.  
I was also concerned that white supremacist and nativist groups more 
closely resemble terrorist organisations than the nonviolent social movements 
focused on by this thesis. This difference in movement type, could invalidate 
comparison. I considered focusing on conservative social movements such as the 
Tea Party, as an alternative comparison, but, while such groups resemble PUL 
organisations more in form, they lack the explicit concern for identity-group-
status that is the signature feature of parading groups.71 Luckily, from my 
reading it seems that many  indeed, potentially most  far right groups never 
participate in ideologically-motivated violence.72 I therefore decided to persist in 
turning to studies of white supremacist and nativist groups for guidance, as they 
remain the best-studied type of ethnic majority protest. 
I here summarise seven studies of white supremacist and nativist 
movements. All the quantitative studies I came across were conducted using 
event analysis, due to the typical reluctance of white supremacists to be 
studied.73 Unlike studies of minority activism, which, according to the literature 
cited above, tend to be at least as interested in the effects of political 
70 Blee (2017), p.4-5 
71 This is not to say ideas about the proper hierarchy of ethnic groups do not play a role in conservative 
movements. The distinction is that, while the far right sees shifts in the ethnic hierarchy as the precursor to 
white subordination, conservatives appear to take more issue with how they think the change in status was 
achieved. This latter position does not necessitate any attachment to and fear for ones own group, and in this, 
the Tea Party and the Orange Order are fundamentally different. Tope et al. (2015), p.324-325 
72 Chermak et al. (2013), p.203 
73 Blee (2017), p.3 
opportunities and resources as they are in threat, threat is the primary interest 
of scholars working on majority-ethnic mobilisations. As such, most of their 
studies examine what threats exactly have the most impact on collective action.  
Status threat, measured through the local size of ethnic minority groups, 
the increasing size of ethnic minorities, and increases in pro-minority 
mobilisation, tends to have a positive relationship with white collective action.74 
The studies also examined the impact of the economy, with the size of the local 
manufacturing industry being a common subject of study. Results were mixed, 
with some studies (such as McVeigh (2009)s analysis of the 1920s KKK) 
revealing a positive correlation with a growing manufacturing industry, while 
others (such as Van Dyke & Soule (2002)s study of mid-1990s militias) reveal a 
positive relationship with manufacturing decline.75  
Beck (2000) and Cunningham & Phillips (2007) also examined the impact 
of comparative economic performance by group, though in different ways (C&P 
used a flat black/white manufacturing workers ratio, Beck used ethnic minority 
groups share of aggregate household income), and with different results 
(positive for C&P, negative for Beck).76 The relationship between white 
supremacist/nativist mobilisation and economic forms of strain and threat is 
therefore unclear. However, it is demonstrably the case that status threat 
increases the rate of ethnic majority protest. 
The goal of this section was to establish a means by which we could prove 
the assumption that parading is associated with ethnic conflict. As shown by this 
74 Quadratic in the case of the population variables. Beck (2000), p.166; Van Dyke & Soule (2002), p.512; 
Cunningham & Phillips (2007), p.802-803; Durso & Jacobs (2013), p.2013; Boutcher et al. (2017), p.695; Ward 
(2017), p.472 
75 Van Dyke & Soule (2002), p.512; McVeigh (2009), p.176; Durso & Jacobs (2013), p.2013; Boutcher et al. 
(2017), p.695; Ward (2017), p.472 
76 Beck (2000), p.166; Cunningham & Phillips (2007), p.802-803 
literature review, white collective action is increased in areas with large and/or 
growing minority populations, a demographic change that is seen by them to 
herald a coming shift in power. I will therefore use size of the opposing group, 
and the change in that size over recent years, as one means of measuring the 
association between parades and ethnic conflict.  
Meanwhile, my review of studies of minority collective action suggests 
that minority protest often responds to the threat of rights erosion. However, it 
is harder to use these studies as a guide to what variables I ought to use to test 
for this effect. The data I use in Chapter Three is drawn, not from surveys, but 
from existing panel data. Therefore, I cannot adopt most the measures of 
discrimination used by survey studies of minority mobilisation. Whats more, 
other measures of rights erosion  such as Williamson et al. (2018)s measure of 
police-caused deaths  do not fit the Northern Irish context.  
The one transferable measure is that used by Jenkins et al. (2003), that 
being the ratio of black to white median family income.77 They argue that if 
whites on average have higher incomes relative to blacks, African Americans will 
perceive that as proof of discrimination.78 It seems reasonable to suggest that 
Northern Irish Catholics will share this perception, given the communal narrative 
of Catholic economic discrimination during Northern Irelands Protestant 
hegemony. This is not quite the standardised measure I would have hoped to 
find  however, it is the best available option, and with it located, we have 
fulfilled the purpose of this section. We turn now to the second section of this 
literature review, and move on from unveiling causes of ethnic conflict, to 
discover what might explain episodes of ethnic peace.  
77 Jenkins et al. (2003), p.289 
78 Ibid, p.283 
2.2: Causes of Conflict, Causes of Peace 
In the previous section, I established a means to prove the link between the 
desire for conflict, and the desire to parade. In doing so, I focused on status-
based explanations for why the scale of ethnic mobilisation varies across people, 
areas and time. In this section, I shift from proving that parades ought to incite 
conflict, to introducing two reasons for why they do not.  
One problem that bedevils scholars of ethnic peace is that ethnic 
inequality is often present over large areas, but actual conflict between ethnic 
groups is highly spatially concentrated. During the Troubles for example, 
violence mostly took place within the Belfast Urban Area, and even there it was 
a feature only of particular highly segregated and deprived inner-city areas, 
while neighbourhoods of similar socio-economic profile in the suburbs saw far 
fewer fatalities.79 To explain this more fine-grained variation, scholars have 
turned to many 39avourable39s, two of which I explore below: ethnic residence 
patterns, and, the influence of community leaders. Below, I review the 
literatures findings regarding the influence of these variables, and lay the 
groundwork for the empirical Chapters that will test their influence.   
I begin by discussing the impact of residence patterns on conflict location. 
Following Weidmann (2009) I categorise this literature into investigations of two 
competing causal paths.80 The first path prioritises motive  the desire by ethnic 
groups to engage in conflict. The second prioritises opportunity  circumstances, 
for example the enemy group being particularly weak in a certain area, which 
make violence more desirable. Most studies stress the importance of 
79 Cunningham & Gregory (2014), p.68 
80 Weidmann (2009), p.526-527 
opportunity. Weidmann & Salehyan (2013) and Salvatore (2016) argue that civil 
war violence in Baghdad and Bosnia respectively was more common in areas 
where the enemy group had a relatively large presence, within an area 
otherwise dominated by the opponent group.81 Dhattiwala (2016) also stresses 
the importance of power, pointing to how during ethnic riots in the Indian city of 
Gujarat, Hindus sense of self-preservation held them back from attacking large 
or united Muslim communities, or those that could quickly seek reinforcements 
from majority-Muslim areas.82  
Madueke (2018) and (2019) explains Christian-Muslim conflict in Jos using 
spatial vulnerability. He finds the spaces most likely to see violence are mixed-
ethnicity neighbourhoods located between ethnically-homogenous 
neighbourhoods, because they are at once open to assault, and unable to resist 
it.83 Legewie & Schaeffer (2016) similarly focus on fuzzy boundaries, arguing 
that the vulnerability of such spaces comes from their indeterminate ownership. 
As they neighbour majority-inhabited areas, but are mixed in population 
themselves, fuzzy boundaries are at once subject to claims of ownership and 
unowned, creating both a threat and a reward that incentivises confrontation.84 
However, ethnic confrontations are not purely the result of material advantage 
or consequence. Pre-existing antagonism also plays a role, and, as I will now 
show, segregated residence patterns play a significant role in generating that 
antagonism. 
Since Allport (1954)s seminal work, it has been argued that contact with 
members of an ethnic minority reduces prejudice towards them.85 Numerous 
81 Weidmann & Salehyan (2013), p.60-61; Salvatore (2016), p.12 
82 Dhattiwala (2016), p.90 
83 Madueke (2018), p.466; Madueke (2019), p.15-16 
84 Legewie & Schaeffer (2016), p.131-132 
85 Sigelman & Welch (1993), p.781-783 
studies, having observed this, have sought to demonstrate whether the opposite 
is true  that, in other words, segregation (usually residential) promotes ethnic 
antagonism. Evidence is building to support this claim.  
In laboratory conditions Enos & Celaya (2018) find that randomly 
assigning identities to groups of people, then spatially segregating them within a 
room, was sufficient to increase levels of intergroup bias, relative to groups that 
were not separated.86 Laurence et al. (2016) reveal that residential segregation, 
when combined with high ethnic minority populations, in English communities 
results in increased white negative attitudes towards ethnic minorities.87 Biggs & 
Knauss (2012) meanwhile show, using the same measure, that the combination 
of segregation and high ethnic minority populations in Local Authorities 
increased the likelihood of local whites being members of the neo-fascist British 
National Party.88  
Despite the strong rationale for segregation being related to conflict 
through negative attitudes though, actual studies examining the impact of 
segregation on conflict are rare. Klasnja & Novta (2016) contend that 
segregation interacts with polarisation (the comparative share of the population 
in each ethnic group, where 1 = 50/50 split), and that at higher levels of 
polarisation, segregation might help reduce conflict by arresting its spread 
across the country.89 Corvalan & Vargas (2015) find a straightforward positive 
correlation between segregation and casualty rates due to conflict, though the 
size of the subnational units the study uses throws doubt on the accuracy of 
their segregation measurements.90 Far more convincing is the work of Cook et 
86 Enos & Celaya (2018), p.32-35 
87 Laurence et al. (2019), p.1054-1055 
88 Biggs & Knauss (2012), p.637-639 
89 Klasnja & Novta (2016), p.944-946 
90 Corvalan & Vargas (2015), p.216 
al. (2018), who exploit fine-grained historical data on USA black-white residence 
patterns, to show that segregation was positively correlated with lynching in the 
1910s & 20s.91 There is therefore evidence to show that residence patterns can 
engender both motive and opportunity for ethnic conflict. In Chapter Four, I 
assess which causal pathway best explains parades-related conflict in Northern 
Ireland, and how in turn this helps us understand why such confrontation is 
surprisingly rare. 
The first studies of the impact of leaders  in this instance, politicians  on 
ethnic conflict tended to show that they exacerbate conflict. Wilkinson (2004)s 
seminal book demonstrated the incidence of Hindu-Muslim riots in towns in Uttar 
Pradesh was positively correlated with competitive elections, a relationship he 
explained as the outcome of intentionally provocative processions organised by 
Hindu Nationalist politicians.92 His findings, already based on the work of 
multiple historians, have since been supported by Dhattiwala & Biggs (2012), 
who also showed that ethnic murders during the 2002 Gujarat riots were more 
common in areas where the BJP faced electoral competition.93 Iyer & Shrivastava 
(2018) have also confirmed the rationality of Hindu Nationalist provocation, by 
demonstrating that such communal riots boosted BJP vote share by around 
5%.94 Politicians have been similarly implicated in fomenting ethnic violence in 
studies of Russia and Indonesia.95  
While some leaders create conflict, others have been shown to be 
instrumental in stopping it. Again, studies of India have paved the way in 
demonstrating this. Studies of Gujarat (2002) and Varanasi (2006) show that, 
91 Cook et al. (2018), p.659 
92 Wilkinson (2004), p.43, 45 & 47-49 
93 Dhattiwala & Biggs (2012), p.502 
94 Iyer & Shrivastava (2018), p.111 
95 Barron (2014), p.127-129; Beissinger (2002), p.303 
even in the face of extreme provocations, various forms of persuasion employed 
by leaders intent on keeping the peace  ranging from speeches to patronage to 
corporal punishment  can counter the work of elite provocateurs and dissuade 
non-elites from violence.96 Multiple other studies, of Myanmar, Kyrgyzstan, 
Nigeria, Indonesia, France and, of course, Northern Ireland, have revealed 
similar factors at play.97 Much as residence patterns appear to concentrate 
violence in particular areas of a city, the presence of strong, peace-oriented 
leadership can prevent violence in even the most vulnerable neighbourhoods. In 
Chapter Five I investigate whether this dynamic can explain why parades-related 
conflict is so rare in Northern Ireland, by examining the ability of community 
leaders to restrain violence in Northern Irelands most contentious post-1998 
parade dispute. 
To conclude, the purpose of this Section of my literature review has been 
to establish how we might explain the puzzling absence of parades-related 
conflict in Northern Ireland. Together with the previous sections summary of 
existing work on ethnic mobilisation, I have shown how this thesis uses existing 
literature as a guide for how this puzzle might be resolved. In the following three 
Chapters, the example of the literature will be put into practice. I begin with 
Chapter Three, wherein I show that participation in parades, just as with 
protests with more explicit ethnic claims, is motivated by anxiety about the 
status of ones group. 
96 Williams (2007), p.157; Berenschot (2011), p.226-227 
97 Walton et al. (2017), p.17; Kutmanaliev (2015), p. 470-471; Khamidov et al. (2018), p.1126-1129; Krause 
(2018), p.148-150, 231-232; Garrett (2013), p.225-226; Clubb (2014), p.850-851 
Chapter Three: The Motives behind Parade Participation 
3.1: Introduction 
As laid out in the Introduction and the Literature Review, the primary purpose of 
this Chapter is to find out if there is, in fact, a relationship between parade 
participation and ethnic conflict. To restate the puzzle, it is apparent that while 
parades are often associated with ethnic conflict, they dont incite actual 
confrontations very often. One answer for why this might be, is that the kinds of 
fears or hatreds that drive ethnic conflict do not motivate people to parade. As 
paraders do not desire conflict, or parade in order to pursue conflict, conflict for 
the most part does not occur. It is the primary goal of this Chapter to test this 
interpretation. Drawing on the work done in Chapter Two, this results in the 
following question: does ethnic threat increase parade participation? 
This Chapter begins with a description of my dependent variables  
participation in PUL and CNR parades  and the dataset I used to create this 
variable: the Parades Commission Dataset (PCD). I follow this up by laying 
further groundwork for the regression, by explaining my choice of unit of 
analysis, independent variables and methodology. The results of the regressions 
will then be presented and summarised. Finally, I will discuss these results, 
interpreting their meaning in light of other knowledge gleaned from survey data, 
and conclude by describing the potential consequences of what has been 
uncovered. In this manner, I will discover whether we should indeed expect 
parades to trigger ethnic conflict. 
3.2: The Parades Commission Dataset 
The data for this study was obtained from the Parades Commission of Northern 
Ireland. The Commission is a non-departmental public body established in 1998 
with the threefold purpose of (1) educating people about parades, (2) promoting 
mediation as a solution to disputes over the right to parade, and (3) to keep 
itself generally informed as to the conduct of public processions and protest 
meetings.98 It is by fulfilling this latter purpose that the Parades Commission 
came to create the dataset I rely on here. 
Since the 1980s, those wishing to organise public processions in the 
United Kingdom have had to notify the police about their intention well in 
advance of holding the parade.99 They must also provide other information about 
the parade, including its route and the date on which it takes place. In Northern 
Ireland, parade organisers should also provide the number of persons likely to 
take part in [the parade].100 The other important difference in Northern Ireland 
is that the police, once they have the notification, must immediately pass that 
information on to the Parades Commission.  
The Parades Commission takes these individual notifications, and collates 
the information they contain into a single dataset. It also categorises the 
parades, grouping them by organisation and political affiliation, and assesses 
whether or not they are likely to disrupt public order. If such a risk is present the 
Commission will then enter into dialogue with the parade organisers and those 
opposing the parade, with the goal of resolving tensions. If no such resolution is 
possible, the Commission will then take steps to minimise the capacity of the 
98 Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, s 2(1) 
99 Public Order Act 1986, s 11(3) 
100 Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, s 6(4) 
parade, and anyone protesting the parade, to offend. This involves preventing 
paraders from playing certain songs, displaying certain images or, in the last 
resort, preventing parades from marching certain routes. Such decisions are also 
recorded in their database. Though data collection has been done since the 
Commissions founding, digital data storage only began in 2006. The upshot of 
all this is that the Commission has produced a massive, publicly-accessible 
database that contains information on the majority of, if not every single, legal 
parade that has taken place in Northern Ireland since 2006. 
Catalogues of collective action events are nothing new in social science. 
Charles Tilly first deployed them in the 1960s, and since then they have been 
used to analyse a wide variety of movements across several countries.101 The 
longevity of their use however has not insulated the tool from criticism. The 
principle issue is the source material used in constructing the catalogues. Almost 
all event catalogues draw information from newspapers, because they tend to be 
the most accessible, selective, informative and accurate sources available 
continuously over the period of interest.102 Newspaper coverage however is 
known to be subject to selection bias.  
McCarthy et al. (1996), Oliver & Myers (1999) and Ortiz et al. (2005) 
demonstrate that newspapers are far more likely to record the occurrence of 
collective action if said action is large, contentious, attended by prominent 
people, takes place in an easily-accessible area (such as major cities) and occurs 
during a slow news cycle.103 Then there is the additional problem articulated by 
Davenport (2009) that newspapers are not neutral transmitters of information. 
Instead, newspapers are institutions telling stories about the world, and the 
101 Davenport (2009), p.5 
102 Hutter (2014), p.349. 
103 McCarthy et al. (1996), p.491; Oliver & Myers (1999), p.70-71; Ortiz et al. (2005), p.398-401 
stories they wish to tell shape their selection and presentation of events.104 None 
of these weaknesses invalidate newspaper catalogues as tools for the study of 
protests. However, for reasons I will now detail, they do make newspapers bad 
sources of data on parades. 
Nationalist and Unionist parades in Northern Ireland are often not very 
big, take place in settlements of all sizes and are rarely contentious enough to 
be newsworthy (see Fig.3.1-3.3). This means many parades are unlikely to be 
covered by newspapers. Whats more, Northern Irish newspaper coverage is 
particularly distorted by influenced by their Nationalist/Unionist ideologies.  
When reporting on the 12th July in 2011, The Belfast News Letter, a 
Unionist paper, repeatedly stressed how large the parades were. They did this in 
part, because as a Unionist mouthpiece their interest was to cast the parading 
tradition as being increasingly popular, not just with Northern Irish Protestants, 
but also with revenue-generating tourists.105 The Nationalist Irish News 
meanwhile sought to tell a story of the 12th as disruptive and costly, in line with 
classic Irish Nationalist hostility to a holiday seen as a celebration of Catholic 
oppression. As such it ignored the peaceful parades detailed by the News Letter 
and restricted coverage to the few parades which were associated with rioting.106  
Such coverage, which alternately make parades look bigger than they 
might be in reality, or more violent than they might be, make the Northern Irish 
newspapers a poor source of data for a comprehensive study of parade 
participation. The Parades Commission Dataset however has no such 
deficiencies. The Commission does not collect data with the purpose of telling a 
story, nor does it have to pick and choose which parades to cover. Its purpose is 
104 Davenport (2009), p.27 & 39 
105 Ferman (2013), p.62 & 66 
106 Ibid, p.63 & 65 
to keep itself generally informed about all Northern Irish parades, and it takes 
in, rather than seeks out, data. The PCD therefore lacks the biases of 
newspapers. This is not to say that the PCD is perfect. Data supplied by 
members of the public has its own problems. However, as I will now detail, 
those flaws are largely correctable and do not cancel out the superior capacity of 
the PCD to represent reality. 
One problem with relying on members of the public to supply your 
information is the resulting absence of consistent style. This results in issues 
like; the same organisation being referred to by several slightly different names; 
the use of local names for route start and end points that are not used by official 
maps, and rampant misspelling. There is also no consistency in deciding whether 
to treat an outward and return parade, put on by the same organisation, as one 
or two parades. The Commissions categorisation of the data is also flawed. I 
encountered several examples during my analysis of the PCD of parades being 
mistakenly labelled as either not Unionist/Nationalist when they clearly were, or, 
as being labelled as one when they were in fact the other. I had to correct these 
flaws in the dataset by means of manually checking the data, and either editing 
values, or not including or deleting parades (the rules I followed to do this are 
outlined in Appendix A). This was a lengthy process, but, in the end it produced 
a stylistically consistent database. 
The other potential issue with the PCD relates to participant data. This has 
two problems. First, some parade organisers provide no participant data at all. 
Second, all participant data is guesswork on the part of organisers, an assumed 
figure rather than an observed one. The absence is a problem, but as it only 
affected 1,537 parades out of the over 31,000 identified, its impact on results 
should be minimal. As for the latter issue, one problem that might result from 
participant size being organiser guesswork is an inflation of participation count, 
resulting either from organisers enthusiastic belief in the appeal of their event, 
or, by their cynical desire to represent their movement as being popular. 
However, the nature of the data would not appear to bear such concerns out. 
Organisers seem to be willing to state low participant numbers for their parades, 
and the numbers of participants claimed often scale alongside, for example, the 
broad social significance of the event commemorated. On this basis it looks as 
though the numbers of participants supplied by organisers are informed and 
realistic guesses. This should not surprise us either. There is little benefit to 
making ones parade look larger on a rarely-read government form. As such, I 
am comfortable employing this information as the basis for my dependent 
variables: participation in CNR and PUL parades. 
Fig. 3.1) PUL Parade Participation  Descriptive Statistics 
Variable Obs  Mean  Min  Max 
 PUL Participants 1390 3299.679 0 82991 
 PUL Troubles Deaths (sqrt) 1390 1.243 0 14.036 
 CNR Participants (Lag) 1390 6.679 0 168.048 
 CNR Population (%) 1390 44.638 2.555 98.026 
 Population Change (%) 1390 .177 -3.761 2.818 
 PUL Working Class (%) 1390 27.339 8.051 40.957 
 Unemployment Ratio 1390 1.39 1 1.7 
 Housing Benefit Claimants (%) 1390 21.421 0 55.227 
 PUL Degree Holders (%) 1390 17.994 3.846 42.203 
 PUL Participants (Lag) 1390 40.698 0 288.082 
 Assembly Election Year 1390 .3 0 1 
Fig. 3.2) CNR Parade Participation  Descriptive Statistics 
Variable 
Obs Mean Min Max 
CNR Participants 1390 360.721 0 42495 
CNR Troubles Deaths (sqrt) 1390 .951 0 15.716 
PUL Participants (Lag) 1390 40.698 0 288.082 
PUL Population (%) 1390 49.643 1.394 93.107 
Population Change (%) 1390 .177 -3.761 2.818 
Unemployment Ratio 1390 1.39 1 1.7 
CNR Working Class (%) 1390 26.335 9.353 44.118 
Housing Benefit Claimants (%) 1390 21.421 0 55.227 
CNR Degree (%) 1390 19.545 8.774 43.655 
CNR Participants (Lag) 1390 6.679 0 168.048 
Assembly Election Year 1390 .3 0 1 
3.3: Dependent Variable & Unit of Analysis 
The Dependent Variable 
My dependent variables are intended to measure participation in Nationalist and 
Unionist parades. I therefore whittled the PCD down to parades associated with 
either the PUL or CNR identity blocs. In practice, this meant identifying the 
broad purpose of every PUL and CNR parade in my dataset. This process is also 
categorised in Appendix A.  
I counted as parades those Nationalist and Unionist public processions 
that were held for the purpose of commemorating important ethno-nationalist 
events, or simply for the purpose of display. This involved, for example, 
excluding PUL and CNR parades held for the purpose of protesting policy, such 
as the 2012-13 Flag Protests or the 2013-2016 Twaddell Civil Rights Marches. It 
also meant excluding parades held by churches, as those celebrated a more 
religious identity, and parades purely associated with recreation or festivity.  
As mentioned above I also removed all parades for which there was no 
data on participants. The final step left was to prepare each variable for 
ecological analysis. This required removing those parades that do not take place 
in a Settlement, and summing the participant-counts of the CNR and PUL 
parades which took place within my units of analysis, into a single count. In the 
regressions I used the exposure command to effectively treat this participant 
count variable as a participation rate of Catholics or Protestants in this type of 
parade, in my units of analysis. This then was the process for constructing my 
dependent variable. I will now go over the process by which I selected my unit 
of analysis. 
Unit of Analysis 
The unit of analysis employed in this study is the Settlement-Year. This unit was 
selected as a compromise choice between features of the dataset, the demands 
of ecological analysis, and the difficulty of subjecting parades to such analysis.  
As previously stated, two of the PCDs chief flaws were the frequent use of 
local, rather than official, terms for locations, and the lack of consistent 
terminology and accurate spelling. These issues meant that my geocoding 
software (opencagegeo) was only able to automatically locate 18,226 out of the 
full dataset of 47,350 parades to postcode-level or below. Manually checking and 
inputting coordinates for the remaining 29,000 parades would have taken far 
more time than I had available. However, most of the remaining parades could 
be located to villages, towns or cities (hereby referred to as Settlements), and 
this, as outlined below, became the best available choice of geographic unit. 
Ecological analyses are bedevilled by the inference problem. The problem 
is that correlations found in geographically-aggregated data do not necessarily 
reflect trends in individual-level behaviour within those units.107 The principle 
response to this problem  which, though not a solution, can help to allay 
concerns  is to use the smallest geographic units possible, thereby making the 
aggregate as reflective of individual-level variation as possible.108 However, in an 
ecological analysis of parades, this solution cannot be employed. Even if I had 
sufficient data to locate every parade to a street or building, it would be unlikely 
that all participants in that parade would live in its start-points immediate 
vicinity. The unit I must choose is therefore one small enough to not over-
107 King (1997), p.14-15; Kalyvas (2006), p.50 & 247 
108 Costalli & Ruggeri (2015), p.44; Kalyvas (2008), p.404 
aggregate the data, and large enough to likely contain the parade participants. 
Conveniently, the Settlement is a fair compromise between these two goals.  
The Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency has identified the 
existence of 136 Settlements in Northern Ireland, with the minimum population 
size for Settlement status being 1,000 residents.109 72% of Northern Irelands 
population lives within the boundaries of a Settlement. On this basis, I assume 
that the majority of the participants in parades that take place in Settlements 
will either live in those Settlements, or, live close enough to be influenced by the 
Settlements peculiar economic and social characteristics.  
These Settlements vary significantly in size, with the largest, Belfast, 
having a population of 280,211  almost three times the size of the next largest 
Settlement, Derry (83,125), while the smallest, Dromara, only has a population 
of 1,006. To account for this, I made two major adjustments. First, instead of 
using the formal Settlement boundaries, I used the Small Area approximation of 
those boundaries.110 This allowed me to disaggregate my census data within 
Settlements by those identified as being either Protestant or Catholic, or brought 
up in the religion. Using Small Areas also allowed me to split Belfast into four 
Settlements, using the internal-to-Belfast Constituency boundaries of North, 
South, East and West Belfast to divide the city. This brought my total number of 
Settlements up to 139. In order for me to test the impacts of time-variant 
variables, I created 10 Settlement-Year units per Settlement (ranging from 2007 
to 2016). I therefore possess a total of 1390 units of analysis, for which I 
constructed counts of parade participants. 
109 NISRA (2015), p.4-5 
110 NISRA (2016), p.3-4 
3.3: Independent Variables & Methods 
As set out in the literature review, the variables of most interest to this study 
measure the threat posed by the ethnic other, specifically, status threat and the 
erosion of rights, as these indicate the existence of conflict. In this section, I 
describe the independent variables used in this thesis, and the data that was 
used to make them. First, I discuss the variables used to measure impact of 
threat and/or discrimination, which were introduced in the literature review. 
Second, I look at measurements of economic insecurity, which can be used to 
assess the impact of access to resources, and/or economic threat. Third, I 
examine several miscellaneous controls which may have an impact on the scale 
of nationalist sentiment. Following this, I move on to briefly discuss my  
methodology, before finally presenting the results of my regression. 
Threat 
My first threat variable measures status threat, using the measurements of 
demographic size and change favoured by the literature on ethnic majority 
protest. Following Ward (2017), I use two distinct variables: one measuring 
population size, the other measuring population change over time.111 The former 
uses the Catholic and Protestant population of the Settlement (expressed as a 
percentage), using the census brought up Catholic/Protestant variable to 
ensure I capture the ethnic rather than religious dimension of the identity. The 
latter takes the percent-change in the Catholic population of a Settlement 
111 Ward (2017), p.468 
between the 2001 and 2011 censuses, and subtracts the percent-change of the 
Protestant population of that Settlement that occurred over the same time. The 
resulting variable is at its highest when the Catholic population is increasing and 
the Protestant population falling, and at its lowest when the Protestant 
population increasing and the Catholic population falling. Also, because the 
literature on ethnic white and far right mobilisation in the United States suggests 
that the relationship between ethnic other population size and mobilisation is 
unlikely to be linear, I include a quadratic term (the proportion of the 
Catholic/Protestant population, squared) in order to test for a potential n-shape 
relationship. 
I also measure status threat through a measure of the size of the ethnic 
others marches, in line with the literature discussed in Chapter Two. To measure 
this I turn my dependent, parade-participants variable into a t-1 lagged variable. 
This means, for example, that I test the impact of total participation in CNR 
parades in a Settlement in 2006, on participation in Protestant parades in a 
Settlement in 2007. As with deaths, the participation variable is right-skewed, 
and so I transformed it via a square root. 
My second measure of threat captures the erosion of rights through a 
measure of economic inequality. As shown in the literature review, 
discrimination is a strong motivator for ethnic minority protest. I cannot assess 
whether my paraders have direct experience of discrimination, but, following 
Jenkins (2003) I include a ratio of Catholic to Protestant unemployment rates as 
a proxy, on the basis that difference in this measure can capture in aggregate 
various forms of personal and structural discrimination. This is an annual 
measure produced by The Executive Office, in their Labour Force Survey Religion 
Report. The higher this measure, the higher the Catholic unemployment rate is 
relative to the Protestant unemployment rate. Unfortunately the data in this 
report is not consistently available at a geographically disaggregated level for 
my time period. Still, it is reasonable to suggest that a sense of how ones ethnic 
group is faring nationally would influence ones propensity to mobilise. 
My third and final measure of threat is two variables peculiar to the 
Northern Irish context: a count of PUL deaths at the hands of CNR groups, and a 
count of CNR deaths at the hands of PUL groups, during the Troubles. I use this 
variable to proxy the potential impact of past violence on present-day peoples 
sense that the other ethnic group poses a threat to them. There is a budding 
literature that has shown that peoples attachment to their partisan or ethnic 
identities is strengthened following historical victimisation, and that this 
increased attachment can be inherited from victimised family members.112 It 
seems reasonable to assume that the Troubles would leave a similar legacy. This 
variable is not intended to measure the actual levels of violence that took place 
between 1969-1998. Instead it a measurement of the likelihood that the 
Protestant or Catholic inhabitants of a Settlement in 2007-2016 would perceive 
themselves as an historically victimised population. I therefore chose to measure 
these variables as counts rather than rates, in line with Tolnay et al. (1996).  
These authors contend convincingly that when people remember non-
quotidian violence (lynching in their article, but the logic applies just the same to 
deaths inflicted by terrorists and/or the military) they are more likely to 
remember the count of victims, rather than the general probability that people 
from their group would have been victimised.113 Data for these variables was 
taken from the Sutton Index of Deaths, a list of deaths associated with the 
112 Balcells (2012), p.334-335; Linke & OLaughlin (2015), p.117-118; Lupu & Peisakhin (2017), p.844 
113 Tolnay et al. (1996), p.800 
Troubles that took place between 1969-2001.114 Suttons list is well-regarded in 
the literature, and is often used to measure the impact of Troubles-era 
violence.115 Its usefulness is compounded by the fact that Sutton records the 
organisational affiliation of the victims and perpetrators of violence, as well as 
the religious affiliation of victims without organisational affiliation. This allows 
me to create two deaths variables mentioned above, as it means both 
perpetrators and victims can be assigned to an ethnic category.  
For purposes of this variable, all Northern Irish Catholics and members of 
armed Republic groups were coded as CNR while all Northern Irish Protestants 
and members of the police and military were coded as PUL. These deaths were 
then aggregated to Settlement level, and the count transformed via square-root 
to account for the datas rightward-skew. In conclusion then, taking all four 
measurements of threat together, I present the following four hypotheses: 
H1: Participation will have a quadratic relationship (i.e. a positive relationship 
with the non-transformed variable, and a negative relationship with the squared 
variable) with both population size and population change. 
H2: The higher the others participation was at t-1, the higher participation will 
be at t. 
H3: The higher the Cath-Prot unemployment ratio, the higher CNR participation 
will be, while the lower the variable, the higher PUL participation will be. 
114 I only used the deaths that took place between 1969 and 1998, the latter date marking the official end of 
the Troubles. 
115 Balcells et al. (2016), p.40; Deglow (2016), p.791 
H4: The higher the deaths count in a Settlement, the higher participation will be. 
Economic Insecurity 
My measurement of economic insecurity takes into account both a permanent 
insecurity, measured through class, and also a more time-sensitive insecurity 
intended to represent the impact of the Great Recession, the worst impact of 
which fell right in the middle of my observed time period. To proxy the first, I 
used the 2011 census to measure the percentage of Catholics and Protestants in 
each Settlement employed in technical, semi-routine, and routine occupations. 
Such people are likely to be low-paid and low-skilled, and therefore economically 
vulnerable.  
To capture the more time-variant impact of the Recession, I measured the 
percent of households in a Settlement in receipt of housing benefit.116 I chose 
this benefit, first, because as it is available to those in work it measures the 
presence of poverty in general, not just the poverty of the unemployed, and 
second, because the type of poverty it measures  the inability to afford shelter 
 is a particularly potent source of insecurity.  
Economic insecurity could have two competing impacts. The resource 
mobilisation thesis would lead us to expect economic insecurity to suppress 
participation by reducing the amount of time, energy or funds people have to 
invest in collective action.117 Threat theory by contrast would lead us to expect 
that a sudden decline in an individuals circumstances may lead to the sense that 
116 Households are used instead of a population measurement because in cases where two people share the 
same house, only one is allowed to claim the benefit. Housing Benefit, gov.uk, accessed 16/06/2019, 
https://www.gov.uk/housing-benefit 
117 Cress & Snow (1996), p.1090 
https://www.gov.uk/housing-benefit
the security of their group is under threat, and inspire counter-mobilisation that 
might re-establish group dominance.118 I believe that the minority population 
(CNRs) are more likely to respond in line with the resource mobilisation thesis, 
while the majority population (PULs) are more likely to behave according to the 
threat thesis. Therefore: 
H5a: The higher the measures of economic insecurity, the lower the participation 
in CNR parades. 
H5b: The higher the measures of economic insecurity, the higher the 
participation in PUL parades. 
Other Controls 
In addition to these variables, I include two other miscellaneous controls. 
Employing the census I measure the percentage of Catholics and Protestants in 
each Settlement educated to at least university level. Higher levels of education 
are positively associated with protest participation by African Americans and 
Hispanics (at least, US-born Hispanics).119 However, I expect higher levels of 
education to negatively correlate with participation in the Northern Irish case, 
because Northern Irish parading is associated with competing nationalist 
sentiments absent from US minority mobilisation, and repeated studies have 
118 Biggs & Knauss (2012), p.634 
119 Williamson et al. (2018) 
shown nationalist sentiment to have a negative relationship with educational 
attainment.120  
I also include a t-1 lagged measure of participation. This is measured 
because many of the parades whose participants I measure recur on an annual 
basis. This control accounts for the habitual motive behind participation  the 
fact that people may parade simply because they have always paraded before.  
Last but not least, I include a binary variable titled electionyear, labelled 
1 on years when there was an election to the Northern Ireland Assembly, the 
devolved government of Northern Ireland.121 Such elections are often 
characterised by intense sectarian competition, as the Unionist and Nationalist 
parties compete to be the largest force in the Assembly, and secure the First 
Minister position. I argue that in this atmosphere of intensified sectarian 
competition, peoples ethnonational identities may become more salient. In such 
a context, higher participation in ethnonational parades is expected, as people 
who feel more attached to their nation may parade more. 
120 Hjerm (2001), p.50-55; Coenders & Scheepers (2003), p.330-333; Hjerm & Schnabel (2010), p.533 
121 There are four types of election that take place in Northern Ireland: Assembly elections to the devolved 
government, Westminster elections to the UK Parliament, local elections to councils and European elections to 
the EU Parliament. I tested both Assembly and Westminster elections, as members of these Parliaments have 
the greatest control over Northern Irish life at this time. Models were compared using AIC, which showed the 
Assembly election model to be the better fit. 
Methods 
My dependent variables  cnrparticipants and pulparticipants  are both 
overdispersed count variables. As such, I analyse them using negative binomial 
regression, standard poisson regressions being inappropriate for such data.122 In 
line with other studies that employ pooled time-series data (for example, Durso 
& Jacobs (2013)) I use a population-averaged form of negative binomial 
regression, in order to account for the likelihood that observations within my 
spatial unit (Settlements) are correlated.123 I also extend this assumption to the 
reported standard errors by using robust standard errors (in xtgee, robust 
standard errors are effectively clustered).  
Population-averaged models employ generalised estimating equations, 
which in turn require the user to set a working covariance structure. Following 
Cui (2007), I use the QIC measure to select the most appropriate correlation 
structure, which turns out to be independent (observations over time are 
independent).124 The results of this analysis are presented below in two forms. 
Regression tables (Fig. 3.4 & 3.5) will be used to show the precise relationships 
between my independent and dependent variables. And with that, we reach the 
end of the sections describing the process of study-construction. Now I present 
my results. 
122 Cunningham & Phillips (2007), p.793; Dhattiwala & Biggs (2012), p.493-494 
123 Durso & Jacobs (2013), p.134-135 
124 Cui (2007), p.211 
Fig. 3.3) Correlates of PUL Parade Participation 
 Model (1) Model (2) Model (3) 
 (PUL) (PUL) (PUL) 
sqrt_puldeaths 0.897** 0.884** 0.785*** 
 (-2.14) (-2.35) (-5.20) 
cnrparticipants_lagged 1.011** 1.006 1.002 
 (2.24) (1.28) (0.46) 
cnrpop_pcent 1.080*** 1.062*** 1.051*** 
 (5.53) (5.15) (4.83) 
cnrpop_pcent_sq 0.999*** 0.999*** 1.000*** 
 (-4.58) (-4.31) (-2.58) 
popchange 1.805*** 1.968*** 2.491*** 
 (2.68) (2.61) (3.95) 
popchange_squared 0.851*** 0.855** 0.802*** 
 (-2.94) (-1.99) (-3.29) 
unemployment_ratio 0.733** 0.842 0.808 
 (-2.47) (-1.07) (-1.36) 
pulworker  1.105*** 1.015 
  (5.74) (0.59) 
hbclaimants  1.033** 1.001 
  (2.56) (0.11) 
puldegree   0.925*** 
   (-3.42) 
pulparticipants_lagged   1.023*** 
   (9.27) 
electionyear_a   0.817*** 
   (-3.33) 
_cons 0.367** 0.0122*** 0.345 
 (-2.45) (-10.07) (-0.96) 
N 1390 1390 1390 
Exponentiated coefficients; z statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
Fig. 3.4) Correlates of CNR Parade Participation 
 Model (1) Model (2) Model (3) 
 (CNR) (CNR) (CNR) 
sqrt_cnrdeaths 0.900 1.011 0.860** 
 (-1.63) (0.20) (-2.04) 
pulparticipants_lagged 1.025*** 1.017*** 1.013*** 
 (6.15) (4.93) (3.51) 
pulpop_pcent 0.841*** 0.877*** 0.926* 
 (-3.15) (-3.19) (-1.95) 
pulpop_pcent_sq 1.001** 1.001* 1.000 
 (2.12) (1.92) (0.98) 
popchange 1.096 0.806 0.819 
 (0.26) (-0.62) (-0.45) 
popchange_squared 0.920 0.901 0.934 
 (-0.72) (-0.93) (-0.54) 
unemployment_ratio 6.253*** 4.133*** 4.713*** 
 (3.43) (3.29) (3.20) 
cnrworker  1.154*** 1.093** 
  (2.72) (2.53) 
hbclaimants  0.953** 0.957* 
  (-2.02) (-1.93) 
cnrdegree   0.978 
   (-0.53) 
cnrparticipants_lagged   1.055*** 
   (4.63) 
electionyear_a   0.826 
   (-0.82) 
_cons 0.0480*** 0.00379*** 0.00485*** 
 (-3.09) (-3.81) (-3.50) 
N 1390 1390 1390 
Exponentiated coefficients; z statistics in parentheses 
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
3.4: Results 
I begin my description of the regression results with the impacts of status 
threat. Starting with the demographic variables, in line with H1, PUL 
participation shows a quadratic relationship with both the size of the Catholic 
population in 2011, and the relative increase of the Catholic population between 
2011 and 2001. Indeed, the latter variable has the largest single impact on the 
dependent variable. CNR participation however bucks this trend.  
In the final model, CNR participation has a slight negative relationship 
with PUL population size, and this does not appear to be quadratic. However this 
effect is also barely significant, being at the 0.1 level. The association meanwhile 
between CNR population and demographic change over time is completely 
insignificant. It appears that minority populations, against expectations, are 
neither threatened by the demographic strength of the majority, nor enthused 
by their own burgeoning populations. This is an important contrast between 
minority and majority ethnic group behaviour, which will be explored further in 
the discussion. 
The other measure of status threat  the size of the opposing ethnicitys 
mobilisations  had a slightly more consistent impact. Past CNR parade 
participation on PUL participation was positive, but not significant. PUL parade 
participation did however have a significant positive relationship to the incidence 
of CNR parade participation. Expectations regarding the impact of rights erosion 
were thoroughly met in the case of CNR participation, but PUL participation was 
unrelated to the ratio of Catholic-to-Protestant unemployment. Finally, both 
parade-types were associated with a significant negative correlation between 
historic victimisation and modern-day parades participation. This was not the 
expected direction of the correlation, and the reasons why this might be the case 
will be covered in the discussion. 
Turning to the economic variables, the expectations encapsulated in H5a 
and H5b were both refuted, with the results regarding CNR participation in 
particular being the reverse of expectations. CNR participation is higher in 
Settlements where the Catholic population is working class, not lower, and there 
is also a slight positive relationship between participation and housing insecurity 
(though this is only significant at the 90% level). PUL participation on the other 
hand is apparently unrelated to the proportion of Protestants in a Settlement 
that are working class, or to the extent to which households in a Settlement 
require housing benefit.  
Finally, we have the miscellaneous controls. As expected, the size of the 
degree-holding population was negatively-associated with participation in CNR 
and PUL parades, though only the relationship with PUL participation is 
significant. Parade participation at t-1 is also consistently, positively-related to 
parade participation at t, though, given how ritualistic parades are, the size of 
the effect is not quite as large as one might expect. More interesting though is 
the impact of the electionyear variable. Contrary to expectations, election years 
are associated with a decline in parade participation for both CNR and PUL 
parades, though only the relationship with PUL parading is significant.  
As outlined, the primary purpose of this Chapter is to discern if there is a 
relationship between parade participation and ethnic conflict. These results 
suggest that there is, in that status threat and the erosion of rights are both 
positively associated with participation in parades. However, what is also clear 
from this preliminary survey of the results, is that there are clear differences in 
what effects CNR and PUL mobilisation. I therefore structure the following results 
discussion to make productive use of this difference, and compare and contrast 
the results of the two mobilisations. I start by discussing the results that have 
the same impact on CNR and PUL participation, and then move on to those 
which had opposite reactions. With this structure, I not only tie participation to 
threat, but also, will be able to isolate what ecological factors spark mobilisation 
amongst ethnic groups regardless of their power, and which factors must 
interact with a groups social status to bring people out onto the streets. 
3.5: Discussion 
Before we embark on discussing the findings described above, we must 
acknowledge their limitations. These results were generated via an ecological 
analysis, using units of analysis with populations (cnrpop and pulpop) that 
ranged in size from 35 and 12, to 65,011 and 45,665 respectively. There is 
therefore every chance, especially in the larger Settlements, that this analysis of 
the aggregate population does not capture the characteristics of the individuals 
actually going on parade. Reliance on this method is somewhat justified by the 
lack of viable alternative data to conduct a similar comparison.  
There is very little survey data examining participation in ethnonational 
parades, or indeed, any collective action events in Northern Ireland. There are 
exceptions. For example, the Northern Ireland General Election Survey asks its 
respondents whether they are members of the Orange Order. However, such 
data sheds light on only a comparatively thin slice of parade participation. My 
Parades Commission Database therefore remains the most comprehensive 
source of data available on parade participation, and aggregate analysis the best 
option available. Whats more, as will be seen over the course of this discussion, 
the results presented here are often in line with established conclusions drawn 
by the wider literature. In the interests of mollifying concerns then, let us 
proceed to discussing those factors with a consistent impact across all parade-
types: education, past parading (same type) and past victimisation. 
CNR-PUL Similarities 
The results regarding educational attainment and repeat parading were as 
anticipated. Scholars have been using the ISSP to demonstrate the negative 
relationship between nationalist sentiment and educational attainment since the 
early 2000s.125 Given that the identities expressed by PUL and CNR parades are 
national, it makes sense that a more educated population would be less likely 
to parade. It is interesting that the negative relationship is only significant for 
Protestants. The reasons for this are unclear, but, may be associated with the 
more leftist character of Irish nationalism (in the context of Northern Ireland) 
as opposed to the more right-wing associations of PUL Britishness.  
In regard to repeat parading, Blake (2019) has already identified unionist 
parades as rituals, in that they are symbolic 69avourabl that is socially 
standardised and repetitive, and nationalist parades share many of the same 
traits.126 Many of the parades in the PCD commemorate historical events, and it 
only makes sense that their participants would turn out year on year to mark 
these dates of national significance. The negative impact of past victimisation 
though makes for a more complex puzzle. 
I expected that historic victimisation would result in deeper attachment to 
ones national identity. Those with stronger attachments to their national 
identities should in turn be more likely to participate in parades. These 
expectations were buttressed by findings that suggest that those with greater 
exposure to civil war violence are more likely to vote for ethnic or nationalist 
parties, and attend protests.127 The results though show a negative relationship 
125 Hjerm (2001), p.50-55; Coenders & Scheepers (2003), p.330-333; Hjerm & Schnabel (2010), p.533 
126 Blake (2019), p.7 
127 Hadzic et al. (2017), p.17; Freitag et al. (2017), p.7-8 
between participation and victimisation. I have two explanations for this. First, 
the work of Hadzic et al. (2017) and Costalli & Ruggeri (2018) suggests that, in 
some contexts at least, the direct impact of civil war on political behaviour fades 
over time.128 Given that the most serious violence of the Troubles took place in 
the late 1960s-early 1970s, over 30 years before many of the parades in my 
dataset took place, it may be that the mobilising effect of violence has waned.  
However, in such a case, the expected result would be non-significance, 
not a significant and negative relationship. A more appropriate explanation is 
extractable from the work of Lesschaeve (2019). Unlike the other studies 
mentioned, Lesschaeve (2019) explicitly measures two separate kinds of ethnic 
war experience: that of being a fighter in the war, and that of having PTSD or 
other war-related trauma.129 He found that the former experience was related to 
increased voting for nationalist parties, while the latter diminished the likelihood 
of doing so.130 As a further test of these possibilities, I have decided to employ a 
second analysis, using survey data gathered in the 2005 edition of the Northern 
Ireland Life and Times Survey. 
The NILT is an annual survey designed to monitor the attitudes and 
behaviour of people in Northern Ireland annually to provide a time-series and a 
public record of how [their] attitudes and behaviour develop on a wide range of 
social policy issues.131 In 2005, a randomly-selected sample of 1200 people 
were asked a series of questions relating to their political behaviour and their 
conflict victimisation (this is the only year both sets of questions were asked). To 
test the validity of my existing results regarding the impact of conflict experience 
128 Hadzic et al. (2017), p.8; Costalli & Ruggeri (2018), p.949-950 
129 Lesschaeve (2019), p.2-3 
130 Ibid, p.12 
131 ARK (2006), Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2005 [computer file], ARK, www.ark.ac.uk/nilt 
[distributor], June 2006. 
on parades participation, I conducted two sets of logistic regressions on Catholic 
(n=357) and Protestant (n=592) respondents to the survey.  
My dependent variable measured whether the respondent had taken part 
in a demonstration, picket or march, which, while not a perfect equivalent of my 
CNR and PUL participation variable (which focuses on a specific kind of parade, 
not all mobilisations), is the best available. My key variables of interest stated 
whether the respondent considered themselves to be a victim of the Troubles or 
whether they had been a victim of any conflict-related violent incidents. I also 
included a number of controls, including income decline, class and education 
level, similar to those included in the ecological regression. 
The results of this analysis are more in line with what we would expect 
from the literature. Victimisation of both kinds was associated with higher levels 
of Catholic collective action, while the latter variant (direct experience of conflict 
violence) was positively correlated with Protestant collective action (being a self-
identified Troubles victim was not significantly correlated with participation). To 
explain this, I could follow Lesschaeve (2019), and argue that my ecological 
analysis measures the effect of the trauma of war, while the survey analysis 
captures fighting experience, but, given that the survey measures ask 
respondents whether or not they are victims of violence, not whether they 
fought, this does not seem a particularly defensible interpretation.  
What is more likely is either (i) that the survey variables non-specificity 
when defining collective action obscures a difference in participation-motivations 
for parades and protests, or, (ii) that a count of Troubles-era murders captures a 
different trait of the ecological environment from the one I intended to measure. 
I do not have the data to confirm or dismiss either of these possibilities, and 
therefore, am left with an unexplained difference. Additional work will be 
required to solve the problem of what exactly the relationship is between 
collective action and historic violence in Northern Ireland, but at least now we 
have a better grasp on the problems we must solve. 
CNR-PUL Differences 
As shown in the literature review, it is common practice for scholars to test the 
effects of demographic change on majority-group mobilisation, but not for 
minority-group mobilisation. The results of my study show why, but also raise an 
important question. PUL parade participation follows the same trend as white 
and nativist protest in the USA, by having a positive, quadratic relationship with 
the ethnic others population size, and with demographic shifts that increase 
the relative size of the Catholic population. Meanwhile, CNR participation has 
mostly no relation to the size of the local Protestant population, nor to any 
Protestant-favouring shift in the local Catholic population. This discrepancy 
confirms the approach of the literature, but, it also suggests an interesting 
characteristic of minority ethnic mobilisation.  
The theoretical justification for why majority-ethnic mobilisation should 
emerge in reaction to local demographic change, is that a rising minority 
population is interpreted by majority groups as a threatening increase in 
minority political or economic power.132 Social psychology has supported this 
argument, by showing that supplying whites in the USA and Canada with 
information that their group will in future no longer be a majority in their city, 
state or country, causes stronger fear and dislike of other ethnic groups, and 
132 Boutcher et al. (2017), p.691-692 
increased sympathy with their own group.133 The process however does not 
happen in reverse. Not only is there no comparable CNR mobilisation in contexts 
where the Protestant population is high or rising, but there is also no CNR 
mobilisation when the Catholic population is rising. 
It is understandable that minorities would not react against demographic 
proof that the ethnic majority remains the majority, or even that locally their 
population is increasing  that is not a jarring departure from the norm. It is less 
expected that there is no relationship between the mobilisation of minorities, 
and their own rising demographic power. It would be ridiculous to suggest that 
whites alone view population size as a measure of power, and regardless, there 
is evidence to the contrary: the same studies that show whites sensitivity to 
rising ethnic minority populations also reveal a similar threat-response amongst 
African Americans to information about rising Latinx populations.134 The lack of 
reverse causation is important, because there is significant disagreement in the 
social movement literature as to whether it is strength or weakness that 
motivates people to join collective action events. The results of the above 
regression would seem to suggest that it is perceived weakness, not perceived 
strength, that causes mobilisation. This conclusion is reinforced by the results 
relating to economic discrimination.  
This time the measure of discrimination has its large, positive effect on 
CNR mobilisation, and no effect on PUL mobilisation, despite being, at its highest 
level, a measure of comparative Catholic weakness and Protestant strength. This 
shows a similarity between minority and majority activism. Despite the 
difference in their collective power, both minorities and majorities are apparently 
133 Outten et al. (2012), p.19-20; Craig et al. (2018), p.206-207 
134 Craig & Richeson (2018), p.389-390 
most mobilised by threats to their position, rather than by their access to 
resources. 
These are not the only differences in how the two groups mobilise, though 
the other differences are not quite so stark. Participation in PUL parades is 
unrelated to participation in CNR parades in the previous year, while there is a 
positive correlation between increased participation in CNR parades, and higher 
PUL participation the year before. As one parader put it, the message often is: 
Listen, were here, were not going to threaten you, but were here, we 
exist.135 I explain this difference through reference to research by the NILT.  
The 2015 edition of the NILT showed that Catholics are more likely to be 
annoyed by Loyalist parades (27%), than Protestants are by Republican 
parades (20%).136 Catholics are also more likely than Protestants to state that 
parades should only be able to march through areas with the consent of local 
residents.137 This evidence suggests Catholics are more prone to be see PUL 
parades (particularly those which seek enter Catholic areas without permission) 
as a symbolic threat, than Protestants are by CNR parades. Taken together with 
the findings regarding the impact of demographic change, we find here further 
evidence that while status threat does impact mobilisation, ethnic groups differ 
in what they perceive as threatening to the status of their group. 
The relationship of participation to the resource mobilisation variables is 
interesting. It is particularly surprising that higher proportions of Protestants 
that are working class in a Settlement has no impact on participation, especially 
135 Blake (2019), p.113 
136 ARK (2016) 
137 In the 2014 NILT, 73% of Catholics agreed that Parades should only be allowed if the organisers and local 
residents agree to the arrangements. Only 57% of Protestants agreed. In the 2015 NILT, in response to the 
same question, 82% of Catholics agreed as opposed to 63% of Protestants. ARK (2015); ARK (2016). 
given that the Orange Order has a mostly working-class membership.138 It may 
be though that expanding the study of PUL participation beyond the Order has 
incorporated parading groups with a more middle or upper-class membership, 
thereby eliminating the association.  
The positive relationship between participation and the proportion of 
working class Catholics could be attributed to two factors. First, Republican 
groups have traditionally been strongest in working class Catholic areas, and 
therefore, people living in majority-working class Catholic communities are more 
likely to participate in Republican parades. Second, working class Catholics are 
most likely of all Catholics to be impacted by unequal levels of unemployment, 
and so are most likely to be mobilised by a sense of discrimination. 
Unfortunately, we have no data to test either of these pathways, so more work 
is needed to properly investigate the link between class and national mobilisation 
in Northern Ireland. 
Finally, we have the unexpected result of the electionyear variable. 
Assembly elections often involve Unionist politicians calling for Protestant unity 
in the face of the threat of a Sinn Fein electoral majority.139 Despite this 
however, PUL parade participation is negatively related to the timing of 
Assembly elections, whereas CNR mobilisation appears unaffected by the 
political context. The question is, why would one community be more responsive 
than the other? One potential explanation for this difference is offered by the 
NILTs examination of political trust. Between 2007 and 2014, when asked How 
much has the N Ireland Assembly achieved? and are you satisfied or 
dissatisfied with the way Northern Ireland MLAs are doing their job?, the 
138 McAuley, James et al. (2008), p.5 
139 Tonge et al. (2014), p.170; DeYoung (2018), p.133 
responses of Catholics were consistently more positive than those of 
Protestants.140 This greater Protestant pessimism offers the following reading of 
electionyear: Protestants, being more pessimistic about the worth of politics, 
are unlikely to respond to the electoral context with any great enthusiasm. 
Therefore, the differential impact of electoral proximity is, I argue, due to 
different levels of trust in the messenger. 
In conclusion, the differences between what mobilises CNR and PUL 
paraders both confirms our previous expectations regarding the impact of ethnic 
threat on parade participation, and, advances our understanding of how ethnic 
minorities and majorities react to their ecological environments. There is a 
tendency in the scholarship on social movements to associate higher levels of 
minority-ethnic activism with communal resources and political opportunities, 
and majority-ethnic activism with threats.141 My literature review suggested 
otherwise, showing that threat was equally important for both minorities and 
majorities, with the real difference lying in the form of threat thought to have 
the most impact. The findings here reflect that broader conclusion.  
What this study has shown is that members of ethnic groups mobilise to 
celebrate the group more, when they think it is under threat. The primary 
difference between ethnic majority and minority mobilisation lies in what group 
members perceive as most threatening. The consequences of this observation 
for the social movements literature will be covered in the following, and final, 
section of this chapter. 
140 See the 2008 through to 2015 NILT surveys. 
141 Azab & Santoro (2017), p.476-477; Owens et al. (2019), p.556 
3.6: Conclusion 
The purpose of this Chapter was to find out if there is, in fact, a relationship 
between parade participation and ethnic conflict. The puzzle at the heart of this 
thesis  the fact that Northern Ireland has so many parades and so little 
parades-related ethnic conflict  is only a puzzle so long as we expect parades to 
be driven by similar motives to that which lie behind ethnic conflict. This Chapter 
has shown that that is the case. Threats to the status of ones ethnic group, and 
the erosion of the rights possessed by the group, indicated by the greater 
strength of an ethnic other, are each positively related to participation in 
parades. However, this is not the only work this Chapter does. I believe this 
study to be the first to compare and contrast the correlates of mobilisation by 
minority and majority ethnic groups. Given this novelty, I will take this section to 
articulate the broader consequences of that comparison for the literature, before 
describing where this dissertation intends to go next. 
As summarised by Owens et al. (2019), minority ethnic mobilisation is 
usually predicted to emerge when new resources or organizational structures 
become available or when the political context becomes more 77avourable to 
activism, while mobilisations by the ethnic majority are more likely to be 
prompted by perceived threats to preexisting privileges.142 My review of the 
literature on ethnic minority protest in the US already challenged that 
assumption, finding the threat of discrimination to regularly increase the 
likelihood of members of minority ethnic groups participating in protest. This 
Chapter further confirms that minority group mobilisation is more likely under 
conditions of threat. More than that though, this study actively compared the 
142 Owens et al. (2019), p.556 
kinds of threat that motivates minorities and majorities to action, testing to see 
whether demographic shifts and economic discrimination impacted minority and 
majority mobilisation respectively. By showing that they do not, I articulate a 
finding that has been assumed, but not tested, by the literature: that the status 
of ones group alters ones perception of what is threatening. However, the 
comparison undertaken here is only partial. There are many gaps for future 
comparisons to fill. 
One clear weakness of this study is my inability to assess the impact of 
changing political opportunities. Due to a combination of Settlement boundaries 
not matching up with constituency boundaries, and the fact that the Nationalist-
Unionist proportions of the Assembly barely shift in size over the period I study, 
I was not able to measure factors relating to political context. Given the 
importance of political opportunity theory in understanding why protests peak at 
particular times, comparing how ethnic groups of differing status respond to 
such opportunities would be a vital addition to further work.  
Second, further studies should seek to examine if the scale of the power 
imbalance offers different findings. Catholics are a very numerically large 
minority (45% of Northern Irelands population in 2011), with the Protestant 
population being only slightly larger (48%). It may well be that in contexts 
where the minority population is far smaller, the comparative importance of 
resources, organisations and political context rises, while that of threat falls. 
Additional studies should therefore seek to compare majority and minority 
mobilisation amongst larger majorities/smaller minorities, as well as conduct 
broader cross-national analyses of differences between majority/minority 
mobilisation. These however are tasks for other studies.  
This thesis will now move away from a discussion of the causes of ethnic 
mobilisation, to discuss the causes of ethnic conflict. Having shown that we 
should indeed expect parades to incite more conflict than they do, we now seek 
to discover why parades-related conflict is so rare. We do this first, by examining 
the impact of demographic residence patterns on parades-related protest.  
Chapter Four: Segregation or Contestability? The Correlates of Parades-
Related Protest 
4.1: Introduction 
In the previous chapter, I established that participation in both PUL and CNR 
parades is motivated by anxiety about the status of ones ethnic group. This 
reveals the link between parading, which is not on the surface an explicitly 
confrontational activity, and ethnic conflict. Having shown that there is a link 
between the motives of parading, and the motives for ethnic conflict, we turn to 
the question of why it is that parades, on average, do not tend to trigger such 
conflict. In this Chapter I assess the impact of demographic geography. 
As identified in Ch.2, a burgeoning literature has identified the borders 
between ethnic areas as the primary site of ethnic violence. However, the 
chapter also identified a debate as to what kind of border is most conducive to 
conflict. Madueke (2018 & 2019) and Legewie & Schaeffer (2016) argue fuzzy 
boundaries, areas of relatively mixed populations lying in between areas 
dominated by particular ethnic groups, are most conducive to conflict because 
they are vulnerable and therefore up for grabs.143 Other studies however, most 
notably Cook et al. (2018), argue that the key factor incentivising conflict is the 
social distance that exists between ethnic groups, a distance that is empirically 
captured by residential segregation.144 In this Chapter I pit these competing 
143 Legewie & Schaeffer (2016), p.131-132 
144 Cook et al. (2018), p.642 
theories against each other, with my results suggesting that it is indeed social 
distance, not contestability, that is more related to ethnic conflict. 
As stated above, I intend to use Chapter Four to investigate the impact of 
residence patterns on conflict. My study differs from those surveyed in literature 
review along two key dimensions. First, I do not proxy ethnic conflict with 
violence, but rather with protests, wherein one ethnic group (Catholics) 
challenge the claims to spatial ownership made by another ethnic group 
(Protestants). Participation in protests carries fewer consequences than 
participation in violence, and this may make protests more common in riskier 
conditions than violence is (i.e. in settings where the ethnic other is more 
numerous).  
Second, my study differs in that I focus on comparing officially-designated 
contested spaces. Therefore, instead of testing theories about what makes one 
space vulnerable to violence, and another not, I am able to test hypotheses 
about what makes one space, already known to be vulnerable, more conflict-
prone than another. As Krause (2018) has shown, just because a space is 
vulnerable to conflict, that vulnerability does not determine conflict.145 Since 
vulnerability has already been quite comprehensively theorised, scholarship 
must move on to determining what catalyses that vulnerability, and turns it into 
conflict. In Chapter 4 I attempt to discern what residence patterns act as those 
catalysts. 
The structure of the Chapter is as follows. Following this Introduction, in 
my next section I will introduce and describe the event with which I measure 
conflict: the parades-related protest. This will involve a quick history of the CNR 
parades-related protest movement, and a description of where I got the data on 
145 Krause (2018), p.52-56 
these protests from. After that I will move to describing the key geographic unit, 
the flashpoint, both how I constructed them and how I categorised them. After 
this I present my hypotheses, the independent variables that test them, the 
method of quantitative analysis, and the results. Finally, I conclude the Chapter 
by discussing the consequences of the results, both in terms of how they reflect 
on past findings, and, by reflecting on how this study could inform future 
research. 
4.2: CNR Counter-Protest 
The form of ethnic conflict studied in this chapter is the Nationalist counter-
protest. In this section, I describe what counter-protests look like, and the loose 
movement they were a part of. I then describe the data used to identify them, 
though, this will not take long given that I already introduced the Parades 
Commission Dataset in the previous chapter. 
Nationalist counter-protests usually involve groups of people, ranging in 
size from 10 to 100, standing by the side of a road to communicate their 
displeasure (usually via handheld signs) at the passage of a Unionist parade past 
or through a majority Catholic area. This opposition is not simply based on 
Catholic antipathy to Unionist parades.146 Catholics have long-disliked or feared 
Unionist parades, both for the Protestant triumphalism they are seen to embody, 
and the disruption brought by blocked roads and loud noises. For most of the 
C20th however, the most common reaction to them was avoidance, either by 
staying at home with the blinds drawn, or going on holiday (something which is 
particularly common during the Twelfth of July celebrations).147  
Catholic quiescence came to an end in the 1990s. Then, self-styled 
residents groups across Northern Ireland began organised protest campaigns 
against Unionist parades.148 Their campaigns, which sought to prevent Loyal 
Order marches from moving through majority-Catholic areas, proved successful, 
with protests convincing the Parades Commission to restrict the routes of 
multiple parades.149 There is no work that identifies a cause for this general shift 
146 Jarman & Bryan (1996), https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/csc/reports/parade11.htm#why 
147 Caldwell (2001), p.110-111, 188, 224, 263; Interview, Sean OBaoill, 25th July 2017. 
148 Jarman & Bryan (1996), https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/csc/reports/parade.htm#dispute 
149 Parades Commission (2000), p.31-44 
https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/csc/reports/parade11.htm#why
https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/csc/reports/parade.htm#dispute
from avoidance to resistance. However, one important change was the 
development of an argument that Unionist parades should only be able to 
parade past Catholic areas with the consent of the residents of those areas.  
This framing, reorienting the issue to one of consent and equal rights, 
found massive support amongst Catholics. A 1999 survey found that 89% of 
Catholics agreed that parades should only take place with residents consent, 
and over a decade later 73% (2014) and 82% (2015) of Catholics continued to 
express this opinion.150 On occasion, this resistance led to outright conflict, with 
the most famous example being the Drumcree Conflict in Portadown, where for 
four years in a row, the passage or non-passage of an Orange parade along the 
majority-Catholic and protested Garvaghy Road led to extensive riots.151 
However, violence is a rare even in relation to protested parades. Most protests 
are as peaceful as they are claimed to be. It should also be restated, as was I 
addressed in the Introduction, that it is rare for parades to be protested: only 
0.1% of PUL parades in my 2006-2016 dataset were protested. 
Nationalist counter-protests are organised rather than spontaneous. This 
is by design. Protest organisers I spoke to often stated that the formal protest 
groups and times were developed in order to lower the risk of conflict posed by 
pre-existing, more-spontaneous mobilisations.152 Since 1998 the protests 
premeditated quality has been legally enforced, as those intending to protest 
parades are required by the Public Processions (NI) Act 1998 to submit advance 
notification of this intent, just the same as those organising parades.153 I 
150 Smithey (2002), p.170; ARK, Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2014 [computer file], ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2015; ARK, Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2015 [computer file], 
ARK www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2016 
151 McKenna, Fionnuala & Martin Melaugh, Developments at Drumcree, 1995-2000, Conflict Archive on the 
Internet, https://cain.ulster.ac.uk/issues/parade/develop.htm#9, accessed 14/01/2019 
152 Interview, Joe Marley, 13th July 2017 
153 Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, s 7(1) & 7(2) 
therefore use the Parades Commission Database to identify which parades are 
protested.  
By comparing information on the date, time and location of protests, with 
the date, time and route of parades, I have been able to link all notified protests 
to the parades they opposed. This allowed me to produce a binary variable 
named protest, that captures whether or not a particular parade was protested. 
The question however, is what population of parades do I compare my protested 
parades with? It would not make sense to compare protested parades to the 
whole dataset, as there are many parades in that dataset that, by not passing 
near Catholic areas, are unlikely to be protested. However, there is a subset of 
parades  named contentious or sensitive parades  which have been 
explicitly identified by the Parades Commission as passing near or through 
Catholic communities liable to protest. As all parades that are protested are also 
contentious/sensitive, those contentious/sensitive, but unprotested, parades 
make for an appropriate control group. 
In this section I have introduced the CNR parades-related protest and 
described both my dependent variable and the data source I constructed it from. 
In the next, I move on to discuss how I identified whether these parades took 
place in a context of social distance, or contestable space. This involved, as I will 
describe, the construction of a new geographic unit: the flashpoint. 
4.3: Flashpoints 
Flashpoints are areas of Northern Ireland  usually sections of roads  identified 
by the Parade Commission. They are set apart because the Commission believes 
that if PUL parades were to walk through these spaces, it would anger nearby 
Catholics. In this study I group my parades into 38 flashpoints. In this section I 
describe how I constructed those flashpoints using QGIS, and how I categorised 
them, to investigate the influence of ethnic residence patterns on the incidence 
of protests. I conclude by stating the hypotheses relating to those 
categorisations, which this study will test. 
One of the chief powers of the Parades Commission, given to it by the 
Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, is the ability to impose restrictions on where 
parades can march. This power is exercised when the Commission believes a 
parade might potentially incite public disorder and/or property damage, or 
otherwise disrupt the life of the community or relationships within the 
community.154  
The presence of such risks is usually brought to the notice of the Parades 
Commission by its own employees (the Authorised Officers) as well as by 
politicians and the police.155 If the Commission judges that the parades does 
post a risk to public order or community relations, it can place restrictions on the 
behaviour of the parade as it marches through a particular area, or ban the 
parade from marching in that area. These restrictions are publicised via an 
official form known as a determination. Breaching these restrictions carries the 
penalties of a fine and jail time, and given their legal status, the Commission is 
154 Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, s 8(6) 
155 Parades Commission (1999), p.22-24; Email response to Freedom of Information request, received 28th 
October 2016. 
usually very exact about the roads and streets on which its restrictions apply.156 
I used their descriptions to create my flashpoints. 
The Parades Commission Dataset identifies those parades that have had 
conditions imposed on them. After cutting the dataset down to only PUL parades 
with conditions, I downloaded the determinations associated with each parade. I 
then matched each parade to a particular stretch of street or road where either 
(i) its behaviour was restricted or (ii) it was forbidden from going. Using QGIS, 
an open-source geographic information system (GIS) program, I marked 
restricted spaces on a map of Northern Ireland (generated using 
openstreetmap).  
As part of this process I found that some of the restricted spaces, though 
not identical, were so close to each other that I felt they should be treated as 
the same flashpoint. This process of identification and grouping resulted in a list 
of 38 distinct flashpoints.157 These flashpoints are present across Northern 
Ireland. They are mostly located in large urban areas, with 30% of them in 
Belfast, and another 20% in settlements with a population of above 18,000, but 
they are not exclusively an urban phenomenon. 25% of flashpoints are to be 
found in villages with a population of under 2,500. 
Once I identified the flashpoints, I then set about categorising them. The 
categories were created in order to test whether it is vulnerable space or social 
distance that most incentivises ethnic conflict. My goal was to assess whether or 
not a flashpoint lay in the vicinity of a fuzzy boundary between areas mostly 
inhabited by different groups, or, a hard, segregated one. I accomplished this 
156 Public Processions (NI) Act 1998, s 8(9) 
157 It was initially 39. However, the extra flashpoint was Belfast city centre, an uninhabited area likely marked 
as contentious due to the parades ability to disrupt economic activity. Given my interest is in a parades 
ability to incur Catholic reaction, I took the approach that this contentious space was not like the others and 
dropped it and the associated parades from the dataset. 
through further use of QGIS. I overlaid the map of Northern Ireland with Small 
Area and gridsquare polygons. The former are the smallest enumeration area 
used in the 2011 census, while the second consists of 1km by 1km (or, in more 
densely populated areas 100m by 100m) squares, arranged in a grid laid over 
the island of Ireland.158 Using data from the 2011 census I constructed two 
ratios, one which provided a measure of how many Catholics lived in an area for 
every 1 Protestant (Protestant:Catholic), and other which measured how many 
Protestants lived in an area for every 1 Catholic (Catholic:Protestant), for both 
geographical units. I used both units because gridsquares offer more finegrained 
picture of population dispersal than the census districts, but, census data is only 
available for gridsquares which overlay space with at least 30 inhabitants in 10 
households.159 Combining the two offers the clearest picture of settlement 
patterns available. 
My principle interest is in borders: areas where there is a noticeable 
transition between spaces mostly inhabited by Protestants, and those mostly 
inhabited by Catholics. I define mostly inhabited as a ration of 1:3 and higher. I 
separate borders into two types. Hard borders exist where the transition is 
between areas where Catholics and Protestants live in large-to-absolute 
majorities (defined as units where the respective ratios are above 1:3). The 
example of this, presented below in Fig. 4.1, is the Crumlin Road, where the 
majority-Catholic neighbourhoods of Mountainview and the Ardoyne border the 
majority-Protestant Shankill.  
Soft borders, meanwhile, exist where the transition is either between 
areas where Catholics and Protestants reside in moderate majorities (where the 
158 For images, see https://www.nisra.gov.uk/support/geography/grid-square-products 
159 NISRA (2015), p.1 
https://www.nisra.gov.uk/support/geography/grid-square-products
respective ratios are between 1:1.5 and 1:3), or between areas where one 
group lives in a large-to-absolute majority, and the other lives in a moderate-to-
small majority. The chosen example of a soft border is Castlederg, pictured 
below in Fig. 4.2. Of the 38 flashpoints, 50% are in the vicinity of borders. Of 
these 19, ten are hard borders, nine soft borders. In the following study, I 
assume that hard borders imply a degree of social separation, while soft borders 
imply the presence of contestable territory. This results in the following 
hypotheses: 
H1: Ethnic conflict is more likely when communities are polarised and socially 
distant from one another. Therefore, hard borders should be positively 
associated with frequency of parade-related protests. 
H2: Ethnic conflict is more likely in spaces where boundaries between the 
communities are fuzzy, and therefore space is contestable. Therefore, soft 
borders should be positively associated with the frequency of protests. 
4.1) Map of Hard Border (Crumlin Road) 
4.2) Map of Soft Border (Castlederg) 
4.4: Controls & Method 
The variables of interest in this study are measured at the level of the flashpoint. 
However, there are other factors beyond patterns of demographic residence that 
are likely to influence the occurrence of protest, and many of these are 
measurable at the level of the parade itself. In this Section, I will first describe 
these control variables. Then I will briefly describe the method used to analyse 
my data, before  moving on to describe the results. 
My first control tests the possibility that protests are as ritualistic as the 
parades they cover, by using a binary variable that accounts for whether the 
same parade was protested the year before. In their work on counter-
mobilisation in the USA, Reynolds-Stenson & Earl (2019) found that larger 
parades were more likely to face counter-protests.160 I test their assumption 
here by taking the sum total of participants in parades that pass a particular 
flashpoint on a particular day. I use the sum total as sometimes multiple PUL 
organisations parade the same flashpoint on the same day, but I assume that if 
numbers do antagonise Catholic residents, they are unlikely to distinguish 
between the size of separate lodge parades.  
It is possible that determinations may reduce parades antagonistic 
qualities. In particular, determinations that totally prevent parades from 
marching through flashpoint areas are likely to remove the need to protest. 
Parades-related protests aim to contest the implicit claim parades make to 
ownership of space. Route bans in effect are indications that the state both 
supports and enforces the protesters side in the debate over spatial ownership. 
160 Reynolds-Stenson & Earl (2019), p.274 
As such, I argue that the higher the proportion of parades p/flashpoint-month 
that have route bans, the lower the likelihood of protests. 
I contend that parades with greater symbolic significance for the PUL 
community are more likely to be protested, as opposition to them is likelier to 
send a stronger message about Catholic grievance. I account for this using a 
binary variable named twelfth, which marks whether or not a parade took 
place on the Twelfth of July, the most important PUL holiday.  
I also include a variable measuring the proportion of votes that were cast 
for Sinn Fein in the constituency within which each flashpoint is based, as a 
proxy for Sinn Fein support in the flashpoint area. This measure takes into 
account the often central role played by Sinn Fein activists and politicians in 
organising and representing the protests, including Joe Marley in North Belfast, 
Daithi McKay in Rasharkin and Thomas OReilly in Newtownbutler.161 I chose to 
use the vote share won in Westminster elections rather than for the devolved 
Northern Ireland Assembly for two reasons. First, there were three separate 
Westminster Parliaments in existence between 2006 and 2016, and only 2 full-
term Assemblies, so using the Westminster vote provides more variation in vote 
share. Second, Sinn Feins abstentionism means they cannot change policy at 
Westminster, so a vote for a Sinn Fein MP is more purely a sign of partisan or 
identarian support than a vote for a Sinn Fein MLA.  
Finally, in line with the findings of Chapter 3 regarding the association of 
Catholic-Protestant employment disparities with increased parade participation, I 
161 Interview, Local Scholar, 15th July 2018; Rasharkin residents could take legal action over parade, Belfast 
Telegraph, 23rd August 2010, https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/rasharkin-residents-
could-take-legal-action-over-parade-28554361.html, accessed 02/12/2019; 20 years on: Still no middle 
ground on Newtownbutler, Fermanagh Herald, 2nd July 2015, https://fermanaghherald.com/2015/07/20-
years-on-still-no-middle-ground-on-newtown/, accessed 02/12/2019 
test to see if Catholic protest is also rendered more likely in years with higher 
relative Catholic unemployment. 
With the control variables established, all that remains to be done is 
establish the method. As my dependent variable is expressed as binary variable, 
while my independent variables of interest are grouped at a higher geographical 
level, a multilevel logistic model was deemed to be the most appropriate. I fit 
the model using the equation below, where a random intercept is added at the 
flashpoint level. With the variables and the model now described, I move now to 
present and discuss the results of my analysis. 
Fig. 4.3) Protest  Descriptive Statistics 
 Variable 
Obs  Mean  Min  Max 
 Protest 1134 .26 0 1 
 Protest (lag) 816 .305 0 1 
 Soft Border 1134 .358 0 1 
 Hard Border 1134 .366 0 1 
 Participants 1134 642.723 1 20000 
 Route Ban 1134 .612 0 1 
 Twelfth 1134 .24 0 1 
 Sinn Vote (%) 1134 27.899 0 71.1 
 Unemployment Ratio 1134 1.405 1 1.7 
Fig. 4.4) Correlates of CNR Protest 
 Model (1) 
Model (2) Model (3) Model (4) Model (5) Model (6) 
protest_lag 1.345*** 1.348*** 1.351*** 1.338*** 1.336*** 1.517*** 
 (3.72) (3.70) (3.58) (3.54) (3.42) (3.39) 
softborder -1.964 -1.961 -1.930 -1.899 -1.517 -1.313 
 (-1.40) (-1.40) (-1.36) (-1.36) (-1.17) (-1.02) 
hardborder 2.320** 2.334** 2.048+ 2.022+ 2.127** 2.306** 
 (2.20) (2.23) (1.83) (1.88) (2.16) (2.40) 
participants_day  -0.089 -0.093 -0.271 -0.275 -0.249 
  (-0.27) (-0.29) (-0.80) (-0.82) (-0.84) 
routeban   -0.545 -0.582 -0.580 -0.510 
   (-0.82) (-0.93) (-0.93) (-0.90) 
twelfth    0.521** 0.521** 0.535** 
    (2.13) (2.09) (2.20) 
sfvote     1.294+ 1.662+ 
     (1.71) (1.94) 
unemployment_ratio      1.019** 
      (2.11) 
_cons *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 (-3.92) (-3.89) (-3.33) (-3.46) (-3.69) (-3.71) 
var(_cons[flashpointid]
** + + + + + 
 (1.96) (1.92) (1.94) (1.91) (1.68) (1.72) 
AIC 554.4 556.2 556.6 555.2 555.5 543.9 
N 816 816 816 816 816 816 
Exponentiated coefficients; Standardized beta coefficients; z statistics in parentheses 
+ p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 
4.5: Findings & Their Implications 
Results 
I begin this section by describing the results of my regression, before moving on 
to discuss the implications. I start by discussing the results relating to the 
control variables.  
Protests do prove to be somewhat ritualistic, with a parade being 
protested one year increasing the likelihood of it being protested the next year. 
A higher vote share for Sinn Fein is also associated with higher odds of a parade 
in that constituency being protested, but, the relationship is only significant at 
the 0.1 level. Against expectations, 12th July parades are less likely to be 
protested than others, which suggests that protesters are less interested in 
sending a message than they are tackling actually-problematic parades. Years 
where more Catholics were unemployed relative to Protestants also increase the 
odds of protests, which implies the sensible conclusion that a broader sense of 
being discriminated against increases Catholics sensitivity to PUL triumphalism. 
My results regarding the impact of route bans and number of participants 
were statistically insignificant, which is surprising. These results may not be 
conclusive however. As regards route bans, one issue with my methodology is 
that while my data gathering method captures parades that attempt to parade a 
contentious route, I do not capture parades that have decided to amend their 
routes on the basis of a route ban, and are therefore no longer contentious. As 
such, the data here may not be sufficient to thoroughly test the effect of parade 
restrictions in ending ethnic conflicts. As regards participants, the difference 
between the results I find and those found by Reynolds-Stenson & Earl (2019) is 
the overall size. Their study finds an effect only for protests exceeding 10,000 
participants in size.162 By contrast, the mean size of my participants variable is 
642. It may be that very large mobilisations do see more counter-
demonstrations, but, given the small size of most parades, this study cannot 
confirm or deny that hypothesis. 
What this study can do however is add to our understanding of what 
demographic residence patterns are most associated with conflict. The results 
show that CNR counter-protest is far more common in proximity to highly-
segregated areas than in areas where the boundary between groups is fuzzier. 
Being in the proximity of a hard border doubles the odds of a parade being 
protested, while proximity to a soft border does not have a significantly 
significant relationship to parades being protested. H1 is proven, while H2 is 
disproven, meaning that this study corroborates the argument that higher 
degrees of segregation are more associated with ethnic conflict that the 
vulnerability of space to ethnic contestation. 
Discussion 
In discussing the key findings of this study, the differences between the work 
done here and that mentioned in the literature review should be acknowledged. 
My measurement of conflict  counter-protests  is a very different phenomenon 
to the violence or deaths that are usually used to quantify conflict. This 
difference may limit the relevance this study has to the literature. Those seeking 
violence are likely to be more careful in selecting their targets than protesters 
162 Reynolds-Stenson & Earl (2019), p.274 
are to select which parades to target. The former choice carries more risk of 
injury (or death) than the latter, and this in turn makes opportunity more 
important to perpetrators choice of where to enact ethnic violence.  
That said, opportunity is not solely about risk. It is also about reward, and 
parades disputes, though they do not offer much in the way of material reward, 
offer symbolic goods. It is reasonable to assume that protests regarding parades 
might have more efficacy in less segregated conditions, as, with less social 
distance between Protestants and Catholics, it may be that PUL parading groups 
are more willing to listen and react constructively to protester grievances. 
However, that is not the pattern we observe here. Protest is far more common in 
areas where ethnic divisions are entrenched. Even though the risks of protesting 
are nowhere near equivalent to the risks of violence, there is still reason to 
suggest that this study demonstrates that it is motive, more than opportunity, 
that best explains ethnic protest. 
Demonstrating that segregated spaces are more likely to produce ethnic 
conflict is however only the first step in this study. The puzzle I am here to solve 
is why parades-related ethnic conflict is so rare. Breaking down the numbers of 
this study offers an answer to that question. First, as mentioned above, only 
nine out of 38, less than a quarter of the flashpoints are in the vicinity of a hard 
border. Whats more, these flashpoints are also geographically concentrated. All 
but one is located in Belfast, and five of the nine are located in North Belfast.  
The fact of their location is not surprising. Deaths during the Troubles 
were similarly concentrated in North Belfast, and this violence intensified 
segregation.163 Beyond Belfast however, such hard borders are very rare. Whats 
163 Doherty & Poole (1997), p.532-534; Cunningham & Gregory (2013), p.68-69 
more, maps suggest that these borders are not simply rare for flashpoints, but 
appear to be rare in general. 
In the next page I present four maps. The first, Fig. 4.5 is of Northern 
Ireland as a whole, and shows the Catholic:Protestant and Protestant:Catholic 
population ratios at Small Area level. This map reveals 22 areas where Small 
Areas with high Catholic:Protestant and Protestant:Catholic ratios directly border 
each other. I investigated these further using gridsquares. As mentioned above, 
one feature of gridsquares is that, if they contain fewer than 30 inhabitants in 10 
households, census data is not provided for them. While this does hamper my 
ability to see precise boundaries using gridsquares, it does allow me to see 
whether the boundaries of Small Areas are heavily populated. Whats more, 
gridsquares covering uninhabited areas are excluded from the map. Taken 
together, I use gridsquares to see if the larger Small Areas are at their edges 
more equivalent in population than they appear, or if at their boundaries, Small 
Areas prove sparsely populated. If these features are indeed present, that would 
reduce the intensity of the border.  
I find that nine of the 22 identified borders are, on closer inspection, 
nothing of the sort. Examples of sparsely-populated and soft borders are 
provided in Fig. 4.6 and 4.7 respectively. Of this remaining 14, over two-thirds 
(eight in total) are in Belfast (see Fig. 4.8). This is not a thorough survey of 
borders in Northern Ireland, and it might still be that both Small Areas and 
gridsquares are too large to see the borders that actually do exist, but are not 
captured by those who draw the grids and districts. However, the most high 
resolution picture we can offers an answer for why parades in Northern Ireland 
are so rarely associated with ethnic conflict. In this Chapter we demonstrated 
that PUL parades most often trigger Catholic counter-protest when in the vicinity 
of hard borders. Such hard borders appear to be quite rare in Northern Ireland 
as a whole, which means parades in Northern Ireland as a whole, are less likely 
to trigger ethnic conflict. 
Fig. 4.5) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (NI) 
Fig. 4.6) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Sparsely-Inhabited Area) 
4.7) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Soft Border) 
4.8) Catholic/Protestant Residence Patterns (Hard Borders in Belfast) 
4.6: Conclusion 
The goal of this Chapter was to explain the rarity of parades-related ethnic 
conflict. I accomplished this by demonstrating that, first, parades-related 
protests are more common on hard borders, and second, there are not many 
hard borders in Northern Ireland. This finding regarding hard borders challenges 
some other findings within the literature, most especially those by Madueke 
(2018) & (2019), and Legewie & Schaeffer (2016), who argue that soft borders 
are more likely to be sites of ethnic conflict.164 The relevance of this finding for 
the literature is twofold. 
First, my work here helps to confirm the importance of studying the 
impact of segregation on conflict. As stated in Chapter Two, studies investigating 
the relationship between segregation and ethnic violence are surprisingly sparse. 
Opportunity rather than motive has been the geographical cause most have 
turned to in order to explain why conflict takes place in some areas and not 
others. This Chapter makes the case for redirecting the spotlight back to motive.  
Second, this study offers an alternative to the standard measurements of 
segregation. Most studies measure segregation using nested census output units 
to produce statistics, such as the classic index of dissimilarity. My method by 
contrast was to combine different types of census output area, to determine 
visually where borders lie. This method was designed to suit the needs of this 
study, and exploited a specific feature of the case: the availability of the 
Combined Grid Square Product. Grid squares offer both more consistent and 
fine-grained geographies in comparison with census outputs, and whats more, 
leave uninhabited or extremely low-population areas uncovered. They are 
164 Legewie & Schaeffer (2016), p.131-132; Madueke (2018), p.466; Madueke (2019), p.15-16 
therefore better able to reveal borders, and, unlike output areas are less prone 
to misrepresent where community borders actually are.165 Census data releases 
using this form of geography are unfortunately rare. However, in contexts where 
they are available, or can be produced using existing census data, they offer a 
means of seeing borders more studies ought to exploit. 
This Chapter has shown how ethnic confrontation is geographically 
concentrated in the vicinity of hard borders. However, even in the most divided 
areas, parades-related ethnic conflict is not inevitable. Human beings may be 
influenced by our environments, but our actions are not dictated by space. 
Human influence also plays a large role in our decision-making. I take this into 
account in the following Chapter. There I tell the story of the Crumlin Road 
parades dispute, the source for the bulk of Northern Irelands parades-related 
violence. By holding the spatial context constant, and comparing years with 
riots, to those without, I show how it was that North Belfast peace activists were 
able, despite heavy constraints, to produce peace not once, but twice, in this 
most conflict-ridden area.  
165 Lloyd et al. (2017), p.2 
Chapter Five: Peace is Possible 
5.1: Introduction 
After many years of disputes around the Crumlin/Ardoyne/Twaddell area, an 
agreement was signed that allowed the Twaddell camp to be dismantled and a 
moratorium to be put in, and for the Orange Order to complete its return parade 
from 2013. The agreement was long sought after. The issues surrounding the 
disputes affected not only everybody in the area but community relations. The 
big story is the fact that there was agreement, even though people had thought 
that this was an intractable problem, and there could be no agreement. The 
agreement also allows a conversation to expand beyond the issue of parades, 
which had entered into every conversation, whether on regeneration, housing or 
bringing tourists or jobs into the area. Parades came into the middle of every 
conversation. Now, with where we are, we have a great platform for moving 
forward.166 
- Gerry Kelly, Sinn Fein MLA for North Belfast 
The purpose of this final empirical Chapter is to propose that one of the reasons 
parades in Northern Ireland provoke so little ethnic conflict, is because often 
local leadership is able to prevent any such conflict from taking place. I do this 
through a study of the Crumlin Road parades dispute. This was a conflict, over a 
decade in length, in which the CNR population of North Belfast sought to prevent 
the Loyal Orders from marching past their neighbourhoods. In this one dispute 
parades proved to be every bit the trigger of violence we might expect them to 
166 Hansard (2016), p.1 
be. In 2004-2005, 2009-2013 and 2015, both the passage of parades up the 
Crumlin Road, and then the blocking of their passage, resulted in violence. Yet, 
even here, violence was not inevitable.  
Between 2006-2008 and in 2016, the 12th July parade incurred no more 
violence than any of the other thousand PUL parades that take place every year. 
This Chapter asks how these periods of peace came about, and also how they 
broke down. The assumption that connects that question to the puzzle of this 
thesis, is that the Crumlin Road is exemplary. I argue that Northern Ireland sees 
less parades-related conflict than we might expect, because peace activists are 
willing and able to prevent it. As the ensuing Chapter will show, those who seek 
conflict must work hard to overcome their influence. 
The Chapter lays this argument out in the following manner. I start by 
introducing the geography and the important actors of North Belfast, because 
without a primer on proper nouns, the story of the Road would be too often 
interrupted. Then I embark on a cross-time comparison of the contexts in which 
riots did and did not occur. This analysis is split into three periods.  
The first, covering 2004-2008, describes how the first major riots on the 
Road came about, and how further conflict was prevented between 2006 and 
2008. The second, covering 2009-2015, shows why that first period of peace 
ended in 2009, and how violence and division was purposefully maintained by 
spoilers over the next six years. I also show how, despite the spoilers success in 
producing violence, they were unable to translate that street-level influence to a 
seat in negotiations. The third section, focusing in on the events of 2016, 
explains how the peace was reconstructed, and the spoilers outmaneuvered. The 
final section concludes by redrawing the link between this case and the broader 
puzzle.  
Examination of the Crumlin Road dispute reveals the power of peace 
activists to arrest and prevent street-level confrontations from becoming violent. 
It also shows that overcoming these restraints requires a sincere effort on the 
part of spoilers. It is the presence of activists, and the absence of these spoilers 
elsewhere in Northern Ireland, that best explains why parades in Northern 
Ireland so rarely result in ethnic conflict. 
Fig. 5.1) Map of the Crumlin Road Wards with Troubles Deaths 
5.2: North Belfast 
Locations & History 
As previously stated, the purpose of this section is to provide essential 
background knowledge, required to understand the Crumlin Road parades 
dispute. This section will be structured as follows: first I will describe the 
location, then briefly summarise the areas history, and finally introduce the 
modern-day peace activists and spoilers who are the main players in the ensuing 
drama. Through this description, I reveal the environmental and historical 
factors that facilitate conflict in North Belfast, while also stressing that violence 
is not an unthinking response to history, but the result of understandable 
decisions made amidst chaos. 
North Belfast is thick with neighbourhoods, but, for simplicitys sake, when 
referring to the areas of interest around the Crumlin Road, I will mostly use the 
place-names appended to the local electoral wards. These correspond roughly, if 
not exactly, with the neighbourhoods people believe they live in. There are three 
major neighbourhoods whose names are useful to know, which can be seen in 
Fig. 5.1. One is the majority-Catholic Ardoyne, positioned north of the Crumlin 
Road. The other are the majority-Protestant wards located to the south of the 
Road: Woodvale (also referred to as Twaddell, due to the nearby Twaddell 
Avenue) and Shankill.  
Beyond these wards, there are two smaller neighbourhoods, distinctive 
because they are Catholic/Protestant enclaves on the wrong side of the Road. 
The small splash of Catholic green in the mass of red on the southern side of the 
Crumlin Road is the neighbourhood of Mountainview. The peninsula of Protestant 
red that butts up against the Ardoyne north of the Road is called Glenbryn (and 
sometimes Upper Ardoyne). The residents of these neighbourhoods have a long 
history of Catholic-Protestant conflict, in particular, the Shankill and the 
Ardoyne. 
The residents of the Shankill have fought their Catholic neighbours since 
the topic of the dispute was Irish Home Rule.167  Ardoyne meanwhile was 
created through ethnic conflict: it first became majority-Catholic thanks to an 
influx of Catholic refugees from elsewhere in Belfast displaced by riots.168 As is 
clear from Fig. 5.1, during the Troubles, death clustered around the Crumlin 
Road. 99 residents of Ardoyne were killed over the course of the civil war.169 
Violence even persisted after Good Friday, most notably during the Holy Cross 
dispute. 
The Holy Cross dispute saw the people of Glenbryn, in response to what 
they perceived as a series of acts of Catholic sectarianism, attempted to block 
Ardoyne residents access to the local Catholic primary school: Holy Cross.170 The 
ensuing campaign of protest was truly ugly, with Protestant crowds shouting at, 
spitting on, and throwing stones, bottles and, at one point, balloons filled with 
urine, at parents and children.171 Throughout 2001 this violence often led to 
riots, which got so bad that by 2003, the wall between Glenbryn and Ardoyne 
was enlarged and strengthened in order to improve security.172 Since then, the 
five wards have featured high levels of sectarian crime. Between 2005-2018, the 
167 Budge & OLeary (1973), p.89 
168 Hepburn (1990), p.86-87 
169 Ardoyne Commemoration Project (2002), p.5-6. Not included in this figure were people killed within the 
boundaries of the Ardoyne, but who were not residents. 
170 Ardoyne Commemoration Project (2002), p.507; Troy (2005), p.28; Police keep factions apart, BBC News, 
20th June 2001, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/1399081.stm, accessed 15/01/18 
171 Troy (2005), p.46-47, 83 & 115; Foy, Marie & Kathryn Torney, Urine-filled balloons thrown at protest, 
Belfast Telegraph, 2nd October 2001 
172 Troy (2005), p.175-183; Belfast Interface Project (2017), p.53 
mean number of sectarian crimes committed p/ward across the whole of 
Northern Ireland, was 2. In Ardoyne, it was 10, in Shankill, 9, and in Woodvale, 
As this history suggests, the area around the Crumlin Road is particularly 
prone to ethnic violence. CNR and PUL residents alike have long lists of atrocities 
the other side has perpetrated against their side, fuelling their anger and stoking 
their fear. However, though history has great influence over people, it does not 
follow that past violence demands future violence. This becomes most clear, 
when we look at North Belfasts peace activists. 
Peace Activists & Spoilers 
In the following analysis, I will most often talk about the work of both peace and 
spoiler activist groups, such as the North & West Belfast Parades and Cultural 
Forum or the Greater Ardoyne Residents Collective. However, it is important to 
note that the groups were not institutions, in a sense that the collective 
possessed any authority. Rather they are collections of important and influential 
personalities. Indeed, within the neighbourhoods of North Belfast the groups 
were better known by the name of their most important activist - the Crumlin 
Ardoyne Residents Association (2009-2016), for example, was most often 
referred to in the Ardoyne as Joe Marleys Group.173 Here then I introduce the 
groups that will feature throughout the oncoming narrative, and summarise their 
character through their chief activists. 
173 Interview, Local Scholar, 15th July 2018. 
The chief peace activist groups in the Catholic neighbourhoods were the 
Ardoyne Parades Dialogue Group (APDG), in existence between 2004 and 2009, 
and the Crumlin Ardoyne Residents Association (CARA), which operated between 
2009 and 2016. As already mentioned, their key figure was Joe Marley. Marley is 
a Sinn Fein activist with impeccable Republican credentials, his father being 
Larry Marley, a Provisional IRA member and mastermind of the 1983 H-Block 
breakout. Marley is a well-known community worker, with a presence in many 
Ardoyne-based volunteer organisations such as the Ardoyne Youth Enterprise 
and the Ardoyne, Bone and Ligoniel Heritage Association. His personal 
connections with Sinn Fein, in addition to the close sponsorship of his group 
practiced by local MLA Gerry Kelly (an ex-IRA member, and a major ally of Gerry 
Adams dating back to the Peace Process), have led peace activism in the 
neighbourhood to be seen as the work of the Republican Party.  
This is not quite accurate. CNR opinion of all shades is represented in 
Ardoyne, and peace also had the backing of more moderate Nationalists and the 
Catholic Church.174 For better and for worse however, the peace activists of 
Ardoyne were seen to be most closely aligned to Sinn Fein and the Provisional 
Republican movement. 
Protestant peace activists were never so closely linked to a single faction. 
The most important voice in negotiation was of course the Orange Order, given 
that it was the Orders 12th July parade that the residents of the Catholic 
neighbourhoods most objected to. However, non-Orange voices were arguably 
more prominent and public, both in the media and on the streets. The main 
organisation representing the interests of the PUL community between 2004 and 
2013 was the North & West Belfast Parades and Cultural Forum.  
174 Ardoyne parade deal: Plea for Garc to halt protest, BBC News, 30th September 2016 
This group brought together UUP, DUP and PUP politicians, 
representatives of various paramilitary groups, local community activists and 
spokesmen for the Loyal Orders, to provide the fullest possible representation of 
PUL opinion.175 The most prominent of these figures, who would remain heavily 
involved in peace work beyond the shuttering of the Forum in 2013, were 
Winston Irvine of the Progressive Unionist Party and Tommy Cheevers of the 
Apprentice Boys.176 Their very different affiliations shows the main difference 
between PUL and CNR peace acitvists. Where the CNR peace activists were most 
associated with the Provisional Republicans, PUL peace activists had no such 
dominant association. They were far more a coalition of the internal factions of 
the PUL mega-identity. 
Where the peace activist groups were associated with multiple, major 
factions within their respective mega-identities, the spoilers were generally 
associated with only small or marginal factions. The CNR spoiler organisation, 
the Greater Ardoyne Residents Collective (GARC), formed in 2009, was most 
closely associated with first Martin Og Meehan and then Dee Fennell. Both men 
were/are activists in Dissident Republican micro-parties, and GARCs protests 
were attended by activists from many Dissident groups.177 GARC was very public 
in its difference and distinction from the Sinn Fein peace activists, because its 
175 ONeill, Sharon, Sinn Fein cautious of parades talks pledge, Irish News, 17th July 2004 
176 Interview, Tommy Cheevers, 22nd March 2018; McAleese, Deborah, Warring sides in secret talks aimed at 
resolving Ardoyne parade dispute, Belfast Telegraph, 4th March 2016. 
177 Latest News from G.A.R.C., greaterardoyneresidentscollective.blogspot.co.uk, 15th May 2010, accessed 
19/10/2017, http://greaterardoyneresidentscollective.blogspot.co.uk/2010/05/latest-news-from-garc.html; 
McCaffrey, Barry, Marchers urged to talk with residents, Irish News, 10th August 2009; Meehan, Martin Og, 
The Twelfth of July - Aggressive attitude of PSNI triggered violent reac-tion, Irish News, 19th August 2009;  
Morris, Alison, Police search at dissident's home, Irish News, 19th August 2009; Baton rounds fired as police 
push march past Ardoyne protest, Irish News, 13th July 2010; Morris, Allison, Eirigi candidate in court over sit-
down protest, Irish News, 2nd February 2011 
intent was to use the parade dispute to try to challenge Sinn Feins dominance in 
Ardoyne.178 This however was not the case with the PUL spoilers.  
There is no formal group associated with the PUL spoilers, who emerged 
during the Orange Orders protest campaign between 2013-2016. The PUL 
spoilers were not interested in supplanting a hegemonic power in their 
community, largely because, as discussed, there is no hegemonic PUL faction in 
North Belfast. They wanted to avoid the resolution of the dispute because they 
saw resolution as defeat. The PUL spoilers therefore, rather than being 
competitors for power, were in fact a hardline faction within one of the North 
Belfast Orange Order lodges: LOL No 1891 Ballysillan. Their most public figure 
was Gerald Solinas, who had a certain amount of authority thanks to his position 
within West Belfast Ulster Defence Association. As will be discussed, there was 
no formal articulation of difference or split by the PUL spoilers. Theirs was a 
struggle within the movement, rather than against the movement. 
To conclude, the Catholics and Protestants of North Belfast have a long 
history of conflict, and so the fact that this area would once again fall into 
conflict in the 2000s has an air of inevitability to it. A survey of the organisations 
present in North Belfast however suggests otherwise. The social standing and 
number of the groups arranged in support of peace were so much greater than 
that of the groups who would prefer conflict, that it is surprising conflict ever 
broke out. As we will see in the following sections however, though the power 
imbalance is striking on paper, in the moment, in the wake of a parade and 
amidst the growing fury of the crowd, that power may no longer be real. As 
mentioned in the previous section, the solution this Chapter offers to the puzzle 
of why parades might not regularly face violence, is that peace activists are able 
178 Hoey (2018), p.66 & 72 
to prevent said violence from taking place. However, other factors impede their 
ability to do so. This is particularly noticeable in 2004 and 2005, when a lack of 
communication and coordination between peace activists and the police gave 
space for riots to break out. 
5.3: From Riots to Peaceful Protest (2004  2008) 
In this section, I will explain why riots occurred on the Crumlin Road in 
2004 and 2005, and the strategies by which peace was obtained and sustained 
from 2006 to 2008. To summarise the findings, peace in this period was 
obtained through an alliance between activists and the state. This alliance 
manifested in the police allowing activists to take the lead in restraining 
potentially-violent crowds. This required a level of trust and coordination that 
was far from guaranteed. Indeed, as we will see from 2004 and 2005, there was 
little cooperation between peace activists and the police. It was only once that 
was established, that both sides could obtain their goal of peace. 
We start by explaining why the riots of 2004 and 2005 happened. The 
immediate assumption might be that people in the Catholic wards rioted, 
because they felt threatened by their Protestant neighbours, and angered by 
Protestant provocations during the march. This is a reasonable interpretation.  
According to observers, the night before the parade gunfire could be 
heard coming from Glenbryn, and other surrounding Protestant areas.179 On both 
the morning and evening marches, these same observers recorded that people 
within and accompanying the parades carried banners and emblems associated 
with paramilitary groups (2004), and engaged in provocative behaviour (both 
years).180 The problem with this thesis however, is that these factors were also 
present before and during the 2002 and 2003 12th July parades, neither of 
which resulted in lengthy periods of post-parade rioting.181 Indeed, the 2005 
12th July parade may well have been less provocative than those that took place 
179 Bukantz et al. (2005), p.27; Cahill et al. (2006), p.43 
180 Bukantz et al. (2005), p.34-35; Cahill et al. (2006), p.51; Starmer & Gordon (2004), p.81 
181 Bukantz et al (2002), p.26-28; Bukantz & Cahill (2003), p.65-67; 
in 2002-2003, with IPEC observers noting how, for the first time, no-one in the 
return parade was holding or drinking alcohol.182 In looking for causes of rioting 
then, we must turn to other circumstances, beyond the conduct of 11th Night 
revellers and the paraders.  
To find these circumstances, I compare detailed reports from observers in 
2002 and 2004/05. All episodes of violence identified here involved a Catholic 
crowd surging forward to attack either an opposing Protestant crowd, or the 
police and army.183 The reports show that peace activists were able to prevent 
violence by interposing themselves between the crowd and their targets, both in 
2002 and in one instance in 2004.184 Yet, CNR peace activists were unable to 
hold their crowd back again in 2004, or at all in 2005. Starmer & Gordon (2005) 
state that the police gave community activists two opportunities to get the crowd 
under control, and were apparently told that doing so was impossible.185  
Comparison between these successes and failures reveals one key 
difference. In the success cases, the peace activists were able to intervene 
before the crowd and their targets came to blows. In the failure cases, the 
activists were having to intervene after the crowd and the police had already 
traded missiles. 
The difficulty of public order policing is that the purpose of it - preventing 
crowds from harming other people, the police themselves and/or private 
property - oftentimes conflicts with the methods of persuasive de-escalation. 
There is little better indication of this than the public order policing operations 
that took place in 2004 and 2005. According to senior police officers I 
182 Cahill et al (2006), p.49-50 
183 Starmer & Gordon (2004), p.93; Starmer & Gordon (2005), p.18; Bukantz et al. (2005), p.33-34; Cahill et al. 
(2006), p.51-52 
184 Bailie, Tony, Riot 'trap' fails to spring, Irish News, 13th July 2002; Bukantz et al. (2005), p.33 
185 Starmer & Gordon (2005), p.18 
interviewed, de-escalation functions best when it can be focused on the violent 
people within the crowd, rather than on the crowd as a whole.186 However, harm 
prevention, particularly in 2004 and 2005, often requires indiscriminate tools, in 
particular, water cannon. In 2005 for example when the police used water 
cannons, they not only drenched the violent elements of the crowd, but also 
soaked the community peace activists (among them two priests and Sinn Fein 
leader Gerry Adams) who had been trying to stop the rioting.187 Starmer & 
Gordon and the peace activists noted that the police had used the water cannon 
as soon as the crowd began throwing missiles.188 The activists argued this meant 
they had been given no opportunity to mediate, and that once the water cannon 
was used, the activists could no longer restrain the crowd.189  
On the basis of this comparison I argue that riots took place in 2004 and 
2005 because when the police responded to crowd attacks with attacks of their 
own, it created a tit-for-tat cycle of escalation. In 2004, it was only when the 
police stopped responding to crowd attacks, instead simply weathering them, 
that the crowd lost interest and voluntarily dispersed.190 
The notable contrast between 2004-05 and 2006-08 was the reduced role 
of police. Unlike in 2004-05 it was peace activists, and not the police, that 
reacted to the limited episodes of missile-throwing. The police also proactively 
reduced their presence on the Road, removing the security screens and the 
armoured landrovers that had been previously deployed as a wall between 
186 Interview, Gary White, 24th July 2017; Interview, Police Officer, 20th December 2017 
187 Dissident republicans blamed for orchestrating serious rioting - Sinn Fein's script goes awry as rioting 
flares, Irish News, 14th July 2005 
188 Starmer & Gordon (2005), p.17 
189 ONeill, Sharon, Anger and Recriminations - Police 'moved too soon', Irish News, 14th July 2005; 
Communities reflect - Water cannon put end to mediation, Irish News, 14th July 2005 
190 Starmer & Gordon (2004), p.97 
Catholic crowd and the Protestant parade.191 The peace activists meanwhile 
appear to have formalised their peacekeeping role. In 2007 the Ardoyne Parades 
Dialogue Group stated that its 100-strong protest would be accompanied by 
nine formally trained marshals, while in 2008, an agreement between the 
Forum and the APDG minimised the polices presence and led to the APDG taking 
full responsibility for policing.192  
The potential for riot did not vanish in these years. As mentioned, crowds 
still threw missiles, and during a parade in June, Protestant and Catholic crowds 
nearly came to blows. However, the new trust afforded to peace activists paid 
off, and they were able to prevent this initial violence from escalating into riot.193 
2006-08 reveal a police force willing to trust that peace activists could 
maintain public order. That trust however took time to build, and was not 
present in 2004-05. The biggest problem was that there was no coordination 
between Sinn Fein and the police. At the time, Sinn Fein did not recognise the 
PSNIs legitimacy. They therefore refused any formal contact with the police, and 
as such there was no possibility for planned peacekeeper coordination.194 
Relations however improved drastically in the months following the 2005 riot.  
First, the PSNIs enforcement of the Parade Commission ban on the 2005 
Whiterock parade deeply impressed Sinn Fein. The sight of police preventing 
crowds of angry Loyalists from entering the majority-Catholic Springfield Road, 
and withstanding live gunfire and hundreds of blast bombs in doing so, 
191 Northern Ireland Policing Board (2006), p.69; Henry, Lesley-Anne, Ardoyne keeps lid on violence, Belfast 
Telegraph, 13th July 2006 
192 McCaffrey, Barry, Relief as Twelfth passes off without major disturbances, Irish News, 14th July 2008; 
PUP's Winston Irvine and Residents' spokesman Joe Marley discuss the latest developments on the parades 
issue, audioboom.com, 22nd July 2013, https://audioboom.com/posts/1513319-pup-s-winston-irvine-and-
residents-spokesman-joe-marley-discuss-the-latest-developments-on-the-parades-issue, accessed 
23/01/2018; McCaffrey, Barry, Attacks put agreement on parades in jeopardy, Irish News, 16th July 2008 
193 Northern Ireland Policing Board (2006), p.65-66 
194 Interview, Gary White, 24th July 2017 
demonstrated to Catholics that they could trust the police to protect their 
interests.195 At the same time, Sinn Fein was itself increasingly interested in 
establishing formal relationships with police. The Partys strategy of taking the 
struggle for a United Ireland inside of Northern Irelands political structures, 
rather than challenging them from without, demanded that they enter the 
Policing Board (the PSNIs political oversight structure), and end the SF-PSNI 
silence.196 The polices actions in Whiterock legitimised Sinn Feins ambitions, 
and in 2006 Sinn Fein engaged with pre-emptive planning of the 12th July 
policing operation for the first time.197 These new relations would be cemented 
when in January 2007, when the party officially accepted the legitimacy of the 
PSNI. This then explains why the peace activists of the Catholic wards were able 
take over the job of policing from the police in 2006-08. It was only by then that 
the two sides were able to coordinate. 
The willingness of police to let peace activists perform the focused crowd-
control they could not did make the difference between the riots of 2004 and 
2005. However, it must be said that in 2005 there was another factor preventing 
peace. During the riots that year, the police came under attack from a 
Republican terror group called Continuity IRA  who threw multiple blast bombs, 
contributing to over 100 injuries.198 Because the peace activists on the ground 
were unable to restrain the crowd regardless, it is difficult to identify the 
separate impact of the CIRA. However, given that CIRA split from Sinn Fein to 
oppose its peace strategy, it seems unlikely that they would have been 
persuaded to step down by Sinn Fein-aligned activists. Given the missteps of the 
195 Starmer & Gordon (2005), p.2; Interview, Sean Murray, 13th July 2017 
196 Bean (2007), p.191-194; Hearty (2018), p.33-34 
197 Interview, Gary White, 24th July 2017; Graham, William, Sinn Fein's Kelly met police ahead of Ardoyne 
parade, Irish News, 14th July 2006 
198 Thornton, Chris, CIRA fired blast bombs, says 'spokesman', Belfast Telegraph 
police, the ability of peace activists to combat spoilers did not have to be tested 
that year. But in 2009 spoilers once again put peace activists to the test. The 
result would not only collapse the peace that had been established between 
2006-2008, but would also lead to the alienation of North Belfasts Protestants, 
and one of the lengthiest protest campaigns in the history of the United 
Kingdom.   
5.4: Peace Activists Lose Control (2009  2016) 
In this section, we establish why both CNR and PUL peace activists were unable 
to prevent the escalation of conflict on the Crumlin Road. First we show why it 
was that CNR peace activists proved powerless to stop violence in 2009-12, 
when they had been so successful in 2006-08. Second, we show why PUL peace 
activists were drawn into supporting a lengthy protest campaign, that did 
nothing but increase ethnic tensions on the Crumlin Road. Through these two 
stories, why, despite the presence of peace activists, violence on the Crumlin 
Road remained possible. 
From 2009-12 riots repeatedly broke out in reaction to the passage of the 
12th July parade up the Crumlin Road. This was not due to a fresh breakdown in 
police-Sinn Fein communication. Instead, the cause lay in the emergence of CNR 
spoiler activists. As will be seen, the ability of peace activists to restrain crowds 
relied on them persuading their fellow CNR residents not to get involved in 
conflict. If those in the crowds were not willing to listen to persuasion however, 
there was little the activists could do. As stated, the authority of the activists 
derived from their standing within Sinn Fein and the IRA. Those mobilised by the 
Dissidents however had little respect for Sinn Fein, and so the peace activists 
were unable to restrain their behaviour. 
The first public indication that Sinn Feins peace activists were losing 
influence in Ardoyne came in April 2009. That month, according to The 
Guardian, senior figures in the Provisional IRA warned the Irish government that 
they would no longer be able to police their side of the line in Ardoyne this 
year.199 Subsequent events confirmed this warning. On the evening of the 13th 
199 McDonald, Henry, We've lost control of Ardoyne, IRA warns, The Guardian, 5th April 2009. 
July 2009, a CNR crowd mobilised by Republic Network for Unity activist Martin 
Og Meehan attacked the parade.200 Whether or not the rioting was planned from 
the start, which Sinn Fein claimed and the various dissident groups disputed, 
events demonstrated that, first, a group of activists separate from the 
established APDG was now capable of mobilising crowds on the Crumlin Road, 
and second, the APDG could not control this crowd.201 Indeed, during the riot the 
CNR peace activists had to be protected by the PSNI.202  
This story repeated itself in 2010.203 Not even Bobby Storey, an IRA man 
known as The Enforcer for his ability to compel loyalty to Gerry Adams within 
the H-Block prison, could dissuade people from rioting.204 Bereft of peace activist 
support, the police had little choice but to resort to the indiscriminate and violent 
methods of crowd restraint that had escalated tensions in 2004-05: water 
cannon and plastic bullets. This happened again in 2011 and 2012.205 In all four 
years, Dissident Republicans proved able to mobilise their own crowds to protest 
against the 12th July parade. They also sought to escalate the conflict in other 
ways.  
One long-term concern of peace activists were so-called riot tourists - 
people who would travel to the Ardoyne on the 12th with the purpose of rioting. 
As such, they often made public appeals for Catholics living outside North Belfast 
200 Simpson, Claire, 'Dissidents' blamed for Ardoyne parade rioting, Irish News, 14th July 2009; Meehan, 
Martin Og, The Twelfth of July - Aggressive attitude of PSNI triggered violent reaction, Irish News, 15th July 
201 McCaffrey, Barry, The Twelfth of July - Dissident outsiders 'bussed into Ardoyne' for violence, Irish News, 
15th July 2009 
202 Archer, Bimpe, The Twelfth of July - Dissidents started riot to attack police, Irish News, 15th July 2009 
203 Police justified in using 120 AEPs during three nights of rioting in north Belfast, policeombudsman.org, 
accessed 07/02/18, https://policeombudsman.org/Investigation-Reports/Police-justified-in-using-120-AEPs-
during-three-ni 
204 Craig, Olga, 'Sinn Fein are yesterday's men', Telegraph, 18th Juluy 2010; Dissidents confronted, Irish 
News, 16th July 2010; Moloney (2007), Loc 10975 
205 Mulgrew, John, Peaceful day of parades ends in night of violence, Belfast Telegraph, 13th July 2011; The 
Twelfth - Tensions give way to rioting after parades, Irish News, 13th July 2011; Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - 
Police officers injured in Ardoyne violence, Irish News, 13th July 2012 
not to come to the Ardoyne.206 GARC by contrast issued calls for Catholics across 
Northern Ireland to come and stand shoulder to shoulder with the beleaguered 
Ardoyne community for the Twelfth of July parade.207  
In addition to this aggravation, in 2011 and 2012 GARC transitioned from 
protesting, to holding its own competing parade at the same time as the Orange 
Order held theirs.208 The 2012 episode particularly infuriated PUL opinion, as a 
series of decisions by the Parades Commission that year meant that GARC ended 
up marching at the time usually reserved for the Orange Order. This was 
interpreted by PUL activists as the Parades Commission discriminating against 
their parade to facilitate a march by a violent republican faction, and was 
described by Winston Irvine as the work of fools or knaves.209 GARCs ability 
to mobilise Dissident crowds therefore not only hamstrung CNR peace activists. 
It also deepened PUL-CNR antagonism, which was particularly problematic for 
the PUL peace activists. 
We now move to explain how it was that PUL peace activists went from 
offering serious concessions in negotiations over the parade dispute, to 
protesting for the shuttering of the Parades Commission. Unlike with the CNR, 
the PUL peace activists did not face an external faction able to disrupt their 
control. Rather, their problem was that, as representatives of the PUL 
community, they were representing people who, between 2009 and 2012, were 
becoming more and more infuriated with the Parades Commission. Where the 
206 Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - Taxi drivers urged not to take protesters to parade, Irish News, 10th July 
207 Greater Ardoyne Residents Collective (GARC) Appeal For Solidarity, 
greaterardoyneresidentscollective.blogspot.co.uk, 8th June 2010, accessed 06/02/18, 
http://greaterardoyneresidentscollective.blogspot.co.uk/2010/06/greater-ardoyne-residents-collective.html; 
Parade protest call 'totally irresponsible', Belfast News Letter, 1st July 2010; 
208 Simpson, Claire, Dismay at city parade decison, Irish News, 9th July 2011; Simpson, Claire, Parade move 
criticised, Irish News, 9th July 2012. 
209 Simpson, Claire, Parade move criticised, Irish News, 9th July 2012. 
CNR peace activists failed because they no longer represented the people on the 
streets, the PUL peace activists failed because their community began to 
demand resistance rather than compromise. 
Adversarial relationships between PUL activists and the Parades 
Commission are nothing new. In 2002, following the Commissions critiques of 
the alcohol-fuelled behaviour of parade supporters, the Orange Order accused 
the Commission of seeking to behave like religious police.210 However, evidence 
suggests that relationships between PUL activists and the Parades Commission 
between 2009 and 2012 were particularly strained. Tommy Cheevers described 
one meeting he held with the Commission where one activist and a 
Commissioner almost came to blows.211  
The source of this antagonism seems to have been the Parades 
Commission repeatedly placing conditions on Orange parades without PUL 
approval. The aforementioned decision in 2012 to force the Orange Order parade 
to return early, interpreted as a facilitation of a GARC parade, was just one 
example of this. In 2010 and 2011 for example the Commission blocked the 
Tour of the North Orange Order parade from marching up the Crumlin Road. In 
reaction, the Forum cut off negotiations with CARA in 2010, and organised an 
actual protest in 2011.212 They protested the Commissions decision in 2012 as 
well, both through the courts and again with a demonstration.213 This opposition 
might appear odd, given that these restrictions had in fact been proposed by the 
210 Kaufmann (2007), p.294 
211 Interview, Tommy Cheevers, 22nd March 2018 
212 Calm urged at city parade, Belfast News Letter, 18th June 2010; Lynagh, Catherine, Loyalists protest over 
parade ruling, Belfast Telegraph, 17th June 2011 
213 McAdam, Noel, Forum rejects 'impossible' Ardoyne deadline and plans to bring its challenge to the High 
Court, Belfast Telegraph, 11th July 2012; Connolly, Maeve, The Twelfth - Group to challenge Ardoyne 
decision, Irish News, 11th July 2012; Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - Tension high as legal aid denied - Loyalist 
bid to overturn ruling fails, Irish News, 12th July 2012 
PUL as potential concessions they could make.214 The bigger problem though 
was not the actions themselves, but their symbolism.  
PUL activists tend to display great sensitivity to public interpretation of 
their actions. Tommy Cheevers for example made a public apology in the 
Shankill Mirror (the local paper of Protestant North Belfast) after he told an anti-
GARC protest he was leading to disperse, in the mistaken belief that the GARC 
parade had been called off.215 The apology was necessary as he believed the 
mistake had damaged [his] integrity.216 That such a small action could be 
viewed by Cheevers as a mistake serious enough to damage the root of his 
authority is suggestive of the insecure position these community representatives 
occupied. They were not in control of PUL opinion, but representatives of it. The 
actions of the Parades Commission, by routinely imposing restrictions on the 
parade without PUL consent, was adding proof to a narrative of PUL victimhood. 
Their impositions thereby created anger that peace activists had to represent. 
This sense of PUL victimhood was, in the early 2010s, truly powerful, as the Flag 
Protests demonstrate.  
In December 2012 the Flag Protests, a protest campaign triggered by 
Belfast City Councils decision to only fly the Union Jack on a limited set of days, 
rather than year-round. This campaign was truly huge: [b]etween the first 
protest on 3 December 2012 and St Patricks Day 2013 (17 March), the police 
recorded 2980 flag-related occurrences [PSNI-speak for protests]217. This 
campaign was fuelled by a sense of PUL victimhood, the loss of the flag being 
interpreted as yet another loss in a series of losses for PUL culture.218 The 
214 Interview, Tommy Cheevers, 22nd March 2018; Interview, Peter Osborne, 14th July 2017 
215 Cheevers, Tommy, Letter of Apology, Shankill MIrror, August 2012. 
216 Ibid 
217 Jarman (2019), p.110 
218 Hearty (2015), p.160; Halliday & Ferguson (2015), p.8-9 
decisions made by the Parades Commission between 2010 and 2012 touched a 
similar nerve. Reaction was however minor, because the restrictions themselves 
were more irritating than a truly significant loss. By contrast decision by the 
Parades Commission in 2013 to ban the Orange Order from parading up the 
Crumlin Road on the evening of the 12th was a clear loss for the community. All 
across Northern Ireland Protestants reacted with fury. 
In the immediate aftermath of the Commission publicising their decision, a 
mass meeting, incorporating representatives from the Loyal Orders, PUL parties 
and paramilitary groups took place on the 10th July, to share impressions of how 
their communities were reacting to the decision, and devise a strategic 
response.219 The dominant interpretation of what had happened was that 
Commission had caved in to the pressure of GARCs violence, and by banning 
the parade was rewarding intolerance.220 The strategy arrived at, and 
announced by the Order, was that the decision would be protested, with 
representatives stating that the goal was to provide a peaceful outlet for their 
anger.221  
Unfortunately, this intention was not realised. When members and 
supporters of the protesting Orange lodges and PUL bands met the police lines 
enforcing the Commissions ban, a riot began within minutes.222 Similar riots 
would take place over the next four nights injuring 71 police officers.223 The 
219 Kilpatrick, Chris, DUP sat alongside top paramilitaries at talks; Gathering held by Orangemen to discuss 
row, Belfast Telegraph, 12th July 2013 
220 Kilpatrick, Chris, Fury over ruling after tense day of deliberations, Belfast Telegraph, 10th July 2013; 
Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - Orangemen discuss contingency plan, Irish News, 11th July 2013. 
221 Kilpatrick, Chris Orangemen plan Ardoyne protest camp until march ban is lifted, Belfast Telegraph, 12th 
July 2013; Interview, Orangeman, 18th December 2017 
222 Kilpatrick, Chris, Hand-to-hand fighting on the edge of Ardoyne as PSNI and loyalists clash, Belfast 
Telegraph, 13th July 2013; Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - Violent clashes in north of city, Irish News, 13th July 
223 Connolly, Maeve, Parade Violence - 71 officers hurt, 72 arrests and 51 plastic bullets fired but calm 
returning to streets, Irish News, 20th July 2013 
scale of the disorder was such that 600 mutual aid officers had to brought in 
from the rest of the UK to support the PSNI.224 The Orange Order, worried about 
the violence, tried to bring an end to the protests.225 They comprehensively 
failed to do so.  
Unofficial protests, spearheaded by the hardliners within LOL No. 1891 
Ballysillan, continued, and a permanent protest occupation, the Twaddell Civil 
Rights Camp, was set up on the Ardoyne-Twaddell interface.226 Under pressure 
to maintain opposition, the Order leadership appears to have capitulated to the 
demand of the hardliners. Protests against the Commissions decision would 
continue for the next three years. Though PUL peace activists might have wished 
for a strategy that would avoid increasing antagonism, they were unable to 
resist the popular pressure to oppose. A second attempt to change strategy in 
2014 was also defeated.227 The hardliners were giving the community what it 
wanted, and the peace activists had to follow in their wake. As Winston Irvine 
put it: 
"This is not a short-term approach, there is a 'stickability' that didn't previously 
exist. People want this issue resolved but are determined to have visible 
presence in the area until such times as it is."228 
224 Connolly, Maeve, Parade violence - Third tranche of British police arrive in city to tackle disorder, Irish 
News, 18th July 2013 
225 Kilpatrick, Chris, Order to call off protest as talks plot resolution path; Tactical changes to be unveiled in 
wake of violence, Belfast Telegraph, 29th July 2013 
226 Young, Connla, We'll eat Christmas dinner here if necessary - Loyalists vow to remain in 'civil rights camp' 
until Orangemen are allowed to pass nationalist district, Irish News, 13th September 2013; Morris, Allison, 
Illegal loyalist parade breaks through line of riot police, Irish News, 28th August 2013; Parades Commission 
(2013d), p.1 
227 Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - More details of graduated response released today, Irish News, 10th July 
2014; Morris, Allison, Twaddell protest parades restarted - Demonstrations will be legal and lawful says 
spokesman, Irish News, 17th July 2014 
228 Morris, Allison, Illegal loyalist parade breaks through line of riot police, Irish News, 28th August 2013 
This Chapter has posited that interventions by peace activists are able to 
prevent parades-related violence. This assertion however has to be justified, 
given the return of violence to the Crumlin Road between 2009-2016. Through 
this section I have demonstrated that, while peace activists can prevent 
violence, their ability to do so is not limitless. Persuading others not to engage in 
violence requires that one be a trusted authority. In CNR North Belfast, the Sinn 
Fein associated peace activists were not seen as trusted authorities by Dissident-
mobilised crowds, and therefore they could no longer prevent riots. In PUL North 
Belfast, the entire notion of a peace-oriented strategy became invalidated by the 
communitys perceived victimisation, and the peace activists had no choice but 
to sign up to a strategy of conflict and protest. Peace activists then are not all-
powerful. However, as will be seen in the next section, even in the face of 
effective spoiling, peace activists were not bereft of power. When the 
opportunity to return to a strategy of peace presented itself, they proved very 
able to capitalise on it. 
5.5: Exclusion, Coercion & Peace (2016) 
In this final section, I explain how the CNR and PUL peace activists of the 
Crumlin Road regained control, and resolved the parade dispute. Given this 
Chapters goal is to resolve the puzzle of peaceful parading, this singular 
achievement requires notice, as it not only demonstrates that peace activists can 
resolve parades-related conflicts, but also, they can do so in the face of 
sustained spoiler activity. The peace activists of North Belfast accomplished this 
feat by excluding spoilers from negotiations, ensuring that only they would have 
input into the shape of the disputes final resolution. This meant that when 
popular opinion moved towards preferring peace to conflict, the activists were 
able to produce agreement between themselves. This agreement neutralised 
spoilers, both through its terms, and through assembling behind it a coalition of 
opinion that made the spoilers look weak and isolated. Bereft of support, the 
spoilers acknowledged defeat, and peace was finally brought to the Crumlin 
Road. 
The exclusion of spoilers from influence over any peace deal was a result 
of coordination between CNR and PUL peace activists, and the Parades 
Commission. Though the Commission did hold talks with GARC in 2011, and PUL 
activists suggested doing so in 2014, these were only dalliances - CARA 
remained, in each factions eyes, the chief representative of North Belfast 
Catholics.229 Peace activists on both sides argued that any talks should only 
occur amongst themselves. Whats more, according to Sean OBaoill, who had 
229 Morris, Allison, Group fronted by dissidents meets Parades Commission, Irish News, 11th June 
2011;Cynical attempt by the Orange to walk away from talks - Joe Marley from residents' group CARA, The 
Nolan Show, 25th June 2014, accessed 14/03/2014, https://audioboom.com/posts/2280921-cynical-attempt-
by-the-orange-to-walk-away-from-talks-joe-marley-from-residents-group-cara-bbcnolan; Interview, Peter 
Osborne, 14th July 2017; Interview, Tommy Cheevers, 22nd March 2018 
long involvement in the dispute as a mediator, each side rejected compromises 
that they new would lead to the other sides activists losing authority.230  
The strategy of excluding GARC was not just practiced by CARA, but also 
baked into the very design of the organisation. The old APDG had been designed 
to represent the entirety of the significant internal diversity of the CNR 
community, being 50-50 activists and residents, and including, in addition to its 
Sinn Fein/IRA core, several INLA/IRSP members.231 CARAs membership by 
contrast was restricted to residents of specific streets: the Crumlin Road, 
Mountainview, and the Dales, which is about three streets further up the Crumlin 
Road, Ardoyne Road, which had always been impacted on, and Balholm Drive.232 
The focus on these streets is interesting given that they exclude Estoril Park and 
Brompton Park, streets that are definitely in Ardoyne.233 The fact that CARA still 
excluded these streets lends credence to the suggestion, made by one 
interviewee, that the choice was designed to remove more critical voices from 
the peace activist group.234  
By 2016, the Orange Order had adopted a similarly exclusive approach. 
This is visible through contrast with its approach in 2014, where, amongst 
others, the PUL team featured Unionist politicians and Gerald Solinas.235 These 
negotiations were in fact inclusive on both sides, with Sean OBaoill stating that 
at one point there were over 30 people in the room.236 In 2016 by contrast both 
230 Interview, Sean OBaoill, 25th July 2017 
231 Interview, Joe Marley, 13th July 2017 
232 Ibid 
233 Fr Gary Donegan confronted by angry Ardoyne protesters, BBC News, 3rd October 2016, accessed 
05/02/2018, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/uk-northern-ireland-37543648/fr-gary-donegan-confronted-by-
angry-ardoyne-protesters 
234 Interview, Politician, 22nd December 2017 
235 Black, Rebecca, We shall not be moved until brethren get down that road, Belfast Telegraph, 28th April 
2014; Young, Connla, Residents to oppose north Belfast parade, Irish News, 28th May 2014; Interview, 
Orangeman, 18th December 2017 
236 Interview, Sean OBaoill, 25th July 2017 
Unionist politicians and Gerald Solinas were no longer in the room. PUL peace 
activists had become increasingly disenchanted with political involvement, with 
almost all of my interviewees suggesting that Unionist politicians tended to be 
more hindrance than help.237 The other group notable in its exclusion was the 
West Belfast UPRG, which means Gerald Solinas was also not involved in 
negotiations.238 Within both the PUL and CNR communities, peace activists had 
managed to exclude oppositional voices from their negotiations. 
Of course, as we touched on in the prior section, the peace activists could 
not agree peace if the majority opinion in their communities still desired conflict. 
In 2016 however, an opportunity for rapprochement presented itself. On the 
15th April 2016 Michael McGibbon, a 33 year old taxi driver and father of four, 
was shot several times in the leg in the Ardoyne.239 He bled to death in the arms 
of his wife. Dissident Republicans were blamed for the attack. On the 19th April 
residents of the Ardoyne held a vigil for McGibbon, at which Joanne McGibbon 
(his widow) and local priest Father Gary Donegan openly criticised the murder as 
the work of Dissident Republicans.240 Even worse for the spoilers, their lead 
figure Dee Fennell, was arrested in suspicion of being involved. Though he would 
be later released without charges, the association between GARC and the 
murder of an innocent man was deeply damaging.  
What had even more impact than the damage to GARCs reputation 
however, was the decision of the North Belfast Orange lodges to suspend that 
nights protest out of respect for the family.241 In response, Jim Roddy, a 
237 Interview, Orangeman, 18th December 2017; Interview, Tommy Cheevers, 22nd March 2018; Interview, 
Alfie McCrory, 22nd March 2018 
238 Young, Connla, Parade talks prompt discord among loyalists, Irish News, 27th June 2016 
239 Monaghan, John, Republican Fennell arrested in taxi driver murder inquiry, Irish News, 18th April 2016 
240 They will never beat us, widow of murdered cabbie Michael tells vigil, Belfast Telegraph, 20th April 2016 
241 Ibid. 
prominent Derry businessman who had attended the funeral, phoned up a PUL 
contact to thank him. As he put it: 
So, after the vigil, I was driving back down home, and I rang someone 
who would've been very close to the protest. And I said "Listen, thank you very 
much, you have actually done something that's very, very important today. 
You've respected a man who'd been brutally murdered. Youve also respected 
the community and youve respected the priest who was holding the vigil." And 
the answer back was "Look, it's alright, there's no issue. It was the right thing to 
do." And glibly I said, "Maybe we should talk some more, maybe there's a 
beginning of something." Then the conversation began to try and sort this 
seemingly intractable dispute out.  
There were conversations happening with other people which I wasn't 
aware of because none of this was planned. But one of the people who 
conversations were happening with, was [The Reverend] Harold Good. And so, 
Harold and myself spoke, and we decided to speak to some of the people who 
were involved in the disputes, totally off the record, outside of the knowledge of 
anybody else, we didn't go to politicians, we didn't go to the police, we didn't go 
to anybody. We just spoke to people in the Orange, people who lived in the 
locality, and we said "Can we talk about this?" It really was a conversation like 
that. There was no considered strategy or plan.242 
Krause (2018) argues that the successful prevention of violence within a 
community depends on the members of said community choosing to value a 
geographic, suburb or city-based identity over their ethnic or sect identities: 
Community leaders rejected simplistic conflict narratives and onesided blame 
242 Interview, Jim Roddy, 28th July 2017 
and supported proactive we-thinking and alternative identities as people of 
Wayame in Ambon and people of Dadin Kowa in Jos, as opposed to Muslim 
versus Christian communities.243  
Such a communal identity could not be established on the Crumlin Road, 
because, as explored above, neighbourhood and sectarian identities overlapped 
significantly. Nevertheless, there was still potential for solidarity between 
neighbourhoods. As one of my respondents noted, the two communities have 
long suffered from troubles relating to drugs, alcohol and suicide, and they are 
both majority working class.244 They also suffered thanks to the actions of 
paramilitaries. The recognition of this similarity by the Ligoniel lodges, and the 
respect they showed to fellow sufferers, did not break down the metaphorical (or 
literal) walls between the communities. However, it created a brief moment of 
mutual respect. Peace activists like Jim Roddy immediately saw that public 
opinion was now potentially in a space that could accept compromise and 
resolution and moved to capitalise on that.  
Negotiations began in April 2016, and an initial deal was worked out in 
June. The Ballysillan and the UPRG however refused to sign up to it.245 CARA 
decided that it could not sign on to an agreement only agreed to by 2 of the 3 
lodges, and the deal was not ratified.246 CNR peace activists however signalled 
that they remained open to further talks.247 It was up to the Orange Order to 
face down their spoilers. 
243 Krause (2018), p.72 
244 Interview, Alfie McCrory, 22nd March 2018 
245 Short, Evan, Historic Ardoyne parading deal collapses, Belfast Media Group, 28th June 2016; McAleese, 
Deborah, On the brink of collapse...proposed deal to end three-year Ardoyne parade dispute, Belfast 
Telegraph, 28th June 2016 
246 Interview, Joe Marley, 13th July 2017 
247 Morris, Allison, The Twelfth - Leading Orangeman urges troublemakers to stay away, Irish News, 12th July 
My interviewees were quite coy regarding the internal politicking that 
occurred in PUL North Belfast over the Summer of the 2016. Disagreement 
surfaced however on the 12th July. Journalists observed that the now-traditional 
protest on that date was not organised, as was usually the case, by all three 
North Belfast lodges. Instead, it was organised by the Ballysillan alone.248 On the 
day observers also noted how small this parade was compared to usual, with 
fewer than 20 members of Ballysillan lodge, and a small number of supporters 
arriving at the protest point, compared to the hundreds normally mobilised. 
Solinas unsurprisingly was there, acting as the spokesman for Ballysillan.249  
According the watching journalist the Ballysillan clearly expected the 
other lodges to join them and waited for an hour and a quarter for them to do 
so before dispersing.250 Though the Orange publicly stated that this had not 
been done to isolate and embarrass the hardliners in the Ballysillan, it is difficult 
to believe them. The Ballysillan hardliners had been the most prominent 
opponents to the deal, and they had been very publicly isolated. Peace activists 
added more pressure in late July when the Loyalist Communities Council, a 
group representing the leadership of various Loyalist paramilitary groups, 
including the UDA, announced their support for the Twaddell deal.251 Though the 
internal conversations that achieved the peace activists goal remain hidden, the 
public pressure appears to have worked. The Ballysillan lodge signed up to the 
deal in September and Gerald Solinas, along with 8 other lodge members, 
248 Kearney, Vincent, Twelfth of July: Ballysillan members left 'isolated' at police barricade, BBC News, 13th 
July 2016, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-36785644, accessed 31/07/2019; McDonald, 
Henry, Maybe, just maybe, we are on the march to a more civilised future;  
Time will tell, but this week's peaceful end to the Twelfth could mark a fresh start for parading, Belfast 
Telegraph, 15th July 2016 
249 Kearney, Vincent, Twelfth of July: Ballysillan members left 'isolated' at police barricade, BBC News, 13th 
July 2016, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-36785644, accessed 31/07/2019 
250 Ibid 
251 Kearney, Vincent, North Belfast: Disputed parades talks to resume, BBC News, 26th July 2016, 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-36894993, accessed 31/07/2019 
resigned from the Orange Order.252 Demonstrably alone in their commitment to 
perpetual opposition, the PUL spoilers backed down. 
CARA too made sure that internal opposition was neutered. In order to 
legitimise the deal, CARA held a public meeting in an Ardoyne community hall 
with the goal of obtaining the approval of the Ardoyne community.253 According 
to members of GARC, and to an interviewee on the complete other end of the 
Catholic political spectrum; Sinn Fein flooded that place, and anybody that was 
trying to talk at it was shut down. They were trying to talk us down 
[unclear]Every time Sinn Fein made a speech, they got a big clap. People from 
Ardoyne tried to talk, they tried to shoot them down.254  
Given Sinn Feins previous exclusion strategy, this silencing seems entirely 
plausible. After all, as Dee Fennell argued, if you truly wanted to get the 
democratic approval of the whole Ardoyne ward (which in 2016 had an adult 
population of 4,000) you would not do it via a public meeting in a building with a 
capacity of around 100 people.255 The public meeting was necessary to give 
CARAs deal a veneer of democratic legitimacy, but Sinn Fein made certain that 
the result of the meeting was guaranteed to be acceptance.  
Further steps were taken to prevent GARC from spoiling the new peace. 
The symbolic return home parade requested by the Orange lodges was 
organised for Saturday morning, an inhospitable time for which to organise a 
protest. In addition to this, a public letter, signed by a wide array of local 
252 Rainey, Mark, Ardoyne parade deal within weeks, Belfast News Letter, 22nd September 2016, 
https://www.newsletter.co.uk/news/ardoyne-parade-deal-within-weeks-1-7592668, accessed 31/07/2019 
253 Interview, Joe Marley, 13th July 2017 
254 Interview, Ardoyne Resident, 22nd July 2016; Fr Gary Donegan confronted by angry Ardoyne protesters, 
BBC News, 3rd October 2016, accessed 20/03/2018, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/uk-northern-ireland-
37543648/fr-gary-donegan-confronted-by-angry-ardoyne-protesters 
255 Breen, Suzanne, Republican group set to protest against agreed Orange parade, Belfast Telegraph, 28th 
September 2016 
community groups, Nationalist politicians and Catholic religious leaders 
requested that GARC not protest the parade.256 Happily for the peace activists 
GARC also supplied ammunition for its own defeat, when the group was filmed 
verbally assaulting Father Donegan during their protest.257 Their actions were 
publicised, and extensively criticised.258 This assassination/revelation of their 
character, combined with the agreement that the 12th July evening parade 
would be voluntarily suspended, appears to have been GARCs death knell. The 
group has not notified the Commission about any parade or protest, since 
November 2016. 
To conclude, the problem peace activists from both the Protestant and 
Catholic communities of the Crumlin Road faced between 2009 and 2016, was a 
loss of control within their communities. Spoilers in the form of GARC and the 
Ballysillan/UPRG faction forced the Crumlin Road dispute to escalate via street-
level protest. The peace activists could not prevent them from protesting. 
However, they could make sure that protesting was all they were able to do. By 
keeping spoilers out of negotiations, both the Protestant and Catholic peace 
activists were able to produce an agreement. With a resolution in sight, and 
public opinion at least tacitly accepting of it, spoilers found themselves isolated. 
Under extensive public and internal pressure to give in, and with the evening 
parade - the primary trigger for protest - suspended, spoilers were no longer 
256 Twaddell protest: Parade resolution in full, Belfast Telegraph, 24th September 2016; Young, Connla, 
Protest passes off peacefully amid heavy police presence, Irish News, 1st October 2016; Young, David, Relief 
as protest over crunch Orange march passes off peacefully, Belfast Telegraph, 1st October 2016; Ardoyne 
parade deal: Plea for Garc to halt protest, BBC News, 30th September 2016 
257 Fr Gary Donegan confronted by angry Ardoyne protesters, BBC News, 3rd October 2016, accessed 
20/03/2018, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/uk-northern-ireland-37543648/fr-gary-donegan-confronted-by-
angry-ardoyne-protesters 
258 Priest hailed after angry scenes at Orange Order parade, Belfast News Letter, 3rd October 2016, 
https://www.newsletter.co.uk/news/latest-news/priest-hailed-after-angry-scenes-at-orange-order-parade-1-
7609832, accessed 01/08/2019; Hedges, John, Backlash against GARC protesters after venomous abuse of 
Holy Cross priest in Ardoyne, anphoblacht, 2nd October 2016, 
https://www.anphoblacht.com/contents/26407, accessed 01/08/2019 
able to generate conflict. Peace activists therefore proved able to prevent 
parades-related violence, even in the face of spoilers. 
5.6: Conclusion 
This Chapter has sought to answer the puzzle of why parades-related 
conflict is so rare in Northern Ireland. To do this, I have used as my case study 
the area in which the most parades-related violence occurred, to see how even 
in this case there was less violence than we might expect. The answer is that 
violence was prevented by the actions of peace activists, who either directly 
persuaded people not to engage in violence, or, collaborated in removing the 
parts of a parade that proved most likely to trigger violence.  
This case showed that the ability of peace activists to restrain violence is 
not limitless. Spoilers were able to exacerbate and escalate conflict between 
2009 and 2016. But peace activists, by excluding spoilers from having any say 
over the shape of resolution, and through the weight of support they had from 
the broader society, proved able to (eventually) outflank spoilers and bring an 
end to the conflict despite their influence. 
This then is how conflict was ended in North Belfast. However, this thesis 
is concerned with a puzzle that extends across Northern Ireland. It is reasonable 
therefore to ask: do the findings generated from a study of North Belfast apply 
across the province? I believe they do, for two reasons. First, peace activists are 
not limited to North Belfast. Jarman et al. (2009) in their study of 26 locations 
across Northern Ireland found multiple examples of PUL and CNR community 
representatives meeting to tackle parades disputes, with Derry and Newry hailed 
as particular examples of successful conflict deescalation.259 Even in less public 
success stories, Jarman et al. (2009) report that representatives desired to 
259 Jarman et al. (2009), p.12 & 20-23 
avoid violence and public disorder.260 Though research on it is slim, what little 
there is suggests that peace activism is common across Northern Ireland. What 
is less common, is spoiler activity.  
GARCs actions on the Crumlin Road came as part of a wave of Dissident 
Republican activism that included both nonviolent and violent actions. However, 
as examinations of violent Dissident actions suggests, this activity was short-
lived, with a rise in activity in 2009-10 swiftly declining and petering out by 
2015.261  
As regards parades-related spoiling, in 2013 Dissidents in several CNR 
areas formed an umbrella group named Communities Against Sectarian 
Parading to unite efforts in combating marches.262 Of the other groups and 
locations mentioned in this communique however, only one other besides GARC 
- the Rasharkin Residents Collective - has ever organised protests. CASP itself 
was extremely short-lived, being shut down in 2015.263 As we saw in North 
Belfast between 2009 and 2015, it was the mobilisation of sizeable protests by 
Dissidents, bringing people onto the street who had little respect for the 
authority of Sinn Fein, that overcame the ability of CNR peace activists to 
prevent violence. The fact that dissidents appear to have had little success 
mobilising opposition to parades beyond North Belfast, helps explain why there 
is so little parades-related violence in Northern Ireland. The reason why North 
Belfast was such an outlier in violence, was because it was the only place in 
260 Ibid, p.48 
261 Horgan & Morrison (2011), p.646; Morrison & Horgan (2016), p.582 
262 Rasharkin Residents Collective, Communities Against Sectarian Parades  21/6/13, Rasharkin Residents 
Collective, 1st July 2013, https://rasharkinrc.webs.com/apps/blog/show/29547086-communities-against-
sectarian-parades-21-6-13, accessed 13/01/2020 
263 Young, Connla, No nationalist protest to be held at Rasharkin parade, Irish News, 16th August 2019, 
https://www.irishnews.com/news/northernirelandnews/2019/08/16/news/no-nationalist-protest-to-be-held-
at-rasharkin-parade-1686869/, accessed  13/01/2020. 
Northern Ireland where spoilers were truly able to disrupt peace activism. 
Elsewhere, those seeking to prevent violence were able to accomplish their goals 
unchallenged. 
Chapter 6: Final Conclusion 
The stated puzzle at the heart of this thesis is, given that episodes of 
ethnic violence in Northern Ireland (and indeed, across the world) so often begin 
with parades, why is it so rare for parades to end in violence? The puzzle 
deepens following the findings of Chapter Three, which demonstrate that in 
Northern Ireland participation in both PUL and CNR parades rises under 
conditions that pose a threat to these groups. Using the evidence at my disposal, 
I propose two reasons for why this might be the case.  
In Chapter Four, I showed that protests directed against parades were far 
more common in the vicinity of sharp borders between segregated Catholic and 
Protestant-majority areas. I also showed that these areas were comparatively 
rare in number, with less than a quarter of areas where conflict was seen as a 
risk being located near such a border.  
Then, in Chapter Five, I complemented this analysis of variation across 
space, with an analysis of variation across time in the most violent parades 
dispute in post-Good Friday Northern Ireland. This Chapter traces the 
emergence, loss and re-emergence of peaceful relations regarding parades on 
the Crumlin Road to the waxing and waning of the authority of local peace 
activists. I show that when the authority of peace activists is buttressed by 
cross-community cooperation and the restriction of conflict to controllable 
spaces, peace can be built in even the most conflict-prone areas.  
These Chapters together propose an answer to the puzzle of why parades 
in Northern Ireland so rarely provoke violence. Not only are the conditions that 
promote conflict rare, but there are a sufficient number of powerful groups 
across the country interested in bringing violence to an end. 
Yet, this thesis is not simply a story of how violence at parades is avoided. 
Each of my empirical Chapters has other stories to tell. In Chapter Three I 
demonstrate that participation in minority, as well as majority, ethnic parades is 
motivated by differing forms of threat: status threat for the majority, rights 
erosion for the minority. This Chapter is not only innovative in its comparison of 
majority and minority activism, but, it also justifies the disaggregated approach 
to threat suggested by Almeida (2019) and refutes the narrative of Owens et 
al. (2019) that threat is a motivator purely for fearful majority groups.  
Chapter Four meanwhile wades into the debate over whether motive or 
opportunity is the pathway by which geography incentivises ethnic conflict. At 
the finish it offers more proof for motive, by showing that CNR counter-protests 
against PUL parades are far more likely in the vicinity of sharp borders between 
segregated areas.  
Finally, Chapter Five advances the literature on the power of activists to 
prevent ethnic conflict, by studying the ability of activists to do so across time. 
This complicated the image of authority as permanent constructed by cross-
geography comparisons, by showing how the authority of the same set of 
activists waxed and waned depending on their ability to collaborate, and the 
spaces in which they attempted to exert it. In short, the empirical chapters not 
contribute answers to the core question of the thesis, but also offer new 
directions in which three distinct literatures could advance. 
Beyond these innovations though, there is another way to build upon the 
findings of this study, and that is to take the analysis of parades and identity 
beyond Northern Ireland. Parades, as shown in the Introduction, are very 
common acts. They are the tools of a wide variety of identity groups. In the UK 
alone, women parade to Reclaim the Night, LGBT people parade for Pride, trade 
unions parade on May Day, Sikhs parade in the Vaisakhi festival, Irish parade on 
St Patricks Day, Scots in favour of independence parade All Under One Banner 
and English nationalists, like the EDL, parade on St Georges Day. These events 
share a similar form, but that one form can be deployed in service of multiple 
goals.  
These parades may state or celebrate a groups existence, commemorate 
an important event in a groups history, express the groups right to public 
space, or demand for society to change so that they might be included in it. 
Parades have been used to do this for well over a century. In particular, the 
traditions of British Protestant parading (through the Orange Order) and Irish 
Catholic parading (through the Ancient Order of Hibernians) have an extremely 
long history, that is not limited to Northern Ireland. OLeary (2016)s study of 
parades in C19th South Wales shows how both the Orange Order and Irish 
Catholics used parades as a means of laying claim to public space.264 What has 
changed since this time however is the context.  
The UK, and indeed much of the Western world, is experiencing a 
proliferation of identities vying for inclusion within the public sphere. The role 
parades play in these diversifying societies is being studied, with two major 
manuscripts comparing the form of and participation in May Day and Pride 
parades across Europe. However, this is but the tip of the iceberg. As the list 
above indicates, it is quite possible that one might never run out of parading 
groups to write about. There is then more work to do on the organisations 
behind and participants in various parades. However, if the focus moves beyond 
individual movements, there are two further questions that require solution. 
264 OLeary (2016), p.124-127 & 147-149 
The first is the question of the consequences of parades, both for their 
participants and their audiences. It has long been argued that parades, much 
the same as other identity-celebrating rituals, are a means to create or 
strengthen peoples attachment to social groups.265 As stated in the Introduction, 
existing studies on participation in national ceremonies have thrown doubt on 
assumptions that such festivals inculcate stronger feelings of national 
belonging.266 Instead, quantitative analysis suggests that attendance is an 
expression of pre-existing national attachment.267  
The quantitative measurement of such feelings of attachment is rare. To 
date, surveys have only been deployed to study Israel and the Netherlands, and 
in each case, the measurement of participation in national rituals differs 
immensely. The Dutch studies explicitly measure participation in Dutch 
Liberation festivals, while the Israeli studies prefer a more general measure of 
exposure, that includes both participation in ceremonies and more passive 
activities such as watching Remembrance Day-related TV programmes.268 The 
study of parades could advance this literature.  
A focus on parades offers scope and comparability. As we have discussed, 
parades take place all over the world, and, tend to take similar forms regardless 
of the identities of participants or the country they are based in. As it is the form 
of the event that is supposed to inculcate identity attachment - in particular, a 
crowds unity of action - this global consistency of form will allows us to see 
whether parades consistently fail to produce identity-attachment, or whether 
their ability to do so is contingent on context. Studies of parades also offer easy 
265 Durkheim (1922), p.429 
266 Ariely (2017), p.2605; Ariely (2019), p.9; De Regt & Lippe (2017), p.290-291; De Regt 
(2018), p.1720 
267 De Regt (2018), p.1720 
268 Ariely (2017), p.2603-2604; Ariely (2019), p.8 
categorisation of affected groups. With parades, unlike festivals or national days 
taken as a whole, there is a very clear demarcation between participant and 
audience. This separation will be useful to determine whether different degrees 
of engagement with the ritual or ceremony have differing impact, something 
which existing studies do not assess. We can also look within these groups, to, 
for example, look at the effects of parades on particular audiences. Given that 
many parades are held by minority groups seeking to incorporate themselves 
within society, examining their reception by elites and legislators offers an 
opportunity to see, not only their psychological impact, but also their potential 
for policy impact.  
The second question parades can be used to solve relates to the function 
of parades. As said, parades claim public space as a means of celebration, self-
definition and demand. However, not all groups choose to do this. For example, 
1% of Northern Irelands population (as of the 2011 census) had Polish 
nationality, yet between 2006 and 2016 there were no parades associated with 
the community.  
One might explain this by stating that there are simply too few Poles. This 
analysis is however thrown into question by the presence of Pride Parades in 
both Belfast and Derry, when the provinces Gay and Lesbian population hovers 
between 1-2% according to the ONS (2012-2017), and the occasional Chinese 
cultural parades in Belfast, when (as of the 2011 census) only 0.3% of Northern 
Irelands population claimed Chinese ethnicity.  
The question of who parades? has particular relevance, given the 
present ethnic/cultural diversification of Western countries, because people do 
not parade without purpose. The practice is often a defensive response, done to 
counteract negative social portrayals, and, as argued by Chapter Three, the 
experience of discrimination can motivate members of minority ethnic groups to 
participate in parades. However, as already stated, Chapter Three as a sub-
national study is limited in what it can test. A cross-national study though could 
answer some very interesting questions. 
It may be that in other countries, different factors supersede threat in 
influencing peoples behaviour. For example, if members of a group feel 
particularly under threat, or, believe that keeping their heads down is a better 
survival strategy than making a challenging claim on public space, then they 
may not parade. It may also be the case that parading is abnormal in particular 
countries, meaning that groups in those countries seeking social acceptance may 
prefer other strategies. Finally, it may well be that some people, though 
technically assigned to a national, gender or ethnic category, may not perceive 
themselves as part of a group, and as such, will feel no need to parade. By 
exploring these possibilities, the question of why do some categories of people 
parade, while others do not? could offer valuable insights into the nature of 
Western diversity, allowing us to distinguish between categories and groups, 
and discover why some contexts appear to facilitate public negotiations of 
difference, where others do not. 
 These then are the questions this thesis offers the opportunity to answer. 
However, this thesis not only offers further questions - it also offers a means to 
obtain the answers. All the work contained within this thesis would not have be 
possible without the data collection and monitoring work done by the Parades 
Commission of Northern Ireland. As described in Chapter Three, this 
government-collated data is far better suited to the study of parades than that 
obtained from newspapers. Newspapers tend cover events that are associated 
with politically contentious issues, are counter-demonstrated and/or disorderly, 
and take place in major, easily-accessible locations.269 The parades in my 
dataset by contrast are mostly small, non-contentious and take place in 
settlements all across the province. Without the Parades Commission, it is 
unlikely that any record of many of these parades would have been made.  
Given the extreme usefulness of government-derived event catalogues, it 
is somewhat surprising, as Greenberg (2019) points out, that they have been so 
rarely used by scholars of social movements.270 To an extent this is explicable by 
the absence of any broader knowledge about the availability of this data. The 
Parades Commission for example does not publicise the fact that they can 
download their data and provide it to users, and it was only through direct 
contact with the Commission that I learned this fact.  
Whats more, the availability of this data is often quite time-limited and 
organisation-specific. The Parades Commissions electronic records for example 
only go back to 2006. Exploration of data availability in Scotland meanwhile, 
where such data is collected by local government units, found great variation 
between localities, both in terms of how far back their electronic datasets stretch 
(ranging from 2007, to the current year only), and what data was collected 
(some localities only record name, date and location, whereas others include 
participant numbers). However, no data source is perfect, and the face that 
government-collected data typically covers far more events than the media, 
should inspire greater efforts to investigate how available such data is.271 It is 
my hope that this study, by demonstrating what datasets built on government-
collected data can do, can help inspire such investigations. 
269 McCarthy et al. (1996), p.491; Oliver & Myers (1999), p.70-71; Ortiz et al. (2005), p.398-
270 Greenberg (2019), http://bit.ly/34yW6Uc 
271 McCarthy et al. (1996), p.488; Wouters (2013), p.93 
To conclude this conclusion, I began this thesis with a description of the 
parade. One of the enduringly fascinating characteristics of political behaviour is 
how events with such great social ramifications can be produced by individual 
actions that, when described, appear entirely banal. This however is the 
consequence of seeing only the action, and not the meaning it holds for 
participants.  
One theme that appears in interviews with participants in parades, and 
the festivities surrounding them, is how little difference there is between the 
parade and the collective identity it promotes. Blake (2019) heard Orangeman 
after Orangeman state as much, and cites directly ones illustrative assertion 
that The parades are my culture.272 However it is not just Orangemen that 
see no distinction between the parade and the nation. ODonnell et al. (2016)s 
analysis of interviews conducted during St Patricks Day in both Belfast and 
Dublin cites similar opinions, with one participant, in reference to the carnival 
atmosphere of St Patricks Day in Belfast, stating The atmosphere is portraying 
Ireland.273  
I opened this thesis by depicting a parade as group of people, essentially, 
going for a bit of a walk, but this was an outsiders description. Seen through the 
eyes of the insider, this group of walkers becomes an act of communication - a 
description of a people, and a demand that the world make space for them. It 
has been my intent with this thesis to demonstrate that it is worth listening to 
what parades are saying, because through them we can see people with 
renewed clarity. 
272 Blake (2019), p.89-94, emphasis added by the cited author. 
273 ODonnell et al. (2016), p.69 
Appendix A: The Parades Commission Dataset 
A.1: The Original Dataset 
I obtained the raw data used to produce the PCD through correspondence with 
the Parades Commission. They provided me with an Excel spreadsheet 
containing the following information on each public procession notified to the 
Parades Commission between 2006-2016: 
 A unique Reference Number,  
 The Date on which the procession took place,  
 The number of Participants and Supporters listed as being part 
of/accompanying the procession,  
 The Organisation that held the procession,  
 The Location of the procession (usually equivalent to the settlement 
or suburb the procession started in, or the name of the local area for 
more rural parades),  
 The first stop on the processions Outward Route (usually a street or 
building name),  
 The Organisation Type, a categorisation system used by the 
Commission to group processions together that were organised by the 
same type of organisation (eg. Individual processions were identified 
as being organised by specific Orange Order lodges, but, all were 
grouped under the category of Orange Order). 
This dataset required significant work before it could be subjected to 
ecological analysis. Necessary additions were as follows. First, I needed to make 
it so the parades could be located to Settlements. Second, the dataset included 
a large number of events that were not parades, following the definition of 
proactive, identarian demonstrations. These included a large number of reactive 
protests, but also, a number of events (including marathons, tractor runs, and 
long drives by car clubs) more properly identified as leisure or charitable 
activities. These would need to be set apart and distinguished from the 
commemorative and identity-promoting demonstrations.  
Finally, there were a number of parades promoting non-CNR/PUL 
identities, for example, Pride Parades and May Day parades by unions, and civic 
parades carried out by various cities. These also needed to be identified and 
distinguished, in order that I might extract from this larger database, one that 
contained only proactive identarian demonstrations associated with the CNR and 
PUL identity-blocs. I describe the processes by which I located and defined the 
parades below. 
A.2: Locating Parades 
In order to locate parades to Settlements, I needed to assign coordinates 
to each parade. For this purpose I took the Outward Route and Location 
information, and analysed them using opencagegeo. Opencagegeo is a tool able 
to convert descriptions of where an event occurs into longitude-latitude 
coordinates. It sets itself apart from similar tools, in that, in addition to 
assigning coordinates, it also provides scores for how precise the coordinates 
supplied were. The most important of these scores was g_value, which 
identifies the level of address that was identified via the information provided 
(from country level to house number level accuracy).  
Using opencagegeo, I was able to assign coordinates to most of my 
parades with at least settlement level accuracy. However, the program was 
unable to handle all the entries in the dataset, due to the consequences of using 
organiser-submitted data. The problems encountered were multiple, including 
misspelt place names, the use of local nicknames rather than official 
designations for place names, and no a lack of standardisation in how the 
Outward Route information was provided.  
Due to the size of the dataset, the Commission only had sufficient 
computing power to provide me with the first line of information contained in the 
Outward Route section. Sometimes this line would be a single street name, 
which opencagegeo could competently geolocate. Sometimes however that first 
line would be a whole phrase (for example, (depart from West City Hall -)), 
which opencagegeo could not locate.  
Finally, the software itself had certain limitations. Opencagegeo matches 
descriptions to coordinates using openstreetmap, an open-source map of the 
world, generated like Wikipedia through user submissions. This did not create 
problems regarding accuracy, as I found openstreetmap to compare quite 
favourably with Google Maps in the accuracy of its location identifications. 
However, its coverage of place names was not quite as extensive as Googles, 
with smaller and more rural communities in Northern Ireland not being 
thoroughly mapped. Even some streets in Belfast were, I discovered, 
unidentified.  
This, in conjunction with the softwares inability to accurately locate all 
parades, meant that I had to manually locate a fair number of the parades 
myself, using openstreetmap, Google Maps and, for locations not listed in either 
of those maps, Facebook and geograph.ie, to look up locations and assign 
coordinates.  For areas where the precise position was uncertain - for example, a 
particular street - I either selected the midpoint of that street or a junction of 
that street and the street the parade was travelling to next, according to which 
one I felt was more likely to be accurate. I labelled those parades located in this 
manner manual. 
A.3: Identifying Parades 
As stated, in order to focus my study on proactive identarian 
demonstrations, I needed to distinguish commemorative events from those held 
for purposes of charity or entertainment. I therefore created the Event Type 
category. Processions were sorted into specific categories in the following 
manner.  
First, the Organisation category was consulted, as certain Organisations, 
like the Orange Order, hold events for only one purpose (in their case, 
Commemoration and Display). Where the event type was not obvious from 
merely looking at the Organisation category, a Google search was conducted, 
looking for a description of the event itself, or, to see if the date on which the 
event took place had any commemorative significance. Information was drawn 
from social media (particularly Facebook), organisation websites and newspaper 
articles, links to which were in turn collected under two new columns: 
Organisation Information and Event Information.  
Precise information about the purpose of each procession was not 
consistently available, and I was unable to categorise 7868 processions. 
However, of these unidentified processions, only 31 might have belonged in the 
PCD, so errors in categorisation are likely to have had limited impact. The Event 
Type categories are as follows: 
1) Commemoration & Display. Defined as an event participated-in to explicitly 
make-visible a particular collective identity AND/OR commemorate a significant 
historical or otherwise-secular event.  
2) Fundraising. Defined as a public procession held for the purpose of raising 
money for a particular cause. The fundraising category supersedes the 
recreation category, though in practice the two are very similar. All events held 
by charities and cause-based civil society groups, for example, MacMillan Cancer 
Support are considered to be Fundraising. 
3) Industrial. Defined as an event participated in for commercial or economic 
purposes, eg. as part of a job, or to sell/buy goods. The major definition 
employed here is the characterisation of military parades as industrial given 
that they are participated in by soldiers as part of their job, rather than 
voluntarily. 
4) Protest. Defined, in line with the Introduction, as a reactive demonstration. 
5) Recreation. Defined as an event participated in purely for fun, and/or as part 
of a hobby. There will be many events in the PCD that people participate in for 
recreational reasons - for example, charity fun runs or the Mountnorris 
Presbyterian Church Vintage Rally - that will not be labelled as Recreation. This 
is because Recreation is intended to capture events that have no consequence 
except individual enjoyment. Where participation is likely engaged in for multiple 
reasons, I choose to code EventType according to the more community-focused, 
rather than self-focused, reason, on the basis that there is a significant 
difference between the choice to run and raise money for others, and the choice 
to run just for oneself. 
6) Religious. Defined as an event participated-in for purposes of 
celebrating ones religion. Includes all events hosted by Churches and other 
religious groups. Distinguished from Commemoration & Display in order to 
avoid conflating ethnonational celebrations with religious events. 
The Event Type category was but one of the additional categories 
required, in order to ensure that the PCD could be extracted from the mass of 
data obtained from the Parades Commission. The other I labelled Affiliation. This 
categorised parades according to the identity of the people participating in 
them. I used a particularly broad conception of identity, which was, in effect, 
the answer to the question what do individuals in the procession have in 
common?. This resulted in the following categories: 
1) Civic. Label given to processions associated with a subnational, spatial entity, 
such as a city or county. This label is assigned mostly to the public processions 
held by charities which provide services to specific communities, such as the 
Randalstown Arches Association, or those held by local governments, such as 
district councils. 
2) CNR. Label given to processions associated with the broad 
Catholic/Nationalist/Republican collective identity. This label is assigned to all 
public processions associated with this broad collective, from events held by 
Gaelic Athletics Associations and other Irish-aligned cultural and sporting 
organisations, to marches held to commemorate Republican martyrs. 
3) Hobbyist. Label given to processions that occur for a purely recreational 
purpose, where there is no connection between participants but their love for the 
hobby, whether thats car enthusiasm or some form of sport. 
4) Other Collective. Defined as an association with all non-PUL/CNR collective 
identities. These identities are grouped together due to the low number of 
processions celebrating them (598 out of 47,000). This label is assigned to 
public processions associated with the following commonalities - gender (ie. 
womens marches), sexuality (LGBT Pride Parades), partisan (Left and Right, for 
example, processions held by unions, People Before Profit or anti-immigrant 
groups), masonic lodges and cross-community marches (in particular the 
marches for communal peace held by members of different Churches every St. 
Patricks Day). 
5) Military. Label given to processions held by serving military units. 
6) None. Defined as an absence of association. Attributed to Industrial events. 
7) Prosocial. Label given to processions associated with charitable interests, that 
are not focused on particular group or area. 
8) PUL. Label given to processions associated with the broad 
Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist collective identity. Most obviously, this includes 
processions carried out by Protestant churches, the Loyal Orders and the 
marches of socialist Loyalist parties like the PUP. It also includes the Royal 
British Legion parades held on Remembrance Day to commemorate those who 
died in the First World War.  
A.4: Data Cleaning 
After locating and categorising all the processions in the original dataset, I 
subjected it to cleaning. While data entry by the Parades Commission was 
mostly done with high accuracy, two flaws in the dataset artificially inflated the 
number of processions. First, the dataset contained entries for processions which 
organisers had decided not to hold (these were often labelled withdrawn). 
These entries were deleted from the dataset. Second, the dataset contained 
some duplicate entries, identified as two or more parades being held by the 
same organisation in the same place, on the same day. This resulted from two 
types of error.  
Error one involved organisers submitting multiple notifications for the 
same procession, as information relating to that procession changed over time 
(for example, the route). This was resolved by retaining the duplicate entry with 
the highest Reference Number, as this would have been the latest notification, 
and deleting the others.  
Error two involved organisers sometimes submitting separate notifications 
for different sections of the same procession (for example, treating the outward 
and return legs of the same procession as two separate processions). Where 
possible, I attempted to solve this problem by retaining the outward route 
procession, and deleting all other entries. The outward route was chosen, as I 
assume it more likely for parade participants to live closer to the start point of a 
procession than to its end point. This error was somewhat harder to resolve than 
the first, as it was not always clear which procession was the outward route. 
Mistakes made in the cleaning process however are unlikely to have led to 
misallocating processions to settlements, given that it is very rare, and as such 
noticeable, for processions to start in one settlement, and finish in another. 
In addition to removing duplicates, I also had to edit the participant 
numbers. Numbers of participants were recorded in the dataset in many 
different ways, including as lower than/higher than a particular number, and as 
ranging between two different numbers. I used the following rules to generate 
whole participant numbers from these various forms of information: 
1) Less than number. SOLUTION: Use the midpoint number between minimum 
(0) and maximum, rounding down. 
2) Range between 0 & number. SOLUTION: Use the midpoint number between 
minimum (0) and maximum, rounding down. 
3) An upper estimate. Often indicated by number max. SOLUTION: Use the 
midpoint number between minimum (0) and maximum, rounding down. 
4) Number of vehicles. SOLUTION: on the assumption that 1 vehicle requires at 
least 1 driver, I assume a 1:1 vehicle-to-human participant ratio. 
5) A range. Indicated either by number - number or number/number. 
SOLUTION: use the midpoint number between the minimum and maximum, 
rounding down. 
6) A lower estimate. Indicated by number+ or number plus. SOLUTION: use 
this lowest estimate as the fixed number of participants. 
7) A rough estimate, eg. number approx.. SOLUTION: use the number. 
8) Two numbers - one for outward parade, one for return parade. SOLUTION: 
use the highest number. 
 After locating, categorising and cleaning the data, the PCD was ready to 
be extracted from the base dataset. I selected all processions held for purposes 
of Commemoration & Display, that were identified as PUL or CNR, that started 
inside the boundaries of a Settlement, and for which there was information on 
participant numbers. For both PUL and CNR I found the sum of participants in 
parades in each identity, in each Settlement-Year. I linked this data with data 
from the 2011 Census and the Sutton Index of Deaths, amongst others, to 
produce the final, analysed dataset. 
Appendix B: List of Interviewees 
Role Name Anonymous? 
Journalist/Ex-PIRA Danny Morrison N 
Academic  Dr Tim Mairs N 
Journalist Henry McDonald N 
Residents' Spokesman Joe Marley N 
Residents' Spokesman Sean Murray N 
Mediator/NGO Peter Osborne N 
Mediator Fr. Gary Donegan N 
Parades Commission Rev Brian Kennaway N 
Residents' Spokesman Gerard Rice N 
Residents' Spokesman Conor Keenan N 
Police Officer Gary White N 
Parades Commissioner N/A Y 
Mediator Sean OBaoill N 
Residents' Spokesman Donncha McNiallais N 
Mediator Jim Roddy N 
Orangeman N/A Y 
Mediator Reverend Harold Good N 
Police Officer N/A Y 
Politician N/A Y 
Civilian N/A Y 
Parader Tommy Cheevers N 
Residents' Spokesman Alfie McCrory N 
Local Scholar N/A Y 
A template consent form has been submitted as Additional Material.  
Bibliography 
Online Datasets 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2005 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2006. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2006 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2007. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2007 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2008. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2008 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2009. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2009 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2010. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2010 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2011. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2012 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2013. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2013 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2014. 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2014 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2015 
ARK. Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, 2015 [computer file]. ARK 
www.ark.ac.uk/nilt [distributor], June 2016 
Books, Reports & Edited Volumes 
Almeida, Paul D., The Role of Threat in Collective Action, in David A. Snow, 
Sarah A. Soule, Hanspeter Kriesi & Holly J. McCammon eds., The Wiley Blackwell 
Companion to Social Movements, (Wiley Blackwell). 
Ardoyne Commemoration Project (2002), Ardoyne: The Untold Truth, (Beyond 
the Pale). 
Bean, Kevin (2007), The New Politics of Sinn Fin, (Liverpool University Press). 
Beissinger, Mark R. (2002), Nationalist Mobilization and the Collapse of the 
Soviet State, (Cambridge University Press). 
Belfast Interface Project (2017), Interface Barriers, Peacelines and Defensive 
Architecture, (Belfast Interface Project). 
Berenschot, Ward (2011), Riot Politics: Hindu-Muslim Violence and the Indian 
State, (London: Hurst). 
Blake, Jonathan (2019), Contentious Rituals: Parading the Nation in Northern 
Ireland, (Oxford University Press). 
Brown, Kristian & Elisabetta Viggiani (2010), Performing Provisionalism: 
Republican Commemorative Practice as Political Performance in Post Agreement 
Northern Ireland, in Lisa Fitzpatrick, Performing Violence in Contemporary 
Ireland, (Carysfort Press). 
Bryan, Dominic (2000), Orange Parades: The Politics of Ritual, Tradition and  
Control, (Pluto Press). 
Budge, Ian & Cornelius OLeary (1973), Belfast: Approach to Crisis. A Study of 
Belfast Politics, 1613-1970, (Palgrave Macmillan). 
Bukantz, Dorothy, Sean Cahill, Mary Elizebeth Bartholomew, Marilyn Horan, 
Steven McCabe, Kelly ONeill & Matthew Schneider (2002), Eyewitness, Conflict 
in Northern Ireland: Summer, 2001 International Observers Report, (Irish 
Parades Emergency Committee & Brehon Law Society). 
Bukantz, Dorothy & Sean Cahill (2003), Parading Paramilitarism - Conflict in 
Northern Ireland: Summer 2002 International Observers Report, (Irish Parades 
Emergency Committee & Brehon Law Society). 
Bukantz, Dorothy & Eileen Clancy (2004), Marching & Disorder: Summer 2003 
International Observers Report, (Irish Parades Emergency Committee & Brehon 
Law Society). 
Bukantz, Dorothy, Sean Cahill, James P. Cullen & Stephen M. McCabe (2005), 
Law and Lawlessness: Orange Parades in Northern Ireland, Summer 2004 
International Observers Report, (Irish Parades Emergency Committee & Brehon 
Law Society). 
Cahill, Sean, James P. Cullen, Marilyn Horan & Stephen M. McCabe (2006), 
Sectarianism on Parade: Orange Parades in Northern Ireland, Summer 2005 
International Observers Report, (Irish Parades Emergency Committee & Brehon 
Law Society). 
Davenport, Christian (2009), Media Bias, Perspective, and State Repression, 
(Cambridge University Press). 
Durkheim, Emile (1912), The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, translated by 
Karen E. Fields (1995), (The Free Press).   
Edwards, Bob & John D. McCarthy (2004), Resources and Social Movement 
Mobilisation, in David A. Snow, Sarah A. Soule & Hanspeter Kriesi eds. The 
Blackwell Companion to Social Movements, (Blackwell Publishing Ltd.). 
Fraser, T.G. (2000), The Apprentice Boys and the Relief of Derry Parades in T. 
G. Fraser ed., The Irish Parading Tradition: Following the Drum, (Basingstoke: 
Macmillan). 
Greenberg, Pierce (2020), Using Continual FOI Requests to Uncover the Live 
Archive: Tracking Protest Policing in the USA, in Kevin Walby & Alex Luscombe 
eds., Freedom of Information and Social Science Research Design, (Routledge). 
Halliday, Donna & Neil Ferguson (2015), When Peace is Not Enough: The Flag 
Protests, the Politics of Identity & Belonging in East Belfast, Irish Political 
Studies, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 525-540. 
Hearty, Kevin (2015), The Great Awakening? The Belfast Flag Protests and 
Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist Counter-memory in Northern Ireland, Irish Political 
Studies, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 157-177. 
Hearty, Kevin (2018), How the suspect community became critical 
engagers: the (re)framing of the Irish republican narrative on policing in 
Northern Ireland, Irish Political Studies, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 21-42. 
Hennessey, Thomas, Mire Braniff, James W. McAuley, Jonathan Tonge, and 
Sophie A. Whiting (2019), The Ulster Unionist Party: Country Before Party?, 
(Oxford University Press). 
Hoey, Paddy (2018), Shinners, Dissos and Dissenters: Irish republican media 
activism since the Good Friday Agreement, (Manchester University Press). 
Horowitz, Donald L. (2002), The Deadly Ethnic Riot, (Berkeley; London: 
University of California Press).  
Hutter, Swen (2014), Protest Event Analysis and Its Offspring, in Donatella 
della Porta ed., Methodological Practices in Social Movement Research, (Oxford 
University Press). 
Jarman, Neil (2000), For God and Ulster: Blood and Thunder Bands and Loyalist 
Political Culture, in T. G. Fraser ed., The Irish Parading Tradition: Following the 
Drum, (Basingstoke: Macmillan). 
Jarman, Neil, Mary-Kathryn Rallings & John Bell (2009), Local Accommodation: 
Effective Practice in Responding to Disputes over Parades, (Institute for Conflict 
Research). 
Jarman, Neil (2019), A Bitter Peace: Flag Protests, the Politics of No and Culture 
Wars, in Charles I. Armstrong, David Herbert & Jan Erik Mustad eds., The 
Legacy of the Good Friday Agreement: Northern Irish Politics, Culture and Art 
after 1998, (Palgrave Macmillan). 
Jarman, Neil & Dominic Bryan (1996), Parade and Protest: a Discussion of 
Parading Disputes in Northern Ireland, (University of Ulster). 
Jarman, Neil & Dominic Bryan (1998), From Riots to Rights: Nationalist Parades 
in the North of Ireland, (Centre for the Study of Conflict, University of Ulster at 
Coleraine). 
Jarman, Neil & Dominic Bryan (2000), Green Parades in an Orange State: 
Nationalist and Republican Commemorations and Demonstrations from Partition 
to the Troubles, 19201970 in T. G. Fraser ed., The Irish Parading Tradition: 
Following the Drum, (Basingstoke: Macmillan). 
Kalyvas, Stathis N. (2006), The Logic of Violence in Civil War, (Cambridge 
University Press). 
Kalyvas, Stathis N. (2008), Promises and pitfalls of an emerging research 
program: the microdynamics of civil war, in Stathis N. Kalyvas, Ian Shapiro, and 
Tarek Masoud eds., Order, Conflict and Violence, (Cambridge University Press). 
Kaufmann, Eric P. (2007), The Orange Order: A contemporary Northern Irish 
history, (Oxford University Press). 
King, Gary (1997), A Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem: 
Reconstructing Individual Behavior from Aggregate Data, (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press). 
Krause, Jana (2018), Resilient Communities: Non-Violence and Civilian Agency 
in Communal War, (Cambridge University Press). 
Mason, Lilliana (2018), Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became Our Identity, 
(University of Chicago Press). 
McAuley, James & Jonathan Tonge (2008), The Social and Political Bases of the 
Orange Order in Northern Ireland: Full Research Report, ESRC End of Award 
Report, RES-000-23-1614, (Swindon: ESRC). 
McCarthy, John D., Clark McPhail & Jackie Smith (1996), Images of Protest: 
Dimensions of Selection Bias in Media Coverage of Protest of Washington 
Demonstrations, 1982 and 1991, American Sociological Review, Vol. 61, No. 3, 
pp. 478-499. 
McFarlan Bruce, Katherine (2016), Pride Parades: How a Parade Changed the 
World, (New York University Press). 
McVeigh, Rory (2009), The Rise of the Ku Klux Klan: Right-Wing Movements and 
National Politics, (University of Minnesota Press). 
NISRA (2015), Review of the Statistical Classification and Delineation of 
Settlements, (Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency). 
NISRA (2016), Technical Guidance on production of official statistics for 
Settlements and Urban-Rural Classification, (Northern Ireland Statistics and 
Research Agency). 
Nolan, Paul, Dominic Bryan, Clare Dwyer, Katy Hayward, Katy Radford & Peter 
Shirlow (2014), The Flag Dispute: Anatomy of a Protest, (Queens University 
Belfast). 
Northern Ireland Policing Board (2006), Human Rights: Annual Report 2006, 
(Northern Ireland Policing Board). 
OLeary, Paul (2012), Claiming the Streets: Processions and Urban Culture in 
South Wales c. 1830-1880, (Cardiff, University of Wales Press). 
Owens, Peter B., Rory McVeigh & David Cunningham (2019), in David A. Snow, 
Sarah A. Soule, Hanspeter Kriesi & Holly J. McCammon eds., The Wiley Blackwell 
Companion to Social Movements, (Wiley Blackwell). 
Rollins, Jaime (2018), Lullabies and Battle Cries, (Bergahn Books). 
Peterson, Abby, Mattias Wahlstrm & Magnus Wennerhag, Pride Parades and 
LGBT Movements: Political Participation in an International Comparative 
Perspective, (London: Routledge).   
Staggenborg, Suzanne (2012), Social Movements, 2nd Ed., (Oxford University 
Press). 
Starmer, Keir & Jane Gordon (2004), Report on the Policing of the Ardoyne 
Parades, 12 July 2004, (Northern Ireland Policing Board). 
Starmer, Keir & Jane Gordon (2005), Report on the Policing of the Ardoyne and 
Whiterock Parades 2005, (Northern Ireland Policing Board). 
Tarrow, Sidney G. (2011), Power in movement: social movements and 
contentious politics: Revised & updated 3rd ed., (Cambridge University Press). 
Tilly, Charles (1978), From Mobilization to Revolution, (Random House; New 
York) 
Tonge, Jonathan, Mire Braniff, Thomas Hennessey, James W. McAuley, & 
Sophie A. Whiting, The Democratic Unionist Party: From Protest to Power, 
(Oxford University Press). 
Troy, Aidan (2005), Holy Cross: A Personal Experience, (Currach Press). 
Van Dyke, Nella (2013), Threat, in David A. Snow, Donatella della Porta, Bert 
Klandermans, & Doug McAdam eds., The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social 
and Political Movements, (Wiley Blackwell). 
Viggiani, Elisabetta (2014), Talking Stones: The Politics of Memorialization in 
Post-Conflict Northern Ireland, (Bergahn Books). 
Wahlstrm, Mattias (2016), Why Do People Demonstrate on May Day?, in Abby 
Peterson & Herbert Reiter eds., The Ritual of May Day in Western Europe: Past, 
Present and Future, (London: Routledge). 
Wilkinson, Steven I. (2004), Votes and Violence: Electoral Competition and 
Ethnic Riots in India, (Cambridge University Press). 
Witherow, Jacqueline (2018), Parading Protestantisms and the Flute Bands of 
Postconflict Northern Ireland, in Jonathan Dueck and Suzel Ana Reily eds., The 
Oxford Handbook of Music and World Christianities, (Oxford University Press).  
Articles 
Abdullah, Zain (2009), Sufis on Parade: The Performance of Black, African, and 
Muslim Identities, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Vol. 77, No. 2, 
pp. 199237. 
Albarracin, Julia, Nathan Munier, and Kristin Bail (2017), Do Independent 
Women Participate in Demonstrations More? Empowerment and Politics in 
Predicting Activism Among Mexican Women, Hispanic Journal of Behavioral 
Sciences, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 297315. 
Ariely, Gal (2017), Remembrance Day influence on national sentiments and 
hostility towards out-groups: evidence from a panel study in Israel, Ethnic and 
Racial Studies, Vol. 40, No. 14, pp. 2596-2614. 
Ariely, Gal (2019), National Days, National Identity, and Collective Memory: 
Exploring the Impact of Holocaust Day in Israel, Political Psychology, Vol. 40, 
No. 6, pp. 1391-1406. 
Azab, Marian and Wayne A. Santoro (2017), Rethinking Fear and Protest: 
Racialized Repression of Arab Americans and the Mobilization Benefits of Being 
Afraid, Mobilization: An International Journal, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 473-491. 
Balcells, Laia (2012), The Consequences of Victimization on Political Identities: 
Evidence from Spain, Politics & Society, Vol.40, No.3, pp.311-347. 
Balcells, Laia, Lesley-Ann Daniels & Abel Escriba-Folch (2016), The 
determinants of low-intensity intergroup violence: The case of Northern Ireland, 
Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 53, No. 1, pp. 3348. 
Beck, E. M. (2000), Guess Who's Coming to Town: White Supremacy, 
Ethnic Competition, and Social Change, Sociological Focus, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 
153-174. 
Bernstein, Mary (1997), Celebration and Suppression: The Strategic Uses of 
Identity by the Lesbian and Gay Movement, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 
103, No. 3, pp. 531-565. 
Beyerlein, Kraig, David Sikkink, and Edwin Hernandez (2016), Citizenship, 
Religion, and Protest: Explaining Latinos Differential Participation in the 2006 
Immigrant Rights Marches, Social Problems, Vol. 66, pp. 163193. 
Biggs, Michael (2006), Who Joined the Sit-Ins and Why: Southern Black 
Students in the Early 1960s, Mobilization: An International Journal, Vol. 11, No. 
3, pp. 321-336. 
Biggs, Michael & Steven Knauss (2012), Explaining Membership in the British 
National Party: A Multilevel Analysis of Contact and Threat, European 
Sociological Review, Vol. 28, No. 5, pp. 633-646. 
Blee, Kathleen M. (2017), How the Study of White Supremacism is Helped and 
Hindered by Social Movement Research, Mobilization: An International 
Quarterly, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 1-15. 
Boutcher, Steven A., J. Craig Jenkins & Nella Van Dyke (2017), Strain, ethnic 
competition, and power devaluation: white supremacist protest in the U.S., 
19481997, Social Movement Studies, Vol. 16, No. 6, pp. 686-703. 
Brown Kris & Adrian Grant (2016), A Lens Over Conflicted Memory: Surveying 
Troubles Commemoration in Northern Ireland, Irish Political Studies, Vol. 31, 
No. 1, pp. 139-162. 
Browne, Brendan Ciarn (2016), Choreographed Segregation: Irish Republican 
Commemoration of the 1916 Easter Rising in Post-Conflict Belfast, Irish 
Political Studies, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 101-121. 
Chermak, Steven, Joshua Freilich & Michael Suttmoeller (2013), The 
Organizational Dynamics of Far-Right Hate Groups in the United States: 
Comparing Violent to Nonviolent Organizations, Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 
Vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 193-218. 
Clubb, Gordon (2014), From Terrorists to Peacekeepers: The IRAs 
Disengagement and the Role of Community Networks, Studies in Conflict & 
Terrorism, Vol. 37, No. 10, pp. 842-861. 
Coddou, Marion (2016), An Institutional Approach to Collective Action: Evidence 
from Faith-Based Latino Mobilization in the 2006 Immigrant Rights Protests, 
Social Problems, Vol. 63, pp. 127150. 
Coenders, Marcel & Peer Scheepers (2003), The Effect of Education on 
Nationalism and Ethnic Exclusionism: An International Comparison, Political 
Psychology, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 313-343. 
Cook, Lisa D., Trevon D. Logan & John M. Parman (2018), Racial Segregation 
and Southern Lynching, Social Science History, Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 635-675. 
Corvalan, Alejandro & Miguel Vargas (2015), Segregation and conflict: An 
empirical analysis, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 116, pp. 212222. 
Costalli, Stefano & Andrea Ruggeri (2015), Forging political entrepreneurs: Civil 
war effects on post-conflict politics in Italy, Political Geography, Vol.44, pp.40-
Costalli, Stefano & Andrea Ruggeri (2018), The Long-Term Electoral Legacies of 
Civil War in Young Democracies: Italy, 1946-1968, Comparative Political 
Studies, Vol. 52, No. 6, pp. 927961. 
Craig, Maureen A. & Jennifer A. Richeson (2018), Hispanic Population Growth 
Engenders Conservative Shift Among Non-Hispanic Racial Minorities, Social 
Psychological and Personality Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 383-392. 
Craig, Maureen A., Julian M. Rucker & Jennifer A. Richeson (2018), Racial and 
Political Dynamics of an Approaching Majority-Minority United States, The 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 677, No. 1, 
pp. 204-214. 
Cress, Daniel M., and David A. Snow (1996), Mobilization at the Margins: 
Resources, Benefactors, and the Viability of Homeless Social Movement 
Organizations, American Sociological Review, Vol. 61, No. 6, pp. 1089-1109. 
Cui, James (2007), QIC program and model selection in GEE analyses, The 
Stata Journal, Vol. 7, Number 2, pp. 209-220. 
Cunningham, David & Benjamin T. Phillips (2007), Contexts for Mobilization: 
Spatial Settings and Klan Presence in North Carolina, 19641966, American 
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 113, No. 3, pp. 781814. 
Cunningham, Niall & Ian Gregory (2014), Hard to miss, easy to blame? 
Peacelines, interfaces and political deaths in Belfast during the Troubles, Political 
Geography, Vol. 40, pp. 64-78. 
Deglow, Annekatrin (2016), Localized legacies of civil war: Postwar violent crime 
in Northern Ireland, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 53, No. 6, pp. 786799. 
De Regt, Sabrina (2018), On the causal relationship between participation in 
national commemorations and feelings of national belonging, Ethnic and Racial 
Studies, Vol. 41, No. 9, pp. 1710-1727. 
De Regt, Sabrina & Tanja van der Lippe (2017), Does Participation in National 
Commemorations Increase National Attachment? A Study of Dutch Liberation 
Festivals, Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 281-299. 
Dhattiwala, Raheel (2016), The Ecology of Ethnic Violence: Attacks on Muslims 
of Ahmedabad in 2002, Qualitative Sociology, Vol. 39, pp. 7195. 
Dhattiwala, Raheel & Michael Biggs (2012), The Political Logic of Ethnic 
Violence: The Anti-Muslim Pogrom in Gujarat, 2002, Politics & Society, Vol.40:4, 
pp.483-516. 
Durso, Rachel M. & David Jacobs (2013), The Determinants of the Number of 
White Supremacist Groups: A Pooled Time-Series Analysis, Social Problems, Vol. 
60, No. 1, pp. 128-144. 
Enos, Ryan D. & Christopher Celaya (2018), The Effect of Segregation on 
Intergroup Relations, Journal of Experimental Political Science, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 
26-38. 
Ferman, Dave (2013), A Parade or a Riot: A Discourse Analysis of Two Ethnic 
Newspapers on the 2011 Marching Season in Northern Ireland, Journal of Media 
and Religion, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 55-70. 
Freitag, Markus, Sara Kijewski & Malvin Oppold (2017), War experiences, 
economic grievances, and political participation in postwar societies: An 
empirical analysis of Kosovo, Conflict Management and Peace Science, 2019, 
Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 405424. 
Incln, Mara & Paul D. Almeida (2017), Ritual Demonstrations versus Reactive 
Protests: Participation Across Mobilizing Contexts in Mexico City, Latin American 
Politics and Society, Vol. 59, No. 4, pp. 47-74. 
Iyer, Sriya & Anand Shrivastava (2018), Religious riots and electoral politics in 
India, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 131, pp. 104122. 
Hadzic, Dino, David Carlson & Margit Tavits (2017), How Exposure to Violence 
Affects Ethnic Voting, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123417000448. 
Hansard (Official Report) (2016), Northern Ireland Assembly, Monday 3 October 
2016, Hansard, Vol. 116, No. 1. 
Harris, Fredrick C. (2006), It Takes a Tragedy to Arouse Them: Collective 
Memory and Collective Action during the Civil Rights Movement, Social 
Movement Studies, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 19-43. 
Hepburn, A. C. (1990), The Belfast riots of 1935, Social History, Vol. 15, No. 1, 
pp. 75-96. 
Hjerm, Mikael (2001), Education, Xenophobia and Nationalism: A Comparative 
Analysis, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 37-60. 
Hjerm, Mikael & Annette Schnabel (2010), Mobilizing nationalist sentiments: 
Which factors affect nationalist sentiments in Europe?, Social Science Research, 
Vol. 39, pp. 527539. 
Horgan, John & John F. Morrison (2011), Here to Stay? The Rising Threat 
of Violent Dissident Republicanism in Northern Ireland, Terrorism and Political 
Violence, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 642-669. 
Jenkins, J. Craig, David Jacobs & Jon Agnone (2003), Political Opportunities and 
African-American Protest, 19481997, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 109, 
No. 2, pp. 277-303. 
Khamidov, Alisher, Nick Megoran & John Heathershaw (2017), Bottom-up 
peacekeeping in southern Kyrgyzstan: how local actors managed to prevent the 
spread of violence from Osh/Jalal-Abad to Aravan, June 2010, Nationalities 
Papers, Vol. 45, No.6, pp. 1118-1134. 
Klasnja, Marko & Natalija Novta (2016), Segregation, Polarization, and Ethnic 
Conflict, Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 60, No. 5, pp. 927-955. 
Kutmanaliev, Joldon (2015), Public and communal spaces and their relation to 
the spatial dynamics of ethnic riots: Violence and non-violence in the city of 
Osh, International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, Vol. 35, No. 7/8, pp. 
449-477. 
Laurence, James, Katharina Schmid, James R Rae & Miles Hewstone (2019), 
Prejudice, Contact, and Threat at the Diversity-Segregation Nexus: A Cross-
Sectional and Longitudinal Analysis of How Ethnic Out-Group Size and 
Segregation Interrelate for Inter-Group Relations, Social Forces, Vol. 97, No. 3, 
pp. 10291066. 
Leal, Joo (2014), Whats (not) in a parade? Nationhood, ethnicity and 
regionalism in a diasporic context, Nations and Nationalism, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 
200217. 
Legewie, Joscha & Merlin Schaeffer (2016), Contested Boundaries: Explaining 
Where Ethnoracial Diversity Provokes Neighborhood Conflict, American Journal 
of Sociology, Vol. 122, No. 1, pp. 12561. 
Lesschaeve, Christophe (2019), Voting After Violence: How Combat Experiences 
and Postwar Trauma Affect Veteran and Voter Party Choices in Croatias 2003 
Postwar Elections, https://doi.org/10.1177/0095327X18819244. 
Linke, Andrew M., Reconceptualizing, Measuring, and Evaluating Distance and 
Context in the Study of Conflicts: Using Survey Data from the North Caucasus of 
Russia, International Studies Review, Vol. 17, pp. 107125. 
Lloyd, C.D., G. Catney, P.Williamson & N. Bearman (2017), Exploring the utility 
of grids for analysing long term population change, Computers, Environment 
and Urban Systems, Vol. 66, pp. 112. 
Lupu, Noam & Leonid Peisakhin (2017), The Legacy of Political Violence across 
Generations, American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp. 836851. 
Madueke, Kingsley L., The Emergence and Development of Ethnic Strongholds 
and Frontiers of Collective Violence in Jos, Nigeria, African Studies Review, Vol. 
62, No. 4, pp. 6-30. 
Madueke, Kingsley L., Routing ethnic violence in a divided city: walking in the 
footsteps of armed mobs in Jos, Nigeria, The Journal of Modern African Studies, 
Vol. 56, No. 3, pp. 443-470. 
Maher, Thomas V., Andrew Martin, John D. McCarthy, & Lisa Moorhead (2019), 
Assessing the Explanatory Power of Social Movement Theories across the Life 
Course of the Civil Rights Movement, Vol. 6, No. 5, pp. 1-23. 
Malek, Amy (2011), Public Performances of Identity Negotiation in the Iranian 
Diaspora: The New York Persian Day Parade, Comparative Studies of South 
Asia, Africa and the Middle East, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 388-410. 
Martinez, Lisa M. (2008), The Individual and Contextual Determinants of Protest 
Among Latinos, Mobilization: The International Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 
189-204. 
McAuley, James W. & Jonathan Tonge, "For God and for the Crown": 
Contemporary Political and Social Attitudes among Orange Order Members in 
Northern Ireland, Political Psychology, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 33-52. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0095327X18819244
McAuley, James W., Jonathan Tonge & Peter Shirlow (2009), Conflict, 
Transformation, and Former Loyalist Paramilitary Prisoners in Northern Ireland, 
Terrorism and Political Violence, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 22-40. 
McCann, James A., Katsuo A. Nishikawa Chvez, Marisa Plasencia and Harper 
Otawka (2016), The Changing Contours of the Immigrant Rights Protest 
Movement in the United States: Who Demonstrates Now?, The Forum, Vol. 14, 
No. 2, pp. 169190. 
McCarthy, John D. & Mayer N. Zald (1977), Resource Mobilization and Social 
Movements: A Partial Theory, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 82:6, pp. 
1212-1241. 
McDowell, Sara (2007), Armalite, the ballot box and memorialization: Sinn 
Fin and the state in post-conflict Northern Ireland, The Round Table, Vol. 96, 
No. 393, pp. 725-738. 
Morrison, John F. & John Horgan (2016), Reloading the Armalite? Victims and 
Targets of Violent Dissident Irish Republicanism, 20072015, Terrorism and 
Political Violence, Vol. 28, No. 3, pp. 576-597. 
Moss, Kenneth, St. Patrick's Day Celebrations and the Formation of Irish-
American Identity, 1845-1875, Journal of Social History, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 
125-148. 
O'Donnell, Aisling T., Orla T. Muldoon, Danielle L. Blaylock, Clifford Stevenson, 
Dominic Bryan, Stephen D. Reicher & Samuel Pehrson (2016), Something That 
Unites Us All: Understandings of St. Patrick's Day Parades as Representing the 
Irish National Group, Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, Vol. 
26, No. 1, pp. 61-74. 
Oliver, Pamela & Daniel J. Myers (1999), How Events Enter the Public Sphere: 
Conflict, Location, and Sponsorship in Local Newspaper Coverage of Public 
Events, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 105, No. 1, pp. 3887. 
Ortiz, David G, Daniel J. Myers, N. Eugene Walls, & Maria-Elena D. Diaz (2005), 
Where do we stand with newspaper data?, Mobilisation, Vol.10, No.3, pp.397-
Outten, H. Robert, Michael T. Schmitt, Daniel A. Miller, & Amber L. Garcia 
(2012), Feeling Threatened About the Future: Whites Emotional Reactions to 
Anticipated Ethnic Demographic Changes, Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 1425. 
Reynolds-Stenson, Heidi & Jennifer Earl (2019), Clashes of Conscience: 
Explaining Counterdemonstration at Protests, Mobilization: An International 
Quarterly, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 263-284. 
Saint-Blancat, Chantal & Adriano Cancellieri (2014), From invisibility to 
visibility? The appropriation of public space through a religious ritual: the Filipino 
procession of Santacruzan in Padua, Italy, Social & Cultural Geography, Vol. 15, 
No. 6, pp. 645-663. 
Salvatore, Jessica Di (2016), Inherently vulnerable? Ethnic geography and the 
intensity of violence in the Bosnian civil war, Political Geography, Vol. 51, pp. 1
Sigelman, Lee & Susan Welch (1993), The Contact Hypothesis Revisited: Black-
White Interaction and Positive Racial Attitudes, Social Forces, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp. 
781-795. 
Snow, David A., Sarah A. Soule & Daniel M. Cress (2005), Identifying the 
Precipitants of Homeless Protest Across 17 U.S. Cities, 1980 to 1990, Social 
Forces, Vol. 83, No. 3, pp. 1183-1210. 
Tolnay, Stewart E., Glenn Deane & E. M. Beck (1996), Vicarious Violence: 
Spatial Effects on Southern Lynchings, 1890-1919, American Journal of 
Sociology, Vol. 102, No. 3, pp. 788-815. 
Tope, Daniel, Justin T. Pickett & Ted Chiricos (2015), Anti-minority attitudes and 
Tea Party Movement membership, Social Science Research, Vol. 51, pp. 322
Van Dyke, Nella & Sarah A. Soule (2002), Structural Social Change and the 
Mobilizing Effect of Threat: Explaining Levels of Patriotand Militia Organizing in 
the United States, Social Problems, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 497-520. 
Walton, Matthew J, Matt Schissler & Phyu Phyu Thi, Failed riots: Successful 
conflict prevention in four Myanmar cities, M.MAS Working Paper, Vol. 1, No. 2, 
pp. 1-24. 
Ward, Matthew (2017), Opportunity, Resources, and Threat: Explaining Local 
Nativist Organizing in the United States, Sociological Perspectives, Vol. 60, No. 
3, pp. 459478. 
Weidmann, Nils (2009), Geography as Motivation and Opportunity: Group 
Concentration and Ethnic Conflict, Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 53, No. 4, 
pp. 526-543. 
Weidmann, Nils B. & Idean Salehyan (2013), Violence and Ethnic Segregation: 
A Computational Model Applied to Baghdad, International Studies Quarterly, 
Vol. 57, No. 1, pp. 52-64. 
Williams, Philippa (2007), HinduMuslim Brotherhood: Exploring the Dynamics 
of Communal Relations in Varanasi, North India, Journal of South Asian 
Development, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 153176. 
Williamson, Vanessa, Kris-Stella Trump, and Katherine Levine Einstein (2018), 
Black Lives Matter: Evidence that Police-Caused Deaths Predict Protest Activity, 
Perspectives on Politics, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 400-415. 
Wouters, Ruud (2013), From the Street to the Screen: Characteristics of Protest 
Events as Determinants of Television News Coverage, Mobilization: An 
International Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 83-105. 
Zepeda-Milln, Chris & Sophia J. Wallace (2013), Racialization in times of 
contention: how social movements influence Latino racial identity, Politics, 
Groups, and Identities, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 510-527. 
Unpublished Theses 
Barron, Patrick (2014), Barriers to the Consolidation of Peace: The Political 
Economy of Post-Conflict Violence in Indonesia, PhD Diss., University of Oxford. 
Caldwell, Agnes Irene (2001), Rising From Our Knees: Nationalist Response to 
Loyal Order Parades in Portadown, 1945-1993, PhD Diss., Wayne State 
University. 
DeYoung, Elizabeth Helen (2018), Girdwood Barracks: power, politics and 
planning in the post-ceasefire city, PhD Diss., University of Liverpool. 
Garrett, Amanda Lynne (2013), When Cities Fight Back: Minorities, Local Politics 
and Conflict in Europe, PhD Diss., Harvard University. 
Smithey, Lee Allen (2002), Strategic Collective Action and Collective Identity 
Reconstruction: Parading Disputes and Two Northern Ireland Towns, PhD Diss., 
University of Texas. 
