Characterising Impacts and Responses to Single and 
Combined Abiotic Stress Exposure in the Legume 
Species Lotus japonicus and Vigna unguiculata 
Christopher Byrne 
A thesis submitted in Full Candidature for the Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, 
Aberystwyth University 
October 2019 
THESIS DECLARATION  
This work has not previously been accepted in substance for any degree and is 
not being concurrently submitted in candidature for any degree. 
Candidate name: Chris Byrne 
Signature: 
Date: 23/10/2019 
This thesis is the result of my own investigations, except where otherwise stated.  
Where correction services have been used, the extent and nature of the 
correction is clearly marked in a footnote(s). 
Other sources are acknowledged by footnotes giving explicit references.  A 
bibliography is appended. 
Signature: 
Date: 23/10/2019 
I hereby give consent for my thesis, if accepted, to be available for photocopying 
and for inter-library loan, and for the title and summary to be made available to 
outside organisations. 
Signature: 
Date: 23/10/2019 
Word count: 34,717 
ABSTRACT 
Abiotic stress poses a threat to food security through adverse effects on crop 
health and function, resulting in reduced yield or crop failure.  Plants possess a 
myriad of physiological and biochemical properties by which abiotic stress 
protection can be conferred, varying between species and to genotype level. 
Better characterising these responses for individual species will aid in the 
development of more abiotic stress tolerant crops. Identification of geographic 
regions of interest for tolerance traits could allow for targeted sampling in breeding 
and development programmes.  
Landrace accessions of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) and the model legume Lotus 
japonicus var. gifu were assessed at seedling stage for their response to drought, 
heat, and waterlogging stress, plus combinations of these. In L.japonicus the 
interaction between root nodulation with rhizobia was also investigated. 
Physiological assessment examining photosynthetic performance, gas exchange, 
and water loss were used alongside metabolomic profiling to provide a holistic 
overview of plant response to stress.    
Variation in biological function in cowpea appeared to be driven to greater extent 
by water deficit, whereas high temperature caused greatest significant variation in 
L. japonicus.  In both species, metabolites associated with amino acid and carbon
metabolism were significantly enriched indicative of impacts on plant primary 
metabolism.  The combination of heat and drought demonstrated exacerbated 
effects in comparison to single stress.   Nodulated L.japonicus plants showed 
limited nitrogen assimilation compared to ammonium nitrate supplied plants, 
however they also demonstrated less metabolite fluctuation under abiotic stress 
indicting potential biotic influence.  Ecological niche modelling indicated potential 
association between environmental background and metabolic behaviour.   
It was concluded that further work characterising metabolic pathways associated 
with tolerance traits be undertaken at multiple growth stages to demonstrate 
impacts on end yield.  Combining this data with ecological niche modelling 
processes has the potential to further illustrate the relationship between 
environmental background and tolerance.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my two supervisors Luis Mur and Hefin Williams.  They have 
always been there to offer advice and support and remained patient with me 
throughout this process.  Im not sure I would have completed this without that 
support.  
I would also like to thank a few people who have helped me along the way.  Notably 
Tom Thomas, the moustached menace of the botany gardens, who helped me sow 
and care for hundreds of seedlings.  Thanks also to Manfred Beckmann and Helen 
Phillips for their assistance in metabolomic analysis. Rob Darby, the laboratory 
manager.  Ayonposi Olaoye for explaining PCR and gel electrophoresis to me.   
Divya Kattupalli for assisting me in the arduous process of collecting 700+ 
metabolite samples in 40oC heat. Thanks also to Michael Abberton and Emily Iwu 
from the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, for access to 
germplasm, and to Manuel Becana for supply of rhizobia.   
Thanks to a cracking bunch of mates who have always been there to chat and help 
me relax when its been stressful, and to great parents who have never offered 
anything but support in anything Ive done. 
Last, but not least, to the girl whos been by my side throughout this whole process, 
dragging me out for walks and keeping me generally sane, my old beagle, Cookie.  
CONTENTS 
Thesis Declaration i 
Abstract ii 
Acknowledgements iii 
Contents iv 
List of Figures viii 
List of Tables xiii 
Abbreviations xiv 
Chapter One: Introduction and Literature Review 1 
1.1. Overview of the thesis structure                                                                          
1.2. General Introduction 
1.2. Abiotic Stress Effects on Plants 4 
1.2.1 Heat Stress: Impacts and Responses  6 
1.2.2. Drought Stress: Impacts and Responses 8 
1.2.3. Waterlogging Stress: Impacts and Responses 10 
1.3 Combinational Stress 12 
1.4.1. Lotus japonicus 15 
1.4.2 Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) 18 
1.5. Biological Nitrogen Fixation Under Stress Conditions 23 
1.6. Conclusion, Knowledge Gaps, and Aims and Objectives 27 
Chapter Two: Abiotic Stress Response in Lotus japonicus Under Nodulated 
and Non-nodulated Conditions 
2.1. Introduction 
2.2. Lotus Japonicus methodology 
2.2.1. Preparation of bacterial solution for inoculation 
2.2.2. Plant material and germination conditions 
2.2.3. Measurement techniques 
2.2.3.1. Morphological assessment 
2.2.3.2. Stomatal Conductance 
2.2.3.3. Chlorophyll Fluorescence 
2.2.3.4. Leaf Relative Water Content 
2.2.3.5. Metabolite Analysis 
2.2.4. Statistical Analysis 
2.3. Results 38 
2.3.1. Morphological assessment 38 
2.3.2. Physiological Parameters 40 
2.3.2.1. Relative Water Content 40 
2.3.2.2. Chlorophyll Fluorescence (Fv/Fm) 40 
2.3.2.3. Stomatal Conductance 41 
2.4. Metabolomic Analysis 46 
2.4.1. Metabolomic overview 46 
2.4.1.  Metabolomic Pathway analyses 64 
2.4.1.1. Leaf metabolomes 67 
2.4.1.1.1. Amino acid metabolism 67 
2.4.1.1.2. Carbon and energy metabolism 76 
2.4.1.2.  Root metabolomes  81 
2.4.1.2.1. Amino acid metabolism   83 
2.4.1.2.2. Carbon and energy metabolism 92 
3.3 Discussion and Conclusion 99 
3.3.1 Plant morphology appears to be affected by both stress and nitrogen 
source  
3.3.2 Physiology is impacted to a greater extent by abiotic stress than by 
nitrogen source 
3.3.3 Metabolism 102 
3.3.3.1 Amino acids 102 
3.3.3.2 Carbon metabolism 106 
3.3.3.3 Secondary metabolism 107 
3.3.4. Conclusion 109 
Chapter Three: Screening Vigna Unguiculata (Cowpea) Genotypes from 
South-West Nigeria For Assessment Of Response To Multiple Abiotic Stress 
Factors  
3.1 Introduction  
3.2. Vigna unguiculata methodology 
3.2.1. Plant germination and growth conditions 
3.2.2. Stress Screening 
3.2.3. Morphological Assessment 
3.2.4. Stomatal Conductance 
3.2.5. Chlorophyll Fluorescence (Fv/Fm) 
3.2.6. Leaf Relative Water Content 
3.2.7. Metabolite analysis 
3.2.8. Statistical Analysis 
3.3. Results 119 
3.3.1. Morphological assessments 119 
4.2.2. Physiological Parameters 126 
4.2.2.1. Chlorophyll Fluorescence (Fv/Fm) 126 
4.2.2.2. Relative Water Content 127 
4.2.2.3. Stomatal Conductance 128 
4.2.2.4 Correlation of physiological parameters 129 
4.2.3 Metabolomic Analysis 135 
4.2.3.1. Metabolomic overview 135 
4.2.3.2. Metabolomic Pathway Analyses 142 
4.2.3.3. Amino acid metabolism 144 
4.2.3.4. Carbon and energy metabolism 155 
4.2.3.5 Cofactor and vitamin metabolism 162 
4.2.3.6 Within Stress Metabolomic Analysis 163 
4.3. Discussion 171 
4.3.1. Drought impact on morpho-physiological parameters 171 
4.3.2. Drought related impacts on metabolism 173 
4.3.3. Tolerance to heat  175 
4.3.4 Waterlogging appeared to have little effect 178 
4.3.6. Metabolic variation observed between accessions  179 
4.4. Conclusion 181 
Chapter Four: Genetic and Environmental Background Contribution To 
Metabolite Variation In Studied Accessions Of Vigna Unguiculata (Cowpea) 
4.1 Introduction 182 
4.2. Methods 
4.2.1. Genetic Variation 
4.2.2. Ecological Niche Modelling 
4.3. Results 189 
4.3.1 Genetic variation 189 
4.3.2. Geographic distribution 194 
5.3.3 Ecological Niche Modelling 195 
5.4. Discussion and conclusion 199 
Chapter Five: General Discussion and Further Work 203 
5.1. The prior state of knowledge and major research gaps identified 
5.2. Study findings and discussion 
5.3. Issues and methodological limitations of the study 
5.4. Recommendations for stakeholders and practitioners, and further 
research 
Reference List 215 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1.1. Diagram showing the transfer of compounds between the plant 
cytosol and bacteroid in symbiotic nitrogen fixation.   24 
Figure 2.1. Photographs of Lotus japonicus var. gifu under varying abiotic stress 
and nodulation conditions.   39 
Figure 2.2.  Relative water content of Lotus japonicus leaves under varying 
abiotic stress conditions and nitrogen sources.   43 
Figure 2.3.  Fv/Fm in Lotus japonicus leaves under varying abiotic stress 
conditions and nitrogen sources.   44 
Figure 2.4.  Stomatal conductance in Lotus japonicus leaves under varying 
abiotic stress conditions and nitrogen sources.   45 
Figure 2.5. Principal component analysis and partial least squares discriminant 
analysis based on identified metabolites in Lotus japonicus leaves.   52 
Figure 2.6. Principal component analysis and partial least squares discriminant 
analysis based on identified metabolites in Lotus japonicus roots.   53 
Figure 2.7. Heatmap analysis demonstrating variation between treatment 
groups and nitrogen source in Lotus japonicus using all identified compounds 54 
Figure 2.8. PCA loading vectors biplots demonstrating variation in ammonium 
nitrate supplied Lotus japonicus under abiotic stress 60 
Figure 2.9. PCA loading vector biplots demonstrating variation in nodulated 
Lotus japonicus under abiotic stress 61 
Figure 2.10.  Heatmap analysis showing metabolic variation under abiotic stress 
conditions in ammonium nitrate supplied Lotus japonicus 62 
Figure 2.11.  Heatmap analysis showing metabolic variation under abiotic stress 
conditions in nodulated Lotus japonicus supplied plants 63 
Figure 2.12. Chart denoting the output of pathway analysis for leaf metabolites 
in Lotus japonicus.  65 
Figure 2.13. Chart denoting the output of pathway analysis for root metabolites 
in Lotus japonicus.  66 
Figure 2.14. Significantly altered metabolites in the glycine, serine and 
threonine pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves  72 
Figure 2.15. Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves  73 
Figure 3.16. Significantly altered metabolites in the phenylalanine metabolism 
pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves  74 
Figure 3.17. Significantly altered metabolites in the arginine and proline 
pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves   75 
Figure 3.18. Significantly altered metabolites in the carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic organisms pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves  78 
Figure 2.19. Significantly altered metabolites in the glyoxylic acid and 
dicarboxylic acid pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves  79 
Figure 2.20. Significantly altered metabolites in the TCA cycle in Lotus japonicus 
leaves 80 
Figure 2.21. Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate pathway in Lotus japonicus roots 87 
Figure 2.22. Significantly altered metabolites in the cysteine and methionine 
pathway in Lotus japonicus roots 88 
Figure 2.23. Significantly altered metabolites in the glycine, serine and 
threonine pathway in Lotus japonicus roots 89 
Figure 2.24. Significantly altered metabolites in the arginine and proline 
pathway in Lotus japonicus roots 90 
Figure 2.25. Significantly altered metabolites in the glutathione pathway in 
Lotus japonicus roots 91 
Figure 2.26. Significantly altered metabolites in the TCA cycle in Lotus japonicus 
roots 95 
Figure 2.27. Significantly altered metabolites in the carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic organisms pathway in Lotus japonicus roots  96 
Figure 2.28. Significantly altered metabolites in the glyoxylic acid and 
dicarboxylic acid pathway in Lotus japonicus roots  97 
Figure 2.29. Significantly altered metabolites in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis 
pathway in Lotus japonicus roots  98 
Figure 3.1.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under control 
conditions  120 
Figure 3.2.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under drought 
conditions  121 
Figure 3.3.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat stress 
conditions  122 
Figure 3.4.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat x drought 
stress conditions  123 
Figure 3.5.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat x 
waterlogging stress conditions  124 
Figure 3.6.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under waterlogging 
stress conditions  125 
Figure 3.7.  Mean RWC, chlorophyll fluorescence, and stomatal conductance in 
Vigna unguiculata under varied environmental conditions.   130 
Figure 3.8. Correlation analyses of RWC, chlorophyll fluorescence, and stomatal 
conductance measurements taken six days after imposition of stress.   131 
Figure 3.9. Principal component analysis based on identified metabolites in 
studied accessions of Vigna unguiculata under control (C), drought (D), heat (H), 
heat x drought (HD), heat x waterlogging (HWL), and waterlogging (WL) 
conditions.   137 
Figure 3.10.  Heatmap analysis demonstrating metabolite variation in studied 
Vigna unguiculata accessions under control (C), drought (D), heat (H), heat x 
drought (HD), heat x waterlogging (HWL), and waterlogging  141 
Figure 3.11.  Pathway analysis output of metabolite data for studied accessions 
of Vigna unguiculata under varied environmental conditions.   142 
Figure 3.12. Significantly altered metabolites in the cysteine and methionine 
pathway in cowpea. 150 
Figure 3.13. Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate pathway in cowpea. 151 
Figure 3.14. Significantly altered metabolites in the glycine, serine, and 
threonine pathway in cowpea. 152 
Figure 3.15. Significantly altered metabolites in the arginine and proline 
pathway in cowpea. 153 
Figure 3.16. Significantly altered metabolites in the phenylalanine/ 
phenylalanine, tryptophan, and tyrosine pathway in cowpea. 154 
Figure 3.17. Significantly altered metabolites in the glyoxylate and dicarboxylate 
pathway in cowpea. 158 
Figure 3.18. Significantly altered metabolites in the TCA cycle in cowpea. 159 
Figure 3.19. Significantly altered metabolites associated with carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic organisms in cowpea 160 
Figure 3.20. Significantly altered metabolites associated with the pyruvate 
metabolism pathway in cowpea. 161 
Figure 3.21. Significantly altered metabolites in the one carbon pool by folate 
pathway in cowpea. 162 
Figure 3.22.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea 
under drought conditions. 166 
Figure 3.23.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea 
under heat stress conditions. 167 
Figure 3.24.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea 
under heat x drought conditions. 168 
Figure 3.25.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea 
under heat x waterlogging conditions. 169 
Figure 3.26.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea 
under waterlogging conditions. 170 
Figure 4.1. Results of agarose gel electrophoresis  192 
Figure 4.2. Molecular dendrogram showing the genetic diversity among 21 
studied accessions of cowpea from Southwest Nigeria. 193 
Figure 4.3. Map showing the geographic distribution of collection locations for 
selected cowpea accessions from Southwest Nigeria.    194 
Figure 4.4. Results of ENMtools identity and niche overlap tests for two 
populations derived from drought metabolite analysis.   197 
Figure 4.5. Results of ENMtools identity and niche overlap tests for two 
populations derived from heat x drought metabolite analysis.   198 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 2.1.   Data table relating to output from pathway analysis of Lotus 
japonicus leaf data 
Table 2.2.  Data table relating to output from pathway analysis of Lotus 
japonicus root data 
Table 3.1. Selection criteria for accessions from the cowpea genebank at the 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Nigeria.    
Table 3.2. Chlorophyll fluorescence values in studied Vigna unguiculata 
accessions under varying environmental conditions.     
Table 3.3. RWC values in studied Vigna unguiculata accessions under varying 
environmental conditions.     
Table 3.4. Stomatal conductance values in studied Vigna unguiculata 
accessions under varying environmental conditions.     
Table 3.5.  Top five positive and negative compounds, derived from the PCA 
loading vectors, for PC1 and PC2.   
Table 3.6.  Data table relating to pathway analysis output of metabolite data 
for studied accessions of Vigna unguiculata under varied environmental 
conditions 
Table. 4.1. Selected Bioclim variables for use in environmental niche 
modelling (numbers in brackets denote Bioclim codes) and relevant stress 
factors tested against variables 
Table 4.2.  Cowpea simple sequence repeat primers used in genetic variation 
analysis of studied accessions and their corresponding forward and reverse 
sequences 
Table 4.3.  Accession groups defined by output of nearest neighbour method 
cluster analysis, based on the point of greatest divergence.    
Table 4.4. Output from ENMtools niche overlap tool.   195 
Abbreviations 
AdoMet: s-adenosylmethionine 
Asn: Asparagine 
ATP: Adenosine triphosphate 
BNF: Biological Nitrogen Fixation 
CAT: Catalase 
CO2: Carbon dioxide 
decarboxy-AdoMet: s-adenosylmethioninamine 
dH2O: deionised water 
ENM: Environmental Niche Model/Modelling 
Fv/Fm: maximum efficiency of PSII in the dark  
GABA: -aminobutyric acid 
Gln: Glutamine 
Hsp: Heat shock protein 
HxD: Heat stress in combination with drought stress 
HxWL: Heat stress in combination with waterlogging stress 
K: Potassium 
N: Nitrogen 
N2: Molecular Nitrogen 
NH3: Ammonia 
NH4NO3: Ammonium nitrate 
Nod: Nodulated with rhizobium 
O2: Oxygen 
PCR: Polymerase chain reaction 
ROS: Reactive Oxygen Species 
RuBisCo: Ribulose-1,5-bisphoshate carboxylase/oxygenase 
RWC: Relative Water Content 
SOD: Superoxide dismutase 
TCA: Tricarboxylic acid 
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW 
1.1 Overview of the thesis structure 
Chapter One serves as both an introduction to the thesis and a review of the existing 
literature.  This chapter aims to provide a broad overview of plant abiotic stress 
research, before moving to a more detailed overview of the species within this study 
(l.japonicus and v.unguiculata) and the existing knowledge on biological nitrogen 
fixation under conditions of stress.  Main knowledge gaps and the aims and objectives 
of this study are also addressed in this chapter.  
Chapter Two focuses on the output from controlled environment experiments to deliver 
physiological and metabolomic analyses of Lotus japonicus under conditions of abiotic 
stress and nodulation with rhizobia.  In this study, Lotus japonicus was exposed to major 
stress factors identified in Southwest Nigeria, at adapted levels appropriate to the 
species, to allow for potential comparison between the model species and cowpea.  
Relevant methodologies for the experimental work are included within the chapter.   
Chapter three aligns closely with chapter two, detailing the outcome of controlled 
environment experiments to analyse the response of selected landrace and developed 
accessions of cowpea from Southwest Nigeria to abiotic stress factors.  Relevant 
methodologies, including the selection criteria for landrace accessions, are included 
within the chapter.  
Chapter Four serves two roles, both associated with potential factors contributing to 
plant behaviour under stress conditions.  It aims to explore the genetic variation 
between the selected cowpea accessions and examine the use of ecological niche 
modelling to investigate potential environmental background association with 
biological response to stress.  An introduction and short review of literature is included 
within this chapter in addition to the relevant methodologies.  
Chapter five presents the overall conclusions from the work and a general discussion, 
reflecting on the research gaps prior to the study and positioning the findings within the 
wider research and acknowledging potential areas for further research.  
1.2. General Introduction  
Across the globe, plants must contend with a myriad of conditions that have the 
potential for adverse effects on their health, and therefore their success in terms of both 
production and reproduction.   A great many of these conditions are abiotic factors, 
largely attributable to climate e.g. temperature and precipitation, but some also 
attributable to human activity e.g. heavy metal toxicity and nutrient depletion.   Whilst 
plants possess a variety of methods for coping with and mitigating the effects of these 
factors, ultimately these can come with an energetic cost such as a reduction in size or 
seed output, or the effects can be too extreme and be fatal to the plant.  In crop plants, 
these losses limit agricultural production, reducing yields, and pose a direct threat to 
food security at regional and global levels.   Whilst impossible to quantify with complete 
accuracy, abiotic stress factors are thought to be responsible for average yield 
reductions of more than 50% across worldwide crop production (Atkinson and Urwin, 
2012), and it is suggested that, in terms of land area, only 3.5% of the globe is not 
affected by some form of environmental constraint (Cramer et al., 2011).  Whilst current 
conditions already pose a clear impediment to production, scientific consensus suggests 
global temperatures are increasing at a faster rate than previously seen, projected 
increase ranges between 0.3  4oC dependent on scenario.  Concomitant with this 
temperature increase is a projected change in weather patterns which contribute to 
abiotic stress; rainfall patterns for instance are predicted to become more erratic and 
expose plants to greater chance of drought and waterlogging incidents.  Though a global 
phenomenon, this change in world climate poses its greatest agricultural impact in 
tropical and subtropical regions, where loss of crop yield contributes to food insecurity 
and undernourishment (Gornall et al. 2010; Lloyd et al. 2011).   Enhancing the 
understanding of plant responses to these stress factors could help to mitigate these 
issues. 
1.3. Abiotic Stress Effects on Plants 
Abiotic stress is imposed on plants in a variety of ways and the likelihood of 
encountering any given stress, and to what extent, can be determined by the 
environment at regional and local level.   Abiotic stress poses a serious limiting factor 
on the production of food crops worldwide, particularly in the global south where more 
adverse climatic conditions are observed.  The major abiotic stress factors are 
commonly cited as drought, extreme temperature, and salinity (Kosov et al. 2018; 
Lamaoui et al. 2018).  Despite the extent to which these three factors limit crop 
production, other factors cannot be ignored. Increased precipitation in the form of both 
extreme short-term events and prolonged wet seasons is a major contributor to 
waterlogging.   Heavy metal toxicity through contamination of soils, primarily due to 
human activity such as mining, coal burning, and agricultural practices (Atkinson and 
Urwin 2012) and increasing CO2 levels are emerging as current and future issues which 
can impede crop production.   Together these factors threaten global food security and 
mitigating against them is a key task for agricultural development.  Ultimately, exposure 
to some form of abiotic stress is unavoidable, and as sessile organisms that cannot 
simply move away from the source of stress, must develop other methods to minimise 
their impacts.  Climate projections vary in the patterns of change predicted, depending 
on several factors relating to anthropological activity and limiting the drivers of climate 
change (Krinner et al. 2013).  One trend observed in many projections however is an 
increased likelihood of experiencing conditions that impose abiotic stress, be that in the 
form of prolonged periods of drought, increasing temperatures, and erratic rainfall that 
could lead to flooding situations (Huang et al. 2013).   Minimising yield loss due to these 
factors will be an important part of ensuring access to food for all.   
It has been suggested that regions where these threats are less severe will need to meet 
the demand for food and supply those areas where climate is having a more pronounced 
effect (Mahmuti et al. 2009).  A key criticism of this is that it strips away food sovereignty 
and reinforces the notion that production of a few staple crops such a wheat, rice, and 
maize is the key to solving food insecurity.  In recent years more effort has been exerted 
in the research of native crop species that have been traditionally cultivated in regions 
where climate impact is greatest and that demonstrate enhanced tolerance to stress 
situations (Mayes et al. 2012; Chivenge et al. 2015), examples include the grains 
sorghum and teff, root crops such as cassava, and legumes including pigeon pea and 
cowpea.   Given these crops are under-researched in comparison to major crop species, 
effort is focusing on characterising the sources of tolerance and identifying breeding 
material.   
Abiotic stress factors, and their respective responses to these stresses have impacts that 
range from the morphological level, to the physiological and biochemical level (Mittler 
2006; Hasanuzzaman et al. 2013; Kokubun 2013).   Multiple plant responses have been 
identified that seek to mitigate the impact of abiotic stress and can be broadly 
categorised into escape, avoidance and tolerance.  Escape is the ability of a plant to 
complete  its life cycle prior to the onset of a particular stress; in this scenario the plant 
simply does not encounter the stress and therefore does not have to form a response 
to it, the mechanisms by which this is achieved generally relate to plasticity in the plants 
production and reproduction, so growth, flowering, or seed production only occur when 
conditions are favourable (Lamaoui et al. 2018).  Avoidance has been described as the 
ability of the plant to encounter a stress factor, but to maintain relatively normal 
internal conditions despite the change in its environment, for instance taking 
physiological action to reduce the amount of water lost under drought conditions 
(Mickelbart et al. 2015).  Tolerance can be classified as the ability of the plant to 
encounter the stress, and for its internal conditions to diverge from their normal state, 
yet through adaptive strategies the plant can endure the stress; modulation of 
antioxidant production and activity under heat stress is an example of a tolerance 
mechanism (Lamaoui et al. 2018).    
1.3.1 Heat Stress: Impacts and Responses  
Heat stress refers to the elevation in temperature of the surrounding environment 
above the thermal optimum for a species.  The severity of heat stress can be defined by 
both the increase in temperature and the duration of exposure.  Temperature increases 
of only a few degrees Celsius can contribute significantly to yield loss (Paupire et al. 
2014).  Heat stress has been demonstrated to have an impact on a range of plant 
physiological processes and biochemical functions.  
A major impact of heat stress is on plant ability to conduct photosynthesis.  Two key 
aspects of this inhibition are through damage to, or decreased activity of, photosystem 
II as well as through reduced activity of the enzyme RuBisCo (Song et al. 2014).  
Photosystem II (PSII) damage/deactivation has long been associated with heat stress, 
and the causes of these changes have been the focus of much research.  Two major 
factors implicated in the damage or deactivation of PSII are a disfunction or 
disorganisation of the thylakoid membrane, and the overaccumulation of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) around the sites of PSII (Zhang et al. 2011; Pospil 2012).  The 
change to thylakoid membranes under conditions of heat stress has been widely 
observed, this can occur through lipid peroxidation and increased membrane fluidity.  
This has been seen to result in disorganisation of thylakoid structure and a scattering of 
membranes as opposed to granal stacking (Verlag et al. 2001; Allakhverdiev et al. 2008).  
Due to positioning on thylakoid membranes, PSII is disrupted and damaged by these 
changes.  
The decreased activity of RuBisCo under heat stress contributes to disruption of the 
Calvin cycle, and therefore an inhibition of carbon assimilation. RuBisCo however, is a 
relatively heat tolerant enzyme and it is the decrease in activity of the associated 
enzyme RuBisCo activase, which is heat sensitive, that limits RuBisco action 
(Allakhverdiev et al. 2008).   A further complication that can arise under high 
temperature exposure is modification to the activity of RuBisCo.  Under optimal 
conditions RuBisCo has a greater affinity for CO2 than O2, however as temperature 
increases this affinity reduces resulting  in oxygenation reactions (Salvucci 2008; 
Dusenge et al. 2019).   
Reproductive faculties of plants have also been identified as a heat stress sensitive.  
Under conditions of high temperature stress a reduction in the period of flowering and 
podding has been observed, concomitant with sharp decreases in pollen viability  
(Bhandari et al. 2016), pod abortion, and a decrease in stigma receptivity (Kaur et al. 
2015). 
Responses of plants to mitigate the impact of heat stress have been well characterised 
occur across a range of physiological and biochemical processes.  Stomata, and their 
role in transpiration has been a predominant focus in the area of plant physiology in 
response to abiotic stress.  In well-watered conditions, during heat stress it has been 
widely demonstrated that plants can manipulate stomatal aperture to increase rate of 
transpiration, thus delivering an evaporative cooling effect (Urban et al. 2017).  Recent 
research has demonstrated this as an effective contributor to tolerance and 
maintenance of other physiological parameters in wheat (Sharma et al. 2015) and olive 
(Haworth et al. 2018).  
Within the plant cell, heat shock proteins (HSPs) contribute to homeostasis by stabilising 
other proteins and assisting in protein refolding (Park and Seo 2015) preventing 
irreversible protein aggregation (Haslbeck and Vierling 2015).  Ubiquitous in nature, 
HSPs are a major contributor to heat stress tolerance.  Potential additional functions 
have been considered for HSPs including a role in mitigating oxidative stress (Scarpeci 
et al. 2008).  
The accumulation of ROS, inducing oxidative stress, has been identified as a major 
source of damage under heat stress.  Accumulation of antioxidant molecules is a well-
studied response in the mitigation of oxidative stress.  Antioxidants exist in enzymatic 
form such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase, and non-enzymatic form such 
as vitamins and glutathione (GSH) (Birben et al. 2012) and they function primarily to 
scavenge and reduce ROS to harmless compounds such as H2O and O2.   
1.3.2. Drought Stress: Impacts and Responses 
Drought poses a particular threat to plant water status, due to a decrease in root uptake, 
leading to tissue and cellular dehydration and an imbalance in solute: water ratio, 
resulting in osmotic stress (Aroca et al. 2012).  The reduction in water availability leads 
to loss of turgor pressure within plant cells and ultimately impacts cell growth and 
function (Anjum et al. 2011) 
An imbalance in the source/sink relationship in plants is associated with drought stress.  
A contributing factor to this is the reduction in carbon assimilation and photosynthesis.  
This factor can be linked somewhat to the plant response to water loss, which is to 
decrease stomatal aperture;  as stomata close they not only limit the amount of water 
leaving, but also the amount of CO2 entering the leaf, thus making less available for 
photosynthetic processes (Basu et al. 2016).  Photosynthesis has also been observed to 
be downregulated due to impact on chlorophyll a and b and carotenoids.  Anjum et al. 
(2011) identify reduction in chlorophyll content to be the main source of inactivation of 
photosynthesis and can be attributed to factors such as the loss of chloroplast 
membranes.  
Response to this process, as demonstrated in tolerant plants, often involves the 
initiation of accumulation of osmoprotectants to assist in stress mediation.  These tend 
to be small molecules containing either ammonium compounds, sugars or sugar 
alcohols, or amino acids (Singh et al. 2015).  Proline is a compound often associated with 
drought stress and been the focus of much research.  There are conflicting ideas on 
prolines contribution to stress tolerance, but it is postulated as a signalling molecule, an 
osmolyte, an ROS scavenger, and a potential trigger for gene expression (Kaur and Asthir 
2015).   
As with heat stress, exposure to drought conditions can result in oxidative stress, caused 
by the accumulation of ROS, leading to damage to plant apparatus.  Response to ROS 
accumulation is characterised by the expression of enzymatic and non-enzymatic 
antioxidants. Signorelli et al. (2013) noted ROS scavenging enzymes such as superoxide 
dismutase in higher quantities in drought tolerant n model legume species (Lotus 
corniculatus and Trifolium pratense), suggesting that antioxidant control measures play 
an important role in limiting drought imposed oxidative stress. 
1.3.3. Waterlogging Stress: Impacts and Responses 
Soil flooding can result in two main stress factors; submergence, where large areas of 
the plant body or entire plant are under water or waterlogging which is defined as 
covering only the root section of the plant (Fukao et al. 2019).  Waterlogging events can 
be short-term or prolonged, with lasting negative impacts being seen in as little as a few 
hours or days depending on the species and tolerance (Malik et al. 2002; Malik et al. 
2015)  
The primary negative consequence of waterlogging is to reduce levels of oxygen in the 
root zone which in turn will induce hypoxia or anoxia in plant root tissues.  Under 
hypoxic/anoxic conditions roots may switch from aerobic respiration to anaerobic 
respiration, which results in consumption of useful organic compounds and the 
accumulation of potentially toxic compounds such as ethanol (Akhtar and Nazir 2013).   
In what may seem a contradictory response, waterlogging can result in a water deficit 
in aerial parts of the plant.  This is linked to stomatal closure upon exposure to 
waterlogging, whilst limiting the influx of CO2 this action also reduces the transpiration 
rate therefore decreasing xylem hydraulic conductance and reducing water availability 
to tissues and cells (Parent et al. 2008).  The stomatal conductance limitation on CO2 
uptake may also result in a decrease in the rate of photosynthesis and damage to the 
photosynthetic apparatus (Bansal and Srivastava 2015).  Photosynthesis can also be 
impaired by feedback inhibition due to overaccumulation of photoassimilates which 
cannot be transported to the root system due to restriction caused by decreased root 
respiration (Yan et al. 2018).  Photosynthesis can be further impeded by a decrease in 
chlorophyll content, particularly under longer term waterlogging, due to the inability of 
roots to assimilate nitrogen (Herzog et al. 2016).  
Plants can express a variety of methods that confer tolerance to waterlogging, ranging 
from morphological to physiological and biochemical.  One important physiological 
adaptation in tolerant species is the formation of aerenchyma in the roots.  This spongy 
tissue has enlarged gas spaces that can enhance internal aeration within the root 
system, enabling enhanced maintenance of oxygen levels (Evans 2004; van Dongen et 
al. 2014).  The formation of aerenchyma has been linked to ethylene production which 
has been seen to be upregulated under hypoxic/anoxic conditions in soybean, barley, 
and maize (Sairam et al. 2008).  A recent experiment observing barley genotypes under 
waterlogging stress found those demonstrating highest levels of tolerance had 
considerably higher levels of aerenchyma than susceptible varieties (Zhang et al. 2015).   
Modifications to plant metabolism play another important role in waterlogging 
tolerance.  The major aspect of metabolism that appears to be altered is energy 
metabolism.  The reduction in oxygen results in a switch from the generation of ATP 
from mitochondria in a switch to its production from glycolysis.  It has been observed 
that an ability to maintain glycolytic function reduces sensitivity to waterlogging stress 
and is dependent on an increased availability of soluble sugars to drive the process 
(Hossain and Uddin 2011) along with enzymes that catalyse the reactions (Alam et al. 
2010).  Accumulation of alanine has also been observed in waterlogged soybean tissue, 
which was linked to upregulation of alanine aminotransferase, an enzyme that catalyses 
the formation of alanine from pyruvate (Rocha et al. 2010a).  The potential function of 
this would be to limit amounts of pyruvate being converted to lactic acid, which in high 
levels can cause unfavourable conditions in plant cells by altering pH.   
1.4 Combinational Stress 
Whilst much informative data can be, and has been, derived from the study and 
observation of single abiotic stress factors, in recent years there has been widespread 
criticism and concern that these data do not reflect the real world environment (Rejeb 
et al. 2014; Suzuki et al. 2014). Under real life conditions plants are continuously 
exposed to combinations of stresses, which cumulatively may elicit different responses 
to single stress.  Research has demonstrated that these combinations of stress may 
result in both antagonistic and synergistic effects, which may have negative or positive 
outcomes for plants.   
The effects of heat and drought on a number of wheat cultivars were investigated 
separately and in combination (Prasad et al. 2011); whilst heat alone caused a more 
severe decrease than drought, the combination of the two factors led to the largest 
reductions.  Expression of the protein synthesis elongation factor (EF-Tu), a known heat 
tolerance factor, in chloroplasts was noted to be at the highest levels during heat stress 
alone, whereas during drought no increase was identified. However, when stresses 
were combined, EF-Tu expression did not increase to the same levels as individually 
applied heat, indicating that drought response signalling could be interfering with heat 
response.  
When drought and heat stress were combined, cotton cultivars selected according to 
varying drought tolerance levels demonstrated a more severe reduction in both 
photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance, and a greater leaf temperature increase 
than those exposed to heat stress alone (Carmo-Silva et al. 2012). Rubisco activities 
were shown to decrease in both the tolerant and susceptible cultivars exposed to the 
combination of heat and drought. The severest impact seen in the susceptible variety; 
these findings would suggest that the combination of heat and drought imposes greater 
inhibition to photosynthesis, and tolerance is displayed via a maintenance of 
photosynthetic activity thus allowing for better acclimation.  Photosynthetic parameters 
were also assessed in an interaction between heat and waterlogging stress  and yielded 
similar results (Lin et al. 2015).  Stomatal conductance and chlorophyll content both 
decreased under combined stress, whereas under waterlogging alone chlorophyll 
content was similar to control values, and stomatal conductance demonstrated a slight 
increase in heat alone.   
Changes to RuBisCo were identified, in this case changes in regulation of either small or 
large subunit transcription which were largely linked to heat involvement. In combined 
stress conditions, an over accumulation of H2O2 was observed that was not present in 
single stresses, indicating the possible interference with ROS scavenging mechanisms 
during the upregulation of combined stress response.  
In contrast, the combination of heat and salinity combined stress can have  ameliorative 
effects (Rivero et al. 2014).  When physiological and molecular parameters were 
measured, salinity stress showed a significantly damaging effect, leading to reductions 
in CO2 assimilation, plant water content and in combination with increased levels of 
ROS.  Whilst such effects were also seen in plants subjected to a combination of heat 
and salinity, the impacts appeared to be reduced.  This was partially attributed to 
altered accumulation of osmo-protectants. In salinity stressed plants proline was the 
major osmo-protectant to be identified, whereas under combined stress glycine betaine 
appeared to be the preferred osmo-protectant.  It is suggested that glycine betaine 
accumulation assists in maintaining photosynthesis via protection of photosystem 
related proteins.   
Transcriptomic analysis of heat and drought stress response in sorghum demonstrated 
different  responses in gene expression when combined (Johnson et al. 2014).  Under 
individually applied stress, responses were as previously described in the literature.   
When combined stress was applied, 5779 transcripts were up or down regulated with 
2043 unique to combined stress.  There was considerable overlap between heat and 
combined stress but little overlap between drought and combined.  These findings 
demonstrate that stresses may overlap, but the unique elements of the combined stress 
may predominate, thus rendering extrapolation from individual stresses difficult.  The 
authors also note the identification of transcription factors associated with single stress 
response in other species, which were observed only under combined stress, thus 
highlighting the importance of species-specific observation due to species-species 
variation.   Similar results were expressed in metabolite profiling of drought and heat 
responses in Arabidopsis; although similarities and overlap could be identified, unique 
responses such as a switch from proline accumulation to glutamine, and the 
accumulation of large levels of sugars were observed (Rizhsky et al. 2004).  The overlap 
suggests the defence pathways might be activated from similar regions, but the ultimate 
differences identified suggest this should be treated as a new, separate defence 
response.  
1.5.1. Lotus japonicus 
Lotus japonicus is a legume from the Fabaceae family, widely used as a model species 
for legume experiments based on its short life cycle of approximately 2-3 months and a 
small genome of 472 Mb, diploid in structure.  The response of L. japonicus to drought 
exposure has been relatively well characterised.  Daz et al. (2005) observed that proline 
accumulated in plants exposed to both fast and slow drought and noted that in a fast 
drought response accumulation was more rapid.  This suggests that Lotus japonicus may 
favour osmotic adjustment as a tolerance strategy.   Building on this work, the 
researchers focussed on the synthesis of proline from glutamate pointing to the 
importance of the presence of a plastidic glutamate synthetase isoform in the proline 
biosynthesis pathway. This was shown with mutants lacking this enzyme accumulating 
markedly lower levels of proline under drought stress (Daz et al. 2010).  Additional 
osmolytic compounds have been targeted through further research which revealed the 
induction of genes associated with the production of trehalose and gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), which would suggest these solutes increase under drought 
stress (Betti et al. 2012).  Exploring the wider metabolome, Sanchez et al. (2012) 
revealed patterns of increase in organic acids such as those associated with the 
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and sugars.  They also revealed a mixed response from 
amino acids with accumulation of proline, leucine and isoleucine, but a downregulation 
in serine, glycine and threonine.  This study concluded that metabolism can be fine-
tuned depending on the stress level and further, that accumulation of compatible 
solutes might point to sensitivity in some interactions. Thus, it cannot be assumed that 
accumulation means tolerance and therefore can be combined with other tolerance 
identification methods.  
Like many plants, observation of stomatal closure is observed in Lotus japonicus under 
drought conditions.  In recent research there has been a focus on the contributing 
factors associated with this closure.  Abscisic acid is a well-studied hormone in relation 
to stomatal control, identified as a trigger for stomatal closure in stressed plants (Leckie 
et al. 1998).  Liu et al. (2015) recently investigated the relationship between ABA and 
another family of plant hormones, the strigolactones, in drought stressed Lotus 
japonicus.  This work revealed strigolactones to be associated with stomatal closure 
under drought stress, and that their accumulation may be required in roots to allow for 
ABA production, however this requires further work and evidence.  
Characterisation of heat stress effects and responses in Lotus japonicus appears to be 
more limited than that of the drought response and indeed, more studies focussing on 
low temperature stress.  However, one  study focusses on the impacts of both drought 
and heat stress on L. japonicus as single and combined stresses (Sainz et al. 2010).  In 
response to heat stress only, plants did not appear to suffer any significant lipid 
membrane damage and exhibited a high level of catalase activity suggesting scavenging 
of H2O2.  This study also investigated to impact of heat on the level of chloroplast Cu/Zn 
Superoxide Dismutase (SOD) in leaves and noted a rapid decrease in the level of the 
protein. This was also observed in heat and drought combinational stress; this would 
suggest a reduction in antioxidant activity which could allow for oxidative damage to 
photosynthetic apparatus.  However, chlorophyll fluorescence was not reduced by heat 
stress, suggesting maintenance of photosynthesis; heat and drought combined had a 
deleterious effect on FVFM which plants were not able to cope with.   
A comprehensive study examining the varying responses of three Lotus species to 
submergence stress showed L.japonicus to utilise a different strategy to the other two 
studied species, Lotus corniculatus and Lotus tenuis (Striker et al. 2012).   In this study, 
Lotus japonicus favoured an escape method of tolerance, diverting resources toward 
shoot growth and extension.   Further to this, a whole plant phenotyping experiment 
affected morphology by limiting growth parameters in both roots and shoots and 
resulted in an overall decrease in chlorophyll fluorescence and stomatal conductance 
(Striker et al. 2014).  This study found that root biology was more significantly affected 
than shoots and that there was a poor connectivity between the two organs responses.   
Rocha, et al. (2010) concluded that L. japonicus wild type (B-139 var. Gifu) is highly 
tolerant to waterlogging stress and that this tolerance is associated with alteration to 
metabolism.  Total amino acids and starch levels significantly increased in shoots in this 
variety under waterlogging, particularly alanine, glutamate and GABA.  Using mutants 
that exhibited limited nitrogen assimilation and therefore lower levels of amino acids, it 
was concluded that tolerance is connected to the nitrogen status of the plant. In 
particular, alanine metabolism was identified as a key factor in hypoxia tolerance, 
presumably by regulated the levels of pyruvate to avoid high concentrations of 
detrimental compounds such as ethanol/lactic acid.  
1.5.2 Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) 
Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) is an annual grain legume cultivated widely across the 
tropical and arid regions of Africa, Asia, and the Americas (Ehlers and Hall 1997; Lucas 
et al. 2013).  The crop is highly regarded for its low input requirements and its hardiness; 
demonstrating tolerance to various environmental stress factors, such as high 
temperature and drought (Craufurd et al. 1998).  Nutritionally, cowpea is a good source 
of protein, with content averaging between 20-39% in seeds and 21-43% in leaves 
(Gonalves et al. 2016), as well as a diverse range of vitamins and minerals (Sinha and 
Kawatra 2003). 
Although production is worldwide, it is in sub-Saharan Africa and predominantly West 
Africa, that the largest producing nations are located. Indeed, it is here where cowpea 
is viewed as an important dietary component (Langyintuo et al. 2003; Ndema et al. 
2010).  An estimated 38 million households in sub-Saharan Africa are thought to 
cultivate the crop, with approximately 200 million people consuming it on a daily basis, 
thus it is argued that it is the most important grain legume in the region (Agbicodo et al. 
2009; Huynh et al. 2013).  Cowpea is largely grown by subsistence farmers, many of 
whom are women, and is often used to feed both family and livestock (Sambo and Odion 
2016).  In terms of research and development, cowpea has been recognised as a 
relatively neglected crop (Caselli-Mechael, 2015); however, in recent years 
organisations such as the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) have 
recognised its value and embarked on focussed research programmes on agronomic 
traits (Andre Bationo et al. 2014).  
Nigeria is the largest cowpea producer in the world, producing an average of three 
million tonnes annually in the period 2003-2013 (FAO, 2016).  Production in Nigeria 
occurs at varying levels, from large-scale commercial level, through to smallholder, 
subsistence level.  The major region for commercial production is the hot, arid zones of 
Northern Nigeria; the crop is generally well adapted to the often harsh, drought prone 
climate and performs well, achieving yields of up to 1.5 tonnes per hectare (Ajetomobi 
and Abiodun, 2010; Abadassi, 2015).  At the smallholder and subsistence level cowpea 
is produced across Nigeria in both the arid northern states and in the more humid 
tropical climate of the southern states.  There are few studies relating to production in 
the southern regions and several authors have suggested that this is not a major 
economic region of interest.  However, the demand for cowpea is not met by southern 
production and is therefore imported into the region (Agbogidi, O. M. and Egho 2012).  
Recent studies have evaluated various parameters relating to production in the south. 
Ezeaku et al. (2015) examined the effects of sowing date and cultivar selection within 
wetter agro-ecologies of south-east Nigeria (more similar conditions to the south-west 
than the northern states).  The major variables were cultivar and date; nine lines 
developed for the region were utilised and an early and late planting date were 
compared.  Early sowing allowed for a longer period of growth within the rainy season, 
when the environment is both wetter and slightly cooler.  Late sowing resulted in plants 
experiencing a longer growth period within the dry season, during which temperatures 
show a marked increase.  Yields of early sown plants were significantly higher than those 
demonstrated by late sown plants.  A similar study was conducted by Agbogidi & Egho 
(2012), in similar climatic conditions but with a planting date that saw growth take place 
from May to August.  The results were somewhat different to those identified by Ezeaku 
et al., with much lower yields being demonstrated.  The differences can potentially be 
attributed to two factors; soil quality and planting date.  Soil quality differences are 
apparent between the two experiments, with that in the Agbogidi & Egho (2012) study 
being a lower quality.  Regarding planting date, the Southwest Nigerian climate is 
characterised by a rainy season and a dry season; the rainy season however is not a 
single, continuous period, and around August there is a miniature hot, dry spell.  In the 
Agbodigi & Egho (2012) study, flowering and pod set would have occurred within this 
hot period and deleterious effects could have contributed to reduced yield.  
Regardless of region, production is hampered by a multitude of constraints that vary 
throughout Nigeria; in Northern regions the most significant threats are heat, drought, 
and the parasitic plant Striga (Muranaka et al. 2011), whereas Southern regions tend to 
encounter more issues with insect pests, pathogens, and higher levels of precipitation 
(Adegbite and Amusa 2010).  
In cowpea research, abiotic constraints have been demonstrated to have a particularly 
deleterious effect on photosynthetic parameters in susceptible varieties. A trend noted 
in several studies is a decrease in chlorophyll fluorescence and CO2 assimilation, linked 
often to a decrease in stomatal conductance, thus often termed as stomatal limitations.  
These decreases have been identified in drought conditions (Uzunova and Zlatev 2013; 
Rivas et al. 2016) and during crop waterlogging  (El-Enany et al. 2013).  Non-stomatal 
limitations to photosynthesis are also identified.  Alterations to PSII activity are noted 
under drought conditions (Singh and Raja Reddy 2011), and under heat stress conditions 
in crops other than cowpea, damage to thylakoid membranes, resulting in a dislodging 
of PSII, and ROS related damage to the D1 protein of PSII have been detected (Prasad et 
al. 2011; Marutani et al. 2012).  The ability to maintain near normal photosynthetic 
parameters under abiotic stress is recognised as a key tolerance trait. 
In cowpea research, there is a lack of non-targeted metabolomics studies that serve to 
deliver a holistic overview of the metabolome under conditions of stress.  In recent years 
Goufo et al. (2017) published a study relating to the overall metabolome under 
conditions of drought stress.  In this study they highlighted the role of osmoprotection 
as a tolerance strategy in cowpea and found drought stress to be progressive, with 
extended periods of stress resulting in more severe changes regardless of growth stage.  
The metabolites involved in osmoprotection were identified as known solutes including 
proline, phenylalanine, and raffinose, in addition to novel compounds such as quercetin 
3-O-6-malonylglycoside.  They also note common alterations to energetic pathways 
such as the TCA cycle in both susceptible and tolerant plants suggesting drought 
responses.  Cowpea has been demonstrated to accumulate proline under drought and 
water logging stress conditions (Singh and Raja Reddy 2011; El-Enany et al. 2013), 
however in other legume species studies have demonstrated an accumulation of other 
small metabolites such as sucrose and glycine betaine (Sanchez et al. 2012).   
El-Enany et al. (2013) investigated the impact of drought and waterlogging on several 
enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants in cowpea.  A sharp increase of free phenolic 
compounds, root and shoot superoxide dismutase, and ascorbic acid under both 
drought and waterlogging was observed.  The free phenolic, i.e. those that are not 
bound to cell wall material, are not defined. In other studies oxidative metabolism has 
been demonstrated to differ under separate drought and salinity stress conditions, with 
an increase in peroxidase activity, suggesting H2O2 scavenging under salinity stress, 
whereas no changes were observed in the drought group (Maia et al. 2012).  This 
contrasts with earlier work by Nair et al. (2008) which investigated differences between 
a tolerant and susceptible variety to drought; this study showed an increase in 
peroxidase activity, accompanied by increased levels of catalase and ascorbic acid.  
Increases of glutathione as an antioxidant molecule, with no response of 
homoglutathione, has also been demonstrated under drought stress.  This  suggested a 
difference between cowpea and many other legumes that tend to employ 
homoglutathione either completely or partially (Cruz de Carvalho et al. 2010). 
With regard to cowpea, there is little available in the literature focusing on  combined 
stress.  Singh et al. (2010) carried out the most significant study regarding multiple stress 
in cowpea, investigating the response of various genotypes to the combination of UVB, 
temperature, and elevated CO2 level.  Findings suggested that exposure to increased 
CO2 levels had a generally positive effect on all parameters (vegetative and 
reproductive), whereas increased UVB and temperature posed generally deleterious 
effects.  CO2 in combination with UVB was able to mitigate some the effect of UVB across 
most parameters and eventually led to only a slightly reduced seed yield.  Interactions 
involving temperature resulted in generally poor outcomes; in vegetative parameters 
the combination of UVB plus temperature showed the lowest overall reductions, and all 
interactions involving temperature demonstrated pod set failure thus yielding no grain. 
The aforementioned study illustrates a complementary effect of two stress factor 
responses, suggesting that the upregulation of one may enhance the effect of another.  
Also demonstrated however is the effect of a dominant stress (temperature) that 
appears to override other stress factors.  Whilst limited in cowpea, further 
understanding of crop process change can be drawn from several studies relating to 
alternative species.   
1.5.3. Biological Nitrogen Fixation Under Stress Conditions 
Legumes differ from almost all other plant species in that they possess the ability to 
form a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen fixing bacteria that convert atmospheric 
nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) that can be utilised by the plant. Identification of 
legumes that can tolerate abiotic stress factors may be of key importance due to their 
properties as nitrogen fixers when nodulated with compatible rhizobia species (Bationo 
et al, 2014).  Dwindling resources are contributing to the high cost of inorganic nitrogen 
fertilisers and their contribution to the climate change could render them an obsolete 
factor for farmers in tropical regions.  The potential to maximise a natural symbiotic 
relationship however could promise an inexpensive and less environmentally harmful 
method of ensuring adequate nitrogen supply, not just to the nitrogen fixing crop but 
also to companion crops and follow on crops if legume cover is used as a green manure 
(Coudel et al. 2018).  Additionally, legumes offer a vital protein source in regions where 
meat can be unaffordable and not always readily available (Chibarabada et al. 2017).   
The outline of the process of biological nitrogen fixation is shown in figure 1.1 (overleaf).  
Requiring relatively large amounts of ATP for activity, this process is energy demanding 
and in nodulated plants diversion of photosynthates to the bacteria is necessary.  This 
capacity for biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) represents a further interaction between 
plants and their environment that can influence behaviour and a further aspect that can 
be affected by abiotic factors.  
Figure 1.1. Diagram showing the transfer of compounds between the plant cytosol 
and bacteroid in symbiotic nitrogen fixation.  1, malic enzyme; 2, alanine 
dehydrogenase; 3, nitrogenase; 4, glutamate dehydrogenase; 5, aspartate amino 
transferase; 7, malate dehydrogenase.  Source: Day et al (2001).  
Given the processes high reliance on the products of photosynthesis for energy, it could 
be assumed that stress factors that inhibit this process would be particularly limiting.  
Studies on soybean, in both drought and waterlogged conditions, have identified a 
significant relationship between photosynthesis and BNF decline.  Fenta et al. (2012) 
examined the relationship between photosynthetic parameters in three contrasting 
soybean genotypes and the activity of nitrogenases, the enzymes responsible for the 
reduction of N2 to NH3.  A strong correlation between these parameters was observed 
with the drought tolerant genotype maintaining photosynthesis and highest levels of 
nitrogenase activity.   A similar decline in activity under drought has been observed in 
cowpea;  Silveira et al. (2003) observed a decrease in both photosynthesis and nitrogen 
fixation, however they note that in their study, an accumulation of sucrose was 
observed in nodules experiencing drought stress, which would suggest a continued 
transfer of photosynthate via the phloem.   Valentine et al. (2010) similarly discuss the 
accumulation of sucrose following drought exposure and link it to a decrease of sucrose 
synthase, the primary enzyme for sucrose break down.  This is postulated as being a 
tolerance response, with sucrose being utilised as an osmolyte to protect nodules.  
In addition to exploring connection to photosynthesis, Furlan et al. (2017) examined the 
impact of drought on metabolism in roots and nodules, contrasting tolerant and 
susceptible genotypes of peanut.  A lower overall impact on metabolism was observed 
in tolerant varieties, however where upregulation was observed it was in known 
osmoprotectants such a trehalose and GABA, thus pointing to osmotic adjustment as a 
protective strategy in nodules.   
With regard to waterlogging, legumes are regarded as one of the most sensitive crop 
groups there is and the impact on nitrogen fixation has long been studied (Minchin,  et 
al, 1978).  Several waterlogged legume species have demonstrated a reduction in the 
number and size of nodules, and a reduction in the activity of nitrogenase (Minchin et 
al., 1978; Jung et al., 2008).  However, in a recent study Tobisa et al. (2014) observed 
increases in nodule size and the total nitrogenase activity in American Jointvetch. These 
contradictory findings could allude to interaction specific responses that vary between 
both species of plant and species of nodulating bacteria.  As root nodules contain 
aerobic bacteria, one of the major factors associated with waterlogging is the lack of 
oxygen availability.   In non-nodulated plants of all species, an important waterlogging 
tolerance strategy appears to be increased presence of aerenchyma, and it is evidenced 
in soybean and various wetland legumes that this also alleviates stress conditions for 
the nodulating bacteria by limiting oxygen diffusion (Thomas et al. 2005; Roberts et al. 
2010).   
Much focus in nodulation research has been on the effect of stress on biological 
nitrogen fixation and there is a lack on data on the effect that nodulation might have in 
terms of promoting stress tolerance.  Crosstalk between response pathways has been 
observed in pathogenic biotic stress/abiotic stress interactions (Pandey et al. 2015; 
Ramegowda and Senthil-Kumar 2015) and in the interaction with plant growth 
promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) (Yang et al. 2009; Lim and Kim 2013).  It could be 
hypothesised that rhizobium interaction could produce similar effects.  A study on Vigna 
radiata (Zahir et al. 2010) found inoculation with Rhizobium mitigated effects of salt 
stress, and when combined with application of L-Tryptophan plants outperformed 
controls in a range of biological parameters.  Similarly, (Staudinger et al., 2016) 
investigated the interaction between nodulation and drought stress in Medicago 
trunculata and demonstrated a delay in leaf senescence when compared to control 
plants, indicative of tolerance rather than avoidance traits.  This study also pointed to 
differences in amino acid profiles, particularly those associated with proline synthesis, 
with decreased levels observed in non-nodulated plants.  These studies indicate the 
potential for stress mitigation through rhizobium inoculation.    
1.6. Conclusion, knowledge gaps, and aims and objectives 
The review of the literature surrounding abiotic stress in Lotus japonicus and Vigna 
unguiculata reveals several knowledge gaps that the work undertaken for this thesis 
intends to address. Given the range of biological processes affected by abiotic stress it 
is apparent that a multi-tiered approach incorporating physical, physiological, and 
biochemical properties can lend a holistic overview of stress responses.   In both Lotus 
japonicus and Vigna unguiculata further research is required in understanding and 
characterizing the effects of simultaneous exposure to multiple abiotic stress factors.  
Though much research exists on the implications of abiotic stress on root nodulation, it 
largely focuses on the capacity for the plant and rhizobia to establish this relationship.  
Little research exists on the potential for the biotic interaction to confer tolerance to 
abiotic stress.  Additionally, there is little to contrast biological nitrogen fixation as the 
primary source of nitrogen with other methods e.g. fertiliser use, and whether this has 
implications for growth and stress response.  This thesis intends to address these gaps 
by introducing nitrogen source regime as a factor in the controlled environment abiotic 
stress experiments for Lotus japonicus.  Lotus japonicus experiments will consider the 
impact of nitrogen source on abiotic stress response by undertaking experiments under 
conditions of nodulation with nitrogen fixing bacteria and feeding with nitrate.   
The existing literature presents a substantial knowledge gap where Vigna unguiculata 
is concerned, particularly in reference to combined abiotic stress research and 
metabolomic analysis.  There is a need for further use of non-targeted metabolomics to 
assess changes to plant metabolism under conditions of stress in a whole metabolome 
approach.    
The primary identified aims and objectives of this study are: 
 Undertake controlled environment experiments utilising the model legume 
Lotus japonicus.  These experiments will explore response to abiotic stress 
factors identified as being of importance in cowpea and the geographic region 
of study; however, they will be exacted under parameters that are more 
appropriate to lotus as a species i.e. a reduced high temperature that reflects 
lotus japonicus lower max temperature threshold.  This work will create data on 
model legume responses to the specific stresses identified and will be utilised 
for comparison with cowpea responses.  
 Undertake controlled environment experiments using non-nodulated cowpea 
varieties, exposed to singular and combined stress derived from IPCC projected 
scenarios for climate change in the Southwest Nigeria region.  To accomplish 
this, 77 previously under-researched landraces, collected within the 
Southwestern region by the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture have 
been obtained.  These lines were chosen for the increased likelihood that they 
are similar to those cultivated by smallholder and subsistence farmers in the 
region, as opposed to breeder developed lines that are unlikely to be accessible. 
This will be an in-depth study examining morphological, physiological, and 
molecular parameters that have been identified within the context of this 
literature review.  
 An exploration of how environmental background and its potential on accessions 
possessing shared biological responses to relevant stresses. Genetic variation 
and environmental background data will be utilised to evaluate the impact of 
each on the responses of accessions to various abiotic stress factors.  Response 
groups will be derived from the controlled environment studies, using these 
varying classifications of accessions, analysis can be carried to explore potential 
associations/similarities in environmental background that contribute to similar 
responses to stress.  
CHAPTER TWO: ABIOTIC STRESS RESPONSE IN LOTUS JAPONICUS UNDER 
NODULATED AND NON-NODULATED CONDITIONS  
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
Lotus japonicus is a legume which, alongside Medicago trunculata, is commonly used as 
a model species.   It has a small genome size of about 470 Mb, diploid genome with 6 
haploid chromosomes, a short life cycle of about 2 to 3 months and its perennial nature 
makes it a convenient plant to study.  Within the legume family, Lotus japonicus is found 
within the subtribe loteae; though this is distinct from the subtribe vigna in which 
cowpea is located, Lotus japonicus was selected for its physiological similarity in forming 
determinate nodules. The ecotype Gifu was selected for experiments. Often dubbed a 
wild type, Gifu is a well- established experimental plant, with desirable characteristics 
such as short generation time and ease of germination and growth (Handberg and 
Stougaard 1992), and it has been widely utilised in abiotic stress experiments  (Daz et 
al. 2010; Sainz et al. 2010). Therefore, Lotus japonicus represents an easy to use model 
plant with which to assess the effect of single and combinational stress on N 
assimilation and nodulation. These observations of chapter can be tested in the non-
model cowpea system.  
The aims and objectives of this chapter are: 
- Test the hypothesis that there will be variable effects on morphological, 
physiological, and metabolic characteristics of plants when supplied with 
nitrogen via different sources.  The comparison used was plants fed with 
ammonium nitrate vs. N2-fixing nodulation with bradyrhizobia.   
- Test the hypothesis that abiotic stress factors - drought, waterlogging, heat - will 
have different impacts on morphological, physiological, and metabolic 
characteristics in Lotus japonicus var. gifu will have different between single and 
combined stress responses.  
2.2.  Lotus japonicus methodology 
2.2.1 Preparation of bacterial solution for inoculation 
A dried sample of Mesorhizobium loti strain R7A was obtained from Manuel Becana at 
Estacin Experimental de Aula Dei (CSIC), Zaragoza.   M. loti R7A was selected for it 
extensive previous use with Lotus japonicus in plant-microbe studies (Kelly et al. 2014).  
Extracts from the original sample were streaked onto yeast mannitol agar (YMA) plates 
and placed into an incubator, agar side uppermost, at 28oC.  At six days after incubation 
a single colony was selected and transferred to 50ml of sterile yeast mannitol broth 
(YMB); this was placed in a shaker at 28oC for 24 hours.  At 24 hours the sample was 
centrifuged (x15,000g) for 15 minutes at 28oC, the YMB was drained off, and the 
remaining pellet was rehydrated with sterile H2O to OD600 0.1 (as detailed by Journet 
et al. (2006).    
2.2.2 Plant material and germination conditions 
Lotus japonicus var. gifu (Ecotype B-129) were sourced from the Aberystwyth University 
genebank.  Prior to germination, seeds were scarified using fine sandpaper, for partial 
removal of the seed coat, in order to speed up germination. Scarified seeds were 
transferred to 15ml centrifuge tubes for sterilisation in 2% (w/v) commercial bleach (4% 
sodium hypochlorite)/dH2O solution.  Following 20 minutes exposure to the 
bleach/dH2O solution seeds were transferred through eight separate washes of sterile 
water and transferred to an Erlenmeyer flask containing dH2O and stored at overnight 
in a dark environment at room temperature (  20C).  Following the imbibition period, 
seeds were transferred to clean filter paper and dried, before being transferred to Petri 
dishes containing a 0.6% solidified agar: H2O medium.  Seeds were placed on top of 
the agar medium and the Petri dishes were sealed with Leucopore tape.  To synchronise 
germination, Petri dishes containing seeds were stored upside down in a dark 
environment, at 40oC, for 24 hours.  The Petri dishes were then transferred, upside 
down, to a dark temperature-controlled cabinet set to 28C, for 72 hours. Following the 
germination period seedlings were removed from the temperature-controlled cabinet 
ready for transfer to pre-prepared 3 diameter pots containing vermiculite pre-washed 
with dH2O.  Pots were placed in seed trays (345 x 215 x 55mm) at a rate of six pots per 
tray, separated into two groups of 18 (Nodulation and No-nodulation), and 
approximately 50ml B&D nutrient solution (Broughton and Dilworth, 1971) was applied 
to each pot.  The B&D nutrient solution was identically prepared for both groups except 
for the concentration of NH4NO3:  
- Nodulated plants: 0.20g NH4NO3 was added to 10L of nutrient solution to 
provide 0.25mM final concentration 
- Non-nodulated plants: 4g NH4NO3 was added to 10L of nutrient solution to 
provide 5mM final concentration 
To ensure as much uniformity as possible, seedlings were selected for transfer based on 
similarity in both root and shoot size and were established at a rate of two seedlings per 
pot.  Once transferred to vermiculite, seedlings in the nodulation group were inoculated 
with the pre-prepared bacterial solution.  To encourage rapid and uniform exposure of 
the roots to the bacterial solution a pipette was used to apply 5ml to the immediate 
area surrounding the base of the plant stem.   All trays were then sealed with plastic 
film to create a humid environment and transferred to a walk-in growth chamber 
(Conviron) set to 23C/21C (day/night), with a 16-h photoperiod, with photosynthetic 
photon flux density of   200 mol m-2 s-1 (Bordenave et al. 2013).  After 2 days the 
plastic film was removed and replaced with transparent seed tray lids.  Plants were 
grown under these conditions until six weeks post germination; relevant nutrient 
solution was applied to the base of the trays and was replenished daily to a depth of 
Plants were grown in these standard conditions for 21 days prior to application of stress 
factors.  Stress factors selected for experimental conditions were drought, high 
temperature, and waterlogging, based on the decision to seek comparable responses to 
Vigna unguiculata in separate experiments.  Combinations of drought plus heat and 
heat plus waterlogging were also imposed.  
2.2.3. MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
2.2.3.1. Morphological assessment 
 Plants were visually assessed for development of symptoms associated with abiotic 
stress including wilting, chlorosis, leaf death.  In addition to this, parameters including 
shoot length and shoot number were scored from photographs for use as covariate 
factors in statistical analysis of physiological responses.  
 2.2.3.2. Stomatal conductance 
Measurements for assessment of stomatal conductance were carried out using an AP4 
portable cycling porometer (Delta T, Cambridge).  Porometer calibration was carried out 
prior to the onset of each set of measurements and during measurements when the 
equipment was introduced to a new climatic environment, for instance when moved to 
a higher temperature growth chamber.  Measurements were expressed in mmol-1 s-2 
and commenced approximately six hours after plants entered the light period, at 
midday.    
2.2.3.3. Chlorophyll fluorescence 
Chlorophyll fluorescence measurements were carried out using a portable modulated 
fluorometer (OS-30p, Opti- Science Inc., Hudson, NH, USA).   Measurements were taken 
from leaves that had been dark adapted for 60 minutes.  The measurement FV/FM was 
used to determine quantum efficiency of photosystem II (PSII).  
2.2.3.4. Leaf relative water content 
For measurement of leaf relative water content (LRWC), a protocol outlined by Sade et 
al., (2015) was followed.  The leaf and petiole were excised from plants and transferred 
immediately to pre-weighed and labelled sealable plastic bags (BW = weight of the bag).  
Samples were immediately placed in a cool, dark container, ensuring bags were tightly 
sealed.  Four replicates were obtained for each treatment.  Total weight of the fresh leaf 
and bag was recorded (TFW), before 2 ml 5mM CaCl2 was pipetted into the bag, 
submerging the petiole but not the leaf.   Samples were left with petioles submerged 
for 24 hours, following which the leaves were removed from the bag, excess liquid 
blotted from the sample, and weighed for turgid weight (TW).  Samples were then 
placed into individual labelled paper bags and placed in a drying oven at 60oC for 72 
hours; the dried leaves were weighed to obtain a dry weight (DW) figure.  
LRWC was calculated using the equation: RWC = ((TFW-BW)-DW)/TW-DW) x 100 
2.2.3.5. Metabolite analysis 
In leaves of lotus japonicus 40mg ( 1mg) of plant material was obtained and placed into 
pre-prepared 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes, each containing a single acetone washed 
stainless steel ball. Lotus japonicus material consisted of entire leaves being removed 
from the plant and weighed, whereas for cowpea samples a disc puncher was used to 
remove a standard amount of material, ensuring consistency across leaf samples. Root 
samples from lotus japonicus were acquired by removing the roots from the growth 
medium, quickly and carefully cleansing with dH20 to remove excess vermiculite and 
cutting a 20mg ( 1mg) sample which was placed into pre-prepared 2 ml 
microcentrifuge tubes.  Care was taken with root samples not to include root nodules 
and to only remove adjacent tissue.    All samples, leaf and root, were then immediately 
flash-frozen in liquid N before being homogenised using a ball mill.  At this stage, 
samples were immediately placed on ice and 1 mL of chilled chloroform: methanol: 
dHO (1:2.5:1) mix was added to the centrifuge tubes.  Samples were then vortexed in 
a cold room at 4 C for 15 min and returned to ice before being centrifuged at 4C at 
5000 x g for 3 minutes. Aliquots of the supernatant were then decanted into clean 
labelled microcentrifuge tube. All samples were analysed using high resolution (HR) flow 
infusion (FI) electro-spray ionisation (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS). 60 L of extracted 
sample was transferred to a glass HPLC vial containing a 200 L flat bottom micro insert 
(Chromacol). Mass spectra were acquired on an Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFinnigan, San 
Jose CA) mass spectrometer coupled to an Accela (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose CA) ultra-
performance liquid chromatography system. 20 L of sample was injected and delivered 
to the ESI source via a flow solvent (mobile phase) or pre-mixed HPLC grade MeOH 
(Fisher Scientific) and ultra- pure H2O (18.2 ) at a ratio of 7:3. The flow rate was 200 
Lmin-1 for the first 1.5 minutes, and 600 Lmin-1 for the remainder of the method. 
The total method time was 30 minutes. 
Positive and negative ionisation modes were acquired simultaneously. One scan event 
was used to acquire all mass spectra, 55.000 - 1000.000 m/z and 63.000 - 1000.00 m/z 
for positive and negative mode respectively. The scan rate was 1.0 Hz. Mass resolution 
was 100,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) 5 x 105 and maximum injection time 
of 250 ms, for both ionisation modes. For preparation of the data output, files were 
exported to CDF-files, mass aligned and centroided in MATLAB (V8.2.0, The MathWorks) 
maintaining highest mass accuracy.  Mass spectra around the apex of the infusion peak 
were combined in a single intensity matrix (runs x m/z) for each ion mode. Data from 
intensity matrix was log-transformed before further statistical analysis. 
2.2.4. Statistical analysis  
Using IBM SPSS Statistics 25, statistical analysis was carried out on stomatal 
conductance, relative water content, and chlorophyll fluorescence data using two 
methods: 
Two-way ANOVA was used to highlight variation across both independent factors 
identified in each experiment; in l. japonicus these factors were nitrogen source and 
environmental treatment.  Post hoc analysis was carried out via Tukey test to determine 
significant differences and homogenous subsets within the data.  Where two-way 
ANOVA was not the correct statistical test to use, due to a significant figure in tests for 
homogeneity of variance, one-way ANOVA was used to determine the Welch and 
Brown-Forsythe statistic.  Where this was the case the Games-Howell post hoc test was 
used.  
Paired t-tests were used to highlight within factor differences in comparison to control 
plants.  In lotus japonicus data were divided into nitrogen source groups and 
environmentally stress groups were individually compared to the control. 
Metabolite data were analysed using the statistical analysis options available within 
Metaboanalyst. Multivariate analysis was carried using PCA and PLS-DA, hierarchical 
clustering was conducted in conjunction with heatmap visualisation, and one-way 
ANOVA was used for the identification of significantly altered compound levels.  
2.3. RESULTS 
2.3.1. Morphological assessment 
Initially, morphological assessments of the effect of variation between both nitrogen 
source and abiotic stress treatment groups was undertaken. This involved using visual 
analysis to assess for recognised symptoms and signs of tolerance.  Across all 
environmental treatments a visible difference was observed between nodulated and 
nitrate supplied plants (figure 2.1). Those within the nitrate supplied group were 
generally larger, showing more elongated leaf stems in greater abundance.  Assessment 
of plants from across treatment conditions within individual nitrogen source groups 
showed that under conditions of drought, waterlogging, heat, and heat plus drought, 
nodulated plants tended to maintain greenness in their leaves and appeared more 
turgid. This contrasted with nitrate supplied plants which showed increased levels of 
chlorosis and wilting.    Stem length was estimated from photographs for use as a 
covariate in the analysis of physiological parameters.  
Figure 2.1. Photographs of Lotus japonicus var. gifu under varying abiotic stress and nodulation 
conditions.  Letters a,b,c,d,e,f denote control, drought, waterlogging, heat, heat plus drought, 
and heat plus waterlogging respectively. i and ii denote nitrogen source as nodulated and 
nitrate respectively.  
2.3.2. Physiological Parameters 
2.3.2.1 Relative Water Content 
To ascertain plant water status, relative water content (RWC) was measured for all 
treatment groups, seven days after exposure to stress (Figure 2.2).  Two-way ANOVA 
was carried using nitrogen source and treatment as independent factors, and stem 
height as a co factor in the analysis. Results indicated an overall significant effect 
between treatment groups (p<0.001), with no significant difference identified between 
nitrogen source groups or in the interaction effect (nitrogen x treatment).  Using Tukeys 
post-hoc test the drought and heat plus drought group values were identified as 
significantly different to the control group.  Comparing the two sources of nitrogen (fig 
2.2.a) it was apparent that within each environmental treatment group there was no 
significant difference in RWC.  The nitrogen source groups were individually analysed 
using one-way ANOVA, based on significance being identified in the overall two-way 
ANOVA analysis. Between treatment significance was <0.01 in both nitrogen groups.  
Tukeys post hoc test was applied which showed that drought and heat plus drought 
treated plants had a significantly lower RWC value than control plants; p < 0.05 in both 
ammonium nitrate and nodulated drought treated plants, p < 0.01 in ammonium nitrate 
supplied heat x drought plants only.  In ammonium nitrate supplied plants the 
waterlogged group demonstrated a significantly lower value than control plants (p < 
0.05).  
2.3.2.2 Chlorophyll Fluorescence (Fv/Fm) 
Measurements of Fv/Fm were conducted seven days after onset of stress.  Two-way 
ANOVA was performed using nitrogen source and stress as independent factors and 
stem length as a covariate.  The analysis showed a significant value for Levenes test for 
homogeneity (p<0.01), therefore one-way ANOVA was considered the best option for 
analysis, within nitrogen source groups.  The nitrogen source *treatment interaction 
effect was highly insignificant, so would not have been considered further anyway.)  
Data for each nitrogen source were analysed separately using one-way ANOVA.  In 
ammonium nitrate supplied plants Levenes test was significant, violating assumptions 
of homogeneity.  Using Welchs ANOVA, a significant difference was identified between 
treatment groups (p<0.01), with drought treated plants showing a significant reduction 
(p<0.05) compared to control groups.  In analysis across treatments in the nodulated 
group the heat and the heat plus drought demonstrated significant reductions in 
comparison to the control group (P<0.05 and p<0.01 respectively).  The findings are 
shown in figure 2.3.  Independent samples t-tests were used to compare nitrogen source 
under each stress condition, the only significant variation being seen in drought exposed 
plants, in which FvFm was significantly higher in nodulated plants (p = 0.01).   
2.3.2.3 Stomatal conductance 
Stomatal conductance measurements were obtained from plants at seven days post 
onset of environmental stress (fig 2.4).  Two-way ANOVA was used for analysis of 
variance across the data, using nitrogen source and treatment as independent factors 
and stem length as a covariate.  However, a significant figure for Levenes test (p<0.01) 
suggests this form of analysis is not appropriate.  Despite this significant figure, it is 
apparent that the interaction effect would not be significant due to a high p value. One-
way ANOVA was used to determine significant variation across treatment, within each 
nitrogen source group.  In the ammonium nitrate treated group a significant variation 
was identified across treatments (p<0.001); compared to the control group, the 
drought, heat plus drought, and the waterlogged group showed significant decreases 
(all p<0.05).  The nodulated group one-way ANOVA resulted in significant Levenes 
statistic, therefore Welchs ANOVA was used, showing significant variation between 
treatment groups (p<0.01).  Games-Howell was used for post-hoc testing and revealed 
that no groups were significantly different to the control group.   Minor differences in 
conductance were observed between nitrate supplied and nodulated plants under 
control and heat stress conditions, however these were not significant. Indeed, 
comparison of the two N sources demonstrates no significant difference under any 
experimental stress conditions.    
Control Drought Heat HD HWL WL
Nitrate
NS NS NS NS NS *** 
Figure 2.2.  Relative water content of Lotus japonicus leaves under varying abiotic stress 
conditions and nitrogen sources.   
RWC was assessed after 7 days of imposition of stress. Samples were taken in the morning 
period.  
Labels across the top demonstrate significant difference between nitrogen sources under 
each environmental condition. NS, no significant difference; *, **, *** denote P values of < 
0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001 respectively.  Error bars =  one standard deviation.  
Letters above the bars indicate significant difference between that stress and the respective 
control. a < 0.05, b < 0.01. HD = Heat + Drought, HWL = Heat + Waterlogging, WL = 
waterlogging 
1 2 3 4 5 6
Nitrate
Nodulated
* NS NS NS NS NS 
a a b 
Figure 2.3.  Fv/Fm in Lotus japonicus leaves under varying abiotic stress conditions 
and nitrogen sources.   
Chlorophyll fluorescence was assessed 7 days after imposition of stress using a 
handheld chlorophyll fluorometer one hour following the onset of the dark period 
once leaves were fully dark adapted. 
Labels across the top demonstrate significant difference between nitrogen sources 
under each environmental condition. NS, no significant difference; *, **, *** denote 
P values of < 0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001 respectively.  Error bars =  one standard 
deviation.  
Letters above the bars indicate significant difference between that stress and the 
respective control. a < 0.05, b < 0.01. HD = Heat + Drought, HWL = Heat + 
Waterlogging, WL = waterlogging 
Control Drought Heat HD HWL WL 
C D H HD HWL WL
Nitrate
NS NS NS NS NS NS 
b b b b 
Figure 2.4.  Stomatal conductance in Lotus japonicus leaves under varying abiotic stress 
conditions and nitrogen sources.   
Stomatal conductance was assessed using a porometer after 7 days of imposition of 
stress. Measurements were taken mid-point in the light period (12 noon) when stomata 
should be maximally open in the control plants. Labels across the top demonstrate 
significant difference between nitrogen sources under each environmental condition. 
HD = Heat + Drought, HWL = Heat + Waterlogging, WL = waterlogging  
NS, no significant difference; *, **, *** denote P values of < 0.05, < 0.01, and < 0.001 
respectively.  Error bars =  one standard deviation.  
Letters above the bars indicate significant difference between that stress and the 
respective control. a < 0.01, b < 0.001. 
2.4. Metabolomic Analysis 
2.4.1.  Metabolomic overview  
To provide mechanistic information on the responses of Lotus japonicus to stress, 
metabolomic approaches were employed. Leaf and root samples were taken seven days 
after onset of environmental stress and assessed using Flow-injection electrospray 
ionization mass spectrometry (FI-ESI-MS).  Samples from leaves and roots were 
processed separately and data were also analysed separately, using the same methods 
for both organs.   
During the initial stage of analysis, compound identification was completed using 
DIMEdb, and names were assigned.  Accounting for potential adduct formation ([M-H]-
, [M-Br]-, [M-Cl]-), a total of 148 and 130 named compounds were identified for leaf and 
root samples respectively.  In order to establish an overview of the distribution of 
compounds across metabolite groups, data for nitrate and nodulated plants were 
considered separately and ANOVA was utilised to signify the number of significantly 
altered metabolites under imposed abiotic stress. In leaves, 133/128 metabolites were 
found to be significantly different (P <0.05) in nitrate/nodulated plants respectively, and 
in roots 109/110 were found to be significant (P< 0.05) in nitrate/nodulated plants 
respectively. 
To establish the major sources of variation contributing to the output of significantly 
altered metabolites, the data were further analysed as a complete set for both leaves 
and roots.  MANOVA was employed in the first instance to ascertain the impact of both 
nitrogen source and abiotic stress treatment.  In leaves there was a statistically 
significant difference in metabolite concentration based on abiotic stress treatment F = 
3.655, P < 0.05, Wilks  <.000, however there was no significant difference in nitrogen 
source or nitrogen source*treatment interaction.   
Visualisation of the variation within the complete metabolite datasets was undertaken 
using principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares discriminant analysis 
(PLS-DA).   
In the leaf sample PCA output (figure 2.5a) clustering occurred according to specific 
experimental grouping, except for some outliers in the heat and waterlogging group.  
PC1 is associated with temperature, with heat treated samples generally demonstrating 
similar expression profiles distinct from those of control samples, regardless of nitrogen 
source; an exception to this is heat treated nodulated plants which remain similar to 
control samples.  Clustering on PC2 is driven by nitrogen source, with nodulated samples 
all demonstrating positive values and ammonium nitrate samples largely associated 
with negative values, with the exception the heat-treated group.  Based on the close 
proximity of many clusters, and the exceptions previously noted, this output could be 
suggestive of crosstalk in the metabolite profiles i.e. metabolites that perform multiple 
functions and are associated with both stress and nitrogen source.  This was further 
interrogated through analysis of the associated biplot (figure 2.5.b) which shows the 
contribution of compounds to the PCA.  In relation to crosstalk or multiple functions of 
particular metabolites, dihydrozeatin and indoleacetic acid show strong contribution to 
both PC1 and PC2.  The loading vectors for PC1 and PC2 indicated the prominence of 
some key molecules. This included the antioxidant glutathione, the auxin indole acetic 
acid (IAA), the bioactive jasmonate; N-jasmonyl isoleucine and the calvin cycle 
photoassimilate, fructose 1-6-bisphosphate. Cytidine was also prominent, and this has 
been linked to stress responses.   The separation between temperature and nitrogen 
source groups became more apparent in the PLS-DA output (figure 2.5.c). Temperature 
accounted for 24.2 % of the variation (component 1), and nitrogen source accounting 
for 14.8 % (component 2).   
Analysis of root data yielded similar outputs in the PCA (figure 2.6.a), though the 
distinction between clusters was reduced.  Analysis of PC1, shows an association 
between temperature and position within the PCA plot.  This is regardless of nitrogen 
source and shows similar expression profiles for this PC for control and drought groups, 
with the major contrast in expression being seen in combinational stress groups (heat 
plus drought and heat plus waterlogging).  The heat-treated samples placed between 
these two contrasting groups, indicative of some change that was potentially 
exacerbated by combinations of stress.  There is a high amount of similarity in 
expression profiles on PC2, indicating a similar response regardless of stress treatment, 
however there is some variation to be observed.  It is ammonium nitrate groups, 
particularly the control, drought, and heat plus drought groups that show greatest 
divergence from their nodulated counterparts, however this pattern can be observed 
between nodulated and ammonium nitrate groups under each stress condition, 
indicating that variation on PC2 is most likely driven by the source of nitrogen.  
Interestingly, the greatest variation between corresponding nitrogen source groups 
(e.g. control/nitrate  control/nod) was seen in the control and drought groups, with 
high temperature groups demonstrating a less distinct separation.   The associated 
biplot (figure 2.6.b) provides some insight on contribution of individual compounds to 
the PCA.   Cytidine was the only metabolite that was prominent in both leaves and roots. 
Other metabolites were L-proline; frequently linked to stress responses, and -
ketoisovaleric acid. Such -keto acids derived by deamination of branched-chain amino 
acids e.g, valine, leucine, and isoleucine. These may be used an oxidative 
phosphorylation energy source or as a detoxification pathway during plant stress.   
There were few compounds identified that appeared to indicate crosstalk in the root 
analysis, with the most prominent being dihydroxyfumaric acid.   
PLS-DA (figure 2.6.b) demonstrates a temperature effect on the first component axis, 
however, this appears to be exclusive to drought and control watered plants, with 
waterlogged groups showing no variation on this axis.  The separation between nitrogen 
source groups is evident on the component 2 axis, and is most apparent between 
corresponding control, drought, and heat groups.   
Heatmap analysis of the leaf and root data is shown in figure 2.7, it is possible to see the 
within group variation in addition to between group variation, and the relative 
concentrations of compounds.  The clustering was performed using Metaboanalyst 
which employs Euclidean distance measure and Ward clustering algorithm.  Analysis 
used all identified metabolites from each separate plant organ.  
Figure 2.7a shows the analysis of the leaf data.  Interpreting this in terms of dissimilarity, 
there is an initial separation that results in two groups; one consisting of the heat and 
heat plus waterlogging samples and the other consisting of all remaining treatments.  
This initial examination suggests that temperature is a major source of variation within 
the data.  Using similarity as a tool for analysis it is evident there are numerous clades 
within the two larger groups identified previously.  In the larger of the two groups 
control temperature data are separated from heat treated sample data within their own 
distinct clade, which shows further separations between the nitrogen sources; these 
separations occur near the bottom of the accompanying dendrogram suggesting the 
metabolite data are very similar, with minor variations.  Heat and heat plus drought 
nodulated data show some similarity to the control temperature data but are distinct 
within their own cluster.  In the smaller of the two initially identified groups, the 
treatments are largely similar, however the heat plus drought ammonium nitrate data 
is separate suggesting there are more differences in this data.  Overall the heatmap data 
for leaves suggest multiple sources of variation with temperature and nodulation being 
major factors, this aligns with the output from PCA analysis.  
In roots (figure 2.7.b), the division furthest from the bottom of the dendrogram, 
therefore suggesting the greatest level of dissimilarity, is between the control 
temperature nodulated samples and all the other samples; examination of the 
corresponding metabolite data in the heatmap shows a tendency toward higher values 
for compounds than other treatments.  Within this cluster, the drought treated 
nodulated group shows some small variation and forms a separate branch.  Within the 
larger of the two groups previously identified there is further clustering near the base 
of the dendrogram, suggesting there is similarity amongst clusters with some key 
differences.  Heat plus drought data for both nitrogen source groups is separated into a 
cluster, as are control and drought data for ammonium nitrate samples.  The remaining 
clusters show a greater similarity between heat and heat plus waterlogging samples 
within nitrogen groups than across the stress treatment, suggesting differences in 
response to stress under varied nitrogen supply.  The waterlogged nitrate data is within 
a separate branch.   The heatmap data overall for lotus japonicus roots does 
demonstrate variation between temperature treatments and nitrogen source, as 
observed in the PCA analysis, however the analysis is more complex than this, 
suggesting nuanced responses with possible interaction effects between stress 
treatment and nitrogen source.  
Figure 2.5. Principal component analysis and partial least squares discriminant 
analysis based on identified metabolites in Lotus japonicus leaves.  Analysis 
incorporates nitrogen source and abiotic stress treatment.  
a) Principal Component Analysis, b) associated loading vectors biplot c) PLS-DA  
Figure 2.6. Principal component analysis and partial least squares discriminant 
analysis based on identified metabolites in Lotus japonicus roots.  Analysis 
incorporates nitrogen source and abiotic stress treatment.  
a) Principal Component Analysis, b) Associated loading vectors biplot , c) PLS-DA  
Figure 2.7. Heatmap analysis demonstrating variation between treatment groups and 
nitrogen source in Lotus japonicus using all identified compounds.  Figure a) variation 
in leaves, figure b) variation in roots. 
Identification of the major sources of variation  
Based on the results obtained from analysis of the comprehensive dataset that yielded 
temperature as the most apparent source of variation, further analysis of abiotic stress 
variation was conducted, removing variable nitrogen sources as a factorLotus japonicus 
is a legume which, alongside Medicago trunculata, is commonly used as a model 
species.   It has a small genome size of about 470 Mb, diploid genome with 6 haploid 
chromosomes, a short life cycle of about 2 to 3 months and its perennial nature makes 
it a convenient plant to study.  Within the legume family, Lotus japonicus is found within 
the subtribe loteae; though this is distinct from the subtribe vigna in which cowpea is 
located, Lotus japonicus was selected for its physiological similarity in forming 
determinate nodules. The ecotype Gifu was selected for experiments. Often dubbed a 
wild type, Gifu is a well- established experimental plant, with desirable characteristics 
such as short generation time and ease of germination and growth (Handberg and 
Stougaard 1992), and it has been widely utilised in abiotic stress experiments  (Daz et 
al. 2010; Sainz et al. 2010). Therefore, Lotus japonicus represents an easy to use model 
plant with which to assess the effect of single and combinational stress on N 
assimilation and nodulation. These observations of chapter can be tested in the non-
model cowpea system.  
The aims and objectives of this chapter are: 
- Test the hypothesis that there will be variable effects on morphological, 
physiological, and metabolic characteristics of plants when supplied with 
nitrogen via different sources.  The comparison used was plants fed with 
ammonium nitrate vs. N2-fixing nodulation with bradyrhizobia.   
- Test the hypothesis that abiotic stress factors - drought, waterlogging, heat - will 
have different impacts on morphological, physiological, and metabolic 
characteristics in Lotus japonicus var. gifu will have different between single and 
combined stress responses.  
2.2.  Lotus japonicus methodology 
2.2.1 Preparation of bacterial solution for inoculation 
A dried sample of Mesorhizobium loti strain R7A was obtained from Manuel Becana at 
Estacin Experimental de Aula Dei (CSIC), Zaragoza.   M. loti R7A was selected for it 
extensive previous use with Lotus japonicus in plant-microbe studies (Kelly et al. 2014).  
Extracts from the original sample were streaked onto yeast mannitol agar (YMA) plates 
and placed into an incubator, agar side uppermost, at 28oC.  At six days after incubation 
a single colony was selected and transferred to 50ml of sterile yeast mannitol broth 
(YMB); this was placed in a shaker at 28oC for 24 hours.  At 24 hours the sample was 
centrifuged (x15,000g) for 15 minutes at 28oC, the YMB was drained off, and the 
remaining pellet was rehydrated with sterile H2O to OD600 0.1 (as detailed by Journet 
et al. (2006).    
2.2.2 Plant material and germination conditions 
Lotus japonicus var. gifu (Ecotype B-129) were sourced from the Aberystwyth University 
genebank.  Prior to germination, seeds were scarified using fine sandpaper, for partial 
removal of the seed coat, in order to speed up germination. Scarified seeds were 
transferred to 15ml centrifuge tubes for sterilisation in 2% (w/v) commercial bleach (4% 
sodium hypochlorite)/dH2O solution.  Following 20 minutes exposure to the 
bleach/dH2O solution seeds were transferred through eight separate washes of sterile 
water and transferred to an Erlenmeyer flask containing dH2O and stored at overnight 
in a dark environment at room temperature (  20C).  Following the imbibition period, 
seeds were transferred to clean filter paper and dried, before being transferred to Petri 
dishes containing a 0.6% solidified agar: H2O medium.  Seeds were placed on top of 
the agar medium and the Petri dishes were sealed with Leucopore tape.  To synchronise 
germination, Petri dishes containing seeds were stored upside down in a dark 
environment, at 40oC, for 24 hours.  The Petri dishes were then transferred, upside 
down, to a dark temperature-controlled cabinet set to 28C, for 72 hours. Following the 
germination period seedlings were removed from the temperature-controlled cabinet 
ready for transfer to pre-prepared 3 diameter pots containing vermiculite pre-washed 
with dH2O.  Pots were placed in seed trays (345 x 215 x 55mm) at a rate of six pots per 
tray, separated into two groups of 18 (Nodulation and No-nodulation), and 
approximately 50ml B&D nutrient solution (Broughton and Dilworth, 1971) was applied 
to each pot.  The B&D nutrient solution was identically prepared for both groups except 
for the concentration of NH4NO3:  
- Nodulated plants: 0.20g NH4NO3 was added to 10L of nutrient solution to 
provide 0.25mM final concentration 
- Non-nodulated plants: 4g NH4NO3 was added to 10L of nutrient solution to 
provide 5mM final concentration 
To ensure as much uniformity as possible, seedlings were selected for transfer based on 
similarity in both root and shoot size and were established at a rate of two seedlings per 
pot.  Once transferred to vermiculite, seedlings in the nodulation group were inoculated 
with the pre-prepared bacterial solution.  To encourage rapid and uniform exposure of 
the roots to the bacterial solution a pipette was used to apply 5ml to the immediate 
area surrounding the base of the plant stem.   All trays were then sealed with plastic 
film to create a humid environment and transferred to a walk-in growth chamber 
(Conviron) set to 23C/21C (day/night), with a 16-h photoperiod, with photosynthetic 
photon flux density of   200 mol m-2 s-1 (Bordenave et al. 2013).  After 2 days the 
plastic film was removed and replaced with transparent seed tray lids.  Plants were 
grown under these conditions until six weeks post germination; relevant nutrient 
solution was applied to the base of the trays and was replenished daily to a depth of 
Plants were grown in these standard conditions for 21 days prior to application of stress 
factors.  Stress factors selected for experimental conditions were drought, high 
temperature, and waterlogging, based on the decision to seek comparable responses to 
Vigna unguiculata in separate experiments.  Combinations of drought plus heat and 
heat plus waterlogging were also imposed.  
2.2.3. MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
2.2.3.1. Morphological assessment 
 Plants were visually assessed for development of symptoms associated with abiotic 
stress including wilting, chlorosis, leaf death.  In addition to this, parameters including 
shoot length and shoot number were scored from photographs for use as covariate 
factors in statistical analysis of physiological responses.  
 2.2.3.2. Stomatal conductance 
Measurements for assessment of stomatal conductance were carried out using an AP4 
portable cycling porometer (Delta T, Cambridge).  Porometer calibration was carried out 
prior to the onset of each set of measurements and during measurements when the 
equipment was introduced to a new climatic environment, for instance when moved to 
a higher temperature growth chamber.  Measurements were expressed in mmol-1 s-2 
and commenced approximately six hours after plants entered the light period, at 
midday.    
2.2.3.3. Chlorophyll fluorescence 
Chlorophyll fluorescence measurements were carried out using a portable modulated 
fluorometer (OS-30p, Opti- Science Inc., Hudson, NH, USA).   Measurements were taken 
from leaves that had been dark adapted for 60 minutes.  The measurement FV/FM was 
used to determine quantum efficiency of photosystem II (PSII).  
2.2.3.4. Leaf relative water content 
For measurement of leaf relative water content (LRWC), a protocol outlined by Sade et 
al., (2015) was followed.  The leaf and petiole were excised from plants and transferred 
immediately to pre-weighed and labelled sealable plastic bags (BW = weight of the bag).  
Samples were immediately placed in a cool, dark container, ensuring bags were tightly 
sealed.  Four replicates were obtained for each treatment.  Total weight of the fresh leaf 
and bag was recorded (TFW), before 2 ml 5mM CaCl2 was pipetted into the bag, 
submerging the petiole but not the leaf.   Samples were left with petioles submerged 
for 24 hours, following which the leaves were removed from the bag, excess liquid 
blotted from the sample, and weighed for turgid weight (TW).  Samples were then 
placed into individual labelled paper bags and placed in a drying oven at 60oC for 72 
hours; the dried leaves were weighed to obtain a dry weight (DW) figure.  
LRWC was calculated using the equation: RWC = ((TFW-BW)-DW)/TW-DW) x 100 
2.2.3.5. Metabolite analysis 
In leaves of lotus japonicus 40mg ( 1mg) of plant material was obtained and placed into 
pre-prepared 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes, each containing a single acetone washed 
stainless steel ball. Lotus japonicus material consisted of entire leaves being removed 
from the plant and weighed, whereas for cowpea samples a disc puncher was used to 
remove a standard amount of material, ensuring consistency across leaf samples. Root 
samples from lotus japonicus were acquired by removing the roots from the growth 
medium, quickly and carefully cleansing with dH20 to remove excess vermiculite and 
cutting a 20mg ( 1mg) sample which was placed into pre-prepared 2 ml 
microcentrifuge tubes.  Care was taken with root samples not to include root nodules 
and to only remove adjacent tissue.    All samples, leaf and root, were then immediately 
flash-frozen in liquid N before being homogenised using a ball mill.  At this stage, 
samples were immediately placed on ice and 1 mL of chilled chloroform: methanol: 
dHO (1:2.5:1) mix was added to the centrifuge tubes.  Samples were then vortexed in 
a cold room at 4 C for 15 min and returned to ice before being centrifuged at 4C at 
5000 x g for 3 minutes. Aliquots of the supernatant were then decanted into clean 
labelled microcentrifuge tube. All samples were analysed using high resolution (HR) flow 
infusion (FI) electro-spray ionisation (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS). 60 L of extracted 
sample was transferred to a glass HPLC vial containing a 200 L flat bottom micro insert 
(Chromacol). Mass spectra were acquired on an Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFinnigan, San 
Jose CA) mass spectrometer coupled to an Accela (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose CA) ultra-
performance liquid chromatography system. 20 L of sample was injected and delivered 
to the ESI source via a flow solvent (mobile phase) or pre-mixed HPLC grade MeOH 
(Fisher Scientific) and ultra- pure H2O (18.2 ) at a ratio of 7:3. The flow rate was 200 
Lmin-1 for the first 1.5 minutes, and 600 Lmin-1 for the remainder of the method. 
The total method time was 30 minutes. 
Positive and negative ionisation modes were acquired simultaneously. One scan event 
was used to acquire all mass spectra, 55.000 - 1000.000 m/z and 63.000 - 1000.00 m/z 
for positive and negative mode respectively. The scan rate was 1.0 Hz. Mass resolution 
was 100,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) 5 x 105 and maximum injection time 
of 250 ms, for both ionisation modes. For preparation of the data output, files were 
exported to CDF-files, mass aligned and centroided in MATLAB (V8.2.0, The MathWorks) 
maintaining highest mass accuracy.  Mass spectra around the apex of the infusion peak 
were combined in a single intensity matrix (runs x m/z) for each ion mode. Data from 
intensity matrix was log-transformed before further statistical analysis. 
2.2.4. Statistical analysis  
Using IBM SPSS Statistics 25, statistical analysis was carried out on stomatal 
conductance, relative water content, and chlorophyll fluorescence data using two 
methods: 
Two-way ANOVA was used to highlight variation across both independent factors 
identified in each experiment; in l. japonicus these factors were nitrogen source and 
environmental treatment.  Post hoc analysis was carried out via Tukey test to determine 
significant differences and homogenous subsets within the data.  Where two-way 
ANOVA was not the correct statistical test to use, due to a significant figure in tests for 
homogeneity of variance, one-way ANOVA was used to determine the Welch and 
Brown-Forsythe statistic.  Where this was the case the Games-Howell post hoc test was 
used.  
Paired t-tests were used to highlight within factor differences in comparison to control 
plants.  In lotus japonicus data were divided into nitrogen source groups and 
environmentally stress groups were individually compared to the control. 
Metabolite data were analysed using the statistical analysis options available within 
Metaboanalyst. Multivariate analysis was carried using PCA and PLS-DA, hierarchical 
clustering was conducted in conjunction with heatmap visualisation, and one-way 
ANOVA was used for the identification of significantly altered compound levels.  
2.3. RESULTS 
2.3.1. Morphological assessment 
Initially, morphological assessments of the effect of variation between both nitrogen 
source and abiotic stress treatment groups was undertaken. This involved using visual 
analysis to assess for recognised symptoms and signs of tolerance.  Across all 
environmental treatments a visible difference was observed between nodulated and 
nitrate supplied plants (figure 2.1). Those within the nitrate supplied group were 
generally larger, showing more elongated leaf stems in greater abundance.  Assessment 
of plants from across treatment conditions within individual nitrogen source groups 
showed that under conditions of drought, waterlogging, heat, and heat plus drought, 
nodulated plants tended to maintain greenness in their leaves and appeared more 
turgid. This contrasted with nitrate supplied plants which showed increased levels of 
chlorosis and wilting.    Stem length was estimated from photographs for use as a 
covariate in the analysis of physiological parameters.  
To ascertain plant water status, relative water content (RWC) was measured for all 
treatment groups, seven days after exposure to stress (Figure 2.2).  Two-way ANOVA 
was carried using nitrogen source and treatment as independent factors, and stem 
height as a co factor in the analysis. Results indicated an overall significant effect 
between treatment groups (p<0.001), with no significant difference identified between 
nitrogen source groups or in the interaction effect (nitrogen x treatment).  Using Tukeys 
post-hoc test the drought and heat plus drought group values were identified as 
significantly different to the control group.  Comparing the two sources of nitrogen (fig 
2.2.a) it was apparent that within each environmental treatment group there was no 
significant difference in RWC.  The nitrogen source groups were individually analysed 
using one-way ANOVA, based on significance being identified in the overall two-way 
ANOVA analysis. Between treatment significance was <0.01 in both nitrogen groups.  
Tukeys post hoc test was applied which showed that drought and heat plus drought 
treated plants had a significantly lower RWC value than control plants; p < 0.05 in both 
ammonium nitrate and nodulated drought treated plants, p < 0.01 in ammonium nitrate 
supplied heat x drought plants only.  In ammonium nitrate supplied plants the 
waterlogged group demonstrated a significantly lower value than control plants (p < 
0.05).  
2.3.2.2 Chlorophyll Fluorescence (Fv/Fm) 
Measurements of Fv/Fm were conducted seven days after onset of stress.  Two-way 
ANOVA was performed using nitrogen source and stress as independent factors and 
stem length as a covariate.  The analysis showed a significant value for Levenes test for 
homogeneity (p<0.01), therefore one-way ANOVA was considered the best option for 
analysis, within nitrogen source groups.  The nitrogen source *treatment interaction 
effect was highly insignificant, so would not have been considered further anyway.)  
Data for each nitrogen source were analysed separately using one-way ANOVA.  In 
ammonium nitrate supplied plants Levenes test was significant, violating assumptions 
of homogeneity.  Using Welchs ANOVA, a significant difference was identified between 
treatment groups (p<0.01), with drought treated plants showing a significant reduction 
(p<0.05) compared to control groups.  In analysis across treatments in the nodulated 
group the heat and the heat plus drought demonstrated significant reductions in 
comparison to the control group (P<0.05 and p<0.01 respectively).  The findings are 
shown in figure 2.3.  Independent samples t-tests were used to compare nitrogen source 
under each stress condition, the only significant variation being seen in drought exposed 
plants, in which FvFm was significantly higher in nodulated plants (p = 0.01).   
2.3.2.3 Stomatal conductance 
Stomatal conductance measurements were obtained from plants at seven days post 
onset of environmental stress (fig 2.4).  Two-way ANOVA was used for analysis of 
variance across the data, using nitrogen source and treatment as independent factors 
and stem length as a covariate.  However, a significant figure for Levenes test (p<0.01) 
suggests this form of analysis is not appropriate.  Despite this significant figure, it is 
apparent that the interaction effect would not be significant due to a high p value. One-
way ANOVA was used to determine significant variation across treatment, within each 
nitrogen source group.  In the ammonium nitrate treated group a significant variation 
was identified across treatments (p<0.001); compared to the control group, the 
drought, heat plus drought, and the waterlogged group showed significant decreases 
(all p<0.05).  The nodulated group one-way ANOVA resulted in significant Levenes 
statistic, therefore Welchs ANOVA was used, showing significant variation between 
treatment groups (p<0.01).  Games-Howell was used for post-hoc testing and revealed 
that no groups were significantly different to the control group.   Minor differences in 
conductance were observed between nitrate supplied and nodulated plants under 
control and heat stress conditions, however these were not significant. Indeed, 
comparison of the two N sources demonstrates no significant difference under any 
experimental stress conditions.    
To provide mechanistic information on the responses of Lotus japonicus to stress, 
metabolomic approaches were employed. Leaf and root samples were taken seven days 
after onset of environmental stress and assessed using Flow-injection electrospray 
ionization mass spectrometry (FI-ESI-MS).  Samples from leaves and roots were 
processed separately and data were also analysed separately, using the same methods 
for both organs.   
During the initial stage of analysis, compound identification was completed using 
DIMEdb, and names were assigned.  Accounting for potential adduct formation ([M-H]-
, [M-Br]-, [M-Cl]-), a total of 148 and 130 named compounds were identified for leaf and 
root samples respectively.  In order to establish an overview of the distribution of 
compounds across metabolite groups, data for nitrate and nodulated plants were 
considered separately and ANOVA was utilised to signify the number of significantly 
altered metabolites under imposed abiotic stress. In leaves, 133/128 metabolites were 
found to be significantly different (P <0.05) in nitrate/nodulated plants respectively, and 
in roots 109/110 were found to be significant (P< 0.05) in nitrate/nodulated plants 
respectively. 
To establish the major sources of variation contributing to the output of significantly 
altered metabolites, the data were further analysed as a complete set for both leaves 
and roots.  MANOVA was employed in the first instance to ascertain the impact of both 
nitrogen source and abiotic stress treatment.  In leaves there was a statistically 
significant difference in metabolite concentration based on abiotic stress treatment F = 
3.655, P < 0.05, Wilks  <.000, however there was no significant difference in nitrogen 
source or nitrogen source*treatment interaction.   
Visualisation of the variation within the complete metabolite datasets was undertaken 
using principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares discriminant analysis 
(PLS-DA).   
In the leaf sample PCA output (figure 2.5a) clustering occurred according to specific 
experimental grouping, except for some outliers in the heat and waterlogging group.  
PC1 is associated with temperature, with heat treated samples generally demonstrating 
similar expression profiles distinct from those of control samples, regardless of nitrogen 
source; an exception to this is heat treated nodulated plants which remain similar to 
control samples.  Clustering on PC2 is driven by nitrogen source, with nodulated samples 
all demonstrating positive values and ammonium nitrate samples largely associated 
with negative values, with the exception the heat-treated group.  Based on the close 
proximity of many clusters, and the exceptions previously noted, this output could be 
suggestive of crosstalk in the metabolite profiles i.e. metabolites that perform multiple 
functions and are associated with both stress and nitrogen source.  This was further 
interrogated through analysis of the associated biplot (figure 2.5.b) which shows the 
contribution of compounds to the PCA.  In relation to crosstalk or multiple functions of 
particular metabolites, dihydrozeatin and indoleacetic acid show strong contribution to 
both PC1 and PC2.  The loading vectors for PC1 and PC2 indicated the prominence of 
some key molecules. This included the antioxidant glutathione, the auxin indole acetic 
acid (IAA), the bioactive jasmonate; N-jasmonyl isoleucine and the calvin cycle 
photoassimilate, fructose 1-6-bisphosphate. Cytidine was also prominent, and this has 
been linked to stress responses.   The separation between temperature and nitrogen 
source groups became more apparent in the PLS-DA output (figure 2.5.c). Temperature 
accounted for 24.2 % of the variation (component 1), and nitrogen source accounting 
for 14.8 % (component 2).   
Analysis of root data yielded similar outputs in the PCA (figure 2.6.a), though the 
distinction between clusters was reduced.  Analysis of PC1, shows an association 
between temperature and position within the PCA plot.  This is regardless of nitrogen 
source and shows similar expression profiles for this PC for control and drought groups, 
with the major contrast in expression being seen in combinational stress groups (heat 
plus drought and heat plus waterlogging).  The heat-treated samples placed between 
these two contrasting groups, indicative of some change that was potentially 
exacerbated by combinations of stress.  There is a high amount of similarity in 
expression profiles on PC2, indicating a similar response regardless of stress treatment, 
however there is some variation to be observed.  It is ammonium nitrate groups, 
particularly the control, drought, and heat plus drought groups that show greatest 
divergence from their nodulated counterparts, however this pattern can be observed 
between nodulated and ammonium nitrate groups under each stress condition, 
indicating that variation on PC2 is most likely driven by the source of nitrogen.  
Interestingly, the greatest variation between corresponding nitrogen source groups 
(e.g. control/nitrate  control/nod) was seen in the control and drought groups, with 
high temperature groups demonstrating a less distinct separation.   The associated 
biplot (figure 2.6.b) provides some insight on contribution of individual compounds to 
the PCA.   Cytidine was the only metabolite that was prominent in both leaves and roots. 
Other metabolites were L-proline; frequently linked to stress responses, and -
ketoisovaleric acid. Such -keto acids derived by deamination of branched-chain amino 
acids e.g, valine, leucine, and isoleucine. These may be used an oxidative 
phosphorylation energy source or as a detoxification pathway during plant stress.   
There were few compounds identified that appeared to indicate crosstalk in the root 
analysis, with the most prominent being dihydroxyfumaric acid.   
PLS-DA (figure 2.6.b) demonstrates a temperature effect on the first component axis, 
however, this appears to be exclusive to drought and control watered plants, with 
waterlogged groups showing no variation on this axis.  The separation between nitrogen 
source groups is evident on the component 2 axis, and is most apparent between 
corresponding control, drought, and heat groups.   
Heatmap analysis of the leaf and root data is shown in figure 2.7, it is possible to see the 
within group variation in addition to between group variation, and the relative 
concentrations of compounds.  The clustering was performed using Metaboanalyst 
which employs Euclidean distance measure and Ward clustering algorithm.  Analysis 
used all identified metabolites from each separate plant organ.  
Figure 2.7a shows the analysis of the leaf data.  Interpreting this in terms of dissimilarity, 
there is an initial separation that results in two groups; one consisting of the heat and 
heat plus waterlogging samples and the other consisting of all remaining treatments.  
This initial examination suggests that temperature is a major source of variation within 
the data.  Using similarity as a tool for analysis it is evident there are numerous clades 
within the two larger groups identified previously.  In the larger of the two groups 
control temperature data are separated from heat treated sample data within their own 
distinct clade, which shows further separations between the nitrogen sources; these 
separations occur near the bottom of the accompanying dendrogram suggesting the 
metabolite data are very similar, with minor variations.  Heat and heat plus drought 
nodulated data show some similarity to the control temperature data but are distinct 
within their own cluster.  In the smaller of the two initially identified groups, the 
treatments are largely similar, however the heat plus drought ammonium nitrate data 
is separate suggesting there are more differences in this data.  Overall the heatmap data 
for leaves suggest multiple sources of variation with temperature and nodulation being 
major factors, this aligns with the output from PCA analysis.  
In roots (figure 2.7.b), the division furthest from the bottom of the dendrogram, 
therefore suggesting the greatest level of dissimilarity, is between the control 
temperature nodulated samples and all the other samples; examination of the 
corresponding metabolite data in the heatmap shows a tendency toward higher values 
for compounds than other treatments.  Within this cluster, the drought treated 
nodulated group shows some small variation and forms a separate branch.  Within the 
larger of the two groups previously identified there is further clustering near the base 
of the dendrogram, suggesting there is similarity amongst clusters with some key 
differences.  Heat plus drought data for both nitrogen source groups is separated into a 
cluster, as are control and drought data for ammonium nitrate samples.  The remaining 
clusters show a greater similarity between heat and heat plus waterlogging samples 
within nitrogen groups than across the stress treatment, suggesting differences in 
response to stress under varied nitrogen supply.  The waterlogged nitrate data is within 
a separate branch.   The heatmap data overall for lotus japonicus roots does 
demonstrate variation between temperature treatments and nitrogen source, as 
observed in the PCA analysis, however the analysis is more complex than this, 
suggesting nuanced responses with possible interaction effects between stress 
treatment and nitrogen source.  
Identification of the major sources of variation  
Based on  
Cross stress analysis of ammonium nitrate supplied plant material revealed a similar 
response in both leaves and roots. Figure 2.7a shows the PCA and loading vector biplot 
for leaf data.  The variation on PC1 is associated with temperature, showing a distinct 
separation between control and heat-treated groups.  The greatest variation on PC1 is 
between the drought and the heat plus drought treated groups.  PC2 has an apparent 
separation between groups defined by water availability; both the drought and the heat 
plus drought group are distinct from other classifications, which have similar expression 
profiles on this PC.  The analysis of this data suggests the expression profiles of leaf 
samples are driven by multiple factors with greatest distinction observed in drought and 
heat and drought data.  The associated biplot suggests that compounds tend to 
contribute distinctly to either PC1 or PC2, with the exception of hydroxyproline which 
exerts a strong influence on both PC1 and PC2.  The major factors contributing to PC2 
were Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, hydroxyproline, arginyl-valine, spermine, and 
proline, in addition to hydroxyisoflavone and glyceraldehyde as major contributors to 
variation on PC1.  
Root data (figure 2.8.b) demonstrated a similar output to leaf data in the distinct 
separation of drought and heat plus drought samples PC1; further investigation of the 
PCA plot shows some separation between other control temperature groups and heat 
treated groups on this PC, suggesting temperature is a major influence on the 
metabolite profiles of groups.  Additionally, both the drought treatment groups 
(including heat plus drought) show separation from other treatments on PC2; this would 
indicate that water availability is a further important source of variation. Analysis of the 
associated biplots revealed alpha-ketovaleric acid, proline, and glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate amongst the major factors contributing to PC2.  Proline and alpha ketovaleric 
acid were identifiable as major compounds on PC1 also.  There were similarities 
between plant organs in the identification of proline acting as one of the most important 
factors in PC2 (water availability), however it was difficult to discern further similarities 
through this analysis.   
In analysis of nodulated plants figure 2.9a shows the PCA and associated biplot for stress 
treatment in leaves.  There is much clustering of samples in this analysis, suggesting 
similarity in expression profiles, however on PC1 there is some apparent division 
between the two temperatures samples were exposed to.  In particular, the heat plus 
waterlogging group is separated on this PC.  PC2 shows a similar clustering of groups, 
however one group that demonstrates a distinct expression profile is the heat plus 
drought combinational stress group.  Major contributors to PC1 appear to be sativan, 
glyceraldehyde, leucyl-leucine, and serotonin.  These compounds appear to be 
associated with/more drastically altered in heat treated plants, and it is difficult to 
identify the compounds associated more greatly with control plants through this 
analysis. Oxoadipic acid and spermine emerged as major compounds associated with 
the variation on PC2.  
Temperature is apparent as a source of variation in root analysis of nodulated plants 
also (figure 2.9.b). This is apparent in the spread of groups on PC1, with heat plus 
drought samples showing the greatest variation to control temperature groups. Both 
the heat and heat plus waterlogging groups also separate from control groups, but to a 
lesser extent.   In contrast to leaf data, it is apparent that water availability accounts for 
the division in PC2, with both drought groups showing distinctly different expression 
profiles to samples where water availability was normal or high.  Alpha-ketoisovaleric 
acid, gallocatechin, and proline amongst the important associated compounds.  Analysis 
of the biplot shows there are a number of compounds that appear on the diagonal in 
the output, suggesting they contribute to both PC1 and PC2; this could suggest crosstalk 
or multiple functions of these compounds within the response to abiotic stress 
treatment.  
Heatmap analysis using the top 50 significant compounds, determined via ANOVA, was 
utilised to further visualise the separation and similarities between the stress factors, 
and to provide greater insight into the compounds contributing to any variation.  In 
ammonium nitrate supplied leaves the division between temperature groups was 
demonstrated by the formation of two clades on the associated dendrogram (2.10.a); 
this separation is confirmed by the corresponding heatmap data.  Heat exposed plants 
demonstrated a reduction in most compounds featured in the analysis, particularly in 
combined stress samples, whereas increased values are observed in control 
temperature samples.  In both low and high temperatures, well-watered and 
waterlogged plants showed more similar responses to each other in comparison to 
respective drought treated plants, as is demonstrated by the branching within the 
dendrogram and the corresponding values shown in the heatmap.  Although different 
in most compounds, both drought treated groups demonstrated an increase over other 
treatments in four metabolites; leucine, betaine, proline, and 5,1 0-methylene-THF.  
Within their respective temperature subgroups, both drought treatments were in a 
separate subcategory as classified by the heatmap.   
In the visualisation of ammonium nitrate supplied root data samples through 
heatmapping, the distinction between temperature levels was less apparent (figure 
2.10.b).  The associated dendrogram has a primary division which groups control and 
drought samples together and the remaining samples are within a second group.  The 
branching within this second group however shows a distinction between the heat plus 
drought samples, which according to the heatmap have a dissimilar response. This could 
indicate that this particular combination of stress factors has a specific response. Lower 
temperature exposed roots, particularly the control group, show increased levels in a 
greater number of compounds than higher temperature plants.  Proline is present, as in 
leaves, in higher levels in both drought and HxD, in addition to alpha-ketoisovaleric acid.  
As with data from nitrate supplied plants, heatmapping was utilised to provide a visual 
analysis of the variation and similarities in leaves and roots of nodulated plants (figure 
2.11).  Two distinct clades show a clear divide between temperature groups in leaves 
(figure 2.11a), each with a further subdivision further down the branches that separates 
the drought samples from those with higher water availability.  Examining the distance 
from the bottom of the dendrogram to the divisions within the temperature groups, it 
is apparent the control temperature clusters originate at a lower level suggesting there 
is more similarity between them that between the heat-treated samples.  This 
corresponds with the heatmap in which a greater variation can be observed in values 
for heat treated samples.  
In nodulated roots (figure 2.11.b), the dendrogram is similar to that of leaves.  A primary 
division at a higher distance can be seen between the two temperature groups, with 
further branching at a lower level.  The secondary branching separates the drought 
groups within each temperature to their own branch, showing there is greater similarity 
between the well-watered and waterlogging samples than with drought.  There 
appeared to be a general tendency for compound concentration to decrease in all 
groups exposed to heat stress.  This contrasted with those compounds in the lower 
temperature group, which tended to show an increase, except for the drought 
treatment. 
Figure 2.8. PCA loading vectors biplots demonstrating variation in 
ammonium nitrate supplied Lotus japonicus under abiotic stress, a) 
leaf data and b) root data.  
Figure 2.9. PCA loading vector biplots demonstrating variation in nodulated Lotus 
japonicus under abiotic stress, a) leaf data and b) root data.  
Figure 2.10.  Heatmap analysis showing metabolic variation under abiotic stress conditions 
in ammonium nitrate supplied Lotus japonicus; a) leaf data, b) root data 
C = control, D = drought, H = heat, HD = heat and drought, HWL = heat and waterlogging, 
WL = waterlogging. 
Figure 2.11.  Heatmap analysis showing metabolic variation under abiotic stress 
conditions in nodulated Lotus japonicus supplied plants; a) leaf data, b) root data 
C = control, D = drought, H = heat, HD = heat and drought, HWL = heat and waterlogging, 
WL = waterlogging. 
2.4.1.  Metabolomic Pathway analyses 
In order to examine specific pathways contributing to variation across the data, pathway 
analysis was carried out using metaboanalyst.  Leaves and root data were analysed 
separately and pathways with a p value of P < 0.05 and an impact score > 0.1 were 
identified and used for mapping. In leaves, eight pathways fell within these established 
criteria, all of which could be categorised into three KEGG classifications; amino acid 
metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, and energy metabolism (figure 2.12).  In roots 
the number of pathways was higher, at 10, however they all fell within the same three 
classifications as identified in leaves (figure 2.13).    
To assess variation within the data for each metabolite, nitrogen sources were 
compared via t-test within stress treatment, and evaluation of stress was performed 
using one-way ANOVA within nitrogen source group, contrasting stress treatment to 
respective control figures.  
ID Pathway Total Expected Hits P Value FDR Impact 
Glycine, serine and 
threonine metabolism 30 2.4689 11 0.000 0.000887 0.55909 
Alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate metabolism 22 1.8106 9 0.000 0.001085 0.27587 
Carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic 
organisms 21 1.7283 8 0.000 0.003879 0.20339 
Glyoxylate and 
dicarboxylate 
metabolism 17 1.3991 6 0.002 0.034343 0.517 
Phenylalanine 
metabolism 8 0.65839 4 0.002 0.040804 0.66667 
f Citrate cycle (TCA cycle) 20 1.646 6 0.004 0.058407 0.23571 
Arginine and proline 
metabolism 38 3.1273 7 0.031 0.30217 0.29856 
Figure 2.12. Chart denoting the output of pathway analysis for leaf metabolites in Lotus 
japonicus. Labels correspond with table 1.  
Table 2.1.   Data table relating to output from pathway analysis of Lotus japonicus leaf data 
ID Pathway Total Expected Hits Raw p FDR Impact 
Alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate metabolism 22 1.7593 11 0.000 1.49E-05 0.94253 
b Citrate cycle (TCA cycle) 20 1.5994 9 0.000 0.00033 0.4034 
Cysteine and methionine 
metabolism 34 2.7189 11 0.000 0.000882 0.26924 
Carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic 
organisms 21 1.6793 8 0.000 0.002361 0.35075 
Glyoxylate and 
dicarboxylate 
metabolism 17 1.3595 7 0.000 0.002969 0.39115 
Glycine, serine and 
threonine metabolism 30 2.3991 9 0.000 0.004738 0.52685 
Arginine and proline 
metabolism 38 3.0388 8 0.008 0.10246 0.40315 
h Glutathione metabolism 26 2.0792 6 0.014 0.13754 0.58541 
Glycolysis or 
Gluconeogenesis 25 1.9992 5 0.043 0.3419 0.32161 
Figure 2.13. Chart denoting the output of pathway analysis for root metabolites in Lotus 
japonicus. Labels correspond with table 2.  
Table 2.2.  Data table relating to output from pathway analysis of Lotus japonicus root data  
2.4.1.1 Leaf metabolomes  
2.4.1.1.1. Amino acid metabolism 
Glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism 
Glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism was identified as the most significantly 
enriched pathway and visualisation of metabolites associated with the pathway shows 
clear variation across compounds (Figure 2.14).  Comparison of nitrogen source showed 
there were no significant differences in three of the identified compounds; serine, 
glycine, and 5, 10-Methylene-THF.  Aspartate semialdehyde, hydroxypyruvic acid, and 
glyoxylic acid all showed a significant variation between nitrogen source under drought 
conditions; p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and P < 0.05 respectively.  Under conditions of heat stress, 
levels of aspartic acid, homoserine, betaine, pyruvic acid, and tryptophan varied 
between nitrogen groups to a significant degree; p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p = 0.001, 
and p < 0.01 respectively.  Betaine, hydroxypyruvic acid, and pyruvic acid were 
differently expressed under HD conditions: p < 0.05, p < 0.001, and p = 0.001 
respectively.  Waterlogging showed differences between nitrogen groups in aspartic 
acid and aspartic acid semialdehyde; p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively.    
In ammonium nitrate-fed plants, metabolite levels were significantly different in 
drought conditions compared to control plants in aspartic acid (p < 0.001), homoserine 
(p < 0.001), aspartate semialdehyde (p < 0.001), betaine (p < 0.01), pyruvic acid (p < 
0.01), tryptophan  (p < 0.01), and glyoxylic acid (p < 0.05). Levels of aspartic acid (p < 
0.05), aspartate semialdehyde (p < 0.05) were significantly different to control levels in 
heat stressed plants.  In HxD treated plants levels of aspartic acid, aspartate 
semialdehyde, serine, hydroxypyruvic acid, pyruvate, and glyoxylic acid were 
significantly different to control values: p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.05, 
ad p < 0.01 respectively. HxWL affected levels of serine (p < 0.05) and pyruvate (p < 
0.05).  Waterlogging had no significant effect on any of the metabolites in this pathway 
in ammonium nitrate fed plants.  
In nodulated plants drought stress brought about significant variation in aspartic acid (p 
< 0.05), homoserine (p < 0.05), and tryptophan (p < 0.01), as compared to control values.  
Heat stress resulted in a difference in aspartic acid (p < 0.05), aspartate semialdehyde 
(p < 0.001), and hydroxypryruvic acid (p < 0.05) levels.  Variation was seen in the HxD 
group in aspartic acid (p < 0.001), aspartate semialdehyde (p < 0.001), serine (p < 0.01), 
pyruvate (p< 0.01), glycine (p = 0.001), and glyoxylic acid (p < 0.01).  HxWL significantly 
altered levels of homoserine, aspartate semialdehyde, serine, hydroxypyruvic acid, and 
pyruvate; p < 0.05, p < 0.001, p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01 respectively.  Aspartic acid 
(p < 0.05), serine (p < 0.05), and hydroxypyruvic acid (p < 0.05) were significantly 
affected by singular waterlogging stress in nodulated plants.  
 Alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism 
The alanine, aspartate and glutamate pathway was the next most significantly 
overexpressed amino acid related pathway in leaf data (Figure 2.15).  Aspartic acid and 
pyruvate also feature in this pathway and their variation has already been described in 
glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism.   Asparagine showed no significant variation 
in any of the analysis. 
Considering first the variation between nodulated and ammonium nitrate supplied 
plants, several metabolites showed significant differences under various stresses.  
Fumaric acid was the only metabolite to show significant variation under drought 
conditions; p < 0.01. Under heat stress there was variation in alanine (p < 0.05) and 
succinic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.05).  The combination of HxD resulted in a variation 
between nitrogen source in succinic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.01), succinic acid (p < 0.05) 
and GABA (p = 0.001).  There was no significant difference between nitrogen source 
under HxWL stress, and in singular waterlogging stress succinic acid semialdehyde and 
GABA were significantly different (p < 0.05 in both compounds). 
In ammonium nitrate supplied plants the only metabolite to be significantly altered 
under drought stress compared to the control was succinic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.01).  
Heat stress significantly altered levels of oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.05) only.  The 
combination of HxD resulted in a significant shift in oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.01), succinic 
acid semialdehyde (p < 0.001), and GABA (p < 0.001).  Oxaloacetic acid was the only 
metabolite to be significantly altered by HxWL stress (p < 0.01), and under singular 
waterlogging stress succinic acid semialdehyde and GABA were altered (p < 0.05 in both 
compounds).  
Nodulated plants demonstrated significant variation in succinic acid semialdehyde only 
(p < 0.05) when comparing drought levels to control levels.  Under heat stress levels of 
oxaloacetic acid and fumaric acid were significantly different to the control; p < 0.01 and 
p < 0.001, respectively.  The combination of HxD resulted in the greatest number of 
significantly altered compounds; oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.001), fumaric acid (p < 0.01), 
and GABA (p < 0.001).  HxWL impacted significantly on oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.001) and 
fumaric acid (p < 0.001), and GABA was the only compound to be significantly altered 
under waterlogging stress (p < 0.05) compared to controls.  
Phenylalanine metabolism  
The identified metabolites within the phenylalanine pathway demonstrated some 
variation between the two sources of nitrogen under a number of environmental 
conditions (Figure 2.16).  The greatest number was under combined HxD stress, in which 
phenylalanine, 2-phenylacetamide, and phenylacetaldehyde were all significantly 
different (p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.01 respectively) between ammonium nitrate and 
nodulated plants.  Singular heat stress produced a significant difference between 
nitrogen source in phenylacetaldehyde (p < 0.01).  2-phenylacetaldehyde showed a 
variation in waterlogged plants (p < 0.05).  
In ammonium nitrate supplied plants there was no significant difference identified 
between stressed plants and controls in any of the compounds associated with this 
pathway.  However, in nodulated plants trans-cinnamic acid levels were significantly 
altered under drought, HxD, and waterlogging stress (all p < 0.05).  Phenylacetaldehyde 
was altered in heat and HxWL stressed plants (both p = 0.001) in comparison to controls.  
Arginine and proline metabolism 
The final amino acid related pathway to be overexpressed to levels within selected 
criteria was arginine and proline metabolism.  Changes in GABA and aspartic acid have 
already been described in glycine, serine, and threonine results.   There were no 
significant differences in hydroxypyruvic acid levels in any of the analysis.  
Proline levels were significantly different between nitrogen sources under conditions of 
drought stress (p < 0.05), and levels of ornithine were significantly different under 
conditions of HxD stress (p < 0.05).  Proline showed a significant difference when 
comparing stress to control within ammonium nitrate supplied plants under drought 
conditions only (p < 0.01).   Within the nodulated group, the only stress that resulted in 
a significant change in comparison to control values was HxD in the compound ornithine 
(p < 0.001).   
Figure 2.14 Significantly altered metabolites in the glycine, serine and 
threonine pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves.  Pathway constructed from 
KEGG pathway diagrams. Red text denotes adjoining pathways.  
Hydroxypyruvic acid 
L-Serine Pyruvic acid 
L-Tryptophan 
5,10-Methylene-THF 
Glyoxylic acid Glycine 
Betaine 
L-Homoserine 
L-Aspartate-semialdehyde 
L-Aspartic acid 
(Tryptophan 
metabolism) 
(Glyoxylate 
metabolism) 
(Alanine, aspartate, and 
glutamate metabolism) 
Figure 2.15 Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves. Pathway constructed from 
KEGG pathway diagrams. Red text denotes adjoining pathways. 
L-Alanine L-Aspartic acid L-Asparagine 
Oxaloacetic acid 
Fumaric acid 
Pyruvic acid 
Gamma-aminobutyric acid 
Succinic acid 
Succinic acid semialdehyde 
Figure 2.16. Identified metabolites in the phenylalanine metabolism pathway 
in Lotus japonicus leaves. Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway diagrams. 
Red text denotes adjoining pathways. 
L-phenylalanine 
Trans cinnamic acid 
Phenylacetylaldehyde 
2 - Phenylacetamide 
Figure 2.17. Schematic of identified metabolites in the arginine and proline 
pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway 
diagrams. Red text denotes adjoining pathways. 
Ornithine L-Proline 
Gamma Aminobutyric acid 
Hydroxyproline 
Pyruvic acid 
Glyoxylic acid 
2.4.1.1.2. Carbon and energy metabolism 
Carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms 
The most significantly overexpressed pathway relating to carbon and energy 
metabolism in leaves was the carbon fixation pathway (Figure 2.18).  As seen in 
previously discussed results, there is a crossover of metabolites with this and other 
pathways; aspartic acid, pyruvic acid, and oxaloacetic acid have already been analysed 
in the alanine and aspartate pathway output. In addition to these three compounds, 
three further compounds showed variation between experimental groups.   
Significant variation between nitrogen sources was seen in drought treated plants in 
both malic acid and fructose-6-phosphate (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively).  
Fructose-6 phosphate was also significantly varied in HxD treated plants (p < 0.01) and 
malic acid in waterlogged plants (p < 0.05).   
Analysis comparing these compounds under stress conditions to those of controls 
showed that none were significantly altered in ammonium nitrate plants, however in 
nodulated plants malic acid levels were altered in HxWL plants (p < 0.05) and fructose-
6-phosphate showed a significant difference in HxD plants.  In addition to these, fructose 
1,6 bisphosphate showed variation against control levels in heat and HxD stress (p < 
0.05 in both compounds).  
Glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism 
Variation in oxaloacetic acid and succinic acid levels was previously described in alanine 
and aspartate metabolism, malic acid in carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, 
and glyoxylic acid in glycine, serine, and threonine results (Figure 2.19).   
Cis-aconitic acid showed no significant difference when comparing ammonium nitrate 
and nodulated data, however glycolic acid showed variation between the two in 
drought, HxD, heat, and HxWL treated plants; p = 0.001, p < 0.001, p < 0.05, and p < 
0.05, respectively.   
In comparison of stressed plants to that of controls, the ammonium nitrate group 
showed significant difference the level of glycolic acid in heat (p < 0.001), HxD (p < 
0.001), and HxWL (p < 0.001) treated plants.  Cis-aconitic acid was also significantly 
altered in drought, heat, HxD, and HxWL (p < 0.01, p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.01, 
respectively). 
In nodulated plants a significant difference was observed in drought and HxWL treated 
plants (p < 0.05 in both treatments) in glycolic acid.  A difference was also seen in levels 
of cis-aconitic acid in heat (p =0.001), HxD (p < 0.05), and HxWL (p < 0.01) groups.   
TCA cycle 
In the pathway analysis, the TCA cycle was identified as being significantly 
overexpressed.  The compounds succinic acid, malic acid, fumaric acid, oxaloacetic acid, 
pyruvic acid, and cis-aconitic acid were identified within the pathway.  (Figure 2.20).  
Figure 2.18. Identified metabolites in the carbon fixation in photosynthetic 
organisms pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves.  Pathway constructed from KEGG 
pathway diagrams. Red text denotes adjoining pathways. 
Fructose 1,6 bisphosphate 
Fructose 6 phosphate 
Pyruvic acid 
Oxalacetic acid 
L Malic acid 
L-Alanine 
L-Aspartic acid 
Figure 2.19. Identified metabolites in the glyoxylic acid and dicarboxylic 
acid pathway in Lotus japonicus leaves.  Pathway constructed from KEGG 
pathway diagrams. Red text denotes adjoining pathways. 
Oxalacetic acid 
L Malic acid Glyoxylic acid 
Cis-Aconitic acid 
Glycolic acid 
Succinic acid 
Figure 2.20. Significantly altered metabolites in the TCA cycle in Lotus 
japonicus leaves.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway diagrams. Red 
text denotes adjoining pathways. 
Pyruvic acid 
Oxaloacetic acid 
Cis-Aconitic acid 
Succinic acid 
Fumaric acid 
L-Malic acid 
(Glycolysis) 
(Alanine, aspartate, & 
glutamate metabolism) 
(Glyoxylate/ 
dicarboxylate 
metabolism) 
(Arginine & proline 
biosynthesis) 
2.4.1.2.  Root metabolomes  
2.4.1.2.1 Amino acid metabolism   
Alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism 
The primary enriched amino acid related pathway identified in root data was the 
alanine, aspartate and glutamate pathway (Figure 2.21).   In comparison of the two 
nitrogen sources within environmental factors, there was significant variation across all 
identified metabolites.  Under control conditions aspartic acid, succinic acid 
semialdehyde, asparagine, glutamine, glutamic acid, pyruvic acid and oxoglutaric acid 
were all significantly different (p< 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.001, p = 0.001, p < 0.001 
and p < 0.05, respectively) in ammonium nitrate supplied plants compared to nodulated 
plants.   Under drought conditions succinic acid semialdehyde (p = 0.001), oxaloacetic 
acid (p < 0.01), asparagine (p < 0.05), glutamine (p < 0.05), pyruvic acid (p < 0.001) and 
oxoglutaric acid (p < 0.05) showed significant variation between nitrogen source.  Heat 
stress resulted in significant variation in alanine (p = 0.01), succinic acid semialdehyde 
(p < 0.0.1), asparagine (p = 0.001) and pyruvic acid (p < 0.05).  Succinic acid 
semialdehyde, asparagine, glutamine and pyruvic acid were significantly varied in 
different nitrogen sources under HxD conditions; p = 0.001, p < 0.05, p < 0.01 and p < 
0.05 respectively.  Under HxWL conditions alanine (p < 0.05), asparagine (p < 0.001), 
glutamic acid (p < 0.05) and pyruvic acid (p = 0.001) were significantly different between 
nitrogen source.  Waterlogging showed a significant variation in aspartic acid (p < 0.001), 
asparagine (p < 0.01), pyruvic acid (p < 0.001) and oxoglutaric acid (p < 0.05).  
In ammonium nitrate supplied plants drought exposed plants showed a significant 
variation in comparison to control plants in aspartic acid (p < 0.01) and succinic acid 
semialdehyde (p = 0.001).  Heat stress resulted in a significant shift in alanine (p = 0.01), 
glutamine (p < 0.01) and pyruvic acid (p < 0.05).   Aspartic acid, asparagine, glutamic 
acid, pyruvic acid and oxoglutaric acid were all significantly different to control values 
under HxD conditions (p < 0.001, p = 0.01, p < 0.01, p < 0.001 and p < 0.05 respectively.  
HxWL resulted in a significant difference in levels of aspartic acid (p = 0.01), alanine (p < 
0.05), glutamine (p < 0.01), glutamic acid (p < 0.05) and pyruvic acid (p = 0.001).  Under 
singular waterlogging stress aspartic acid was the only significantly altered metabolite 
in comparison to control values (p < 0.001).  
Nodulated plants appeared to show less variation when comparing stress values to 
control values, however several significant differences were observed.  Under drought 
conditions succinic acid semialdehyde, pyruvic acid, and fumaric acid were all 
significantly different to control values (p < 0.001 for all compounds).  Heat stress 
resulted in an alteration in succinic semialdehyde (p < 0.001), pyruvic acid (p < 0.001), 
oxoglutaric acid (p < 0.05), and fumaric acid (p<0.001).  Succinic acid semialdehyde (p < 
0.001), oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.05), glutamic acid (p = 0.001), pyruvic acid (p < 0.001), 
oxoglutaric acid (p < 0.05) and fumaric acid (P < 0.001) were all significantly different 
under HxD stress.  HxWL significantly affected succinic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.001), 
oxaloacetic acid (p < 0.05), glutamic acid (p < 0.05), pyruvic acid (p < 0.001), oxoglutaric 
acid (p < 0.05) and fumaric acid (p < 0.001).  Under singular waterlogging conditions 
aspartic acid, alanine, succinic acid semialdehyde, pyruvic acid, and fumaric acid were 
all significantly different to control values (p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001, p < 0.001, p < 
0.001 respectively).   
Cysteine and methionine metabolism 
Aspartic acid and pyruvic acid both appear in the cysteine and methionine pathway, and 
activity relating to these two compounds has been describe in alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate metabolism (Figure 2.22).   Several other compounds in the pathway were 
also identified as significantly altered in relation to varying factors.  
Several compounds showed differences between nodulated and ammonium nitrate 
supplied plants in control conditions; serine (p = 0.001), homoserine (p < 0.05), 3-
mercaptopyruvate (p < 0.01) and methanethiol (p < 0.01).   Homoserine, 3-
methylpropionic acid, 3-mercaptopyruvate, and methanethiol were the only 
compounds to show significant variation in drought in different nitrogen source groups 
(p < 0.05, p < 0.05, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01 respectively).  Under heat stress cysteine (p< 
0.01), aspartate semialdehyde (p < 0.01), 3-mercaptopyruvate (p < 0.05) and 
methanethiol (p < 0.05) all showed significant variation in levels between nitrogen 
sources.   There was no significant variation between nitrogen sources under HxD 
conditions.  HxWL resulted in variation in serine (p < 0.05) only, whereas singular 
waterlogging resulted in differences in levels of homocysteine (p < 0.05), 3-
mercaptopyruvate (p = 0.001), and methanethiol (p < 0.05).   
In plants supplied with nitrogen in the form of ammonium nitrate, significant differences 
were observed under stress, in comparison to control levels, in serine (heat, HxD, HxWL; 
all p < 0.001), 3 methypropionic acid (heat, p < 0.01; HxD, p < 0.001; HxWL, p = 0.001), 
and aspartic acid semialdehyde (heat, HxD, HxWL; all p < 0.05).   
 A greater number of compounds were differently accumulating in nodulated roots 
under conditions of stress. Drought stress resulted in a significant change to levels of 3 
methylpropionic acid (p < 0.001), homocysteine (p < 0.05), and 3-mercaptopyruvate (p 
< 0.001).   Variation between heat stress and controls was observed in cysteine (p < 
0.05), 3 methylpropionic acid (p < 0.01) and homocysteine (p < 0.05). HxD impacted 
levels of cysteine (p < 0.01), aspartic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.05), 3-methylpropionic 
acid (p < 0.001), homocysteine (p < 0.05), 3-mercaptopyruvate (p < 0.001), and 
methanethiol (p < 0.01).  Cysteine (p < 0.05), aspartic acid semialdehyde (p < 0.001), 3-
methylpropionic acid (p < 0.001), homocysteine (p < 0.31), 3-mercaptopyruvate (p < 
0.05), and methanethiol (p < 0.01) were all significantly altered by HxWL stress.  Serine 
and 3-methylpropionic acid were the only compounds to show significant change under 
waterlogging stress (p < 0.001, p < 0.05 respectively).  
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism 
In the glycine, serine and threonine pathway, a number of identified metabolites have 
already been described previously; aspartic acid and pyruvate in alanine, aspartate and 
glutamate metabolism, and aspartate semialdehyde, serine, and homoserine in the 
cysteine and methionine pathway (Figure 2.23).   
In comparison of compound levels in ammonium nitrate supplied and nodulated roots 
the only compound showing no significant difference under any stress was 
aminoacetone.  Levels of betaine were significantly different in heat, HxD, HxWL, and 
waterlogging treated plants (p < 0.05 for each stress).  Glycine was significantly different 
in control plants (p < 0.01) and HxWL (p < 0.05).  Hydroxypyruvic acid levels varied 
significantly in control plants (p < 0.05), drought (p < 0.05), and HxD (p < 0.001).  
The identified metabolites all showed significant variation between one or more stress 
factors, compared to control values, in ammonium nitrate supplied plants.  Drought did 
not result in any significant variation in compound levels except for in serine and 
homoserine, which have been previously described. Heat stress resulted in a significant 
change in aminoacetone and betaine levels (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively).  In HxD 
treated plants, a difference in levels of aminoacetone (p < 0.01) and hydroxypyruvic acid 
(p < 0.05) was observed.  Aminoacetone (p < 0.001), betaine (p < 0.01) and glycine (p < 
0.05) were significantly altered under HxWL conditions.  Aminoacetone and glycine 
were the only metabolites significantly altered by waterlogging (p < 0.05 and p < 0.05, 
respectively).  
Arginine and proline metabolism 
Glutamate, glutamine, aspartic acid, and fumaric acid have all been described in 
previous sections; hydroxyproline, proline, and N-acetyl-L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde 
were also identified and described here (Figure. 2.24).  Comparing nitrogen sources, 
proline showed variation between ammonium nitrate and nodulated plants in both heat 
and HxWL (p < 0.05 in both compounds).  N-acetyl-L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde 
demonstrated differences in control plants (p < 0.05) and HxD plants (p < 0.05).  
Hydroxyproline showed variation in waterlogging only (p < 0.01). 
The only compound to show any significant variation in stress levels, as compared to 
control, under ammonium nitrate as the primary nitrogen source was N-acetyl-L-
glutamate-5-semialdehyde; heat, p < 0.05; HxD, p < 0.05.  
N-acetyl-L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde also showed significant differences in stressed 
plants compared to control under nodulated conditions (heat, p < 0.05; HxD, p < 0.01; 
HxWL, p < 0.05).  In addition to this, hydroxyproline also showed significant variation in 
heat (p < 0.001), HxWL (p < 0.001) and waterlogging (p < 0.001).  
Glutathione metabolism 
Glutathione metabolism is included with amino acids as it is synthesised from 
glutamate, cysteine, and glycine.  Changes to glutamate, cysteine, and glycine have 
already been characterised, however, additionally, ascorbic acid, glutathione, and 
cysteinyl-glycine were also identified within the pathway.   
Comparing nitrogen sources, ascorbic acid showed a significant difference between 
nodulated and ammonium nitrate supplied plants under control conditions (p < 0.001), 
drought (p < 0.05), heat (p < 0.05), and waterlogging (p < 0.001) stress.  Cysteinyl-glycine 
was significantly different in control groups only (p < 0.001).  HxD and HxWL treated 
plants also showed significant variation between the two nitrogen sources (p < 0.05 in 
both treatments).  
Ascorbic acid and glutathione were both significantly altered under stress conditions, in 
comparison to control levels, in plants supplied with ammonium nitrate.  In ascorbic 
acid the variation was observed in HxWL plants (p < 0.05) and in glutathione the 
variation was in heat and HxD treated plants (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 respectively).  
In nodulated plants glutathione and cysteinyl-glycine were both differently 
accumulating under stress conditions.  Glutathione was affected by waterlogging (p < 
0.01), and cysteinyl-glycine by drought, heat, HxD, HxWL and waterlogging (p < 0.01, p 
< 0.05, p < 0.01, p = 0.01, and p < 0.05 respectively).  
Figure 2.21. Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and glutamate 
pathway in Lotus japonicus roots.  Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not 
shown. Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.  Text in red 
signifies major associated pathways.  
L-Alanine L-Aspartic acid L-Asparagine 
Pyruvic acid 
Oxaloacetic acid 
Glutamic acid 
Fumaric  acid 
Succinic acid semialdehyde 
(Glycolysis) 
(Nitrogen metabolism) 
(TCA cycle) 
Figure 2.22. Identified metabolites in the cysteine and methionine pathway in 
Lotus japonicus roots. Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not shown. 
Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.  Text in red 
signifies major associated pathways. 
L-Serine L-Cysteine Pyruvic acid 
3-Mercaptopyruvic acid 
L-Homoserine 
Methanethiol 
L-Homocysteine L-Aspartate semialdehyde 
L-aspartic acid 
5- Methylthioadenosine 3-Methylthiopropionic acid 
Figure 2.23. Identified metabolites in the glycine, serine and threonine pathway in 
Lotus japonicus roots. Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not shown. 
Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.  Text in red signifies 
major associated pathways. 
Hydroxypyruvic acid L-Serine Pyruvic acid 
Glycine Betaine 
Aminoacetone 
L Homoserine 
L-Aspartate semialdehyde L-Aspartic acid 
Figure 2.24. Significantly altered metabolites in the arginine and proline pathway 
in Lotus japonicus roots.  Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not shown. 
Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.  Text in red signifies 
major associated pathways. 
L Glutamic acid 
N-Acetyl-L-glutamate 5-semialdehyde 
L Arginine L-Proline 
Hydroxyproline 
Fumaric acid 
L-Aspartic acid 
Figure 2.25. Significantly altered metabolites in the glutathione pathway in 
Lotus japonicus roots.  Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not 
shown. Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.   
Glutathione 
Ascorbic acid 
Glycine 
Cysteinylglycine 
L Cysteine 
L Glutamic acid 
2.4.1.2.2. Carbon and energy metabolism 
TCA cycle 
The primary carbon and energy related pathway identified in pathway analysis was the 
TCA cycle (Figure 2.26).  Several metabolites within this pathway have been described 
in previous pathways; fumaric acid, oxaloacetic acid, oxoglutarate, and pyruvic acid all 
feature in alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism. 
Differences in levels of succinic acid were observed between nitrogen sources under 
heat and HxWL stress (both p < 0.05).  Malic acid was significantly different in 
waterlogging groups (p < 0.05). Phosphoenolpyruvic acid showed a difference in heat 
stress groups (p < 0.01).  Cis-aconitic acid and citric acid were both significantly different 
between control groups (p < 0.001 and p < 0.05 respectively).   
Plants that were supplied with ammonium nitrate solution showed significant variation 
in succinic acid levels under heat (p < 0.05), HxD (p < 0.01) and HxWL (p < 0.05) in 
comparison to control levels.   
Greater variation was seen in nodulated plants in terms of stressed plants in contrast to 
control plants.  Succinic acid was observed in significantly different levels in drought, 
heat, HxD, HxWL, and waterlogged plants (all p < 0.05 except for HxD p < 0.01).  Malic 
acid was altered in drought (p < 0.05), heat (p < 0.01), HxD (p < 0.01), HxWL (p < 0.01), 
and waterlogging (p < 0.05).  Significant differences in citric acid levels were observed 
in drought, heat, HxD, and HxWL stressed plants (all P < 0.05).  Drought, heat, HxD, 
HxWL, and waterlogging all significantly altered levels of cis-aconitic acid (p < 0.01, p < 
0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.01, p < 0.05 respectively).   
Carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms  
In carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, the only metabolite for which variation 
has not been described is glyceric acid 1,3 bisphosphate.  Phosphoenolpyruvate, 
aspartic acid, oxaloacetic acid, pyruvic acid, alanine, and malic acid are all described in 
previous pathways.   
Glyceric acid 1,3 bisphosphate was seen to be significantly different between nitrogen 
sources under control and drought stress conditions (both p < 0.01).   Under ammonium 
nitrate supply, HxD, HxWL, and waterlogging stressed plants showed significantly 
different levels to control plants (all p < 0.05).  In nodulated plants the differences were 
seen in heat (p < 0.05), HxD (p < 0.01), and HxWL (p < 0.05).  
Glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism 
Citric acid, succinic acid, cis-aconitic acid, malic acid, and oxaloacetic acid have all been 
characterised in previous pathway data.  Additionally, glycolic acid and phosphoglycolic 
acid were identified in the pathway analysis.  
Comparing nitrogen sources, both glycolic acid and phosphoglycolic acid were 
significantly different in control (p < 0.01, and p < 0.05 respectively), drought (p < 0.001 
in both), heat (p < 0.001 and p < 0.01 respectively), and waterlogged (p < 0.01 and p < 
0.001 respectively) plants.  
Only glycolic acid showed significant variation between stressed and control plants 
under ammonium nitrate supplied conditions (drought, p< 0.05; HxD, p < 0.001; 
waterlogging, p = 0.001).   
In nodulated plants, a significant difference was seen in levels of glycolic acid under 
conditions of drought, heat, HxD, and HxWL stress (all P < 0.001).  Levels of 
phosphoglycolic acid were significantly different in HxWL (p < 0.01) and waterlogging (p 
< 0.001).   
Glycolysis or gluconeogenesis 
Glucose 1 phosphate was the only identified metabolite in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis 
that has not yet been described; oxaloacetic acid, phosphoenolpyruvic acid, pyruvic 
acid, and glyceric acid 1,3-biphosphate were described in previous pathways.  
Significant difference between nitrogen source groups was observed in drought 
exposed plants only (p < 0.001), with levels in nodulated plants being significantly higher 
than ammonium supplied plants.  
Within the ammonium nitrate supplied group, a significant reduction in glucose 1 
phosphate levels was observed between control plants and stress exposed plants in 
drought, heat, HxD (all p < 0.001), and HxWL (p< 0.01).  In nodulated plants levels of 
glucose 1 phosphate were significantly lower in heat, HxD, and HxWL plants (p < 0.05, p 
< 0.01, p < 0.05 respectively) in comparison to control plants.  
Figure 2.26. Significantly altered metabolites in the TCA cycle in Lotus japonicus 
roots. Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not shown. Pathway diagram 
constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.  Text in red signifies major associated 
pathways. 
Citric acid 
Cis Aconitic acid 
Oxoglutaric acid 
Succinic acid 
Fumaric acid 
L-Malic acid 
Oxaloacetic acid 
Phosphoenolpyruvic acid Pyruvic acid 
(Glycolysis) 
(Arginine biosynthesis) 
Figure 2.27. Significantly altered metabolites in the carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic organisms pathway in Lotus japonicus roots. Non-significant 
intermediary metabolites are not shown. Pathway diagram constructed from 
KEGG pathway mapping.   
Glyceric acid 1,3 biphosphate 
Oxalacetic acid 
L-Malic acid Pyruvic acid 
Phosphoenolpyruvic acid 
L-Alanine 
L-Aspartic acid 
Figure 2.28. Significantly altered metabolites in the glyoxylic acid and 
dicarboxylic acid pathway in Lotus japonicus roots.  Non-significant 
intermediary metabolites are not shown. Pathway diagram constructed 
from KEGG pathway mapping.   
Oxalacetic acid Citric acid 
cis-Aconitic acid 
Succinic acid 
L-Malic acid 
Glycolic acid 
Phosphoglycolic acid 
  Figure 2.29. Identified metabolites in the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway 
in Lotus japonicus roots.   Non-significant intermediary metabolites are not 
shown. Pathway diagram constructed from KEGG pathway mapping.   
Glucose 1 phosphate 
Glyceric acid 1,3- biphosphate 
Phosphoenolpyruvic acid 
Pyruvic acid 
Oxaloacetic acid 
2.5. Discussion and Conclusion 
The primary objectives of this chapter were to further understand the effects of singular 
and combinational abiotic stress on the physiology and metabolism of the model 
legume Lotus japonicus var. gifu. It further assessed whether the source of nitrogen, 
ammonium nitrate or nodulation, contributed to variation within these assessed 
parameters.  We observed that both stress factor and nitrogen source result in variable 
change to morphology, physiology, and metabolism to varying degrees of significance.  
2.5.1 Plant morphology appears to be affected by both stress and nitrogen source  
From a morphological perspective the source of nitrogen could be seen to have an effect 
across environmental conditions.  The most apparent difference between the two 
nitrogen groups was in growth rate, with the ammonium nitrate supplied group 
generally growing faster and being larger than nodulated plants.  Root nodulation 
requires high levels of photosynthate to be transported to root nodules as an energy 
supply for nitrogen fixing bacteria; this could conflict with the demand for 
photosynthate in areas of new growth such as new leaves, and as such rate of growth 
could be inhibited.   Nitrogen form and the quantity available could also contribute to 
the alteration in growth rate.  Use of B&D solution provided high levels of ammonium 
nitrate, which can be rapidly assimilated by plants with little energetic cost. Whilst BNF 
provides nitrogen to the plant in the form of directly utilisable ammonia, the quantity in 
which it is supplied is dependent on the rate of BNF.  This can be affected by exposure 
to abiotic stress, as seen in drought (Streeter 2003; Valentine et al. 2010) and heat stress 
(Aranjuelo et al. 2007), or potentially the growth stage of plants and nodules.  
Abiotic stress produced visible effects on plants in ways which were expected; 
droughted and waterlogged plants showed wilting and chlorosis, with effects seemingly 
exacerbated by a combination with heat stress.  Plants from nodulated groups however 
appeared to withstand abiotic stress to a greater extent than the ammonium nitrate 
supplied plants, particularly in droughted conditions; given their smaller stature and 
decreased surface area, this could be linked to reduced water requirements or reduced 
water loss.  
2.5.2 Physiology is impacted to a greater extent by abiotic stress than by nitrogen 
source 
In contrast to morphological analysis, the source of nitrogen appears to have little to no 
effect on physiological processes in Lotus japonicus.  Abiotic stress however did impact 
physiological processes, generally in ways that would be expected.  Drought is widely 
recognised as the predominant abiotic stress to affect plant water status, leading to a 
decrease in leaf relative water content.  Recent studies have considered whether the 
combination of heat and drought exacerbates this decrease and concluded that, in 
general, it does not (Sehgal et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2017); in this study these findings 
were echoed, suggesting that the addition of heat does not increase the rate of plant 
water loss in drought stressed Lotus japonicus.   Interestingly, one of the only 
physiological factors to be observed as significantly different between the two nitrogen 
sources was the relative water content of waterlogged plants, where the RWC of 
ammonium nitrate supplied plants was significantly lower than nodulated.  The reason 
for this is unclear, especially given the research evidence demonstrating waterlogging 
to have a more deleterious effect on nodulated plants and assuming that the lower 
stomatal conductance seen in ammonium nitrate supplied plants would limit water loss 
to a greater extent than nodulated plants.  
Photosynthetic parameters appear to be impacted to a greater extent by heat stress 
than by drought or waterlogging stress.  A decrease in FV/FM was found to be significant 
in nodulated plants only, with the variation within groups in ammonium nitrate supplied 
groups masking any significant effect.  Impairment of photosynthetic parameters under 
heat stress is a widely recognised issue in plant stress biology, notably due to rubisco 
deactivation and damage to photosystem II (Sharkey, 2005; Allakhverdiev et al., 2008; 
Carmo-Silva et al., 2012).  In this study HxD resulted in a greater reduction in FV/FM than 
heat or drought stress alone, indicating a negative effect of the interaction; this finding 
agrees with observations made in other legume species including chickpea and lentil 
(Awasthi et al. 2017; Sehgal et al. 2017).   
Stomatal conductance was not significantly affected by nitrogen source in this study but 
it is the most significantly altered physiological parameter under abiotic stress.  A 
decrease in the rate of stomatal conductance is a known plant response in both drought 
and waterlogging conditions and was observed in this study.  The decreases observed 
in the combinational stress groups suggest that drought and waterlogging response 
override the heat response.  The closure of stomata under a combinational stress event 
that involves heat is a potentially risky strategy; whilst limiting water loss, plants are also 
exposing themselves to greater incidence of increased internal temperatures that result 
in actions such as membrane damage.  Indeed, in this study heat and drought resulted 
in significantly impaired photosynthetic parameters, as was also observed in ammonium 
nitrate supplied heat and waterlogged plants.    
2.5.3. Metabolism 
The effects of abiotic stress and variable nitrogen source on metabolism is complex; the 
major source of variation in this study was stress, found to be significant through 
MANOVA, however some variation was also observed in nitrogen source.   The output 
of heatmapping analysis would suggest that temperature stress is the primary source of 
variation in metabolic response, particularly in leaves, with the exception of ammonium 
nitrate supplied plant roots, in which drought contributes a greater role.    Changes to 
amino acid and carbon/energy metabolism were revealed through pathway analysis, 
suggesting an impact on primary metabolism; this analysis demonstrated changes in 
abundance not only of pathway end products, e.g. amino acids, but also intermediary 
metabolites which have other potential roles in abiotic stress response.  Secondary 
metabolites were also revealed amongst the most significantly altered, with a variety of 
associated roles including antioxidant mechanisms, osmolytic potential, and signalling 
activity.  Comparison of leaves and roots revealed some differences in the plant organs 
response to stress, and differences in the significance of nitrogen source.  
2.5.3.1 Amino acids 
The roles of amino acids and their metabolic intermediates are well documented in their 
function in growth and development in Lotus japonicus, and to their role in abiotic stress 
response, acting as osmolytic compounds, antioxidants and ROS scavengers, and serving 
as precursor molecules for secondary metabolites associated with tolerance 
(Ramakrishna and Ravishankar 2011; Batista-Silva et al. 2019).   
The alanine, aspartate, and glutamate pathway is intimately associated with the 
assimilation and distribution of nitrogen in plants.  This pathway was identified in both 
leaf and root analysis, with a key difference being the absence of glutamine and 
glutamate as significant molecules in leaves; given their role in the initial assimilation of 
ammonia in the root, this is not an entirely unexpected result.  Of some interest 
however is the variation between these two compounds, with the addition of 
asparagine which was identified in leaves also, between nitrogen source and stress 
factor.  The observation of both asparagine and glutamine at significantly higher levels 
in ammonium nitrate supplied plants would suggest that this is providing plants with 
higher level of nitrogen than is provided by nodulation; this is consistent with the 
differences observed in plant growth and morphology.  It is however also apparent that 
plants supplied with ammonium nitrate show greater fluctuation between levels in 
roots upon exposure to abiotic stress; a significant reduction in heat and HxWL stressed 
plants would suggest temperature inhibits nitrogen assimilation.  Interestingly HxD 
exposed plants did not show the same reduction in Asn or Gln but behaved in a way 
consistent with drought.  Whilst lower levels of Asn and Gln were observed overall in 
nodulated plants, abiotic stress did not induce fluctuations to the same degree; 
contribution of the ascorbate-glutathione pathway as an antioxidant source protecting 
nodules has been observed (Becana et al. 2010), however in this study associated 
compounds were observed in higher quantities in ammonium nitrate supplied plant 
roots and in similar levels across stresses in nodulated plants.  Asparagine can serve as 
a key transporter of nitrogen between plant organs; in this study, in leaves, levels were 
observationally, but not significantly, higher in ammonium nitrate supplied plants, 
which could be consistent with the increased rate of uptake and supply in roots.  
Following the initial assimilation of nitrogen, the fate of glutamine is a rapid transfer to 
glutamate, which in turn is largely converted to alanine and aspartate; in these 
compounds, the lower rate of variation between nitrogen sources could suggest that 
mobilisation of nitrogen via asparagine is responsible for the growth-related differences 
in plants.   
Post nitrogen assimilation, variation in abundance was observed in several other amino 
acids.  The aromatic amino acids tryptophan, phenylalanine, and tyrosine are commonly 
derived via the shikimic acid pathway and frequently serve as precursors to the 
production of secondary metabolites.  Phenylalanine and tryptophan were both 
observed in leaves.  Whilst there was some significant variation in phenylalanine levels, 
there was no discernible pattern to up-/down-regulation, however there were clear 
variations in downstream metabolites trans-cinnamic acid and 2-phenylacetamide.  The 
reduction in levels of trans-cinnamic acid under drought conditions could be associated 
with a rapid mobilisation to downstream compounds coumaric acid and salicylic acid; 
both of which were observed at higher levels in drought stressed plants, and in HxD 
stressed nodulated plants.   There is much evidence of salicylic acids role in promoting 
stress tolerance via multiple actions including defence signalling, proline mobilisation 
and antioxidant activation (Khan et al. 2015).   
Proline has been much researched and discussed as a key player in abiotic stress 
response and its regulation has been touted as a stress marker; the primary role of 
proline in these stress situations is as an osmoprotectant.  In Lotus japonicus it has been 
widely observed to accumulate under drought stress (Signorelli and Monza 2017) 
conditions, show a greater accumulation in the combination of heat and drought (Sainz 
et al. 2010).  Indeed, in the close relative Lotus corniculatus, nitrogen in the form of 
ammonium resulted in  significantly higher levels than in nodulated plants (Daz et al. 
2005b).  In this study, proline was observed in both leaves and roots, and demonstrated 
upregulation under both drought and HxD conditions, echoing the findings of previous 
research.  It is interesting to note however, that in both leaves and roots, under drought 
conditions there is significant variation between nitrogen sources, with much greater 
accumulation in ammonium nitrate supplied plants. This contrasts with previous work 
studying Lotus corniculatus, in which nodulated plants accumulated higher quantities of 
proline than nitrate fed (Borsanii and Dfaz 1999) and more recent work in Medicago 
trunculata in which nodulation resulted in greater accumulation (Staudinger et al. 
2016b).  A suggested explanation for the result from this study is that the level of 
drought experienced by the nodulated plants was lower than that of the ammonium 
nitrate group, due to slower growth and reduced water requirement, thus proline as an 
osmoprotectant was not yet required by the plant.  
The sulphur containing amino acid pathway that relates to cysteine and methionine 
production was enriched in roots, with a tendency for plants to show a decrease in 
metabolite levels, including of cysteine itself, when affected by heat stress and a 
maintenance of levels under drought and waterlogging stress. HxD however was 
particularly affected, suggesting exacerbated effects under this combination of stresses.  
A key compound in the uptake of sulphur, cysteine is intimately linked with the 
metabolism of glutathione (also identified), the accumulation of which has been well 
documented in heat stress tolerance due to factors including activity as an antioxidant 
ROS scavenger and involvement in modulation of antioxidant enzymes and heat shock 
proteins (Zagorchev et al. 2013; Hasanuzzaman et al. 2017).  Whilst accumulation is 
associated with tolerance, a decline in levels could be associated with susceptibility to 
stress damage and reduced quantities have been reported to have negative effect on 
the biological functions of plant cells (Kumar and Chattopadhyay 2018).  
Though the lysine biosynthesis pathway was identified in both leaf and root pathway 
analysis, lysine itself was not identified within the dataset.  Observation of the 
metabolites that were identified shows they were common compounds which feature 
in multiple other pathways, and therefore may not be connected solely with lysine; 
additionally, the pathway analysis features only a small number of compounds for lysine 
biosynthesis, therefore likelihood of a false overexpression could be increased.  
2.5.3.2 Carbon metabolism 
In this work, the TCA cycle, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate, and photosynthetic carbon 
fixation pathways were identified in both roots and leaves, in addition to glycolysis 
which was identified in roots.  Regarding stress impacts, the most noticeable effect was 
the general reduction in compound levels in all groups exposed to higher temperature 
stress, when compared to control temperatures.  Combinational stress appeared to 
exacerbate the reduction in carbon metabolism related compounds, particularly when 
heat and drought were combined; this observation was made in both leaves and roots, 
suggesting similar effects in both plant organs. Previous work by Sainz et al. (2010) found 
the combination of heat and drought to have an increased damaging effect in 
photosynthetic parameters in Lotus japonicus, and similar findings have been observed 
in lentil ((Sehgal et al. 2017).  Though there are other sources of intermediates found in 
these carbon metabolism pathways, e.g. protein and lipid catabolism contributing to the 
TCA cycle, photosynthesis is a key source for carbon metabolism and impairment is likely 
to have downstream effects; in this study photosynthetic activity was impaired to a 
more significant level in HxD plants than single stress, likely affecting carbon 
metabolism.    
The primary difference observed between plant organs where carbon metabolism is 
concerned was between nitrogen sources.  Compound levels in roots demonstrated a 
more significant variation than in leaves.  Observation of the root data showed that 
many of the compounds associated with carbon metabolism were higher in nodulated 
plants that in ammonium nitrate supplied plants, particularly under healthy control 
conditions, with some exceptions such as oxaloacetic acid and oxoglutaric acid under 
heat stress.  One possible explanation for this could relate to the proximity of sampling 
tissue to root nodules.  Energy supply to root nodules involves the translocation of 
sucrose to the root, where it is converted to other sugars and metabolised through 
glycolysis, followed by conversion to oxaloacetic acid and malic acid, and potentially to 
succinic acid and fumaric acid (Dicenzo et al. 2017).  It is these metabolites that cross 
into the bacteroid space, and increased abundance in the surrounding root tissue could 
be attributed to this.   
2.5.3.3 Secondary metabolism 
The identification of secondary metabolites with varying functions presents a further 
area of interest in the response to abiotic stress in Lotus japonicus var. gifu.   When 
examining the most significant 20 percent from each plant organ it is apparent that 
there is no crossover, suggesting that outside of primary metabolism there is a 
divergence in compounds and their roles in stress response. Unlike primary metabolism, 
it is evident that the source of nitrogen is a key source of variation in many identified 
metabolites, in both leaves and roots.  
In leaves, phenolic compounds in the form of sativan and coumaric acid were identified.   
Coumaric acid has been discussed previously in relation to trans-cinnamic acid and 
salicylic acid production.  Sativan is a constituent of the isoflavonoid family of 
compounds.  There is not much evidence for sativans actions within plants under abiotic 
stress exposure, however other isoflavans and isoflavonoids such as glabridin and 
daidzein have been reported to play a role in antioxidant activity and growth regulation 
under stress conditions (Posmyk et al. 2005; Kumar and Pandey 2013).  
Indole-3-acetic acid and dihydrozeatin occurrence and variation in leaves would appear 
to indicate an impact on plant hormone levels driven by nodulation.  This is further 
indicated by the occurrence of cis-zeatin as a significant compound in root analysis.  In 
all three cases levels were significantly higher in nodulated plants than in ammonium 
nitrate supplied plants.  Cis-zeatin is a cytokinin type hormone, and dihydrozeatin is 
involved in its synthesis; the presence of high levels of cytokinin type hormones in leaves 
of nodulated plants has long since been documented (Henson and Wheeler, 1976), 
though there is little to document the accumulation of these hormones in comparison 
to plants with different sources of nitrogen.  Long associated only with growth 
regulation, recent research has examined the role of cytokinins in relation to stress 
interactions, linking accumulation to heat stress tolerance and the maintenance of 
photosynthesis under drought conditions in Arabidopsis, as well heat stress tolerance 
in young pea leaves (Schfer et al. 2015; Pavl et al. 2018).  In this study however, levels 
of these compounds are highest in control temperature plants, with a decrease in levels 
in heat treatment, suggesting a greater association with growth and demonstrating a 
negative impact on this by heat stress.  Like cis-zeatin, IAA was upregulated in nodulated 
plants, with little variation in stress response except for HxWL and waterlogging, 
suggesting its significance in this data relates to nitrogen source.  There is some evidence 
that suggests increased levels of IAA have been found in nodulated plants, however it is 
confined mainly to nodule and root tissue (Ghosh et al. 2015), with no evidence of 
distribution to leaves or a systemic upregulation.   
2.5.3.4. Conclusion 
Lotus japonicus var. Gifu appears to be impacted by heat stress to a greater extent than 
by drought stress, as is evidenced by physiological and metabolomic analysis.  A 
combination of these stresses, HxD, appears to have an exacerbated negative effect, 
indicative of antagonistic effects of the single stresses.   
Investigation into varied impacts of nodulation and nitrogen supply proved somewhat 
inconclusive.  Some variation was observed in relation to nitrogen uptake and supply 
and in carbon metabolism and transfer to roots, however this is largely associated with 
known factors such as the increased energetic requirements in nodulated plants for 
supply to rhizobacteria.  There was little evidence that the interaction between host and 
N-fixing bacteria was resulting in changed stress response.  This hypothesis could 
however be tested further, with analysis at different growth stages and with more 
established root nodules.   
A major limitation to the study was the use of only one genotype, whereas use of 
multiple genotypes with mixed, known tolerance responses to stress could have 
provided a deeper insight into the compounds associated with varied stress response in 
Lotus japonicus.  
CHAPTER THREE: SCREENING VIGNA UNGUICULATA (COWPEA) GENOTYPES FROM 
SOUTH-WEST NIGERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF RESPONSE TO MULTIPLE ABIOTIC 
STRESS FACTORS  
3.1 INTRODUCTION  
Vigna unguiculata, or cowpea, is an important grain legume grown mostly in the tropics.  
West Africa is the largest production region in the world, and Nigeria ranks as the 
greatest producing country.  In Nigeria production occurs at its greatest scale in the 
north of the country and research has largely focussed on improving production in this 
region.  However, cowpea is an important constituent of the staple diet in southern 
Nigeria also and existing demand is not met (Agbogidi, O. M. and Egho 2012).  Research 
into varieties from the south is limited.  Thus far research has focussed largely on 
agronomic traits, including yield and seed quality, with findings mainly associated with 
soil quality and sowing dates (Agbogidi, O. M. and Egho 2012; Ezeaku, I et al. 2015).  
Research into physiological parameters associated with abiotic stress has demonstrated 
limitations to photosynthesis under drought, heat, and waterlogging conditions (El-
Enany et al. 2013; Uzunova and Zlatev 2013; Rivas et al. 2016) attributable to stomatal 
limitation and photosystem II damage, caused by thylakoid membrane disruption and 
ROS accumulation (Prasad et al. 2011; Singh and Raja Reddy 2011; Marutani et al. 2012).   
Metabolic activity has been researched in cowpea, but not to a great extent and often 
relating to isolated pathways or in a targeted approach.  Targeted studies have 
identified a number of osmoprotectants including proline and glycine betaine or sugars 
(Singh and Raja Reddy 2011; Bita and Gerats 2013; Hasanuzzaman et al. 2013).  
Upregulation of the metabolism of antioxidant compounds has also been observed, 
particularly glutathione and ascorbic acid (Nair et al. 2008).  Non-targeted metabolite 
analysis that can provide a more holistic overview of metabolism under stress is an area 
lacking in output.  Recently a study into cowpea metabolism under drought conditions 
has suggested an important role of osmoprotection as a tolerance strategy, resulting in 
accumulation of compounds including proline, phenylalanine, and raffinose 
concomitant with decreases in levels of compounds associated with carbon metabolism 
such as those of the TCA cycle (Goufo et al. 2017).   These findings suggest there is a 
need for more detailed studies into the physiological and metabolic responses of 
cowpea under abiotic stress, particularly looking at multiple factors and combined 
abiotic stress.  
A decision was made to utilise landrace accessions from the Southwest Nigeria. This was 
based on the potential to identify sources of tolerance that are present within the gene 
pool of the study region.  Additionally, traditional cultivars and landraces are likely to be 
more indicative of the resource available to smallholder farmers within the region, who 
may not be able to access improved varieties.  Cultural and social preferences have been 
reported to play a large role in the uptake of improved varieties also, so utilising a variety 
of local accessions from which to identify tolerance traits would be a logical step.   
The aim of this chapter is to characterise responses of twenty-one cowpea accessions 
from Southwest Nigeria to a range of single and combined abiotic stress factors.   
This will be established by: 
- Using morphological, physiological, and metabolomic analyses to test the 
hypothesis that the abiotic stresses drought, high temperature, and 
waterlogging will have different impacts on biological function.   Additionally, 
the hypothesis that combinational stress results in a different response to single 
stress will be tested using the combinations heat x drought and heat x 
waterlogging.   
- Using morphological, physiological, and metabolomic analysis to explore 
variation between accessions under varied stress conditions.  
3.2. Vigna unguiculata methodology 
Given the focus on the South-west region of Nigeria, it was necessary to identify and 
select plant material that would be relevant to this geographic area.  Three 
commercially available elite varieties developed specifically for the South-west region 
by the Institute of Agricultural Research and Trainings (I.A.R&T) Grain Legumes 
Improvement Programme were selected; namely Ife Brown, Ife BPC, and Ife 98-12.  In 
addition to investigating elite varieties, landraces that represent the potential spectrum 
of varieties traditionally cultivated by cowpea growers in the South-west region were 
also selected.  The International Institute for Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, holds the 
worlds largest cowpea germplasm selection in its genebank; 15,122 unique accessions.   
Using data from IITAs genebank, available accessions were selected based on 
adherence to criteria outlined in table 3.1  
Based on these criteria 77 accessions were selected and acquired from IITA.  The data 
table provided by IITA lists collection coordinates which were used to map the 
geographic distribution of selected accessions, demonstrating adequate distribution 
IITA data classification Selection criteria 
Country Nigeria 
State/Province Ondo/Oyo/Ogun/Osun/Edo 
Ecological/Vegetation Zone  Forest 
Frequency at collection site Frequent/abundant/occasional 
Biological Status  Traditional cultivar/Landrace 
Table 3.1. Selection criteria for accessions from the cowpea genebank at the 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Nigeria.    
across the region of interest.  To further refine the number of accessions the rate of 
germination was assessed and those with a rate of >80% were selected for further 
screening; this producing a figure of 18 accessions.  In addition to these landraces, a 
further three developed accessions were identified as being relevant to the study region 
in existing literature; Ife Brown, Ife BPC, and Ife 98-12.   
3.2.1. Plant germination and initial growth conditions 
Seeds were sown in trays, with drainage holes, (345 x 215 x 55mm) containing 3 x 5 
plastic inserts, in a 4:1 mix of Levington M2 compost and grit, at a rate of two plants per 
section.  To minimise the effect of within tray position as a factor affecting experimental 
outcomes, varieties were sown in a randomised block design.  After sowing, trays were 
placed in a controlled environment growth chamber set to the following conditions; 
light/dark, 12/12h; photosynthetic photon flux density of   300 mol m-2 s-1; 
temperature, 33o/23oC (light/dark, respectively).  Trays were well watered daily, shortly 
after the onset of the light period.  Plants were grown under these initial conditions for 
21 days, at which point stress response experiments were initiated.  
3.2.2. Stress screening 
Seeds from 21 selected genotypes were sown and germinated using the method 
described previously, with a total number of 36 plants per genotype.  For assessment of 
responses to multiple abiotic stress, plants were divided into six treatment groups of six 
plants per genotype.   The stress treatments utilised in this study were drought, high 
temperature (heat), waterlogging, and combinations of heat x drought and heat x 
waterlogging.   Drought was imposed by a total removal of water supply to plants 
following the onset of the stress experiment period.  High temperature stress was 
imposed by exposing plants to temperatures above their optimum temperature range, 
in Lotus japonicus this was 33C and in cowpea this was 40C.  Waterlogging was 
imposed by placing plants in trays with a height that exceed that of the pots they were 
grown in; these trays were filled so the water level was above the soil level and base of 
the stem, the water was topped up twice daily to ensure it remained above the soil level.  
Combinations of stress were imposed by exposing plants to two factors at once, so a 
high temperature with the total removal of water supply and high temperature with a 
consistent level of water above the soil level.   
3.2.3. Morphological assessment 
Plants were visually assessed for development of symptoms associated with abiotic 
stress including wilting, chlorosis, leaf death.  In addition to this, overall parameters such 
as growth rate, height, and foliage were also considered.  Plants were scored according 
to tolerance where the outcome of stress exposure allowed this.   Tolerance scores were 
allocated on a scale of 1-4, where 1 indicates a high level of tolerance to stress and 4 
indicates damage/susceptibility to stress.  
3.2.4. Stomatal conductance 
Measurements for assessment of stomatal conductance were carried out using an AP4 
portable cycling porometer (Delta T, Cambridge).  Porometer calibration was carried out 
prior to the onset of each set of measurements and during measurements when the 
equipment was introduced to a new climatic environment, for instance when moved to 
a higher temperature growth chamber.  Measurements were expressed in mmol-1 s-2 
and commenced approximately six hours after plants entered the light period, at 
midday.    
3.2.5. Chlorophyll fluorescence 
Chlorophyll fluorescence measurements were carried out using a portable modulated 
fluorometer (OS-30p, Opti- Science Inc., Hudson, NH, USA).   Measurements were taken 
from leaves that had been dark adapted for 60 minutes.  In cowpea experiments this 
was achieved by switching off growth chamber lights and taking readings under low 
level green torch light.  
3.2.6. Leaf relative water content 
For measurement of leaf relative water content (LRWC), a protocol outlined by Sade et 
al., (2015) was followed.  The leaf and petiole were excised from plants and transferred 
immediately to pre-weighed and labelled sealable plastic bags (BW = weight of the bag).  
Samples were immediately placed in a cool, dark container, ensuring bags were tightly 
sealed.  Four replicates were obtained for each treatment.  Total weight of the fresh leaf 
and bag was recorded (TFW), before 2 ml 5mM CaCl2 was pipetted into the bag, 
submerging the petiole but not the leaf.   Samples were left with petioles submerged 
for 24 hours, following which the leaves were removed from the bag, excess liquid 
blotted from the sample, and weighed for turgid weight (TW).  Samples were then 
placed into individual labelled paper bags and placed in a drying oven at 60oC for 72 
hours; the dried leaves were weighed to obtain a dry weight (DW) figure. LRWC was 
calculated using the equation: RWC = ((TFW-BW)-DW)/TW-DW) x 100 
3.2.7. Metabolite analysis 
In leaves of cowpea 40mg ( 1mg) of plant material was obtained and placed into pre-
prepared 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes, each containing a single acetone washed stainless 
steel ball. Lotus japonicus material consisted of entire leaves being removed from the 
plant and weighed, whereas for cowpea samples a disc puncher was used to remove a 
standard amount of material, ensuring consistency across leaf samples. All samples 
were then immediately flash-frozen in liquid N before being homogenised using a ball 
mill.  At this stage, samples were immediately placed on ice and 1 mL of chilled 
chloroform: methanol: dHO (1:2.5:1) mix was added to the centrifuge tubes.  Samples 
were then vortexed in a cold room at 4 C for 15 min and returned to ice before being 
centrifuged at 4C at 5000 x g for 3 minutes. Aliquots of the supernatant were then 
decanted into clean labelled microcentrifuge tube. All samples were analysed using high 
resolution (HR) flow infusion (FI) electro-spray ionisation (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS). 
60 L of extracted sample was transferred to a glass HPLC vial containing a 200 L flat 
bottom micro insert (Chromacol). Mass spectra were acquired on an Exactive Orbitrap 
(ThermoFinnigan, San Jose CA) mass spectrometer coupled to an Accela 
(ThermoFinnigan, San Jose CA) ultra-performance liquid chromatography system. 20 L 
of sample was injected and delivered to the ESI source via a flow solvent (mobile phase) 
or pre-mixed HPLC grade MeOH (Fisher Scientific) and ultra- pure H2O (18.2 ) at a ratio 
of 7:3. The flow rate was 200 Lmin-1 for the first 1.5 minutes, and 600 Lmin-1 for the 
remainder of the method. The total method time was 30 minutes. 
Positive and negative ionisation modes were acquired simultaneously. One scan event 
was used to acquire all mass spectra, 55.000 - 1000.000 m/z and 63.000 - 1000.00 m/z 
for positive and negative mode respectively. The scan rate was 1.0 Hz. Mass resolution 
was 100,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) 5 x 105 and maximum injection time 
of 250 ms, for both ionisation modes. For preparation of the data output, files were 
exported to CDF-files, mass aligned and centroided in MATLAB (V8.2.0, The MathWorks) 
maintaining highest mass accuracy.  Mass spectra around the apex of the infusion peak 
were combined in a single intensity matrix (runs x m/z) for each ion mode. Data from 
intensity matrix was log-transformed before further statistical analysis. 
2.2.7. Statistical analysis 
Using SPSS statistics software, statistical analysis was carried out on stomatal 
conductance, relative water content, and chlorophyll fluorescence data.  Initially, two-
way ANOVA was used to test for significance of variation in accession type and 
environmental stress and to identify any significant interaction effects.  Post hoc analysis 
was carried out via Tukey test to determine significant differences and homogenous 
subsets within the data.  Where two-way ANOVA was not the correct statistical test to 
use, due to a significant figure in tests for homogeneity of variance, one-way ANOVA 
was used to determine the Welch and Brown-Forsythe statistic.  Where this was the 
case the Games-Howell post hoc test was used to  
Paired t-tests were used to highlight within factor differences in comparison to control 
plants.  Pairwise comparisons were carried per genotype selecting environmental 
stress/control as factors.  
Metabolite data were analysed using the statistical analysis options available within 
Metaboanalyst. Multivariate analysis was carried using PCA and PLS-DA, hierarchical 
clustering was conducted in conjunction with heatmap visualisation, and one-way 
ANOVA was used for the identification of significantly altered compound levels.  
3.3. RESULTS 
3.3.1 Morphological assessments 
Plants were visually assessed six days after stress onset. Where evident, tolerance 
scores were applied in order to quantity any differences in genotypic responses to 
stress.  Comparison between control plants of each genotype (figure 3.1) suggested 
there were no major morphological differences between the lines at this growth stage, 
which was three weeks post germination or V2 stage (first two trifoliate leaves fully 
developed).    
Drought (figure 3.2) and heat x drought (figure 3.4) stressed plants showed the greatest 
change in physical appearance in comparison to control plants.  Imposition of these 
stresses also resulted in the greatest variation in response amongst different genotypes.   
Leaf wilting and chlorosis were the most apparent symptoms which were exhibited to 
varying degrees amongst the genotypes. Plants were given tolerance scores in both 
drought and heat x drought. Exposure to heat stress at 40 oC appeared to have minimal 
impact across genotypes (figure 3.3) which appeared show little evidence of chlorosis.  
The single visible symptom of heat stress in leaves was chlorosis, which was present at 
low levels in several genotypes.   The primary symptom in waterlogged plants, both 
when applied alone or in combination with heat stress, was chlorosis, particularly in 
lower leaves (figure 3.6).  The combinational stress group heat + waterlog demonstrated 
lower levels of chlorosis than waterlogging alone (figure 3.5).  
10860 
13663 
Ife 98-12 
Ife BPC 
Ife Brown 
Figure 3.1.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under control conditions 
(well-watered/33oC) at six days into the experiment period.  Accession names are 
to the right of photographs.  
10860 
13663 
Ife 98-12 
Ife BPC 
Ife Brown 
Figure 3.2.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under drought conditions 
(water withheld/33oC) at six days into the experiment period.  Accession names are 
to the right of photographs.  
Figure 3.3.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat stress conditions (well-
watered/40oC) at six days into the experiment period.  Accession names are to the right of 
photographs.  
10860 
13663 
Ife 98-12 
Ife BPC 
Ife Brown 
Figure 3.4.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat x drought stress 
conditions (water withheld/40oC) six days into the experiment period.  Accession names 
are to the right of photographs.  
10860 
13663 
Ife 98-12 
Ife BPC 
Ife Brown 
10860 
13663 
Ife 98-12 
Ife BPC 
Ife Brown 
Figure 3.5.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under heat x waterlogging stress 
conditions (waterlogged/40oC) six days into the experiment period.  Accession names are to 
the right of photographs.  
10860 
Ife Brown 
Ife BPC 
Ife98-12 
Figure 3.6.  Photographic examples of cowpea accessions under waterlogging stress 
conditions (waterlogged/33oC) six days into the experiment period.  Accession names are to 
the right of photographs. 
3.3.2 Physiological Parameters 
3.3.2.1 Chlorophyll Fluorescence  
Assessment of chlorophyll fluorescence was used as an indicator of photosynthetic 
performance under stress conditions.  Maximum quantum yields of photosystem II 
(FV/FM) were measured six days after exposure to stress conditions. Figure 3.7 shows 
the variation between treatment groups, based on the mean value across accessions.  
ANCOVA was used for primary assessment of variation within the data, using genotype 
and stress treatment as independent factors and plant height as a covariate.  Levenes 
test for homogeneity returned a significant value, indicating a need for further analysis 
using one-way ANOVA.  Despite the significant value of Levenes test, the stress group 
variation was highly significant (p<0.001) and the  interaction value between genotype 
and stress should still be acknowledged as the value was highly significant (<0.001), 
therefore it is still likely this interaction has an effect out the data output.  One-way 
ANOVA was used for further analysis, and due to the significant value observed in 
Levenes test the Welch and Brown Forsyth values were considered (both p<0.001).  
Using Games-Howell for post hoc analysis the drought, heat plus drought groups, and 
the heat plus waterlog groups all showed a highly significant reduction in FV/FM 
compared to the control group (P <0.001), the heat group showed a significant 
reduction (p<0.01), with no significant difference shown between the control group 
waterlog groups.   
Environmental treatment groups were separately analysed using one-way ANOVA with 
accession as a factor and this returned a result of no significant difference between 
accessions.  The variation in chlorophyll fluorescence between accessions is shown in 
table 3.1, which also indicates whether stress values were significantly different to 
control values for each accession.  This analysis was conducted based on the significant 
value returned for between groups anlaysis in one-way ANOAV. The drought and heat 
plus drought treated group presented the greatest number of accessions with 
significant difference to control groups, with 13/21 and 20/21, respectively, at p <0.05 
or lower.  Heat plus waterlogging also resulted in significant differences compared to 
controls across the five accessions.   
3.3.2.2 Relative water content 
Assessment of RWC was used to provide an indication of plant water status at six days 
post stress factor onset. ANCOVA was used to assess the variation between genotype 
and stress values, with plant height included as a covariate in the analysis.  Levenes test 
for homogeneity returned a significant value which indicated a need for further analysis 
using one-way ANOVA.  The genotype*stress interaction p value was highly non-
significant, suggesting there would be no interaction effect.  Due to the significant value 
for Levenes test in one way ANOVA the Welch and Brown Forsyth values were used for 
analysis, both of which were p<0.001, suggesting a highly significant variation between 
stress groups.  Figure 3.7 shows the mean RWC for all treatment groups compared to 
the control group which had a mean RWC of 88 %.  Using Games-Howell for post hoc 
analysis, the drought, heat, heat plus drought, and heat plus waterlogging groups were 
identified as being significantly different to the control value (all p<0.001). 
The abiotic stress groups were separately analysed using one-way ANOVA with 
accession as a factor but no significant difference between accessions was observed. 
Subsequently, genotypes were analysed by treatment group using independent sample 
t-tests, comparing stress group to controls for the same genotype.  Using this method, 
all genotypes in the heat, heat plus waterlog, and waterlog groups showed no significant 
difference to controls.  However, the drought and heat plus drought group showed 
significant variation in comparison to controls in 10/21 and 14/21 accessions 
respectively (see table 3.2).  Generally, the data for individual genotypes showed lower 
RWC in the combined heat plus drought group when compared to the single stress 
drought group, However, four genotypes showed the opposite effect.   
3.3.2.3 Stomatal conductance  
Stomatal conductance measurements were taken six days after the onset of stress 
conditions for comparison against the control group. Under abiotic stress conditions, 
stomatal aperture changed e.g. closing to reduce water loss through transpiration under 
drought conditions and opening to allow for evaporative cooling during periods of 
increased temperatures and exposure to heat stress.  The effects of combinational 
abiotic stress on stomatal aperture are somewhat variable, though it was hypothesized 
that this could have an effect and produce a different output to singular stress.   
ANCOVA using plant height as a covariate, and genotype and stress group as 
independent variables initially returned a significant value for Levenes test, suggesting 
one-way ANOVA as a more appropriate test.  Despite the significance of Levenes test, 
the interaction effect returned a highly significant figure (p<0.001) and could still be 
considered in the analysis.  One-way ANOVA similarly returned a significant value for 
Levenes test, therefore the Welch and Brown Forsyth values were used to establish 
between group significance for stress treatment (both <0.001).  Post hoc analysis using 
Games Howell indicated highly significant differences compared to control values.  The 
drought and the heat plus drought group, which were significantly lower than the 
control group (both p < 0.001), whereas the heat and heat plus waterlogging group both 
showed an increase in stomatal conductance, with this being statistically higher in the 
combined stress group (p < 0.001).   
The environmental treatment groups were separately analysed using one-way ANOVA 
with accession as a factor; this returned a result of no significant difference between 
accessions as shown in table 3.3.  Based on the significant differences observed between 
groups overall, comparison of stress treatments against controls for each accession was 
carried out using t-tests and revealed significant differences between each treatment.  
In drought and heat plus drought   treated plants 21 and 20/21 accessions showed a 
significant decrease to a value of p < 0.05 or lower.   Under heat and heat x waterlogging 
conditions the trend was for stomatal conductance to increase, with 8/21 and 12/21 
accessions demonstrating an increase significant to p < 0.05 or lower, and in 
waterlogging, three accessions showed significant variation to controls at a level of p < 
0.05. 
3.3.2.4 Correlation of physiological parameters 
Bivariate Pearsons correlation was used to investigate the strength of the relationship 
between the assessed physiological parameters (figure 3.8).  Moderate, positive 
correlations were observed in all interactions.  In comparing, RWC and stomatal 
conductance, a significant correlation of r=.524, p < 0.01 (n=504) was observed.  With 
RWC compared with FV/FM this was r=.537, p < 0.01 (n = 504).  Between FV/FM and 
stomatal conductance the correlation was r = .549, p < 0.01 (n=504).    
C D WL H H+D H+WL
C D WL H H+D H+WL
** *** *** 
*** *** 
C D WL H H+D H+WL
*** *** *** *** 
Figure 3.7.  Mean RWC, chlorophyll fluorescence, and stomatal conductance in Vigna unguiculata under 
varied environmental conditions.  All physiological parameters were assessed six days after onset of 
abiotic stress. 
RWC was assessed via leaf sampling across a three-hour period in the first half of the light period. 
FV/FM was assessed using a handheld chlorophyll fluorometer one hour following the onset of the dark 
period once leaves were fully dark adapted. 
Stomatal conductance was assessed using a porometer. Measurements were taken mid-point in the 
light period (12 noon) when stomata should be maximally open in the control plants. 
Labels across the top demonstrate significant difference between the stressed values and control 
values; * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, ***, 0.001.  Error bars =  one standard deviation. 
C = control, D = drought, WL = waterlogged, H = heat, H+D = heat x drought, H+WL = heat x 
waterlogging. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Relative Water Content (%)
r = .537
p < 0.01
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Relative Water Content (%)
r = .524
p < 0.01
0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85
Chlorophyll Fluorescence (FvFm)
r = .549
p < 0.01
Figure 3.8. Correlation analyses of RWC, chlorophyll fluorescence, and stomatal conductance 
measurements taken six days after imposition of stress.  Correlation coefficient and P values are 
shown for each interaction.  
3.3.3. Metabolomic analysis 
3.3.3.1 Metabolomic overview 
To assess the response of plant metabolism to abiotic stress factors samples were taken 
from leaves only at seven days post onset of stress treatment from all accession types.   
FI-ESI-MS was used for sample analysis.   Metaboanalyst was used to perform ANOVA 
as a statistical analysis, from which a list was derived of compounds that are 
differentially expressed to a value of P > 0.05, totalling 306 compounds.  The individual 
compounds were identified using DIMEdb, after accounting for adduct formation ([M-
H]-, [M-Br]-, [M-Cl]-) although some remained unidentifiable.  
Initial analyses were conducted on data separated into environmental stress groupings, 
excluding accession as a factor.  PCA analysis was used to provide insight on the variation 
between treatment groups (figure 3.9).  Two factors emerged as the primary sources of 
variation; water availability correlated to PC1, and temperature correlated to PC2.  
Together these components accounted for   40 % of the variation in the dataset.  On the 
PC1 axis the groupings demonstrating greatest variation are the drought and heat plus 
drought groups, which separate to an extent from the remaining groups.  This would 
suggest they have a similar expression profile for metabolites contributing to variation 
on this PC.  PC2 shows the variation between temperature levels, with some crossover 
seen in the drought and heat plus drought groups, and a greater degree of separation 
between the control and waterlogged groups when contrasted with heat and heat plus 
waterlogged groups.  The analysis shows that across these two PCs there is overlap 
between the treatment groups; as the treatment groups consist of multiple genotypes 
with potentially varied responses to abiotic stress this could be where the crossover is 
identified.  Compounds with the strongest contribution to both PC1 and PC2  were 
derived from the PCA loadings plot (table 3.4) Allantoin and allantoic acid appeared to 
accumulate under drought stress, particularly with heat x drought, in addition to 
hydroxyfumaric acid, whereas glutamic acid was accumulating in well-watered samples.  
Docosahexaenoic acid and hexadecenoic acid suggested accumulation in heat treated 
groups, with 2 ketobutyric acid and delta-tocopherol contributing strongly in control 
temperature 
Figure 3.9. Principal component analysis based on identified metabolites in studied 
accessions of Vigna unguiculata under control (C), drought (D), heat (H), heat x 
drought (HD), heat x waterlogging (HWL), and waterlogging (WL) conditions.   
Compound PC1 Compound PC2 
Glutamic acid -0.19014 2-Ketobutyric acid -0.10376 
3-Methylthiopropionic acid -0.13136 Delta-Tocopherol -0.09384 
Flavin Mononucleotide -0.12806 3-Phosphoglyceric acid -0.09108 
Methanethiol -0.12602 B-Sulfinyl pyruvate -0.09039 
Isopentenyl pyrophosphate -0.11567 Isopentenyl pyrophosphate -0.07862 
Allantoic acid 0.18132 Allantoic acid 0.18136 
Dihydroxyfumaric acid 0.16059 Docosahexaenoic acid 0.18082 
Allantoin 0.15601 Allantoin 0.17625 
L-Tryptophan 0.11065 Hexadecanedioic acid 0.16324 
3-p-Coumaroyl-1,5-
quinolactone 
0.10936 Epicatechin 0.14827 
Table 3.4.  Top five positive and negative compounds, derived from the PCA loading vectors, 
for PC1 and PC2.   
Heatmapping was used to further visualise the variation between treatment groups.  In 
initial analyses focusing on the natural variation of between treatments (figure 3.10, a), 
there were two distinct groups of drought treated and non-drought treated samples. 
Within these groups there was a further evident separation as the non-drought treated 
data showed a distinct split between high and control temperature treatments. There 
was little differentiation between further subgroups, whereas the drought treated data 
were more clearly divided into drought and heat plus drought.  Average data across 
treatments offered greater visualisation of the variation across all significant 
compounds (figure 3.10, b).  The primary division, as shown in the accompanying 
dendrogram, demonstrates a separation between two clusters that feature the two 
drought groups in one cluster and all remaining sample groups in the other.  This would 
support the observations seen in the PCA analysis suggesting variation based on water 
availability.  Within the large cluster further branches are visible creating smaller 
clusters with greater similarity, these groups consist of the control and waterlogged 
samples and the heat and heat plus waterlogged groups, thus supporting the 
observation from the PCA analysis that temperature contributes to variation.   Due to 
the large number of compounds involved in the analysis, it was not possible to identify 
them at this point.  Therefore, the top 50 significant compounds (figure 3.10.c) from the 
data were used for further analysis; these showed a similar clustering to figure 3.10.b 
and it was possible to determine sources of variation.   In drought treated plants several 
amino acids were observed as showing increased abundance. These included proline, 
phenylalanine, and leucine; the ureide compounds allantoin and allantoic acid in 
addition to the phenolic compound epicatechin.  Heat plus drought treated plants 
showed the accumulation of additional metabolites in comparison to drought, notably 
docosahexanaenoic acid, oxoglutaric acid, and cystathionine. The accumulation of these 
compounds was also detected in other heat-treated groups, demonstrating a crossover 
of responses in the heat plus drought group.  Control and waterlogged plants were 
largely similar in their metabolite profiles with differences being linked with the 
accumulation of glutamic acid, threonic acid, and hydroxyphenylacetic acid in 
waterlogged plants. This accumulation was also observed in heat + waterlogged plants, 
indicating a potential stress specific role.  Heat and heat plus waterlogged plants 
demonstrated the greatest level of compound accumulation overall.   
4.2.3.2 Metabolomic Pathway Analyses 
Pathway analysis, using significantly altered compounds, was carried out in 
metaboanalyst.  Pathways with a significance of P < 0.05 and impact value greater than 
0.1 were identified (figure 3.11).  This highlighted 11 pathways in total, were all 
categorised into KEGG classifications as either amino acid, carbon/energy, or vitamin 
and co-factor metabolism (table 3.5).    
h i j k 
Figure 3.11.  Pathway analysis output of metabolite data for studied accessions of Vigna unguiculata under 
varied environmental conditions.  Letters next to data points correspond with information in table 4.6 
overleaf.  
4.2.3.3 Amino acid metabolism 
Amino acid metabolism was identified as a metabolic network with an abundance of 
compounds enriched in pathway analysis; in total six of the 11 pathways identified as 
significantly enriched were amino acid related.  
Cysteine and methionine metabolism 
Cysteine and methionine metabolism was the most significantly enriched pathway, with 
20 compounds identified compared to the expected six if they had arisen through 
random events.  Significant differences were observed in all compounds when 
comparing the stress values to control values and these appeared to be largely drought 
or heat related.   
In response to drought stress both significant increases and decreases were observed.  
Compounds that were seen to significantly increase under drought stress were serine, 
cysteic acid, s-adenosylhomocysteine, cystathionine, and methionine (p < 0.001).  
Significant decreases were observed in aspartic acid, 2-ketobutyric acid, thiocysteine, 3-
sulfinylpyruvic acid, cysteine, aspartate semialdehyde, pyruvic acid and methanethiol (p 
< 0.001).  
With heat stress significant compounds (p values of < 0.01) appeared to increase in 
abundance, except for cysteic acid, thiocysteine, 3-sulfinopyruvic acid and 2-ketobutyric 
acid, which were all s decreased with.  S-adenosylmethionine, s-
adenosylmethioninamine, s-adenosylhomocysteine, cystathionine, homoserine, 3-
methylthiopropionic acid, methionine, and methanethiol were all significantly increased 
(p < 0.001). Cysteic acid and O-acetylserine (p < 0.01) and homocysteine (p < 0.05) 
significantly were decreased 
Responses were mixed in HxD plants, with some metabolites following the same pattern 
as drought and others as heat stressed plants.  There were significant (P < 0.001). 
increases were observed in s-adenosylmethionine, serine, s-adenosylmethioninamine, 
s-adenosylhomocysteine, cystathionine, O-acetylserine, and methionine compared to 
controls.  Against this, there were significant decreases in levels of aspartic acid, 2-
ketobutyric acid, thiocysteine, 3-sulfinylpyruvic acid, aspartic acid semialdehyde, 
pyruvic acid, and methanethiol were observed (p < 0.001) and cysteine (p < 0.05).  
HxWL tended to respond in the similar manner as heat stressed plants, as opposed to 
waterlogged plants.  Significant increases in the levels of s-adenosylmethionine, serine, 
aspartic acid, s-adenosylmethioninamine, s-adenosylhomocysteine, cystathionine, O-
acetylserine, homoserine, 3-methylpropionic acid, homocysteine, cysteine, aspartic acid 
semialdehyde, methionine, and pyruvic acid (all p < 0.001); methanethiol was also 
increased (p < 0.01).  Significant decreases were observed in cysteic acid and 2-
ketobutyric acid (p < 0.001).  
Under waterlogging  there was mostly no significant difference in metabolite abundance 
compared to controls.  The only exceptions to this were s-adenosylhomocysteine, O-
acetylserine, homocysteine and pyruvic acid, which all showed an increase (all p < 
0.001).  
Alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism 
Enhancement was seen with pathway with 13 compounds observed compared to an 
expected four (if random).   There was also a tendency was toward a decrease in drought 
exposed compound levels, and an increase in heat exposed plants in this pathway.  
In comparison to controls, the levels of aspartic acid, alanine, argininosuccinic acid, 
pyruvic acid, and fumaric acid were all significantly decreased under drought stress (all 
p < 0.001) whereas asparagine and gamma-aminobutyric acid were significantly 
increased (both p < 0.001).  
Under heat stress conditions 2-ketoglutaramic acid, argininosuccinic acid, succinic acid, 
oxoglutaric acid, glutamine, fumaric acid, glutamic acid, gamma-aminobutyric acid (p < 
0.001) and carbamoyl phosphate showed a significant increase (p < 0.05) compared to 
control plants.  There were no significant decreases.  
HxD stressed plants showed divided response, with metabolites showing patterns 
similar to either heat or drought. with Some compounds showed a distinctive different 
marked difference to both individual stresses e.g. asparagine. Metabolites that 
accumulated to significantly lower levels than in control plants were aspartic acid, 
alanine, pyruvic acid, fumaric acid, and glutamic acid (p < 0.001).  Argininosuccinic acid, 
asparagine, oxoglutaric acid, glutamine, and GABA all accumulated to significantly 
higher levels (all p < 0.001).   
In HxWL plants, significant increases were observed in all identified metabolites (all p < 
0.001), with no significant decreases observed.  
Waterlogging resulted generally in no significant difference to controls.  The exceptions 
to were alanine and GABA which both showed an increase (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001 
respectively).  
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism 
Eighteen compounds were identified in the significantly enriched glycine, serine and 
threonine metabolism pathway.   
In drought exposed plants there was a tendency towards significant decreases in levels 
as shown by aspartic acid, aminoacetone, pyruvaldehyde, phosphoserine, aspartate 
semialdehyde, phosphohydroxypyruvic acid, 2-ketobutyric acid, pyruvic acid, glyoxylic 
acid (p < 0.001) and betaine aldehyde (p < 0.01).  Increase in levels was observed in 
betaine, serine, glycine, hydroxypyruvic acid, tryptophan, and 5, 10-methylene THF (all 
p < 0.001).  
The levels of compounds in heat treated plants tended to remain similar to levels 
observed in controls or else showed an increase.  Thus, betaine aldehyde, 
pyruvaldehyde, betaine, glycine, tryptophan and 5, 10-methylene-THF all showed a 
significant increase in levels (a p < 0.001).  A significant decrease was seen in 
phosphoserine (p < 0.001), phosphohydroxypyruvic acid (p < 0.01) and 2-ketobutyric 
acid (p < 0.01).   
The HxD response bore much similarity to drought response.  Significant decreases were 
observed in aspartic acid, aminoacetone, pyruvaldehyde, phosphoserine, 
phosphohydroxypyruvic acid, 2-ketobutyric acid, pyruvic acid and glyoxylic acid (all p < 
0.001).  Significant increases were seen in betaine, serine, glycine, hydroxypyruvic acid, 
tryptophan and 5,10-methylene THF (all p < 0.001).  
HxWL treated plants tended to express levels similar to singular heat stressed plants.  
Compounds that were significantly increased in this group were aspartic acid, amino 
acetone, betaine aldehyde, pyruvaldehyde, O-phosphohomoserine, aspartate 
semialdehyde, serine, glycine, pyruvic acid and glyoxylic acid (all p < 0001).  Significantly 
lower levels, compared to controls, were seen in phosphoserine (p < 0.001), 2-
ketobutyric acid (p < 0.001), and hydroxypyruvic acid (p < 0.01).   
Waterlogging stress appeared to have the least significant impacts, but there were 
differences observed in some compounds.  Increased levels were seen in betaine 
aldehyde (p < 0.001), pyruvaldehyde (p < 0.05), O-phosphohomoserine (p < 0.01), 
hydroxypyruvic acid (p < 0.01) and pyruvic acid (p < 0.001).  The only significant decrease 
observed in waterlogging was in levels of phosphoserine (p < 0.001).   
Arginine and proline metabolism 
Arginine and proline metabolism was significantly enhanced with 18 observed as 
opposed to seven if these has been assigned randomly.  Many of these metabolites have 
already been described as they appear in cysteine and methionine metabolism, or 
aspartate, alanine and glutamate metabolism.  Additionally, spermidine, proline, N-
acetyl-L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde, and N-acetyl-L-glutamyl-5-phosphate were 
identified.  Under drought conditions, these four compounds were all significantly 
upregulated (all p< 0.001).  Heat stress resulted in a significant increase in levels of 
proline (p < 0.001), spermidine (p < 0.01), and N-acetyl-L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde (p 
< 0.001). HxD had a significant effect on proline and N-acetyl-L-glutamate-5-
semialdehyde (both p < 0.001) accumulation, with both increasing compared to 
controls.  Proline was elevated by highly significant levels (p < 0.001) in HxWL plants, 
and spermidine and N-acetyl-L-glutamyl-5-phosphate were both significantly increased 
(both p < 0.05) compared to controls.  Waterlogging caused a significant decrease in N-
acetyl-L-glutamyl-5-phosphate (p < 0.001) in comparison to control values, with no 
other significant differences observed.  
Phenylalanine, and phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan metabolism 
The pathway analysis recognises phenylalanine metabolism as its own pathway, as well 
as part of a wider pathway including tyrosine and tryptophan.  In the analysis, both these 
pathways were identified as significantly overexpressed.  Given the level of crossover, 
the metabolites of both pathways are discussed together here. In relation to control 
level, drought resulted in a significant increase in phenylalanine, trans cinnamic acid and 
tryptophan (all p < 0.001), whereas a significant decrease was seen in 2-
phenylacetamide, 3-dehydroquinate, and 2-aminobenzoic acid (all p < 0.001). Heat 
stress resulted in significant increases in phenylpyruvic acid, phenylalanine, trans-
cinnamic acid, 3-dehydroquinate, and chorismate (all p< 0.001). Under HxD stress 
significant increases were seen in phenylpyruvic acid, phenylalanine, trans-cinnamic 
acid, tryptophan (all P < 0.001) and chorismate (p < 0.05), and significant decreases were 
observed in 2-aminobenzoic acid and 2-phenylacetamide (both p < 0.001).  Under HxWL 
conditions a significant decrease was observed in erythrose 4-phosphate (p < 0.01), with 
significant increases in phenylpyruvic acid, 2-phenylacetamide, trans cinnamic acid, 3-
dehydroquinate and 2-aminobenzoic acid (all P < 0.001) and chorismate (p < 0.01).  In 
waterlogged plants only transcinnamic acid was significantly altered, showing an 
increase (p < 0.05).  
Figure 3.12. Significantly altered metabolites in the cysteine and methionine pathway in 
cowpea. Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG 
pathway data.  L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging. 
L-Serine 
O-Acetylserine 
L-Cysteine 
L-Cystathionine 
L-Homocysteine 
L-Methionine 
Methanethiol 
Cysteic acid 
L-Aspartate-semialdehyde 
L-Aspartic acid 
L-Homoserine 
S-Adenosylhomocysteine 
S-Adenosylmethionine 
S-Adenosylmethioninamine 
2-Ketobutyric acid 
3-Methylthiopropionic acid 
Pyruvic acid 
Thiocysteine 
Figure 3.13. Significantly altered metabolites in the alanine, aspartate and glutamate pathway in 
cowpea. Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway 
data.  L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
Carbamoylphosphate 
L-Aspartic acid L-Alanine L-Asparagine 
Pyruvic acid 
Argininosuccinic acid 
Fumaric acid 
Succinic acid 
Oxoglutaric acid 
2-Keto-glutaramic acid 
L-Glutamic acid 
Gamma-Aminobutyric acid 
Figure 3.14. Significantly altered metabolites in the glycine, serine, and threonine pathway in 
cowpea. Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway 
data.  L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
Hydroxypyruvic acid 
Phosphohydroxypyruvic  
O-Phosphohomoserine 
L-Serine 
L-Tryptophan 
Glycine 
Pyruvic acid 
Glyoxylic acid 
5,10-Methylene-THF 
O-Phosphohomoserine 
Aminoacetone 
2-Ketobutyric acid 
Betaine 
Betaine aldehyde 
L-Aspartate-semialdehyde 
L-Aspartic acid 
Figure 3.15. Identified metabolites in the arginine and proline pathway in cowpea. Non-
significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway data.  
L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
Glutamic acid 
Gamma-Aminobutyric acid Glutamine 
N-Acetyl-L-Glutamyl- 
5-phosphate 
N-Acetyl-L-Glutamate- 
5-semialdehyde 
Proline L-Arginine 
S-Adenosylmethionine 
Spermidine S-Adenosylmethioninamine  
Urea Argininosuccinic acid 
Figure 3.16. Identified metabolites in the phenylalanine/phenylalanine, tryptophan, and tyrosine 
pathway in cowpea. Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG 
pathway data.  L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
D-Erythrose-4-phosphate 3-Dehydroquinate 
Chorismate 
L-Tyrosine 
2-Aminobenzoic acid 
L-Tryptophan 
Phenylpyruvic acid 
Phenylalanine 
Trans-cinnamic acid 
2-Phenylacetamide 
4.2.3.4. Carbon and energy metabolism 
The identified pathways that relate to carbon and energy metabolism were glyoxylate 
and dicarboxylate metabolism, the TCA cycle, carbon fixation in photosynthetic 
organisms, and pyruvate metabolism.  Many of the metabolites observed feature in 
more than one pathway; metabolite variation under stress and pathways featured in 
are reported here.  
Cis-aconitic acid features in the TCA cycle and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate.  In 
comparison to control values, significant decrease was observed under drought 
conditions (p < 0.001), with significant increases observed under heat and HxWL 
conditions (both p < 0.001).   
Malic acid is identified in the TCA cycle, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate, and pyruvate 
metabolism, and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms.  Malic acid was 
significantly decreased under drought (p < 0.001) and increased in heat and HxWL (p < 
0.001) when compared to controls. 
Glycolic acid was found in glyoxylic acid and dicarboxylic acid metabolism, significantly 
decreasing in drought (p < 0.001) and HxD (p < 0.01), and increasing in heat, HxWL (p < 
0.001), and waterlogging (p < 0.01) in comparison to control values. 
Citric acid is found in glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism and the TCA cycle and 
compared to control values was observed to significantly increase under drought and 
HxD conditions and significantly decrease under H and HxWL conditions (all p < 0.001).   
Phosphoglycolic acid, found in glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, was 
significantly decreased under drought and HxD (p < 0.05) compared to controls.  
Succinic acid plays a role in glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism and the TCA cycle, 
it demonstrated a significant increase compared to controls under heat and HxWL 
conditions (p < 0.001).   
Glyoxylic acid features in glyoxylic acid and dicarboxylic acid metabolism and showed 
significant decreases compared to controls under drought and HxD conditions (p < 
0.001), with a significant increase under HxWL conditions (p < 0.001). 
Fumaric acid is a feature of the TCA cycle and showed a significant decrease in heat and 
HxD plants (p < 0.001) and a significant increase in HxWL conditions (p < 0.001) in 
comparison to controls.  
Oxoglutaric acid was significantly upregulated under heat, HxD and HxWL conditions (p 
< 0.001) compared to control values and is a component of the TCA cycle.  
Pyruvic acid is a metabolite in the TCA cycle, carbon fixation in photosynthetic 
organisms, and pyruvate metabolism.  Compared to control values, significant 
decreases were observed in drought and HxD conditions (p < 0.001) with significant 
increases in HxWL and waterlogging (p < 0.001).  
The amino acids alanine and aspartate both feature in the carbon fixation in 
photosynthetic organisms and were both significantly decreased in drought and HxD (p 
< 0.001) and increased in HxWL (p < 0.001) and waterlogging (p < 0.01).  Additional 
components of this pathway were fructose-6-phosphate which was significantly 
increased under HxWL (p < 0.001) and waterlogging conditions (p < 0.01) and decreased 
under drought and HxD conditions (p < 0.001). Erythrose-4-phosphate which was 
significantly decreased under HxWL conditions (p < 0.001).  
Additional metabolites observed in the pyruvate metabolism pathway were 
acetylphosphate, which showed a significant decrease under HxD conditions and an 
increase under HxWL and waterlogging conditions (p < 0.001), S lactoylglutathione, 
which was significantly higher under drought, HxD and waterlogged conditions (p < 
0.001), lactic acid, which was significantly increased in heat, HxWL (p < 0.001), and 
waterlogging (p < 0.01), and decreased under drought (p < 0.001) and HxD conditions (p 
< 0.01).   
Figure 3.17. Identified metabolites in the glyoxylate and dicarboxylate pathway in cowpea.        
Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway data.          
L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
cis-Aconitic acid 
Citric acid 
Succinic acid 
Malic acid 
Glyoxylic acid 
Glycolic acid 
Phosphoglycolic acid 
Figure 3.18. Identified metabolites in the TCA cycle in cowpea. Non-significant 
metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway data.          
L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
Citric acid 
cis-Aconitic acid 
Oxoglutaric acid 
Succinic 
Fumaric acid 
Malic acid 
Pyruvic acid 
Figure 3.19. Identified metabolites associated with carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms 
in cowpea.  Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG 
pathway data.  L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
D-Erythrose-4-phosphate Fructose-6-phosphate 
(Glyoxylate/dicarboxylate 
metabolism) 
Malic acid Pyruvic acid 
Acetylphosphate S-Lactoylglutathione 
Pyruvaldehyde L-Lactic acid 
Pyruvic acid 
2-Isopropylmalic acid Malic acid 
Figure 3.20. Identified metabolites associated with the pyruvate metabolism pathway in 
cowpea.  Non-significant metabolites are not shown.   
L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
3.3.3.5 Cofactor and vitamin metabolism 
An additional pathway observed in the pathway analysis was one carbon by folate 
metabolism. Within this pathway folic acid was found to significantly increase in drought 
(p < 0.01), heat, HxD and HxWL (p < 0.001).  5-methyltetrahydrofolic significantly 
increased under drought, heat and HxD conditions (p <0.001). 5, 10-
methenyltetrahydrofolic acid increased in drought (p < 0.01) and HxD (p < 0.001).  
Dihydrofolic acid showed a significant decrease in drought conditions and a significant 
increase in HxWL conditions (both p < 0.001).  
Figure 3.21. Significantly altered metabolites in the one carbon pool by folate pathway in cowpea. 
Non-significant metabolites are not shown.  Pathway constructed from KEGG pathway data.                    
L-R: Control, drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, waterlogging 
Folic acid 
Dihydrofolic acid 
5,10-Methenyltetrahydrofolic acid 
5-Methyltetrahydrofolic acid 
4.2.3.6 Within Stress Metabolomic Analysis 
In initial statistical analysis accession variety was found to be a significant contributor to 
variation in the dataset (p < 0.001).  Additionally, the data charts displayed to 
demonstrate between stress variability for each metabolite show the extent of within 
stress variability through their error bars.  Therefore, it was appropriate to consider the 
variability in accession response to stress.  
The analysis of within treatment variation was performed using pathway analysis 
identified compounds, for which the grouped accession response has previously been 
described.  A comparison of stress values against control values was carried out using 
metaboanalyst in order to verify that compound response under stress followed the 
same trend for each genotype e.g. all increasing, but to varying extents. These analyses 
demonstrated that under each stress condition each genotype followed a general trend 
with none deviating from it.   
Drought 
Accession-specific variation under drought conditions is shown in figure 3.22.  Multiple 
compounds appear to be contributing to variation within the data on both the PC1 and 
PC2.  ANOVA identified seven compounds that varied significantly between the 
accessions; phenylacetaldehyde, pyruvate, spermidine, glycolic acid and alanine (all p < 
0.001), as well as fructose-6-phosphate and O-phosphohomoserine (both p < 0.05).  
Heatmap analysis of the top 25 varied compounds revealed several clusters that could 
identified from the associated dendrogram.  There is a primary division in the 
dendrogram occurring at the furthest point which establishes two distinctly varied 
groups.  Within these two groups there are further clusters identified that possess 
greater similarity to one another.  Further cluster emerge at the base, showing that 
there are pairs and triplets that are more closely linked in their response than others, 
however this also demonstrates the crossover of the responses.  
Figure 3.23 shows variation in heat treated accessions.   Compounds most strongly 
associated with variation on the PCA biplot appear to be 2-ketobutyric acid and urea, 
however results from ANOVA signify significant variation only in phenylacetaldehyde, 
spermidine (both p < 0.001), O-acetylserine, and L-methionine (both p < 0.05).   
Heatmap analysis coupled with a dendrogram shows a primary division into two clusters 
that express greatest dissimilarity.  Within these two clusters there are further divisions, 
resulting in five clusters which express high levels of similarity in terms of their 
metabolite expression profiles.  
Heat x Drought 
The analysis of heat plus drought stress is shown in figure 3.24.  As seen in previous 
stress data, 2-ketobutyric appears to be one of the strongest contributors to variation 
in the PCA analysis, in addition to citric acid and urea.  Only three compounds were 
identified as significantly varied within the data however, these were argininosuccinic 
acid, phenylacetaldehyde, and N-acetyl-L-glutamate semialdehyde (all P < 0.001).  
Clustering within the heatmap analysis shows a primary division indication higher levels 
of dissimilarity between two distinct groups. Within the larger of these two groups, 
there are further branches into clusters that express higher level of similarity, 
potentially indicative of shaed responses to heat among different genotypes.  
Heat x Waterlog 
Analysis of accession variation under heat x waterlogging stress is shown in figure 3.25.  
The strongest contributor to variation in the PCA was 2-ketobutyric acid.  Seven 
compounds were identified as significantly varied between accessions; 
phenylacetaldehyde and O-acetylserine (both p < 0.001), succinic acid and homoserine 
(all p < 0.01), and phenylpyruvate, carbamoylphosphate, and betaine aldehyde (all p < 
0.05).  Clustering in the heatmap analysis identified two primary divisions, with three 
genotypes in one and 18 in the other.  Within the larger cluster it is apparent that there 
is a high level of similarity in response to waterlogging across genotypes, however the 
branching that occurs near the base of the tree suggests nuance that could warrant 
further investigation.  
Waterlogging 
Data for between accession variation in waterlogging conditions is shown in figure 3.26.  
2-ketobutyric acid was a strong component on the PCA in addition to erythrose 4-
phosphate and O-phosphohomoserine.  Significant variation between accessions could 
be seen in phenylacetaldehyde and O-acetylserine (both p < 0.001), and proline (p < 
0.05).  Heatmap analyses showed a division into two primary groups, with visibly 
dissimilar general metabolite profiles. Within these clusters further divisions can be 
seen that identify smaller groupings with higher levels of similarity; at the lowest level 
(above single genotypes) this results in approximately seven groups.  
Figure 3.22.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea under drought 
conditions.  
Figure a) PCA loading vector bi-plot demonstrating component contribution to variation  
Figure b) heatmap analysis displaying the variation in the top 25 significant compounds based 
on mean values of accessions 
Figure 3.23.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea under heat stress 
conditions.  
Figure a) PCA loading vector bi-plot demonstrating component contribution to variation  
Figure b) heatmap analysis displaying the variation in the top 25 significant compounds based 
on mean values of accessions 
Figure 3.24.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea under heat x drought 
conditions.  
Figure a) PCA loading vector bi-plot demonstrating component contribution to variation  
Figure b) heatmap analysis displaying the variation in the top 25 significant compounds based on 
mean values of accessions 
Figure 3.25.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea under heat x 
waterlogging conditions.  
Figure a) PCA loading vector bi-plot demonstrating component contribution to variation  
Figure b) heatmap analysis displaying the variation in the top 25 significant compounds based 
on mean values of accessions 
Figure 3.26.  Analysis of accession variation in studied accessions of cowpea under 
waterlogging conditions.  
Figure a) PCA loading vector bi-plot demonstrating component contribution to variation  
Figure b) heatmap analysis displaying the variation in the top 25 significant compounds based 
on mean values of accessions 
3.3.4. DISCUSSION 
The primary aim of this study was to examine the impact of abiotic stress on the 
morphology, physiology, and metabolism of developed and landrace cowpea varieties 
from south west Nigeria. These abiotic stress factors  drought, heat, and waterlogging 
- were to feature both singularly and in combination.  These factors were selected as 
the objectives of the study due to the projections for potential climate variation in the 
experimental region of Southwest Nigeria. Furthermore, it was hypothesised that 
comparison between accessions could expand on information relating to behaviours 
conferring tolerance.   
Cowpea is recognised as an important tropical crop, particularly for arid regions, due to 
its tolerance of heat and drought.  The parameters by which cowpea confers this 
tolerance have been shown to be both physiological and biochemical in nature, with 
responses directed at preventing water loss through osmoprotection and stomatal 
regulation, and through maintaining photosynthetic function by way of antioxidant 
production.   
3.3.4.1. Drought showed the greatest impact on morpho-physiological parameters 
The maintenance of morpho-physiological characteristics, such as turgidity in leaves, 
water status, and photosynthetic capability are well acknowledged drought tolerance 
traits.   
Visual observation of plants conducted at day seven of the experiment provided the first 
evidence that water deficiency was having a more severe effect than other treatments, 
and that the combinational effect of heat x drought together exacerbated negative 
impact.  Chlorosis and wilting were observed, particularly in the heat x drought group, 
which would suggest a potential impact to physiological parameters; a reduction in 
chlorophyll levels would impede rates of photosynthesis, and while leaf wilting serves 
as a method of reducing water loss, in several accessions it was to a level that indicated 
leaf death.   
Stomatal conductance was significantly reduced in drought and heat x drought plants, 
across all genotypes. This response was not unexpected, as stomatal closure is a well-
known mechanism for reduction of water loss through transpiration. This change in 
stomatal conductance has the potential to impact on photosynthesis, as whilst 
protecting from water loss it also limits the intake of CO2.  Additionally, in the 
combination with heat stress, stomatal closure limits the opportunity for evaporative 
cooling which can lead to harmful internal leaf temperatures. Decreases in intracellular 
CO2 have been observed to have a negative impact on chlorophyll fluorescence (Else et 
al. 2009), findings which were echoed in this study with the observation that Fv/Fm was 
significantly decreased in drought and heat and drought plants only.  The observation 
that heat x drought had a significantly greater reduction in Fv/Fm, compared to singular 
drought stress, could be indicative of additional non-stomatal inhibition of 
photosynthesis caused by temperature increase, however it is not possible to confirm 
this without further data.  
It was possible to allocate tolerance scorings to the two drought groups, which 
demonstrate a strong visual variation between the studied accessions.  This variation 
was not observed in heat, waterlogging, and a combination of these two factors, with 
stressed pants showing little morphological difference to control plants, except for 
some low-level chlorosis in several accessions under the combinational stress.  
3.3.4.2. Drought related impacts on metabolism 
Under drought conditions, carbon metabolism appeared to be the aspect of metabolism 
most greatly affected with a significant reduction in levels of malic acid, succinic acid, 
fumaric acid, cis-aconitic acid and glyoxylic acid, among others.  The reduction of CO2 
assimilation incurred when stomata are closed limits the amount of carbon entering the 
carbon fixation pathway and further downstream pathways, which could provide an 
explanation for down regulation in this area.  A recent study by Goufo et al. (2017) noted 
a similar outcome in two cowpea genotypes of varying drought tolerance, six days after 
drought onset.  The smaller decrease in levels of carbon metabolism associated 
compounds under combinational heat x drought stress suggests some kind of synergistic 
interaction between pathways and actions for heat tolerance and drought tolerance.     
Changes to plant amino acid profile are well recognised as a tolerance strategy in 
drought conditions, particularly the accumulation of compounds that act as osmolytes.  
The most notable amino acid with osmoprotectant properties is proline, which was 
observed to be significantly increased in this study in drought and heat x drought treated 
plants.   Proline was not the only amino acid to accumulate under drought conditions 
however, with increases observed in methionine, asparagine, serine, glutamic acid, 
glycine, and the non-protein amino acid gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).  
The role of free methionine under abiotic stress has been little researched, however it 
is a recognised substrate for the production of polyamines which have been indicated 
as having stress related roles (Zagorchev et al. 2013).  The polyamine spermidine was 
identified in the pathway analysis, in this instance in proline metabolism (fig 4.15), and 
levels were significantly increased under drought and heat x drought conditions.  
Research into polyamines has linked them to multiple abiotic stress roles, and 
spermidine in particular has been implicated in drought related responses (Alczar et al. 
2010).   Under drought conditions, stomatal closure is an important mechanism by 
which plants limit water loss.  A study by Liu et al. (2000) acknowledged increased levels 
of spermidine under drought conditions and correlated this to an inhibition of inward 
K+ channels in guard cells, thus contributing to stomatal closure.  Similar observations 
of an increased spermidine-stomatal closure relationship were identified by Agurla et 
al. (2018), alongside a concomitant increase in ROS and nitric oxide, recognised as 
signalling molecules in stomatal function.  Whilst spermidine is synthesised through 
other mechanisms, these findings could be indicative of a methionine - spermidine 
pathway in drought related stomatal closure in Vigna unguiculata.   
Glycine links to photorespiration, and its accumulation under stress conditions along 
with serine, as observed in this study, could indicate that photorespiration was 
increased under drought conditions.  RuBisCos affinity for CO2 has been reported to 
decrease under high temperatures, increasing activity in photorespiration; this would 
align with findings in this study in which the combination of heat x drought resulted in 
greater accumulation of metabolites associated with photorespiration that drought 
alone.  Unfortunately, no data was collected on the activity of RuBisCo, as an 
observation of maintained activity rather than inactivation would suggest a change in 
roles from photosynthesis to photorespiration.   
The accumulation of GABA in drought stressed plants represents a further avoidance 
strategy.  The function of GABA under drought conditions has been the subject of much 
research and biological roles including osmoprotection and pathway signalling have 
been postulated (Dedemo et al. 2013; Ramesh et al. 2017).  Of interest in this study is 
the potential source of accumulated GABA in drought stressed cowpea.  The major 
metabolic pathway for production of GABA is the GABA shunt, a function which is 
intimately connected to the TCA cycle, drawing on 2-oxoglutaric acid as a substrate for 
glutamate and ultimately yielding succinic acid which feeds back into the cycle.  Previous 
research has largely demonstrated that when the GABA shunt is upregulated, so is the 
TCA cycle, however in this study findings show a downregulation.  One possible 
explanation for this is an alternative source of GABA in the form of polyamines as a 
substrate.  Evidence for this mechanism of GABA production has been identified in faba 
bean (Vicia faba) under hypoxic stress conditions (Yang et al. 2013), with levels showing 
a concurrent increase with putrescine, spermine, and spermidine.  The reaction is 
catalysed by amine oxidases and diamine oxidases which have been reported to oxidise 
both putrescine and spermidine (Shelp et al. 2012; Podlekov et al. 2019).  Though 
putrescine was not detected in this study, the accumulation of spermidine could 
indicate polyamines as a GABA source in drought stressed cowpea.      
3.3.4.3. Tolerance to heat  
All the accessions included in the study appear to show tolerance to the level of heat 
stress that was imposed. In wider research cowpea has been shown to tolerate high 
temperatures above 40C so this is not entirely unexpected.  The purpose of heat stress 
in this stud was not to examine absolute upper thresholds, but to test response to 
projected extreme high temperatures for the Southwest region of Nigeria through to 
2050, which 40C adequately covers. Observing the morphological and physiological 
parameters, there appears to be little variation between them.  A notable physiological 
process of plants under heat stress is the opening of stomata, increasing conductance 
and the rate of evaporative cooling.  This is a beneficial process when there is adequate 
water availability, and in this study, it was an observable trend.   As the heat plus drought 
group showed a closing of stomata, and the other two heat exposed groups 
demonstrated an overall increase in conductance, this would suggest that water 
availability plays a dominant role over temperature in cowpea stomatal function.   
Carbon metabolism appeared to be upregulated in heat stressed plants, with heat and 
heat x waterlogging plants demonstrating significantly higher levels of associated 
compounds than those seen in controls.  The pattern of increase was similar to that of 
stomatal conductance, with heat x waterlogging tending to demonstrate higher levels 
than the singular heat stress across compounds.  As a decrease in carbon metabolism in 
drought was attributed to a reduction in CO2 assimilation due to closed stomata, so the 
increase in levels observed in heat treatments with no drought imposition can likely be 
attributed to an increase in stomatal aperture, allowing for great diffusion of CO2 into 
the mesophyll.  Photosynthetic function did not appear to be impaired under high 
temperature, as maintenance of FV/FM suggests, and therefore the assimilation of 
substrates for carbon metabolism pathways should not be impaired either.  This 
maintenance of activity at a high temperature would suggest the potential for 
identification of protective mechanisms within the wider metabolism of the plant.  
Amino acid abundance was less extensively altered under high temperatures than under 
water stress, however there were changes observed that could be indicative of heat 
tolerance mechanisms.  Increases in methionine were observed, as in drought stress 
and multiple functions have been described in response to heat stress.  Methionine 
plays a key role in the formation of low molecular weight (lmw) chloroplast heat shock 
proteins (Hsp).  These methionine rich proteins have been demonstrated to have a 
protective effect on PSII and result in more rapid acclimation of PSII and the whole 
electron transport chain under heat stress conditions (Heckathorn et al. 1998).  This 
increased synthesis of methionine under heat stress, and link to lmw Hsps has been 
more recently discussed by Obaid et al. (2016).  Additionally, methionine is a precursor 
molecule for spermine, either via spermidine or via s-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) 
and s-adenosylmethioninamine (decarboxy-AdoMet).  Under heat stress conditions, 
AdoMet and decarboxy-AdoMet were identified via pathway analysis and showed an 
increase, and spermine was observed in the wider metabolite data also showing an 
increase.   
Amino acids of the glutamate family (glutamine, glutamate, and the non-protein AA 
GABA) all demonstrated an increase in levels under high temperature stress.  As 
previously discussed in the context of drought, GABA plays an important role as a stress 
related molecule with diverse proposed functions.  The accumulation of GABA under 
heat stress conditions in Vigna unguiculata has long been recognised (Mayer et al. 
1990).  A major source of injury in heat stress occurs through the increase in reactive 
oxygen species, resulting in oxidative stress; lipid peroxidation to photosynthetic 
parameters via degradation of degradation of thylakoid membranes.  In addition to 
osmoprotectant properties, discussed in the context of drought stress, GABA is reported 
to induce upregulation of both enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants (Nayyar et al. 
2014) including glutathione, which showed an increase in this study.  Similar findings 
were observed by Li et al., (2016), who also report an upregulation of the TCA cycle and 
GABA shunt metabolism under heat stress, as seen in this study.   
3.3.4.4 Waterlogging appeared to have little effect 
Soil waterlogging imparts stress on plants by way of reducing oxygen availability in the 
root zone to hypoxic or anoxic conditions and limiting the diffusion of CO2.  Exposure to 
these conditions can result in a switch to anaerobic metabolism, with the potential to 
generate toxic by-products, and the accumulation of ROS resulting in oxidative stress.  
These effects are first seen in the root tissue, with effects becoming more widely visible 
in leaves through actions such as stomatal closure, chlorosis, and wilting.   
Research on the impact of waterlogging in cowpea is limited in comparison to heat and 
drought, perhaps due to major production occurring in hot, arid zones, however 
research that does exist suggests it is a sensitive to relatively waterlogging tolerant 
species (Minchin and Summerfield, 1976; Minchin. et al., 1978).  In this study, little 
difference was seen between control and waterlogging groups; waterlogging alone 
tended to produce levels similar to those of controls, and the combined stress of heat x 
waterlogging largely yielded responses similar to those seen in singular heat stress.  The 
notable variations consisted of alanine and pyruvate metabolism, in which there were 
increased levels in waterlogged plants.   
Alanine accumulation, seen in this study, is a frequently observed tolerance response to 
waterlogging exposure, with the main aim thought to be a diversion of pyruvate into 
non-harmful alanine under hypoxia induced anaerobic fermentation conditions, as 
opposed to potentially harmful products such as lactic acid of ethanol (Striker et al. 
2014; Herzog et al. 2016).  A study into the effects of flooding on soybean metabolism 
revealed alanine as the most significantly upregulated amino acid, suggesting its 
accumulation is associated with the storage of carbon and nitrogen that would be lost 
under oxygen deficient conditions (Nakamura et al. 2012).  These findings accord with 
those of Komatsu et al. (2015), who additionally identify upregulation in pyruvate 
metabolism.  Both studies relate these metabolic alterations to upregulation in the TCA 
cycle, which could provide some explanation as to the higher levels identified in heat x 
waterlogging plants compared to waterlogging alone.   
It is worth noting that plant morphological and physiological parameters under 
waterlogging conditions were much less extensively changed than under imposition of 
drought.  However, this study has focussed on stress responses in leaf tissue and one 
shortfall would be a lack of root tissue data.  The small but apparent levels of chlorosis 
in some waterlogged plants could indicate the spread of stress symptoms and analysis 
of root data or a more prolonged waterlogging period could yield more informative 
results.  
3.3.4.5. Metabolic variation observed between accessions  
Under all conditions of stress, there was evidence of variation between the accessions 
involved in the study when analysing the metabolic response.  The primary question 
relating to this variation is whether it is associated with tolerance or whether it is simply 
an innate difference in metabolism as control genotypes under optimum conditions 
showed variation.  Based on the number of stress/tolerance related compounds that 
had been revealed in pathway analysis alone, these were used to further examine 
impact of accession.   
Heatmap analysis provided a particularly useful tool for visualising similarity between 
accessions based on their metabolite profile, and under all conditions including control 
there was clustering of accessions to varying extent.  Assessing whether this clustering 
and variation in metabolite levels was indicative of increased tolerance or susceptibility 
proved unsuccessful.  Comparison of heat, HxWL, and WL plants against respective 
controls yielded little variation in terms of morphological difference, which would 
suggest that these stress factors had little impact across accessions.  A comparison 
between physiological parameters and metabolite levels could provide a beneficial 
insight to correlation between the two, but variation in group sample sizes rendered 
this inappropriate.  It was possible however to explore some association between the 
metabolome and responses in drought and HxD exposed plants. The data for both 
drought and HxD response highlighted drought tolerance associated metabolites, 
notably proline, abundance of which was compared to tolerance values to see if a higher 
level was associated with drought tolerance.   This yielded mixed results, with the overall 
conclusion that within this study, higher levels of these compounds were not necessarily 
associated with tolerance.  In the drought group, there was some evidence that lines 
with high tolerance e.g. lines 9278 and 9729 had higher levels of proline and glycine, 
however much of the remaining evidence suggests no link, with several of the least 
tolerant lines showing an increase in these compounds.  The result was even more 
mixed in HxD, in which the five most tolerant lines all yielded lower levels of proline, 
and five of the six least tolerant showed an increase or no change.  In other studies that 
have aimed to characterise drought response via the metabolome and across a range of 
genotypes similar issues have been recognised.  Goufo et al. (2017) carried out the most 
extensive cowpea metabolite analysis to date on genotypes with different physiological 
responses to drought but yielded no significant differences in metabolite variation 
between them.  Also, whilst not examining metabolic responses per se, Agbicodo et al. 
(2009) comment on similar morpho-physiological behaviours observed in cowpea 
genotypes at opposite ends of the drought tolerance spectrum, as well as commenting 
on the complex nature of genotypic drought response in cowpea.  
4.5. CONCLUSION 
In the studied accessions, drought resulted in the most negative effect on plants, 
particularly in combination with heat stress.  The changes observed in physiology and 
metabolism would confirm cowpea as a drought avoider as opposed to drought 
tolerant.  This is associated with increases in osmoprotective compounds and decreased 
stomatal conductance that both aim to limit plant water loss.  All accessions appear to 
be tolerant to heat stress, with maintenance of physiological parameters.   
The potential of methionine as a marker for response to both heat and drought stress 
was observed, with divergent pathways for polyamine synthesis under heat and 
drought.  This could be further characterised by linking enzymatic activity under these 
conditions to confirm or reject this hypothesis.  Additionally, methionines role in heat 
shock proteins could be further explored.  Considered together, these two factors could 
define methionine as an important stress tolerance biomarker.  
GABA accumulation under different stress conditions potentially results from different 
pathways.   Enzyme activity assays could be used to confirm or reject this notion.   
CHAPTER FOUR: GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND CONTRIBUTION TO 
METABOLITE VARIATION IN STUDIED ACCESSIONS OF VIGNA UNGUICULATA 
(COWPEA) 
5.1 Introduction 
Environmental background is a widely recognised factor in determining plant response 
to abiotic stress exposure.  Tolerance to abiotic stress may be associated with historical 
exposure within species or genotypes.  Much focus has been placed on studying the 
genetics of species or populations from varying backgrounds, and alternatively genetic 
tolerance to stress.  There is limited research however on the association between 
environmental background and how it links to the response of the metabolome under 
stress.   While it is to be accepted that genetics will influence the metabolite profile of 
a species or accession, there is also the possibility that genetically dissimilar lines will 
yield similar results under stress based on a shared historic environment.   
Ecological niche modelling (ENM), sometimes known as species niche modelling, is a 
modelling approach that utilises environmental data from known presence locations of 
populations.  Commonly used for modelling the potential distribution of a species or 
population, this practice characterises the climate niches a population is likely to 
tolerate (Warren et al. 2010).  Climate is regarded as the primary factor driving the 
geographic distribution of plants species (Ferrarini et al. 2019).   The term climate niche 
refers to a set of conditions consisting of temperature and precipitation factors in which 
a particular species or population occurs (Castro-Insua et al. 2018). This niche reflects 
physiological tolerance to climate conditions and may exert an influence on where a 
species or population may be distributed; in response to changing climate species or 
populations may shift distribution to a location that best fits their niche (Wiens et al. 
2009; Castro-Insua et al. 2018).  Understanding whether different genotypes, within a 
species or population, that occupy similar climate niches express similar biological 
responses to climate stress factors could be beneficial in terms of identifying areas of 
tolerance.   
ENMs vary in the data they use to capture the niche of a population or species; this is 
largely dependent on whether they are correlative or mechanistic.  Mechanistic or 
process-based models require more detailed data relating to the biological function of 
a species or population under chosen environmental conditions (Elith and Leathwick 
2009).  Correlative models tend to work on a simpler basis utilising location presence or 
absence data combined with environmentally relevant data to provide understanding 
of distribution across a landscape (Elith et al. 2011).  When capturing a niche, models 
can factor in both geographic and environmental space, with environmental space 
considered the most powerful of the two factors (Elith and Leathwick 2009).  Given their 
use of only location and climate data, ENMs have been criticised in terms of potentially 
lacking nuance or more specific effects to a locality e.g. soil type or biotic interactions 
(Leito and Santos 2019).  However, it is also argued that at the macro or meso-
ecological scale climate variables alone are sufficient for quantifying niche variability, 
and are particularly useful for study groups with sparse occurrence data (Lyon et al. 
2019).   
When considering differences between species or populations environmental 
background, niche overlap is an often-utilised parameter for assessment.  Niche overlap 
considers how similar the niches of test subjects are and the outputs can be considered 
in terms of niche equivalency (null hypothesis  niches are indistinguishable).  In a study 
by Warren et al. (2008) the hypothesis that ecological divergence is associated with 
speciation was considered utilising a comparison of sister species across a specified 
geographic range.  In tests of niche equivalency for a range of insects, bird, and mammal 
species the findings suggested that species niches were significantly different, thus 
rejecting the null hypothesis of niche equivalency.  Smith et al. (2019) suggest that 
ecological niches reflect the tendency of related lineages to possess similar tolerances 
and behaviours in response to environmental factors.  They also note that whilst many 
models are run at species level, population niche variation within species should not be 
ignored and they identify significant divergence in niches between closely related 
genotypes of the same species.   Whether ecological divergence equates to biological 
divergence is an important question, which relies on the availability of data for both 
parameters.  Aguirre-Gutirrez et al. (2015) address this issue through an analysis of 
multiple species of white pine that possess definable morphological and physiological 
traits.  The resulting output from niche equivalency testing reports that there was a 
significant difference between the ecological niche spaces of physiologically different 
white pine species.   
Cowpea is a genetically diverse species, with over 15,000 different accessions held by 
the International Institute for Tropical Agriculture alone, representing only half the 
worlds diversity.  This presents an abundance of genetic material from which desired 
traits such as high yield, pest resistance, and abiotic stress tolerance can be derived.   In 
relation to abiotic stress response, research has focussed primarily on linking 
morphological and physiological responses to genetic similarity, with little available on 
the influence of genetic similarity on metabolic action under stress.    
Aims:  
- There is little information available on the genetic variation of the cowpea 
accessions used in the controlled environment experiments.  The use of 
landraces from across the Southwest region of Nigeria was decided upon as they 
most probably represent the diversity of crop cultivated by subsistence farmers 
and smallholders.  An aim of this chapter was to assess genetic similarity 
amongst the studied accessions and analyse whether this contributed to 
variation in metabolite abundance under varied environmental conditions.   
- A further aim of this chapter was to explore the influence of environmental 
background on the response to abiotic stress.  In further analysis of the effect of 
background environment on the response to abiotic stress, developed lines were 
excluded as their background is a controlled one.  Only landrace accessions were 
used in this analysis as the geographic origin of these lines can be pinpointed to 
a particular location, thus allowing for comparison of environmental 
backgrounds.   
4.2. Methods 
4.2.1. Genetic variation 
Genetic variation within the cowpea experimental population was assessed via 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).   DNA was isolated from leaves of the 21 cowpea 
genotypes used in in-depth experiments using a DNeasy plant mini kit, following the 
included protocol, from QIAGEN.  
Primers utilised were simple sequence repeats (SSRs), identified in work by Adetiloye et 
al. (2013).  The SSRs resulting in use were VM 74 and VM 98, obtained from Thermo 
Fisher.  For PCR, 10l sample was prepared per genotype and amplification was 
performed at optimum annealing temperature for each primer, as advised by Thermo 
Fisher; these were VM 74 = 46C and VM 98 = 48.5C. 
Genotype Ife BPC was used for a positive control, having been demonstrated to have 
presence of all SSRs in the work by Adetiloye et al. (2013).  The negative control was 
dH2O.   
Visualisation of marker presence was carried out using agarose gel electrophoresis at a 
rate of 2% agarose.  Gelstar Nucleic Acid Gel Stain was added to the agarose solution 
before pouring at a rate of 5l/50ml gel.  Gel plates were made to a thickness of 
approximately 7.5mm and run for approximately 30 minutes at a voltage of 76v.  A 1 kb 
DNA ladder was used for identification of bands.  
4.2.2. Ecological Niche Modelling 
Prior to running ecological niche modelling software, it was necessary to consider 
climatic variables that were appropriate to the region of interest.  These were selected 
from the WorldClim Global Climate Dataset of bioclimatic variables; these are a set of 
19 climate variables derived from monthly temperature and rainfall values that 
represent annual trends, seasonality, and extreme factors (http://www.worldclim.org). To 
construct climate layers for use in the ENM process, PCA was utilised in the first instance 
to identify factors with greatest contribution to variation.  He first three principle 
components were used in preliminary analysis.  In addition to this, the environmental 
variables tested in previously described controlled environment experiments  control, 
drought, heat, heat x drought, heat x waterlogging, and waterlogging  were considered 
and six relevant bioclim variables were selected (see table 4.1 for selected bioclims).   
In order to conduct a comparison of population niches, it is necessary to define the 
populations in question and observed location.  In this study, populations were defined 
based on the outcome of metabolite analysis examining within stress variation; this gave 
six factors which were all divided into two groups.  Location data were taken from the 
coordinates provided in the IITA accession database.  
Table. 4.1. Selected Bioclim variables for use in environmental niche modelling (numbers 
in brackets denote Bioclim codes) and relevant stress factors tested against variables.   
Bioclim Relevant stress factors 
(5) Max temperature of warmest 
month 
Heat, heat x drought, heat x 
waterlogging 
(10) Mean temperature of warmest 
quarter 
Heat, heat x drought, heat x 
waterlogging 
(13) Precipitation of wettest month Waterlogging, heat x waterlogging 
(14) Precipitation of driest month Drought, heat x drought 
(16) Precipitation of wettest 
quarter 
Waterlogging, heat x waterlogging 
(17) Precipitation of driest quarter Drought, heat x drought 
Modelling was carried out using ENMTools 1.3 and Maxent 3.3.3.  Firstly, niche identity 
tests were run for all datasets, based on the specific division of populations (e.g. control, 
pop 1/2; drought, pop 1/2).  This test utilises the location data points defined within 
each population and combines them into one sample group, the data points are then all 
randomised, and new populations of the same size as the originals are produced  now 
containing random location data points.  Repetition of this process generates a 
pseudoreplicate set of population data against which comparisons of true values can be 
made. Each pseudoreplicate run produces a set of three values, Schoeners D, an I 
statistic, and Relative Rank.  Schoeners D is an assumption based index that calculates 
species range based on probability distributions for particular regions, with niche 
overlap calculation based on species abundance in these locations, the I statistic is non-
assumption based (Hosseinian Yousefkhani et al. 2016).  The output value of these tests 
runs from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (complete overlap). 
Following this process Maxent and ENMtools were used to create a true niche overlap, 
a set of values based on the actual location data for the two populations.  Niche 
equivalency was tested by comparing the true overlap against 100 pseudoreplicates 
generated through identity tests, defining a statistically significantly dissimilar as true 
overlaps that fall within the lowest five % of these combined values (Warren et al. 2008; 
Aguirre-Gutirrez et al. 2015) 
4.3. Results 
4.3.1 Genetic variation 
Assessment of genetic variation between accessions was carried out using PCR.  Simple 
sequence repeats (SSRs), identified through a previous study on genetic variation in 
Nigerian cowpea accessions by Adetiloye, et al. (2013), were used as primers.  Gel 
electrophoresis was used to visualise the results.  The most informative results were 
ascertained through use of two markers: VM74 and VM98 (table 4.2).   
SSR Primers Primer sequence  
VM 74 F: 5' ctctacaccttccatcattc 
R: 5' cctttgctgtgtggtggttt 
VM 98 F: 5' ggaagcctttggaaattgatg 
R: 5' ccctacattgaaggtcaacaa 
In both VM 74 and VM 98 bands were detected at approximately 100bp and 200bp.  
Lines were scored for the presence of bands and a dendrogram generated based on the 
presence or absence of DNA fragments (figure 4.1).   The dendrogram was constructed 
using the nearest neighbour method, and the division resulting in the greatest number 
of distinct groups could be seen at a distance of 1.0 (figure 4.2).  At this point, accessions 
were separated into four clusters containing five, four, eight and four accessions 
respectively (see table 4.3 for grouping details).  
Table 4.2.  Cowpea simple sequence repeat primers used in genetic variation analysis 
of studied accessions and their corresponding forward and reverse sequences 
Using the output from genetic variation analysis, the groups identified were used to 
examine variation of metabolites.  The previously defined pathway data sets for each 
environmental treatment were divided according to the cluster analysis and analysed 
using Metaboanalyst ANOVA.   
The drought, heat, and heat x waterlogging demonstrated no significant difference in 
compound levels amongst the eight gene groups. Heat x drought analysis showed a 
significant difference in argininosuccinic acid (p < 0.001).  A significant difference was 
observed between groups in waterlogging data in O-acetylserine (p < 0.001).  The 
greatest number of significant differences between cluster groups was observed in the 
control data with 14 compounds identified with the following values; urea, p < 0.05; 
Phenylacetaldehyde, Carbamoyl phosphate, Glycolic acid, Glyoxylic acid, L-Malic acid, 2-
Phenylacetamide, L-Proline, L-Aspartate-semialdehyde, and D-Erythrose 4-phosphate, 
Cluster Accessions 
1 9184, 9289, 9290, 10860, Ife BPC 
2 9204, 9101, 9185, 9187 
3 9283, 9173, 9199, 9197, 9206, 9278, 
9279, 9284 
4 Ife Brown, 9174, 13663, Ife 98-12 
Table 4.3.  Accession groups defined by output of nearest neighbour method cluster 
analysis, based on the point of greatest divergence.    
all p < 0.01; L-Asparagine, Phosphohydroxypyruvic acid, N-Acetyl-L-glutamate 5-
semialdehyde, and N-Acetyl-L-glutamyl 5-phosphate, all p < 0.001.   
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
Figure 4.1. Results of agarose gel electrophoresis (2% agarose) visualising PCR 
amplified SSR primers VM 74 (above) and VM 98 (below).  Left-hand lanes show 1 kb 
DNA size marker.  
4.3.2. Geographic distribution 
Figure 4.3 demonstrates the geographic range of accessions within the southwest 
region of Nigeria.    Accessions were collected from six states within the region with a 
minimum and maximum distance between accession sites of 9.2km and 315km, 
respectively.  Several accessions were given the same collection coordinates in the 
accompanying data from IITA, therefore they are attributed to a single point on the map 
resulting in 14 separate collection sites.  
0 40 8020 Miles
Nigeria
Benin
Kwara
Delta
Ekiti
Niger
Lagos
Delta
Delta
92909289
92049199
13663
10860
Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia,  OpenStreetMap contributors, and
the GIS user community
Figure 4.3. Map showing the geographic distribution of collection locations for 
selected cowpea accessions from Southwest Nigeria.    
4.3.3 Ecological Niche Modelling 
In this study 100 pseudoreplicates per test group were run and sorted from smallest to 
largest.   Following this a true niche overlap for the populations within each dataset was 
calculated; for this the actual populations are compared, and values established.  These 
values are then compared with pseudoreplicate data to establish whether they are 
significantly lower, in this case if they were within the lowest five percent of values.  
Test group Climate variable D I 
Control PCA 1,2,3 0.881 0.975  
Drought PCA 1,2,3 
Bio 14 
Bio17 
0.879 
0.573* 
0.480** 
0.967 
0.881* 
0.819** 
Heat PCA 1,2,3 
Bio 5 
Bio 10 
0.700 
0.893 
0.903  
0.916 
0.991 
0.993 
Heat x drought PCA 1,2,3 
Bio 10 
Bio 14 
Bio 17 
0.740 
0.937 
0.922 
0.367** 
0.385**  
0.916 
0.997 
1.000 
0.725** 
0.728** 
Heat x waterlogging PCA 1,2,3 
Bio 5 
Bio 10 
Bio 13 
Bio 16 
0.916 
0.930 
0.931 
0.980 
0.987  
0.992 
0.996 
0.997 
1.000 
1.000  
Waterlogging PCA 1,2,3 
Bio 13 
Bio 16  
0.768 
0.986 
0.977 
0.949 
1.000 
0.999 
Table 4.4. Output from ENMtools niche overlap tool.  Results from PCA based 
analysis and relevant bioclim variables are displayed.  Values for Schoeners D and 
the I statistic are shown.  
* denotes values in the lowest 5% compared to pseudoreplicates 
** denotes values in the lowest 1% compared to pseudoreplicates 
The results of the ecological niche modelling are displayed in table 4.4 and figures 4.4 
and 4.5.   Principle component analysis was carried out using bioclim data for the region 
of Southwest Nigeria, and climate layer files were constructed based on PCs I, 2, and 3.  
In the first instance, identity tests and niche overlap were carried out for each test group 
using this PCA based data, however this demonstrated no significant difference in the 
environmental backgrounds of populations.   Further analysis using relevant singular 
bioclimatic variables revealed largely non-significant niche overlap values except for 
drought and heat x drought-based population groupings using precipitation based 
bioclim variables.   
The results of the niche overlap tests in which the observed overlap was in the lowest 
five percent are displayed in figures 4.4 and 4.5 along with the pseudoreplicates 
generated by the identity tests.    Though these populations would appear to be from 
more divergent ecological backgrounds than the compared pseudoreplicate data, they 
are not completely divergent.  Using the I statistic, the results would suggest there is 
still a medium to high overlap in both the drought and heat x drought derived 
populations, however when Schoeners D is considered both populations can be 
considered to come from low-medium overlapping backgrounds.  
Observed overlap 
group 1/group 2 
D = 0.573 
Observed overlap 
group 1/group 2 
I = 0.881 
Observed overlap 
group 1/group 2 
D = 0.480 
Observed overlap 
group 1/group 2 
I = 0.820 
Figure 4.4. Results of ENMtools identity and niche overlap tests for two populations 
derived from drought metabolite analysis.  The labelled arrows represent the 
observed niche overlap.  Columns represent the niche overlap values created in the 
identity tests (red columns represent D values and blue columns represent I values).   
Histogram A shows the output for bioclim 14 (precipitation of the driest month) 
and histogram B shows the output for bioclim 17 (precipitation of the driest 
quarter). 
Observed overlap group 
1/group 2 
D = 0.367 
Observed overlap group 
1/group 2 
I = 0.725 
Observed overlap group 
1/group 2 
D = 0.385 
Observed overlap group 
1/group 2 
I = 0.728 
Figure 4.5. Results of ENMtools identity and niche overlap tests for two populations 
derived from heat x drought metabolite analysis.  The labelled arrows represent the 
observed niche overlap.  Columns represent the niche overlap values created in the 
identity tests (red columns represent D values and blue columns represent I values).   
Histogram A shows the output for bioclim 14 (precipitation of the driest month) 
and histogram B shows the output for bioclim 17 (precipitation of the driest 
quarter). 
4.4. Discussion and conclusion 
The assessment of the impact of genetic variation, based on cluster analysis, showed 
little in the way of differences in the metabolome under conditions of abiotic stress.  
Interestingly it was under control conditions that the greatest variation in metabolite 
content was observed.  This could indicate a common response regardless of genetic 
similarity or distinction in the accessions studied, whereby compounds are accumulated 
or decreased in similar patterns to similar levels upon exposure to abiotic stress.  In a 
recent metabolite analysis study of drought effects on cowpea, two genetically distinct 
varieties demonstrated metabolite abundance under stress that was not significantly 
different between them (Goufo et al. 2017) which would be suggestive of a shared 
response.  The variation within control plants would therefore likely be associated with 
differences in basal metabolic behaviour affecting parameters such as growth rate.  
It is worth noting that there are factors within the study that could be improved upon 
to deliver a more robust output in terms of defining genetically similar groups. The use 
of SSRs as markers was decided upon due to previous research in cowpea genetics that 
have found them to be highly polymorphic, abundant within the genome, easily 
reproducible, and require simple screening techniques (Ogunkanmi et al. 2008; Asare et 
al. 2010; Desalegne et al. 2016).   It was anticipated that six SSR markers would be used 
for PCR and subsequent analysis, however, in the timeframe of the study, utilisable 
results were only achieved for two of these.  An increased number of markers would 
have revealed more points of similarity or divergence within the genotypes.    
The results from environmental niche modelling point to two findings where this study 
is concerned.  Firstly, the use of multiple climate variables that a representative of the 
broader climate, as is more likely using the top three principle components, points to a 
large level of overlap between collection locations.  This would suggest that the climate 
across the region is generally similar, with a potential for variation in singular aspects.  
Secondly, the use of individual bioclim variables using groupings derived from relevant 
controlled environment experiments could provide some use in identifying locations for 
plants with particular metabolic traits.   
Niche overlap was considered a valid method for investigating the environmental 
background of populations based on the available data.  Location records were present 
for each accession within a population and the selection of populations was driven by 
changes to metabolism invoked by climate factors.   Evaluation of the similarity of niches 
for the two contrasting metabolic responses to a climate could infer whether niche is a 
contributing factor to this separation.  A similar technique has been utilised in the 
evaluation of environmental niches of Mexican white pines (Aguirre-Gutirrez et al. 
2015) and a range of sister-pairs of insects, birds, and mammals across the Isthmus of 
Tehuantepec in Mexico (Warren et al. 2008).  These were linked species with varying 
biological characteristics.  In this study, species level is replaced by population level, a 
concept addressed by Smith et al. (2019), who indicate potential for subspecies level to 
incorporate variation attributed to ecotypes and local adaptation.   
As a correlative distribution model, it is inferred that the populations in question were 
able to develop successfully in their respective location and any environmental impacts 
were within their tolerance range (Kearney and Porter 2009).    In this study, the bioclims 
and experimental data that best represent this were drought related.  All the 
combinations of climate variable x treatment group where drought was a factor 
returned an output where the observed overlap was in the lowest five percent of values 
compared to pseudoreplicates.  Therefore, it could be suggested that a variation in the 
environmental backgrounds of the populations in question contributed to the variation 
in metabolite profile.   
Caution is to be applied however when interpreting ENMs with a restricted set of 
variables as this excludes other variables that could pose a factor in the population 
range.   Biotic factors represent a significant limitation to crop production and may exert 
a significant influence on species distribution depending on tolerance and presence of 
biotic interactions.  Though biotic factors are a considerable risk in the geographic 
region of interest, they were not included in the study as the controlled environment 
data utilised did not incorporate this element.  This would represent an interesting area 
for further study, which would have to incorporate the nuance and variability in 
tolerance to particular pest/pathogen species, particularly in reference to strain-host 
interactions.  Additionally there are a number of other geographic or environmental 
factors that may demonstrate an influence on the presence and biological behaviour of 
differing genotypes such as soil parameters and altitude (Hawlitschek et al. 2011). It is 
noted that at increased altitude temperatures may fall, incidental sunlight increases, 
and transpiration in plants may also increase; all of which could affect photosynthetic 
parameters and metabolism (Gale 2004; Wang et al. 2017).  An added layer of 
complexity is the effect altitude would have on biotic factors such as pests and 
pathogens. This illuminates a limitation in the use of niche modelling in that it is difficult 
or impossible to fully characterise the whole ecological profile at each presence 
location.   
It should be noted that the population sizes and number of location points utilised in 
this work were limited, this was due largely to the limitations imposed by the number 
of accessions it would be possible to screen in environmental studies.  Any further work 
should incorporate a greater number of location points per population, more than 25 
per population (Pearson et al. 2007) to provide a more coherent and detailed overview 
of the environmental niches.   Additionally, in this study it was difficult to attribute a 
particular outcome from the metabolite variation on which the different populations 
are based; the patterns of change did not seem to be associated with tolerance or 
susceptibility. Therefore, despite the observed differences in environmental 
background and metabolic differences between populations, an association between 
environmental background and tolerance cannot be made.   
CHAPTER FIVE: GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK 
5.1. The prior state of knowledge and major research gaps identified 
The literature review presented in chapter one provided an overview of the state of 
knowledge prior to this work being undertaken.  Key findings from the literature 
demonstrated that a wide range of data were available concerning the response of 
plants to abiotic stress responses.  Research within this field relates to a wide variety of 
species from across the plant kingdom and reveals many similar responses across 
species, ranging from morphological modifications to changes in physiological 
behaviour, and alterations to plant metabolism.  As research progresses, a key finding 
and research theme is that of nuance within these biological categories, particularly at 
species level but also at varietal or genotypic level.  This raises an issue in that 
assumptions cannot necessarily be made in terms of plant behavioural response to 
stress and highlights the need for in depth studies focussed at species and genotype 
level.  These findings presented a research gap in cowpea which, as a neglected tropical 
crop species, has received comparably less attention than major crop species.  The 
research that has been conducted has tended to maintain focus on developed varieties, 
with little focus on traditional cultivars and wild genotypes.   
 Also evident from the literature review was the dominant focus on single stress 
research, with a comparable lack of research examining responses to multiple combined 
stress factors.  Recent research in this area has shown that there can be considerable 
variability in plant response to single abiotic stress factors when compared to 
combinations of two or more stress factors.  This variation can be expressed in the form 
of  beneficial and antagonistic effects on plant response which are also difficult to 
predict from the single stress factors, similarly these variations exist between species 
and at genotypic level, meaning assumptions cannot be made and that there is a need 
for further research examining these interactions.   Research gaps were identified for 
both L.japonicus and cowpea (V.unguiculata)  
Biological nitrogen fixation and the interaction between rhizobia and environmental 
stress has been the focus of some research, much of which has focussed on the effects 
of stress on the ability of the bacteria to survive and maintain biological function.  An 
area lacking in knowledge how inoculation with rhizobia might affect the ability and 
mechanisms by which plants respond to abiotic stress, with the potential for both 
negative effects that limit tolerance or positive effects that confer greater tolerance.   
The use of rhizobia inoculation in controlled environmental stress experiments tested 
this hypothesis.   
Metabolite change under conditions of environmental stress has become a more 
popular field of research, particularly using broad-spectrum metabolomics.  Whilst 
much information has been derived for several species, the literature demonstrated 
that Vigna unguiculata remained un under investigated crop, with only two studies 
seeking to characterise the global metabolite profile. There remains also a gap in the 
knowledge regarding landrace accessions that might be representative of the varieties 
cultivated by smallholders.  This study sought to contribute to the growing body of data 
concerning the metabolism through the use of select landraces from the region of 
interest, Southwest Nigeria.  
The use of ecological modelling techniques to assess the environmental background, 
potentially identifying regions in which plants might be more likely to confer tolerance 
to particular traits, was also identified as an area in which there was a lack of 
knowledge.  The literature highlights the use of such work to examine regional 
distinction between different species and highlights the potential for this to work at a 
sub-species/genotypic level.  In reference to Vigna unguiculata, there was no pre-
existing work considering these factors, which represent a distinct gap within the 
literature.   
5.2. Study findings and discussion 
An important for criteria for crop breeding and development programmes, particularly 
in the face of climate change and increased climate volatility, is information on how 
plants respond to abiotic stress. Multiple aspects of abiotic stress impacts and responses 
have been characterised across many plant species and findings have demonstrated 
that whilst some characteristics are shared, responses are often species specific or 
indeed genotype specific.  Use of model species that are easy to grow and obtain 
reproducible results can sometimes be indicative of responses in non-model species 
(Sato et al., 2008).  In this study the aim was to characterise the impacts and responses 
of the model legume Lotus japonicus on exposure to abiotic stress factors under both 
nodulated and ammonium nitrate regimes for nitrogen supply.   Results from the study 
of L. japonicus could then be compared to output from a separate experiment 
examining the impacts and responses in V. unguiculata (cowpea) genotypes.   
The data from the two experiments suggest that their similarities were more limited 
than their differences. In both species, a similar pattern in decline in relative water 
content was observed, with significantly lower values for plants under water deficit and 
maintenance under well-watered conditions.  Data from chlorophyll fluorescence 
readings differed between the two species however, with FV/FM being reduced under 
heat conditions in L. japonicus but maintained under water deficit, whereas in cowpea 
FV/FM was significantly reduced in drought conditions but maintained under heat.  This 
would suggest the two species diverge in the stress factors they have the greatest 
tolerance to.  Similarly, for stomatal conductance, while both species demonstrated 
decreases under drought conditions, indicative of stomatal closure, they differed in 
response to waterlogging stress, with levels increasing in cowpea and decreasing in 
Lotus japonicus.  This variation in response could be indicative of differences in 
tolerance to waterlogging, the decrease in Lotus japonicus indicating hypoxia and 
decreased respiration in the root zone which signals for stomatal closure in leaves.  
However, there is the possibility that cowpea plants simply were not exposed to 
waterlogging for long enough and continuation for a more prolonged period could 
reveal a decrease in stomatal conductance at a later point.   
Metabolomic approaches were used extensively in this current project as changes in 
osmolyte accumulation patterns and indeed in primary and secondary metabolism are 
associated with responses to stress. Variation between the two species was observed in 
the metabolomic analysis.  There were similarities in the data, with the output from 
pathway analysis identifying many as being significantly enriched in both species.  
Additionally, proline accumulation was observed to the greatest extent in both species 
under water deficit conditions, indicative of a shared general response.  However, 
carbon metabolism was differently regulated, showing a decrease in associated 
metabolites under heat stress in L. japonicus whereas increases were observed in 
cowpea under heat stress.  Similarly, under drought conditions, carbon metabolism was 
maintained or upregulated in L. japonicus and downregulated in cowpea.  These 
contrasting responses could be indicative of varied sources of photosynthetic 
impairment; damage to apparatus in L. japonicus, linked to the decrease observed in 
FV/FM, and sensitivity to stomatal limitations on photosynthesis in cowpea.  Amino acid 
profiles also differed between species.  Phenylalanine metabolism was identified in L. 
japonicus, with downstream compounds coumaric acid and salicylic acid changing in 
response to water deficit, thus indicating potential antioxidant metabolism and 
tolerance signalling.  In cowpea, metabolism of sulphur containing amino acids, 
particularly methionine, pointed to stress induced increase in polyamines such as 
spermidine and heat shock proteins, conversely these compounds demonstrated 
decreases in L. japonicus under similar stress.  Taken together these variations could 
indicate that L. japonicus responses to abiotic stress are not immediately transferable 
to those of cowpea and could further confirm the notion of enhanced tolerance to 
different stress factors.  It is worth considering though that variation in accession 
numbers and the methods by which the data were analysed; the data from L. japonicus 
characterises show response for one genotype, whereas analysis could demonstrate a 
different output through comparison of multiple genotypes from both species with 
known abiotic stress tolerance and susceptibility.   
The impact of nodulation by rhizobia species has demonstrated beneficial effects in 
plants exposed to varying abiotic stress factors (Zahir et al., 2010; Staudinger et al., 
2016).  The mechanisms by which this enhanced tolerance in conferred remain poorly 
understood, but it is supposed that crosstalk between response pathways could result 
in a synergistic effect (Yang et al. 2009; Lim and Kim 2013).  This was explored in this 
study using L. japonicus under N source regimes of nodulation or ammonium nitrate.  
Differences were observed in the morphology of the plants, with ammonium nitrate 
plants appearing to have enhanced growth rates compared to nodulated plants.  
Physiologically plants were almost identical, however in the metabolism there was some 
variation.  Nitrogen assimilation was the most apparent point of divergence, with levels 
of asparagine and glutamine significantly higher in ammonium nitrate supplied plants. 
This would suggest enhanced uptake in nitrogen at this point, which would correlate to 
the increased growth rate observed.  Metabolite fluctuation was greater in ammonium 
nitrate supplied plants however, suggesting they are more metabolically sensitive to 
abiotic stress than nodulated plants.  It remains unclear as to whether nodulation was 
contributing to stress tolerance, though plants appeared healthier and maintained 
greenness when compared with ammonium nitrate fed plants, there is little evidence in 
the metabolite data to suggest regulation of particular compounds or pathways is 
responsible for this.  
In breeding for enhanced stress tolerance there is a need to source genetic material 
with the relevant traits.  It has been demonstrated that metabolism plays an important 
role in the mitigation of stress effects, and the accumulation of particular compounds 
can confer tolerance.  If environmental background could be linked to the presence of 
these compounds, or to their accumulation in accessions under stress conditions, this 
could help to isolate geographic areas of interest for genetic resources.  The ecological 
niche of a species or population relates to the environment in which it is found, and the 
interactions between organism and environment. Often used for predictive modelling, 
i.e. where a species might be distributed in the future, the occupancy of a niche also 
points to the historic relationship between organism and environment, which will 
potentially have shaped biological function.  The hypothesis that variation in 
metabolism under stress conditions might be linked to variation in environmental 
background was explored in this study through the use of niche modelling.  Using 
relevant climate layers that would be likely to contribute to variation in the parameter 
being assessed e.g. temperature to groups defined by heat stress, little variation could 
be seen between niches in heat and waterlogging.  However, groups defined by their 
differing metabolic responses to drought came from niches that were significantly 
different.  Unfortunately, there was not a strong correlation between the differences 
observed in metabolism and tolerance level, meaning environment could not be 
confidently linked to tolerance. However, the work suggests that there is the potential 
to explore this concept further, using better defined metabolite data, potentially 
derived from plants of known tolerance, and through the use of larger sample groups.  
Exploration of parameters outside metabolism could also be correlated to 
environmental background to understand whether there is variation in these processes.  
Screening for physiological alterations can be less time demanding allowing for a greater 
number of accessions.  Using this process to ascertain environmental niche variation 
followed by characterisation of the metabolism post modelling could yield greater 
location points for analysis and deliver a more robust output from ENMs.  
5.3. Issues and methodological limitations of the study 
There are several issues and limitations to this study that exist due to inherent 
differences between experimental and real world conditions, or because it was not 
practicable to undertake more widespread analysis.  
 The study was designed to specifically investigate the responses of landraces to abiotic 
stress, as opposed to a focus solely on developed varieties.  Whilst it is successful in the 
aspect of utilising landraces, the question should be asked of how representative the 
germplasm used were of traditional landraces and cultivars that will currently be used 
in smallholder cowpea production.   Whilst these are technically landraces, the lines 
were acquired from IITA, where they will they been propagated, and good seed will have 
been selected.  These were then germination tested in this study, and the lines selected 
for use were those with over 80% germination.  It is important to highlight that this may 
not be the experience farmers have with traditional varieties and perhaps one approach 
that may be useful in further research is to collect accessions from small markets and 
producers.  In this instance this was not practical, as the work was conducted in Wales, 
with Nigerian contacts providing what was accessible. Additionally, this is only a very 
small representation of the vast number of landraces that exist, with 13,000+ varieties 
of cowpea in the IITA genebank alone.  
The experiments undertaken in this research were all conducted in controlled 
environment conditions which, whilst designed to consider multiple stress factors in 
order to more realistically simulate real-world conditions, they were not fully 
representative of conditions in the geographic region of interest.  Given the plethora of 
external factors plants face in their production cycle, it would be virtually impossible to 
fully represent conditions, however it can be acknowledged that biotic factors were not 
considered within this research and there are multiple environmental aspects such as 
altitude, CO2 concentration, UVB , soil profile and salinity, all of which could have an 
impact on plant biological processes but which were excluded from this research. The 
manner in which stress factors are imposed represents a further limitation to this work 
and much controlled environment work.  This study, as in many others, maintained 
exposure to consistent levels of stress, e.g. a consistent high temperature, and this can 
mask the reality of fluctuations that would be seen in field conditions.  
The range of methodologies utilised could also be considered to have some limitation 
on the study, and where possible it would be preferable to have a wider overview of the 
biology through analysis of more variables.  This was largely limited by time constraints 
and the ability to collect all the data within a short timeframe.  The nature of the study 
resulted in large datasets, particularly for Vigna unguiculata, with all the acquisition of 
the experimental samples taken within 24 hours to be considered a single time point.  
Similarly, there was a limitation to the study in terms of the plant growth stages that 
could be assessed.  This was driven by the space that was practically available for 
controlled environment conditions and the inability to pursue field trials in Nigeria due 
to the cost implications.  Therefore a decision was made to conduct all analysis at 
seedling level, which was manageable, and to acknowledge that there are effects 
previously observed at later stages, such as reproduction and pod bearing, which could 
not be observed in this study.  
5.4. Recommendations from the work for stakeholders and practitioners, and further 
research 
In terms of stakeholders who can benefit from the development made in this field of 
research, it is important to look at the full breadth of the sector.  
An immediately obvious stakeholder group is fellow researchers, particularly those 
studying lotus japonicus, cowpea, or abiotic stress from a physiological and 
metabolomic approach.  As highlighted in the literature review and throughout the 
work, there are variations and nuances seen in species response to abiotic stress, 
however continued work in this field allows for a deeper understanding of cross species 
similarities.  In terms of applied cowpea research, this contributes to a deeper 
understanding of cowpea metabolism under abiotic stress and the mechanisms by 
which the crop might respond, either in general as a species or genotype responses.  If 
further work is able to identify biomarker metabolites that confer tolerance, this could 
be particularly useful to breeders and it highlights the use of landraces as a wide genetic 
resource pool.    
Perhaps the most important stakeholder group this research may be useful to and could 
deliver some impact to is farmers, particularly smallholders and subsistence farmers 
who are cultivating for their own consumption or to diversify.  The role of landraces is 
being highlighted more frequently as an important factor in the future supply of food.  
They are noted for their ability to provide relative stability of yield and their cultural and 
social sustainability (Walters, 2018). Identifying sources of tolerance in these could 
provide accessible and culturally appropriate varieties, this is in comparison to 
developed varieties which may be hard to source or that are not in line with farmer 
needs and wants.  Implementing this would require input into dissemination and 
knowledge exchange between stakeholders i.e. from researcher to farmer but could 
result in developments where the end users feel they have more sovereignty within the 
food system.   
Considering these recommendations further, a number of findings from the study 
suggest there is potential for further research, which are as follows. 
Larger scale studies in cowpea with the capacity to evaluate responses to abiotic stress 
at multiple growth stages and to understand the impacts on crop yield.  There was no 
yield data available for the landrace accessions utilised in this study and so work should 
quantify what a normal yield is for these lines.  This work concentrated only on seedling 
stage, however abiotic stress has been demonstrated to have impacts in later vegetative 
stages and importantly on reproductive traits.   
In both cowpea and Lotus japonicus further work that characterises the recovery of 
plants from exposure to abiotic stress could be of value.  It has been demonstrated that 
recovery from stress exposure is not necessarily linked to behaviour under stress 
conditions (Saud et al. 2017), therefore plants appearing to be more disrupted in their 
biological function can recover to normal function more rapidly or to a greater extent 
than less impacted varieties.  
Use of a greater number of genotypes in Lotus japonicus research focussing on impacts 
of nodulation could elicit more detailed information on the potential for synergistic 
effects.  In particular, the use of genotypes with known abiotic stress responses ranging 
from susceptible to tolerant could allow for more targeted identification of metabolic 
responses and potential tolerance biomarkers.  
Combining metabolite analysis with proteomics to illustrate enzyme activity under 
stress could offer a more robust overview of pathways under stress, particularly where 
metabolites of interest could have been derived from multiple pathways.  This could 
contribute to identification of potential biomarkers for tolerance. Specifically relating to 
this study, confirming or rejecting the hypothesis that GABA is being synthesised from 
polyamines, the fate of methionine in relation to polyamine synthesis and heat shock 
protein synthesis, and the activity of RuBisCo to confirm or reject potential for 
photorespiration as a contributor to glycine accumulation.  
REFERENCE LIST 
Abadassi, J. and Abadassi, J. 2015. Available online at www.ijpab.com Cowpea ( Vigna 
unguiculata ( L .) Walp .) Agronomic Traits Needed in Tropical Zone. 3(4), pp. 158165. 
Adegbite, A.A. and Amusa, N.A. 2010. The major economic field diseases of cowpea in 
the humid agro-ecologies of south-western Nigeria. Archives Of Phytopathology And 
Plant Protection 43(16), pp. 16081618. Available at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03235400802677768?journalCode=ga
pp20 [Accessed: 24 November 2015]. 
Adetiloye, I.S., Ariyo, O.J., Alake, C.O., Oduwaye, O.O and Osewa, S.O. 2013. Genetic 
diversity of some selected Nigeria cowpea using simple sequence repeats (SSR) 
marker. African Journal of Agricultural Research 8(7), pp. 586590. doi: 
10.5897/AJAR11.811. 
Agbicodo, E.M. et al. 2009. Breeding drought tolerant cowpea: constraints, 
accomplishments, and future prospects. Euphytica 167(3), pp. 353370. Available at: 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10681-009-9893-8. 
Agbogidi, O. M. and Egho, E.. 2012. Evaluation of eight varieties of cowpea ( Vigna 
unguiculata ( L .) Walp ) in Asaba agro-ecological environment , Delta State , Nigeria. 
European Journal of Sustainable Development (2012) 1(2), pp. 303314. 
Aguirre-Gutirrez, J. et al. 2015. Similar but not equivalent: Ecological niche 
comparison across closely-related Mexican white pines. Diversity and Distributions 
21(3), pp. 245257. doi: 10.1111/ddi.12268. 
Agurla, S. et al. 2018. Polyamines increase nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in 
guard cells of Arabidopsis thaliana during stomatal closure. Protoplasma 255(1), pp. 
153162. doi: 10.1007/s00709-017-1139-3. 
Ajetomobi, J. and Abiodun, A. 2010. Climate change impacts on cowpea productivity in 
Nigeria. African Journal of Food, Agriculture, Nutrition and Development 10(3). doi: 
10.4314/ajfand.v10i3.54082. 
Akhtar, I. and Nazir, N. 2013. Effect of waterlogging and drought stress in plants. 
International Journal of Water Resources and Environmental Sciences 2(2), pp. 3440. 
doi: 10.5829/idosi.ijwres.2013.2.2.11125. 
Alam, I. et al. 2010. Proteome analysis of soybean roots under waterlogging stress at 
an early vegetative stage. Journal of Biosciences 35(1), pp. 4962. doi: 
10.1007/s12038-010-0007-5. 
Alczar, R. et al. 2010. Polyamines: Molecules with regulatory functions in plant abiotic 
stress tolerance. Planta 231(6), pp. 12371249. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1130-0. 
Allakhverdiev, S.I. et al. 2008. Heat stress: an overview of molecular responses in 
photosynthesis. Photosynthesis Research 98(13), pp. 541550. Available at: 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11120-008-9331-0 [Accessed: 19 January 2017]. 
Andre Bationo, Boaz Waswa, Jeremiah M.Okeyo.Fredah Maina,Job Kihara, U.M. 2014. 
Fighting Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Multiple Roles of Legumes in Integrated 
Soil Fertility Management. Springer Science & Business Media. Available at: 
http://www.americanbanker.com/issues/179_124/which-city-is-the-next-big-fintech-
hub-new-york-stakes-its-claim-1068345-
1.html%5Cnhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15003161%5Cnhttp://cid.oxfordjo
urnals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/cid/cir991%5Cnhttp://www.scielo.cl/pd [Accessed: 18 
February 2016]. 
Anjum, S. et al. 2011. Morphological, physiological and biochemical responses of 
plants to drought stress. African Journal of Agricultural Research 6(9), pp. 20262032. 
Available at: http://www.academia.edu/download/30900204/Anjum_et_al.pdf. 
Aranjuelo, I. et al. 2007. Effect of elevated temperature and water availability on CO2 
exchange and nitrogen fixation of nodulated alfalfa plants. Environmental and 
Experimental Botany 59(2), pp. 99108. doi: 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2005.10.008. 
Aroca, R. et al. 2012. Regulation of root water uptake under abiotic stress conditions. 
Journal of experimental botany 63(1), pp. 4357. Available at: 
http://jxb.oxfordjournals.org/content/63/1/43.full [Accessed: 21 April 2016]. 
Asare, A.T. et al. 2010. Assessment of the genetic diversity in cowpea (Vigna 
unguiculata L. Walp.) germplasm from Ghana using simple sequence repeat markers. 
Plant Genetic Resources: Characterisation and Utilisation 8(2), pp. 142150. doi: 
10.1017/S1479262110000092. 
Atkinson, N.J. and Urwin, P.E. 2012. The interaction of plant biotic and abiotic stresses: 
from genes to the field. Journal of Experimental Botany 63(10), pp. 35233543. 
Available at: http://jxb.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/jxb/ers100. 
Awasthi, R. et al. 2017. Effects of individual and combined heat and drought stress 
during seed filling on the oxidative metabolism and yield of chickpea (Cicer arietinum) 
genotypes differing in heat and drought tolerance. Crop and Pasture Science 68(9), pp. 
823841. doi: 10.1071/CP17028. 
Bansal, R. and Srivastava, J.P. 2015. Effect of waterlogging on photosynthetic and 
biochemical parameters in pigeonpea. Russian Journal of Plant Physiology 62(3), pp. 
322327. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1134/S1021443715030036. 
Basu, S. et al. 2016. Plant adaptation to drought stress. F1000Research 5(0), p. 1554. 
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7678.1. 
Batista-Silva, W. et al. 2019. The role of amino acid metabolism during abiotic stress 
release. Plant Cell and Environment 42(5), pp. 16301644. doi: 10.1111/pce.13518. 
Becana, M. et al. 2010. Recent insights into antioxidant defenses of legume root 
nodules. New Phytologist 188(4), pp. 960976. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
8137.2010.03512.x. 
Betti, M. et al. 2012. Cellular Stress Following Water Deprivation in the Model Legume 
Lotus japonicus. Cells 1(4), pp. 10891106. doi: 10.3390/cells1041089. 
Bhandari, K. et al. 2016. Heat Stress at Reproductive Stage Disrupts Leaf Carbohydrate 
Metabolism, Impairs Reproductive Function, and Severely Reduces Seed Yield in Lentil. 
Journal of Crop Improvement 30(2), pp. 118151. doi: 
10.1080/15427528.2015.1134744. 
Birben, E. et al. 2012. Oxidative Stress and Antioxidant Defense. World Allergy 
Organization Journal 5(1), pp. 919. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzy015. 
Bita, C.E. and Gerats, T. 2013. Plant tolerance to high temperature in a changing 
environment: scientific fundamentals and production of heat stress-tolerant crops. 
Frontiers in plant science 4, p. 273. Available at: 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3728475&tool=pmcentre
z&rendertype=abstract [Accessed: 28 December 2015]. 
Bordenave, C.D. et al. 2013. Defense responses in two ecotypes of Lotus japonicus 
against non-pathogenic Pseudomonas syringae. PLoS ONE 8(12), pp. 116. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0083199. 
Borsanii, O. and Dfaz, P. 1999. Proline is Involved in Water Stress Responses of Lotus 
corniculatus Nitrogen Fixing and Nitrate Fed Plants. 155, pp. 269273. doi: 
10.1016/S0176-1617(99)80018-2. 
Carmo-Silva, A.E. et al. 2012. Decreased CO2 availability and inactivation of Rubisco 
limit photosynthesis in cotton plants under heat and drought stress in the field. 
Environmental and Experimental Botany 83, pp. 111. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0098847212000883 [Accessed: 30 
November 2015]. 
Castro-Insua, A. et al. 2018. Climatic niche divergence drives patterns of diversification 
and richness among mammal families. Scientific Reports 8(1), pp. 112. doi: 
10.1038/s41598-018-27068-y. 
Chibarabada, T.P. et al. 2017. Expounding the value of grain legumes in the semi- and 
arid tropics. Sustainability (Switzerland) 9(1). doi: 10.3390/su9010060. 
Chivenge, P. et al. 2015. The Potential Role of Neglected and Underutilised Crop 
Species as Future Crops under Water Scarce Conditions in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 12(6), pp. 5685
5711. Available at: http://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/12/6/5685/. 
Coudel, A. et al. 2018. Cover crop crucifer-legume mixtures provide effective nitrate 
catch crop and nitrogen green manure ecosystem services. Agriculture, Ecosystems 
and Environment 254(February), pp. 5059. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2017.11.017. 
CRAUFURD, P.Q. et al. 1998. Heat tolerance in cowpea: effect of timing and duration 
of heat stress. Annals of Applied Biology 133(2), pp. 257267. Available at: 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1744-7348.1998.tb05826.x [Accessed: 18 February 
2016]. 
Cruz de Carvalho, M.H. et al. 2010. Homoglutathione synthetase and glutathione 
synthetase in drought-stressed cowpea leaves: Expression patterns and accumulation 
of low-molecular-weight thiols. Journal of Plant Physiology 167(6), pp. 480487. doi: 
10.1016/j.jplph.2009.10.023. 
Dedemo, G. et al. 2013. Osmoprotection in Sugarcane under Water Deficit Conditions. 
Plant Stress 7(1), pp. 17. Available at: 
http://www.globalsciencebooks.info/JournalsSup/images/Sample/PS_7(1)1-7o.pdf. 
Desalegne, B.A. et al. 2016. Assessment of genetic diversity in Ethiopian cowpea [Vigna 
unguiculata (L.) Walp.] germplasm using simple sequence repeat markers. Plant 
Molecular Biology Reporter 34(5), pp. 978992. doi: 10.1007/s11105-016-0979-x. 
Daz, P. et al. 2005a. Drought and saline stress. Lotus Japonicus Handbook (Figure 1), 
pp. 3950. doi: 10.1007/1-4020-3735-X_3. 
Daz, P. et al. 2005b. Osmotically induced proline accumulation in Lotus corniculatus 
leaves is affected by light and nitrogen source. Plant Growth Regulation 46(3), pp. 
223232. doi: 10.1007/s10725-005-0860-7. 
Daz, P. et al. 2010. Deficiency in plastidic glutamine synthetase alters proline 
metabolism and transcriptomic response in Lotus japonicus under drought stress. New 
Phytologist 188(4), pp. 10011013. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03440.x. 
Dicenzo, G.C. et al. 2017. crossm Succinate Transport Is Not Essential for Symbiotic 
Nitrogen Fixation by Sinorhizobium meliloti or Rhizobium. (September). doi: 
10.1128/AEM.01561-17. 
van Dongen, J.T. et al. 2014. Low-Oxygen Stress in Plants: Oxygen Sensing and 
Adaptive Responses to Hypoxia. Plant Cell Monographs 21(December). doi: 
10.1007/978-3-7091-1254-0. 
Dusenge, M.E. et al. 2019. Plant carbon metabolism and climate change: elevated CO2 
and temperature impacts on photosynthesis, photorespiration and respiration. New 
Phytologist 221(1), pp. 3249. doi: 10.1111/nph.15283. 
Ehlers, J.D. and Hall, A.E. 1997. Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L. Walp.). Field Crops 
Research 53(13), pp. 187204. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378429097000312 [Accessed: 3 
February 2016]. 
El-Enany, A.E. et al. 2013. Role of antioxidant enzymes in amelioration of water deficit 
and waterlogging stresses on Vigna sinensis plants. Journal of Biology and Earth 
Sciences 3(1), pp. B144B153. Available at: 
http://journals.tmkarpinski.com/index.php/jbes/article/view/59 [Accessed: 26 April 
2016]. 
Elith, J. et al. 2011. A statistical explanation of MaxEnt for ecologists. Diversity and 
Distributions 17(1), pp. 4357. doi: 10.1111/j.1472-4642.2010.00725.x. 
Elith, J. and Leathwick, J.R. 2009. Species Distribution Models: Ecological Explanation 
and Prediction Across Space and Time. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 
Systematics 40(1), pp. 677697. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120159. 
Else, M.A. et al. 2009. Root signals and stomatal closure in relation to photosynthesis, 
chlorophyll a fluorescence and adventitious rooting of flooded tomato plants. Annals 
of Botany 103(2), pp. 313323. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcn208. 
Evans, D.E. 2004. Aerenchyma formation. New Phytologist 161(1), pp. 3549. doi: 
10.1046/j.1469-8137.2003.00907.x. 
Ezeaku, I, E. et al. 2015. Planting date and cultivar effects on growth and yield 
performance of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp). African Journal of Plant Science 
9(11), pp. 439448. Available at: 
http://www.academicjournals.org/journal/AJPS/article-abstract/C86F90455968 
[Accessed: 12 April 2016]. 
Fenta, B.A. et al. 2012. Characterization of Drought-Tolerance Traits in Nodulated Soya 
Beans: The Importance of Maintaining Photosynthesis and Shoot Biomass Under 
Drought-Induced Limitations on Nitrogen Metabolism. Journal of Agronomy and Crop 
Science 198(2), pp. 92103. Available at: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1439-
037X.2011.00491.x [Accessed: 24 May 2016]. 
Ferrarini, A. et al. 2019. Redefining the climate niche of plant species: A novel 
approach for realistic predictions of species distribution under climate change. Science 
of the Total Environment 671, pp. 10861093. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.353. 
Fukao, T. et al. 2019. Submergence and waterlogging stress in plants: A review 
highlighting research opportunities and understudied aspects. Frontiers in Plant 
Science 10(March), pp. 124. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00340. 
Furlan, A.L. et al. 2017. Metabolic features involved in drought stress tolerance 
mechanisms in peanut nodules and their contribution to biological nitrogen fixation. 
Plant Science 263(June), pp. 1222. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2017.06.009. 
Gale, J. 2004. Plants and altitude - Revisited. Annals of Botany 94(2), p. 199. doi: 
10.1093/aob/mch143. 
Ghosh, P.K. et al. 2015. Production and metabolism of indole acetic acid in root 
nodules and symbiont (Rhizobium undicola) isolated from root nodule of aquatic 
medicinal legume Neptunia oleracea Lour. Journal of Botany 2015. doi: 
10.1155/2015/575067. 
Gonalves, A. et al. 2016. Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L. Walp) a renewed multipurpose 
crop for a more sustainable agri-food system. Nutritional advantages and constraints. 
Journal of the science of food and agriculture . Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26804459 [Accessed: 6 February 2016]. 
Gornall, J. et al. 2010. Implications of climate change for agricultural productivity in the 
early twenty-first century. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences 365(1554), pp. 29732989. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0158. 
Goufo, P. et al. 2017. Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L. Walp.) metabolomics: 
Osmoprotection as a physiological strategy for drought stress resistance and improved 
yield. Frontiers in Plant Science 8(April), pp. 122. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00586. 
Handberg, K. and Stougaard, J. 1992. for Classical and Molecular Genetics. The Plant 
Journal 2(4), pp. 487496. doi: 10.1094/MPMI.1997.10.1.59. 
Hasanuzzaman, M. et al. 2013. Physiological, biochemical, and molecular mechanisms 
of heat stress tolerance in plants. International journal of molecular sciences 14(5), pp. 
964384. Available at: http://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/14/5/9643/htm [Accessed: 
16 November 2015]. 
Hasanuzzaman, M. et al. 2017. Glutathione in plants: biosynthesis and physiological 
role in environmental stress tolerance. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants 
23(2), pp. 249268. doi: 10.1007/s12298-017-0422-2. 
Haslbeck, M. and Vierling, E. 2015. A first line of stress defense: Small heat shock 
proteins and their function in protein homeostasis. Journal of Molecular Biology 
427(7), pp. 15371548. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2015.02.002. 
Hawlitschek, O. et al. 2011. Ecological niche modelling and ndna sequencing support a 
new, morphologically cryptic beetle species unveiled by DNA barcoding. PLoS ONE 
6(2). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016662. 
Haworth, M. et al. 2018. The Impact of Heat Stress and Water Deficit on the 
Photosynthetic and Stomatal Physiology of Olive (Olea europaea L.)A Case Study of 
the 2017 Heat Wave. Plants 7(4), p. 76. doi: 10.3390/plants7040076. 
Heckathorn, S.A. et al. 1998. The small, methionine-rich chloroplast heat-shock protein 
protects photosystem II electron transport during heat stress. Plant Physiology 116(1), 
pp. 439444. doi: 10.1104/pp.116.1.439. 
Herzog, M. et al. 2016. Mechanisms of waterlogging tolerance in wheat - a review of 
root and shoot physiology. Plant Cell and Environment 39(5), pp. 10681086. doi: 
10.1111/pce.12676. 
Hossain, A. and Uddin, S.N. 2011. Mechanisms of waterlogging tolerance in wheat: 
Morphological and metabolic adaptations under hypoxia or anoxia. Australian Journal 
of Crop Science 5(9 SPEC. ISSUE), pp. 10941101. 
Hosseinian Yousefkhani, S.S. et al. 2016. Ecological niche differentiation and taxonomic 
distinction between Eremias strauchi strauchi and Eremias strauchi kopetdaghica 
(Squamata: Lacertidae) on the Iranian Plateau based on ecological niche modeling. 
Italian Journal of Zoology 83(3), pp. 408416. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/11250003.2016.1209581. 
Huang, P. et al. 2013. Patterns of the seasonal response of tropical rainfall to global 
warming. Nature Geoscience 6(5), pp. 357361. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ngeo1792. 
Huynh, B.-L. et al. 2013. Gene Pools and the Genetic Architecture of Domesticated 
Cowpea. The Plant Genome 6(3). Available at: 
https://dl.sciencesocieties.org/publications/tpg/abstracts/6/3/plantgenome2013.03.0
005 [Accessed: 18 February 2016]. 
Johnson, S.M. et al. 2014. Transcriptomic analysis of Sorghum bicolor responding to 
combined heat and drought stress. BMC genomics 15, p. 456. Available at: 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=4070570&tool=pmcentre
z&rendertype=abstract. 
Jung, G. et al. 2008. Effects of waterlogging on nitrogen fixation and photosynthesis in 
supernodulating soybean cultivar Kanto 100. Plant Production Science 11(3), pp. 291
297. doi: 10.1626/pps.11.291. 
Kaur, G. and Asthir, B. 2015. Proline: a key player in plant abiotic stress tolerance. 
Biologia Plantarum 59(4), pp. 609619. doi: 10.1007/s10535-015-0549-3. 
Kaur, R. et al. 2015. Responses of mungbean (Vigna radiata L.) genotypes to heat 
stress: Effects on reproductive biology, leaf function and yield traits. Scientia 
Horticulturae 197(October), pp. 527541. doi: 10.1016/j.scienta.2015.10.015. 
Kearney, M. and Porter, W. 2009. Mechanistic niche modelling: combining 
physiological and spatial data to predict species ranges. Ecology letters 12(4), pp. 334
50. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19292794 [Accessed: 9 July 
2014]. 
Kelly, S. et al. 2014. Genome sequence of the Lotus spp. microsymbiont 
Mesorhizobium loti strain R7A. Standards in Genomic Sciences 9(1), pp. 17. doi: 
10.1186/1944-3277-9-6. 
Khan, M.I.R. et al. 2015. Salicylic acid-induced abiotic stress tolerance and underlying 
mechanisms in plants. 6(June), pp. 117. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00462. 
Kokubun, M. 2013. Genetic and cultural improvement of soybean for waterlogged 
conditions in Asia. Field Crops Research 152, pp. 37. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378429012003188 [Accessed: 23 
March 2016]. 
Komatsu, S. et al. 2015. Omics techniques and their use to identify how soybean 
responds to flooding. Journal of Analytical Science and Technology 6(1), p. 9. Available 
at: http://www.jast-journal.com/content/6/1/9 [Accessed: 25 February 2016]. 
Kosov, K. et al. 2018. Plant abiotic stress proteomics: The major factors determining 
alterations in cellular proteome. Frontiers in Plant Science 9(February), pp. 122. doi: 
10.3389/fpls.2018.00122. 
Krinner, G. et al. 2013. Long-term climate change: Projections, commitments and 
irreversibility. Climate Change 2013 the Physical Science Basis: Working Group I 
Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change 9781107057, pp. 10291136. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.024. 
Kumar, D. and Chattopadhyay, S. 2018. Glutathione modulates the expression of heat 
shock proteins via the transcription factors BZIP10 and MYB21 in Arabidopsis. Journal 
of Experimental Botany 69(15), pp. 37293743. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ery166. 
Kumar, S. and Pandey, A.K. 2013. Chemistry and Biological Activities of Flavonoids: An 
Overview. 2013 
Lamaoui, M. et al. 2018. Heat and Drought Stresses in Crops and Approaches for Their 
Mitigation. Frontiers in Chemistry 6(February), pp. 114. doi: 
10.3389/fchem.2018.00026. 
Langyintuo, A.S. et al. 2003. Cowpea supply and demand in West and Central Africa. 
Field Crops Research 82(23), pp. 215231. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037842900300039X [Accessed: 18 
February 2016]. 
Leckie, C.P. et al. 1998. Abscisic acid-induced stomatal closure mediated by cyclic ADP-
ribose. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 95(26), pp. 1583715842. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15837. 
Leito, P.J. and Santos, M.J. 2019. Improving models of species ecological niches: A 
remote sensing overview. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 7(JAN), pp. 17. doi: 
10.3389/fevo.2019.00009. 
Li, Z. et al. 2016. Metabolic pathways regulated by -aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
contributing to heat tolerance in creeping bentgrass (Agrostis stolonifera). Scientific 
Reports 6(July), pp. 116. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep30338. 
Lim, J.H. and Kim, S.D. 2013. Induction of drought stress resistance by multi-functional 
PGPR Bacillus licheniformis K11 in pepper. Plant Pathology Journal 29(2), pp. 201208. 
doi: 10.5423/PPJ.SI.02.2013.0021. 
Lin, H.-H. et al. 2015. Proteomic analysis of broccoli (Brassica oleracea) under high 
temperature and waterlogging stresses. Botanical Studies 56(1), p. 18. Available at: 
http://www.as-botanicalstudies.com/content/56/1/18 [Accessed: 30 March 2016]. 
Liu, J. et al. 2015. Osmotic stress represses strigolactone biosynthesis in Lotus 
japonicus roots: exploring the interaction between strigolactones and ABA under 
abiotic stress. Planta 241(6), pp. 14351451. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00425-015-2266-8. 
Liu, K. et al. 2000. Inward potassium channel in guard cells as a target for polyamine 
regulation of stomatal movements. Plant Physiology 124(3), pp. 13151325. 
Lloyd, S.J. et al. 2011. Climate change, crop yields, and undernutrition: Development of 
a model to quantify the impact of climate scenarios on child undernutrition. 
Environmental Health Perspectives 119(12), pp. 18171823. doi: 
10.1289/ehp.1003311. 
Lucas, M.R. et al. 2013. Markers for breeding heat-tolerant cowpea. Molecular 
Breeding 31(3), pp. 529536. Available at: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11032-
012-9810-z [Accessed: 18 February 2016]. 
Lyon, N.J. et al. 2019. Evaluating the utility of species distribution models in informing 
climate change-resilient grassland restoration strategy. Frontiers in Ecology and 
Evolution 7(FEB), pp. 18. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2019.00033. 
Mahmuti, M. et al. 2009. Controlling crop disease contributes to both food security 
and climate change mitigation. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability 7(3), 
pp. 189202. doi: 10.3763/ijas.2009.0476. 
Maia, J.M. et al. 2012. Differences in Cowpea Root Growth Triggered by Salinity and 
Dehydration are Associated with Oxidative Modulation Involving Types I and III 
Peroxidases and Apoplastic Ascorbate. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 32(2), pp. 
376387. Available at: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00344-012-9308-
2/fulltext.html?view=classic [Accessed: 5 June 2016]. 
Malik, A.I. et al. 2002. Short-term waterlogging has long-term effects on the growth 
and physiology of wheat. New Phytologist 153(2), pp. 225236. doi: 10.1046/j.0028-
646X.2001.00318.x. 
Malik, A.I. et al. 2015. Tolerance of three grain legume species to transient 
waterlogging. AoB PLANTS 7, pp. plv040-. Available at: 
http://aobpla.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2015/04/22/aobpla.plv040.short 
[Accessed: 10 December 2015]. 
Marutani, Y. et al. 2012. Damage to photosystem II due to heat stress without light-
driven electron flow: involvement of enhanced introduction of reducing power into 
thylakoid membranes. Planta 236(2), pp. 75361. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22526503 [Accessed: 28 April 2016]. 
Mayer, R.R. et al. 1990. Effects of heat shock on amino acid metabolism of cowpea 
cells. Plant Physiology 94(2), pp. 796810. doi: 10.1104/pp.94.2.796. 
Mayes, S. et al. 2012. The potential for underutilized crops to improve security of food 
production. Journal of Experimental Botany 63(3), pp. 10751079. Available at: 
http://jxb.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/jxb/err396. 
Mickelbart, M. V. et al. 2015. Genetic mechanisms of abiotic stress tolerance that 
translate to crop yield stability. Nature Reviews Genetics 16(4), pp. 237251. doi: 
10.1038/nrg3901. 
Minchin, F.R., Summerfield, R.J, Eaglesham, A.R.J, and Stewart, K.A. 1978. Effects of 
short-term waterlogging on growth and yield of cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata ). Journal 
of Agricultural Science. 90, pp. 355366. 
Minchin, F.R. and Summerfield, R.J. 1976. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and vegetative 
growth of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata (L.) walp.) in waterlogged conditions. Plant and 
Soil 45(1), pp. 113127. Available at: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00011133 
[Accessed: 10 December 2015]. 
Mittler, R. 2006. Abiotic stress, the field environment and stress combination. Trends 
in plant science 11(1), pp. 159. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1360138505002918. 
Muranaka, S. et al. 2011. Stability of Striga gesnerioides resistance mechanism in 
cowpea under high- infestation level , low soil fertility and drought stresses., pp. 313
Nair, A.S. et al. 2008. Studies on the changes in lipid peroxidation and antioxidants in 
drought stress induced cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L.) varieties. Journal of 
Environmental Biology 29(September), pp. 689691. 
Nakamura, T. et al. 2012. Evaluation of metabolite alteration under flooding stress in 
Soybeans. Japan Agricultural Research Quarterly 46(3), pp. 237248. doi: 
10.6090/jarq.46.237. 
Nayyar, H. et al. 2014. -Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) Imparts Partial Protection from 
Heat Stress Injury to Rice Seedlings by Improving Leaf Turgor and Upregulating 
Osmoprotectants and Antioxidants. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 33(2), pp. 408
419. doi: 10.1007/s00344-013-9389-6. 
Ndema, N. et al. 2010. Effects of some physical and chemical characteristics of soil on 
productivity and yield of cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata L. Walp. ) in coastal region 
(Cameroon). African Journal of Environmental Science and Technology 4(3). Available 
at: http://www.ajol.info/index.php/ajest/article/view/56331 [Accessed: 18 February 
2016]. 
Nir Sade, E.G. and M.M. 2015. http://www.bio-protocol.org/e1451 Vol 5, Iss 8, Apr 20, 
2015. Measuring Arabidopsis, Tomato and Barley Leaf Relative Water Content (RWC) 
5, pp. 912. 
Obaid, A.Y. et al. 2016. Analysis of transcriptional response to heat stress in Rhazya 
stricta. BMC Plant Biology 16(1), pp. 118. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12870-016-0938-6. 
Ogunkanmi, L.A. et al. 2008. Genetic diversity in wild relatives of cowpea (Vigna 
unguiculata) as revealed by simple sequence repeats (SSR) markers. Journal of Food, 
Agriculture and Environment 6(34), pp. 263268. 
Pandey, P. et al. 2015. Shared and unique responses of plants to multiple individual 
stresses and stress combinations: physiological and molecular mechanisms. Frontiers 
in Plant Science 6(September), p. 723. Available at: 
http://journal.frontiersin.org/Article/10.3389/fpls.2015.00723/abstract. 
Parent, C. et al. 2008. An overview of plant responses to soil waterlogging. Plant stress 
2(1), pp. 2027. 
Park, C.J. and Seo, Y.S. 2015. Heat shock proteins: A review of the molecular 
chaperones for plant immunity. Plant Pathology Journal 31(4), pp. 323333. doi: 
10.5423/PPJ.RW.08.2015.0150. 
Paupire, M.J. et al. 2014. The metabolic basis of pollen thermo-tolerance: 
Perspectives for breeding. Metabolites 4(4), pp. 889920. doi: 
10.3390/metabo4040889. 
Pavl, J. et al. 2018. Cytokinin at the crossroads of abiotic stress signalling pathways. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 19(8), pp. 136. doi: 
10.3390/ijms19082450. 
Pearson, R.G. et al. 2007. Predicting species distributions from small numbers of 
occurrence records: A test case using cryptic geckos in Madagascar. Journal of 
Biogeography 34(1), pp. 102117. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2006.01594.x. 
Podlekov, K. et al. 2019. Phytohormones and polyamines regulate plant stress 
responses by altering GABA pathway. New Biotechnology 48(July 2018), pp. 5365. 
doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2018.07.003. 
Posmyk, M. et al. 2005. Antioxidant enzymes and isoflavonoids in chilled soybean ( 
Glycine max ( L .) Merr .) seedlings $. 162. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2004.08.004. 
Pospil, P. 2012. Molecular mechanisms of production and scavenging of reactive 
oxygen species by photosystem II. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Bioenergetics 
1817(1), pp. 218231. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2011.05.017. 
Prasad, P.V. V et al. 2011. Independent and Combined Effects of High Temperature 
and Drought Stress During Grain Filling on Plant Yield and Chloroplast EF-Tu Expression 
in Spring Wheat. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science 197(6), pp. 430441. doi: 
10.1111/j.1439-037X.2011.00477.x. 
Ramakrishna, A. and Ravishankar, G.A. 2011. Influence of abiotic stress signals on 
secondary metabolites in plants. Plant Signaling and Behavior 6(11), pp. 17201731. 
doi: 10.4161/psb.6.11.17613. 
Ramegowda, V. and Senthil-Kumar, M. 2015. The interactive effects of simultaneous 
biotic and abiotic stresses on plants: Mechanistic understanding from drought and 
pathogen combination. Journal of Plant Physiology 176, pp. 4754. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2014.11.008. 
Ramesh, S.A. et al. 2017. -Aminobutyric acid (GABA) signalling in plants. Cellular and 
Molecular Life Sciences 74(9), pp. 15771603. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2415-7. 
Rejeb, I. et al. 2014. Plant Responses to Simultaneous Biotic and Abiotic Stress: 
Molecular Mechanisms. Plants 3(4), pp. 458475. Available at: 
http://www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/3/4/458/. 
Rivas, R. et al. 2016. Drought tolerance in cowpea species is driven by less sensitivity of 
leaf gas exchange to water deficit and rapid recovery of photosynthesis after 
rehydration. South African Journal of Botany 103, pp. 101107. Available at: 
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0254629915003920. 
Rivero, R.M. et al. 2014. The combined effect of salinity and heat reveals a specific 
physiological, biochemical and molecular response in tomato plants. Plant, cell & 
environment 37(5), pp. 105973. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24028172. 
Rizhsky, L. et al. 2004. When Defense Pathways Collide. The Response of Arabidopsis 
to a Combination of Drought and Heat Stress. Plant Physiology 134(April), pp. 1683
1696. doi: 10.1104/pp.103.033431.1. 
Roberts, D. et al. 2010. Strategies for Adaptation to Waterlogging and Hypoxia in 
Nitrogen Fixing Nodules of Legumes. Waterlogging Signalling and Tolerance in Plants 
(January), pp. 3759. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-10305-6. 
Rocha, M. et al. 2010a. Analysis of alanine aminotransferase in various organs of 
soybean (Glycine max) and in dependence of different nitrogen fertilisers during 
hypoxic stress. Amino Acids 39(4), pp. 10431053. doi: 10.1007/s00726-010-0596-1. 
Rocha, M. et al. 2010b. Glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle are linked by alanine 
aminotransferase during hypoxia induced by waterlogging of Lotus japonicus. Plant 
Physiology 152(3), pp. 15011513. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.150045. 
SA, W. 2018. Essential Role of Crop Landraces for World Food Security. Modern 
Concepts & Developments in Agronomy 1(5), pp. 9194. doi: 
10.31031/mcda.2018.01.000523. 
Sainz, M. et al. 2010. Heat stress results in loss of chloroplast Cu/Zn superoxide 
dismutase and increased damage to Photosystem II in combined drought-heat 
stressed Lotus japonicus. Physiologia Plantarum 140(1), pp. 4656. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3054.2010.01383.x. 
Sairam, R.K. et al. 2008. Physiology and biochemistry of waterlogging tolerance in 
plants. Biologia Plantarum 52(3), pp. 401412. doi: 10.1007/s10535-008-0084-6. 
Salvucci, M.E. 2008. Association of Rubisco activase with chaperonin-60: A possible 
mechanism for protecting photosynthesis during heat stress. Journal of Experimental 
Botany 59(7), pp. 19231933. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erm343. 
Sambo, B.E. and Odion, E.C. 2016. Clipped Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp) 
Fodder Utilization: A Potential for Income Growths of Resource Poor Farmers in the 
Savannah Regions of Nigeria. Sustainable Agriculture Research 5(1), p. 70. Available at: 
http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/sar/article/view/36640 [Accessed: 18 
February 2016]. 
Sanchez, D.H. et al. 2012. Comparative metabolomics of drought acclimation in model 
and forage legumes. Plant, Cell and Environment 35(1), pp. 136149. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02423.x. 
SANCHEZ, D.H. et al. 2012. Comparative metabolomics of drought acclimation in 
model and forage legumes. Plant, Cell & Environment 35(1), pp. 136149. Available at: 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02423.x. 
Saud, S. et al. 2017. Effects of nitrogen supply on water stress and recovery 
mechanisms in Kentucky bluegrass plants. Frontiers in Plant Science 8(June), pp. 118. 
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00983. 
Scarpeci, T.E. et al. 2008. Investigating the role of plant heat shock proteins during 
oxidative stress. Plant Signaling & Behavior 3(10), pp. 856857. doi: 
10.4161/psb.3.10.6021. 
Schfer, M. et al. 2015. The role of cis-zeatin-type cytokinins in plant growth regulation 
and mediating responses to environmental interactions. Journal of Experimental 
Botany 66(16), pp. 48734884. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv214. 
Sehgal, A. et al. 2017. Effects of Drought , Heat and Their Interaction on the Growth , 
Yield and Photosynthetic Function of Lentil ( Lens culinaris Medikus ) Genotypes 
Varying in Heat and Drought Sensitivity. 8(October). doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01776. 
SHARKEY, T.D. 2005. Effects of moderate heat stress on photosynthesis: importance of 
thylakoid reactions, rubisco deactivation, reactive oxygen species, and 
thermotolerance provided by isoprene. Plant, Cell and Environment 28(3), pp. 269
277. Available at: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01324.x [Accessed: 
27 January 2016]. 
Sharma, D.K. et al. 2015. Wheat cultivars selected for high Fv /Fm under heat stress 
maintain high photosynthesis, total chlorophyll, stomatal conductance, transpiration 
and dry matter. Physiologia plantarum 153(2), pp. 28498. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24962705 [Accessed: 13 November 2015]. 
Shelp, B.J. et al. 2012. Hypothesis/review: Contribution of putrescine to 4-
aminobutyrate (GABA) production in response to abiotic stress. Plant Science 193194, 
pp. 130135. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.06.001. 
Signorelli, S. and Monza, J. 2017. Identification of 1-pyrroline 5-carboxylate synthase 
(P5CS) genes involved in the synthesis of proline in Lotus japonicus. Plant Signaling 
and Behavior 12(11), pp. 37. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2017.1367464. 
Silveira, J.A.G. et al. 2003. N-compound accumulation and carbohydrate shortage on 
N2 fixation in drought-stressed and rewatered cowpea plants. Spanish Journal of 
Agricultural Research 1(3), p. 65. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228603065_N-
compound_accumulation_and_carbohydrate_shortage_on_N2_fixation_in_drought-
stressed_and_rewatered_cowpea_plants [Accessed: 4 June 2016]. 
Singh, M. et al. 2015. Roles of osmoprotectants in improving salinity and drought 
tolerance in plants: a review. Reviews in Environmental Science and Biotechnology 
14(3), pp. 407426. doi: 10.1007/s11157-015-9372-8. 
Singh, S.K. et al. 2010. Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata [L.] Walp.) genotypes response to 
multiple abiotic stresses. Journal of photochemistry and photobiology. B, Biology 
100(3), pp. 13546. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20605100 
[Accessed: 17 November 2015]. 
Singh, S.K. and Raja Reddy, K. 2011. Regulation of photosynthesis, fluorescence, 
stomatal conductance and water-use efficiency of cowpea (Vigna unguiculata [L.] 
Walp.) under drought. Journal of photochemistry and photobiology. B, Biology 105(1), 
pp. 4050. Available at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1011134411001588 [Accessed: 24 
November 2015]. 
Sinha, R. and Kawatra, A. 2003. Effect of processing on phytic acid and polyphenol 
contents of cowpeas [Vigna unguiculata (L) Walp]. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 
58(3), pp. 18. Available at: 
http://link.springer.com/10.1023/B:QUAL.0000040322.01063.d4 [Accessed: 18 
February 2016]. 
Smith, A.B. et al. 2019. Niche Estimation Above and Below the Species Level. Trends in 
Ecology and Evolution 34(3), pp. 260273. doi: 10.1016/j.tree.2018.10.012. 
Song, Y. et al. 2014. Effects of high temperature on photosynthesis and related gene 
expression in poplar. BMC Plant Biology 14(1), pp. 120. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-14-
Staudinger, C. et al. 2016a. Evidence for a rhizobia-induced drought stress response 
strategy in Medicago truncatula. Journal of Proteomics 136, pp. 202213. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2016.01.006. 
Staudinger, C. et al. 2016b. Evidence for a rhizobia-induced drought stress response 
strategy in Medicago truncatula. Journal of Proteomics 136, pp. 202213. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2016.01.006. 
Streeter, J.. 2003. Effects of drought on nitrogen fixation in soybean root nodules. 
Plant Cell and Environment 26, pp. 11991204. doi: 10.1007/BF02661853. 
Striker, G.G. et al. 2012. Different strategies of Lotus japonicus, L. corniculatus and L. 
tenuis to deal with complete submergence at seedling stage. Plant Biology 14(1), pp. 
5055. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2011.00493.x. 
Striker, G.G. et al. 2014. Phenomic networks reveal largely independent root and shoot 
adjustment in waterlogged plants of Lotus japonicus. Plant, Cell and Environment 
37(10), pp. 22782293. doi: 10.1111/pce.12268. 
Suzuki, N. et al. 2014. Abiotic and biotic stress combinations. New Phytologist 203(1), 
pp. 3243. doi: 10.1111/nph.12797. 
Thomas, A.L. et al. 2005. Aerenchyma formation and recovery from hypoxia of the 
flooded root system of nodulated soybean. Annals of Botany 96(7), pp. 11911198. 
doi: 10.1093/aob/mci272. 
Tobisa, M. et al. 2014. Root distribution and nitrogen fixation activity of tropical forage 
legume american jointvetch (Aeschynomene americana L.) Cv. glenn under 
waterlogging conditions. International Journal of Agronomy 2014. doi: 
10.1155/2014/507405. 
Urban, J. et al. 2017. Stomatal conductance increases with rising temperature. Plant 
Signaling and Behavior 12(8). Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2017.1356534. 
Uzunova, K. and Zlatev, Z. 2013. Drought  induced changes in photosynthesis of 
young cowpea plants. Agricultural Science and Technology 5(1), pp. 3234. 
Valentine, A.J. et al. 2010. Legume Nitrogen Fixation and Soil Abiotic Stress: From 
Physiology to Genomics and Beyond. doi: 10.1002/9781444328608.ch9. 
Verlag, F. et al. 2001. Alteration in chloroplast structure and thylakoid membrane 
composition due to in vivo heat treatment of rice seedlings: correlation with the 
functional changes. 592 
Wang, H. et al. 2017. Photosynthetic responses to altitude: an explanation based on 
optimality principles. New Phytologist 213(3), pp. 976982. doi: 10.1111/nph.14332. 
Warren, D.L. et al. 2008. Environmental niche equivalency versus conservatism: 
Quantitative approaches to niche evolution. Evolution 62(11), pp. 28682883. doi: 
10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00482.x. 
Warren, D.L. et al. 2010. ENMTools: A toolbox for comparative studies of 
environmental niche models. Ecography 33(3), pp. 607611. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-
0587.2009.06142.x. 
Wiens, J.A. et al. 2009. Niches, models, and climate change: Assessing the assumptions 
and uncertainties. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 106(SUPPL. 2), pp. 1972919736. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901639106. 
Yan, K. et al. 2018. Vulnerability of photosynthesis and photosystem I in Jerusalem 
artichoke (Helianthus tuberosus L.) exposed to waterlogging. Plant Physiology and 
Biochemistry 125(February), pp. 239246. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.02.017. 
Yang, J. et al. 2009. Rhizosphere bacteria help plants tolerate abiotic stress. Trends in 
Plant Science 14(1), pp. 14. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2008.10.004. 
Yang, R. et al. 2013. GABA shunt and polyamine degradation pathway on -
aminobutyric acid accumulation in germinating fava bean (Vicia faba L.) under hypoxia. 
Food Chemistry 136(1), pp. 152159. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.08.008. 
Zagorchev, L. et al. 2013. A central role for thiols in plant tolerance to abiotic stress. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 14(4), pp. 74057432. doi: 
10.3390/ijms14047405. 
Zahir, Z.A. et al. 2010. Substrate-dependent auxin production by Rhizobium phaseoli 
improves the growth and yield of Vigna radiata L. under salt stress conditions. Journal 
of Microbiology and Biotechnology 20(9), pp. 12881294. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.1002.02010. 
Zhang, L.T. et al. 2011. Mitochondrial alternative oxidase pathway protects plants 
against photoinhibition by alleviating inhibition of the repair of photodamaged PSII 
through preventing formation of reactive oxygen species in Rumex K-1 leaves. 
Physiologia Plantarum 143(4), pp. 396407. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2011.01514.x. 
Zhang, X. et al. 2015. Waterlogging tolerance in barley is associated with faster 
aerenchyma formation in adventitious roots. Plant and Soil 394(12), pp. 355372. 
doi: 10.1007/s11104-015-2536-z. 
Zhou, R. et al. 2017. Drought stress had a predominant effect over heat stress on three 
tomato cultivars subjected to combined stress. BMC Plant Biology , pp. 113. Available 
at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12870-017-0974-x. 
