Microsoft Word - CVThesis_ready to print_22042011.doc
The metabolism of starch in the model legume
Lotus japonicus
Ccile Vriet
Thesis submitted to the University of East Anglia for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
September 2010
 This copy of the thesis has been supplied on condition that anyone who consults it is
understood to recognise that its copyright rests with the author and that no quotation from the
thesis, nor any information derived therefrom, may be published without the author's prior,
written consent
Abstract
The metabolism of transitory starch is of central importance to many aspects of plant
growth and development. Studies carried out on A. thaliana have greatly enhanced our
knowledge of the pathways involved, highlighting their complexity. However, information
about these pathways in other species is lacking. In particular, almost nothing is known
about the metabolism of transitory and storage starch in legumes, a family that includes some
of the most agriculturally important forage and grain crops.
In this study, the model Lotus japonicus was used to explore the metabolism of starch in
legumes and investigate its importance for several agriculturally important traits.
Characterisation of mutants from a forward genetic screen was linked with TILLING reverse
genetics to assemble a comprehensive suite of starch mutants. These mutants were used to
elucidate the main components of starch synthesis and degradation in L. japonicus. Although
these components were for the most part conserved with those in A. thaliana and other
species, the control of flux through the pathways and their importance in sustaining normal
plant growth were shown to be different. Whereas a severe deficiency in starch synthesis had
much less effect in L. japonicus than in A. thaliana, the loss of the capacity for starch
degradation had a much more profound consequence for plant growth. Further investigation
of these differences may lead to a better understanding of the regulatory mechanisms linking
the metabolism of starch with plant growth. This suite of L. japonicus mutants was also used
in combination with a collection of annual and perennial species of the genus Lotus to
investigate the importance of carbon partitioning for the perenniality trait. Results of this
analysis suggested that root starch reserves play an important role in determining the
vegetative re-growth vigour in perennial Lotus species.
A mes grands-parents, Jean et Odette Rigault;
A mes parents et mes frres, Robert, Maryline, Guillaume et Rmi Vriet;
En mmoire de ma grand-mre, Odette Vriet.
Contents
1.3.2.1. Phosphorylation and initial hydrolytic attack on the intact starch granule .. 12
1.6. CONSERVATION AND EVOLUTION OF STARCH METABOLISM ACROSS THE PLANT
Contents
2.9. GENE MAPPING AND IDENTIFICATION OF THE MUTATIONS ISOLATED FROM FORWARD
Contents
2.11.2. Denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), Western blotting, and
3.1.2. Phylogenetic relationship of the genes involved in starch metabolism and their
3.1.3. Information about the relationship between carbohydrate metabolism and plant
3.1.5. Morphological and physiological traits of the L. japonicus accessions Gifu and
3.2.1. In silico identification of genes involved in starch metabolism in L. japonicus
Contents
3.2.2. Comparative genomic analysis of the starch metabolism genes in L. japonicus
3.2.3. Analysis of the expression pattern of the starch metabolism genes across organs
3.2.4. Diurnal turnover of leaf starch in MG-20 and Gifu accessions of L. japonicus.. 89
3.2.5. Pattern of starch and sugar accumulation across organs in MG-20 and Gifu
3.3.1. L. japonicus and A. thaliana share similar starch metabolism gene families but
CHAPTER 4: ISOLATION OF STARCH METABOLISM MUTANTS OF LOTUS
4.1.2. Approaches for the identification of mutants from forward genetic screens in
4.2.2. Gene mapping and TILLING as complementary approaches to identify mutations
4.2.3. Identification of several mutant alleles of the starch synthesis genes PGI, PGM,
4.2.4. Identification of several mutant alleles of the starch degradation genes GWD1
4.2.5. Phenotype of the uncharacterised mutants and map positions of their mutations
Contents
4.2.5.2. Candidate enzyme approach employed for the identification of the mutations
4.2.5.4. SL4618-12 fine mapping and mutation identification by next generation
4.3.1. Forward and reverse genetics to isolate starch metabolism mutants in L.
4.3.2. Advantages and disadvantage of using EMS mutagenesis to generate mutant
4.3.4. Strategies for the identification of the uncharacterised mutations from the
4.3.5. Nature of the mutations identified in the starch metabolism mutants from forward
5.1.1. Importance of carbohydrate metabolism for plant growth and reproduction, and
5.1.3. Properties and structure-function relationships in three key enzyme of starch
5.3.2. Importance of starch metabolism for plant growth and its regulation in legumes
Contents
CHAPTER 6: IMPORTANCE OF STARCH FOR PERENNIALITY AND RE-
6.1.2. Importance of the perenniality trait in agriculture: perennial to annuals, and now
6.2.1. Mutants of L. japonicus with altered root starch content are impaired in their
6.2.2. Re-growth vigour positively correlates with root starch content in natural genetic
6.3.1. Correlation between root starch content and re-growth vigour in starch
6.3.2. Correlation between root starch content and re-growth vigour and the
6.3.3. Study of the importance of starch for re-growth and perenniality in other legumes
6.3.4. Genetic determinants of vegetative re-growth vigour and the perenniality trait in
7.2. A SUITE OF LOTUS JAPONICUS STARCH MUTANTS REVEALS BOTH CONSERVED AND
List of Figures
Figure 7. Transcript levels of the core set of starch metabolism genes in different organs of L
Figure 8. Transcript levels of the sucrose synthase genes LjSUS1 to LjSUS4 across organs. 88
Figure 10. Diurnal changes in leaf starch content through development in L. japonicus MG-
Figure 11. Starch and soluble sugar content across organs and through development in L.
Figure 12. Diurnal changes in leaf starch content of eight-week old L. japonicus MG-20 and
Figure 13. Starch content diurnally and across organs in eight week-old Lotus japonicus
Figure 14. Phenotype and growth parameters of L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu plants, and
Figure 16. TILLING workflow and example of EMS-induced mutations identified by
Figure 19. Chromosomal location of the starch metabolism genes of L. japonicus and
Figure 21. Structures of the starch metabolism genes and positions of the non-silent
Figure 22. Separation of PGM and PGI isoform activities by native gel electrophoresis. .. 132
Figure 23. Heat sensitivity of the activity of the plastidial (PGI1) and cytosolic (PGI2)
List of Figures
Figure 25. Results of the candidate enzyme approach performed for the synthesis mutants
Figure 26. Results of the candidate enzyme approach performed for the degradation mutants
Figure 27. Zymograms of starch-metabolizing enzyme activity in several of the forward
Figure 28. Fine mapping and mutation identification strategy of the mutation responsible for
Figure 29. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with
Figure 30. Predicted effect on AGPase function of the S400L amino acid change in the large
Figure 31. Protein domains of the LjGWD1 and comparison of its amino acid sequence with
Figure 32. Predicted effect of the gwd1-1 mutation on the secondary structure of LjGWD1.
Figure 33. Predicted effects of the gwd3-1 splice-site junction mutation on LjGWD3
Figure 34. Comparison of the amino acid sequence of LjGWD3 with those of other species.
Figure 39. Proposed model of the partitioning of carbon resources in monocarpic
Figure 41. Pilot cutting-back experiments performed on the L. japonicus starch mutants
Figure 42. Cutting -back experiment performed on the collection of L. japonicus starch
Figure 43. Correlation between re-growth vigour following cutting-back, starch content, and
Figure 44. Phylogenetic relationship of the species of the genus Lotus and their life form. 211
Figure 45. Cutting-back experiment performed on a collection of 24 natural variants of the
List of Figures
Figure 46. Root starch content, re-growth vigour, life form, and geoclimatic origin of the
Figure 47. Phylogenetic relationship of the species of the genus Medicago and their life
Figure 49. Iodine staining of the shoot and root starch of annual and perennial species of
List of tables
Table 1. List of Lotus, Arabidopsis, and Medicago species and ecotypes mentioned in this
Table 2. Primers used for gene sequencing, TILLING, genotyping, and RT-PCR analysis. 52
Table 5. Microsatellite SSR markers used for rough mapping of mutant phenotypes from the
Table 6. Homologs in L. japonicus of the core set of genes encoding enzymes of starch
Table 7. Most advanced backcrossing stage of the forward screen and TILLING mutant lines
Table 8. Results of complementation analyses (allelism tests) performed on several of the
Table 9. Microsatellite SSR markers used for rough mapping of the forward screen
Table 10. Mapped interval and flanking microsatellite markers of the forward screen
Table 11. List of mutations isolated from forward screen and TILLING in several starch
Table 12. List of the mutations identified in the regions of LjGWD1 and LjGWD3 genes
Table 13. Statistics on the mutations identified by TILLING in the targeted regions of the
Table 14. Starch content at the end of the day in leaves of mutants with starchless or low-
Table 15. Mutant alleles of genes encoding enzymes of starch metabolism in L. japonicus.
Table 16. AGPase activities in leaves of the apl and aps synthesis mutants of L. japonicus.
Table 17. List of putative candidate genes identified and sequenced for the yet
List of Figures
Table 18. List of primers designed for the identification of the mutation responsible for the
mutant phenotype of SL4618-12 using the Illumina Solexa sequencing technology.
Acknowledgements
The writing of this PhD thesis and the work presented in it would not have been done
without the support, encouragement, and help of many people.
First of all, I would like to thank my PhD supervisors, Dr. Trevor Wang and Professor
Alison Smith for giving me the great opportunity to work on this research project at the John
Innes Centre (Norwich, UK) and for their supervision. I am extremely grateful to Professor
Alison Smith for her valuable guidance, critical comments and suggestions of experiments,
and for her great help for the writing of my research paper. The writing of this PhD thesis
turned out to be very challenging; I am deeply grateful to her and my current supervisors at
CropDesign NV (Gent, Belgium), Dr. Christophe Reuzeau and Dr. Wim Van Camp, for their
patience, support and encouragement during its writing. I would like to thank Professor
Alison Smith and Dr. Trevor Wang for reading and giving me comments on my thesis
chapters. I also would like to thanks my advisor, Dr. Philip Wigge for interesting discussions
and his advice during my PhD committee meetings.
Part of the work presented in this thesis has been published in the journal Plant Physiology
(Vriet et al., 2010; Appendix 2). Many thanks go to my co-authors, and in particular to Dr
Andreas Brachmann for his great help and contribution for the mapping of the forward
screen mutations, to Tracey Welham, Jodie Pike, and Dr. Jillian Perry for their initial work
on the isolation of starch metabolism mutants from forward genetic screen and TILLING,
and to Shusei Sato for providing me with genome sequence information. I am also grateful
to Tracey Welham and Marilyn Pike for doing the few last experiments needed for the re-
submission of my manuscript.
I also would like to thank all the people at the John Innes Centre that helped on the
realisation of this research project one way or another. Special thanks go to the horticultural
staff for taking care of my plants, to Andrew Davis, for doing some of the imaging of my
plants, and to Sue Bunnewell for making the microscopy sections. Many thanks also go to
the European Commission for the funding (Marie Curie fellowship; EU EST Programme
019727).
Special thanks go to people of Dr. Trevor Wang and Professor Alison Smiths lab, and in
particular to Dr. Lionel Hill, Dr. Jillian Perry, Dr. Fran Robson, Dr. Irmi Horst, Tracey
Welham, and Baldeep Kular for their kindness, friendship, and for the many interesting
discussions about science and beyond.
I own many thanks to my friends at JIC, especially Akiko Sugio, Alexandre Robert-
Seilaniantz, Debora Gasperini, Ren Dreos, Victoria Nicholls, Clare Simpson, and Rita Lei
Acknowledgements
with whom I have had wonderful discussions at lunch times. My greatest thanks go to
Akiko, Alex, Debora, and Ren for their wonderful kindness, great friendship and advice,
and for their patience and perseverance in trying to improve my cooking skills. I am also
forever grateful to them for dragging me out of the lab from time to time to go on wonderful
trips in the nice Norfolk countryside, and for great dinners in restaurant or at their homes. It
is where my best memories of my time in Norwich lie, thanks ever so much for all this A
very special thank go to Akiko and Alex for their touching and fantastic support and
encouragements during difficult times. Thanks a lot as well to my friends from France, and
in particular to Cline Leroy for keeping in touch.
At last but not least, I would like to thank my family, and in particular my parents, my two
brothers, and my grand parents for their love, support, understanding, and for always being
there when I needed some help or encouragements.
A very big thank you again to all the people mentioned above
Ccile Vriet
Gent, Belgium
21 September 2010
CHAPTER 1
General Introduction
If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants
Isaac Newton
CHAPTER 1: General Introduction
1.1. Carbohydrate metabolism in plants
Plants are photoautotrophic organisms that, together with bacteria, possess the ability to
use the energy from sunlight to reduce carbon dioxide and other simple nutrients into all the
primary and secondary metabolites required for growth and development. Plants can be
divided into two functional parts with regard to this photosynthetic activity: sources and
sinks (Sonnewald and Willmitzer, 1992). Sources are defined as the parts of the plant in
which there is net fixation and reduction of carbon dioxide into assimilates, whereas sinks
are the organs characterised by a net import of these molecules. Photosynthesis is principally
active in mature mesophyll cells of the leaves (the sources), and the assimilates, primarily
sucrose, are transported to developing organs such as roots, tubers, flowers, fruits or seeds
(the sinks) where they are stored or immediately metabolised. This relationship between
source and sink tissues/organs changes throughout the plant life cycle as the sink strength or
the number of sink organs competing for the common pool of carbohydrates varies
according to the developmental stage. In addition, this partitioning of carbon can also be
influenced by environmental conditions either abiotic (e.g. atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentration, temperature) or biotic (e.g. pathogen attack) (Wardlaw, 1990; Farrar and
Williams, 1991; Herbers et al., 2000).
The sugars produced and exported through the plant are not only vital as substrates to
sustain the metabolism of cells, they are also important signalling molecules. Indeed, sugar
status is known to modulate carbon metabolism in response to changing environmental
conditions, depending on the availability of other nutrients (Stitt and Krapp, 1999; Coruzzi
and Bush, 2001; Coruzzi and Zhou, 2001). This ensures optimal synthesis and use of carbon
and energy resources. Generally, a high level of sugars promotes growth and carbohydrate
storage whereas a low sugar level enhances photosynthesis and reserve mobilization. In
addition, soluble sugars have been postulated to act as regulatory molecules in many
different developmental processes including the control of seed and embryo development,
the formation of adult structures (e.g. leaves, tubers, roots, nodules), the induction of
flowering, and leaf senescence (Bernier et al., 1993; Borisjuk et al., 2004; Gibson, 2005;
Rolland et al., 2006; Wingler et al., 2006).
As well as partitioning assimilates between source and sink tissues and organs, almost all
plants studied to date also perform another form of partitioning: the partitioning of the
photoassimilates between sugars and starch.
Chapter 1: General introduction
1.2. Nature and importance of starch
1.2.1. Transitory and storage starch
There are two types of starch: transitory and storage starch. In source leaves during the
day, a proportion of the products of photosynthesis are exported from the chloroplast to the
cytosol where they are converted to sucrose. Concurrently, the remaining part of the
photoassimilates is partitioned into starch within the chloroplast. This starch (referred as
transitory starch hereafter) is remobilized during the subsequent night and thereby provides
a steady supply of carbon for export to sink tissues and to sustain growth and energy
metabolism of the plant through the dark period (Zeeman and ap Rees, 1999). This
conversion of starch to sucrose at night in plant leaves is one of the most important daily
fluxes of carbon on earth, involving tens of millions of tons of carbon every night (Niittyl et
al., 2004).
In contrast, storage starch is a medium- to long-term (from several days to several months)
form of carbon store found in specialized plastids of non-photosynthetic tissues and organs
such as seeds, roots and tubers. This starch is synthesised from imported photoassimilates
(mainly sucrose), normally during a particular developmental phase (e.g. seed development),
to be degraded during a subsequent phase (e.g. seed germination).
1.2.2. Starch granule composition and structure
Starch consists of two distinct homopolymers of glucose: amylopectin and amylose.
Amylopectin is a highly branched polymer that contains -1,4-linked glucose chains 
(glucans) connected by -1,6 branch points whereas  amylose, which is almost free of -1,6 
branch points, is essentially linear. These two polysaccharides are assembled together inside
plastids to form the starch granule  a three dimensional semi-crystalline particle (Figure 1).
This crystalline nature is associated with the highly organised architecture of the
amylopectin component, and thus will vary according to the ratio of amylose and
amylopectin. The structure of amylopectin is brought about by the non-random distribution
of branch points, with regions of high-branch frequency alternating with regions devoid of
branches, so as to enable neighbouring linear chains to align in parallel arrays of double
helices. This conserved architecture allows the dense packaging of glucose units (Myers et
al., 2000; Smith, 2001). Amylopectin accounts for 70% to more than 90% of the starch
depending of the plant species and organs, the developmental stage of that organ and, to
Chapter 1: General introduction
some extent, the growth conditions of the plant (Martin and Smith, 1995; Zeeman et al.,
2002).
9 nm9 nm
Figure 1. Starch granule structure and composition.
Modified from Jobling et al. (2004) and Teltow et al. (2006). A. Schematic representation of the starch
granule structure composed of amorphous and semi-crystalline zones. Together, these two zones form
a growth ring of several hundred nm across. The semi-crystalline zone consists of alternating
crystalline and amorphous lamellae. The size of the starch granule varies from 1 to 100 m in length,
depending on the plant species and tissue. B. Enlargement of a growth ring showing the arrangement
of the alternating crystalline and amorphous lamellae. The crystalline lamellae contains amylopectin
molecules formed by chains of glucose units organized into clusters. Adjacent chains within a cluster
form double helices that pack together in ordered arrays. The amorphous lamellae, high in -1,6 
branch points, contains amylopectin in a less ordered state together with amylose. C and D.
Representation of the glycosyl bonds in amylopectin (C) and amylose (D). Amylose is essentially linear
while amylopectin is highly branched with -1,6 linkages. 
Chapter 1: General introduction
Differences between transitory and storage starches are found in the structure of
amylopectin (branch length distribution) and in the morphology and appearance of the starch
granules (Tomlinson et al., 1997; Zeeman et al., 2002). Starch granules found in leaves are
generally disc-shaped, and are usually smaller (1-10 m) than those in storage organs (1-100
m), probably because their synthesis usually occurs over a shorter period of time. The
appreciable variation in the number, size, and morphology of the starch granules in the
storage tissues of different species suggest that these characteristics are at least partially
genetically determined. Lastly, the starch granule also contains small amounts of proteins,
lipids and minerals (mainly phosphate), the amount of which is dependent on the botanical
source (Martin and Smith, 1995).
1.2.3. Industrial and agronomic importance of starch
Starch is not only the most important carbohydrate reserve in plants, it is also a major
component of the human diet (about half of the calories consumed by humans comes from
starch). It is also an important raw material for many industrial processes in the food, textile,
paper, and adhesives industries (Jobling, 2004), including the production of biodegradable
plastics (Mooney, 2009). Importantly as well, starch is used as a source of energy, for the
production of bioethanol (so-called first generation biofuel; Smith, 2008), or even hydrogen
(Zhang et al., 2007).
In its native form, starch has a limited number of industrial uses, essentially as a thickener
or binder. Upon heating in water, however, starch swells and increases in viscosity, to form a
gel upon cooling. The composition and structure of the starch granules affects the properties
and functionalities of starches. Amylose and amylopectin in particular differ dramatically in
their physical characteristics (amyopectin forms pastes when heated in water, whereas
amylose form gels). The ratio amylose:amylopectin therefore has an important impact on the
applications of starch. Many treatments and chemical modifications, including cross-linking,
cationisation, and partial hydrolysis, are often carried out after extraction to modify the
functionality of starch, and increase its versatility. Some other modifications such as change
in the amylose, amylopectin, and phosphate content, however, are often expensive and
difficult to achieve in vitro. Since the desirable physical properties of starch vary
considerably between plant species and organs, crop species used as a source of starch have
long been selected for particular applications. For instance, tuber and root starch both have
larger granules and lower protein and lipid contents than starches from cereal endosperms.
Consequently, these starches form clear, bland pastes upon processing, and are excellent for
food applications. Potato tuber starch, on top of that has a high content of phosphate, which
coupled to the large size of its granules, gives it a very high swelling power (Jobling, 2004).
Chapter 1: General introduction
Yet, the vast majority of starch currently used by the industry is cereal starch because of its
convenience for transport and storage.
Over the past two decades, the great progress made in understanding the metabolism of
starch, and the isolation of many of the genes involved in the pathway, together with
advances in the genetic modifications of crops, has made possible the production of novel
starches with improved functionality in planta. For instance, mutation of the Waxy gene that
encodes a Granule Bound Starch Synthase (GBSS; see section 1.3.1) leads to the production
of amylose-free starch. Thus, in addition to waxy mutants of maize, barley, sorghum, and
potato that have been known for years, waxy potato plants have recently been developed by
genetic engineering (Amflora, BASF Plant Science) and are now commercially available.
These amylose-free starches present many advantages for the food industry and paper
manufacturer, in particular, as they yield clear and stables pastes, and have improved freeze-
thaw stability compared to normal starches (Zheng et al., 1998; Jobling et al., 2002). High-
amylose starches are also of great interest because of their high gelling strength, which
makes them especially useful for sweets. High-amylose starches can also be processed into
resistant starches that have nutritional benefits (Bird et al., 2000). In plants, this high-
amylose phenotype is caused by the inhibition of the activity of an enzyme involved in the
synthesis of starch (Starch Branching Enzyme; see section 1.3.1). Other variations between
species and organs that affect starch properties in ways valuable to industry include the
branching of amylopectin, the phosphate content of the starch, and granule size and shape
(Jobling et al., 2004).
Beside its use in industrial processes, starch plays a primary role in storage organs and
tissues, many of which are of agronomic importance. High starch content is a desired trait
for all the starch-rich seeds of cereal crops used as a major dietary source of energy for
humans (for example, maize, rice, wheat, sorghum, and barley). Similarly, tuber and
tuberous root starches are also very important agronomically (e.g. potato tubers and cassava
roots), and an increased starch content in these tissues has already been successfully
achieved by genetic modification (e.g. Ihemere et al., 2006).
1.2.4. Importance of starch in plant growth and development
As mentioned above, the role of transitory starch in many species is to provide the plant
with a supply of carbon during the night, when photosynthesis cannot take place. Starch can
also act as an overflow sink for newly assimilated carbon when the rate of assimilation
exceeds the demand for sucrose (Caspar et al., 1985; Schulze et al., 1991; Ludewig et al.,
1998). By acting as a buffering agent of the carbon balance of the plant, this transitory starch
plays a central role in growth and development. Hence, A. thaliana mutants deficient in the
Chapter 1: General introduction
synthesis of starch (reduced-starch and starch-free mutants), or mutants with a reduced
capacity to degrade it (starch-excess mutants) generally display a reduced rate of growth
under many environmental conditions, especially when grown under short days (Caspar et
al., 1985; Lin et al., 1988a and b; Caspar et al., 1991; Schulze et al., 1991). In wild-type
(WT) plants, an artificial extension of the night beyond the normal end of day results in the
depletion of starch in leaves, and in an abrupt reduction of the plant growth rate (Gibon et
al., 2004). This impaired rate of growth in both the mutants severely altered in leaf starch
metabolism, and in the WT plants submitted to extended dark periods, is accompanied by
large transcriptional changes indicative of carbon starvation (Smith and Stitt, 2007; Usadel
et al., 2008). Taken together, this strongly suggests that, at least in some species such as A.
thaliana, the transitory storage of carbon as starch is essential for maintaining the
metabolism and growth of the plant during the night.
In addition to this central role in plant growth, starch metabolism is involved in many
development and environmentally-induced processes, including responses to pathogen attack
and nutrient availability, acclimation to abiotic stresses (e.g. cold and drought stresses),
senescence, and flowering (MacDonald et al., 1970; Chatterton and Silvius, 1981; Paul and
Stitt, 1993; Martindale and Leegood, 1997; Corbesier et al., 1998; Schulze et al., 1991;
Handford and Carr, 2007). Its importance in flowering initiation is revealed in several of the
A. thaliana mutants that cannot accumulate starch to a normal level, or accumulate it in
excess. In addition to the impaired rate of growth, such mutants usually display a delay in
flowering independent of their slower rate of growth (Caspar et al., 1985; Eimert et al.,
1995; Yu et al., 2000). Yu et al. (2000) hypothesized that this late floral initiation in the
starch-deficient mutants could be directly caused by their lack of starch, which is normally
degraded to provide the plant with soluble sugars that serve as a signal for the initiation of
flowering. In agreement with this hypothesis, the late-flowering-phenotype of one of these
mutants (pgi1-1; see section 1.3.1) could be reversed upon addition of soluble sugars
(sucrose, fructose, or glucose) to the growth medium (Yu et al., 2000), therefore suggesting
an important role played by carbohydrate metabolism in flowering time. As an alternative
hypothesis, Eimert et al. (1995) suggested that starch accumulation and flowering may share
a common pathway. The delayed flowering and increased starch accumulation phenotype of
rice transgenic plants overexpressing the ethylene receptor ETR2 suggest that hormonal
signals may also be involved (Wuriyanghan et al., 2009). Hence, the molecular mechanism
responsible for this interaction between starch metabolism and flowering induction is likely
to be complex.
Despite the importance of starch metabolism, our comprehension of how starch is
degraded and the mechanisms underlying the regulation of its metabolism is still incomplete.
Our understanding of the pathways of starch synthesis and degradation in leaves, however,
Chapter 1: General introduction
has dramatically improved over the past few years, especially from studies carried out in A.
thaliana. In the next sections, I shall review our current knowledge of the metabolism of
transitory starch in source leaves, and of storage starch in seeds, fruits, roots and tubers.
1.3. The metabolism of transitory starch in source leaves
1.3.1. The pathway of starch synthesis
1.3.1.1. The synthesis of ADP-glucose
In the light, photosynthetic CO2 fixation in leaves drives, through the Calvin cycle, the
synthesis of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P). This molecule is used as precursor both for
the synthesis of sucrose (that is further stored in the cytosol or exported to the rest of the
plant), and for the synthesis of starch (Figure 2 and Figure A1). This synthesis of starch
occurs entirely inside the chloroplast. In a first step, and still as part of the Calvin cycle, one
molecule of G3P and one of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) combine to produce
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, which is subsequently converted to fructose-6-phosphate (Fru6P).
This reaction is catalysed by the enzymes aldolase and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase.
The chloroplastic isoform of phosphoglucoisomerase (PGI, EC 5.3.1.9) is the first enzyme
involved in the synthesis of starch beyond the Calvin cycle. This dimeric enzyme catalyzes
the reversible isomerisation of Fru6P into glucose-6-phosphate (Glc6P) (Smith and
Doolittle, 1992). In A. thaliana, mutants lacking this enzyme show a reduced level of starch
in leaves, but still accumulate starch in heterotrophic tissues (e.g. seeds and root cap cells).
Such mutants also display a delayed flowering time when grown in short day conditions (Yu
et al., 2000).
The next step in the pathway of starch synthesis involves the plastidic
phosphoglucomutase (PGM, EC 2.7.5.1), which catalyzes the conversion of Glc6P to
glucose-1-phosphate (Glc1P). Importance of this enzyme for photosynthetic starch synthesis
in chloroplasts is illustrated by the A. thaliana pgm mutant isolated from forward screens
(Caspar et al., 1985). This mutant, which has a completely starch-free phenotype, has a
reduced rate of photosynthesis, an impaired growth rate and a delayed flowering time when
grown in short day conditions. This mutant is characterised by very high level of soluble
sugars (sucrose, glucose and fructose) during the day (10-fold increase over the wild-type)
but has very low sugar levels during the second part of the night. Futhermore, it also shows
higher invertase and sucrose synthase activities, but lower AGPase activity (Caspar et al.,
1985; Gibon et al., 2004; Blasing et al., 2005).
Chapter 1: General introduction
Calvin
cycle
Sucrose
Fru6P
Glc6P
STARCH
Glc1P ADPGlc
Chloroplast stroma
Cytosol
PGI1 PGM1 AGPase
SS, BE,
ISA1, ISA2
ATP 2Pi
3PGA Pi Reduction
Calvin
cycle
Sucrose
Fru6P
Glc6P
STARCHSTARCH
Glc1P ADPGlc
Chloroplast stroma
Cytosol
PGI1 PGM1 AGPase
SS, BE,
ISA1, ISA2
ATP 2Pi
3PGA Pi Reduction
Figure 2. Proposed pathway of transitory starch synthesis in A. thaliana.
A fraction of the carbon assimilated via the Calvin cycle is exported to the cytosol for the synthesis of
sucrose. The remaining fraction (about half of the newly assimilated carbon in A. thaliana) is used for
starch synthesis within the chloroplast. This flux of carbon into starch is primarily controlled via the
allosteric regulation (activation by 3PGA and inhibition by Pi) and redox-activation of the AGPase
enzyme (in red). The core set of starch metabolic enzymes and transporters involved are in blue.
Abbreviations: PGI1, phosphoglucoisomerase, plastidal isoform; PGM1, phosphoglucomutase,
plastidial isoform; AGPase, ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase; SS, starch synthases (SS1, SS2, SS3,
SS4, GBSS); BE, starch branching enzymes (SBE1, SBE2, SBE3); ISA1 and ISA2, isoamylases
(debranching enzymes, DBE); TP, triose-phosphate; TPT, triose-phosphate transporter; 3PGA, 3-
phosphoglycerate; Pi, inorganic phosphate.
Adenosine 5 diphosphate glucose (ADPGlc) pyrophosphorylase (AGPase, EC 2.7.7.27) is
a key enzyme in the pathway of starch biosynthesis. This enzyme catalyses the synthesis of
ADPGlc and PPi from Glc1P and ATP. This constitutes the first committed step of starch
synthesis (Neuhaus et al., 1990; Kleczkowski et al., 1991; Green and Hannah, 1998).
AGPase in higher plants is a heterotetramer (22) composed of two large (LS) and two 
small (SS) subunits (Anderson et al., 1990). The small subunit is responsible for the catalytic
activity while the large subunit plays a regulatory function. This large subunit is sensitive to
two allosteric effectors: 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA), acting as an activator and Pi, acting as
an inhibitor (Sanwal et al., 1968; Ball and Preiss, 1994; Kleczkowski et al., 2000). Most
plants possess one or two SS genes and several LS genes that are differentially expressed
between different tissues and organs (Smithwhite and Preiss, 1992; Singh et al., 2002;
Crevillen et al., 2005; Ohdan et al., 2005; Rosti et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2007). In addition to
this tissue-specific pattern of expression, the different LS isoforms have been shown to
Chapter 1: General introduction
confer distinct kinetic and regulatory properties to the heterotetrameric enzyme (Crevillen et
al., 2003). Such evidence suggests that heterotetramers are formed to respond to substrates
and allosteric effectors in a way that is best suited to the particular metabolic demand of a
given plant organ or tissue. In A. thaliana, four LS genes (AtAPL1, AtAPL2, AtAPL3 and
AtAPL4) and two SS genes (AtAPS1, AtAPS2) have been identified, of which one (AtAPS2)
was found to be non-functional (Crevillen et al., 2003). The APS1/APL1 heterotetramer, the
main AGPase isoform expressed in leaves, was found to have the highest affinity for
substrates and sensitivity to allosteric effectors in comparison to AGPase containing the
three other isoforms. These isoforms were mainly expressed in sink tissues (Crevillen et al.,
2003 and 2005). Mutants lacking either APS1 (adg1 mutant) or APL1 (adg2 mutant) display
a strong starchless phenotype in leaves (Lin et al., 1988a; Lin et al., 1988b).
1.3.1.2. Elongation and branching of the glucan chain
Starch synthases (SS, EC 2.4.1.21) are the enzymes responsible for the transfer of the
glucosyl moiety of the soluble precursor ADPGlc to the non-reducing end of an -1,4 glucan 
chain during starch synthesis. Plants possess multiple isoforms of SS that can be classified
into two groups according to their conserved sequence and function. The first group of SS
genes encodes isoforms primarily involved in the synthesis of amylose while the second
group contains genes exclusively involved in amylopectin biosynthesis. Genes belonging to
the first group encodes isoforms named granule-bound starch synthases (GBSS). In many
species, GBSSI genes appear to be expressed mostly in storage organs whereas GBSSII genes
are responsible for the synthesis of amylose in non-storage tissues such as leaves (Fujita and
Taira, 1998; Nakamura et al., 1998; Vrinten and Nakamura, 2000; Edwards et al, 2002). The
second group of SS genes, which is involved solely in the synthesis of amylopectin, encodes
the isoforms SSI, SSII, SSIII and SSIV. Analyses of mutants lacking each of these isoforms
suggest that they possess specific roles, each of them acting on the elongation of an
amylopectin chain of a defined length. The synthesis of the shortest chain of glucan (10
glucosyl units or less) is achieved through the activity of SSI, while SSII preferentially
elongates medium-length chains (12-24 glucosyl units), and SSIII, the longest chains
(Commuri and Keeling, 2001; Zeeman et al., 2007a). Consistent with this model, the SSII
and SSIII isoforms were shown to make distinct and synergetic contributions to the synthesis
of amylopectin in potato plants (Edwards et al., 1999; Lloyd et al., 1999) although some
overlapping functions between the two were recently found in A. thaliana (Zhang et al.,
2008). In this species, SSIII was also shown to influence the rate of transitory starch
synthesis (Zhang et al., 2005). In contrast to the three other SS single null mutants, plants
lacking SSIV display a severely reduced growth rate with no modification in amylopectin
structure or composition but a dramatic decrease in the number of starch granules and
Chapter 1: General introduction
increase in their size (Roldan et al., 2007). From these observations, the authors suggested
that the SSIV isoform is involved in the priming of starch granule formation. This theory has
further been supported by the finding that mutants lacking both SSIII and SSIV fail to
initiate any starch granules and remain starchless (Szydlowski et al., 2009). Another SS
gene, named SSV (At5g65685), has been identified in the genome of A. thaliana and other
plant species. However, the function of the enzyme encoded by this gene is still unknown
(Deschamps et al., 2008b).
In addition to the activity of the SS isoforms, the formation of amylopectin in the
chloroplast requires the creation of branch points clustered at regular intervals on the glucan
chains. These -1,6 branch points are the result of the activity of the starch branching 
enzymes (BEs, also named SBEs; EC 2.4.1.18). The reaction involved is a
glucanotransferase reaction which consists of the cleavage of internal -1,4-linkages, and the 
transfer of glucan segments of six or more glucose residues to the same or a neighbouring
chain of the amylopectin molecule (Borovsky et al., 1975). Higher plants contain multiple
isoforms of BE that fall into two classes: class I (also named class B) and class II (also
known as class A) based on their amino acid sequence (Burton et al., 1995). These two
major classes of BE differ in the length of the glucan chain transferred and their substrate
specificities: BEI proteins have a high affinity for amylose and preferentially transfer longer
glucan chains than BEII. In contrast, their BEII counterparts preferentially branch
amylopectin (Guan and Preiss, 1993; Takeda et al.., 1993). Three BE genes (BE1, BE2,
BE3) have been identified in A. thaliana. Sequence comparisons indicate that BE2 and BE3
belong to the SBEII class, while BE1 is not related to the standard plant SBE class I or II
(Dumez et al., 2006). This gene which has orthologs in rice and poplar has relatively
recently been classified within a third class named SBEIII (Han et al., 2007). The down-
regulation of BEI activity seems to have no or only minimal effect on the amount of starch
synthesised and its composition in most plant species studied (Blauth et al., 2002; Satoh et
al., 2003; Dumez et al., 2006). In contrast, a lack of BEII activity has been shown to reduce
the branching frequency of amylopectin and its synthesis, resulting in an increased amylose
to amylopectin ratio, both in photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic tissues (Bhattacharyya
et al., 1990; Stinard et al., 1993; Jobling et al., 1999; Nishi et al., 2001; Dumez et al., 2006).
Debranching enzymes (DBEs, EC 3.2.1.41) have traditionally been associated with the
pathway of starch degradation. However, evidence indicates that these enzymes also play a
role in starch synthesis. DBEs fall into two groups in plants: isoamylase-type and
pullulanase-type (also named limit-dextrinase; LDA). These enzymes hydrolyse -1,6 
linkages and -limit dextrin. Three isoamylase-type proteins (ISA1, ISA2 and ISA3), and 
one pullulanase (LDA) exist in A. thaliana. The loss of either ISA1 or ISA2 activity results
in the accumulation of water-soluble phytoglycogen instead of starch (Zeeman et al., 1998b;
Chapter 1: General introduction
Delatte et al., 2006a). Based on this observation, a model has been prosposed to explain the
role of DBEs in starch synthesis. This model suggests that these enzymes play a clearing
role by removing the soluble glucans not attached to the starch granule so as to prevent the
accumulation of phytoglycogen (Zeeman et al., 1998b). A second model has also emerged
that rather proposes a glucan-trimming activity for the DBEs. In this model, DBEs remove
the branch points of amylopectin that could otherwise disturb the crystallisation of the starch
granule (Ball et al., 1996; Myers et al., 2000).
1.3.2. The pathway of starch degradation
As discussed above (section 1.2.4), transitory starch is the main source of carbon to
maintain growth and metabolism during the night in many plant species. The pathway of
starch degradation (Figure 3 and Figure A1) that is relatively more complex than the
pathway of starch synthesis can be divided into three main steps. The first one corresponds
to the initial attack of the starch granule and involves a cycle of phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation events at its surface. Subsequently, starch is hydrolysed into maltose, the
major product of starch degradation, and to a lesser extent into glucose. Lastly, these
products are then exported from the chloroplast to the cystosol where they are further
metabolised.
1.3.2.1. Phosphorylation and initial hydrolytic attack on the intact starch granule
Several A. thaliana mutants with a starch-excess (sex) phenotype, in whose the starch
content of leaves at the end of the night is higher than that of the wild-type plants, have been
isolated from forward screens. One of them, designated sex1, has a drastic starch-excess
phenotype in leaves associated with a strong reduction of phosphate content and increased
amylose content (Caspar et al., 1991). This mutant also has elevated starch contents in
flowers, seeds and root tips. Map-based cloning of the mutated gene in sex1 (Yu et al., 2001)
revealed that it encodes a glucan-water dikinase (EC 2.7.9.4), an enzyme located at the
surface of the starch granule that transfers a -phosphate group of ATP to a proportion of the 
glucose residues of amylopectin. This GWD1 enzyme (originally called R1 protein) had
already been identified as a starch-bound protein essential for starch degradation in potato
leaves and tuber (Lorberth et al., 1998). As in A. thaliana, mutant potato plants lacking
GWD1 had a loss of phosphate groups covalently linked to the amylopectin fraction of
starch and a starch-excess phenotype in leaves. In A. thaliana starch granules, approximately
1 in 2000 glucose residues carries a phosphate group (Yu et al., 2001). These phosphate
groups were shown to be specifically transferred to the C6 position of glucose residues by
the GWD1 enzyme (Ritte et al., 2006). The starch-excess phenotype of the gwd1 (sex1)
Chapter 1: General introduction
mutants suggests that this phosphorylation of amylopectin by GWD1 is necessary for the
initial attack on the starch granule. Consistent with this essential role for normal starch
degradation, GWD1 was found to bind the surface of the starch granules at night only (Ritte
et al., 2000). In addition, the phosphorylation of glucans on the surface of the starch granules
was also higher at night than during the day (Ritte et al., 2004).
Hexose
phosphate
Sucrose
STARCH
Chloroplast stroma
Cytosol
SEX4 GWD1
Linear
glucans
Branched
glucans
Maltose
Maltotriose
GlucoseLDA
GlucosePHS1
Glc1P
TP TP
Maltose
Hetero-
glycan?
PHS2?
Hexose
phosphate
Sucrose
STARCHSTARCH
Chloroplast stroma
Cytosol
SEX4 GWD1
Linear
glucans
Branched
glucans
Maltose
Maltotriose
GlucoseLDA
GlucosePHS1
Glc1P
TP TP
Maltose
Hetero-
glycan?
PHS2?
Figure 3 Proposed pathway of transitory starch degradation in A. thaliana.
During the night, starch is degraded to release maltose and glucose. First, phosphorylation by GWD1
and GWD3, and dephosphorylation by SEX4 occurs at the surface of the starch granule. This may
allow the action of BAM and ISA3. This results in the release of maltose and linear glucans that can be
further metabolised into maltose and glucose by BAM and DPE1. Loss of any of these enzymes
reduces starch degradation and causes a starch excess phenotype. Alternatively, linear glucans can
be degraded by PHS1 into Glc1P. The starch granule can also be attacked by AMY3 activity to release
branched glucans that can be degraded by LDA and ISA3. Loss of PHS1, AMY3 or LDA, however,
does not cause a starch excess phenotype suggesting that these reactions do not constitute the main
pathway of starch degradation in A. thaliana (shown in grey and light blue). Next, maltose and glucose
are exported from the chloroplast to the cytosol (via the transporters MEX1 and GT, respectively) to be
further metabolised into hexose phosphates and sucrose by enzymes including DPE2, and possibly
also PHS2. The sugar molecules would then be used to support the growth and energy metabolism of
the plant during the dark period. Steps involving several enzymatic reactions for which the importance
is not known are represented with broken arrows. The importance of the glucose transporter in starch
degradation has yet to be established (dashed arrow). Abreviations: GWD1, glucan water dikinase 1;
GWD3, glucan water dikinase 3, also named phosphoglucan, water dikinase (PWD); BAMs, beta-
amylases (BAM3 and BAM4); ISA3, isoamylase (debranching enzyme); DPE1, disproportionating
enzyme; AMY3, alpha-amylase 3; LDA, limit dextrinase (also called pullulanase: debranching enzyme);
MEX1, maltose transporter; GT, glucose transporter; TPT, triose-phosphate transporter; DPE2,
maltose transglucosidase; PHS1, glucan phosphorylase, plastidial isoform. PHS2, glucan
phosphorylase, cytosolic isoform; HXK1, hexokinase 1.
Chapter 1: General introduction
A second starch phosphorylating enzyme that was identified in a starch-bound protein
fraction (Kotting et al., 2005) was named phosphoglucan, water dikinase (PWD; also known
as GWD3 and referred as such thereafter). In contrast to GWD1 that phosphorylates the
glucose residues in C6 position, the GWD3 enzyme exclusively phosphorylates them in their
C3 position. Importantly, this phosophorylation by GWD3 requires that the glucan substrate
has been previously phosphorylated in C6 position. In other words, GWD3 acts downstream
of GWD1 and is dependent on its prior action (Zeeman et al., 2007a and b). Loss of GWD3
activity also results in increased leaf starch content relative to the wild-type. This phenotype,
however, is much less pronounced than in the gwd1 mutant plants, at least in A. thaliana
(Baunsgaard et al., 2005; Kotting et al., 2005). It is worth noting that another GWD gene has
been identified in the genome of A. thaliana and other species (Glaring et al., 2007).
However, the enzyme encoded by this gene (named GWD2) is not required for normal starch
degradation, although capable of phosphorylating -glucans in vitro (Glaring et al., 2007).
Recently, loss of a dual-specificity protein phosphatase (DSP4; also named PTPKIS1) was
found to be responsible for the phenotype of another starch excess mutant: the sex4 mutant
of A. thaliana (Niittyl et al.., 2006; Sokolov et al., 2006). Like the gwd1 and gwd3 mutants,
the starch-excess phenotype of sex4 arises from impaired starch degradation at night. In
addition, sex4 mutants accumulate phosphorylated intermediates of starch degradation
(Kotting et al., 2009). The authors also showed that the SEX4 protein is able to
dephosphorylate the starch granule surface as well as soluble glucan chains. It is interesting
to note that the ortholog of this enzyme in humans is a protein called Laforin that is
implicated in the control of glycogen metabolism. Laforin deficiency results in the
accumulation of aberrant glycogen particles (polyglucosans or lafora bodies) that leads to
neuronal dysfunction and early death (Worby et al., 2006; Gentry et al., 2006 and 2007).
Another putative chloroplastic phosphatase named LSF1 (for LIKE SEX4, previously
PTPKIS2) may also be involved in this dephosphorylation of starch (Comparot-Moss et al.,
2010).
1.3.2.2. Metabolism of branched and linear glucans, and production of maltose
As mentioned above, the class of enzymes involved in the degradation of leaf starch has
been widely discussed. -amylases (AMY; EC 3.2.1.1) and other endoamylases 
hydrolytically cleave -1,4 linkages resulting in the production of a mixture of linear and 
branched malto-oligosaccharides (MOS). These enzymes were previously thought to be
responsible for the initial attack of the starch granule in leaves as it is the case in the
endosperm of germinating cereal seeds (cf section 1.4.2). However, evidence suggests that,
in leaves, AMY activity does not have an important role in starch degradation, at least under
normal growth conditions. The A. thaliana genome encodes three AMY proteins (AMY1, 2,
Chapter 1: General introduction
and 3) of which, only one, AMY3, is localised in the chloroplast (Zeeman et al., 1998a; Yu
et al., 2005). Knock-out mutants of this plastidial -amylase in A. thaliana showed normal
rates of starch degradation (Smith et al., 2003). Starch metabolism was also normal in the
triple mutant amy1/amy2/amy3 (Yu et al., 2005).
Recent data from studies performed in A. thaliana and potato indicate that the starch
granules are degraded by exo-amylolysis and debranching activities rather than by endo-
amylolysis activity. This exo-amylolysis is carried out by a group of amylase named -
amylases (BAM; EC 3.2.1.2) which catalyze the removal of maltose units from the non-
reducing end of -glucan chains, while the debranching action is carried out by debranching 
enzymes (DBE). Loss of specific isoforms of BAM (BAM3 in A. thaliana; PCT-BMY in
potato) and the DBE ISA3 in leaves from A. thaliana and potato results in reduced rates of
starch degradation (Scheidig et al., 2002; Hussain et al., 2003; Wattebled et al., 2005;
Delatte et al., 2006b; Fulton et al., 2008). In vitro, BAM3 and ISA3 recombinant proteins
have a high level of activity on soluble glucans, but each shows very little capacity to
degrade the starch granule (Scheidig et al., 2002; Hussain et al., 2003). However, the release
of glucan increases when both enzymes are used in combination (Edner et al., 2007),
suggesting that these two enzymes act synergistically. Indeed, as an exo-amylase, BAM can
act only on the outer chains of the branched glucans to produce a surface of short chains on
which it cannot act further. ISA3 activity is necessary to remove the branch points and
uncover longer chains that BAM can then continue to hydrolyse. In agreement with this
model, Delatte et al. (2006b) showed that short glucan chains accumulated on the granule
surface of A. thaliana isa3 mutants, probably because they were no longer efficiently
removed by the debranching activity of ISA3. Further, in vitro hydrolysis of the starch
granule surface by BAM3 and ISA3 was found to be enhanced upon the simultaneous
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the glucan residues at the surface of the starch
granule by GWD and SEX4 activities (Edner et al., 2007; Kotting et al., 2009). This
observation has led to a model for starch degradation in leaves involving the synergistic
action of GWD1, GWD3, SEX4, and the starch degrading enzymes BAM3 and ISA3 (Edner
et al., 2007; Zeeman et al., 2007a and b; Kotting et al., 2009). In this model, the
phosphorylation by GWD1 and GWD3 has been proposed to result in the uncoiling of the
amylopectin double helices, thereby allowing the BAM and ISA enzymes to access the
glucan chains. This hypothesis was supported by the fact GWD3-catalysed C3
phosphorylation disturbs the structure of the amylopectin molecule (Hansen et al., 2009).
The removal of the phosphate groups by the action of SEX4 is also required since -
amylases cannot efficiently hydrolyse phosphorylated glucans (Edner et al., 2007).
The model described above places BAM3 and ISA3 as key players in the enzymatic
hydrolysis of the starch granule in leaves of A. thaliana at night. Yet, it is possible that other
Chapter 1: General introduction
enzymes may also play a role in starch degradation and/or compensate at least partly for
their functions when they are missing. Recent evidence shows that this is the case. Loss of
the DBE limit dextrinase LDA (aka pullulanase, PU1) has no effect on the rate of starch
degradation as observed in the isa3 mutant (Wattebled et al., 2005; Delatte et al., 2006b).
The isa3/lda double mutant however showed a greater reduction of starch content than the
isa3 mutant. This suggests that in the absence of ISA3, LDA is necessary for the degradation
of starch (Delatte et al., 2006b). Furthermore, AMY activity was increased and soluble
branched glucan accumulated during the night in the double mutant. Thus, it is likely that in
the absence of ISA3, the degradation of starch occurs through the endo-amylolytic attack of
AMY3 that provides soluble substrates for LDA (Delatte et al., 2006b). Although these two
last enzymes are not essential for starch degradation under normal growth-room conditions,
they could be important under specific conditions, for instance under exposure of the plant to
stresses. Similarly, additional isoforms of BAM (out of the nine -amylases enzymes 
encoded in the genome of A. thaliana, four are predicted to be chloroplastic) have recently
been shown to participate in the degradation of starch under normal or stress conditions.
Thus, BAM1 was found to play an overlapping role with BAM3 (Fulton et al., 2008).
Suprisingly, bam4 mutants also showed elevated levels of starch despite the BAM4 protein
lacking -amylase activity (Fulton et al., 2008). The authors suggested that BAM4 facilitates 
or regulates the degradation of starch upstream and independently of BAM1 and BAM3.
The result of the combined action of the enzymes mentioned above is the release of
maltose and maltotriose from the starch granule. The maltotriose then released  too short to
act as a substrate for BAM (Chapman et al., 1972) can further be degraded by this enzyme
after action of another plastidial enzyme called disproportionating enzyme, or D-enzyme
(also referred as DPE1; EC 2.4.1.25). This enzyme transfers two of the glycosyl units from
maltotriose to another glucan chain (making them available for hydrolysis by the -amylase) 
and releases a glucose molecule. This role is supported by the fact that knock-out mutants of
DPE1 in A. thaliana show a reduced rate of starch degradation at night accompanied by
accumulation of maltotriose and grow slower than the WT plants (Critchley et al., 2001).
Alpha-1,4 glycosyl bonds can be cleaved by starch phosphorylase (SP; EC 2.4.1.1) to
produce Glc1P. Only one plastidial isoform of -glucan starch phosphorylase has been 
predicted from the genome sequence of A. thaliana. This isoform referred as PHS1 could be
responsible for the hydrolysis of linear glucan chains to glucosyl monomers but its role in
starch degradation is still unclear. Under normal growth conditions, A. thaliana and potato
plants lacking PHS1 do not display any impairment in starch degradation, suggesting that
one or more isoforms of -amylases rather than the plastidial starch phosphorylase plays an 
important role in this process (Sonnewald et al., 1995; Zeeman et al., 2004a). However,
PHS1 could play a role under specific conditions. phs1 mutant plants develop small lesions
Chapter 1: General introduction
on their leaves that are bordered by cells accumulating large amounts of starch, and are
sensitive to any sudden drought and salt stress (Zeeman et al., 2004a and b). One possible
explanation is that the loss of this enzyme activity could compromise the ability of the plant
palisade and mesophyll cells to tolerate any transient water stress, leading to cell death.
Under these stress conditions in WT plants, phosphorolysis could supply substrates for the
plastidial oxidative pentose phosphate pathway that would generate reducing power required
for the scavenging of reactive oxygen intermediates (Zeeman et al., 2004a and b).
1.3.2.3. Fate of maltose in the cytosol
According to the model presented above, the main products of starch degradation in the
chloroplast in leaves are maltose, and to a lesser extent, glucose (Weise et al., 2004; Lu and
Sharkey, 2006). To be further used for the metabolism of the cell and growth of the plant
during the night, these products must be exported to the cytosol. Information about this
export comes from studies performed on isolated chloroplasts from different species (Stitt
and ap Rees, 1980; Stitt and Heldt, 1981; Kruger and ap Rees, 1983), and from the
characterisation of chloroplast envelope glucose and maltose transporters: glucose can be
exported through a glucose transporter (Schafer et al., 1977; Weber et al., 2000; Servaites et
al., 2002) while the export of maltose is carried out by the maltose transporter MEX1.
Evidence that this protein constitutes the major route by which maltose is exported in higher
plants come from the analysis of the A. thaliana mutant lacking this protein (Niittyl et al.,
2004). This mutant accumulates high levels of maltose inside the chloroplast during the
night, and starch degradation is decreased (Niittyl et al., 2004; Lu et al., 2006). Once
exported from the chloroplast, evidence suggests that the fate of maltose involves a
transglucosidase termed DPE2. This enzyme transfers one of the glucose molecules of
maltose to an, yet unknown, acceptor, releasing the other as free glucose. Mutants lacking
DPE2 accumulate a very high level of maltose (Chia et al., 2004; Lu and Sharkey, 2004) like
those lacking MEX1. It is likely that the free glucose molecule thus released from maltose
by DPE2 is converted to hexose-phosphate by a hexokinase enzyme. The metabolism of the
second glucosyl moiety from maltose remains to be discovered. It is possible to speculate
that it is transferred to a cytosolic carbohydrate molecule (heteroglycan) which would be
subsequently acted on to release free glucose or hexose-phosphate molecules (Fettke et al.,
2009). A cytosolic isoform of the glucan phosphorylase (PHS2) has been proposed to be
involved in this reaction (Smith et al., 2005).
1.4. The metabolism of storage starch in sink tissues and organs
Chapter 1: General introduction
1.4.1. Why distinguish the metabolism of storage and transitory starch?
Historically, the metabolism of storage starch, rather than transitory starch, was the subject
of most, if not all, studies because of its ready availability as well as its economic and
agronomic importance. Hence, the plants used for these studies were mostly important
storage starch crops such as maize, rice, pea and potato. Only in the last decade has the
metabolism of starch in leaves received increasing attention with the development of the
model plant A. thaliana and the discovery of its primary importance to plant growth.
Transient starch is made within living cells, synthesised and mobilized on a daily basis in
leaves. In contrast, storage starch constitutes a long term reserve of carbon synthesised in
organs and tissues that can be structurally and metabolically very different from the leaves.
As a result, the control and even the nature of the pathway is expected to be different
between the two types of starch, and from one tissue or organ to another. Evidence shows
that this is indeed the case (Zeeman et al., 2007). To start with, the first steps of the synthesis
of transitory and storage starch are fundamentally different. As presented above, the starch
synthesised in leaves is made from the photoassimilates coming from the Calvin cycle. In
contrast, the synthesis of starch in non-photosynthetic organs and tissues requires the import
of sucrose as first step. Catabolism of this sugar produces the substrates Glc-6-P and ATP.
These are imported into the plastids from the cytosol via specific translocators of the plastid
envelope (Neuhaus and Wagner, 2000). This differs from the synthesis of starch in leaves
where the Glc-6-P and ATP are made photosynthetically within the plastid. Likewise, the
degradation of starch also occurs differently depending on the organs and tissues, and the
function it fullfills. Differences regarding the nature of the enzymatic pathway and its
regulation are the subject of the following paragraphs, and of section 1.5.2.
1.4.2. Starch synthesis and degradation in cereal and legume seeds
The core pathway of starch synthesis in seeds (Figure 4) has been well characterised for all
major cereal crops (maize, wheat, rice, and barley) and for pea. Detailed studies of the
enzymes involved have revealed a similar scheme of starch formation to that in leaves. In
pea, for instance, mutants affected in starch synthesis carry mutation at five loci that encode
several of the enzymes involved in starch synthesis (branching enzyme, AGPase, plastidial
isoform of PGM, and two starch synthases: r, rb, rug3, rug5, and lam mutants, respectively;
Wang et al., 1998). Mutations at these loci lead to change in starch content and in polymer
(amylose and amylopectin) composition, and alter the structure of the starch granule. Except
for lam, all these mutations also alter the shape of the seed, from round to wrinkled
Chapter 1: General introduction
(Bogracheva et al., 1999). Some significant differences, however, exist between the pathway
of transitory and storage starch synthesis, some of which are presented below.
First, starch synthesis in seeds requires the involvement of a sucrose synthase enzyme
(also known as Susy) that converts sucrose and UDP into UDP-Glc and fructose. It is this
UDP-Glc that, after conversion to into Glc6P, will be used for the synthesis of starch. A
deficiency in Susy in developing maize endosperm (shrunken1 mutant; Chourey et al., 1998)
or pea embryo (rug4 mutant; Craig et al., 1999) results in a reduced starch content.
Sucrose
Cytosol Plastid
Fructose
UDPGlc
Glucose
Glc1P
Glc6P
Fru6P
2PiATP
UGPase
AGPase
ADPGlc
FKHXK
PGI2 PGM2
ADPGT
Glc1P
ADPGlc
Glc6P
AGPase
SS, BE
Linear
glucans
Glc1P
Maltose
Glucose
Sucrose
STARCH
Sucrose
Cytosol Plastid
Fructose
UDPGlc
Glucose
Glc1P
Glc6P
Fru6P
2PiATP
UGPase
AGPase
ADPGlc
FKHXK
PGI2 PGM2
ADPGT
Glc1P
ADPGlc
Glc6P
AGPase
SS, BE
Linear
glucans
Glc1P
Maltose
Glucose
Sucrose
STARCHSTARCH
Figure 4. Proposed pathway of storage starch synthesis and degradation.
Susy plays a key role in this pathway by converting the sucrose coming from the source tissue of the
plant into hexose phosphates. These Glc6P molecules would then be used for the synthesis of starch
in the plastid. One exception to this is the existence in cereal endosperms of an alternative pathway. In
this tissue, a cytosolic isoform of the AGPase enzyme produces ADPGlc that is transported from the
cytosol to the amyloplast to be used for starch synthesis (reactions and proteins involved are shown in
red and purple). In contrast to starch synthesis, the pathway of starch degradation in heterotrophic
tissues and organs is still largely unknown. In germinating legume cotyledons, the amylopast
membrane disintegrates so that starch degradation is catalysed by cytosolic enzymes. Evidence
suggests that glucan phosphorylase plays an important role in this degradation. In germinating cereal
endosperm, both the amyloplast envelope and the plasma membrane disintegrate. Degradation of
starch in this non-living tissue is thought be hydrolytic (i.e. involvement of amylases) rather than
phosphorolytic (i.e. via glucan phosphorylase). To date, almost nothing at all is known about the way
starch is degraded in other storage organs such as potato tubers. Abbreviations for enzymes and
transporters are: Susy, sucrose synthase; UGPase, UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase; Inv, Invertase;
HXK, hexokinase; PGM, phosphoglucomutase; FK, fructokinase; PGI, phosphoglucoisomerase;
AGPase, ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase; SS, starch synthase; BE, starch-branching enzyme;
ADPGT, ADP-glucose/ADP transporter; G6PT, glucose-6-phosphate/phosphate transporter.
Chapter 1: General introduction
Another distinctive feature of the synthesis of storage starch in grasses (Poaceae or
Gramineae, also known as cereals) is the involvement of a cystosolic isoform of the APGase
enzyme in addition to the plastidial one. This is the case for instance in maize, barley, and
wheat endosperms in which this cytosolic isoform accounts for 85 to 95% of the total
AGPase activity depending of the species (Denyer et al., 1996b; Thorbjrnsen et al., 1996b). 
Evidence that this cytosolic isoform is essential for starch synthesis in the endosperm come
from the study of two maize mutants: shrunken2 (sh2) and brittle2 (bt2) that carry mutations
in the genes encoding the small and large subunit of AGPase, respectively. These mutants
display a strong reduction of the level of starch accumulation in the endosperm that
correlates well with the reduction seen in their AGPase activity (Giroux and Hannah, 1994).
Further evidence for the importance of a cytosolic AGPase comes from the reduced starch
and increased ADP-Glc contents found in the brittle1 (bt1) mutant. BT1 encodes an
amyloplast envelope protein thought to be an ADP-Glc transporter (Shannon et al., 1998;
Kirchberger et al., 2007). Thus, grass endosperm cells possess two separate ways of
providing ADP-Glc for starch synthesis: via the plastidial, or via the cytosolic AGPase. The
emergence, conservation, and dominance of this endosperm-specific pathway (also referred
to as the alternate pathway) through the grass family, and during the domestication of
cereals, suggest that it has a selective advantage in this plant family (Comparot-Moss and
Denyer; 2009). It has been hypothesised that the synthesis of ADP-Glc in the cytosol may
enable the production of starch in a more energy-efficient manner than when it is
synthesized in the plastid, by drawing upon the relatively abundant pool of ATP present in
the cytosol, rather than the more limited plastidial pool of ATP (Comparot-Moss and
Denyer, 2009).
Starch degradation in cereal seeds (Figure 4) has also been relatively well studied due to its
social and economic importance; the sugars produced during germination can be fermented
to alcohol. In this unusual tissue  the starch-containing cells die upon seed maturation  
the complete degradation upon germination of starch requires the co-operative action of
several hydrolytic enzymes (AMY, BAM, DBE, and -glucosidase enzyme) that are also 
found in other non-photosynthetic storage organs, and in photosynthetic tissues (Fincher et
al., 1989; Sun and Hanson, 1990; Sissons et al., 1994; Sissons and MacGregor, 1994). In
contrast to leaves, however, it appears that in cereal endosperm, there is no cycle of
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation involving the GWDs and SEX4 enzymes, nor any
direct attack by BAM activity occuring. Rather, the attack on the starch granule seems to be
exclusively catalysed by AMY (Fincher et al., 1989). Another important difference between
these tissues is the final product of the degradation of starch: in cereal endosperm, the main
product is glucose, whereas in living cells, the main products of starch degradation are
sucrose and hexose phosphate. This difference affects the nature and control of the pathway:
Chapter 1: General introduction
starch degradation must be coordinated with metabolic demand in the same cell in a leaf but
not in an endosperm
In contrast, starch degradation in legume seeds is not well studied. Nevertheless, evidence
suggests that the degradation of this starch follows again a different scheme that may involve
the action of starch phosphorylase following the endo-amylolytic attack of the starch granule
(Juliano and Varner, 1969; Tarrago et al., 1976).
1.4.3. Starch synthesis and degradation in potato tubers and in roots
The mechanisms underlying the transport and unloading of photoassimilates and their
subsequent use for starch synthesis in heterotrophic organs such as potato tubers (Figure 4)
have been broadly studied, and are in general well characterised. As in seeds, Susy activity
plays an important role for the synthesis of starch (positive correlation) in these organs as
demonstrated by the study of susy-antisense potato tubers (Zrenner et al., 1995). Invertases
perform the hydrolysis of sucrose into glucose and fructose in an irreversible manner.
Interestingly, studies of these Susy-deficient plants revealed that the hydrolysis of sucrose by
invertases cannot compensate for the loss of Susy (Zrenner et al., 1995).
In contrast to the conversion of sucrose to starch, the degradation of starch in these
heterotrophic tissues, and its regulation is still largely unknown (Smith et al., 2005).
Likewise, the metabolism (both synthesis and degradation) of starch in roots and other
vegetative tissues has only been very poorly studied so far, and very little is know about the
nature of the pathway and enzymes of starch synthesis and degradation active in these
tissues.
As described above, the pathways of starch synthesis and degradation vary significantly
between tissues and organs of plants. In addition to this, the metabolism of starch has also
been found to vary considerably with plant species, and with environmental conditions
thanks to a very tight, and yet highly flexible, regulation. This constitutes the subject of the
next section.
1.5. Regulation of the metabolism of transitory and storage starch
As sessile organisms, plants are exposed to numerous stimuli in an environment which is
in constant change (e.g. fluctuations in the availability of light, water and nutrients, or in
pathogen attack). Facing this challenge, plant metabolism is highly flexible. This plasticity is
of vital importance as it allows the plant to achieve environment-induced changes in
Chapter 1: General introduction
phenotypes and thus ensure its survival in the prevailing conditions. The accumulation and
degradation of transitory starch is no exception to this as described below.
1.5.1. The regulation of starch synthesis and degradation in leaves
1.5.1.1. Regulation of the rate of starch synthesis and degradation
The synthesis of starch during the day in A. thaliana and many other plant species is
clearly not a simple overflow for photoassimilates in surplus to the immediate demand for
metabolism and growth. Rather, evidence shows that in these species enough starch is
synthesized during the day to match the anticipated amount of carbohydrates that will be
required during the following night. Hence, a change in daylength leads to a modification in
the partitioning between sugars and starch with the rate of starch synthesis being inversely
related to the length of the light period. In other words, A. thaliana plants growing under
short day (SD) conditions would have a faster rate of starch accumulation than those
growing under long day (LD) conditions. Moreover, the longer the night period, the greater
is the proportion of carbon being partitioned into starch during the day. Thus, A. thaliana
plants in a 6 h photoperiod accumulate 80% as much as starch as in a 12 h photoperiod
(Gibon et al., 2004).
Similarly, the rate of starch degradation is also tightly controlled in A. thaliana and
adjusted to the length of the photoperiod so that the rate of starch degradation at night in SD
(i.e. long nights) is slower than in LD conditions. This ensures that a constant supply of
sugars is available through the whole night (Smith and Stitt, 2007). Two different kinds of
control of this degradation of starch could occur, firstly at the onset of the dark period, and
secondly through the night. Starch degradation usually starts after a short delay following the
transition from light to dark. Therefore, the depletion of sugars, rather than the absence of
light, has been suggested to be the most important factor triggering the degradation of starch
(Zeeman and ap Rees, 1999). Sugar signalling pathways could play a role in this process
(Rolland et al., 2002; Moore et al., 2003). Following this short delay, starch degradation
occurs at a remarkably constant rate throughout the night so that the starch reserves are
almost completely depleted at the end of this period (Smith e al, 2005; Zeeman et al.,
2007a). Notably, this linear degradation of starch was also observed in mutants that
accumulated a reduced amount of starch due to reduction in AGPase activity (Lin et al.,
1988). Further evidence that this regulation is not only tight but also very flexible comes
from studies of plants submitted to abnormal changes in the length of the light and dark
period. It was found that when plants entrained to a long day photoperiod were submitted to
an early night halfway through the photoperiod, their rate of starch degradation slowed
down. Conversely, plants entrained to short days exhibited an increased rate of starch
degradation when the photoperiod was doubled in length (Lu et al., 2005). Similar
Chapter 1: General introduction
experiments were performed by Gibon et al., 2004 who showed that the adjustment of the
degradation rate to the length of the photoperiod could be achieved within three days.
These remarkable adjustments show that, in A. thaliana, the synthesis and degradation of
starch are closely coupled to the diurnal energy demand of the plant, itself dependent on the
environmental conditions such as the length of day and night. The importance of this control
for the plant carbon economy is reflected by the results of experiments in which plants were
subjected to a further period of darkness at the end of a normal 12 h night. Under this
condition, and within few hours, massive modification of the leaf transcriptome (up-
regulation of the expression of genes involved in amino-acid, lipid, cell wall degradation,
and many other classes, such as protein turnover and RNA metabolism) suggests that the
plant is entering a carbon starvation mode (Thimm et al., 2004; Gibon et al., 2004).
However, the mechanisms by which plants sense the amount of starch present at the end of
the day, and are able to anticipate the length of the following night and fine-tune the rate of
starch turnover accordingly so as to achieve optimal growth, remain largely unknown.
Recent research (Graf et al., 2010) has shown that the circadian clock plays a central role in
controlling this conversion of starch to sugars in leaves at night, and that failure to set the
right rate of starch degradation leads to reduction in plant growth.
It must be mentioned, however, that the timing and pattern of starch degradation is likely
to be different in plants growing under natural conditions than in controlled environments.
For instance, in some species, the degradation of leaf starch can also occur at the start and
end of the day when light levels are relatively low. Furthermore, starch degradation can also
be induced during the photoperiod under conditions promoting high rates of photorespiration
(Smith et al., 2005). This suggests that, under natural environments, the mechanisms
controlling starch turnover are likely to respond to a wide range of complex inputs.
There is evidence that the accumulation and degradation of starch is controlled at the
transcriptional and post-translational level, involving factors such as the level of light and
metabolites. The possible or established influence of these different controls is presented
below, first concerning the synthesis of starch, and then its degradation.
1.5.1.2. Regulation of the enzymes of starch synthesis: the example of AGPase
Flux control analyses have allowed the identification of the enzymes of starch synthesis
that exercise the greatest degree of control in this pathway. Under low light conditions, most
of the flux control resides in the reaction catalysed by AGPase. Under high light, the flux
control is shared between several enzymes. 50% of the control is still exerted by AGPase
while the remaining 50% is shared between PGI, PGM, and SBE (Neuhaus and Stitt, 1990).
AGPase therefore exerts a considerable control over starch synthesis in leaves.
Consequently, this enzyme has been extensively studied and a complex and high level of
Chapter 1: General introduction
regulation of its activity has been discovered. A summary of our current understanding of
this regulation is presented below.
AGPase has been found to be regulated both at the transcriptional and post-translational
level. At this second level, the modulation of the enzyme activity is of two types: allosteric
and redox regulation. First, AGPase is allosterically regulated by two effectors with
antagonistic actions: 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA), which leads to the activation of AGPase,
and inorganic phosphate (Pi), that inhibits AGPase when its concentration increases (Ghosh
and Preiss, 1966). Changes in 3-PGA and Pi contents are themselves controlled by the level
of sucrose synthesis in the cytosol: during periods of active photosynthesis, the production of
energy in the form of NADPH and ATP is high, resulting in an increase of chloroplastic 3-
PGA and triose phosphate from CO2 reduction, and a decline of chloroplastic Pi from the
synthesis of ATP. At the same time, the transfer of 3-PGA and triose phosphates to the
cytosol in exchange of Pi from the cytosol is enhanced. Reduced Pi and increased 3-PGA
and triose phosphate in the cytosol activate the cytosolic fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
(FBPase) and sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) enzymes, leading to increased sucrose
synthesis. When the rate of photosynthesis is high relative to the demand for sucrose, the 3-
PGA to Pi ratio in the chloroplast is also high and the AGPase enzyme is activated, resulting
in increased ADP-Glc synthesis. Hence, the newly assimilated carbon will be preferentially
directed toward starch synthesis under sucrose sufficiency conditions. Conversely, when the
demand for sucrose is high, the ratio of 3-PGA to Pi in the chloroplast will be low. Thus, the
AGPase enzyme activity will be inhibited, and the flux of carbon through the pathway of
starch synthesis will be restricted so as to allow a greater synthesis of sugars (Trethewey and
Smith, 2010).
Studies carried out in A. thaliana, potato and pea have revealed that AGPase is also redox
regulated, and that this regulation is modulated by change in sugar level via two different
sugar signalling pathways - either by sucrose, via a pathway dependent on the SNF1-related
kinase SnRK1, or by glucose, via the involvement of hexokinase (HK) (Geigenberger et al.,
2005). Another sugar, trehalose-6-phosphate (T6P) was also found to promote the post-
translational redox activation of AGPase (Kolbe et al., 2005). Furthermore, the authors
showed that this activation by T6P was modulated by cytosolic sucrose levels, and depended
on the expression of SnRK1. In all cases, the activation of AGPase by redox modification
(reduction of a disulfide bridge) is thought to be mediated by a thioredoxin enzyme. AGPase
can also be redox-regulated via a light-dependant signal involving the action of a ferredoxin
and thioredoxin reductase (Buchanan and Balmer, 2005).
Lastly, the highly responsive activation of the AGPase genes by sugar and light signals
constitutes another level of regulation. Genes encoding the different isoforms of the large
subunits and the small subunit of the enzyme were found to be strongly and differentially
Chapter 1: General introduction
regulated by sugar and light/dark exposures in leaves of A. thaliana and other plant species
(Sokolov et al., 1998; Wingler et al., 2000; Hendriks et al., 2003). However, it is important
to note that protein and enzyme activity level did not follow these rapid changes in gene
expression (Sokolov et al., 1998)
The regulation of AGPase described above is the best characterised example of a
regulatory mechanism implicated in the synthesis of starch. However, many other enzymes
involved in carbon partitioning have also be found, or are likely to be subjected to similar
regulation. Redox reactions, in particular, have been proposed to play an important role in
the metabolism of plants by modifying the activity of numerous enzymes involved in carbon
partitioning in response to light and sugars (Geigenberger et al., 2005). Similarly, SnRK1
and HK have been shown to play a role in the regulatory network that controls the
expression and post-translational activation of several sugar- and starch-related enzymes
(Smeekens et al., 2000).
1.5.1.3. Regulation of the enzymes of starch degradation
As for starch synthesis, several regulatory mechanisms act on the enzymes of the starch
degradation pathway. Transcriptional and post-transcriptional controls as well as feedback
inhibition or activation by metabolites may play a role in the control of flux through this
pathway (Smith et al., 2005; Zeeman, et al., 2007).
Transcripts of several of the genes encoding starch- and maltose-metabolizing enzymes
were found to be co-expressed and levels showed a strong diurnal rhythm (Smith et al.,
2004). Expression of the genes GWD1, GWD3, ISA3, AMY3, DPE1 and PHS1 was shown to
be under the control of the circadian clock (Harmer at al., 2000; Schaffer et al., 2001).
Importantly, however, the amount of the corresponding proteins was found to be maintained
relatively constant throughout the diurnal cycle (Yu et al., 2001, Smith et al., 2004; Lu et al.,
2005). This lack of correspondence between transcript and enzyme levels highlights the
complexity of starch metabolism and suggests that post-transcriptional and post-translational
regulation is certainly more important in controlling the amounts of enzymes and their
activities in vivo on a diurnal basis (Smith et al., 2004).
Post-translational control of the enzyme activities involved in starch degradation occurs at
several levels. First, the level of metabolites of starch degradation could influence the rate of
the degradation through feed-back regulation (Smith et al., 2005; Zeeman, et al., 2007). It
was proposed that such mechanism may be responsible for the phenotype of the A. thaliana
dpe1, dpe2 and mex1 mutants. Although the DPE1, DPE2 and MEX1 proteins are only
involved downstream of the attack of the starch granule, their loss-of-function results in a
reduced rate of starch degradation. Because these mutants accumulate abnormally high
levels of maltose or maltotriose (Critchley et al., 2001; Chia et al., 2004; Lu and Sharkey,
Chapter 1: General introduction
2004; Nittyl et al., 2004) it is possible to speculate that these malto-oligosaccharides (MOS)
may inhibit the enzymes directly involved in the hydrolysis of starch. Maltose for instance
was shown to inhibit BAM activity at high concentration (Lizotte et al., 1990). Alternatively,
these MOS could also compete with granular starch for the binding and activities of enzymes
involved in starch degradation.
The redox activation of enzymes constitutes another mechanism implicated in the
regulation of starch degradation. In contrast to starch synthesis, however, only a light-
independent pathway could be responsible for the redox activation of the enzymes of starch
degradation. In spinach, BAM was thus found to interact with a thioredoxin (Balmer et al.,
2003), and it was hypothesized that this type of redox modulation could also apply for
GWD1 and SEX4 (Mikkelsen et al., 2005; Sokolov et al., 2006).
Lastly, it is interesting to note that in A. thaliana isa mutants that accumulate soluble
phytoglycogen instead of starch, the tight regulatory mechanism of the degradation does not
take place, and the phytoglycogen reserves are depleted before the end of the night (Zeeman
et al., 1998b; Delatte et al., 2005). This suggests that the controlled degradation of starch at
night is dependent on the presence of granular starch and/or that the cycle of
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events taking place at the surface of the starch
granule plays a major role in this control.
1.5.2. The regulation of storage starch metabolism
Surprisingly very little is known so far about the mechanisms involved in the regulation of
the synthesis and turnover of storage starch in non-photosynthetic tissues compared to those
of transitory starch metabolism. Some examples of the regulatory mechanisms involved,
mainly from studies performed in potato tubers on the conversion of sucrose to starch, are
presented here.
First, as for the synthesis of transitory starch in leaves, AGPase exerts an important level
of control over the synthesis of storage starch in potato tubers and cereal seeds (Sweetlove et
al., 1998 ; Giroux et al., 1996; Smidansky et al., 2002, 2003, and 2007). In addition, analyses
performed in potato tuber suggested that in this storage organ, a large proportion of the
control of starch synthesis resides outside the committed, linear pathway. Thus, antisense
suppression of the amyloplastidial ATP translocator (sometimes referred to as the adenylate
transporter) resulted in a strong reduction in starch synthesis in potato tubers. The control
coefficient of this transporter that supplies the AGPase substrate ATP to the plastid was
estimated to be 0.78 (Tjaden et al., 1998). SnRK1 has also been shown to exert an important
external control over starch accumulation in potato tubers (Tiessen et al., 2003; McKibbin et
al., 2006).
Chapter 1: General introduction
Since protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation play a ubiquitous role in regulating
cellular processes, protein kinases and phosphatases are also likely to be involved in the
regulation of starch accumulation and degradation. Finally, evidence suggests that some of
the enzymes of the starch metabolic pathway may work within complexes and that there are
probably more interactions between enzymes than those already identified (Tetlow et al.,
2004a and b).
1.6. Conservation and evolution of starch metabolism across the plant kingdom
Most living organisms accumulate either glycogen or starch as a carbon reserve. Both are
made of glucose units. However, while glycogen is a polymer constituted of branched
glucose chain lengths of uniform size distribution, the distribution of chain lengths in the
amylopectin polymer of starch is polymodal. Of the two energy storage polymers, glycogen
is the most widespread: it is found in archaea, bacteria and in most eukaryotes. In contrast,
starch is restricted to plants and algae that are believed to be descendants of an
endosymbiotic event involving a glycogen-synthesizing eukaryotic host cell, and a starch
synthesising prokaryotic endosymbiont. This event introduced the plastid organelle into the
eukaryotic cells and rendered them able to perform oxygenic photosynthesis. Most likely,
the prokaryotic symbiont was an ancestor of the present-day group V cyanobacteria
(Deschamps et al., 2008a). Indeed, whereas other bacteria synthesize glycogen, this group of
cyanobacteria synthesize large, insoluble, polysaccharide granules resembling starch
granules (Schneegurt et al., 1997; Nakamura et al., 2005). In contrast to glycogen, these
starch-like granules are osmotically inert, and therefore could have presented the advantage
of allowing the accumulation in the cell of the biopolymer in large amounts (Comparot-
Moss and Denyer, 2009).
Three eukaryotic lineages are known to descend from the common eukaryotic ancestor that
underwent the endosymbiosis event mentioned above: the Chloroplastida (land plants and
green algae), the Rhodophyceae (red algae), and the Glaucophyta (freshwater algae having
peptidoglycan-containing plastids known as cyanelles). Importantly, in plants and green
algae, starch accumulates within the plastid, whereas organisms of the Glaucophyta and
Rhodophyceae lineages accumulate starch in their cytosol. This cytosolic starch (also known
as floridean starch) involves the use of UDP-Glc as substrate and is thought to be comprised
purely of amylopectin (Yu et al., 2002). It has been shown that, despite the difference in the
nature and location of the synthesis of starch between the Chloroplastida and red algae
lineages, their starch synthesis pathways share a common origin and represent a chimera of
the host and endosymbiont storage glucan synthesis (Patron and Keeling, 2005).
Chapter 1: General introduction
Genome analyses of many model and crop plants have revealed that the metabolism of
starch is for large part conserved from the early photosynthetic organisms mentioned above
to the higher plants we know today. However, many significant and interesting differences
can be found from one plant species to another, some of which have already been mentioned
in the previous sections. One notable difference, for instance, is the presence in the
endosperms of grasses (e.g. maize, rice, wheat, barley, sorghum) of a cytosolic isoform of
the AGPase enzyme in addition to the plastidial one (see section 1.4.2). This relative recent
evolution of the cytosolic ADP-Glc synthesis is estimated to coincide with the evolution of
monocots to grasses approximately 70 Mya (Comparot-Moss and Denyer; 2009). This
contrasts with the conservation of the plastidial ADP-Glc synthesis which location in the
symbiont/plastid most likely remained constant through the evolution of Chloroplastidida
(Deschamps et al., 2008a).
The extent to which transitory starch accumulates in leaves and its importance in supplying
carbon to the plant during the night differs dramatically between species. In some species
starch constitutes a major form of storage whereas in others it can be viewed much more as
an overflow product of photosynthesis. In A. thaliana, where starch constitutes a source of
carbon indispensable for the plant to avoid carbon starvation and growth arrest during the
night, about half of the products of photosynthesis are partitioned into starch within the
chloroplast (Zeeman et al., 1999). In this species, as well as in soybean, cotton, and tobacco,
starch synthesis is constitutive, in that photoassimilates will be partitioned into starch even
if there is still a demand for sucrose. However, alternative strategies exist in plants in
relation to the importance and extent to which starch accumulates and is degraded. In pea
and spinach, for instance, evidence suggests that the photoassimilates are channelled into
starch only when the demand for sucrose synthesis is exceeded by the rate of photosynthesis.
In this overflow model, starch accumulates when the sucrose supply exceeds the capacity
of the leaf cells to use and store it, and the demand from sink tissues (Zeeman and Rees,
1999). This difference in strategy of carbon partitioning is notably reflected in the phenotype
of mutants altered in the synthesis of starch. Hence, for some species such as A. thaliana and
tobacco, this starch is important for normal growth (Caspar et al., 1985; Lin et al., 1988a;
Schulze et al., 1991; Huber and Hanson, 1992). In contrast, starchless mutants of pea, for
instance, grow normally (Harrison et al., 2000), possibly because, in addition to starch, these
plants also store sucrose in their leaves. Lastly, in many grasses, photoassimilates are used to
produce sucrose and fructan both for export and to be stored in vacuoles, prior to being used
as a supply of carbon during the night (Smith et al., 2005; Smith and Stitt, 2007).
In some species there may be significant variations in the metabolism of starch depending
on developmental conditions. In tobacco, for instance, the diurnal pattern of starch turnover
changes dramatically through leaf development. Thus, a strong diurnal turnover of starch
Chapter 1: General introduction
was observed in younger leaves whereas in older leaves much less of the starch was
diurnally remobilized, and its level progressively increased. Subsequently, during
senescence, all of the starch was degraded and the resulting products exported from the
leaves before their abscission (Matheson et al., 1962 and 1963).
In addition to this, the predominant pathway of starch degradation (i.e. phosphorolytic
versus hydrolytic) in the chloroplasts of source leaves may be species-dependent. In A.
thaliana, starch degradation occurs mainly via hydrolysis. This assumption is supported by
the 18:1 ratio of amylolytic to phosphorolytic activity, the fact that the phosphorylase
activity in chloroplasts was estimated to be too low to sustain the rate of starch degradation
(Lin et al., 1998c), and by more recent evidence from the study of knockout mutants
showing that BAM activity is required for normal starch degradation, while PHS1 is not (see
section 1.3.2 and reference therein). Moreover, the nature of the main products of transitory
starch degradation, namely maltose and glucose (Servaites and Geiger, 2002; Weise et al.,
2004) also favour this model. However, the situation may not be the same in other species.
In pea, for instance, early studies suggested that starch degradation is mainly phosphorolytic.
Indeed, pea chloroplasts do not contain significant activities of -amylase or -amylase, but 
do contain sufficient starch phosphorylase activity to mediate the observed rate of starch
degradation (Stitt et al., 1978).
Remarkably little is known to date about the metabolism of starch in legume species other
than pea, and its function in biological processes such as the accumulation of reserves in
seeds, the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen via symbiosis with rhizobial bacteria, or
perenniality and vegetative re-growth. These agronomically important traits are the subjects
of the following paragraphs together with an introduction on the importance of legumes in
agriculture and the species developed as model legumes.
1.7. Legumes and model legumes
1.7.1. The importance of legumes in agriculture
The legume family (Fabaceae or Leguminosae) is the third-largest family of flowering
plants (Angiosperms), comprising approximately 700 genera and around 18 000 species
(Doyle and Luckow, 2003). Legumes grow in a wide range of habitats and show
extraordinary diversity (Doyle and Luckow, 2003). They possess many characteristics of
agronomic importance, making them the second most agriculturally important group after
the grass family. Firstly, legume seeds represent an important source of protein and oil both
for human food and livestock feed. Major protein-rich legume crop seeds for human
Chapter 1: General introduction
consumption are common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), chickpea (Cicer arietimum) and pea
(Pisum sativum), while those grown for their high oil content are mainly soybean (Glycine
max) and peanut (Arachis hypogea). Furthermore, legumes are also grown as forage crops
for animal feed (Singh et al., 2007). This includes species like alfalfa (Medicago sativa),
clover (Trifolium pratense), and birds-foot trefoil (Lotus corniculatus). Hence, legumes
comprise some of the most agriculturally important crops and account for about a third of the
worlds primary crop production (Graham and Vance, 2003). Moreover, legumes are also
increasingly recognised as a source of valuable secondary compounds, some of which have
health promoting effect (e.g. isoflavones; Dixon and Sumner, 2003). Lastly, because of their
capacity for phosphorus and symbiotic nitrogen fixation (see section 1.8), legumes provide
an opportunity to develop more sustainable agricultural systems by providing a free and
renewable source of phosphate and nitrogen, thus reducing the need of fertilizers. Given their
conservative strategy of growth, perennial legume crops are of current and potential
agronomic importance for forage, grain production and the production of biofuels.
1.7.2. Lotus japonicus as model system
Although A. thaliana represents a powerful plant model because of its characteristics and
the numerous tools and facilities developed for its analysis, it does not represent a suitable
system for studying all physiological and developmental processes exhibited within the plant
kingdom. This includes legume-specific processes such as the fixation of nitrogen via
symbiosis with rhizobia.
Studies on legume genomics first focused on the species of agronomic importance (e.g.
pea, bean and soybean). However, many of their characteristics (e.g. large genome size,
tetraploidy, transformation and regeneration difficulties) limited the use of these species as
experimental systems and pointed out the need for the development of a model legume plant.
In fact, not one, but two legume species: Lotus japonicus and Medicago truncatula have
been chosen and developed as model systems. Both species exhibit desired characteristics for
genetic and genomic analyses, including a relatively small genome (450-500Mbp; only three
to four times that of A. thaliana), a diploid and autogamous nature, as well as a relatively
short generation time and a susceptibility to Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Kuchuk et al.,
1990; Handberg and Stougaard, 1992). The impetus for the development of these two models
was justified solely for the study of the rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Symbiotic nitrogen
fixation by rhizobia in legumes take place in specialised organs called root nodules. Nodules
of L. japonicus and M. truncatula represent the two classes of nodule ontogeny, determinate
and indeterminate development, respectively (Brewin, 1991). In addition, the sequencing of
these two legume genomes provides a unique opportunity for synteny comparisons (Cannon
Chapter 1: General introduction
et al., 2006; Sato and Tabata, 2006; Gepts et al., 2005; Young et al., 2005). These two model
legumes have benefited, over the past few years, from the development of a wide range of
genetic and genomics resources, a summary of which is presented below with a particular
focus given on L. japonicus.
L. japonicus is a temperate perennial species native to Japan, Korea and China that belongs
to the genus Lotus. This genus is large and extremely diverse (Figure 5), comprising about
200 species distributed worldwide (Arambarri, 2000a and b) and found in a broad range of
habitats. Most of these species are grow in temperate regions although there are also
subtropical and tropical species. These species have been divided into two classes according
to their origin of diversity: the old world species that occurs in the Mediterranean region,
including part of Europe, Africa and western Asia, and the new world species, native from
western North America (Arambarri et al., 2000a and b). These species are highly
polymorphic and vary for numerous genotypic traits (e.g. ploidy, number of chromosomes)
and phenotypic characters such as growth habit (annuality versus perenniality), reproduction
type (self-fertility), and flowering time. Among the genus Lotus, three species: L.
corniculatus (broadleaf birds-foot trefoil), L. glaber (also called L. tenuis, narrowleaf
trefoil) and L. uliginosus (greater birds-foot trefoil) are commonly used in agriculture for
pasture and forage.
L. japonicus is a self-fertile, diploid species with a relatively small genome (472 Mb)
consisting of six pairs of chromosomes (Jiang et al., 1997; Sato et al., 2008). Genomics in
this species was initiated in 1999 with a collection of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) and
followed in 2000 by the start of the sequencing of its genome (ecotype Miyakojima, MG-20)
using a whole-genome shotgun sequencing approach in combination with BAC end
sequencing (Sato et al., 2008). To date, genome sequences of about 67% of the genome (315
Mb) likely to cover 93.1% of the gene space have been determined (Sato et al., 2008).
Moreover, as of May 2009, a total of 192,409 L. japonicus ESTs derived from a variety of
organs have been generated and clustered into 20,996 unique sequences (from DCFI Gene
Index of L. japonicus; http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/plant.html). These ESTs have
been used in several transcriptome analyses (Asamizu et al., 2004). Information generated by
the Lotus genome and cDNA sequencing projects are available on public databases and at
the following website: http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html. In addition to the
accumulation of ESTs and genome sequences, research on L. japonicus also benefits from
the development of a wide range of resources, including transcriptomic, metabolomic, and
functional genomic tools (see section 4.1.3 for a detailed description of the functional
genomic resources available, and the following publications for a review of all the omics
tools developed for legume research: Udvardi et al., 2005; Sato et al., 2006; Varshney et al.,
2009). As for genetic analyses, three high-density genetic linkage maps have been
Chapter 1: General introduction
established, two are inter-specific linkage maps based on a L. japonicus x L filicaulis cross
and a L. japonicus x L burtii cross, while the third is based on an intra-specific cross between
the two most divergent accessions of Lotus japonicus: Gifu (B-129) and Miyakojima (MG-
20) (Hayashi et al., 2001; Kawaguchi et al., 2001; Sandal et al., 2002).
Lastly, since L. japonicus has adapted to a variety of environmental conditions, it is
thought to possess a broad range of genetic variation. This natural variation could be used to
investigate potential traits of agronomic importance (e.g. plant height, seed yield, cold
tolerance) by Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) mapping. Thus far, 108 wild accessions of L.
japonicus have been collected across the whole of the Japanese archipelago. A list of
ecotypes with phenotypic data as well as information on location and climate are available
from Legume base (http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/lotusjaponicus/index_e.html). Available
also for natural variation and QTL analysis are recombinant inbred lines (RILs) between
Gifu and MG-20. These lines have already proved useful in several studies (Sandal et al.,
2006; Gondo et al., 2007).
Figure 5. Illustration of the diversity of inflorescences in species of the genus Lotus.
Top row, right to left: L. alpinus, L. berthelotii, L. nevadensis. Middle row: L. scoparius, L. oblongifolius,
L. creticus. Bottom row: L formosissimus, L. corniculus, L. maritimus, L. uliginosus.
Chapter 1: General introduction
1.8. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation
Nitrogen and phosphate availabilities constitute two major limitations to plant growth. In
order to facilitate the uptake of these nutrients, many species have elaborated symbiotic
interactions with microbial partners. Most legume species possess the capacity to form such
interactions with two microbial partners: nitrogen-fixing rhizobial bacteria and phosphorus-
fixing mycorrhizal fungi. It has been estimated than over 80% of all the land plants are able
to form mycorrhizal symbiosis (Morgan et al., 2005), a symbiosis thought to be ancient
(Oldroyd and Downie, 2004). In contrast, symbiotic nitrogen fixation with the gram-negative
soil bacterium rhizobium has evolved more recently (Oldroyd and Downie, 2004) and is
found in nearly all species (90%) belonging to the legume family. These two symbioses
allow legumes to grow in soil low in phosphate and nitrogen without the need to add
fertilizers, thus making them ideal crops for sustainable agriculture. In contrast, in well-
fertilised soil in which nitrogen is readily available, these symbioses may reduce plant
growth rather than promote it due to the high symbiont demand for carbon (Morgan et al.,
2005). The nitrogen-fixing bacteria provide the plant with nitrogen in the form of
ammonium, whereas the mychorrhizal fungus aids in the uptake of phosphate. In exchange,
the host plant assures a supply of carbohydrate to the symbiont. Such processes involve
complex interactions between the two symbiotic partners. The process of symbiotic nitrogen
fixation in legumes is presented below.
The fixation of atmospheric nitrogen (N2) consists in its reduction into ammonium (NH4
by the nitrogenase enzyme complex which is found in rhizobia. The reaction catalyzed by
the nitrogenase is as follow: N2 + 8 H+ + 8 e + 16 ATP  2 NH3 + H2 + 16 ADP + 16 Pi 
To fix the nitrogen, legumes plants have adapted to live in a symbiotic relationship, and a
special root organ, the nodule, has evolved to allow nitrogenase function since this enzyme
requires an environment very low in oxygen and very high in ATP. The generation of ATP,
however, requires a high flux of oxygen. Nodules house the nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and
surround them with an oxygen diffusion barrier as well as providing a high amount of
oxygen which is bound to a protein called leghemoglobin. The establishment of this
nitrogen-fixing symbiosis is a complex mechanism that requires a) the intracellular infection
of the host plant cells by the bacterium, b) the development (organogenesis) of the nodules,
and c) the fixation of nitrogen per se. As mentioned above (in section 1.7.2) two type of
nodule organogenesis exist depending of the legume species: determinate (e.g. in Lotus,
soybean, common bean) and indeterminate (e.g. in Medicago, pea, and clover).
First, signals between the rhizobia and the plant are needed in order to initiate the
development of the nodules: flavonoid and isoflavonoid signalling molecules are released by
the plant that attract the rhizobia on the plant root hair surface and induce the secretion of
bacterial molecules (lipochitin oligosaccharides) known as Nod factors. The structure of
Chapter 1: General introduction
these Nod factors determines the host specificity (Morgan et al., 2005). Their recognition by
the plant receptors allow the infection to occur. This step is known to involve a rapid influx
and oscillation of Ca
in the cytosol of the root hair cells. This so-called Ca
spiking then
leads to the cessation of tip growth, the curling of the root hair, and the formation of tubular
structures: the infection threads, which allow penetration of the bacteria into the root tissue.
At the same time, inner (in indeterminate nodules) or outer (in determinate) cortical cells are
activated, de-differentiate, and divide. Their successive divisions lead to the formation of a
nodule primordium. The infection threads grow towards the primordium, and when they
reach it, rhizobia are released into the cytoplasm of their cells. These intracellular rhizobia
differentiate into bacteroids. Simultaneously, a number of primordium cells generate a
meristem. In determinate nodules, cell expansion of a transient meristematic region
determines the nodule growth. In contrast, in indeterminate nodules, this meristem is
persistent, allowing continued nodule growth. The resulting mature symbiotic organ is
composed of different zones, along a differentiation gradient, and of a mix of uninfected and
infected cells. The uninfected cells contain a large number of amyloplasts while the infected
cells are densely packed with nitrogen-fixing bacteroids and contain small vacuoles
(Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 1997; Hossain et al., 2006).
Nitrogen fixation is dependant of carbon supply to the bacteroids. Sucrose is transported
from the shoot of the plant host to the infected cells of the nodules where it is further
metabolised to furnish the bacteroids with decarboxylic acids (presumed to be malate) for
their respiration, to fuel the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia by the nitrogenase enzymes,
and provide carbon skeletons for the subsequent assimilation of ammonia into amino acids
by the plant (Gordon et al., 1995; Galvez et al., 2005). Thus the net carbon flux from the
plants phloem tissue to the bacteroids results in a net nitrogen flux in the opposite direction,
from the bacteroids to the xylem tissue of the plant (Schulze et al., 2004).
Because this nitrogen fixation process is so energetically expensive and consumes carbon,
nodule formation only occurs when it is beneficial for the growth of the plant, under
nitrogen-limiting conditions. Furthermore, not all plant cells are invaded by bacteria. This
suggests that the plant is able to restrict the invasion by rhizobia. This process by which the
plant avoids excessive nodulation and is able to inhibit the emergence of further nodules is
called autoregulation of nodulation (Magori and Kawaguchi, 2009).
1.9. Legume seed development and filling
The success of germination and early plant growth is in large part determined by the
physiological and biochemical characteristics of the mature seed. Of central importance for
Chapter 1: General introduction
this success are the reserves that are stored in the seed to be used as source of energy during
the heterotrophic growth phase of germination and early seedling growth. In addition to their
central position in the life cycle of higher plants, seeds such as those of grain legumes and
cereals crops are major food sources. In cereal grains, the major storage tissue is the
endosperm while in legumes seeds, the principal organs of reserves storage are the
embryonic cotyledons.
The major components of legume seeds are proteins (referred to as storage proteins),
carbohydrates (mainly starch), and lipids (often triacylglycerols). Their levels vary between
species. The protein content in mature seeds of Lotus and soybean is about 40% of the dry
weight (Gallardo et al., 2008; Dam et al, 2009) while the protein content in Medicago ranges
between 30 and 40% depending of the genotypes (Djemel et al., 2005). Seeds of pea exhibit
a lower protein content (about 20 to 25%). In this species, the major constituent is starch
(accounting for up to 50% of the dry weight). The starch content in mature seeds of Lotus,
soybean and Medicago is very low (less than 1%). This is because starch in seeds of these
species is either not synthesised in large amounts, or is completely degraded during seed
maturation, probably to provide carbon skeletons for the synthesis of other compounds
(Gallardo et al., 2008). Lipids in Lotus constitute 7% of the mature seed dry weight while the
lipid content in pea is between approximately 1.5 and 3%. In contrast, the lipid content in
soybean can be higher than 20% (Dam et al., 2009).
Seed development and maturation in legumes consists of three different phases:
histodifferentiation (or cell division phase; also referred as pre-storage phase), seed filling
(or enlargement phase; also named storage phase), and desiccation. The histodifferentiation
phase is characterised by cell division. Cell divisions are first confined to the endosperm and
seed coat, and then concern the embryo. During the seed-filling phase, the growth of the
embryo occurs by cell enlargement. This phase is associated with the synthesis and
accumulation of reserves (Munier-Jolain and Salon, 2003).
During the pre-storage phase, nutrients coming from the phloem are downloaded into the
seed-coat. A transient accumulation of protein and starch occurs in this tissue which controls
the supply of nutrient to the embryo, thus regulating the cell division phase (Panitz et al.,
1995). During this phase, high activities of seed-coat associated acid invertases play an
important role by creating a high hexose environment that promotes the embryo cell division
(Weber et al., 2005). Indeed, flow of sucrose from the phloem has been specifically
implicated, and the acid invertase activity and hexose concentration in the apoplast have
been shown to be positively correlated with the final cell number of the embryo (Munier-
Jolain and Salon, 2003).
With the cessation of cell division, the embryo enters a transition phase during which it
develops from a meristem-like structure into a highly differentiated storage organ.
Chapter 1: General introduction
Simultaneously, it also becomes green and photosynthetically active. As an adaptation to the
low oxygen environment of the maturing embryos, respiration decreases and the energy state
increases (Borisjuk et al., 2003 and 2004). This transition is accompanied by a switch from a
hexose-based metabolism controlled by invertases, to a sucrose-based metabolism controlled
by sucrose synthase activity (Weber et al., 1995; Sturm et al., 1999). This differentiation
process is induced by the changing oxygen/energy conditions and by a high rate of sucrose
transport into the embryo that also promotes storage activities (Rosche et al., 2002). Indeed,
in seeds, as in other plant organs and tissues, sucrose has a dual function, both as a nutrient
sugar and as a signalling molecule. In legume seeds, sucrose acts on transcriptional and post-
translational levels to affect carbon fluxes and trigger storage-associated processes
(Smeekens et al., 2000; Koch et al., 2004). Other factors including the hormone abscisic acid
(ABA) and SnRK1 kinases have been shown to be involved in this regulatory network
controlling seed differentiation (Weber et al., 2005).
During the storage phase, nutrients continue to be transported to the embryo where they
are metabolised into storage compounds. Sucrose synthase activity is thus associated with
starch synthesis in the embryo (Djardin et al., 1997). Besides, sucrose regulates the activity
of several enzymes involved in reserve accumulation. Notably, sucrose induces the up-
regulation of the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC; EC 4.1.1.31) whose
activity correlates with seed protein content (Sugimoto et al., 1989; Rolletschek et al., 2004;
Weber et al., 2005).
Proteins involved in cell division are abundant during the early stages of seed
development. Their levels then decrease during seed filling, prior the accumulation of the
major storage proteins (Gallardo et al., 2003). In legumes, the storage proteins consist for
large part of globulins. There are two main groups of globulins that have been classified
depending of their sedimentation coefficient: legumins and vicilins. Accumulation of these
storage proteins is highly regulated by the supply of nutrients (Golombek et al., 2001). In
addition, the energy state could also control the partitioning of assimilates into the different
storage products. Energy demand is lowest for starch, intermediate for proteins, and highest
for lipids. In Vicia embryos, for instance, protein accumulation is initiated in regions rich in
ATP while starch is first detected in region with lower ATP content. This results in the
pattern of starch accumulation being inversely oriented to that of the storage protein legumin
during the transition phase (Borisjuk et al., 2003).
Seed development depends on interactions between the plant and the seed, and on
interactions between the genotype and the environment of the plant. As presented above, the
first phase (histodifferenciation) seems to be maternally controlled (Weber et al., 2005). Cell
division rate varies according to the supply of carbon and nitrogen (Munier-Jolain and Salon,
2003). Evidence suggests that hormones and environmental factors may also play a role in
Chapter 1: General introduction
the control of this mitotic activity in the seed (Ozga et al., 2002). However, this first phase
also seems to depend of the embryo genotype (Domoney et al., 2006). Switch from the
maternal tissues to the filial tissues (embryo) control during the transition phase is marked
by the initiation of a nutrient uptake system based on the formation of transfer cells, an
increased sucrose uptake, and the generation of embryonic sink strength (Weber et al.,
2005). Carbon supplied during the second phase (seed filling) seems to derive mainly from
recent photosynthate rather than from remobilized carbon, while the supply of nitrogen to
the seed depends both upon N2 fixation and the retrieval of nitrogen from the soil (Domoney
et al., 2006).
Attempts have been made to improve the nutritional quality of legume seeds because of
their importance in our diet and that of other animals. For instance, an increase of seed
protein content while maintaining seed yield is a target of pea breeding (Gallardo et al.,
2008). Such a goal may be achieved by increasing nitrogen remobilization or uptake by the
plant, or by modifying the embryonic control of nutrient uptake and metabolism. This
strategy has already been employed with success, for example, in Vicia (Rolletschek et al.,
2004). Seed-specific expression of a bacterial PEPC in this legume species induced a shift of
metabolic fluxes from sugars and starch into organic acids and free amino acids that resulted
in an increased protein content with no consequence on seed yield (the decreased number of
seed per pod found in the transgenic plants was compensated by an increase in seed dry
weight; Rolletschek et al., 2004). Furthermore, legume seeds also contain a certain number
of undesirable and antinutritional components that are the target of research and breeding
programs aiming at impoving their nutritional quality (Wang et al., 2003).
1.10. Perenniality and vegetative re-growth
1.10.1. Annuality versus Perenniality
Annual plants undergo their entire life cycle from seed to seed within a single growing
season. That is to say, all the different part of the plant (roots, stems and leaves) die
annually, and only the seed bridges the gap between one generation and the next. In contrast,
plants that are able to persist for several growing seasons are called perennials. These plants
go back to vegetative growth following seed production, and are able to grow back each year
following overwintering, for instance, through the persistence of vegetative organs such as
roots, rhizomes, stolons, or tubers. A third class of plants, which require two years to
complete their life cycle, are called biennials. The flowering of these plants is delayed by a
requirement for winter vernalisation. Both annual and biennial plants are monocarpic.
Chapter 1: General introduction
Monocarpic plants die following flowering and seed setting. They are often, but not
necessarily short lived; there are also some monocarpic perennials. Most perennials,
however, are polycarpic: flowering and seed production occurs many times during their life
time, and over many years, interspersed by period of vegetative growth (Munn-Bosch,
2007). In addition, some plants can behave as an annual or a perennial depending of local
climatic and geographic growth conditions. Lastly, perennial plants can be classified into
three classes, depending on their growth habit: woody (trees and shrubs), creeping (strategy
based on asexual, clonal reproduction), and herbaceous, which vegetative growth is thought
to result from the activity of apical meristems sustained by nutrients accumulated in storage
organs (Munn-Bosch, 2007). Discussion on the perenniality trait in the following section
and elsewhere in the text concerns this third class of herbaceous, polycarpic perennial plant
species versus their annual counterparts.
1.10.2. Majors determinants of perenniality
How perennials are able to undergo successive cycles of vegetative growth and flowering
that are synchronized to the changing seasons has not been extensively studied and is not yet
fully understood. In the past, meristem determinacy and programmed cell death have been
suggested to be the two major determinants of perenniality (Thomas et al., 2000). The
authors also suggested that this important difference between annual and perennial growth
was likely to result from relatively minor changes in the relationship between genes involved
in apical meristem determinacy on the one hand, and programmed senescence and cell death
processes on the other, hence the proposed quantitative nature of this trait. In 2002, Battey
and Tooke hypothesized that the transition to flowering and the molecular mechanism
controlling it could be another determinant factor of perenniality. Their study highlighted
several important points. First, that meristem determinacy is an important feature of
flowering in many annual species. Conversely, in perennials, the ability to preserve active
axillary meristems (ie meristem indeterminancy) past the reproduction period is crucial to
the initatiation of another period of outgrowth (also termed post-sexual cycle re-growth;
Lammer et al., 2004). Hence, failure to impose determinacy in annual species could be the
basis for perennial growth. In addition, flowering and senescence processes are linked in
annuals, the senescence being triggered by seed setting. Conversely, two keys features of
perennial growth are the conservation of the vegetative meristem during and past the
flowering phase, and the separation of flowering from senescence. Perennials also share two
other features: a tendency for a delay between flower initiation and emergence, and the
regulation of the duration of flowering (Battey and Tooke, 2002). Lastly, perennials also
distinguish themselves from monocarpic annual plants by their ability to suspend growth
Chapter 1: General introduction
during a dormant period and then resume it, often seasonally, in reponse to change in
environmental conditions (e.g. cold and daylength; Rohde and Bhalerao, 2007). Despite
these important differences between annual and perennial species, Battey and Tooke (2002)
suggested that the basis of flowering control could be similar between them, and that the life-
form was likely to result from quantitative relationships between genes involved in
vegetative growth, flowering and senescence. Such a hypothesis is supported by the fact that
a switch between an annual and biennial strategy can be accounted for the expression level
of a single gene involved in the control of flowering time (Michaels and Amasino, 2000).
Further, the fact that either of the two strategies can be found among closely related plant
species or varieties (e.g. in wheat; Cox et al., 2006) tends to support this idea that a change
between these life forms might not require major genetic innovation.
This crucial importance of meristem determinacy and floral transition in determining the
annual or perennial growth status of the plant has since been confirmed by three recent and
very interesting studies in tomato and A. thaliana (Shalit et al., 2009; Melzer et al., 2008;
Wang et al., 2009). Results of these studies showed that change in the expression of only a
few genes involved in the control of flowering time was able to affect determinacy of all
meristems, and confer phenotypes common to the polycarpic perennial lifestyle to a
monocarpic annual species that included limitation of the duration of flowering, increased
longevity, and even induction of secondary growth reminiscent of that found in woody
perennial species.
Evidence suggests that the partitioning of the plant resources may also be an important
determinant of the perenniality trait. In general, annual species and fast-growing species tend
to maximize resource acquisition, whereas perennials and slow-growing species rather
maximize the conservation of resources (Aerts and Chapin, 2000). This theory is supported
by studies on leaves comparing annual with perennial species. Indeed, annuals are
characterized by leaf traits that allow the acquisition of a high level of carbon while
perennial species possess leaf characteristics linked to persistence and defence (Garnier and
Laurent, 1994). Comparison of annual and perennial species also suggests that they differ in
their senescence process, both in term of their intrinsic rate of leaf senescence, with
perennials being less sensitive to senescence signals that closely-related annuals species
(Thomas and Howarth, 2000), and at the whole-plant level (Munn-Bosch, 2008). Further, it
may be hypothesised that the ability of the plants to store nutrient resources in perennial
organs and remobilize them may also play an important role for their perennial lifestyle,
especially in determining their capacity for vigorous re-growth.
Resources in annual plants are thought to be for the most part directed to reproduction,
whereas in perennials, the resources are believed to be also directed to persistent, storage
organs. Thus, the annual strategy can be explained as a way of increasing the number of
Chapter 1: General introduction
progeny surviving, since higher number of viable progeny is expected to be produced by a
redistribution of the nutrients from the plant to the seed during senescence. This strategy may
represent a long term advantage by allowing a higher rate of genetic diversity. Conversely,
the perennial strategy may represent a more effective strategy, particularly in certain
unfavourable and highly competitive environments where the plants have to compete with
other organisms for space, light and a limited amount of nutrients. In such conditions, the
fact that perennials re-grow from structures and resources that have survived through the
winter may represents a benefit over their annual relatives as this strategy potentially allows
them to become larger, stronger and thus more competitive from one year to the next.
1.11. Research objectives
The aim of this work was to increase our understanding of the metabolism of transitory and
stored starch in legumes, and investigate its role in perenniality and re-growth, symbiotic
nitrogen fixation, and seed development, three traits of agronomic importance in legumes. L.
japonicus represents an excellent model to study this since it is a perennial and temperate
legume species as well as a close relative of several species used as forage crops, and is able
to nodulate. Furthermore, L. japonicus also benefits from the recent development of many
genomic resources.
First, I have performed a series of bioinformatic analyses aiming at characterising the
metabolism of starch in L. japonicus. These included detailed gene sequence, phylogenetic
and gene expression analyses of the set of genes involved in starch synthesis and degradation
in this species. In addition, I also carried out some biochemical assays designed to establish
the diurnal pattern of starch accumulation and degradation in source leaves of MG-20 and
Gifu, two ecotypes widely used for research in L. japonicus. I extended this analysis to other
organs and tissues, and throughout development. Results of these analyses can be found in
Chapter 3. In this chapter, the similarities and differences found between the pathway of
starch metabolism in A. thaliana and in other plants species are also discussed.
Prior the start of this PhD research project, a collection of putative mutants altered in starch
synthesis and degradation had been established using forward and reverse genetic screens on
an EMS-mutagenised population of L. japonicus. In Chapter 4, I will present the isolation of
these mutants, the identification of the mutations in the forward screened mutants, and the
generation of additional mutants via TILLING. In the next Chapter (Chapter 5), I will
describe the results of genetic, biochemical, and physiological analyses I performed on them.
In particular, I will focus on the new information gained from the molecular and phenotyping
Chapter 1: General introduction
analysis of the mutants. This functional characterisation provided insights into the nature of
the pathway and the importance of starch for several aspects of plant growth and
development and symbiotic nitrogen fixation in L. japonicus. Results from structure-function
relationship analysis of key enzymes of the starch metabolism pathway are also presented in
this chapter.
I used both this collection of starch metabolism mutants together with a suite of natural
genetic variants of the genus Lotus to test the hypothesis that the partitioning of carbon as
starch in roots is important for vegetative re-growth in perennial species. Evidence gained
from this analysis supports an important role played by root starch in determining the
capacity of perennial Lotus plants to re-grow following cutting-back. Results of this analysis
are presented in Chapter 6.
Finally, I will discuss the comprehensive and unique collection of L. japonicus starch
metabolism mutants established in this study and how my work has contributed to a deeper
understanding of the pathways of starch metabolism and its regulation, and the importance
of carbon partitioning for growth and development in perennial, nitrogen-fixing legume
species.
CHAPTER 2
Materials and Methods
Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything new
Albert Einstein
CHAPTER 2: Materials and Methods
2.1. Plant material, rhizobial strain, and growth conditions
2.1.1. Plant ecotypes, species, and rhizobial strain
L. japonicus (Regel) K. Larsen accessions (aka ecotypes) Gifu (B-129) and Miyakojima
(MG-20) were used as wild types (WT) for experimental analyses. All forward and reverse
genetic mutants used in this study were generated in Gifu. Seeds of this accession were
treated with ethylmethane-sulphonate (EMS) which resulted in a population of plants with
random point mutations (Perry et al., 2003 and 2009). This population was used both for
TILLING (Targeted Induced Local Lesions In Genomes; McCallum et al., 2000) and
forward genetic screens. The rhizobium Mesorhizobium loti Tono strain was used to
inoculate L. japonicus plants for acetylene reduction assays (see section 2.14).
Several species of the genus Lotus, were also used in this study. Seeds of the wild
accessions and the RI lines were ordered from the NBRP (National BioResource Project;
http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/bean/lotusjaponicus/top/top.jsp). Annual and perennial species
of Lotus were kindly donated by the Germplasm Resource Information Network (GRIN;
http://www.ars-grin.gov/) of the USDA/ARS (United States Department of
Agriculture/Agriculture Research Service). A list of the plant species and ecotypes used in
this study can be found in Table 1. For some experiments, plants of Arabidopsis thaliana
ecotype Columbia (Col) were used as comparators. Some analyses were also performed on a
set of annual and perennial species of A. thaliana obtained from TAIR (http://www.A.
thaliana.org/; Table 1)
2.1.2. Crossing and plant generation used for analyses
Homozygous mutants in Gifu background, which had been selected from the EMS
mutagenesis screen, were out-crossed, and then subsequently back-crossed at least once to
the ecotype MG-20. These crosses needed to be carried out to reduce the number of
background mutations generated by EMS, and eliminate their possible effects on the
phenotype and establish a mapping population for the identification of the forward screen
mutations. In a few cases where the results of rough mapping (see section 2.9.2) revealed
that the mutations lay in a region of genome translocation between the two parents Gifu and
MG-20 (Kawaguchi et al., 2005), Lotus burtii rather than MG-20 was used as crossing
partner.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 1A
Scientific name and synonyms USDA ID Life form
Lotus angustissimus PI 368894 annual
Lotus arabicus PI 214109 annual
Lotus arenarius PI 319020 annual
Lotus burtii n/a perennial
Lotus collinus PI 641351 annual
Lotus conimbricensis PI 308033 annual
Lotus corniculatus var. corniculatus (aka L. filicaulis) PI 464684 perennial
Lotus denticulatus PI 236862 annual
Lotus edulis PI 244281 annual
Lotus gebelia PI 464824 perennial
Lotus glinoides PI 246736 annual
Lotus halophilus (aka L. pusillus) PI 300237 annual
Lotus japonicus, ecotype B-129 (aka Gifu) n/a perennial
Lotus japonicus, ecotype MG-20 (aka Miyakogusa) n/a perennial
Lotus mearnsii PI 226275 perennial
Lotus ornithopodioides PI 442514 annual
Lotus palustris (aka L. lamprocarpus) PI 311427 perennial
Lotus parviflorus (aka L. hispidus) PI 415815 annual
Lotus peregrinus (aka L. carmeli) PI 368905 annual
Lotus subbiflorus (aka L. hispidus) PI 631785 annual
Lotus tenuis (aka L. glaber) PI 302922 perennial
Lotus uliginosus (aka L. pedunculatus) W 6 20479 perennial
Lotus unifoliolatus (aka L. purshianus; L. americanus) PI 338644 perennial
Lotus weilleri PI 196332 annual
Table 1B
Species name USDA ID Life form
Medicago arabica PI 495200 Perennial
Medicago cancellata PI 440491 Annual
Medicago carstiensis PI 641414 Annual
Medicago cretacea PI 641510 Perennial
Medicago heyniana PI 537136 Perennial
Medicago hybrida PI 538998 Annual
Medicago marina PI 516711 Annual
Medicago muricoleptis PI 495401 Perennial
Medicago noeana PI 495407 Perennial
Medicago papillosa PI 464704 Annual
Medicago pironae PI 253450 Annual
Medicago polymorpha var. polymorpha PI 206695 Perennial
Medicago praecox PI 495434 Perennial
Medicago prostrata PI 577446 Annual
Medicago sativa subsp. falcata PI 631682 Annual
Medicago sativa subsp. glomerata PI 641405 Annual
Medicago sativa subsp. sativa PI 536533 Annual
Medicago sauvagei PI 499155 Perennial
Medicago saxatilis W 6 5898 Annual
Medicago secundiflora PI 537238 Perennial
Medicago soleirolii PI 537242 Perennial
Medicago suffruticosa PI 304529 Annual
Medicago tenoreana PI 499161 Perennial
Medicago truncatula PI 384648 Perennial
Table 1C
Species name NASC stock code Life form
Arabidopsis arenosa (Care-1) N3901 Perennial
Arabidopsis ly rata subsp. lyrata N22696 Perennial
Arabidopsis ly rata subsp. petraea N3219 Perennial
Arabidopsis suecica (Sue1) N22505 Perennial
Arabidopsis halleri N9852 Perennial
Arabidopsis thaliana, ecotype Columbia (Col0) n/a Annual
Arabidopsis thaliana, ecotype Landsberg erecta (Ler) n/a Annual
Arabidopsis korshinskyi (Olimarabidopsis cabulica) N4653 Annual
Capsella rubella N22697 Annual
Olimarabidops is pumila N3700 Annual
Table 1. List of Lotus, Arabidopsis, and Medicago species and ecotypes mentioned in this study.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 1. List of Lotus, Arabidopsis, and Medicago species and ecotypes mentioned in this study.
Continued.
Lotus and Arabidopsis species and ecotypes listed here were analysed in this study; Medicago species
were selected for further analysis on the importance of carbon allocation for perenniality and re-growth.
Seeds of all the species of the Lotus and Medicago genus (Table 1A and 1B, respectively) were
ordered from the USDA GRIN germplasm (http://www.ars-grin.gov/) at the exception of L. burtii and L.
japonicus, ecotype Gifu and MG-20 that were obtained from the John Innes Centres germplasm
collections. The life form information corresponds to the one given by the USDA database. Seeds of all
the Arabidopsis species (Table 1C) were ordered from the TAIR database (http://www.A. thaliana.org/)
at the exception of seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana, ecotypes Col0 and Ler that were from Alison Smith's
laboratory (John Innes Centre). Information on the life form of these species was obtained from Al-
Shehbaz and OKane (2002) and Clauss and Koch (2006).
Crossings were performed as described in Jiang and Gresshoff (1997), using the
homozygous mutant as male parent (i.e. pollen donor; in Gifu background for first out-
cross), and MG-20 WT as female parent unless otherwise indicated. When forward genetic
mutants were crossed for the first time with MG-20 (referred to as out-cross, designed as
B1), it was possible to confirm that the F1 plant resulted from a true cross by marker
analysis. In case of the TILLING reverse genetic mutants, the hybrid nature of the F1, and
therefore its heterozygosity for the mutation, could be confirmed by genotyping (see section
2.6.7). In both cases, seeds from crossed plants (B1F1) were collected, sown, and the
corresponding F2 segregating population screened for the mutant phenotype. There were two
possibilities: either the mutation responsible for the mutant phenotype was known (as for the
mutants from TILLING, and the forward genetic mutants for which the mutation had been
identified), or it was yet not known (uncharacterised mutants isolated from forward screens).
In the first case (mutation known), the F2 population could be genotyped for the mutation as
well as phenotyped, and homozygous and heterozygous plants for the mutant and WT alleles
were isolated, self-fertilised, and their seeds (F3 generation) harvested. Both the
homozygous mutants and their WT segregants (or their progeny) were used for most
analyses, to allow more accurate mutant versus WT comparison. The number of background
mutations will be similar between the two, as will be the genome background. Mutants were
generally back-crossed several times (see Chapter 4). The same procedure was carried out
for the subsequent crosses (referred to as back-crosses, designated B2, B3, etc). In contrast,
when the back-crossings were performed on forward screen mutant lines for which the
mutation of interest was unknown, the hybrid nature of the F1 could only be assessed by
analyzing the phenotype of their progeny (i.e. segregation for mutant phenotype in the F2).
In this case, only homozygous mutants - based on the phenotype  were kept and allowed to
self-fertilize. The subsequent offspring (generally F3 or F4) were used for analysis with the
two WT parents, MG-20 and Gifu as controls. The number of back-crosses and generation of
the plants used in each experiment are stated in the text. Lastly, crosses between mutants of
several of the mutant lines were also performed for complementation analyses, (aka allelism
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
tests) to determine whether mutations responsible for the phenotypes of independent mutant
lines were carried by the same locus (no complementation will occurs and the F1 plants will
show the mutant phenotype) or by different loci (the WT phenotype will be restored in the
F1 plants).
2.1.3. Plant and bacteria growth conditions
Plants were grown with 12 h light, 12 h dark, or with 16 h light, 8 h dark either in a
greenhouse or in a controlled environment chamber or room (CER) as stated in the text. In
greenhouses, plants were grown with supplementary, artificial lighting (high pressure
sodium lamps) with a minimum light level at 200 mol quanta photosynthetically active
radiation (PAR) m
(supplemental lighting put for a period of 16 h, from 12 to 4 pm; from
September until April) or without supplemental lighting (referred to as natural light
conditions; from April until September). In the controlled environment chamber or room, the
humidity was 75% and the day/night temperature 22 C/18 C. Light intensity was ca. 200
mol quanta PAR m
in the controlled environment room (CER), and ca. 100 mol
quanta PAR m
in growth chamber (SANYO MLR-350 and -351; SANYO E&E Europe
B.V., Loughborough, UK).
For most experiments, and unless otherwise indicated in the text, plants were grown in F2
compost (Levington, Scotts Professional, Ipswich, UK). In a few cases, plants were grown in
a mixture of perlite:vermiculite (1:1) to allow easier harvesting of the root samples. When
this was the case, plants were fed twice a week with Hornum solution containing 5 mM
NH4NO3, 3 mM KNO3 (Handberg and Stougaard, 1992). For most experiments, seeds were
scarified with sand paper before sowing on compost. Once sown, seeds were covered with a
clear plastic propagator top that was removed after full emergence of the cotyledons. For
some experiments (for plant culture in vitro, germination capacity assay, or when resources
of seeds of a particular genotype were limited), seeds were scarified, sterilized with 10%
(v/v) bleach (containing 1% available chlorine), and incubated in sterile water overnight
(ON) at 4 C. These seeds were then germinated on water agar (15 g.L
Difco bacto-agar)
for three to seven days before transfer to compost or growth media.
Plants for acetylene reduction assay were transferred from compost to perlite:vermiculite
(1:1 v/v) after seven to eight weeks of growth, and fed twice a week with nitrogen-free
nutrient solution (Broughton and Dilworth, 1971). Roots of the plants were truncated at the
time of transfer to stimulate lateral root formation and aid the production of nodules upon
inoculation with Mesorhizobium loti strain Tono. These bacteria were grown on TY medium
(5 g.L
tryptone, 3 g.L
yeast extract, 10 mM CaCl2).
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.1.4. In vitro culture of pods
For in vitro culture of pods, peduncles carrying mature flowers were harvested, and the end
of the peduncle immediately immersed in distilled water (dH2O). Subsequent procedures
were carried out under aseptic conditions. The entire peduncles were surface sterilized with
10% (v/v) bleach (containing 1% available chlorine), and then rinsed repeatedly in sterile
water. The peduncles were re-cut at the end and inserted through a hole in the lid of a 50 mL
tube filled with autoclaved Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium (micro and macro elements
including vitamins, pH 5.8; Duchefa Bioechemie B.V., Haarlem, The Netherlands) with or
without 3% (w/v) sucrose, then transferred to a growth chamber with 16 h light, 8 h dark for
about four weeks.
2.2. Cutting-back experiments and biomass measurements
Cutting-back experiments were performed in order to mimic grazing and determine the
capacity for vegetative re-growth of natural and induced variants of Lotus for root starch
content. Unless otherwise indicated, these experiments were carried out on plants grown
from seeds in F2 compost (Levington, Scotts Professional, Ipswich, UK).and the cutting
back were performed on mature plants that were flowering and setting seeds. More details
about the developmental stage of the plants and the environmental growth conditions under
which they were grown for the cutting back experiments are given in the text and figure
legends of chapter 6. The shoot and root fresh weight and ratio were measured by cutting off
the shoot at 1 to 2 cm from the base of the stem. For plants that were allowed to re-grow,
shoots and leaves present at the base of the stem were removed. Fresh weight measurements
were performed immediately after harvest. The root system was weighed after being washed
with water to remove soil, and then blotted on absorbent paper to remove excess water.
Fresh weight measurements of the new shoot and root after re-growth (generally six weeks
post cutting) were performed the same way. For dry weight measurement, plant material was
placed into a glass beaker and dried in an oven (Qualivac, LTE Scientific Ltd., Oldham, UK)
for two to four days at 80 C until the weight was constant.
2.3. Pollen viability and germination assays
2.3.1. Cytological observation of pollen grains
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Pollen viability was assessed using two different dyes: 1% (w/v) acetocarmine (1 g
acetocarmine in 100 mL 45% acetic acid), and fluorescein diacetate (FDA; 2 g.mL
prepared by diluting 2 mg.mL
stock solution (in acetone) in 0.4 M mannitol solution as
described by Zhang et al. (2001) with a few minor modifications. In addition, pollen was
also stained with iodine (Lugols solution) to check the accumulation of starch (see section
2.4). Anthers were collected from flowers at anthesis and the pollen grains were released on
a glass slide by gently squashing the anthers with fine forceps. Pollen grains were covered
with the staining solution and a coverslip applied for observation under a microscope. Iodine
and acetocarmine stained pollen grains were observed and photographed with a Zeiss
Axioskop light microscope (Carl Zeiss Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, UK). Fluorescein stained
pollen grains were examined and imaged with a Leica DM 6000 microscope using a
fluorescent filter for green dyes (L5; exitation at 460-500 nm, and emission at 512-543 nm)
and a DFC420 digital camera (Leica Microsystems Ltd., Milton Keynes, UK).
2.3.2. In vitro pollen germination assay
In vitro germination of pollen grains was performed as described by Nashilevitz et al.
(2009) with some modifications. Flowers from at least three plants of each genotype were
harvested at anthesis. Three anthers per flower were removed and placed into a microfuge
tube containing 0.5 mL of germinating solution (10% sucrose, 2 mM boric acid, 2 mM
calcium nitrate, 2 mM magnesium sulfate, and 1 mM potassium nitrate). After shaking to
release the pollen grains, tubes were incubated at 25 C for 24 h in the dark. Germination
capacity was assessed at several time points by examining the germinating pollen grains
under a light microscope (Zeiss Axioskop). Germinating pollen was also stained with
acetocarmine, FDA, and iodine.
2.4. Iodine staining of plant tissues
Iodine staining was used to estimate the amount of starch present in different plant tissues
and genotypes. With the exception of embryos and seeds, iodine staining of all plant tissues
was performed as follows: pigments were removed by heating in 80% (v/v) ethanol for 30
min at 70 C before letting the tissue decolorise in contact of natural or artificial light for
several hours. When needed, several washes with 80% (v/v) ethanol were performed until
the plant tissue became completely white. Tissues were then covered with iodine (Lugols
solution) generally for 10-20 min. Stained tissues were washed once with water to remove
excess iodine prior to imaging. Stained tissues were observed with either a Leica MZ8
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
binocular or on a Zeiss Axioskop light microscope. Iodine staining of developing embryos
and mature seeds differed from this protocol in that the pigments were removed by
incubation in chloroform:ethanol:water (v:v:v; 5:5:1) prior to treatment with 80% ethanol.
Unless otherwise stated in the text, leaf samples of the mutant plants were harvested at the
end of the light period for mutants defective in starch synthesis, and at the end of an
extended dark period of up to 44 h for the mutants defective in starch degradation.
2.5. Microscopy of leaf starch granules
Sample embedding and sectioning for light microscopy (LM) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) were carried out by Sue Bunnewell (JIC, Norwich, UK). For each
genotype, one leaflet of a fully developed leaf from the top of plant was cut into pieces of
about 0.5 cm
, pooled with those of two other biological replicates, and placed in a fixation
solution of 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde in 0.05 M sodium cacodylate, pH 7.3. After vacuum
infiltration, the fixative was washed out by three successive 10 min washes in 0.05 M
sodium cacodylate before fixing in 1% (w/v) OsO4 for 1 h at room temperature (RT).
Samples were then washed three times for 10 min in dH2O, and then submitted to
dehydration series of ethanol solutions. Once dehydrated, the samples were gradually
infiltrated with LR White resin (London Resin Company, Reading, Berkshire) by successive
changes of resin:ethanol mixes over approximately 24 h at RT. Lastly, samples were
transferred into gelatine capsules filled with resin, and allowed to polymerise for 16 h at 60
C. Sections were prepared with a glass knife using a Reichert Ultramicrotome (Leica
Microsystems).
For LM, 0.5 m semi-thin sections were applied to glass slides, and stained with 0.5%
(w/v) toluidine blue in 0.5% (w/v) borax solution. Sections were subsequently stained with a
drop of Lugols solution then covered with a cover slip for observation and imaging using
either the Zeiss Axioskop light microscope or the Nikon Eclipse E800 fluorescent
microscope (Nikon Precision Europe GmbH, Livingston, Scotland). Micrographs with this
second microscope were captured with a Pixera Pro ES600 digital camera (Pixera Co., San
Jose, USA). Ultrathin sections of between 95 to 100 nm for TEM were prepared from the
same embedded material used to obtain the LM sections. These TEM sections were prepared
and imaged by Sue Bunnewell (JIC, Norwich, UK).
2.6. General molecular methods
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.6.1. Isolation of DNA
Genomic DNA was extracted with phenol:chloroform as follows: a few young leaves were
harvested on ice or dry ice in collection tubes (96-well plate, 1000 L-well; Qiagen Ltd.,
Surrey, UK) containing a tungsten carbide bead (Qiagen). After addition of 400 L of 200
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 250 mM NaCl, 25 mM EDTA, 0.5% w/v SDS pre-heated to 65 C,
they were homogenized in a mixer mill (Retsch MM300; Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany) for
2 min at 30 oscillations s
. The rack was turned 180 and the grinding repeated. After a 60
min incubation at 65 C, samples were centrifuged at 5000 g for 10 min and 300 L of
supernatants were treated with 200 L of phenol:chloroform:isoamyalcohol (v:v:v; 25:24:1),
pH 8.0. DNA was precipitated at -20 C for at least 60 min with 220 L isopropanol and 20
L 3 M sodium acetate (NaAc), pH 5.2, before centrifugation at 5000 g for 45 min. The
DNA pellet was washed with 200 L 70% (v/v), air dried, and re-suspended in 10 to 50 L
of TE (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) or nuclease-free water at 4 C for
at least one hour. Samples of 1 L were diluted 1:6 with 6X DNA loading dye (10 mM
TrisHCl, pH 7.6; 60 mM EDTA, 60% glycerol; 0.03% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 0.03% (w/v)
xylene cyanol) were subjected to electrophoresis on 1% agarose gels to check integrity and
estimate concentration. In most cases, samples were also treated with RNAse. Five- to ten-
fold dilutions were used for further experiments.
In some instances, DNA extraction for Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was carried out
using FTA cards. This was performed according to the manufacturers instructions
(Whatman Ltd., Kent, UK).
2.6.2. Isolation of RNA
Plant material was harvested and ground in liquid nitrogen using a pestle and mortar. Total
RNA was extracted with CONCERT reagent (Invitrogen Ltd., Paisley, UK), and purified
using the RNeasy kit Minikit with one-column DNAse I treatment (Qiagen) as described
by the manufacturer. RNA was eluted with nuclease free water and the RNA content
determined using a Picodrop spectrophotometer (Picodrop Ltd., Saffron Walden, UK).
Absorbance was measured at 260 nm (nucleic acid) and 280 nm (protein) to access the purity
of the samples with the calculated ratio A260/A280. A ratio between 1.8 and 2.1 indicates a
high purity RNA. One L of the RNA samples diluted 1:2 with 2X RNA loading dye (95%
formamide (v/v); 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.05% (v/v) SDS; 0.025% (w/v) bromophenol blue;
0.025% (w/v) xylene cyanol) were also subjected to electrophoresis on 1% agarose gels to
check RNA integrity.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.6.3. Primer design
Gene-specific primers for PCR for genotyping, candidate gene sequencing, and RT-PCR
analysis were designed using the Primer3 software (http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/cgi-
bin/primer3/primer3_www.cgi; Rozen and Skaletsky, 2000) and the CODDLE program
(Codons Optimized to Discover Deleterious Lesions; http://www.proweb.org/coddle/) to
identify intronic and exonic region of genes. Primers were generally 20 bp in length, and
with an annealing temperature close to 60 C. Whenever possible, primers for RT-PCR were
designed as intron-spanning so as to avoid non-specific gene - instead of/in addition to
cDNA - amplification. Primers were ordered from Sigma-Genosys. A list of the primers
used can be found in Table 2.
2.6.4. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
DNA amplifications by PCR were performed either using classical Taq polymerase
(Amersham Biotech, Freiburg, Germany), or using the TaKaRA ExTaq polymerase kit
(TAKARA Biotechnology Inc., Shiga, Japan). When the classical Taq polymerase was used,
PCR was performed with a 10 L reaction mix containing the template (genomic DNA, 1
ng-1 g), 1X PCR Buffer, 0.2 mM dNTPs, and 0.5 U of the Taq polymerase. The PCR
program used was as follows: an initial denaturation at 95 C for 3 min: followed by 28-35
cycles of 94 C, 1 min, annealing temperature, 1 min; 72 C, 1 min/kb; and a final extension
step at 72 C for 10 min. Amplification with the TaKaRA ExTaq polymerase was
performed according to the manufacturers instructions. In both cases, the cycling conditions
(number of cycles and extension time) were optimised for each primer pair, and using an
annealing temperature about 5 C below the melting temperature of the primers given by the
supplier, Sigma-Genosys. PCR was performed using a MJ Research PTC-200 Peltier
Thermal Cycler (MJ Research, Inc., Waltham, USA).
2.6.5. cDNA synthesis and semi-quantitative RT-PCR
Reverse transcription was performed with 5 g of RNA using SuperScript II reverse
transcriptase (Invitrogen) and oligo(dT)15 primers (Promega Ltd., Southamtpon, UK)
according to the manufacturers instructions. All samples were measured in technical
triplicates on three biological triplicates consisting of leaf material harvested from three
single plants and extracted individually. The housekeeping genes Ubiquitin 10 (UBQ10) and
Elongation factor  (EF) were used as reference genes (internal standards).  
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 2A
Gene Primer name Primer sequence 5'-3' Position
PGI1 LjPGI1_1F TGGTCAAAACCTGAAAACAAAACAC -79
LjPGI1_1R TTCCAATTTCCATCCCAGTATTTCC 1118
LjPGI1_2F GGAATGAGTTTTGCTAAATGTTCTT 1311
LjPGI1_2R TCATCATTGCATAGTCATACAGAAA 2472
LjPGI1_3F GCTAAATTTTGACTCGCTCCCAATC 3484
LjPGI1_3R ATAGAGTCCATTAGGCTGGTTCAGA 3982
LjPGI1_4F ATTGTTGCTCAGGAGCCCTAGTTTC 4822
LjPGI1_4R AACTCATGCTTTCATGAGGATCCAG 5841
LjPGI1_5F CGAAGTCCATGATTATGCCACTAAA 6431
LjPGI1_5R CCAAAACAACTTATTGCAACCTGCT 6983
PGM1 LjPGM1_1F GTGGCACCTGTGTTTCCTTT -178
LjPGM1_1R TGCAATACAAAAGCCAGCAG 1407
LjPGM1_2F TGTTCAATTCATTGCCTCCA 1238
LjPGM1_2R CCTGGTGAGGAAGACCCTCT 2843
LjPGM1_3F CCCAGTTCATGGAAAATGAGA 2850
LjPGM1_3R TTGAATTCTTTCCTCTGTGGTG 4485
LjPGM1_4F AAACGGGCTCCTAGTGTTGA 5818
LjPGM1_1634R CATCTGCAAACTGGAGGACA 7315
LjPGM1_1374F TGACCACATTCGTGAGAAAGA 6463
LjPGM1_4R CGGGAACAGGTTGATTCACT 8257
APL1 LjAPL1_1F CACACAGTGCTTCATGTGGA -98
LjAPL1_1R CTGCCATAGAAACCCCAGAG 1401
LjAPL1_2F GGTGGTACCAGCTGTTTGGT 1188
LjAPL1_2R TTGCTTTCAGGTCTGCTCCT 2837
LjAPL1_3F GGAAAATTCGCACCTCAAAG 2635
LjAPL1_3R TGGACATCCAACCACATGAA 4356
LjAPL1_4F AAGCACCAAAGCCTTATTGG 4203
LjAPL1_4R GCGGCATTGGAATATCAAGA 5794
GWD1/SEX1 LjGWD1_6F GGAGGGCAGATCTGGAATTT -1349
LjGWD1_6R GAACAAACAGAATCCAATCAAAA 325
LjGWD1_7F GAGTGTCAGCAAAGGCAAGA 105
LjGWD1_7R CTCCCTCATCTTTTCCTGGT 1802
LjGWD1_8F AGGTCTCCTGAATTGACTGGA 1477
LjGWD1_8R TCAAATAAGCAAAAAGTGCAAAA 3466
LjGWD1_9F GAAAAAGCTGGGAAGCCTAA 3305
LjGWD1_9R TGGCTAGCTGGTTAGTGTGC 4993
LjGWD1_10F GAGAGGCATGGCAACAATCT 4801
LjGWD1_10R TCCAACCTTCAGTGTCCTCA 6233
LjGWD1_11F TCAGAAAGGTCCTGCAATCA 5699
LjGWD1_11R TGACAACAACCACCAACACC 6401
LjGWD1_1F TCTCTCCAGGCACTGATTGA 6033
LjGWD1_1R CGTAAGCTAAGGATCGCAAA 7523
LjGWD1_2F CAGTTTTCATGCCCTGGACT 8767
LjGWD1_2R TGGCATATCTGGTGTCAGGA 10401
LjGWD1_3F ACTTGACGTGCTTGCACCAT 11234
LjGWD1_3R TGAAAACTTCCCTGGATCAAA 12963
LjGWD1_4F TGTGTTCTCAAGCCCAGTTT 13551
LjGWD1_4R CTTCTCTTGTTCGCCAGGAT 15239
LjGWD1_5F TGCCCCCATTTTAATGTTGT 15569
LjGWD1_5R TCAAACACACAGATTCACCAAA 17133
Table 2. Primers used for gene sequencing, TILLING, genotyping, and RT-PCR analysis.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 2A continued
Gene Primer name Primer sequence 5'-3' Position
GWD3/PWD LjGWD3_1F CCGAATCAATCAATCGACAA -128
LjGWD3_1R GATATCCGCGCATCAAAATC 1463
LjGWD3_2F CGCTTAAGCAAAGCCATGTA 1617
LjGWD3_2R CAACTCCTAAGTCATGTTCCACA 3077
LjGWD3_3F AATTCCACGCTCCAAATGTC 5733
LjGWD3_3R CCATGTTGAACTTGATTGATGG 7467
LjGWD3_4F TGCTCCATCTTGCAATAGTCT 8956
LjGWD3_4R ATGGACCAAGTGCCTCTGAA 14339
LjGWD3_5F TCAACAGACCCCTACACATGA 15920
LjGWD3_6F GTCGCCTTTGTAACGTGTGA 14899
LjGWD3_6R ATTCCGGACCTTGAACCTCT 16339
LjGWD3_7F GCTGTTCATTTGAAGGATGC 16061
LjGWD3_7R AGAGGTTCAAGGTCCGGAAT 16320
LjGWD3_8F CGTGCTTCCTCTATACCTCAGAA 17645
Table 2B
Gene Primer name Primer sequence 5'-3' Position
PGM1 LjPGM1_TILL_2F(T2F) GGTGCTCTGGATCGTGTTGCTGAA 6257
LjPGM1_TILL_2R(T2R) TCCAGAAAAACGGTGGGGAAACAA 7558
APL2 LjAPL2_TILL_1F AAAGCAGACCCAAAAAGTGTGGCTTCC 358
LjAPL2_TILL_1R TGTCAACATGCTGCAAATTTTGGCAAT 1643
LjAPL2_TILL_2F TGAAGGCATGCCACTTGATTTTCTTGA 1320
LjAPL2_TILL_2R ATGCTGTGATGCAGGATAAGTGTGTGC 2817
APS1 LjAPS1_TILL_2F GCATAGGCGGAACCAGGAAAAACC 698
LjAPS1_TILL_2R TCCAATGGAAGTTGCACCAGGAAT 1981
LjAPS1_TILL_1F TGCCCAGCAGAGTCCTGAGAATCC 1253
LjAPS1_TILL_1R GACGGAGGCAAATATCGTGGTTGG 2582
GWD1/SEX1 LjGWD1_TILL_1F CAAAGTAGATCGTTCTTTCACCTTGACCA 9502
LjGWD1_TILL_1R ATGCTCATTTTCCTGGGAAGCAAACAC 10685
LjGWD1_TILL 2F GGAGGAATATGAAGCAGCTCGACAAGA 3124
LjGWD1_TILL 2R AGCCACATGCTTTGCCACAAAATTACA 4702
GWD3/PWD LjGWD3_TILL_1F AGAGGTTCAAGGTCCGGAAT 16320
LjGWD3_TILL_1R GGCAGTAGGGGTCAAACAAC 17825
Table 2C
Gene Primer name Primer sequence 5'-3' Position
GWD3/PWD LjGWD3_RT-PCR_1F AGCCAGAAGAATGTGGTGCT 7729
LjGWD3_RT-PCR_1R TGCCATCTTCATTTCCTTCC 7886
LjGWD3_RT-PCR_2F TTGCTATGCGTCAAAAGTGG 6189
LjGWD3_RT-PCR_2R CTCCCAGCAGCTGTTACCTC 14725
EF-1 EF-1_TC14056_1F GGACAGACTCGTGAGCACGCAC n/a
EF-1_TC14056_1R CAGGCTTCAAGACACCAGTTTCAAC n/a
Table 2. Primers used for gene sequencing, TILLING, genotyping, and RT-PCR analysis. Continued.
The position given for each primer sequence corresponds to the nucleotide position of its 5' end from
the start codon of the gene. For sequencing of the candidate genes affected by the forward genetic
screen mutations, primers were designed to cover the whole coding sequence. A. Primers for gene
sequencing and genotyping in relation to mutations discovered in the forward genetic screen. B.
Primers for gene sequencing and genotyping in relation to mutations isolated by TILLING. C. RT-PCR
primers for GWD3 transcript expression analysis
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.6.6. Agarose gel electrophoresis
DNA, RNA, PCR and RT-PCR products (1-2 L, diluted 1:2 with 2X loading dye) were
subjected to electrophoresis on 0.5 to 2% TBE (Tris Borate EDTA; 1X TBE: 89 mM Tris,
89 mM Boric acid, 2 mM EDTA) or TAE (Tris Acetate EDTA; 40 mM Tris, 20 mM
Acetate, 1 mM EDTA) agarose gels containing ethidium bromide (0.5 g.mL
) depending
on the nucleic acid nature and fragment size. PCR products generated were visualised and
imaged under ultraviolet (UV) light using a Molecular Imager system and the Quantity One
Analysis software from Biorad (Biorad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, USA). DNA fragment
size and quantity were estimated by comparison with a 100 bp or 1 kb Ladder (New England
Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, USA).
2.6.7. Genotyping via DNA sequencing and restriction analysis
Genotyping of individual plants was carried out using gene-specific primers as listed in
Table 2. PCR products for sequencing were generated as described in section 2.6.4, using the
TaKaRA ExTaq polymerase (TAKARA Biotechnology). Following PCR, 1 to 2 L of
PCR product were added to 10 L of sequencing reaction mix provided by the ABI
PRISMBigDyeTerminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit, and the
sequencing reaction performed according to the manufacturers instructions (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, USA). Automated DNA sequencing was performed on an ABI
PRIM 377XL DNA sequencer (Perkins Elmer, Connecticut, USA) by the DNA
sequencing Service at the JIC Genome Laboratory. DNA sequences were analysed either
using the Chromas software (Technelysium Ltd., Helensvale, Australia), or using the Vector
NTI software (Invitrogen)
In some cases, mutation genotyping could be carried out by restriction analysis relatively
quickly, robustly, and at a lower cost than by sequencing. When this was the case,
genotyping was performed by PCR followed by treatment of the PCR products with
restriction enzymes (Table 3). Enzymes used for this restriction analysis were ordered from
either Roche (F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., UK) or NEB (New England Biolabs). Reactions
were carried out according to the manufacturers instructions in a 25 L volume containing
15 L of restriction mix to which 10 L of PCR product were added. One L of sample was
then loaded on agarose gel to determine the genotype of the plant tested.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 3. Mutant allele genotyping by sequencing and restriction analysis. Continued on next page.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Table 3. Mutant allele genotyping by sequencing and restriction analysis. Continued.
Variants identified by TILLING with silent mutation (i.e. mutation not causing an amino acid change or
mutation located within intron) or amino acid change with a PSSM difference given by PARSESNP < 0
have been ignored here. Only enzymes that were used for restriction analysis in this study are
mentioned here, together with their restriction profile in the mutant variant, WT and heterozygote. The
column 'site' corresponds to the restriction site of the enzyme, with the following number code: (1) if
gained in variant, and (2) if lost from reference. Expected restriction profile was obtained by submitting
the sequence of the gene retrieved from the Miyakogusa database
(http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html; Sato et al., 2008) to the NEB Cutter v2.0 tool available at
http://tools.neb.com/NEBcutter2/.
2.7. In silico analyses of genes and proteins
2.7.1. Gene and protein sequence analyses
Prediction of genes and their corresponding cDNA and amino acid sequences was
performed using the Genscan (http://genes.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html; Burge et al., 1997;
1998), FGENESH (http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.html), and GenomeScan
(http://genes.mit.edu/genomescan.html; Yeh et al., 2001) programs. Gene structures (i.e.
exonic and intronic regions) were determined using the CODDLE program.
Multiple DNA and protein sequence alignments were performed using the Clustal W2
program available at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/index.html. Defaults settings
were used unless otherwise indicated. Percent of identity between sequences at the genomic
DNA, cDNA, and amino acid level was determined using this program. Multiple sequence
alignments generated by Clustal W2 were used to draw phylogenetic trees using
Dendroscope (http://www-ab.informatik.uni-tuebingen.de/software/dendroscope). Editing
and analyses of the protein sequences alignments were performed using GeneDoc
(http://www.nrbsc.org/gfx/genedoc/). Subcellular localisation predictions of the proteins
were obtained using the TargetP (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP/) and Predotar
(http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/predotar/predotar.html) programs.
The Blastp tool at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), and Pfam and PROSITE
databases (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/; http://www.expasy.ch/prosite/) were used to search for
protein motifs and functional domains. The CAZy (Carbohydrate-Active enZYmes) database
(http://www.cazy.org/) was searched for proteins containing a Carbohydrate Binding Motif
(CBM). Secondary structures of proteins were predicted using the JPred program
(http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/www-jpred/). Three-dimensional structures of proteins
were retrieved from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB;
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do) and visualised using the VMD and Swiss PDB
viewer software (http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/, and http://spdbv.vital-it.ch/,
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
respectively). The Swiss PDB viewer software was also used for in silico mutagenesis.
Trials of three dimensional amino acid structure predictions by homology modelling were
performed using PHYRE (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre/), the Swiss Model server
(http://swissmodel.expasy.org/), and Geno3D http://geno3d-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-
bin/geno3d_automat.pl?page=/GENO3D/geno3d_home.html.
2.7.2. Identification of the starch metabolism gene homologs in L. japonicus
Genes encoding known enzymes of starch metabolism in L. japonicus were identified by
searching the Miyakogusa genome database developed by the Kasuza DNA Research
Institute (http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html; Sato et al., 2008) using the gene names as
keywords and by peforming a Blastp with the protein sequences of their A. thaliana
homologs against L. japonicus genome sequences. Hits that included clones and Selected
Genome Assembly (LjSGA) sequences were selected for further analyses. These included
use of the Clustal W2 program for protein sequence alignment of homologs and other
members of the same gene family. From this, it was possible to assign with confidence the
orthologs of known starch metabolism genes of other species in L. japonicus and discover
duplication events in several instances. Alignments also allowed identification of problems
associated with incorrect annotations, incorrect predictions, or incomplete sequences for the
L. japonicus genes and proteins. Where the coding sequence retrieved was incorrectly
predicted or partial, it was used to search the database for the contig containing the
corresponding genomic sequence. A predicted full length coding sequence was then obtained
using the programs FGENESH, Genscan, and GenomeScan programs (see above for web
address and related publications).
When homologs of known genes encoding enzymes of starch metabolism could not be
identified in the L. japonicus genome database using the approach mentioned above, Blastn
or tBlastn searches were performed against the LjEST database (DCFI Gene Index of L.
japonicus (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/plant.html). Where possible, a partial or full
length coding sequence was obtained by aligning several EST clones and the resulting
sequence was used to search the Miyakogusa genome database or to screen Transformation-
competent Artificial Chromosome (TAC) and Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC)
libraries.
2.8. Analysis of gene expression data from microarrays
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Affymetrix gene chip data were retrieved from the Lotus Gene Expression Atlas
assembled by Andry Andriankaja and Michael Udvardi (personal communication; Samuel
Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma). Organs analysed included leaves, stems,
flowers, and nodules, as well as several samples of a time course for pods and seed
development (Table 4). Plant growth and harvest conditions were similar to those used for
the construction of the Medicago Gene Expression Atlas (Benedito et al.. 2008). The plant
materials were harvested 3 hours after dawn from plants grown under long day conditions.
RNA isolation, probe preparation, array hybridisation and normalisation of the data were
also carried out as described by Benedito et al., 2008.
Organ Description
Leaf Trifolia without their petioles from 28 d old plants
Petiole Petioles from 28 d old plants
Stem Stems from 28 d old plants
Flower Fully developed flowers
Root Roots from 28 d old plants
Nod0d N-starved roots at 0 dpi (control for nodules)
Nod21d Mature N-fixing nodules at 21 dpi
Pod10d Seed pod, 10 dap (late embryogenesis)
Pod14d Seed pod, 14 dap (accumulation of storage compounds)
Pod20d Seed pod, 20 dap (mature seed, onset of dessication)
Seed10d Developing seeds, 10 dap (late embryogenesis)
Seed12d Developing seeds, 12 dap (transition between embryogenesis and seed filling)
Seed14d Developing seeds, 14 dap (accumulation of storage compounds)
Seed16d Developing seeds, 16 dap (accumulation of storage compounds)
Seed20d Developing seeds, 10 dap (physiologically mature seeds, onset of dessication)
Table 4. Description of the organs analysed using the Lotus Gene Expression Atlas.
Microarray data (Affymetrix) for the L. japonicus Gene Expression Atlas were generated by Andry
Andriankaja and Michael Udvardi (personal communication; Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation,
Ardmore, Oklahoma). Abbreviations: d, days; dpi, days post inoculation; dap, days after pollination.
Data available from the Lotus Gene Expression Atlas corresponded to absolute,
normalised transcript levels. Normalization was performed by the authors as described in
Benedito et al. (2008). These data were processed into an excel file as follows: when several
probe sets could be attributed to a single gene, or when a gene had several corresponding
clones or LjSGA sequences, a median value was calculated, so that each gene had only one
transcript level value. An extreme case could be observed for LjGWD1
(Chr4.LjT08E06.100.nc) that corresponded to five different probe sets on the chips. Levels
of expression of these probe sets varied significantly from one to another. Other genes with
multiple probe sets were LDA (four probsets), GWD3 (three probe sets) and APL1, APL2,
SS1, SS2, BAM1, BAM3, BAM7, DPE2, PHS2 (two probe sets each). A table of
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
correspondence between the Lotus starch metabolism genes and their probe sets and the
probe sets absolute transcript levels can be found in Table A1. Graphs were drawn using
both absolute transcript values and log2 transformed values. Based on analysis of the whole
data set values, the threshold under which the the expression level was considered as
background/noise signal was determined to be ca. 60 in case of the absolute transcript values
and ca. 6 in case of the log2 transformed values.
2.9. Gene mapping and identification of the mutations isolated from forward genetic
screens
2.9.1. Mapping population generation and genomic DNA samples preparation
In this study, mapping populations were created for each of the mutant lines from crosses
between mutants (in the Gifu background) and the WT ecotype L. japonicus MG-20. F1
plants were allowed to self-pollinate and mutant plants were selected in the F2 generation
based on iodine-staining of leaves (see section 2.4). Genomic DNA from these plants was
isolated as described above (see section 2.6.1). Mapping techniques employed for the
identification of the mutations in this study are presented below.
2.9.2. Rough genetic mapping
Rough mapping was carried out initially by bulk segregant analysis (Michelmore et al.,
1991) using microsatellite Simple Sequence Repeat (SSR) markers on at least two pools of
eight genomic DNA samples of mutants isolated from F2 segregating populations from a
cross with MG-20. Markers were designed at Kazusa DNA Research Institute and ordered
from Sigma-Genosys. An exhaustive list of all SSR markers designed by the Kazusa DNA
research institute can be found in the Miyakogusa database
(http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html). Typically, the size of the PCR products using these
SSR markers was about 100-200 bp length and the difference of size between MG-20 and
Gifu varied from 2 bp to 40 bp. PCR products with a size difference of more than 20 bp were
separated with a 2.5-3% agarose gel. For lower size differences, 5% acrylamide gel
electrophoresis was used (Wang et al., 2003).
Three to four SSR markers were selected for each of the six chromosomes of Lotus
japonicus. This selection was based on two main criteria: a) their position on the
chromosome: markers were selected so that they were as much as possible equidistant to
each other and allowed a full coverage of each chromosome; and b) the sequence
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
polymorphism between MG-20 and Gifu: markers giving PCR products with large size
difference between the two accessions were privileged so as to facilitate the scoring A list of
these selected markers can be found in Table 5.
Thus identified, the rough chromosomal interval where the mutation mapped was
confirmed on the mutant individuals. For each of the mutant lines, further rough mapping
(up to an interval of about 5 cM) was carried out using additional SSR markers, generally on
a larger population of mutants. PCR and PCR product electrophoresis for this mapping was
performed as described above (section 2.6.4).
Marker Chr. Map position
TM0193 1 20.1
TM0438 1 42.6
TM0143 1 66.2
TM0065 2 14.0
TM0076 2 46.0
TM0002 2 67.3
TM0080 3 12.5
TM0005 3 34.0
TM0049 3 55.1
TM0616 3 70.4
TM0182 4 8.8
TM0030 4 32.2
TM0046 4 53.8
TM0034 5 4.8
TM0048 5 27.6
TM0036 5 49.7
TM0302 6 14.0
TM0013 6 36.9
TM0336 6 57.6
Table 5. Microsatellite SSR markers used for rough mapping of mutant phenotypes from the forward
genetic screen.
The SSR markers selected were designed by the Kazusa DNA research institute
(http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html). Map positions are in cM and correspond to the location of the
markers on the genetic linkage map of Lotus japonicus from a cross between the accession Gifu and
MG-20 (maternal and paternal parents, respectively).
2.9.3. Fine genetic mapping
For several of the mutant lines finer mapping was performed on a large set of mutant
individuals isolated from F2 segregating populations (see Chapter 4). This mapping was
performed using SSR markers designed either at Kazusa DNA Research Institute or with the
Simple Sequence Repeat Identification Tool (SSRIT; Temnykh et al., 2001). SSR markers
within the target regions were PCR amplified and fluorescently labelled (Schuelke, 2000).
The method used multiplex PCR amplification and automated capillary electrophoresis
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
analysis, using an ABI 3730xl 96-capillary DNA Analyzer (M. Groth, LMU; unpublished)
and GeneMapper software (Applied Biosystems). This mapping was performed by
Andreas Brachmann (Biozentrum der LMU Mnchen, Germany).
2.9.4. Mapping data analysis
For each individual, and for each marker, discrimination between homozygous MG-20,
homozygous Gifu, and heterozygotes, was performed by PCR gel electrophoresis as
mentioned above. Scoring was based on the size of the PCR product(s) that were revealed by
ethidium bromide (rough mapping) or by their fluorescent signals (fine mapping). Data were
entered and processed in Excel files. The mapped interval was determined as the region
where no recombination occurred.
2.9.5. Physical mapping and mutation identification
Mapping was coupled to the candidate-gene approach so that any strong candidate gene
(i.e. genes known to play a key role in starch metabolism in other plant species; see Chapter
3) located in the mapped region was sequenced to establish whether its sequence carried a
mutation potentially responsible for the mutant phenotype. Such genes (referred as the core
set of starch metabolism genes) were mapped according to the results of gene prediction
analyses and the information made available from the Miyakogusa database. Relatively
recently (May 2008), this database has been updated to include a comprehensive list of all
the predicted genes and encoded protein sequences. Before the update, genome sequences
were retrieved and the gene and protein prediction were performed manually as described
above (section 2.7).
In cases where the mapped interval defined for a particular mutant line did not contain any
of these strong candidate genes, finer mapping was performed, and the candidate-gene
approach was extended as follows: once the mapping interval was reduced to a relatively
small chromosomal region (generally less than 10 cM), the corresponding genome sequence
(physical map) was examined for putative candidate genes using the Miyakogusa database.
Genes were designated as good candidates when they were likely, based on their annotation
and the information available in the literature, to be responsible for the phenotype of the
mutant in question, if mutated. This included all genes putatively, or known to be involved
in the metabolism of starch or its regulation according to the results of extensive literature
searches. Following analysis of their gene structures and the design of primers, the whole
predicted coding region of such genes was sequenced.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
The possible effects of the mutations thus identified on the protein function was predicted
using the PARSESNP program (Project Aligned Related Sequences and Evaluate SNPs;
http://www.proweb.org/parsesnp/) in combination with SIFT (Sorting Intolerant From
Tolerant) as set up on the CODDLE web page. A SIFT score smaller than 0.05 and a PSSM
(Position-Specific Scoring Matrix) difference score above 10 indicates a deleterious effect.
2.10. Targeted Induced Local Lesions in Genomes (TILLING)
2.10.1. Gene sequence analysis using CODDLE and primer design
TILLING was carried out to isolate mutants for genes known to be involved in starch
metabolism in other plant species. Primers were designed using the Primer3 program in the
region identified by CODDLE as having the maximum likelihood of producing deleterious
alleles following EMS mutagenesis. The targeted region ranged from about 1 kb to 1.5 kb in
length. Gene-specific primers used for TILLING are listed in Table 2.
2.10.2. Screening for polymorphisms
TILLING was carried out using the general TILLING population and the plant population
of starch metabolism mutants from the forward screen (Perry et al., 2003 and 2009).
TILLING for the genes LjPGM1, LjAPS1, LjAPL2, and LjGWD1 was performed as follows:
genomic DNA isolated from these populations was quantified and diluted to 5 ng l
Normalized DNA was pooled 4-fold and 1 l pooled DNA was used in a 10 l PCR
reaction. In total, up to 4908 individuals from the general population were screened for each
of the primer pairs. Heteroduplexes were digested with Cel1 from fresh celery (prepared at
JIC), filtered though a Sephadex G50 column, concentrated, and loaded as previously
described (Colbert et al., 2001; Till et al., 2001). Samples were run on either ABI 377 or LI-
COR 4300 DNA analyzer using gene-specific primers that were either labelled with the
fluorescent dyes 6-carboxy-fluorescein (6-FAM) and 4,7,2,7-tetrachloro-6-carboxy-
fluorescein (TET) for analysis with an ABI 377 sequencer, or with the IRD 700 and IRD 800
labels for analysis with LI-COR 4300 sequencer as previously described (Perry et al., 2003
and 2009; Colbert et al., 2001). TILLING on the genes LjPGM1, LjAPS1, LjAPL2 was
carried out by Jodie Pike and Tracey Welham (TSL and JIC, respectively, Norwich, UK). I
carried out TILLING on the GWD1 gene (two regions targeted). TILLING for LjGWD3 was
carried out by RevGenUK (http://revgenuk.jic.ac.uk/) on an ABI 3730xl 96-capillary DNA
Analyzer following the method of Le Signor et al. (2009).
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.10.3. Mutation identification and PARSESNP analysis
Individuals from pools yielding cleavage products were analysed individually to confirm
the presence of the mutation and identify the mutant line containing it. The point mutations
thereby detected were confirmed and identified by sequencing. The severity of their effects
on protein function was predicted using the PARSESNP program in combination with SIFT,
as done for the forward screen mutations identified and described above. A SIFT score
smaller than 0.05 and a PSSM (Position-Specific Scoring Matrix) difference score above 10
indicate a deleterious effect.
Mutations which resulted in the loss of a splicing-site or a premature stop codon and those
with a PSSM (Position-Specific Scoring Matrix) difference score greater than zero, or likely
to have an effect according to my own bioinformatics analysis (multiple sequence
alignments; see section 2.7), were selected for further analysis. M3 seeds of mutant lines
carrying such mutations were sown and their phenotype analysed. When mutations were
heterozygous at M2, which was the case for the majority of selected lines, homozygous
mutants were selected from the heterozygous and homozygous WT segregants by
genotyping.
2.11. Protein analysis methods
2.11.1. Protein extraction and quantification
Protein extracts for immunoblots, starch binding assay, and native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) of starch-metabolising enzyme activities were prepared by
homogenizing 0.2-0.4 g of leaf material in 1 mL of cold extraction buffer containing 100
mM HEPES, pH 7.5; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM DTT, 0.1% (w/v) polyvinylpolypyrrolidone
(PVPP), and 10% (v/v) glycerol prior to centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 C.
The total protein content in the supernatant of each extract was determined using the
Bradford method (Bradford, 1976). This assay was performed on a 96-well microtitre plate
and the absorbance of the samples was read at 595 nm using a microtitre plate reader
(Spectra Max 340 PC and software SoftMax Pro; Molecular Devices Inc., Sunnyvale, USA)
according to Bradford solution manufacturers instructions (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St Louis,
USA). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions of 0.1 to 1 mg.mL
were used for the
standard curve.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.11.2. Denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), Western blotting, and
protein immunodetection
For the detection of GWD1 (SEX1) and SEX4 proteins in L. japonicus, antiserum to the
SEX4 protein of A. thaliana (Niittyl et al., 2006) and a polyclonal antibody to the R1
protein (GWD1) of potato (Lorberth et al., 1998) were used. Soluble extracts of leaf soluble
proteins were obtained as mentioned above (section 2.11.1). Depending on the experiment,
25 g to 100 g of protein was separated by SDS-PAGE. Briefly, equal amounts of protein
from the mutant and corresponding WT were diluted with 2X SDS-PAGE sample loading
Buffer (Laemmli Loading dye; 62.5 mM TrisHCl pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS,
0.01% (w/v) Bromophenol blue, 5% (v/v) -mercaptoethanol), heated at 95 C for 5 min, 
cooled, and then loaded onto the gels. Protein sample separation by denaturing SDS-PAGE
was carried out using a Mini-protean II apparatus (Biorad Laboratories). Gels (1 mm thick;
6% acrylamide in the resolving gel for GWD1 protein separation, 10% for SEX4; 4% in the
stacking gel) were prepared and run in Tris-Glycine buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM Glycine,
0.1% SDS, pH 8.3) according to Laemmli (1970). The ProSieve pre-stained colour protein
markers (BMA, Rockland, USA) or Precision Plus Protein standards (Biorad
Laboratories) were used as molecular mass standards. When required, proteins on gels were
visualised by staining with Coomassie blue (BioSafe Coomassie G-250 stain, Biorad
Laboratories).
Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane (PROTRAN BA 85; Schleicher &
Schnell, Dassel, Germany) by transfer for 90 min at 100 V and 4 C using the Mini Trans-
blot Cell (Biorad Laboratories) in a buffer of 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 20% methanol,
and 0.1% SDS.
After blocking for 15 min in PBS Buffer (150 mM NaCl; 75 mM Na2HPO4; 25 mM
NaH2PO4) with 2% milk powder (w/v), the membrane was incubated ON at 4C in presence
of the primary antibody diluted 1:5000 in PBS buffer. After incubation, the membrane was
rinsed several times in PBS buffer with and then without 0.5% Triton-X100, blocked again,
and incubated 1 h at RT in presence of the second antibody (anti-rabbit IgG; Sigma-Aldrich)
diluted 1:1500 in PBS buffer. Finally, immunodetection was carried out by using an
Alkaline Phosphatase chromogen (BCIP/NBT) according to the manufacturers instructions
(Sigma-Aldrich; SIGMAFAST BCIP/NBT tablets).
2.11.3. Starch-binding assays
In vitro and in vivo starch-binding assays were carried out to assess the capacity of
endogenous GWD1 proteins extracted from gwd1-1 and WT plants to bind starch. Starch-
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
binding assays were performed with a protocol modified from Ritte et al. (2000) and Kotting
et al. (2005) that had been scaled down. Leaf starch granules were isolated as follow: leaf
material was harvested two to four hours after the end of the light period from plants grown
in the glasshouse under short day conditions, and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. 1.5
to 3g of leaf material was homogenised in mortar with 5 mL of extraction buffer that
consisted of 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5; 1 mM EDTA, pH8; 1 mM DTT, 0.1% (w/v)
polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP), and 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100. The resulting homogenate
was passed through Miracloth prior to centrifugation for 5 min at 10,000 g. The supernatant
was discarded and the pellet resuspended in 2 mL extraction buffer following several
washes. The resuspended pellet was then filtered through a syringe filled with cotton wool.
The recovered filtrate was layered on top of a 2 mL cushion of 95% Percoll (Sigma-
Aldrich Co., St Louis, USA) and 5% 0.5 M HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5). Following centrifugation
at 2000 g for 15 min, the pelleted starch was washed twice with extraction buffer, and then
dried. If not used immediately, this starch was stored at -20 C.
Analysis of in vivo starch-associated proteins was carried out as follows: dry starch
extracted as described above was resuspended in SDS-PAGE loading buffer (ca. 10 L per
mg of dry starch). Bound proteins were solubilized by incubating the starch granules with
this buffer for 15 min at RT with shaking. After centrifugation, the supernatant was heated
for 5 min at 95 C and then loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel (6% acrylamide).
For in vitro binding assays, commercial starch from potato and corn (Sigma-Aldrich Co.,
St Louis, USA) was used. This starch was washed with dH2O prior to resuspension in
soluble protein extract (ca. 500-1000 g of protein for 5 mg of dry starch). The suspension
was incubated for 30 min at 4 C under shaking, and then placed on top of a 4 mL cushion of
95% Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St Louis, USA) and 5% 0.5 M HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5).
Following centrifugation, the pelleted starch was washed twice with extraction buffer.
Finally, the proteins bound to the surface of the starch granule were released by incubation
in SDS-PAGE loading buffer at RT.
Soluble protein extracts, SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis, western blotting,
immunodetection, and Coomassie staining were carried out as described above (sections
2.11.1 and 2.11.2).
2.12. In vitro enzyme activity assays
2.12.1. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) assay
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
AGPase activity was assayed in the direction of ADP-glucose synthesis (ATP + glucose-1-
P  ADP-glucose + PPi) using a protocol modified from Ghosh and Preiss (1966). Briefly, 
leaf material (0.2-0.3 g) was harvested on ice, extracted in 3 mL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4),
1 mM EDTA, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, and clarified by centrifugation at 4C. Each assay
contained 10 L soluble extract in 190 L of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 15 mM MgCl2, 15
mM 3-phosphoglycerate (PGA), 1.5 mM ATP, 0.5 mg.mL
BSA, 0.5 mM Glc-1-P, 0.5 mM
C] Glc-1-P at 1 MBq mmol
, and 12.5 U.mL
inorganic pyrophosphatase (from yeast,
Roche Diagnostics). After incubation for 10 min at 37 C, samples were processed by
treatment with DEAE cellulose discs according to Ghosh and Preiss (1966) and the ADP-
glucose product measured by liquid scintillation counting.
2.12.2. Phosphoglucose-isomerase (PGI) assay
PGI activity was assayed spectrophotometrically, using a protocol modified from Jones et
al. (1986). Briefly, leaf material was extracted in ice-cold buffer consisting of 0.1 M HEPES,
pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, and of 50 g.mL
of the serine protease inhibitor
phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; previously dissolved in ethanol), and 1 mM DTT.
Homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 C and the supernatant used for the
assay. The extracts were heated at 50C for 10 min to inactivate the plastidial isoform. The
reaction mix contained 150 mM Tris, pH 8.3; 1.5 mM NAD; 5 mM fructose-6-phosphate
(Fru-6-P); 2 U.mL
 glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH); 5 L of extract. PGI 
activity was determined by monitoring the production of NADH at 340 nm using a
microtitre plate reader. Contribution of the cytosolic and plastidial isoforms to the total PGI
activity was estimated by heating the extracts at 50 C for 10 min, as described in Jones et al.
(1986).
2.12.3. Native PAGE of starch-metabolising enzyme activities
Native PAGE of starch-metabolising enzyme activities (also called a zymogram or activity
gel) was performed with a method modified from Shaw and Prasad (1970) for PGI and PGM
activities, and as described in Delvalle et al. (2005) for other starch-modifying activities (i.e.
starch synthase, branching and debranching enzymes, amylases, and starch phosphorylases).
Samples of 100 g of protein extracts, prepared as described above (section 2.11.1), were
mixed with native-PAGE sample loading buffer (20 mM TrisHCl pH 6.8, 12% (v/v)
glycerol, 0.025% (w/v) Bromophenol blue) and then loaded onto a native polyacrylamide gel
(either 5, 6, or 7.5% acrylamide used in the resolving gel; 3.75% in the stacking gel).
Electrophoresis was carried out for 3 h at 15 V.cm
, at 4 C.
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
Native PAGE gels for the detection of PGM and PGI activities contained 1% (w/v) potato
starch (Sigma-Aldrich). Following electrophoresis, gels were incubated for 30 min to 1 h at
37 C in 100 mM Tricine (pH 8), 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25 mM NADP, 1 mM MTT (3-4,5-
Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide), a trace of Meldolas blue (Sigma-
Aldrich), 1 U.mL
Glc-6-P dehydrogenase from Leuconostoc mesenteroides and either 7
mM of Glc-1-P (PGM activity) or 8 mM of Fru-6-P (PGI activity). Once the enzyme activity
bands were clearly visible, the development was stopped by transferring the gel into dH2O.
Native PAGE gels for the detection of SBE, DBE, AMY and BAM enzyme activities
contained 0.3% (w/v) of potato or corn starch (Sigma-Aldrich), amylopectin (from potato;
Sigma-Aldrich), or -limit dextrin (from potato; Sigma-Aldrich). Following electrophoresis, 
gels were incubated a minimum of 2 h at 37 C in a developing buffer containing: 100 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT. Following this step, gels were
stained with Lugols solution.
Native PAGE gels for the detection of starch phosphorylase and starch synthase enzyme
activities contained 1% (w/v) of glycogen (from oyster; Sigma-Aldrich). Following
electrophoresis, gels were incubated for 2 h at 37 C in a buffer containing 100 mM sodium
citrate and 20 mM Glc-1-P for starch phosphorylase activities (PHS1 and 2), and 50 mM
glycylglycine - NaOH, pH 9, 100 mM ammonium sulphate, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM
MgCl2, 0.25 gL
BSA, and 1 mM ADP-Glc for starch synthase activities (SSI and III).
Following this development, gels were stained with Lugols solution.
2.13. Metabolite quantification
2.13.1. Starch extraction and quantification
Starch extraction and quantification was performed with a method modified from Smith
and Zeeman (2006) by Alexander Graf (JIC, personal communication). Briefly, 50-200 mg
of tissue were harvested into pre-weighed 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and rapidly frozen in liquid
nitrogen. Samples were then homogenized on dry ice using a pulverizing mill (MM300;
Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany). One mL of 0.7 M perchloric acid was added to each sample
and 0.4 mL of the resulting homogenate was transferred to a 96-well microtitre plate. After
centrifugation for 10 min at 3200 g, the pellet was washed twice with 100 and 80% ethanol
(centrifugation for 5 min at 3200 g between each wash). The starch-containing pellet
(colourless) was finally re-suspended in 150 L dH2O and incubated at 95 C for 15-30 min.
The pellet was then washed with 100% ethanol, air-dried and re-suspended in 300 l dH2O.
Three hundred L of 0.2 M sodium acetate (pH 4.8) and 10 L of 9:1 amyloglucosidase:-
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
amylase (from Aspergillus niger; 10 g.l
; Roche Diagnostics) were then added to each
sample, and the samples incubated at 37 C for between two hours and ON. Following this
step, samples could be stored at -20 C until used. A control plate of samples was
simultaneously processed which differed only by the addition of 10 L dH2O instead of the
enzyme mix.
The starch content was assayed enzymatically by measuring the amount of glucose thus
released. Performed on 96-wells microplates, this assay consisted of the conversion of
glucose to 6-phosphogluconate by G6PDH and hexokinase (HK) with a concomitant
reduction of NAD to NADH. Samples were vortexed and centrifuged 10 min at 5800 g. One
to 20 L of supernatant were added to 50 L of reaction buffer containing 100 mM HEPES,
4 mM MgCl2, 2.2 mM ATP, 1.6 mM NAD and 8 U.mL
of HK (from yeast overproducer;
Roche Diagnostics). The reaction was started by adding 0.4U of G6PDH (from Leuconostoc
mesenteroides; Roche Diagnostics) to each sample. The production of NADPH was followed
spectrophotometrically at 340 nm. Values were subtracted from those of control samples in
which the enzymes amyloglucosidase and -amylase were replaced by dH2O (10 L).
Glucose concentration was determined using a standard curve and the linearity of the assay
was checked with NADH standards.
2.13.2. Soluble sugar extraction and quantification
To quantify soluble sugars, plant tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and
extracted in perchloric acid (0.7 M). After homogenisation and centrifugation, the
supernatant was used for sugar measurements and the pellet for starch assays. Starch was
assayed as described above. The supernatant containing free sugars was adjusted to pH 7 by
the addition of ice-cold neutralizing solution (2 M KOH, 0.4 M MES and 0.4 M KCl).
Precipitated potassium perchlorate was pelleted by centrifugation (10 min, 3000 g, 4 C),
and the soluble fraction (containing the soluble sugars and MOS) was stored at -20 C until
used.
Sucrose, glucose and fructose contents were determined spectrometrically by reading
absorbance at 340 nm. Twenty five L of sample were mixed with dH2O (up to 200 L) and
50 L of sugar assay cocktail (100 mM HEPES, 4 mM MgCl2, 2.2 mM ATP, 1.6 mM NAD
and 8 U.mL
of HK and placed in a microtitre plate. Glucose, fructose, and sucrose were
determined by the successive additions of the enzymes G6PDH (from Leuconostoc
mesenteroides, 1 U.L
; Roche Diagnositics), phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI; from yeast,
10 g.L
; Roche Diagnositics), and -fructosidase (Roche Diagnositics)  
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
2.13.3. Malto-oligosaccharide (MOS) analysis by HPLC
Leaf tissue (0.3 g approximately) was harvested and frozen in liquid N2. The material was
powdered and extracted in 1.5 mL of 0.7 M perchloric acid. After centrifugation (3000 g, 5
min, 5 C), 1 mL of supernatant was adjusted to pH 5 with the following neutralizing
solution: 2 M KOH, 0.4 M MES and 0.4 M KCl). The potassium perchlorate precipitate was
removed by centrifugation (10,000 g, 10 min, 4 C), and the soluble fraction (containing the
MOS) was stored at -20 C until use.
For the analysis of MOS by High Performance Anion Exchange Chromatography with
Pulsed Amperometric Detection (HPAEC-PAD), 100 L of extracts were purified through
sequential 1.5 mL columns of Dowex 50 and Dowex 1 resins (Sigma-Aldrich). The
compounds were eluted with water, lyophilized by freeze-drying and then re-dissolved in
HPLC-grade water. Metabolites were assayed by HPAEC-PAD using a HPLC machine
(DIONEX; Dionex Co., Sunnyvale, USA). Peaks were identified by adding known
amounts of MOS standards. Peak areas were determined using the Chromeleon software
(Dionex) and compared to standard curves.
2.14. Acetylene reduction assay
Acetylene reduction assays were performed by Tracey Welham (JIC, Norwich, UK) to
determine the symbiotic nitrogen fixation capacity of the nodules of several of the Lotus
japonicus mutants and their corresponding WTs. Plants were grown and inoculated with
Mesorhizobium loti strain Tono as mentioned above (section 2.1.3). Four weeks after
inoculation, the whole root system was placed in a 35 mL tube and sealed with rubber lid. A
volume of 0.5 mL acetylene was injected, and the samples incubated for one to two hours at
RT. The amount of ethylene produced was quantified by comparison with an ethylene
standard using a gas chromatogram equipped with a hydrogen flame ionization detector as
described by Horst et al. (2007).
2.15. Statistical analyses
All physiological analyses were performed with a minimum of three biological replicates
as stated in the text for each experiment. The Students t test (p<0.05) was used to analyse
statistical significance of the differences obtained between genotypes or treatments.
Phenotyping data were subjected to Chi-square (
) statistical analyses to test the goodness-
of-fit of the observed to expected ratio. A ratio of 1:2:1 (homozygous
Chapter 2: Materials and methods
mutant:heterozygous:homozygous WT) was expected for a phenotype conferred by a single
recessive mutation. Chi-square analysis was also performed on the results of the genetic
mapping to test for significant (p<0.05) linkage between the SSR markers and the mutant
gene. These were considered as assorting independently when the ratio of individuals from a
F2 segregating population from a backcross between a homozygous mutant in Gifu and MG-
20 was not statistically significantly different from 25% scoring homozygotes Gifu
(Gifu/Gifu), 50% heterozygotes (Gifu/MG-20), and 25% homozygotes MG-20 (MG-20/MG-
20). In contrast, the more linked were the SSR marker and the mutated locus (i.e. toward
case of co-segregation), the lower was the recombination frequency, and the higher was the
proportion of individuals scoring homozygous Gifu for this marker.
CHAPTER 3
The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
The cure for boredom is curiosity. There is no cure for curiosity
Dorothy Parker
CHAPTER 3: The metabolism of starch in
Lotus japonicus
3.1 Introduction
3.1.1. Rationale for studying the metabolism of starch in L. japonicus
Studies in A. thaliana have greatly enhanced our knowledge about pathways of transitory
starch metabolism (Smith et al., 2005; Zeeman et al., 2007; Chapter 1, section 1.3). These
studies have also revealed the important role that starch turnover plays in the productivity of
the plant by assuring the supply of carbon skeletons to sustain its energy metabolism and
growth during the dark period. Mutants of A. thaliana unable to synthesize transitory starch,
or with reduced rates of starch degradation at night, generally have a reduced rate of growth
and a delayed flowering time relative to wild-type plants under most conditions (Caspar et
al., 1985; Caspar et al., 1991; Eimert et al., 1995; Corbesier et al., 1998; Smith and Stitt,
2007). However, it is not known whether information about the nature and importance of
starch turnover in A. thaliana is widely applicable. Plant species differ considerably in the
extent to which starch is stored in leaves at night, and in diurnal patterns of growth and
metabolic demand (Smith et al., 2005; Chapter 1, section 1.6). Furthermore, the metabolism
of starch can vary widely with plant organs and environmental conditions. The function and
regulation of starch metabolism in heterotrophic organs and its importance in major
physiological and developmental processes such as perenniality, vegetative re-growth,
symbiotic nitrogen fixation, and the accumulation of seed storage reserves, cannot be easily
studied in A. thaliana and remain largely unknown. These processes represent traits of
agronomic value in legumes, a family that includes some of the most agriculturally important
forage (e.g. alfalfa and clover) and grain (e.g. pea, common bean, and soybean) crops.
Some information is already available about storage starch metabolism in pea and other
legume crops (e.g. Wang et al., 1998 and references therein). However, characteristics
including large genome sizes and recalcitrant transformation and regeneration have limited
progress on these species. To date, there is insufficient information to allow either an
overview of the nature and importance of transitory and storage starch metabolism in
legumes, or a meaningful comparison with the detailed picture emerging for A. thaliana. The
recent development of both L. japonicus and M. truncatula as legume model systems, and
the wide range of genetic and genomic resources generated for them, offer the opportunity
for a systematic analysis.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
3.1.2. Phylogenetic relationship of the genes involved in starch metabolism and their
expression pattern
Phylogenetic and expression pattern analyses can provide useful information for the design
of reverse genetic studies and to understand the phenotype of mutants and transgenic plants
with decreased or increased expression of a particular gene or set of genes of interest. The
presence of several close homologs, for instance, is predictive of possible gene function
redundancy. Phylogenetic analyses of gene families across several different species can also
reveal interesting conservation and divergence that can help predict the importance and/or
role of genes in a biological process of interest. Similarly, knowing the expression pattern of
a particular gene at the tissue, cell-type, and/or subcellular level can provide insight into its
function. Lastly, the study of genes sharing the same expression pattern as a gene of interest
(often referred as co-expression analysis) can help identify new genes involved in the same
biological process, predict the function of unknown genes and/or identify novel function for
already characterised genes.
The nature and functionality of phylogenetically-related genes may be different from one
species to another due to the occurrence of evolutionary events such as gene duplication.
Gene duplication is generally considered as a major evolutionary source of new protein
function. The genomes of most eukaryotes have undergone whole genome duplication
(WGD) events during their evolutionary history. In addition to WGD (also referred as
segmental duplication), small local events can also generate duplicated genes. Following one
or another of these events, the duplicated gene can accumulate deleterious mutations and
become non-functional or be lost. Alternatively, both duplicated genes can be maintained if
the presence of both copies is advantageous. Over time, the function of these duplicated
genes can diverge from the ancestral gene, and their expression patterns change. This can
occur via sub- and/or neo-functionalization. In the case of sub-functionalisation, the
functions of the original single-copy gene are partitioned between the duplicates, whereas in
the case of neo-functionalization, one or both of the copies acquire a novel function (Force et
al., 1999).
The metabolism of starch involves genes of many different gene families, most of which
have been the subject of phylogenetic analyses (Chapter 1, section 1.6). Overall, these
analyses have revealed relatively complex phylogenetic relationships for most of the starch
metabolism gene families due to the presence of duplicate copies of several genes arising
from both WGD and local, independent, duplication events. To add to the complexity, these
duplication events after speciation appear to have often occurred in several plant species in
parallel, resulting in homologous groups of genes. In some cases, the homologous genes
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
have undergone convergent evolution while in other cases, divergence of their expression
and function occurred between plant species (e.g. phylogenetic relationship and expression
pattern of the GBSS and SS genes; Edwards et al, 2002; Pan et al., 2009). Most of the A.
thaliana starch genes have now been studied in detail (Chapter 1, section 1.3 and reference
therein). Information about the homologs of these genes and their functionality in several
model and crop species, including legume species, however, is lacking.
3.1.3. Information about the relationship between carbohydrate metabolism and plant
growth from QTL analysis
As a complementary approach to the study of laboratory induced-mutants (aka artificially-
generated genetic variation), natural diversity provides a rich source of naturally occurring
change-of-function alleles that can be harnessed to identify the loci underlying complex,
quantitative, physiological processes such as flowering time and plant growth (reviewed in
Koornneef et al., 2004). Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analyses generally use natural
genetic variation of immortal mapping populations such as Recombinant Inbred Lines
(RILs) and Near Isogenic Lines (NILs). QTLs for many polygenic traits have been identified
in several plant species including L. japonicus (e.g. Yano and Sasaki, 1997; Alonso-Blonco
and Koornneef, 2000; Gondo et al., 2007). Genes responsible for differences in traits can
then be identified by candidate gene searches and positional cloning. In addition, QTL
analysis can also be used to reveal correlations between several traits and provide insight
into the structure of metabolic and regulatory networks.
QTL analysis has recently been employed in studies aiming at determining the importance
of carbohydrate metabolism in several plant growth and development processes, and at
discovering interactions between this metabolism and other metabolic pathways (El-Lithy et
al., 2004 and 2005; Calenge et al., 2006; Sulpice et al., 2009). A study carried out by
Calenge et al. (2006) focused on traits related to the interaction between carbon (C)
metabolism and nitrogen (N) availability. Using the A. thaliana Bay-0 x Shahdara
Recombinant Inbred Lines (RIL) population, these authors identified 39 QTLs for starch,
glucose, fructose, and sucrose contents. Their analysis also revealed colocalizations of the
QTLs related to carbohydrate metabolism with traits for other physiological processes
including nitrogen- and senescence-related traits, and traits for flowering time and water
status. El-Lithy et al. (2005) used natural allelic variation in a set of 123 A. thaliana
accessions to study photosynthetic performance and sugar and starch accumulation in
combination with flowering and growth-related traits. A large variation was observed in
carbohydrate levels and their diurnal patterns. In general, plant growth was found to be more
closely linked with transitory starch levels than with soluble sugar levels. No correlation,
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
however, was observed between the patterns of sugar and starch accumulation and the
geographical origin of the different accessions. This suggests that parameters other than
photo-climatic conditions may play a major role in determining the pattern of carbohydrate
accumulation. Furthermore, their study also revealed that photosynthetic rate is a highly
conserved trait among all the A. thaliana accessions analysed that varies only under severe
selective pressure (e.g. atrazine). Lastly, using recombinant inbred lines derived from the
cross between Landsberg erecta and Kondara the authors also performed QTL analysis for
carbohydrate-related traits and plant growth. Correlation and co-localisation of the QTLs
revealed a complex relationship between carbohydrate content and plant growth- and
flowering-related traits.
3.1.4. Carbon partitioning and plant growth strategies
Fast-growing plant species in general tend to maximize resource acquisition, whereas
slow-growing species or accessions rather maximize the conservation of resources. With
regard to the metabolism of carbohydrates, this means that faster-growing plants are
expected to hold less carbohydrate in reserve as starch that would allow them to cope with
unexpected changes in their environmental conditions. This hypothesis is supported by the
fact that plants growing in favourable habitats often have an inherently high Relative Growth
Rate (RGR), whereas those from less favourable environments have an inherently low RGR,
even when grown in the same favourable conditions (Grime and Hunt, 1975; Poorter et al.,
2005). This idea is also consistent with the results of a study carried out by Cross et al.
(2006) in which variation in growth parameters, metabolite levels and activities of key
enzymes involved in C and N metabolism were measured across 24 accessions of A.
thaliana. Their results revealed differences in the extent to which starch is exhausted in a
regular light/dark cycle among the accessions. Faster-growing accessions had a lower level
of starch at the end of the night than their slower-growing counterparts. Interestingly, their
results also indicated that increased growth was related to increased fluxes driven by a
higher catalytic activity of enzymes in central C and N metabolism rather than increased
levels of starch, sugars, and other metabolites. Meyer et al. (2007) performed large scale
metabolite profiling on a Col-0 x C24 RIL population. Levels of most of the metabolites
they analysed also showed a negative rather than a positive correlation with the plant growth
rate. Taken together, these results indicate that faster growth is driven by faster fluxes,
themselves driven by higher enzyme activities rather than a higher level of central
metabolites.
Recently, the analysis carried out by Cross et al. (2006) was extended to the metabolic
profiling of all major classes of metabolites in 94 A. thaliana accessions (Sulpice et al.,
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
2009). In agreement with the results of the study of Cross et al. (2006), a high negative
correlation was observed between starch level and biomass production (R = 0.54). Rosette 
biomass also showed a significant, but lower, correlation to protein (R = 0.37), chlorophyll 
(R = 0.31), and several low-molecular-weight metabolites (sucrose, total amino acids, 
glycine, alanine, glutamate, threonic acid, benzoic acid, sinapic acid). Correlations were
nonsignificant with other metabolites. Importantly as well, this analysis identified starch as a
central component coordinating metabolism with growth. However, since starch is a
polymer of carbon without known regulatory activities, it is likely that regulators of starch
metabolism or signals derived from starch, rather than starch itself, act as integrators of the
metabolic network regulating plant growth.
The possibility of using biomarkers to predict biomass production in plants is of interest
for crop improvement. In this context, Sulpice and collegues (2009) also generated a
correlation network combining transcript levels, metabolite levels, and biomass data. Doing
so, they identified two genes, Kelch repeat F-box protein (At1g23390), and a myo-inositol-
1-phosphate synthase 1 (IPS1; At4g39800), whose transcript level significantly correlated
with rosette biomass (R = 0.65 and -0.62 and P = 0.0016 and 0.0026, respectively) and were
also significantly associated with starch. These two genes therefore represent good candidate
genes to modulate biomass production in crops. It is worth noting, however, that all studies
presented above have been carrried out in A. thaliana and in controlled environments. It
remains to be determined if these finding are widely applicable to other plant species and to
field grown plants.
3.1.5. Morphological and physiological traits of the L. japonicus accessions Gifu and
MG-20
Gifu (B-129) and Miyakojima (MG-20) are the two experimental accessions most
commonly used for research in L. japonicus. Gifu originates from the central region of the
Japanese mainland whereas Miyakojima comes from the most southern part of Japan. These
two accessions display a high level of polymorphism (over 4%) with each other - the highest
level of polymorphism relative to Gifu amongst 15 accessions of L. japonicus collected
across the whole of Japan (Kawaguchi et al., 2001). This polymorphism at the genomic
DNA level is reflected in phenotypic differences at the whole plant level. In particular, MG-
20 plants grow faster and flower earlier than Gifu (generation time of 2-3 months for MG-20
versus 3-4 months for Gifu; flowering time around 6 weeks and 8 weeks, for MG-20 and
Gifu, respectively; Kawaguchi et al., 2001). Further, MG-20 flowers readily under white
fluorescent light, while Gifu flowers less and with delay under these conditions. MG-20
plants also have several other distinguishing characteristics such as larger leaves and a lower
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
anthocyanin content that is reflected in the colour of the stem and petiole (green for MG-20,
rather purple in case of Gifu). Gifu plants have many trichomes on their leaves, especially
around the sepals whereas MG-20 plants possess very few (Kawaguchi et al., 2001). Other
characteristics thus far not reported in the literature that I noted when growing the plants in
many different conditions for this study included a much higher susceptibility of MG-20
relative to Gifu to several plant diseases including fungal infection (in particular mildew),
and diseases carried by insects or damage caused by them (e.g. infection by Impatiens
Necrotic Spot Virus; thrips). In addition, senescence-like symptoms after seed setting in MG-
20 were more pronounced than in Gifu. Lastly, Gifu plants generally have darker-green
leaves and produce more tillers than MG-20 plants.
3.1.6. Aims and Approaches
In contrast to A. thaliana, almost nothing is known about the metabolism of starch in the
model legume L. japonicus, and only very little about its nature and importance in legumes
and perennial plants in general. The limited amount of literature on starch in L. japonicus
available thus far only concerned seeds and nodules (Chapter 5, section 5.1.1 and 5.1.2). I
present here the results of extensive bioinformatic analyses aiming at identifying the set of
genes involved in the synthesis and degradation of starch in the genome of L. japonicus, and
generate the first molecular-function map for starch metabolism in this species. I also
formulate hypotheses about the functionality of these genes in the pathway of transitory and
storage starch metabolism through the analysis of publicly available microarray data
resources. Furthermore, I carried out starch and sugar measurements across organs, at
several developmental stages, and in different growth conditions to characterise the
accumulation and turnover of starch in the two L. japonicus accessions MG-20 and Gifu.
Conservation and divergence with the metabolism of starch in other species, and in A.
thaliana in particular, is also discussed in this Chapter. Lastly, I suggest future experiments
to characterise further the metabolism of starch in L. japonicus and to test the hypothesis that
variation in starch metabolism may correlate with differences of biomass production in this
species.
3.2. Results
3.2.1. In-silico identification of genes involved in starch metabolism in L. japonicus and
their genome location
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
In order to identify genes involved in starch synthesis and degradation in L. japonicus, and
to determine their position on the genetic linkage map, I first compiled a list of the A.
thaliana genes involved in the metabolism of leaf starch (Table 6). This included genes
involved in the partitioning of photoassimilates into starch, in the synthesis and degradation
of starch, and in the subsequent metabolism of maltose (Smith et al., 2005; Zeeman et al.,
2007; Fulton et al., 2008; Ktting et al., 2009). Recent progresses in EST and genome
sequencing projects in L. japonicus allowed me to identify the homologs of these genes in
this species as described in Materials and Methods (Chapter 2, section 2.7.2). Briefly,
candidate genes were identified by searching the Miyakogusa genome database using the
gene names as keywords and/or by peforming Blastp searches using the protein sequences of
their A. thaliana homologs. Blastn or tBlastn searches were also performed against the
LjEST database. Sequences of all the hits retrieved were submitted to multiple sequence
alignments to determine whether they indeed corresponded to the L. japonicus homolog of
the A. thaliana gene in question.
My investigation revealed a certain number of mis-annotations within the Miyakogusa
genome database (Sato et al., 2008). For instance, two of three clones (namely
chr1.CM0982.220.nd, chr1.CM0982.370.nd, and chr1.LjT29N14.30.nd) that were annotated
as encoding plastidial isoforms of PGI (PGI1) corresponded in fact to putative cytosolic
isoforms of the enzyme (PGI2). Similarly, the clones LjT28H07.90.nc and
chr6.CM0114.50.nc could not be conclusively confirmed as the homolog of AtPHS2 in L.
japonicus. Two other clones, LjT22N06.110.nd and chr3.LjT02C24.30.nd, were also most
likely to have been mis-annotated as the homologs of AtSS3 and AtDPE2, respectively, given
their low percentage of identity at the amino acid level. Likewise, a certain number of the
LjSGA sequences were also most likely mis-annotated as starch metabolism genes. Results
of this examination are presented in (Table 6). In an attempt to facilitate any future
comparative analyses, all starch metabolism genes identified in L. japonicus were given the
same name as their homologs in A. thaliana.
My bioinformatic analysis also aimed at determining whether the translated sequences
given in the database were complete and correctly predicted. When this was not the case (i.e.
amino acid sequence incomplete or mis-predicted), I carried out additional analyses that
included manual gene and protein sequence predictions. Doing so, I was able to correct the
predicted protein sequence of LjAPL3, LjGWD1, LjGWD3, LjAMY1, LjBAM1, and
LjBAM3. Unfortunately, in several cases, the complete protein sequence could not be
obtained either because the programs I used failed to predict the correct intron-exon
structure, or because the corresponding genomic DNA sequence was only partially
sequenced (Table A2). In case of LjGWD1, the prediction of the full coding region was
difficult due to the presence of a retroelement in the last intron. The complete translated
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
sequence, however, could be obtained by using EST sequence information retrieved from the
DCFI gene index database gene. A retroelement insertion (LTR-RT; 4594 bp) was also
found within the genomic sequence of LjGWD3 (see Chapter 5, section 2.7.1 for more
details). The genomic sequence lengths of these two genes and their introns were
significantly bigger in L. japonicus than in A. thaliana, even when not taking the presence of
the retro-transposon into account (LjGWD1: 16785 bp, 33 exons versus AtGWD1: 9010 bp,
32 exons; LjGWD3: 12913 bp, 18 exons versus AtGWD3, 7372 bp, 31 exons). This was also
true of most other genes I analysed and is consistent with the difference of intron length and
gene density between these two plant species at the whole genome level: the average lengths
of genes and introns are 2917 versus 1918 bp, and 395 versus 157 bp in L. japonicus and A.
thaliana, respectively. The average gene density in L. japonicus was estimated to be one
gene in every 10.2 kb versus one gene in every 4.5 kb in A. thaliana (Sato et al., 2008).
Whenever possible these genes were mapped onto the genetic linkage map of L. japonicus
using information provided by the Miyakogusa genome database. The position of the genes
whose sequences corresponded to an LjSGA rather than a clone sequence could not be
determined since LjSGA sequences are not anchored to the genome (Sato et al., 2008). This
affected the genes LjAMY2, LjBAM1, and LjBAM6. The resulting molecular function map for
genes involved in starch metabolism in L. japonicus is presented in Figure 6. The use of this
map for identifying the affected genes in the mutants with altered starch metabolism is
discussed in the next chapter (Chapter 4, section 4.2.2).
3.2.2. Comparative genomic analysis of the starch metabolism genes in L. japonicus and
other plant species
I was able to identify L. japonicus genes encoding all classes of enzymes involved in starch
metabolism in A. thaliana, but there were several differences in isoform representation. First,
several homologs of starch metabolic genes or their corresponding cDNA sequence could
not be identified either in the genome or in the EST database of L. japonicus. For instance, I
could not find L. japonicus sequences homologous to A. thaliana genes encoding the glucan,
water dikinase AtGWD2 and the -amylases AtBAM2 and AtBAM4 (Table 6). For several 
other A. thaliana genes (namely SS3, SS4, SBE2, SBE3, ISA3, SEX4, PHS1), clones, LjSGA,
and/or EST sequences of candidate genes could be identified, but could not be confirmed
with certainty as being their L. japonicus homolog. Conversely, I found a number of
duplications of starch metabolism genes in L. japonicus, including APL2, SS2, GBSS, AMY3,
BAM3, and PHS2.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Table 6. Homologs in L. japonicus of the core set of genes encoding enzymes of starch metabolism in
A. thaliana. Continued on next page.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Table 6. Homologs in L. japonicus of the core set of genes encoding enzymes of starch metabolism in
A. thaliana. Continued.
The core set of A. thaliana genes was taken from information in Smith et al. (2004; 2005), Zeeman et
al. (2007), Fulton et al. (2008) and Ktting et al. (2009). Candidate genes in L. japonicus were retrieved
by searching the Miyakogusa genome database developed by the Kasuza DNA Research Institute
(http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html; Sato et al., 2008), then manually analyzed at the level of
predicted amino acid sequence. The table shows only the gene sequences retrieved with coverage
greater than 30% and greater than 50% identity at the amino acid level with the A. thaliana
homologous sequence. In cases where the translated sequence was found to be incomplete or
mispredicted, the gene and protein prediction were performed manually. Protein sequences of all the
predicted genes mentioned in this table can be found in annexe (Table A4). The map positions (in cM)
are from the L. japonicus genetic map from a cross between MG-20 and Gifu. All markers are SSR
markers, except those marked with an asterisk (*), which are dCAPS markers. The map position and
markers that are underlined are the closest to the gene. Genes located on Selected Genome Assembly
(LjSGA) sequences are unmapped (corresponding chromosome given as 0) since these sequences
are not anchored to the genome. Additional information on the clones, including the corresponding
contig, its accession number and marker sequences, is given in the Miyakogusa database (under
'Clone list'). No clones, LjSGA or EST sequence hits could be obtained in L. japonicus for three of the
A. thaliana genes: GWD2, BAM2 and BAM4. Several sequence hits could be identified for the genes
SS3, SS4, SBE1, SBE3, ISA3, SEX4, and PHS1, but they could not be attributed as their homologs in
L. japonicus with good confidence. Details of the bioinformatic analyses performed to generate this
table are in Chapter 2, section 2.7.2. Abbreviations: EC number, Enzyme Commission number; CAZy
family, describes the family of the functional domains (structurally-related catalytic and carbohydrate-
binding modules) of the enzymes as given in the CAZy database; GH, Glycoside Hydrolases; GT,
Glycosyl-Transferases; CBM, Carbohydrate-Binding Modules; Chr, Chromosome.
In order to confirm the correct annotation of the L. japonicus starch metabolism genes thus
identified, and examine their phylogenetic relationship with other members of their gene
family, I carried out a comprehensive phylogenetic analyis of all the starch gene families
(Figure A2). For this, I performed an exhaustive search for homologous genes in fully
sequenced plant genomes. This included the three eudicot species A. thaliana, Vitis vinifera
(grapevine), and Populus trichocarpa (poplar), and the two monocot species Oryza sativa
(rice), and Sorghum bicolor (sorghum). The rationale for restricting this analysis to fully
sequenced genomes was to obtain a clear view of the extent of similarities and divergence
existing between higher plant species in terms of isoform representation for each starch gene
family, and to avoid the uncertainty as to whether a gene may be present in some species but
absent in others because it is in a region of their genome not yet sequenced. I completed this
analysis with subcellular localisation prediction of the protein sequences used to draw the
phylogenetic trees. This was carried out using the two programs TargetP and Predotar
(Chapter 2, section 2.7.1; Table A3). In some cases, I also performed careful examination of
the multiple protein sequence alignment to investigate the likelihood, based on the
conservation or not of key residues, that some genes may be pseudogenes or functional
copies (Figure A3).
As expected, LjPGI1 and LjPGM1 clustered closely with AtPGI1 and AtPGM1,
respectively (Figure A2A and Figure A2B), and were predicted to be plastidial (Table A3).
Interestingly, I could identify two copies of the PGI1 gene in rice, both predicted to be
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
plastidial. Two copies of the PGM1 gene were also found in poplar although one of them
(XP_00322433) was not predicted to be plastidial, most likely due to misprediction of its
sequence in the N-terminal region (Figure A2A and Figure A2B, Table A3). Supprisingly,
no distinct clades of plastial and non-plastidial isoforms could found for PGM, while the two
phylogenetic clades observed for PGI clearly corresponded to plastidial genes in one clade,
and to non-plastidial genes in the other (Figure A2A and Figure A2B).
71.0 cM
APL2a
AMY3a
29.3-29.7
84.0 cM
GBSSb
49.4-52.7
72.9 cM
AMY3b
BAM3a
BAM3b
PHS2b
49.3-50.1
72.1-72.5
69.2 cM
34.8-36.8
56.1 cM
GBSSa
APL2b
AMY1 0.4
10 cM
67.4 cM
BAM9 49.9
71.0 cM
APL2a
AMY3a
29.3-29.7
84.0 cM
GBSSb
49.4-52.7
72.9 cM
AMY3b
BAM3a
BAM3b
PHS2b
49.3-50.1
72.1-72.5
69.2 cM
69.2 cM
69.2 cM
34.8-36.8
56.1 cM
GBSSa
APL2b
AMY1 0.4
10 cM
67.4 cM
BAM9 49.9
Figure 6. Molecular function map for starch metabolism in L japonicus.
Genetic linkage map of L. japonicus from a cross between the accessions Gifu and MG-20 (maternal
and paternal parents, respectively) showing the position of the annotated starch metabolism genes
listed in Table 6. The number and genetic distance in cM of each of the 6 linkage groups of L.
japonicus are given at their top and bottom, respectively. Names of the genes involved in the starch
synthesis and degradation pathway (in blue and red, respectively) are given on the left side of each
chromosome and their position (in cM) are given on the right side.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
I identified one gene encoding an AGPase small subunit (APS1) and six genes encoding
the AGPase large subunit isoforms in the genome of L. japonicus. Interestingly, two copies
of the gene encoding the AGPase large subunit isoform 2 (APL2) could be identified in L.
japonicus and in poplar (Figure A2C). Duplicate copies of the APL2 gene have thus far not
been reported in other plant species (Georgelis et al., 2007 and 2008). Examination of the
AGPase multiple sequence alignment revealed the absence of conservation, in LjAPL2b, of
several amino acid residues very conserved across all other sequences analysed (Figure
A3A). Some of these residues have been identified in previous studies to be crucial for the
activity of the enzyme (Jin et al., 2005; Greene et al.,, 1998; Kavalki et al., 2001; Chapter 5,
section 5.2.1 and reference therein). This suggests that LjAPL2b may not be a functional
copy. It is also interesting to note that proteins belonging to this APL2 group were present in
all eudicot species analysed (A. thaliana, poplar, grapevine, and L. japonicus) but absent
from the genome of the two monocot species rice and sorghum (Figure A2C).
While only four large subunit (LS) isoforms have been identified in A. thaliana, five of
them could be identified in L. japonicus. Homologs of LjAPL5 could also be found in the
genomes of grapevine, poplar, and rice (Figure A2C). The existence of this fifth LS isoform
of AGPase has only recently been mentioned in the literature (Georgelis et al., 2007) and its
function has not yet been studied. Analysis of the conservation of the key residues in APL5
revealed that LjAPL5 may not be functional, in contrast to its homologs (Figure A3A).
All but one species analysed encoded two proteins homologous to AtAPL3/AtAPL4.
Grapevine was the only species to encode only one. Overall, there was a higher level of
identity at the amino acid level between LjAPL3 and LjAPL4 on one hand, and AtAPL3 and
AtAPL4 on the other (82 and 84% identity, respectively), than between LjAPL3 and
AtAPL3, and between LjAPL4 and AtAPL4 (69 and 68% identity, respectively). This was
also the case for poplar (Figure A2C). This observation suggests that the duplication event in
these eudicot species took place after their speciation. The closest homologs of these
AGPase isoforms in rice and sorghum formed a separate clade (named monocot APL3/4)
with two members in each species (Figure A2C). Lastly, two small subunit (SS) APS1 genes
were identified in rice and in sorghum. Homologs of the A. thaliana pseudogene APS2 were
also found in poplar (two APS2 gene copies), and in grapevine. No homologs of this gene
could be identified in the genome of monocots.
Six classes of starch synthase have been identified in plants: GBSS, SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4,
and SS5. Two GBSS and two SS2 genes could be identified in the genome of L. japonicus.
Poplar, grapevine, rice, sorghum, wheat (Triticum aestivum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), and
several legume species including pea (Pisum sativum) also have two GBSS genes (Figure
A2D; Edwards et al, 2002; Pan et al., 2009). Three SS2 genes have been identified in several
cereal species including rice, sorghum, wheat, and maize (Pan et al., 2009). In eudicots, most
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
other members of the legume family have two SS2 genes (Pan et al., 2009), and so do other
eudicot species including poplar and grapevine (Figure A2D; Pan et al., 2009). An homolog
of the AtSS5 gene was present in all the plant genomes analysed except sorghum. The
function of the enzyme encoded by these SS5 genes is still unknown (Deschamps et al.,
2008b). The predicted AtSS5 protein is truncated at the C-terminus while OsSS5 is truncated
at the N-terminus in comparison to their SS5 homologs; therefore, these two proteins are
likely to be pseudogenes unless their sequence has been mispredicted (Figure A3B). Lastly,
while only one SS3 and one SS4 gene were found in the genome of each eudicot species, two
copies of SS3 and two copies of SS4 could be identified in the genome of sorghum and rice,
respectively (Figure A2D; Yan et al., 2009).
The L. japonicus genome contains two genes for each of the starch degrading enzymes
AMY3 and BAM3. Two copies of AMY3 and BAM3 are also present in the genome of
grapevine and poplar, respectively (Figure A2H and Figure A2I). In contrast, the genome of
A. thaliana contains only one AMY3 and one BAM3 gene. The copy number for the other
AMY and BAM genes also varies from one species to another. Thus, the poplar and
grapevine genomes have two copies of AMY1 while other species have only one. Poplar also
has two copies of BAM1. In contrast, only one homolog of the A. thaliana and L. japonicus
BAM5 and BAM6 genes could be identified in the genome of grapevine, poplar, rice, and
sorghum. Similarly, the BAM4 gene could only be identified in A. thaliana and grapevine,
and no homolog of BAM7 could be found in monocot genomes or the genome of poplar. I
also identified a large, monocot-specific group of genes encoding AMY1-like proteins
constituted of seven members in rice, and five in sorghum that clustered apart from the
eudicot AMY1 group. Most proteins of these two groups are predicted to be secreted (Table
A3). This localisation in the secretory pathway was experimentally demonstrated in case of
the AtAMY1 protein (Doyle et al., 2007). Both LjBAM5 and AtBAM5 are also predicted to
be part of the secretory pathway (Table A3).
Two copies of PHS2 could be identified in the genome of L. japonicus. This duplication
event was not seen in any other plant species genome analysed in this study. However,
grapevine and poplar possesses two copies of PHS1. In addition, the phylogenetic analysis I
performed identified a putative new PHS isoform group consisting of a sequence from each
of poplar and grapevine. To the best of my knowledge, neither of these two proteins has yet
been characterised and their functions remain unknown.
3.2.3. Analysis of the expression pattern of the starch metabolism genes across organs
in L. japonicus
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
To get insight into the relative levels and patterns of expression of of all the starch
metabolism genes I identified in L. japonicus, I analysed their transcript levels using existing
microarray data obtained from several different organs including leaves, stems, flowers, and
nodules, as well as several samples of a time course for pod and seed development. The
Affymetrix microarray data used for this study were obtained from the Lotus Gene
Expression Atlas assembled by Andry Andriankaja and Michael Udvardi (personal
communication; Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma). Transcript level
analysis was carried out as described in Chapter 2, section 2.8. A detailed description of the
organs analysed is presented in Table 4 and a list of correspondence between probesets and
gene names is given in Table A1. Results of the analysis of the expression pattern of the core
set of starch metabolism genes in these different organs are presented in Figure 7.
The LjPGI1, LjPGM1 and LjAPS1 genes were expressed in all the organs analysed.
LjAPL1 was the main LS isoform expressed in leaves, with lower expression in petiole,
stem, and flowers, and very little to no expression in roots, nodules, pods and seeds. In
contrast, LjAPL3 exhibited the highest expression level among the LS genes in all organs,
except in leaves and petiole where its expression level was lower than that of LjAPL1.
LjAPL2a was only very weakly expressed in leaves, but it was the second most highly
expressed LS isoform in every other tissue. In contrast, the second gene copy of LjAPL2
(LjAPL2b) and LjAPL5 did not display any significant level of expression in any of the
organs analysed suggesting they may not be functional. Transcript level of LjAPL4 was at
the threshold of detection across all organs analysed. It is interesting to note that the
expression of LjPGM1, LjAPS1, LjAPL2a, and LjAPL3 was up-regulated in nodules in
comparison to inoculated roots.
Both the LjSS1 and LjSS2a genes were expressed in all the organs analysed. Transcript
level of LjSS1 was higher than that of LjSS2a in leaves, petioles, stems, flowers and pods
while the opposite was found in roots, nodules and seeds. In contrast, LjSS2b was very
weakly expressed, and only in leaves. Both copies of the LjGBSS1 gene were significantly
expressed across all organs, except in roots where the transcript level of LjGBSS1b was very
low. In all organs, the expression level of LjGBSS1a was much higher than that of
LjGBSS1b. An interesting pattern of expression could be seen for the LjSS5 gene.
Transcripts of this gene were present in leaves, petiole, stem, pods, and seeds, but not in
roots or flowers. Across all organs, its transcript level was the highest in nodules at 21 days
post inoculation (dpi). Its absolute transcript level in this tissue was over 15 times higher
than in inoculated roots at 0 dpi. The expression of LjGBSS1a, LjGBSS1b and LjSBE2 were
also higher in nodules than in inoculated roots.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Figure 7A
Transcript levels in leaves, stems, roots, and flowers
Petiole
Flower
Transcript levels in nodules
Nod0d
Nod21d
Transcript levels in pods
Pod10d
Pod14d
Pod20d
Figure 7. Transcript levels of the core set of starch metabolism genes in different organs of L
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Figure 7A continued
Transcript levels in seeds
Seed10d
Seed14d
Seed20d
Figure 7B
LjSS5 gene expression
tissue
Figure 7. Transcript levels of the core set of starch metabolism genes in different organs of L
japonicus. Continued
A. Log2 transformed transcript levels of the starch metabolism genes across tissues derived from
Affymetrix gene chip data, and B. Expression pattern of LjSS5 across tissues. Transcript level values
were retrieved from the Lotus Gene Expression Atlas assembled by Andry Andriankaja and Michael
Udvardi (personal communication; Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma), and
processed as described in Chapter 2, section 2.8. A correspondence between the Lotus starch
metabolism genes and their probe sets and the probe sets absolute transcript levels is given in Table
A1. For each gene, bars from left to right correspond to its transcript levels in each of the organs
mentioned in the title of the graph (same order). Abbreviations: A description of the organs analysed
can be found in Table 4 (Chapter 2). The plant materials were harvested 3 hours after dawn from
plants grown under long day conditions. RNA isolation, probe preparation, array hybridisation and
normalisation of the data were also carried out as described by Benedito et al., 2008. Values are
means  SE of three biological replicates.
LjGWD1 transcript was present at a significant level in all organs. Levels of LjGWD3
transcript were similar to those of LjGWD1 in leaves, but lower in all other organs,
especially in root and nodules. Members of both BAM and AMY gene families had organ-
specific patterns of expression. At the time point used in this study, LjBAM1 was the main
BAM isoform expressed in leaves, where it was highly expressed, whereas LjBAM5 was the
main isoform expressed in petioles, stems, seeds, and pods. In seeds and pods, its level of
expression was very high. LjBAM6 was only significantly expressed in leaves while
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
LjBAM7, LjBAM8, and LjBAM9 were expressed in all organs. The expression of LjBAM3a
and LjBAM1 were up- and down-regulated, respectively, in nodules in comparison to
inoculated roots. LjAMY1 and LjAMY3b transcript levels were low across all the organs
analysed while the genes LjDPE1, LjPHS1a, LjPHS1b, and LjMEX1 were significantly
expressed in all organs.
To validate the robustness of this analysis, the transcript level of four of the six members
of the sucrose synthase gene family in L. japonicus (LjSUS1, LjSUS2, LjSUS3, and LjSUS4)
was also analysed the same way (Table A1 and Figure 8). The pattern and level of
expression thus obtained for these genes were compared to the one obtained by qRT-PCR by
Horst et al. (2007). Results from these analyses were very similar: LjSUS1 was the main
isoform expressed in leaves, stem and flowers whereas LjSUS3 was the most highly
expressed isoform in roots and nodules. Further, the expression of LjSUS3 was enhanced in
nodules in comparison to its expression level in all the other organs. Consistent with this
expression pattern, LjSUS3 was shown to be important for nodule function (Horst et al.,
2007).
L. japonicus Susy gene expression (by tissues)
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
Tissues
l SUS1
L. japonicus Susy gene expression (by gene)
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
SUS1 SUS2 SUS3 SUS4
Petiole
Nod0d
Nod21d
Flower
Pod10d
Pod14d
Pod20d
Seed10d
Seed12d
Seed14d
Seed16d
Seed20d
Figure 8. Transcript levels of the sucrose synthase genes LjSUS1 to LjSUS4 across organs.
These genes for which the pattern of expression has been determined by qRT-PCR in a previous study
(Horst et al., 2007) were used as controls to validate the relevance and reliability of the starch
metabolism gene expression analysis carried out using the Lotus Gene expression Atlas.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
3.2.4. Diurnal turnover of leaf starch in MG-20 and Gifu accessions of L. japonicus
To examine the extent of diurnal starch turnover in leaves of L. japonicus, starch contents
was measured at the end of the day and the end of the night at two week intervals during the
growth of plants of the WT MG-20 and Gifu B-129. Measurements were made on fully-
expanded leaves harvested from plants grown in a controlled-environment chamber with 12
h light, 12 h dark. Results of iodine staining showed an increase in leaf starch content in
MG-20 and Gifu plants as they matured (Figure 9). This was confirmed by quantification of
starch content (starch assays done by Marilyn Pike, JIC). For the first six weeks of growth,
the two accessions showed similar, strong diurnal changes in starch content, with a starch
content at the end of the day in excess of 7.5 mg starch g
fresh weight and a content at the
end of the night of less than 0.6 mg g
fresh weight (Figure 10). As the L. japonicus plants
matured, a gradual accumulation of transitory starch was observed in their leaves, both at the
end of day and at the end of the night. At eight weeks, the diurnal amplitude of change in
starch content remained the same, but leaves had a starch content at the end of the day of
approximately 14 mg g
fresh weight and retained approximately 5 mg starch g
fresh
weight in their leaves at the end of the night. Between eight and ten weeks there was a
dramatic increase in leaf starch content. In Gifu, a diurnal turnover of about 10 mg starch g
fresh weight was maintained but starch content at the end of the night was 20 mg g
fresh
weight. In MG-20 ten week-old plants, starch content was over 50 mg g
fresh weight
throughout the diurnal cycle.
I completed this analysis by the measurement of leaf starch in MG-20 and Gifu plants
grown under two different growth conditions. A clear accumulation of starch in leaves as the
plant matured was also observed in other growth conditions (Figure 11). In addition, I
carried out starch content measurements on fully-expanded leaves of eight week old plants,
in a controlled-environment chamber, under two different photoperiod lengths: short day
(12 h light, 12 h dark) and long day (16 h light, 8 h dark) conditions. Leaf starch contents
were higher in plants grown in 16 h than in 12 h photoperiod (Figure 12). The leaf starch
content was much higher in MG-20 than in Gifu in both photoperiods. The amount of
transitory starch diurnally turned over was ca. 50 mg starch g
fresh weight in MG-20 plants
grown in a 12h photoperiod. In contrast, in 16 h photoperiod, only the accession Gifu
showed a clear diurnal turnover of starch. Under this photoperiod length, the amount of
starch measured in leaves of MG20 was extremely high and was maintained at about the
same level throughout the diurnal cycle (ca. 180 mg starch g
fresh weight at the end of the
day and at the end of the night; Figure 12). However it is worth nothing that such differences
in the pattern of starch accumulation and turnover between MG-20 and Gifu plants were not
seen under all growth conditions. When grown in a glasshouse under natural light conditions
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
and not supplemented with any artificial lighting, both accessions accumulated similarly
high amount of starch in their leaves, and no significant diurnal remobilisation of starch was
observed in either accession (Figure 13 and Figure 14).
Gifu MG-20
4 weeks
10 weeks
Age of plants:
MG-20
Leaves harvested from top to bottom of the shoot
MG-20
MG-20 Gifu
Gifu MG-20
4 weeks
10 weeks
Age of plants:
Gifu MG-20
4 weeks
10 weeks
Age of plants:
MG-20
Leaves harvested from top to bottom of the shoot
MG-20
MG-20
Leaves harvested from top to bottom of the shoot
MG-20
MG-20 Gifu
MG-20 Gifu
Figure 9. Iodine staining of leaves of MG-20 and Gifu plants.
A. Iodine staining of leaflets of four and ten week-old L. japonicus MG20 and Gifu plants harvested at
the end of the day (EOD) and the end of the night (EON), at the same time as the samples for the
quantitative measurements of starch content shown in Figure 10. Each leaflet is from a different plant.
B. Iodine staining of leaflets of ten week-old plants harvested from the top to the bottom of the shoot.
Senescing leaves (i.e. Leaves close to abscission that displayed chlorosis symptoms) are indicated by
an asterisk. C. Eight week-old plants of MG-20 and Gifu, at the time of harvesting of the leaf samples
for the quantitative measurements of starch content shown in Figure 12, and iodine staining of leaflets
of the two accessions at the end of the day (EOD) and the end of the night (EON) in 12h light, 12h
dark. Each leaflet is from a different plant.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
4 6 8 10
Age of plants (weeks)
MG-20 EOD
MG-20 EON
Gifu EOD
Gifu EON
Figure 10. Diurnal changes in leaf starch content through development in L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu
plants.
Plants were grown in 12 h light, 12 h dark in a controlled environment chamber. Mature leaves were
harvested at the end of the day (EOD) and the end of the night (EON) and assayed for starch content
at the indicated times after germination (four to ten week-old plants). Values are means  SE of
measurements on six samples, each of which consisted of 3 fully expanded leaves taken from the top
of the shoot of two plants.
3.2.5. Pattern of starch and sugar accumulation across organs in MG-20 and Gifu
accessions of L. japonicus
Starch and soluble sugar contents were also quantified across organs. Measurement of
starch (and soluble sugars) content were performed on samples harvested at the end of a 16 h
photoperiod from six and ten week-old MG-20 plants grown in a CER, and from eight week
old MG-20 and Gifu plants grown in greenhouse. Leaves were found to contain the highest
amount of starch in both conditions (Figure 11 and 13). Stems and pods had relatively low
starch contents but had a much higher levels of soluble sugar (sucrose, glucose and fructose)
than in leaves (Figure 11). In roots, the starch content was also low in comparison to leaves
with most of the starch accumulating in its upper part (crown and primary root). Similar
levels of starch across organs, including leaves, were found for MG-20 and Gifu plants
grown in natural light, long day conditions (Figure 13).
One difficulty of studying the metabolism of starch in a legume species such as L.
japonicus is its upright stature and tendency of the stem to lodge and the plant to become
bushy when getting older, resulting in different level of exposure of the leaves to light, some
being shaded by others. Possibly, this may well have an effect on the amount of starch being
accumulated from one leaf to another. In additions, differences in the metabolism of starch
may also exist between younger and older leaves. For these reasons, iodine staining and
starch quantification of L. japonicus leaves were always performed, unless otherwise
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
indicated, on fully developed leaves from the top of the plant. However, results of
preliminary analysis in which leaves of different maturation stage were harvested from
different height of the stem of MG-20 and Gifu plants and stained with iodine did not reveal
any strong difference in terms of starch content and its diurnal turnover (Figure 9).
Nevertheless, a remobilization of the carbon stored as starch before leaf abscission was
observed by iodine staining in only one of the two L. japonicus accessions analysed. Leaves
of MG-20 ready to abscise (i.e. oldest leaves at the bottom of the shoot, characterised by
senescence symptoms such as decrease in chlorophyll content) still contained large amount
of starch, at a level that appeared similar to those found in mature, non-senescing leaves. In
contrast, Gifu leaves close to abscission contained less starch than the others, suggesting that
starch in these leaves was being remobilised and the carbon derived from it exported
elsewhere in the plant prior to abscission (Figure 9).
leaves Stem Roots Pods
6 weeks old
10 weeks old
leaves Stem Roots Pods
leaves Stem Roots Pods
leaves Stem Roots Pods
leaves Stem Roots Pods
6 weeks old
10 weeks old
leaves Stem Roots Pods
leaves Stem Roots Pods
leaves Stem Roots Pods
Figure 11. Starch and soluble sugar content across organs and through development in L. japonicus
MG-20 plants.
MG-20 plants were grown in compost, in a controlled environment room (CER) in 16 h light, 8 h dark.
Samples were harvested at the end of the day from six and ten weeks-old plants. In these growth
conditions, and at the time of the harvesting of the samples, six weeks-old plants had just started to
flower while ten week old plants were bearing green pods. Values are means SE of measurements on
three biological replicates of sample, each from a different plant.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
MG20 WT Gifu WT
MG20 WT
Gifu WT
MG20 WT Gifu WT
MG20 WT
Gifu WT
Figure 12. Diurnal changes in leaf starch content of eight-week old L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu plants
grown under two different photoperiods.
Plants were grown in a controlled environment chamber, either in 12 h light, 12 h dark (A) or in 16 h
light, 8 h dark (B). Starch content (mg Glc equivalents g
fresh weight) was measured in leaves
harvested at the end of the day (EOD) and the end of the night (EON). Values are means SE of
measurements on six samples, each from a different plant. Each sample consisted of 4 to 8 fully-
expanded leaves taken from the upper part of the shoot. MG-20 plants growing in the 16 h photoperiod
were flowering at the time of the sample harvesting.
U. leaves L. leaves U. stem L. stem
+U.root
L. root U. leaves L. leaves
MG20 WT
Gifu WT
EOD EON
U. leaves L. leaves U. stem L. stem
+U.root
L. root U. leaves L. leaves
MG20 WT
Gifu WT
EOD EON
Figure 13. Starch content diurnally and across organs in eight week-old Lotus japonicus MG-20 and
Gifu plants.
Plants were grown in a greenhouse in natural light, long day conditions (ca. 16h light/8h dark
photoperiod, from April to June 2007). Plants were grown in perlite:vermiculite (1:1) and fed twice a
week with a nutrient solution (composition given in Chapter 2) following germination of the seeds in
compost. Under these growth conditions, MG20 plants had just started to flower at the time the
samples were harvested. Values are means SE of measurements on four biological replicates, each
of which consisted of samples taken from two plants. Abbreviations: EOD, end of day; EON, end of
night; U., upper; L., lower. Upper and lower leaves refer to the first 3 to 5 leaves from the top and
bottom of the shoot of the plants, respectively. Lower stem and upper roots correspond to the crown
root and the first ca. 2 cm of stem at the base of the shoot. Lower roots consisted mostly of secondary
roots.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Figure 14. Phenotype and growth parameters of L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu plants, and iodine
staining of their leaves.
A. Iodine staining of leaves of four week-old MG-20 and Gifu plants at the end of the day (EOD) and
the end of an extended night (EON). Each leaf is from a different plant. B. Phenotype of eight week-old
MG-20 and Gifu plants representative of several biological replicates. C. Growth parameters of eight
week-old plants of the two genotypes. Values are means  SE of four biological replicates. Plants were
grown in perlite:vermiculite (1:1) in a greenhouse under natural light, long day conditions. Shoot and
root height/length are in cm; fresh weights (FW) and dry weights (DW) are in g.
3.3. Discussion
3.3.1. L. japonicus and A. thaliana share similar starch metabolism gene families but
also display interesting divergences
I investigated the extent to which the genes known to be important for starch metabolism
in A. thaliana and other plant species are conserved in the model legume L. japonicus.
Recent progresses in EST and genome sequencing in L. japonicus allowed me to identify the
mean SE mean SE
Shoot height 16,6 0,2 9,1 0,7
Root length (average) 21,4 0,6 16,0 0,4
Root length (maximum) 30,5 3,4 22,8 1,9
Shoot and root length 37,9 0,5 25,1 0,7
Leaves FW 0,564 0,083 0,164 0,015
Number of leaves 14,75 0,63 11,50 1,44
Average leaf FW 0,038 0,005 0,015 0,002
Stem FW 0,307 0,049 0,046 0,007
Shoot FW 0,945 0,118 0,262 0,014
Root FW 0,935 0,146 0,299 0,024
Shoot and root FW 1,917 0,272 0,581 0,037
Shoot and root DW 0,244 0,029 0,087 0,005
Dry weight/FW in % 12,89 0,44 14,94 0,15
Shoot:Root ratio 1,04 0,07 0,89 0,05
MG20 Gifu
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
starch metabolism genes in this species. Genes encoding members of all class of enzymes
known to be involved in the pathway of starch metabolism in A. thaliana and other species
were found in L. japonicus. However, new members of the different starch gene families will
certainly continue to be identified as more genome sequences become available. In total, 38
starch metabolism genes were detected in the L. japonicus genome that covered all the starch
gene families encoded by 41 genes in A. thaliana (Table 6). The L. japonicus homologs of
30 of these genes could be identified with good confidence (Table 6). Overall, results of my
bioinformatic analyses revealed a high level of conservation between genes involved in
starch metabolism in L. japonicus and A. thaliana and other higher plant species (Figure A2).
All but eight of the 38 genes I identified could be anchored to the genetic linkage map of
L. japonicus. This core set of starch metabolism genes were mapped according to the results
of gene prediction analyses and the information made available from the Miyakogusa
database. Relatively recently, this database has been updated (May 2008) to include a
comprehensive list of all the predicted genes and encoded protein sequences. Before then,
genome sequences were retrieved and the gene and protein prediction were performed
manually as described above (Chapter 2, Section 2.7.2). My work created the first L.
japonicus molecular function-map for starch metabolism. Use of this information for a
candidate gene approach aiming at identifying the mutations isolated from forward genetic
screens for altered starch metabolism is presented in the next chapter (Chapter 4, Section
4.2.2). In the future, the information given here could also accelerate the identification of
genes underlying QTLs in L. japonicus for the study of starch metabolism-related traits and
their interaction with other traits.
   Genes encoding the glucan, water dikinase GWD2 and the -amylases BAM2 and BAM4 
could not be found in the genome of L. japonicus (Table 6) and no sequences could be
attributed with good confidence as encoding the L. japonicus homolog of SS3, SS4, SBE2,
SBE3, ISA3, SEX4, and PHS1. Three main hypotheses can be advanced to explain this.
Firstly, these genes may be present, but in a region of the genome not yet sequenced (to date
67% of the L. japonicus genome representing about 93% of the gene space has been
sequenced; Sato et al., 2008). Secondly, these genes could be expressed at too low a level for
their transcripts to be detected and represented in the EST collection. Lastly, there may be
differences in the composition of some of the gene families between the two species, and
these genes may simply be absent from the genome of L. japonicus. One analysis that could
be carried out to help rule out one or other of these possibilities would be to search for
homologs in the genome and EST database of other plant species, including other legume
species (e.g. soybean, Medicago). If such genes cannot be identified in the genome of other
(legume) species, then it is possible to speculate they may simply be absent. AtGWD2 for
instance does not play a crucial role for starch degradation in A. thaliana, and its presence in
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
the plant kingdom appears to be restricted to a small number of eudicot species (Figure
A2G). Indeed, homologs of AtGWD2 could only be identified so far in the genome of
Ricinus communis (XP_002527361) and Citrus clementina (Glaring et al., 2007). It is
entirely possible, therefore, that GWD2 genes may have been lost through evolution in L.
japonicus as in other species by lack of selective pressure to maintain them. In contrast, the
genes encoding SEX4, ISA3, SS3 and SS4 are more likely to be present in the L. japonicus
genome, but in a region not yet sequenced, since these enzymes have been shown to be
essential for starch metabolism in A. thaliana (Edner et al., 2007; Zeeman et al., 2007a and
b; Kotting et al., 2009; and references therein). Similarly, homologs of SBE2, SBE3, BAM2,
and PHS1 are most likely present in the genome of L. japonicus given their widespread
occurrence among higher plant species (Figure A2).
Some genes known to be present in single copy in A. thaliana were found in multiple
copies in L. japonicus. This was the case for the genes encoding APL2, SS2, GBSS, AMY3,
BAM3, and PHS2 (Table 6; Figure A2). In L. japonicus, one gene encoding for each for the
following AGPase subunits - APS1, APL1, APL3, APL4, and APL5 - has been identified. In
contrast, two genes were found to code for the APL2 isoform (Figure A2C). It appears that a
duplication of this gene also occurred in poplar. This is the first time, to the best of my
knowledge, that a duplication of this gene in higher plant species is reported. However,
analysis of their protein sequence for the conservation of key residues for activity suggests
that the LjAPL2b gene may not be a functional copy (Figure A3A).
In contrast to the genome of A. thaliana that encodes only four LS isoforms, genes
encoding a fifth LS isoform (named APL5) could be identified in L. japonicus as well as in
grapevine, poplar, and rice. To the best of my knowledge, none of these APL5 protein have
yet been characterised and their functions remain unknown. LjAPL5 lacks several conserved
amino acid residues, suggesting that this isoform may not be functional. In contrast, there is
no evidence to suggest that its homologs in grapevine, poplar, and rice are non-functional
(Figure A3A).
Homologs of both LjAPL3 and LjAPL4 genes are present in other eudicot species including
A. thaliana, grapevine and poplar. In contrast, only one homolog of these two genes has thus
far been identified in pea (Patron and Keeling, 2005; Georgelis et al., 2007; Yan et al., 2009;
Figure A2C). Two possibilities can be advanced to explain the presence of these two closely
related isoforms in some plant species and not others. First, the full genome sequence is not
yet complete for several of the plant species mentioned above, and these genes may be found
later. Second, the duplicated gene copies could have originated from a whole genome
duplication (WGD) event, and then have been lost in several species, but conserved in other.
Differences in tissue or developmentally specific expression (sub-functionalisation) could
explain why some of the duplicated genes would have been lost and other retained.
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
Alternatively, tandem duplication events could have occurred independently in some plant
species but not in others after their speciation. Results of the analyses I performed reveal that
the two APL3 and APL4 homologs in A. thaliana, L. japonicus, and poplar are more closely
related with each other than with their closest homolog in the other species (Figure A2C).
This strongly suggests that the duplication event occurred after their speciation. This also
seems to be the case in wheat, but not in maize and rice. In these species, APL3 and APL4
seem to have arisen from a WGD event that occurred prior to their speciation (Patron and
Keeling, 2005; Yan et al., 2009; Figure A2C).
Overall, evolutionary analyses reveal a complex phylogenetic relationship for members of
the AGPase gene family. This is particularly true for the LS that has undergone a larger
number of duplications than the SS genes. Interestingly, the inclusion of the AGPase genes
identified in genome of the moss Physcomitrella patens (seven LS and four SS genes) into
the phylogenetic analysis carried out by Georgelis et al. (2008) suggests that the earliest
duplication in the LS occurred prior to the divergence of angiosperms and mosses, more than
400 million years (Mya) ago. The SS shows a much higher level of conservation among
species than the LS. Nonetheless, the two subunits exhibit similar sensitivities to activity-
altering amino-acid changes, at least when expressed heterogously in bacteria (Georgelis et
al., 2007). To explain this higher evolutionary rate seen for the plant AGPase LS than for the
SS, Smith-White and Preiss (1992) suggested that the SS has more selective constraints than
the LS. Georgelis et al. (2007) further hypothesized that this more intense evolutionary
constraint could be due to the fact that the SS is less tissue-specific, and therefore must form
enzyme complexes with different LSs. Studies of the expression pattern of AGPase genes in
several plant species, including A. thaliana, rice, potato, tomato, and barley have indeed
shown that the expression of the LS genes is tissue-specific while the SS is more broadly
expressed (La Cognata et al., 1995; Park et al., 1998; Akihiro et al., 2005; Ohdan et al.,
2005; Rosti et al., 2006; Crevillen et al., 2005).
Six classes of starch synthase genes have been identified in plants. One SS1 and one SS5
gene and two GBSS and SS2 genes could be identified in the genome of L. japonicus.
Previous studies had also identified two different GBSS1 genes in the legume species pea
(Denyer et al., 1997). The results of a recent study (Pan et al., 2009) show that these two
GBSS1 genes (namely, GBSS1a and b) are present in many other legume species, including
the two starchy-seeded legumes cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) and mung bean (Vigna
radiata), and the three oilseed legume species alfalfa (Medicago sativa), soybean (Glycine
max), and L. japonicus. Phylogenetic analysis performed on the starch synthase gene family
also indicates that the SS2 duplicate genes (SS2a and SS2b) have been retained in several
legume species (Senoura et al., 2004; Pan et al., 2009). However, in contrast to the GBSS
duplicates that were found in all the species studied by Pan and colleagues (2009), only the
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
legume species kidney bean, cowpea, mung bean, and L. japonicus had retained the SS2
duplicates. SS2b was shown to be non-functional in soybean (Pan et al., 2009). Furthermore,
an homolog of the AtSS5 gene could be identified in L. japonicus and all the other plant
species genomes analysed with the exception of sorghum. The role of this starch synthase
isoform in starch synthesis is not yet known.
Taken together, my analyses of the starch gene families identified several interesting
duplication events and divergence of isoform representation between L. japonicus and other
higher plant species including A. thaliana. In the future, it would be interesting to explore
the function and importance for starch metabolism of these different gene copies and
isoforms yet uncharacterised. In particular, the function of the APL5 and SS5 genes would
merit to be investigated. While these two genes are either absent or likely to be pseudogene
in A. thaliana, they are present and likely to be functional in several other higher plant
species (Figure A2 and Figure A3A and B). Therefore, their analysis could reveal new starch
enzyme functions and interesting differences with the metabolism of starch in A. thaliana.
Most proteins encoded by the AMY1 group of genes were predicted to be secreted (Table
A3) and their localisation in the secretory pathway have been experimentally confirmed for a
few of them, including AtAMY1 (Doyle et al., 2007). Evidence suggests that the AtAMY1
enzyme may play a role in starch degradation during cell death (Doyle et al., 2007),
however, the role of these secreted alpha-amylases in starch degradation remains elusive.
Recently, it was shown than the rice -amylase isoform I-1 (AmyI-1) that contain a signal 
peptide for translocating the ER membrane, but no plastid targeting signal, still had a
plastidial localisation (Kitajima et al., 2009). More particularly, the authors were able to
show that AmyI-1 was synthesised in the ER lumen and transported to the Golgi apparatus
before being targeted to the plastid (Kitajima et al., 2009). This suggests that -amylases 
lacking a predicted transit peptide for platidial localisation may still be targeted to the plastid
and be functionally active there following a transit through the secretory pathway.
3.3.2. Transcript profiling of the starch metabolism genes across organs in L. japonicus
The synthesis and degradation of starch occurs in both photosynthetic and non-
photosynthetic organs and requires the participation of many enzymes. These processes are
known to vary between species, to be dependent on environmental conditions, and controlled
in a tissue- and developmentally-specific manner, therefore suggesting the involvement of a
highly complex regulation. Very little is known so far about the set of enzymes important for
the synthesis of starch in each particular tissue of the plants, and the regulatory mechanism
involved in turning on or off the expression of the genes encoding these enzymes. In
addition, more information is needed to generate hypotheses regarding the function of the
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
duplicate copies of starch metabolism genes I identified in the genome of L. japonicus. To
shed light on these questions, I investigated the spatial and developmental expression pattern
of the core set of L. japonicus starch metabolism genes by using the transcriptomic data of
the Lotus gene expression atlas generated and made available by Andry Andriankaja and
Michael Udvardi (personal communication; Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore,
Oklahoma). Results of the analysis I performed using this resource provided new insights
into the potential involvement of these genes and gene copies in starch metabolism in the
different organs of the plant. Interesting tissue-specific patterns of expression as well as
differences and similarities with their known pattern of expression in other species could
also be identified.
The LjPGI1, LjPGM1 and LjAPS1 genes were significantly expressed in all organs
analysed (Figure 7 and Table A1B). Their level of expression in leaves is consistent with the
central role that these genes play in the synthesis of starch in this tissue in other plant species
(Chapter 1, section 1.3 and references herein). The relatively high level of expression of
LjPGM1 and LjAPS1 in non-photosynthetic organs including root and seeds, however,
contrasts with the results of recent analyses carried out in A. thaliana and in rice (Tsai et al.,
2009). In these species, PGM1 and APS1 transcripts and enzyme activities could be detected
in leaves but not in roots, consistent with the fact that roots of these two plant species are
starch-free with the exception of the root cap cells. The relatively high expression of these
two genes in roots of L. japonicus is consistent with the observation that this species
accumulates significant amount of starch in its roots, as shown by the results of my starch
content analyses (Chapter 3, section 3.2.5, and Chapter 4, section 4.2.3).
The expression of LjPGI1 was also found to be relatively high in both leaves and sink,
non-photosynthetic, organs such as roots (Figure 7 and Table A1B). Similarly, the PGI1
enzyme was shown to be active in both leaves and roots in A. thaliana and in rice (Tsai et
al., 2009). It has been hypothesised that the expression and activity of PGI1 in these organs
may reflect its biological role in pathways other than the synthesis of starch (e.g. the
production of NADPH through the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway; ap Rees, 1980 and
1985).
This transcriptome analysis also provided new information regarding the different isoform
and duplicate copies of genes identified in L. japonicus. Thus, LjSS2a was constitutively
expressed in all organs analysed while LjSS2b was very weakly expressed only in leaves.
The transcript levels of LjAPL2b, LjAPL5, LjAMY1, and LjAMY3b were too low to be
considered as being expressed in all the organs analysed, suggesting that they may be
pseudogenes (Figure 7 and Table A1B). Alternatively, it is possible that the expression of
these genes is turned on under specific environmental conditions, or expressed in tissues or
at a particular developmental stage not analysed in this study. It is also possible that these
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
genes could be expressed in a very cell-specific manner. Expression could be masked if this
particular cell type is of minor abundance in the tissue analysed (for instance, transcript level
of a gene specifically expressed in guard cells would be low on a whole-leaf basis since this
organ is mostly constituted of other cell types). Detailed analysis of the protein sequence
encoded by LjAPL2b and LjAPL5, and in particular, of the conservation of the residues
known to be crucial for the AGPase enzymatic activity, suggests that these genes are indeed
likely to be non-functional in L. japonicus (Figure A3A). In contrast, the relatively high
transcript level of LjAPL3 and LjAPL2a in all the organs analysed with the exception of
leaves (in this organ, LjAPL1 is the main LS AGPase gene expressed) suggests that these
two genes may play a role in starch synthesis in non-photosynthetic tissues of the plants.
Tissue-specific expression patterns could also be observed for members of several gene
families. Thus transcript level of LjSS1 was higher than that of LjSS2a in leaves, petioles,
stems, flowers and pods whereas the opposite was found in roots, nodules and seeds. LjSS5
was significantly expressed in leaves, petiole, stem, pods, and seeds, but not in roots nor in
flowers. LjBAM1 was the main BAM isoform expressed in leaves whereas LjBAM5 was the
main isoform expressed in petioles, stems, seeds, and pods. In seeds and pods, its level of
expression was very high. LjBAM6 was only significantly expressed in leaves while
LjBAM7, LjBAM8, and LjBAM9 were expressed in all organs. LjDPE1 and LjDPE2,
LjPHS2a and LjPHS2b, and LjMEX1 genes were constitutively and ubiquitously expressed,
suggesting that the encoded enzymes may be involved in starch degradation in all the organs
of the plants.
The expression of several genes was up-regulated in nodules (21 dpi) in comparison to
inoculated roots (0 dpi), suggesting that the encoded proteins may be involved in starch
metabolism in this organ. This was the case for the starch synthesis genes LjPGM1, LjAPS1,
LjAPL2a, and LjAPL3 as well as LjGBSS1a, LjGBSS1b, LjSS5, and LjSBE2. The expression
of LjSS5, in particular, was highly nodule-enhanced: across all the organs analysed, its
expression was the highest in nodules (Figure 7). It would be interesting to investigate the
putative contribution of this enzyme to nodule starch metabolism and function. Transcript
levels of several genes involved in starch degradation also significantly differed between
nodules and roots. Thus LjBAM3a gene expression was up-regulated in nodules whereas the
expression of LjBAM1 was down-regulated in comparison to roots.
There was little change in the expression pattern of the starch synthesis and degradation
genes through pod and seed development. In addition, the expression profiles were very
similar between pod and seeds. However, it is important to stress that transcript levels were
analysed at only one time during the day in this study. Expression of some genes encoding
starch-degrading enzymes is known to fluctuate diurnally to a large extent in source leaves,
and significant diurnal fluctuations could also occur in sink tissues. More generally, one
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
must be careful when interpreting the results of transcript expression analysis as illustrated
by studies carried out on the diurnal transcriptome of starch metabolism-related genes
(Smith et al., 2004; Lu et al., 2005; Gibon et al., 2006). Despite marked and coordinated
changes seen in the transcripts of several enzymes involved in starch degradation, the
amounts of the corresponding enzymes did not change substantially. This suggests a
complex relationship between transcript levels, protein levels, enzyme activities, and carbon
fluxes, and underlines the importance of combining the analysis of transcript and metabolite
with measurements of enzyme activities (Smith and Stitt, 2007). Nevertheless, the analysis
of gene expression can provide insights into the function of genes and help identify
candidates for reverse genetic studies.
One obvious way of gaining compelling evidence about which genes are important for a
particular pathway of interest and deciphering their function is to generate and characterise
mutants and/or transgenic plants down-regulating or over-expressing them. We undertook
such strategy in L. japonicus to determine the genes important for transitory and storage
starch metabolism in this model legume species. Details of this approache and its results are
presented in the next chapter.
3.3.3. The metabolism of starch in L. japonicus
Overall, the results of the analyses I performed on the accumulation and turnover of starch
in L. japonicus revealed that this species accumulates starch and is able to remobilize it in
leaves at night. Large variation in the amount of starch accumulated and its turnover were
observed that depended on the environmental conditions as well as on the genotype of the
plants. These discoveries and their significance are discussed in detail in this section and the
next.
When grown under artificial, low light in a controlled environment chamber, both the level
of starch and its diurnal turnover in both MG-20 and Gifu young plants (about four to eight
weeks-old) were very similar to that seen for A. thaliana plants grown under similar growth
conditions (e.g. Yu et al., 2001, Baunsgaard et al., 2005; Yu et al., 2005, Fulton et al., 2008;
Figure 10). However, starch levels increased both at the end of the day and at the end of the
night as the plant matured (Figure 10). Plants of the accession MG-20 in particular,
accumulated an increased amount of starch in their leaves and significant differences in the
amount of starch accumulated during the days and remaining at the end of the night could be
seen between MG-20 and Gifu plants at eight and ten weeks of growth. Reasons for these
variations in the amount of starch accumulated and its level of diurnal turnover between the
accessions are unclear but could include intrinsic differences in carbon partitioning and
storage, differences in the extent of nodulation, and differences in developmental stage at the
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
time of harvest (Figure 10). Ten week old MG-20 plants had started to flower, which was
not the case of the Gifu plants. It seems possible, therefore, that a change in carbohydrate
metabolism triggered by this transition of developmental stage in MG-20 could be partly
responsible for the difference in diurnal starch turnover observed between MG20 and Gifu at
this particular time point.
In several other of the growth conditions tested, MG-20 only (Figure 10 and Figure 12) or
both MG-20 and Gifu plants (Figure 13) also accumulated large amount of carbon as starch
in their leaves as they aged, of which only a small fraction was remobilized at night. The
physiological significance of this large amount of starch being accumulated and not
diurnally turned over is still unknown and remains to be discovered. It may be hypothesised
that the accumulation of this larger amount of starch in leaves may represent a conservative
strategy of growth that would allow the plants to sustain their growth and energy metabolism
in a range of stress or unfavourable environmental conditions. Hence, it would be interesting
to determine whether and to what extent the large amount of leaf starch remaining at the end
of the night would be remobilized under stress conditions to avoid carbon starvation.
Measuring the fluxes of carbon in plants submitted to periods of extended dark, in low CO2,
or with reduced nutrient supply could help determine how much the plants rely on these
starch reserves and other carbon sources when unable to produce any new photoassimilates
from photosynthesis. Comparative analyses could be made with other natural variants or
plant species that strictly remobilize all the starch accumulated during the day at night.
Transitory starch synthesis can be programmed or serves as an overflow mechanism
(Stitt et al., 1996; Lin et al., 1988b; Schulze et al., 1991; Huber and Hanson, 1992). In the
programmed model, transitory starch is synthesised as a source of carbon to maintain growth
and energy metabolism of the plant during the night. This model is supported by the ability
of leaves of several plant species to synthesise starch constitutively, even when
photosynthetic rates are low, such as under low CO2 and light intensity conditions. In
contrast, in plant species in which the overflow mechanism applies, the rate of
photosynthesis and the assimilation of its product exceed the demand for sucrose during the
day and at night. In this case, starch constitutes an overflow product of the newly assimilated
carbon, and only a fraction of the starch accumulated during the day will be remobilized at
night. These two models are not mutually exclusive and their relative importance in a given
plant species is likely to be dependent on both intrinsic differences in metabolism (e.g.
genotype and the developmental stage of the plant) and the environmental growth
conditions. Results of my analysis suggest that both models are operative in L. japonicus.
I also investigated the accumulation and turnover of starch in leaves of different
maturation stages. Results of iodine staining did not reveal any significant difference in the
amount of starch accumulated between younger and older leaves in MG-20 and Gifu plants
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
(Figure 9). This seems to differ from tobacco plants in which a strong diurnal pattern of
starch turnover was observed in younger leaves whereas much less of the starch was
diurnally turned-over, and its level progressively increased, in older leaves (Chapter 1,
section 1.6). Variation in light quality and intensity, temperature, humidity, and nutrient
availability could be some of the factors that could explain the differences observed. In
several species including tobacco and soybean, starch stored in leaves is remobilized before
their abscission (Chapter 1, section 1.6; Matheson and Wheatley, 1962 and 1963; Egli et al.,
1980). A remobilization of the starch prior leaves abscission was visible by iodine staining
in Gifu, but not in MG-20 plants (Figure 9). Increases in leaf starch content with leaf and/or
plant age have been observed in several other species, including tobacco (Matheson and
Wheatley 1962; ler et al., 2001) and soybean (Ainsworth et al., 2006).
Very little is known about the metabolism of starch through development and across
environmental conditions in most plant species studied to date. The metabolism of starch in
A. thaliana, for instance, has so far been exclusively studied on ca four week old plants (i.e.
before bolting) grown in controlled environment chambers and under a very limited number
of growth conditions. Nevertheless, the partitioning of the products of photosynthesis into
starch has been shown to be both finely regulated and highly flexible, and the amount of
carbohydrate stored as starch is known to be dependent on the environmental conditions.
Consistent with this idea, large differences in the pattern of starch accumulation and
degradation were found between L. japonicus plants grown in different growth conditions.
Firstly, L. japonicus plants growing in 16 h photoperiod conditions accumulated larger
amounts of starch in leaves than those growing in shorter days (12 h photoperiod). In
addition, more leaf starch was left at the end of the night in 16 h than in 12 h photoperiod
(Figure 12). These results are in agreement with previous studies of the metabolism of starch
in other plant species. In A. thaliana, the accumulation of starch in leaves was faster in
plants growing in short days (SD; 8 h light, 16 h dark) than in those growing in long days
(LD; 16 h photoperiod). This faster rate of accumulation, however, could not totally
compensate for the shorter photoperiod, so that plants growing in LD accumulated more
starch than plants growing in SD. Similarly there was more starch left at the end of the night
in leaves of plants grown in LD than in SD, even so their rate of starch degradation was
faster (Lu et al., 2005). Likewise, in tomato plants, the amounts of starch and hexose sugars
increased with an increase in the length of the light period at any given time (Logendra et al.,
1990).
Significant differences were also found between plants grown in the same photoperiod, but
in different growth conditions. Hence, the level of starch measured in eight week-old MG-20
and Gifu plants was significantly different between the results of two experiments in which
plants were grown in a controlled environment chamber at a similar light intensity (ca. 100
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
mol m
) but the chamber used for the first experiment was fitted with both white and red
fluorescent tubes and did not have humidity control while the chamber used for the second
experiment was fitted with white fluorescent tubes only, and the humidity level was set to
75% (Figure 10 and Figure 12). This suggests that differences in the light quality and in the
level of ambient humidity might have differently affected carbon partitioning and be
responsible for this variation. In addition, I discovered large variation in the amount of starch
accumulated between MG-20 and Gifu under most conditions tested (Figure 10, Figure 12,
and not shown). However, it must be mentioned that such differences between the two
accessions were not seen when the plants were grown in natural light, in long day
conditions. In these conditions, both MG-20 and Gifu accumulated large and similar
amounts of starch from an earlier stage (Figure 13 and Figure 14). Differences in the amount
of starch accumulated between L. japonicus plants growing in a controlled environment
chamber and in natural light conditions were important in case of Gifu. It is not yet clear
which factors are responsible for such variation. The intensity and quality of light, the
temperature, the CO2 level, the availability of nutrients, and the extent of nodulation could
be some of the factors that could affect significantly the metabolism of transitory starch.
Significant differences in growth rate, flowering and generation time exist between MG-20
and Gifu. The extent of this physiological difference varies depending on the conditions of
growth. Thus, the faster growth rate of MG-20 plants relative to Gifu was less pronounced
when grown in a glasshouse than when grown in a controlled environment chamber or room.
This could be linked or due to differences in photosynthetic efficiency, in carbon
partitioning, or in light perception. In this respect, it is interesting to note that the growth rate
and biomass production of Gifu plants and their leaf starch accumulation was significantly
higher when grown in a glasshouse in natural light, and even more so in a glasshouse
supplemented with lighting high in red light (incandescent light bulbs) than when grown in a
controlled environment chamber or room (lighting assured with fluorescent tubes with a low
proportion in red/far-red light). Hence, there is good reason to suspect that not only the
intensity of light, but also its quality (e.g. the proportion of white versus red/far red
radiation) are at least partially responsible for the differences observed (Chapter 3, section
3.2.4). More particularly, white, fluorescent light appeared to promote growth and starch
accumulation in MG-20 while it has the opposite effect in Gifu. In contrast, in Gifu, growth
and starch accumulation appeared enhanced by the presence of red:far red wavelengths in
the irradiance (Figure 10, Figure 12, and Figure 13). Such plant response is likely to be
phytochrome-mediated. One experiment that could be performed to explore the importance
of the quality of light over plant productivity and starch accumulation in L. japonicus would
be to grow MG-20 and Gifu plants in controlled environment chambers varying only in the
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
source of light used (i.e. white light in one condition, and white light plus far-red light in the
other).
Taken together, the results of my analyses showed important differences in the level of leaf
starch accumulation and its turnover depending on the plant age, genetic differences between
MG-20 and Gifu, and the environmental conditions of growth. More particularly concerning
this later factor, the results suggested an important control exerted by the nature of light over
plant growth and development in L. japonicus as observed for other plant species (Keiller
and Smith, 1989). This illustrates the high level of plasticity and complexity of the
metabolism of starch in plants and highlights the difficulty of extrapolating the results of
experiments performed in controlled environmental conditions and on very young plants, to
what may happen in natural growth conditions, and throughout the life of the plant.
Although providing novel information on the metabolism of starch in L. japonicus and
interesting insight into its regulation, the analyses I performed are preliminary and additional
experiments would be needed to determine precisely the factors that control the pattern of
starch accumulation and degradation in L. japonicus.
3.3.4. Carbon partitioning and plant growth strategy in L. japonicus
In addition to variation in the accumulation and turnover of leaf starch, plants of the
accessions L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu differed significantly in growth vigour, with MG-
20 plants showing faster growth and higher biomass production than Gifu plants (Figure 9).
It is potentially of great interest to determine whether a significant correlation exists between
starch content and plant productivity and to identify the genes controlling the important
differences observed between MG-20 and Gifu for these two traits. In A. thaliana, starch
content and growth have been shown to be inversely correlated (Sulpice et al., 2009). It is
not yet known whether this negative correlation holds true through the developmental stage
of the plants, for other plant species and/or in other environmental conditions than in a
controlled environmental chamber, in relatively low light. However, this model may not
apply, for instance, to plant species in which the amount of assimilated carbon from
photosynthesis largely exceeds the amount of starch they need to remobilize to avoid carbon
starvation at night. The results of my analyses suggest that it may not be the case in L.
japonicus. This species therefore represents an excellent system in which to test the wider
applicability of the finding of Sulpice et al. (2009).
Further, it would be interesting to perform QTL analysis on leaf starch content and
biomass production in L. japonicus so as to discover novel regulators of these two traits.
Together with their high level of polymorphism, the large genetic variation observed for
both starch metabolism and growth in Gifu and MG-20 accessions make them excellent
Chapter 3: The metabolism of starch in Lotus japonicus
candidates to use as parents for these QTL analyses. Such analyses could be done on
recombinant lines (RIL) from a cross between these two accessions. Once the QTLs are
identified, the corresponding region on the genome can be searched for putative candidate
genes controlling the synthesis of starch in L. japonicus. These genes and their mode of
action could then be further characterised by carrying out complementation analysis and/or
by generating additional variants (mutant alleles) of these genes via TILLING or other
techniques. A set of RILs (187 lines) has already been developed by the Kasuza DNA
research institute, and can be ordered from the Legume base
(http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/lotusjaponicus/index_e.html). This resource has already been
used with success in several studies (e.g. Sandal et al., 2006; Gondo et al., 2007).
QTL analysis on the plant traits mentioned above could simply consist in quantifying leaf
starch content at the end of the day and night, together with the measurement of an indicator
of biomass production and growth. This is typically achieved by calculating the Relative
Growth Rate (RGR), a comprehensive parameter able to take into account, to a large extent,
plant performance and fitness that have been shown to vary among plant species, with
environmental growth conditions, and developmental changes (e.g. onset of flowering or the
formation of storage organs). RGR calculation is generally based on dry weight
measurements (Hoffmann and Poorter, 2002) which are destructive, hence requiring a large
number of plants to analyse growth in time. For A. thaliana, which in its vegetative phase
grows as a rosette with limited leaf overlap, a non destructive system based on image
analysis of leaf area has been developed (Leister et al., 1999), and is now widely used as an
effective and reliable way of determining plant growth rate. Unfortunately, thus far, no
equivalent methods have yet been developed for the measure of growth rate in L. japonicus.
From the results of the preliminary analyses I performed, the difference between MG-20 and
Gifu was the largest in terms of both starch accumulation and plant growth rate when grown
in growth cabinet or in CER fitted with low white light. However, it may be preferable to
use more natural growth conditions if the aim is to transfer the knowledge from model
species to crops. In any cases, pilot experiments would need to be performed to confirm this
before setting up any large scale experiments. The conditions of growth in terms of nutrient
supply is another important factor to consider (e.g. C and N limiting or not limiting
conditions) when setting up such experiment. Alternatively, or in addition to QTL analysis
using RILs, the wild accessions of L. japonicus available from the Legume base could also
be used to explore the existence of correlations between carbon metabolism and growth in
this species.
CHAPTER 4
Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of
Lotus japonicus
One never notices what has been done; one can only see what remains to be done
Marie Curie
CHAPTER 4: Isolation of starch metabolism
mutants of Lotus japonicus
4.1. Introduction
4.1.1. Reverse genetic approaches in plants
Whole genome sequencing and transcriptome analyses have provided very valuable
information on genes and their expression in a continually increasing number of species.
Genetic approaches, however, remain of central importance in determining the function of
genes. Forward and reverse genetics are two highly complementary approaches to
investigate gene function. Reverse genetics consists of isolating mutants in which the
function of a gene of interest is altered. In higher plants, targeted gene disruption methods
are not yet fully established and alternative methods are needed to obtain mutants. Reverse
genetic strategies generally employed include insertional mutagenesis using either T-DNA
or transposons, fast neutron and chemical mutagenesis, e.g. using ethyl methane sulfonate
(EMS) or N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) combined with TILLING, and RNA interference
(RNAi; Mansoor et al., 2006).
Insertional mutagenesis addresses gene function through the identification of tagged loci
and the analysis of the mutant phenotypes. This typically results in complete loss of function
of the gene of interest due to the disruptive nature of the technique. Advantages of fast
neutron and chemical mutagenesis include the ease of generating large mutant populations
and their almost universal applicability. Hence they can be used on organisms that are not
easily transformable or in which active transposons have not yet been characterised.
Radiation induced deletions can be readily detected by PCR (Li et al., 2001), but the number
of such deletions that the genome can tolerate is limited. In contrast, chemical agents such as
EMS induce point mutations randomly that can be tolerated at high density, thereby
permitting near saturation and good coverage of the genome with a manageable number of
mutant individuals (Henikoff et al., 2004). However, the risk associated with this high
density of mutations per genome is that background mutations can cause phenotype(s) that
may be attributed wrongly to the candidate gene. Hence, several backcrosses to the WT
plants are necessary to attribute the phenotype to the mutation with good confidence. For
each F2 generation resulting from these crosses, the Mendelian ratio (i.e. the segregation
ratio of homozygous mutants versus heterozygous and homozygous WTs) can be used as an
indicator of the nature of the mutation. F2 segregating populations can also be analysed to
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
check that the mutation thought to be responsible for the mutant phenotype segregate with it.
Hence, misattribution problems can only occur when the background mutation is closely
linked to the mutation causing the phenotype and does not segregate following backcrossing.
This risk decreases as the number of backcrosses increases. Performing several backcrosses,
isolating several deleterious mutant alleles affecting the candidate gene, and doing
complementation analyses are generally used to exclude the possibility of wrong mutation-
phenotype assignment. Alternatively, if several alleles are available, complementation tests
can be performed.
EMS induces point mutations that are G/C to T/A transitions in more than 99% of the
cases (Greene et al., 2003). An advantage of the use of this type of chemical agent is that it
generates a wide range of mutations (e.g. missense, splicing and stop codon mutations). This
offers the potential to recover not only strongly affected or knockout alleles, but also alleles
with subtle changes in gene functionality such as partial loss-of-function alleles
(hypomorphic mutations), novel-function alleles (neomorphic mutation) or gain-of-function
alleles (hypermorhic mutations). These weaker alleles are especially beneficial in cases
where the complete disruption of the gene function would be lethal for the plant. The
proportion of truncations (premature stop codon and splice site junction mutations) versus
missense and silent changes vary between species, but generally truncations occur in the
range of ca. 3 to 5%, and 30 to 50% are missense changes (Greene et al., 2003; Perry et al.,
2009; Till et al., 2004; Slade et al., 2005). From this last class of mutation, only about 50%
are thought to be deleterious for the protein function (Till et al., 2004)
Large EMS-mutagenised populations can be used in a high throughput, reverse genetic
strategy called TILLING (Targeting Induced Local Lesions IN Genomes; McCallum et al.,
2000; Comai and Henikoff, 2006). TILLING is based on chemical mutagenesis combined
with screening for mutations in genes of interest in a large population of mutant individuals.
This technique is based on the detection of mismatches caused by point mutations in
heteroduplex DNA by an endonuclease such as CEL1 (Till et al., 2004a) that allows the
detection of a single mutant allele in a pool of WT alleles (Colbert et al., 2001). Details of
the TILLING process are provided in Chapter 2, section 2.10, and in Figure 15 and 16.
Briefly, this involves the amplification of region(s) of the gene of interest (generally 1 to 1.5
kb in length) by PCR on pooled WT and mutant DNA with fluorescently labelled primers.
Mismatched heteroduplexes are generated between the WT and mutant DNA by melting and
re-annealing the PCR products. Annealed products are then incubated with the endonuclease
that cleaves at mismatches. The resulting cleavage products are normally separated by gel
electrophoresis (Figure 16).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Lotus japonicus Gifu seeds
M1 seeds sown
EMS mutagenesis
M2 plants
Phenotype scoring
(iodine staining of leaves for
starch mutant collection)
SL1 SL2 SL3
SL1-1 SL1-2 SL1-3
M2 seeds collected
Mutant family
Mutant
TILLING Forward genetic screen mutant collection
M1 plants (1428 families)
starch-free/reduced-starch mutant
starch-excess mutant
Lotus japonicus Gifu seeds
M1 seeds sown
EMS mutagenesis
M2 plants
Phenotype scoring
(iodine staining of leaves for
starch mutant collection)
SL1 SL2 SL3
SL1-1 SL1-2 SL1-3
M2 seeds collected
Mutant family
Mutant
TILLING Forward genetic screen mutant collection
M1 plants (1428 families)
starch-free/reduced-starch mutant
starch-excess mutant
Figure 15. Generation of the population of TILLING and forward screen mutants.
Seeds of Lotus japonicus Gifu were EMS-mutagenenized and seeds were harvested from the resulting
M1 plants. M1 seeds were sown and the M2 plants were scored for defective root nodules and several
plant morphological characters. M2 plants were also screened for altered starch metabolism
phenotypes (cf. Perry et al., 2003). All mutants altered in starch synthesis and degradation used in this
study came from this original screen. For each family (designed with the SL number), a single healthy-
looking plant (designed with SLxxxx-n, where n identifies the sibling; referred to as a mutant line
thereafter) was chosen for the general TILLING population. Genomic DNA was extracted and seeds
were harvested from these plants, individually. Seeds were also harvested from the selected mutant
lines that displayed a mutant phenotype of interest (forward screen mutant collection).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
IRD 700 channel image IRD 800 channel image
Size Marker
Mismatch indicating
the presence of a
mutation
IRD 700 channel image IRD 800 channel image
Size Marker
Mismatch indicating
the presence of a
mutation
Figure 16. TILLING workflow and example of EMS-induced mutations identified by TILLING in L.
japonicus.
A. Typical TILLING workflow (modified from a LI-COR brochure). A population of TILLING mutants is
generated from seeds that have been mutagenised, using EMS, to induce point mutations in the
genome as described in Figure 15. DNA samples from these mutant plants are collected in 96-well
plates. Up to eight plates are pooled into one and the samples subjected to PCR with the forward and
reverse gene specific primers labelled with two different fluorescent dyes (IRDyes 700 and 800 for
TILLING performed using a LI-COR 4300 DNA analysis system). The resulting PCR products are
heated and then cooled, allowing the formation of heteroduplex between the wild-type and mutant
samples. The CEL1 nuclease is then used to cleave the DNA at the mismatches. Lastly, samples are
denatured and electrophoresed on the LI-COR sequencer. B. An example of TILLING results obtained
for LjGWD1 in L. japonicus. The image for the IRD700 primer is shown on the left, and for the IRD800
primer is shown on the right. CEL1-cleaved heteroduplexes appear as dark bands/spots (circled in red
for IRD700 and in blue for IRD800) that indicate the presence of a mutation. Mutations can be
distinguished from PCR artifacts by the appearance of cleavage products in both the IRD700 and the
IRD800 channel images, and at reciprocal sizes that add up to the full length of the PCR product. After
detection of a mutation in a DNA sample pool (corresponds to a lane), each individual DNA sample of
this pool is screened so as to determine which of them carry the mutation. The DNA sample of the
mutated individual is then sequenced, leading to the identification of the mutation.
In addition to its ease of use, relative low cost, and high throughput nature, TILLING is
widely applicable and particularly well suited for species with few genomic resources, where
insertion mutagenesis and other reverse genetic techniques remain difficult. First described
by McCallum and collegues (2000) in A. thaliana, this strategy has since be applied to many
other plant species including L. japonicus ( Perry et al., 2003), maize (Zea mays; Till et al.,
2004b), wheat (Triticum aestivum; Slade et al., 2005), rice (Oryza sativa; Till et al., 2007),
soybean (Glycine max; Cooper et al., 2008), pea (Pisum sativum; Dalmais et al., 2008),
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris; Porch et al., 2009), and Medicago truncatula (Le Signor
et al., 2009). Apart from being a powerful approach for gene function analysis, TILLING
can also be used for DNA polymorphism assessment, and plant improvement. Hence,
TILLING and EcoTILLING can be used in plant breeding for identifying allelic variation in
genes that correlate with phenotypes of interest, and for establishing allelic series at these
genetic loci by screening germplasms and/or induced mutant populations (Wang et al.,
2006). Furthermore, the use of TILLING has also been proposed as a suitable alternative to
genetic engineering technology for the development of new plant varieties with improved
traits since the use of such induced mutations has a much wider public acceptance and does
not face the same level of regulatory restrictions as those imposed on genetically modified
material since they do not involve the introduction of foreign DNA into the plant genome
(Tadege et al., 2009).
4.1.2. Approaches for the identification of mutants from forward genetic screens in
higher plants
In addition to their use in reverse genetics, EMS-mutagenised populations are also used in
forward genetics, a well suited approach to uncover unknown genes involved in a particular
biological process. This approach consists in screening the population for mutant phenotypes
of interest followed by the identification of the genetic basis of these phenotypes. Identifying
single point mutations in an EMS-mutagenised population is technically challenging. This is
generally achieved through map-based cloning (also referred as positional cloning or gene
mapping). Briefly, this approach involves two main steps: genetic mapping and physical
mapping. Genetic mapping uses linkage analysis and relies on natural polymorphisms
occurring between different ecotypes of the same species. For L. japonicus, the most widely
used ecotypes for this analysis are MG-20 and Gifu because of their high level of
polymorphism (Kawaguchi et al., 2001) and the availability of markers for linkage analysis
(SSR and AFLP; http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html).
The principle of positional cloning in plant species with sequenced genomes is as follows:
a plant homozygous for the mutant allele of interest in one particular ecotype is crossed with
a WT individual of a second ecotype (or species). The resulting F1 generation plants are
allowed to self-pollinate, which leads to recombination events during meiosis between the
genomes of the two parents. Plants of the next generation (segregating F2 population) are
screened for the mutant phenotype of interest. The genomic DNA of these plants is then
submitted to genetic mapping. This consists of looking for linkage to genetic markers based
on the principle that the mutated locus will always retain its original genetic background,
and that the recombination frequency will be low for the genetic markers in the vicinity of
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
the mutation. From this, a rough chromosomal region (ca. 5 cM) containing the mutation is
defined (Figure 17). This mapped interval is further reduced with the selection and use of
additional markers within it. Once this region is small enough (generally less than 0.1 cM),
physical mapping is used to determine the absolute position of the mutation on the genome
and identify the gene mutated. This is followed by cloning and testing of the candidate gene
(Remington et al., 2001).
Major advances including genome sequencing, the availability of large sets of markers and
improvements to the methods used to detect DNA polymorphisms, have made this process
easier and significantly faster in A. thaliana and some other plant species (Jander et al.,
2002). Historically, physical mapping involved the screening of large insert genomic
libraries (e.g. BAC) and a procedure termed chromosomal walking. For model plant species
for which the genome has been sequenced, however, it is possible to speed up the process of
identifying the mutation by following a candidate gene approach which consists of searching
for genes that could be responsible for the phenotype, once the mapped interval is small
enough to do so. Further, advances recently made in sequencing techniques (so called next-
generation sequencing technology) now allow effective gene mapping by a process
involving whole-genome resequencing (Huang et al., 2009). Such an approach, however, can
only be used for species for which the genome is completely sequenced, of good quality, and
of relatively small size (e.g. A. thaliana genome, ca. 125 Mb). For other plant species such
as L. japonicus (genome size of ca. 472 Mb), next-generation sequencing technology can
still be used to accelerate the identification of the mutated gene once the interval where the
mutation maps is restricted to a relatively small genomic region (less than 500 kp). Use of
this technology (referred to as targeted resequencing) could prove particularly useful and
cost effective in cases, for instance, where the mutated gene causes a weak phenotype,
therefore causing difficulties in the final stages of the map-based cloning approach.
4.1.3. Functional genomic tools in L. japonicus
L. japonicus is a valuable model species for research into several physiological and
developmental processes (Chapter 1, section 1.7.2). This species has a small diploid genome,
is self fertile, can be transformed easily and is therefore amenable for forward and reverse
genetics and functional genomics. In addition to EST sequence libraries, high resolution
genetic linkage maps and a sequenced genome, a wide range of functional genomics tools
has been developed for this species. These include populations of mutants, TILLING, and
RNA interference.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
MMGHHGGHMHHH
MMHHMGGGMGHG
MHHMMGGGHGHG
MHHHMHGGGGGG
HGMHMHHGGHGG ssr1
Rb. frequency
2 3 4 5 61Ind. Nr. 8 9 10 11 127
Phenotype Mutant Wild-type
Gifu MG-20
Mutation
1 2 3 4 5 61 2 3 4 5 6
2 3 4 5 61
2 3 4 5 61
Chr. Nr.
Ind. Nr. 8 9 10 11 127
Marker
MMGHHGGHMHHH
MMHHMGGGMGHG
MHHMMGGGHGHG
MHHHMHGGGGGG
HGMHMHHGGHGG ssr1
Rb. frequency
2 3 4 5 61Ind. Nr. 8 9 10 11 127
Phenotype Mutant Wild-type
Gifu MG-20
Mutation
1 2 3 4 5 61 2 3 4 5 6
2 3 4 5 61
2 3 4 5 61
Chr. Nr.
Ind. Nr. 8 9 10 11 127
Marker
Figure 17. Principle of gene mapping.
In this example, the mutant phenotype is caused by a single recessive mutation in the genome of the L.
japonicus accession Gifu. The mutation identification process starts by crossing this accession with
another accession, in this case MG-20 (A). These two plant accessions show a high level of
polymorphism at the DNA sequence level. Plants of the F1 generation that are heterozygous for the
mutation are allowed to self-fertilise (B), and the F2 progeny are phenotyped to distinguish the mutants
from their WT segregants. Cross-over events during meiosis allow fragments of DNA from the parents
to segregate independently. The DNA region at the mutant locus, however, will stay homozygous Gifu
in the population of mutants (C). Polymorphism markers (microsatellites SSR markers in this example)
are used to identify this region according to the frequency of recombination (Rb. frequency). Here, the
mapping analysis (rough mapping) locates the mutation, that co-segregates with the ssr2 marker, in
the interval flanked by the ssr1 and ssr3 markers (D). Use of additional markers in this mapped interval
(finer mapping) allow the interval to be reduced, until it is small enough to carry out physical mapping
and candidate gene searches. Abbreviations: G, Gifu; M, MG20; H, heterozygote; ssr, simple
sequence repeat; Ind. Nr., individuals number.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Mutagenesis using T-DNA, transposons, or retro-transposon insertions that disrupt gene
function have been used in both model legumes L. japonicus and M. truncatula. In M.
truncatula, insertion mutagnesis using Tnt1 has been developed and about 15,000
independent lines have been generated to date. It has been estimated that this population size
should provide a very high probability of tagging any average-sized, single copy gene
(Tadege et al., 2009). So far in L. japonicus, T-DNA and transposon insertions have only
been used to a limited extent (Schauser et al., 1998; Schauser et al., 1999). In contrast, the
use of EMS mutagenesis for TILLING in L. japonicus is already well established. A Lotus
TILLING facility has been available to the research community since 2003 (Perry et al.,
2003). This TILLING resource comprises a general structured population of M2 progeny of
4904 EMS-mutagenized M1 embryos, each representing an independent family, that was
generated in the ecotype Gifu. Thematic populations for nitrogen-fixing root nodule
symbiosis, development, and starch synthesis and degradation have also been assembled
(Perry et al., 2003 and 2009). The phenotypes can be searched using the following web-
based database: http://www.lotusjaponicus.org. In addition, a new population of
approximately 3500 mutagenized mutant lines of the ecotype MG-20 is being assembled
(Tadege et al., 2009). This Lotus TILLING facility can be accessed at
http://revgenuk.jic.ac.uk.
Based on the analysis of subsets of genes, the mutation load of the original population has
been estimated to be one per 502 kb. This is equivalent to approximately 940 mutations per
genome (Perry et al., 2009). In earlier estimates, an average mutation frequency of six
mutations per 2.3 Mb of sequences (equivalent to 2.6 mutations per Mb) suggested that each
genome bears ca. 1300 point mutations caused by EMS (Perry et al., 2003), a value similar
to that reported for the A. thaliana TILLING (McCallum et al., 2000). The mutation types
identified in the GENEPOP population for all the genes analyzed by TILLING to date
consisted of 3.5% truncations (of which 2.8% were premature stop codons and 0.7% affected
splice site junctions), 47.7% missense changes, and 48.8% silent changes (of which 28.3%
were silent because they were located in an intronic region, and 20.5% were silent because
they did not result in an amino acid change; Perry et al., 2009). Hence, a disadvantage of
carrying out TILLING on an EMS mutagenised population is that the proportion of
knockouts among the mutant alleles recovered is low (ca. 3.5% on average in L. japonicus).
A major advantage, however, is that it generates allelic series with alleles differing in
strength. This offers the potential of providing more detailed information on protein
function.
Forward genetic screens using the same EMS-mutagenized population as the one used for
TILLING have also been successfully carried out in L. japonicus, notably for identifying
nodulation-defective mutants (Perry et al., 2003). Lastly, a series of transcriptomic,
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
proteomic, metabolomic tools and resources have also been developed for this species (e.g.
Wienkoop and Saalbach, 2003; Desbrosses et al., 2005). A more exhaustive review on the
functional genomics tools developed for L. japonicus and other legume species can be found
in the reviews of Udvardi et al. (2005) and Tadege et al. (2009).
4.1.4. Aims and Approaches
In order to elucidate the pathway of starch synthesis and degradation in legumes and
provide resources for future experimentation, an EMS-mutagenized population of L.
japonicus was screened for mutants altered in transitory starch metabolism. Positional
mapping together with a candidate gene and candidate enzyme approaches were used to
identify their mutations. In addition, TILLING was also used to confirm that the mutations
identified were indeed responsible for the mutant phenotype and to obtain additional
mutations in genes known to affect leaf starch content in other species. Results of this work
are presented below. In total, several deleterious mutations affecting seven genes encoding
key enzymes of the starch metabolism pathway were identified. Mapping was also
performed for several other starch synthesis and degradation mutants from forward genetics.
The mutations responsible for these mutant phenotypes still remain to be identified.
Candidate gene searches in the mapping interval identified in these mutants suggest that the
mutations they carry are likely to affect novel proteins involved in starch metabolism.
Methods and strategies followed to achieve these results and the approaches that could be
employed for the identification of the yet uncharacterised mutations are also discussed in this
chapter.
4.2. Results
4.2.1. Forward genetic screens to isolate mutants affected in starch metabolism
Prior the start of this research project, and in order to identify mutants affected in leaf
starch metabolism, a forward genetic screen was performed on 1428 M2 families (17,100
plants) from a batch of seeds of L. japonicus, ecotype Gifu, mutagenized with EMS (Perry et
al., 2003). This population was screened in the laboratory of Dr. Trevor Wang (JIC) for
mutants displaying either a low or a high content of starch in leaves relative to the WT.
Initial screening and isolation of the mutant lines were carried out by Trevor Wang and
collegues (JIC) as described below and presented in Figure 15. Starch content was estimated
by staining decolorized leaves with iodine solution. This staining with iodine provided a
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
quick, easy, robust, and high throughput way of estimating the starch content in leaves of the
mutants of this collection. As starch is synthesised during the day and degraded at night,
screening was performed on leaf samples harvested at the end of the day in order to identify
starch synthesis mutants (reduced-starch or starch-free phenotype), and at the end of the
night in order to identify starch degradation mutants (starch-excess phenotype). Because leaf
starch was generally not completely degraded at the end of a normal night, and the content
varied with growth conditions and the age of the plants, screening for degradation mutants
was usually performed on young plants (about 4 weeks old) in the glasshouse under long
day, natural light conditions and after subjecting them to an extended dark period of up to 44
h. From this first screen, a set of eleven synthesis and ten degradation mutants was selected
by Tracey Welham (JIC). I then performed a second screen in which several of the mutants
that were not fertile and did not present a clear and reproducible mutant phenotype were not
analysed further. This resulted in a selection of a set of ten synthesis and six degradation
mutants to characterise.
The selected mutant lines were backcrossed at least once to the WT accession MG-20
(Table 7; performed with the help of Tracey Welham). Confirmation that the F1 plant
resulted from a true cross was obtained by marker analysis that was performed as described
in Material and Methods (Chapter 2, section 2.1.2). With the exception of SL5272-11,
segregation ratios in the F2 progeny indicated a recessive monogenic mode of inheritance for
the starch mutant phenotypes, consistent with the nature of such mutations in other species.
Some allelism tests were also carried out by Tracey Welham (JIC) and myself on the
mutants selected for further analysis. We made 16 different combinations of crosses for the
synthesis mutants and six in the case of the degradation mutants. Results suggested that the
mutations defined at least five loci for the synthesis mutants, and four loci for the
degradation mutants (Table 8). Three of the starch synthesis mutants, namely SL4308-12,
SL4715-2 and SL5069-2, were shown to be allelic.
4.2.2. Gene mapping and TILLING as complementary approaches to identify
mutations affecting starch metabolism
To discover genes necessary for starch metabolism in L. japonicus, two approaches were
undertaken: gene mapping, to identify the mutations responsible for the phenotypes of the
starch synthesis and degradation mutants from the forward screen; and TILLING, to identify
mutations in genes encoding enzymes known to be necessary for starch metabolism in other
plant species (Chapter 3; Table 6). TILLING was also used to identify additional mutant
alleles of genes for which only one mutant allele had been isolated from the forward genetic
screen.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Table 7A. Starch synthesis mutants from forward screen
SL4715-2 pgi1-1 B3F2
SL4308-12 pgi1-2 B2F2
SL5069-2 pgi1-3 B3F2
SL4725-4 pgm1-4 B3F2
SL4867-11 pgm1-5 B2F2
SL5127-5 apl1-1 B3F1
SL5074-12 n/a B2F2
SL5249-3 n/a B3F1
SL4618-12 n/a B1F3
SL5143-3 n/a B2F1
Table 7B. Starch degradation mutants from forward screen
SL5215-2 gwd1-1 B2F2
SL5358-3 gwd1-1 B2F1
SL5104-12 gwd3-1 B3F1
SL4841-4 n/a B3F2
SL5035-7 n/a B3F2
SL5272-11 n/a B2F1
Table 7C. Starch synthesis mutants from TILLING
SL4490-1 pgm1-1 B2F2
SL0755-1 pgm1-2 M4/M5
SL1837-1 pgm1-3 B1F3
SL0933-1 apl2-1 B1F2
SL0443-1 apl2-2 B1F2
SL0501-1 apl2-3 B1F2
SL4318-1 apl2-4 B1F2
SL0529-1 aps1-1 B3F1
SL4504-1 aps1-2 M3
SL5072-1 aps1-3 B2F1
SL4723-1 aps1-4 M3
Table 7D. Starch degradation mutants from TILLING
SL1833-1 gwd1-2 B1F2
SL4958-1 gwd1-4 M3
SL3001-1 gwd1-3 B1F2
SL0176-1 gwd1-5 M3
SL5535-1 gwd1-6 M3
SL0692-1 gwd3-2 M3
SL0639-1 gwd3-4 M3
SL4648-1 gwd3-3 M3
Allele name
Backcrossing stage (most
advanced)
Mutant Line name Allele name
Backcrossing stage (most
advanced)
Mutant Line name
Backcrossing stage (most
advanced)
Mutant Line name Allele name
Backcrossing stage (most
advanced)
Mutant Line name Allele name
Table 7. Most advanced backcrossing stage of the forward screen and TILLING mutant lines selected
for further analyses.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Starch synthesis mutant
lines crossed
No. of F1 pods
obtained
Complementation (starch
synthesis res tored)
SL4725-4xSL4308-12 6 yes
SL4725-4xSL4308-12 2 yes
SL4725-4xSL5069-2 5 yes
SL4308-12xSL4715-2 10 no
SL4308-12xSL5069-2 4 no
SL5069-2xSL4715-2 4 no
SL4618-12xSL5074-12 1 yes
SL4618-12xSL5249-3 3 yes
SL4618-12xSL4867-11 3 yes
SL4618-12xSL5127-5 1 yes
SL5074-12xSL5249-3 2 yes
SL5074-12xSL4867-11 3 yes
SL5074-12xSL5127-5 none n/a
SL5249-3xSL4867-11 3 yes
SL5249-3xSLSL5127-5 none n/a
SL4867-11xSL5127-5 3 yes
Starch degradation mutant
lines crossed
No. of F1 pods
obtained
Complementation (starch
degradation restored)
SL4841-4xSL5035-7 4 yes
SL4841-4xSL5215-2 4 yes
SL5215-2xSL5035-7 2 yes
SL5104-12xSL4841-4 4 yes
SL5104-12xSL5035-7 4 yes
SL5104-12xSL5215-2 3 yes
Table 8. Results of complementation analyses (allelism tests) performed on several of the starch
synthesis and degradation mutants from the forward screen.
I initially carried out rough mapping on the forward screen mutant lines by bulk segregant
analysis (Michelmore et al., 1991), using genomic DNA from at least two pools of eight
mutants from F2 populations from crosses with MG-20. Microsatellite SSR markers evenly
distributed over the arms of each of the six chromosome pairs of L. japonicus (three to four
SSR markers per chromosome) were selected from the markers developed by the Kazusa
DNA Research Institute (http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html; Table 9). The mapping
interval thus identified was confirmed by further mapping on the mutant individuals. An
example of mapping results is given in Figure 18. Using information from the genome
sequence of L. japonicus, mapping was coupled to a candidate-gene approach so that any
strong candidate gene (i.e. genes known to play a key role in starch metabolism in other
plant species) located in the mapped region was sequenced. The molecular function-map for
starch metabolism in L. japonicus I had established (Chapter 3, Figure 6) was used to
facilitate this strategy. In the absence of any strong candidate gene within the mapped
interval, searches were extended to consider other potential candidate genes. Synteny with
the genomes of the legume species soybean (http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) and M.
truncatula (http://www.medicago.org/genome/) was also used in some cases where the L.
japonicus genome sequence was not available.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Marker Chromosome Map position
TM0193 1 20,1
TM0438 1 42,6
TM0143 1 66,2
TM0065 2 14,0
TM0076 2 46,0
TM0002 2 67,3
TM0080 3 12,5
TM0005 3 34,0
TM0049 3 55,1
TM0616 3 70,4
TM0182 4 8,8
TM0030 4 32,2
TM0046 4 53,8
TM0034 5 4,8
TM0048 5 27,6
TM0036 5 49,7
TM0302 6 14,0
TM0013 6 36,9
TM0336 6 57,6
Table 9. Microsatellite SSR markers used for rough mapping of the forward screen mutations.
The map positions are in cM and correspond to the location of the markers on the genetic linkage map
of L. japonicus (Figure 19).
SL5074-12 (Gifu) x MG20
tested plants: controls results
cM Marker Position 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 G H M G H M c
51 TM0356 51.4
BM1186 51.8
52 TM1207 52.2
52 TM0107 52.6 H G G G G H G G G H G M 7 3 0 0,3%
53 TM0236 53.8 G G G G G G G G G G G H M 10 0 0 0,0%
TM0371 53.8
55 TM1418 55.8 G G G G G G G G G G G H M 10 0 0 0,0%
56 TM0098 56.6 G G H G G H G G G G G H M 8 2 0 0,0%
57 TM0269 57.0 G G H G G H H H G G G H M 6 4 0 2,2%
TM0009 57.4 G H H H H H H H H G G H M 2 8 0 11,1%
TM0276 57.8
TM0509 57.8 G H H H H H H H H G G H M 2 8 0 11,1%
TM0398 57.8
59 TM0318 59.8
Chromosome I
7 3 0
10 00
10 00
2 8 0
2 8 0
8 2 0
6 4 0
Figure 18. Example of mapping results.
Individuals of a F2 segregating population from a cross between the mutant line SL5249-3 and MG-20
that displayed a mutant phenotype were analysed for mapping. For each SSR marker, the plants
scored as either homozygous Gifu (G, in green), homozygous MG-20 (M, in red), or heterozygous (H,
in yellow). Only mutant plants that were recombinants in the region of the genome where the mutation
map according to previous rough mapping analyses are shown here; all other tested F2 mutant plants
scored Gifu with these markers. Molecular markers and phenotypic data were subjected to Chi-square
) statistical analyses to test the goodness-of-fit of the observed to expected ratio (shown on the left;
see Chapter 2, section 2.15). In this particular example, the mutation maps on chr1, between the
markers TM0107 at position 52.6 cM and TM0098 at position 56.6 cM as shown by the recombination
frequency and the breakpoint in recombination. The mutation is said to co-segregates with TM0236
(53.8 cM) and TM1418 (55.8 cM) since no recombination events are seen for none of the mutant
samples analysed with these markers.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
When sequencing of candidate genes (primers are given in Table 2) revealed mutations,
biochemical and genetic approaches were used to check rigorously that the mutations were
indeed responsible for the starch phenotype. As described in the following sections, this
strategy led to the identification of the mutated genes in six out of the ten synthesis mutants,
and three out of the six degradation mutants. Results of this mapping are presented in Figure
19 and Table 10.
10 cM
84.0 cM
GBSSb
67.4 cM
71.0 cM
APL2a
AMY3a
pgi1-1
SL5074-12
SL5249-3
SL5035-7
SL4618-12
SL4841-4
pgi1-2
pgi1-3
SL5143-3
72.9 cM
AMY3b
BAM3a
PHS2b
69.2 cM
GWD1 gwd1-1
apl1-1
SL5272-11
56.1 cM
APL2b
GBSSa
pgm1-5
gwd3-1
BAM3b
10 cM10 cM
84.0 cM
GBSSb
67.4 cM
71.0 cM
APL2a
AMY3a
pgi1-1
SL5074-12
SL5249-3
SL5035-7
SL4618-12
SL4841-4
pgi1-2
pgi1-3
SL5143-3
72.9 cM
AMY3b
BAM3a
PHS2b
69.2 cM
GWD1 gwd1-1
apl1-1
SL5272-11
56.1 cM
APL2b
GBSSa
pgm1-5
gwd3-1
BAM3b
Figure 19. Chromosomal location of the starch metabolism genes of L. japonicus and mapped position
of the mutations discovered in the forward genetic screen.
Genetic linkage map of L. japonicus derived from a cross between the ecotypes Gifu and MG-20
(maternal and paternal parents, respectively). For each chromosome, the number is given at the top
and the size (in cM) at the bottom (data from http://www.kazusa.or.jp/lotus/index.html). Genes involved
in the synthesis and degradation of starch (lettered in white and black, respectively) are shown on
the left of each chromosome. Mutations from the forward genetic screen are shown on the right
of each chromosome. Identified mutations are labelled with allele numbers; mapped intervals of the
mutations yet to be characterised are labelled with the SL number of the mutant lines. The starch
metabolism genes are listed in Table 6. Full details of the mutant alleles identified are given in Tables
10 and 15.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Mutant line Mutant class Chromosome Mapped interval Flanking markers
Recombination
frequency
SL4308-12 synthesis 1 0,0 TM0102-TM0192 7/19
SL4715-2 synthesis 1 0.0-1.2 TM0102-TM0039 6/13
SL5069-2 synthesis 1 0.0-4.0 TM0058-TM0094 9/17
SL4725-4 synthesis - - - -
SL4867-11 synthesis 5 27.6-49.7 TM0048-TM0366 n/a
SL5127-5 synthesis 4 32.2-53.8 TM0030-TM0046 n/a
SL5074-12 synthesis 1 52.6-56.6 TM0107-TM0098 4/112
SL5249-3 synthesis 1 4.8-7.6 TM0063-TM0982 5/75
SL4618-12 synthesis 1 62,2 TM2089-BM1994 6/286
SL5143-3 synthesis 2 46.0-67.3 TM0076-TM0002 4/24
SL5215-2 degradation 4 20.5-29.4 TM283-TM0500 5/19
SL5358-3 degradation 4 21.3-32.2 TM0131-TM0030 4/24
SL5104-12 degradation 5 50.1-56.1 TM0703-TM1948 1/24
SL4841-4 degradation 1 1.6-7.6 TM0032-TM0982 11/87
SL5035-7 degradation 1 45.4-47.0 TM0989-TM0001 8/131
SL5272-11 degradation 4 32.2-47.8 TM0030-TM0387 5/16
Table 10. Mapped interval and flanking microsatellite markers of the forward screen mutations.
Mutant class was determined by iodine staining of leaflets at the end of the day (revealing synthesis
mutants) and the end of the night (revealing breakdown mutants). The mapped interval corresponds to
the upper and lower limit (given in cM) of the interval in which the mutation maps. The map positions
are from the L. japonicus linkage map (see Figure 19). Recombination frequencies are the number of
recombinants obtained with both flanking markers divided by the total number of mutants analyzed.
The mutation in line SL4725-4 was not mapped because the mutated gene was successfully identified
by a candidate gene approach based on the starch-free phenotype of the plant.
TILLING was carried out using DNA isolated from plants that originated from the same
population of EMS-mutagenized L. japonicus seeds used for the forward genetic screen
(Perry et al., 2003 and 2009; Figure 15). The genes targeted and the mutations identified are
described below and the gene-specific primers used for this TILLING are listed in Table 2.
TILLING on the genes LjPGM1, LjAPS1, LjAPL2 was carried out by Jodie Pike and Tracey
Welham (The Sainsbury Laboratory and JIC, respectively, Norwich, UK). I carried out the
full TILLING process on the LjGWD1 gene for which two different regions of the gene were
targeted, and the whole population (4904 individuals) screened for both. TILLING for
LjGWD3 was carried out by RevGenUK (http://revgenuk.jic.ac.uk/). Selection of the region
of this gene to TILL, primer design and results analysis were carried out by myself. An
illustration of the TILLING workflow followed and the TILLING results obtained can be
found in Figure 15 and 16.
For each of the gene regions targeted by TILLING, several mutant alleles with non-silent
mutations were identified (Table 11). Only the mutations predicted to be deleterious (PSSM
score given by the PARSESNP program >10) or shown to result in a mutant phenotype are
discussed in the following sections. However, all the variants identified for the LjGWD1 and
LjGWD3 genes, including those with a silent mutation (i.e. mutation not causing an amino
acid change or mutation located within intron) are listed in Table 12 and Table 13. Mutants
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
were screened for either a reduced-starch or a starch-excess phenotype. Most of the mutants
isolated were heterozygous at the M2 generation, so homozygous mutant, heterozygous, and
WT segregant plants in the M3 generation were identified by sequencing (primers are given
in Table 2 and Table 3). As carried out for the forward screen mutants, the TILLING
mutants thus identified with an altered starch phenotype and selected for further analyses
were out- and successively back-crossed to MG-20 to reduce the numbers of background
mutations introduced by EMS mutagenesis (Table 7). Whenever possible, and unless
otherwise indicated, mutant characterisation was carried out on both homozygous mutants
and their WT segregants (or their progeny) to allow a more accurate mutant versus WT
comparison since the number of background mutations would be similar between the two, as
would be the genome background.
Table 11A. Starch synthesis mutants from forward screen
Mutant Line Gene Allele Nucleotide
change
Effect PSSM
difference
SIFT score
SL4715-2 PGI1 pgi1-1 C917T Q200* n/a n/a
SL4308-12 PGI1 pgi1-2 G3602A W360* n/a n/a
SL5069-2 PGI1 pgi1-3 G5047A Splice junction n/a n/a
SL4725-4 PGM1 pgm1-4 G1233A Splice junction n/a n/a
SL4867-11 PGM1 pgm1-5 G377A G95D 17.1 0.00
SL5127-5 APL1 apl1-1 C4408T S400L 21.2 0.00
Table 11B. Starch degradation mutants from forward screen
Mutant Line Gene Allele Nucleotide
change
Effect PSSM
difference
SIFT score
SL5215-2 GWD1 gwd1-1 G4633A E566K 6.6 0.00
SL5358-3 GWD1 gwd1-1 G4633A E566K 6.6 0.00
SL5104-12 GWD3 gwd3-1 G7871A Splice junction n/a n/a
Table 11C. Starch synthesis mutants from TILLING
Gene Mutant line Allele Nucleotide
change
Effect PSSM
difference
SIFT score
PGM1 SL4490-1 pgm1-1 G6413A D436N 19.4 0.00
SL0755-1 pgm1-2 G6848A W467* n/a n/a
SL1837-1 pgm1-3 G6932A W495* n/a n/a
SL4532-1 G6924A E493K
SL4619-1 G7194A G533D
APL2 SL0933-1 apl2-1 G1104A D236N 8.7 0.12
SL0443-1 apl2-2 G1471A G275E 23.6 0.00
SL0501-1 apl2-3 C2369T P383S 11.1 0.12
SL4318-1 apl2-4 G2453A Splice junction n/a n/a
APS1 SL0529-1 aps1-1 G1059A A111T 20.5 0.00
SL4504-1 aps1-2 G1129A S134N 19.7 0.00
SL5072-1 aps1-3 G2379A A359T 22.9 0.00
SL4723-1 aps1-4 C1077T L117F 3.6 0.18
SL4543-1 G1203A A159T
SL4799-1 G1215A G163S
SL0553-1 G1216A G163D
SL4827-1 G1219A G164E
SL4638-1 G1842A R289K
Table 11. List of mutations isolated from forward screen and TILLING in several starch synthesis and
degradation genes in L. japonicus. Continued on next page.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Table 11D. Starch degradation mutants from TILLING
Gene Mutant line Allele Nucleotide
change
Effect PSSM
difference
SIFT score
GWD1 SL1833-1 gwd1-2 G3303A W303* n/a n/a
SBD2 SL3001-1 gwd1-3 G3994A W456* n/a n/a
SL4958-1 gwd1-4 G3491A R324K 5.7 1.00
SL0176-1 gwd1-5 C4236T P497L 1.9 1.00
SL5791-1 G3559A G347R -4.0 0.39
SL0133-1 G3745A E409K 0.22
SL6221-1 G3745A E409K 0.22
SL1752-1 G3748A E410K 0.24
SL3333-1 G3748A E410K 0.24
SL4545-1 G3748A E410K 0.24
SL4704-1 G3932A D436N 0.54
SL6904-1 G3932A D436N 0.54
SL1523-1 C4173T P476L 0.07
SL1651-1 C4173T P476L 0.07
SL1786-1 C4173T P476L 0.07
SL1981-1 C4173T P476L 0.07
SL4826-1 C4173T P476L 0.07
SL0672-1* C4239T S498F 12.5 0.01
SL6859-1* G4582A G549S 12.0 0.64
GWD1 SL5535-1 gwd1-6 G9912A A968T 6.4 0.16
PHD SL0897-1 G9769A S920N 0.83
SL6392-1 G9774A D922N 0.52
GWD3 SL0692-1 gwd3-2 G16648A G890E 10.2 0.02
SL4648-1 gwd3-3 C17437T P1153L 28.9 0.02
SL0639-1 gwd3-4 G16918A G980E 0.02
SL4691-1 G16666A G896E -1.2 0.12
SL1185-1 C16702T T908I 0.10
SL1335-1 C16801T S941F 0.02
SL1603-1 C16948T P990L 0.09
SL2714-1 C16956T P993S 0.41
SL5713-1 G16962A V995I 0.08
SL1840-1 G17052A E1025K 0.16
SL0489-1 G17094A D1039N 0.10
SL0528-1 G17163A A1062T -0.4 0.04
SL1002-1 G17277A E1100K 0.28
SL6581-1 G17286A V1103I 0.30
SL6084-1 G17313A E1112K 0.90
SL0326-1 G17316A V1113I 0.36
SL6298-1 C17322T R1115C 0.00
SL4584-1 C17349A P1124T 0.37
SL1795-1 C17382T L1135F 0.06
Table 11. List of mutations isolated from forward screen and TILLING in several starch synthesis and
degradation genes in L. japonicus. Continued.
A and B, mutations from forward screen; C and D, mutations from TILLING. For mutations identified by
TILLING (C and D), the tables show only non-silent mutations, e.g. Mutations giving rise to alterations
at splice sites, to stop codons (*), or to missense changes. Variants identified by TILLING with silent
mutation (i.e. mutation not causing an amino acid change or mutation located within intron) have been
ignored here. The positions of the nucleotide changes given are their position from the start codon of
the corresponding gene. The asterisk (*) indicates that no seeds were available (seed bags missing
from TILLING seed collection) and that therefore the phenotype of the mutants of these lines could not
be analyzed. A SIFT score smaller than 0.05 and a PSSM (Position-Specific Scoring Matrix) difference
score above 10 indicates a deleterious effect. The variant displayed is colored according to the severity
of its effect, as given by the PARSESNP program: changes to a stop codon and splice junction
changes are colored red, and silent changes are colored black. If a missense change is in a Block, it is
colored according to its PSSM difference score: if the score is less than 0, indicating that variant
residue is more similar to the corresponding column of the Blocks alignment than the reference
residue, then the change is colored green; if it is greater than 10, it is colored red, otherwise it is
colored black. Missense changes outside of a Block are also colored black.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Table 12A. GWD1 TILLING - SBD2 domain
1 SL1833-1 G3303A W303* Het
2 SL4958-1 G3491A R324K 5.7 1.00 Het
3 SL5791-1 G3559A G347R -4.0 0.39 Hom
4 SL5039-1 G3591A L357= Het
5 SL4627-1 C3609T F363= Het
6 SL5060-1 G3744A K408= Hom
7 SL0133-1 G3745A E409K 0.22 Het
8 SL6221-1 G3745A E409K 0.22 Hom
9 SL1752-1 G3748A E410K 0.24 Het
10 SL3333-1 G3748A E410K 0.24 Het
11 SL4545-1 G3748A E410K 0.24 Het
12 SL4704-1 G3932A D436N 0.54 Het
13 SL6904-1 G3932A D436N 0.54 Het
14 SL3001-1 G3994A W456* Het
15 SL1523-1 C4173T P476L 0.07 Het
16 SL1651-1 C4173T P476L 0.07 Het
17 SL1786-1 C4173T P476L 0.07 Het
18 SL1981-1 C4173T P476L 0.07 Het
19 SL4826-1 C4173T P476L 0.07 Het
20 SL0176-1 C4236T P497L 1.9 1.00 Het
21 SL0672-1 C4239T S498F 12.5 0.01 Hom
22 SL6859-1 G4582A G549S 12.0 0.64 Het
Table 12B. GWD1 TILLING - PHD domain
1 SL6491-1 G9637A Non-coding Hom
2 SL0122-1 C9729T Non-coding Het
3 SL0836-1 C9729T Non-coding Het
4 SL0897-1 G9769A S920N 0.83 Het
5 SL6392-1 G9774A D922N 0.52 Het
6 SL5293-1 C9830T L940= Het
7 SL0511-1 C9891T L961= Het
8 SL5535-1 G9912A A968T 6.4 0.16 Het
9 SL6027-1 C9924T Non-coding Het
10 SL5936-1 C10448T Non-coding Het
11 SL1027-1 G10490A Non-coding Het
12 SL6040-1 C10605T Non-coding Het
# Line
Nucleotide
Change Effect
Difference SIFT Score Zygosity
Zygosity
Difference SIFT Score#
Nucleotide
Change EffectLine
Table 12. List of the mutations identified in the regions of LjGWD1 and LjGWD3 genes targeted by
TILLING.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Table 12C. GWD3 TILLING
1 SL0692-1 G16648A G890E 10.2 0.02 Het
2 SL4691-1 G16666A G896E -1.2 0.12 Het
3 SL1185-1 C16702T T908I 0.10 Het
4 SL1335-1 C16801T S941F 0.02 Het
5 SL0639-1 G16918A G980E 0.02 Het
6 SL6226-1 C16937T P986= Het
7 SL1603-1 C16948T P990L 0.09 Het
8 SL2714-1 C16956T P993S 0.41 Het
9 SL5713-1 G16962A V995I 0.08 Hom
10 SL4942-1 C16998T L1007= Het
11 SL6423-1 C16998T L1007= Het
12 SL0688-1 G17048A Q1023= Het
13 SL0137-1 G17048A Q1023= Het
14 SL1164-1 G17048A Q1023= Hom
15 SL1840-1 G17052A E1025K 0.16 Het
16 SL0489-1 G17094A D1039N 0.10 Het
17 SL0528-1 G17163A A1062T -0.4 0.04 Het
18 SL1002-1 G17277A E1100K 0.28 Het
19 SL2727-1 C17283T L1102= Het
20 SL6581-1 G17286A V1103I 0.30 Hom
21 SL6084-1 G17313A E1112K 0.90 Het
22 SL326-1 G17316A V1113I 0.36 Het
23 SL6298-1 C17322T R1115C 0.00 Het
24 SL4584-1 C17349A P1124T 0.37 Het
25 SL1795-1 C17382T L1135F 0.06 Het
26 SL4648-1 C17437T P1153L 28.9 0.02 Het
Zygosity
Difference SIFT ScoreLine#
Nucleotide
Change Effect
Table 12. List of the mutations identified in the regions of LjGWD1 and LjGWD3 genes targeted by
TILLING. Continued.
The positions of the nucleotide changes given are their position from the start codon of the
corresponding gene. Hom corresponds to homozygotes and Het to heterozygotes. The variant
displayed is colored according to the severity of its effect, as given by the PARSESNP program:
changes to a stop codon and splice junction changes are colored red, and silent changes are colored
black. If a missense change is in a Block, it is colored according to its PSSM difference score: if the
score is less than 0, indicating that variant residue is more similar to the corresponding column of the
Blocks alignment than the reference residue, then the change is colored green; if it is greater than 10, it
is colored red, otherwise it is colored black. Missense changes outside of a Block are also colored
black.
Obtained Predicted Obtained Predicted Obtained Predicted
Percentage of
Non silent changes 86.4 52.1 25 45.1 73.1 53.9
Truncation changes 9.1 6.4 0 5.2 0.0 3.9
Nonsense 9.1 4.4 0 3.6 0.0 3.7
Splice junction 0.0 2.0 0 1.6 0.0 0.2
Missense changes 77.3 45.7 25 39.8 73.1 50.0
Predicted deletorious 9.1 6.0 8.3 15.4 7.7 7.0
Predicted non deletorious 68.2 41.7 16.7 24.4 65.4 43.0
Silent changes 13.6 47.9 75 54.9 26.9 46.1
GWD1-SBD2 GWD1-PHD GWD3
Table 13. Statistics on the mutations identified by TILLING in the targeted regions of the LjGWD1 and
LjGWD3 genes.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
GWD1-SBD2 GWD1-PHD GWD3
Ratio Hom:Het (in %) 18.2 8.3 11.5
G to A transition (in %): 63.6 41.7 57.7
C to T transition (in %): 36.4 58.3 42.3
Targeted region length (in bp) 1578 1183 1299
Number of mutations obtained 22 12 26
Number of mutation per kb 13.9 10.1 20.0
Number of
Duplicate mutation 2 1 1
Triplicate mutation 1 0 1
Quadruple mutation 0 0 0
Quintuple mutation 1 0 0
Table 13. Statistics on the mutations identified by TILLING in the targeted regions of the LjGWD1 and
LjGWD3 genes. Continued.
The predicted percentages of the different categories of mutations are those given by the CODDLE
program. Nonsense changes refer to mutation leading to premature stop codons. Abbreviations: Hom,
homozygote; Het, heterozygote. SBD2 stands for Starch Binding Domain and PHD for Phospho-
Histidine Domain.
4.2.3. Identification of several mutant alleles of the starch synthesis genes PGI, PGM,
and AGPase
Taking advantage of the knowledge gained from A. thaliana (Chapter 1 and Table 6), I
examined with Tracey Welham (JIC) whether the starch-free and reduced-starch mutants
selected in the forward screen lacked PGI1, PGM1, or AGPase by coupling the genetic
linkage mapping with a candidate gene and enzyme approach. Doing so, we were able to
determine that the mutations affecting these three enzymes accounted for the phenotypes of
six of the ten synthesis mutants, as described below. In addition, additional mutant alleles of
genes coding for PGM1 and two different subunits of AGPase were also generated via
TILLING.
4.2.3.1. PGI1 mutant alleles
Three of the synthesis mutants from the forward screen (SL4308-12, SL4715-2 and
SL5069-2) had leaf starch contents that were only 10% of WT values (Figure 20 and Table
14), but their embryo and root starch contents were indistinguishable by iodine staining from
those of WT plants (Figure 20). This pattern of starch distribution is also seen in the A.
thaliana pgi1 mutant (Yu et al., 2000). The three mutants were shown by crossing to be
allelic, and the mutations in all three mapped to the same interval at the top of chromosome I
(Figure 19, Table 6 and Table 10). The LjPGI1 gene is located in this interval. Sequencing of
the PGI1 gene in the three mutants revealed two mutations that create stop codons (pgi1-1,
SL4715-2; pgi1-2, SL4308-12) and one (pgi1-3, SL5069-2) at a splice-site junction (Figure
21 and Table 15).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Figure 20. Iodine staining of starch synthesis and degradation mutants.
A-C. Iodine staining of leaves of mutants obtained from the forward genetic screen and from TILLING.
All mutant lines shown here except gwd1-3 and gwd3-4 were derived from outcrosses of the original
mutant with MG-20. Each leaflet is from a different plant. Plants were grown in 16-h light, 8-h dark and
were ca. four weeks old at the time of harvest. The name of the mutant allele is given where this is
known (Table 15). A. Mutants in starch synthesis from the forward genetic screen and TILLING.
Leaflets were harvested at the end of the day. B and C. Mutants from the forward genetic screen (B)
and TILLING (C). Leaf phenotype of the gwd1-3 and gwd3-4 TILLING mutants is shown in comparison
to those of their segregating WT. Leaflets were harvested at the end of an extended night of up to 44 h.
D. Starch contents of roots and embryos of WT and starch synthesis mutant plants. Plants were
harvested when approximately 3 months old. Roots and embryos were decolorized prior to staining
with iodine solution. Note that roots and embryos of WT plants have high starch contents, those of
pgm1-4 have no detectable starch, those of aps1-1 mutant have drastically reduced starch contents,
and those of pgi1-2 (SL4308-12 ) mutant appear very similar to WT.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Genotype
Wild-type Mutant
pgm1-3 25.3  6.4 b n.d.
pgm1-4 20.1  4.8 b n.d.
pgm1-5 29.7  6.2 6.1  1.3
pgi1-1 17.2  5.9 1.83  0.35
pgi1-2 50.6  4.7 4.56  1.90
aps1-1 47.0  4.1 3.73  1.29
apl1-1 59.6  10.5 12.7  2.0
Starch content (mg Glc equivalents g
fresh weight)
Table 14. Starch content at the end of the day in leaves of mutants with starchless or low-starch
phenotypes.
Values are means  SE of measurements on six samples, each consisting of fully-expanded leaves
from the upper part of the shoot of a single plant.
For each genotype, F3 homozygous mutant and
wild-type plants for analysis were selected by genotyping individual plants in a single F2 population
derived from a cross between the original mutant in Gifu and MG-20. Plants were grown for 7 weeks,
as described for starch quantification in Chapter 2, section 2.13.1.
n.d., not detected.
I performed native PAGE followed by activity staining on protein extracts from WT leaves
that revealed two bands of PGI activity. From equivalent studies on other species, these are
likely to be attributable to the cytosolic and plastidial isoforms of the enzyme. One of these
two bands was missing in extracts of mutant leaves. Assuming that the relative mobilities of
these isoforms are the same in L. japonicus as in the other species studied to date - with the
plastidial isoform always migrating faster (Shaw and Prasas, 1970; Weeden and Gottlieb,
1982) - the missing band was attributable to the plastidial isoform (Figure 22). As a further
check on the identity of these mutants, I assayed leaf extracts for PGI activity. In several
species including A. thaliana, spinach (Spinacia oleracea), cauliflower (Brassica oleracea)
and Clarika xantiana, it has been shown that the activity of the cytosolic and plastidial
isoform can be separately estimated by measurement before and after heat treatment of the
extract, because the plastidial isoform is much more heat sensitive than the cytosolic isoform
(Weeden and Gottlieb, 1982; Jones et al., 1986). For extracts of MG-20, activity was reduced
by heat treatment 10 min at 50C (8.9  0.4 before heat, 7.1  0.5 after heat) whereas there
was no decline after heat treatment in extracts of pgi1-1 (8.9  0.1 before heat, 9.5  0.2 after
heat; all values are mol min
FW and means  SE from 3 plants), suggesting that the
pgi1-1 mutant was indeed lacking plastidial PGI enzyme activity. However, careful
examination of the PGI activity in L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu WT plant extracts before
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
and after heat treatment by native PAGE gels revealed that, in contrast to all the other
species mentioned above, the cytosolic PGI isoform of L. japonicus is also sensitive to heat
treatment (Figure 23). Nevertheless, the results of the native PAGE gels of PGI enzyme
activity clearly show the specific loss of the plastidial isoform of PGI in the pgi1-1 mutant
(Figure 22).
pLjPGI1
pgi1-3pgi1-1 pgi1-2
Starch synthesis genes
LjAPL1
apl1-1
LjAPL2
apl2-1 apl2-2 apl2-3 apl2-4
aps1-2
aps1-1
LjAPS1
aps1-4
aps1-3 3
pLjPGM1
pgm1-5 pgm1-1
pgm1-3
pgm1-4 pgm1-2
Starch degradation genes
gwd1-1
gwd1-3
LjGWD1
gwd1-5
gwd1-2
gwd1-4
gwd1-3 gwd1-6
LjGWD3
gwd3-1 gwd3-2
gwd3-3
gwd3-4
pLjPGI1
pgi1-3pgi1-1 pgi1-2
Starch synthesis genes
LjAPL1
apl1-1
LjAPL2
apl2-1 apl2-2 apl2-3 apl2-4
aps1-2
aps1-1
LjAPS1
aps1-4
aps1-3 3
pLjPGM1
pgm1-5 pgm1-1
pgm1-3
pgm1-4 pgm1-2
Starch degradation genes
gwd1-1
gwd1-3
LjGWD1
gwd1-5
gwd1-2
gwd1-4
gwd1-3 gwd1-6
LjGWD3
gwd3-1 gwd3-2
gwd3-3
gwd3-4
Figure 21. Structures of the starch metabolism genes and positions of the non-silent mutations
discovered in the forward genetic screen and by TILLING.
Boxes and lines indicate exons and introns, respectively. Only the TILLING mutations leading to a
starch phenotype and/or predicted by the PARSESNP program to have PSSM values >0 are shown.
The length of the gene sequence (in base pair, bp) is given on the right. The symbols above the gene
specify the mutation type and position. Octagons, stop codons; diamonds, splice site junction
mutations; triangles, amino acid changes. Details on the nature and position of the mutations are given
in Table 15.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Gene Mutant line Allele
Nucleotide
change
Effect of the mutation Source of the
mutation
LjPGI1 SL4715-2 pgi1-1 C917T Q200* Forward screen
SL4308-12 pgi1-2 G3602A W360* Forward screen
SL5069-2 pgi1-3 G5047A Splice-site junction Forward screen
LjPGM1 SL4725-4 pgm1-4 G1233A Splice-site junction Forward screen
SL4867-11 pgm1-5 G377A G95D Forward screen
SL4490-1 pgm1-1 G6413A D436N TILLING
SL0755-1 pgm1-2 G6848A W467* TILLING
SL1837-1 pgm1-3 G6932A W495* TILLING
LjAPL1 SL5127-5 apl1-1 C4408T S400L Forward screen
LjAPL2 SL0933-1 apl2-1 G1104A D236N TILLING
SL0443-1 apl2-2 G1471A G275E TILLING
SL0501-1 apl2-3 C2369T P383S TILLING
SL4318-1 apl2-4 G2453A Splice-site junction TILLING
LjAPS1 SL0529-1 aps1-1 G1059A A111T TILLING
SL4504-1 aps1-2 G1129A S134N TILLING
SL5072-1 aps1-3 G2379A A359T TILLING
SL4723-1 aps1-4 C1077T L117F TILLING
LjGWD1 SL5215-2 gwd1-1 G4633A E566K Forward screen
SL5358-3 gwd1-1 G4633A E566K Forward screen
SL1833-1 gwd1-2 G3303A W303* TILLING
SL3001-1 gwd1-3 G3994A W456* TILLING
SL4958-1 gwd1-4 G3491A R324K TILLING
SL0176-1 gwd1-5 C4236T P497L TILLING
SL5535-1 gwd1-6 G9912A A968T TILLING
LjGWD3 SL5104-12 gwd3-1 G7871A Splice-site junction Forward screen
SL0692-1 gwd3-2 G16648A G890E TILLING
SL4648-1 gwd3-3 C17437T P1153L TILLING
SL0639-1 gwd3-4 G16918A G980E TILLING
Table 15. Mutant alleles of genes encoding enzymes of starch metabolism in L. japonicus.
For mutations identified by TILLING, the table shows only those giving rise to alterations at splice sites,
to stop codons (*), or to missense changes leading to a starch phenotype, or with PSSM values given
by PARSESNP >0.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
pgm1-4 pgm1-5pgm1-1 pgi1-2
pgm1-4 pgm1-5pgm1-1 pgi1-2
Figure 22. Separation of PGM and PGI isoform activities by native gel electrophoresis.
The positions of bands corresponding to the activity of the plastidial (PGM1, PGI1) and cytosolic
(PGM2, PGI2) isoforms of the enzymes are indicated by arrowheads. The experiment was repeated on
three different mutant and segregating wild-type plants for each genotype; representative results are
displayed for one plant of each genotype. For each genotype, wild-type and mutant lanes are from the
same gel. A. gels treated to reveal PGM activity. Each lane contained 100 g of protein from a soluble 
extract of leaves. B. gel treated to reveal PGI activity. Each lane contained 50 g of protein from a 
soluble extract of leaves.
Figure 23. Heat sensitivity of the activity of the plastidial (PGI1) and cytosolic (PGI2) isoforms in L.
japonicus.
50 g of protein from soluble WT extracts of leaves of L. japonicus (1-9) and A. thaliana (10, 11) that
had been or had not been heat-treated were subjected to PAGE followed by activity staining.1-3 and
10, WT extract not heated; 4-6 and 11, heat treated for 10 min at 50C; 7-8, heat treated for 20 min at
50C. The positions of bands corresponding to the activity of the PGI1 and PGI2 isoforms of the
enzymes are indicated by arrowheads. Each lane contained 50 g of protein from a soluble WT extract 
of leaves.
4.2.3.2. PGM1 mutant alleles
One of the synthesis mutants, SL4725-4, appeared from iodine staining to lack starch in
leaves, roots, and embryos, suggesting that it might be a pgm1 mutant (Figure 20).
Consistent with these iodine staining results, quantitative measurements of starch content
failed to detect any starch above the detection limit of the assay in any of the organs
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
analysed, including leaves, roots and stem (Table 14 and not shown). A. thaliana, tobacco,
and pea mutants lacking PGM1 are starch-free in all plant parts examined (Caspar et al.,
1985; Hanson and McHale, 1988; Harrison et al., 1998). The phenotype of this mutant is
described in more detail in Chapter 5, section 5.2.2. Another mutant from forward screen,
SL4867-11, had strongly reduced starch content relative to WT plants in all organs examined
(Figure 20 and Table 14). I mapped the mutation accounting for its phenotype to an interval
of about 10 cM on chromosome V, in which the LjPGM1 gene is located (Figure 18, Table 6
and Table 10). PGM1 genes of these two mutants were sequenced. The PGM1 gene in
SL4725-4 contained a mutation affecting a splice-site junction, and the gene in SL4867-11
contained a mutation predicted to result in the amino acid change G95D. These mutants are
referred to as pgm1-4 and pgm1-5, respectively (Figure 21 and Table 15). To investigate the
lack or reduction of PGM1 activity in the mutants, I carried out native PAGE followed by
activity staining on protein extracts from leaves. This revealed two bands of PGM activity in
the WT extract. Assuming that the relative mobilities of the PGM isoforms are the same in L.
japonicus as in A. thaliana and in pea (Caspar et al., 1985; Harrison et al., 1998), the upper
and lower bands are attributable to the plastidial (PGM1) and cytosolic (PGM2) activities,
respectively. The band attributable to the plastidial isoform was missing from extracts of
pgm1-4 and pgm1-5 mutants, confirming that plastidial PGM activity is strongly reduced or
absent in both cases (Figure 22).
In parallel to this forward genetic approach, TILLING was also performed on the PGM1
gene. The program CODDLE was used to identify the region(s) of the gene most likely to
contain mutations deleterious for the function of the encoded protein. The TILLING mutant
population (about 5000 individuals) was then screened for mutations in the targeted region of
the gene thus selected as described in Chapter 2, section 2.10. This TILLING resulted in the
isolation of lines homozygous for three additional mutant alleles of the PGM1 gene (Figure
21 and Table 15). Two of these alleles named pgm1-2 and pgm1-3 contained mutations
creating stop codons. Mutants of both lines (SL755-1 and SL1837-1, respectively) appeared
from iodine staining to lack starch in all plant parts and were identical in phenotype to pgm1-
4 (Figure 20). The mutation in the third allele, pgm1-1 (SL4490-1), was predicted to result in
the amino acid change D436N. Activity of the plastidial isoform of PGM was reduced in
pgm1-1, as assessed by native gel electophoresis (Figure 22) but no reduction in starch
content of the plant was apparent from iodine staining (Figure 20).
4.2.3.3. AGPase mutant alleles
I used similar approaches to identify the mutation accounting for the phenotype of another
synthesis mutant, SL5127-5, in which leaf starch content at the end of the day in plants
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
grown in growth cabinet was reduced by about 80% (Table 14). Following a candidate
enzyme approach, I assayed the AGPase activity in extracts of the WT and mutant leaves.
Activity was 93% lower in this mutant than in WT extracts (Table 16). Activity in extracts
made from mixtures of WT and mutant leaves was 98.5% of that predicted from separate
extracts of the two genotypes, hence the large difference in activity is likely to result from
loss of AGPase function in the mutant rather than the presence of inhibitory substances in the
mutant leaf. No visible reduction of starch content could be observed by iodine staining in
the roots or embryos of this mutant (data not shown).
AGPase in higher plants is a heterotetramer composed of two small (APS) and two large
(APL) subunits. As described in earlier chapters, many species possess one or two APS
genes and several APL genes that are differentially expressed between organs (e.g. Crevillen
et al., 2003; 2005; and citations therein). One APS gene and six APL genes could be
identified in the L. japonicus genome (Table 6). In A. thaliana, loss of the small subunit (in
the adg1 mutant) almost eliminates AGPase activity and starch synthesis and loss of the
major leaf isoform of the large subunit (in the adg2 mutant) reduces activity by 95% and
starch synthesis by 60% (Lin et al., 1988b; Wang et al., 1997). To discover whether a
mutation in one of the AGPase subunit genes was indeed responsible for the starch
phenotype of this mutant, I carried out mapping and gene sequencing. The mutation mapped
to an interval on chromosome IV encompassing a gene encoding a large subunit of AGPase,
APL1 (Figure 19, Table 6 and Table 10). Sequencing revealed a single mutation in the APL1
gene of SL5127-5, predicted to result in the amino acid change S400L. A detailed structure-
function analysis of the AGPase protein is presented in the next chapter.
To understand further the importance of AGPase subunits in L. japonicus, TILLING was
used to identify mutations in one of the two copies of the second large subunit gene, APL2a
(hereafter referred to simply as APL2), and in the single small subunit gene identified in the
genome of L. japonicus, APS1. For APL2, four allelic variants containing mutations
predicted to have a deleterious effect on activity of the encoded protein could be identified.
The iodine staining I performed revealed that none of these had a clear effect on starch
content in any of the organs examined, including leaves, roots, and embryos (not shown).
One of the four mutant alleles identified for APS1, aps1-1, contained a mutation predicted to
bring about the amino acid change A111T (Figure 21 and Table 15). In contrast to the APL2
mutants, mutants of this line (SL0529-1) displayed a strong reduction in starch content in
leaves, roots and embryos (Figure 20). AGPase activity in leaves of this mutant grown in a
growth cabinet was about 70% lower than in WT leaves (Table 16), and leaf starch content
was reduced by up to 90% (Table 14).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Genotype
AGPase activity (nmol
min-1 g
fresh weight)
MG-20 b1457  41
Gifu 1367  140
apl1-1 105  9
apl1-2 1166  166
apl2-1 1844  32
apl2-3 1996  63
apl2-4 1364  174
aps1-1 439  10
aps1-2 1376  160
aps1-3 1412  168
Table 16. AGPase activities in leaves of the apl and aps synthesis mutants of L. japonicus.
Plants were grown in a greenhouse as described in Chapter 2, and harvested 10 h into the 16 h light
period when seven to 12 week-old.
Values are means  SE of measurements on three plants.
4.2.4. Identification of several mutant alleles of the starch degradation genes GWD1 and
In order to identify the mutations responsible for the starch-excess phenotypes of the
degradation mutants, I followed a similar strategy to that for the synthesis mutants, and
coupled the map-based cloning to a candidate gene approach. Thus far, the mutations in
three of them have been identified. The mutations in lines SL5215-2 and SL5358-3 mapped
to the same interval on chromosome IV, and the mutation in SL5104-12 mapped to the top
of chromosome V (Figure 19 and Table 10). These two intervals encompass genes encoding
GWD1 (Ritte et al., 2002) and GWD3 (aka PWD; Baunsgaard et al., 2005; Ktting et al.,
2005), respectively (Figure 19 and Table 6). In A. thaliana, the gwd1 (aka sex1) mutant has a
severe starch-excess phenotype, and reduced growth under short-day conditions (Caspar et
al., 1991; Yu et al., 2001). The gwd3 (aka pwd) mutant (Baunsgaard et al., 2005; Ktting et
al., 2005) also has a starch excess phenotype, although less severe than that of gwd1.
Sequencing revealed that SL5215-2 and SL5358-3 both carry a mutation in GWD1, while
SL5104-12 has a mutation in GWD3. Although SL5215-2 and SL5358-3 were independently
selected, they carry the same mutation in GWD1, predicted to result in the amino acid
change E566K (Figure 21 and Table 15). Plants carrying this mutation are referred to as
gwd1-1 mutants. The mutation in GWD3 affects a splice-site junction and results in the
nucleotide change G7871A (Figure 21 and Table 15). Results of detailed molecular analyses
performed on these mutations are presented in the next chapter (Chapter 5, section 5.2.1). In
addition, leaf starch granule microscopy of plants carrying these mutant alleles was also
carried out (Figure A4)
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Since only one mutant allele was isolated from the forward screen for GWD1 and GWD3,
the L. japonicus TILLING population was screened for additional mutant alleles of these two
genes. Isolation of these additional allelic variants was needed to gain compelling evidence
that the forward screen mutations in GWD1 and GWD3 are indeed responsible for the starch-
excess phenotypes. The TILLING I performed on the GWD1 gene targeted two regions of
the genes, one encoding part of the phospho-histidine domain of the enzyme (PHD; Yu et al.,
2001), and one encompassing the sequence encoding the second of the two putative starch
binding domains of the protein (SBD, CBM45 family; Mikkelsen et al., 2006). Only one
missense change could be isolated from the TILLING of the region of the gene encoding the
PHD domain of the enzyme. In contrast, two changes leading to premature stop-codon
sequences and nine different missense changes, of which two were predicted to be
deleterious, were obtained for the region coding for the SBD-2 domain of GWD1. As
expected, mutants of the two lines isolated by TILLING that had point mutations in GWD1
leading to stop-codons (SL1833-1 and SL3001-1, gwd1-2 and gwd1-3, respectively; Figure
21 and Table 15) had altered starch metabolism (Figure 20). Leaves of M3 homozygous
mutant plants of both lines displayed a very strong starch-excess phenotype, stronger than
that of gwd1-1 (Figure 20). With the help of Tracey Welham (JIC) starch quantifications
were performed that confirmed very high levels of starch in the gwd1-2 mutant (end of night
values WT 0.90.3, gwd1-2 43.13.3 mg g
fresh weight, meanSE of at least five
replicates; see also Figure 24). Immunoblotting (carried out by Tracey Welham; JIC) with an
antiserum to GWD1 from potato revealed that an immuno-reactive protein of the expected
mass was present in extracts of WT plants, but missing in extracts of the gwd1-2 mutant
(Figure 24). Mutants of these two lines were also strongly impaired in growth and
reproduction. Functional analysis of their phenotypes is described in more detail in Chapter
5, section 5.2.2.
Several other mutant alleles were identified by TILLING, of which two (SL0672-1 and
SL6859-1) were predicted to have a deleterious effect on the enzyme function.
Unfortunately, both M2 and M3 seeds of these mutant lines were reported missing from the
seed stock, and therefore, could not be further analysed. None of the other mutant alleles
identified were predicted by the PARSESNP program to have a deleterious effect on enzyme
function and leaves of the homozygous mutants did not have a starch excess phenotype (data
not shown).
TILLING performed on GWD3 targeted the region encoding the nucleotide binding
domain involved in the dikinase activity of the enzyme (NB domain; Ktting et al., 2005). A
suite of 19 mutant alleles with missense change mutations was identified. Only two of them
were predicted by the PARSESNP program to have a deleterious effect on the protein
function (PSSM score greater than ten), but their homozygous mutants did not display any
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
clear starch excess phenotype. In contrast, homozygous mutants for another allele, gwd3-4
(SL0639-1; Figure 21 and Table 15) had a clear starch excess phenotype in leaves (Figure
Figure 24. Starch content phenotype and western blot of of gwd1-3 TILLING mutant.
A. Elevated starch content of leaves in gwd1-2 leaves at end of day (EOD) and end of night (EON).
Values are means  SE of measurements on at least five, 4 week old plants. Plants were from lines
derived by outcrossing to MG-20 and selfing F2 segregants. B. Absence of GWD1 protein in gwd1-3
leaves. Samples of 10 g protein from soluble extracts of leaves of the gwd1-3 mutant and its WT
segregant were subjected to electrophoresis on a 4-12% gradient polyacrylamide-SDS gel,
electroblotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane, and probed with rabbit serum containing antibodies to
potato GWD1 at a dilution of 1/1000. M is molecular mass markers, values in kD.
4.2.5. Phenotype of the uncharacterised mutants and map positions of their mutations
4.2.5.1. Phenotype of the mutants yet to be characterised
The starch synthesis mutants isolated from the forward screen displayed much variation in
their phenotypes (from slight reduction to a completely starch-less phenotype). Differences
in starch-excess phenotypes among the class of starch degradation mutants isolated from
forward genetics were much less apparent (Figure 20). However, it was clear from the
screening results that all were capable of some starch degradation. Although most of these
mutants did not show any significant differences in growth rate or flowering time relative to
the WT, two of the synthesis mutants - SL5074-12 and SL5249-3 - displayed severely
impaired growth as well as delayed flowering, and a reduction in fertility. Mutants of
SL5249-3 also had pale green leaves suggesting a reduction in chlorophyll content. These
traits consistently co-segregated with the reduced leaf starch content of the mutants of these
two lines, suggesting that a single mutation was responsible for all the phenotypic traits
observed. However, analysis of segregating populations from several independent F1 crosses
would be required to confirm this.
Another of the starch synthesis mutants of L. japonicus, SL4618-12, that had mildly
reduced leaf starch content, also displayed some degree of impairement in growth and
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
flowering (Figure 20). The effect of the mutation in this line was developmentally
dependent: as the plant matured, the reduced-starch phenotype became less clear. However,
when reaching maturity, the plants could then be relatively well distinguished from the WT
by a significant delay in flowering (ca. two to four weeks).
4.2.5.2. Candidate enzyme approach employed for the identification of the mutations
In an attempt to identify the mutations responsible for the phenotypes of the starch
synthesis and degradation mutants from the forward screen, I initially followed a candidate
enzyme approach. This approach consisted in performing a series of biochemical assays for
well characterised enzymes known to be important for starch metabolism (Figure 25, Figure
26, and Figure 27). For the starch synthesis mutants, I assayed for the activity of PGM, PGI
and AGPase. As described above, this helped in the characterisation of two of the mutant
lines, SL4715-2 and SL5127-5, as pgi1 and apl1 mutants, respectively. From this analysis, it
seemed unlikely that a mutation in one of these three enzymes could be responsible for the
phenotypes of any of the starch synthesis mutants that remained uncharacterised (Figure 25).
This was further confirmed by the results of the genetic linkage mapping (Figure 19 and
Table 10).
Although the degradation of starch is less well characterized and more complex than the
synthesis of starch, I also followed a candidate enzyme approach for the unidentified
degradation mutants. Firstly, I performed quantification of malto-oligosaccharides (MOS) in
order to determine whether any of the degradation mutants could be mutated in either MEX1
or DPE2. The A. thaliana mex1 and dpe2 mutants accumulate very high levels of maltose
(up to 100-fold greater than in the WT; Chia et al., 2004; Lu and Sharkey, 2004; Niittyl et
al., 2004) as well as displaying a starch-excess phenotype in leaves. Althrough the analysis
revealed an altered diurnal pattern of MOS accumulation and degradation for some of the
starch degradation mutants, none of them had an increased maltose level similar to the one
found in the mex1 and dpe2 mutants of A. thaliana (Figure 26). Secondly, I also carried out a
western blot for the proteins SEX1 and SEX4, loss of either of which is likely to give rise to
a strong starch excess phenotype. Polyclonal antibodies directed again the potato SEX1 and
the A. thaliana SEX4 protein were used to assess whether the LjSEX1 and SEX4 proteins
were present in crude protein extracts. Western blot of SEX1 revealed that the protein was
present at a WT level in all the starch degradation mutant lines tested. However, since the
protein may still be present but inactive, the possibility that one or some of these mutants
may be a sex1 mutant could not be excluded from this experiment. Antiserum against
AtSEX4, unfortunately, failed to detect the protein in blots of WT extracts (Figure 26).
In addition, I also performed native PAGE followed by activity staining for the several
starch metabolizing enzyme activities, including starch branching enzymes, starch
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
debranching enzymes, -amylase 5, and starch phosphorylases (Figure 27). This was 
directed at determining whether the starch phenotype of any of the unidentified mutants was
caused by a lack or deficiency in one of these enzymes. Depending on the enzyme activity
tested, polyacrylamide gels contained starch, amylopectin or glycogen. Bands corresponding
to the enzyme activities mentioned above could be found in the extracts of both the
unidentified mutants and the WT, suggesting that none of these mutants were affected in
these enzymes. From the results presented in Figure 27A and B, it appeared that mutants of
the line SL5035-7 may lack or have reduced isoamylases and starch branching enzyme
activities, however this was not confirmed in subsequent analyses (Figure 27D and data not
shown).
MG20 WT SL4867-11 SL5074-12 SL5249-3 SL5127-5 SL4618-12
MG20 WT SL4867-11 SL5074-12 SL5249-3 SL5127-5 SL4618-12
Figure 25. Results of the candidate enzyme approach performed for the synthesis mutants from
forward screen.
A-C. PGI, PGM, and AGPase activity assays performed on leaf extracts of the synthesis mutants in
comparison to the WT MG-20. A and B. PGI1 (plastidial) and PGI2 (cytosolic) isoform activity in leaf
extracts of the synthesis mutants in comparison to the WT MG-20. The positions of bands
corresponding to the activity of the plastidial and cytosolic isoforms of the enzymes are indicated by
arrowheads. Approximately 100 g of protein from soluble extracts of leaves from three plants were
loaded into each lane. A. Native gel electrophoresis followed by PGI activity staining. SL4308-12 (pgi1-
2) was used as control. B. Native gel electrophoresis followed by PGM activity staining revealing a
strong reduction in PGM1 enzyme activity in mutants of the line SL4867-11 (pgm1-5). Mutants of
SL4725-4 (pgm1-4) were used as controls. C. In vitro AGPase enzyme activity assay on leaf extracts
of the starch synthesis mutants in comparison to the WT MG-20. For each genotype, the assay was
performed on three biological replicates and each of them was assayed in triplicate. Values are mean 
SE of measurement on three plants. A dramatic reduction in AGPase enzyme activity was found in the
mutant line SL4618-12 (apl1-1). FW, fresh weight.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Glucose
Fructose
Sucrose
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Glucose
Fructose
Sucrose
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Maltose
Maltotriose
Maltose
Maltotriose
10020
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Glucose
Fructose
Sucrose
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Glucose
Fructose
Sucrose
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Maltose
Maltotriose
Maltose
Maltotriose
MG20 WT SL4841-4 SL5035-7 SL5215-2 SL5104-12
Maltose
Maltotriose
Maltose
Maltotriose
10020
10020
Figure 26. Results of the candidate enzyme approach performed for the degradation mutants from
forward screen.
A and B. Measurements of maltose, maltotriose, and soluble sugars contents in leaf extracts of the
degradation mutants in comparison to the WT MG-20. Plants were grown in 16 h light, 8 h dark
photoperiod. Measurements were done at two different time points: at the end of the 16 h photoperiod
(A) and at the middle of the dark period (B). Sugar contents were quantified by HPLC (HPAEC-PAD)
as described in Chapter 2, section 2.13.3. Values are mean  SE of measurement on three plants. FW,
fresh weight. C. Western blots of SEX1 and SEX4 proteins performed on leaf extracts of the
degradation mutants in comparison to the L. japonicus WT MG-20 and Gifu. The A. thaliana mutant
sex4 and WT col-0 were used as controls. Twenty-five g of protein were loaded in each lane. M
indicates molecular mass markers; values are in kDa. The blots were probed using StSEX1 or AtSEX4
antisera at a dilution of 1:5000.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Figure 27. Zymograms of starch-metabolizing enzyme activity in several of the forward screen mutants
in comparison to the WT MG-20.
Native PAGEs followed by activity staining (aka zymograms) were performed on leaf extracts of the
synthesis and degradation mutants from the forward screen, in comparison to the WT MG-20
(candidate enzyme approach). Approximately 100 g of proteins from soluble extracts of leaves from
three plants was loaded onto poylacrylamide gels containing different subtrates. A, starch; B, D, and E,
amylopectin; C, glycogen. After migration and incubation in the appropriate buffer (Chapter 2, section
2.12.3), starch-enzyme activities were revealed by iodine staining. On the right of each gel, a putative
attribution of the enzyme activities corresponding to the bands is made according to the annotation
given for equivalent analyses in A. thaliana (Zeeman et al., 1998; Wattebled et al., 2005 and 2008;
Dumez et al., 2006; Delvall et al., 2005). Identification of the different bands in A. thaliana was
established following the analysis of mutant plants defective in each of the specified activity.
Abbreviations: WT, wild-type; Iso1, isoamylase; SBE2.2, starch-branching enzyme 2.2; SBE2.1, starch-
branching enzyme 2.1; LDA, limit-dextrinase, BAM5, -amylase 5, PHS1 and 2, starch phosophorylase 
1 and 2. Detailed information on these enzymes, including their corresponding locus name and
accession number can be found in Table 6.
Taken together with the results of the mapping presented above, results of this candidate
enzyme approach suggested that none of the unidentified mutants was likely to be affected in
most of the core set of enzymes involved in the pathways of starch synthesis and
degradation. However, not all the starch enzymes - including several that may have been
responsible for the phenotype of some of the mutants (e.g. ISA2, ISA3, SS3, SS4, DPE2)-
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
could be mapped onto the genetic map. Further, the activity of several starch synthases, -
amylases, ISA3, DPE1 and DPE2 known to play an important function in starch synthesis or
degradation remain to be tested for this set of uncharacterised mutants.
4.2.5.3. Map position of the mutations yet to be identified
In collaboration with Andreas Brachmann (LMU, Munich), I mapped the mutations
responsible for the mutant phenotype of the remaining four synthesis mutants (SL5249-3,
SL5143-3, SL5074-12 and SL4618-12) and three degradation mutants (SL4841-4, SL5035-7
and SL5272-11) from the forward screen. To date, mutations of four of the mutants have
been mapped to intervals of less than 5 cM (synthesis mutants SL5249-3 and SL4618-12 and
degradation mutants SL4841-4 and SL5135-7; Figure 19 and Table 10). This mapping was
coupled to the candidate gene approach so that any strong candidate gene (i.e. genes known
to play a key role in starch metabolism in other plant species) located in the mapped region
was sequenced. In agreement with the results of the candidate enzyme approach, however,
no strong candidate genes could be identified within the mapped region of any of these seven
yet uncharacterised mutants. Hence, the search for candidate genes was extended to genes
known to be, or potentially, involved in carbohydrate metabolism and its regulation.
Several putative candidate genes could be identified for some of these mutant lines, and
were sequenced (Table 17). This included genes encoding proteins possibly involved in
carbohydrate metabolism or its regulation, including 14-3-3 proteins and protein
phosphatases. Analysis of the coding sequence of all these genes, however, did not identify
any mutations other than Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) between MG-20 and
Gifu. Taken together, this suggests that the mutated genes responsible for the phenotypes of
these mutants are likely to encode previously-undiscovered components or regulators of the
pathways of starch metabolism.
The presence of several recombinants for the flanking markers of these mapped regions
means it could still be possible to shorten the interval where the mutation maps without the
need to isolate more mutants. Unfortunately for most of the mutations, the presence of gaps
in the genome sequence in these regions rendered difficult any comprehensive candidate
gene approach as well as the design and use of additional markers for finer mapping. In one
particular instance, however, namely the mutant line SL4618-12, the mutation could be
mapped to an interval of less than 0.1 cM. Finer mapping and strategy employed for the
identification of this mutation are presented in more detail below.
4.2.5.4. SL4618-12 fine mapping and mutation identification by next generation
sequencing
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
For SL4618-12, mapping by bulk segregant analysis originally mapped the mutation close
to the marker TM0143, at the bottom of chromosome 1 (Figure 19 and Table 10). This
position was later confirmed and refined by finer mapping (Figure 28). At first, this finer
mapping was performed on the mutants only (120 individuals with reduced-starch phenotype
isolated from F2 segregating populations), and thereafter on a whole F2 population of 802
segregants (200 mutants, 602 WT) in collaboration with Dr. Andreas Brachmann (LMU
Munich, Germany). This segregating population consisted of F2 plants from three
independent F1 crosses to check the robustness of the phenotyping and genotyping results.
Interestingly, it was found that this mutant line had a particularly high recombination rate
compared to all the other lines of our collection as well as many published results of map-
based cloning in L. japonicus. Further, it became apparent from the mapping of whole
population of 802 F2 that the frequency of recombination in the mapped region of this
mutant line was significantly higher for the mutants than it was for its WT segregants (five
recombinants out of 200 mutants were identified with the markers TM2089 and BM1994,
while only four recombinants out of about 600 WT and heterozygous plants could be
identified with the same markers).
From this fine mapping, the mapped interval containing the mutation could be refined to a
150 kb region on the physical map (less than 0.1 cM on the genetic linage map) that
contained 22 predicted genes (Figure 28). Three putative candidate genes, namely an
adenosine kinase, a thioredoxin-like fold protein, and an unknown plastidial protein were
identified among them (Table 17). Sequencing of their coding sequence, however, did not
identify any point mutation that could have led to affected protein function.
After having envisaged different approaches for the identification of the mutation of this
line, an attempt to identify the mutation in SL4618-12 was made by massively parallel
sequencing (so called next generation sequencing) using the Illumina Solexa sequencing
technology (Illumina Inc., San Diego, USA). Such approach can be divided into the
following three main steps: 1) Genomic DNA extraction, primer design and long range PCR;
2) Sequence data generation by Illumina genome analyzer; and 3) Sequence data analysis.
Such an approach has recently been employed in A. thaliana on one occasion (Sturre et al.,
2009) but has not yet been attempted in any other plant species.
The strategy I chose to follow consisted of amplifying long DNA fragments overlapping
each other, and covering the whole region of interest, followed by the use of the Illumina
Solexa sequencing technology (massively parallel sequencing) and the subsequent de novo
assembly of the short sequences. For this approach, the original homozygous mutant in Gifu
background was backcrossed with a wild type plant of the ecotype Gifu (instead of MG-20),
and the resulting F2 segregating population was screened for plants displaying the mutant
phenotype. Ten of the homozygous mutant plants together with 10 biological replicates of
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
the Gifu WT were isolated to be further used for the identification of the mutation by
massively parallel sequencing. Genomic DNA extraction was performed on leaf material
harvested from each of these individuals, as described above (Chapter 2, section 2.6.1).
1 protein kinase
2 PPR protein
3 WRKY3 TF
4 ADK/ATPADK1
5 Thioredoxin-like fold, chloroplastic
6 Hypothetical protein, chloroplastic
7 putative protein
8 PPR protein
9 cyclin-like F-box
10 Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
11 FLO2, FL1, AP2 (APETALA 2) TF
12 RWD-RK domain-containing protein
13 RWD-RK domain-containing protein
14 putative protein
15 putative protein
16 RWP-RK domain-containing protein
17 Histone-like TF CBF/NF
18 MCM8; DNA-dependent ATPase
19 Hypothetical protein
20 Ribosomal protein S23
21 Alpha/beta hydrolase fold
22 IQD2; calmodulin binding
List of predicted proteins
(Physical map)
ssr01
ssr15
TM2089
BM1994
Mapped interval
(Genetic linkage map)
3/802
1/802
Nber of recombinants:
71.0 cM
1 protein kinase
2 PPR protein
3 WRKY3 TF
4 ADK/ATPADK1
5 Thioredoxin-like fold, chloroplastic
6 Hypothetical protein, chloroplastic
7 putative protein
8 PPR protein
9 cyclin-like F-box
10 Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
11 FLO2, FL1, AP2 (APETALA 2) TF
12 RWD-RK domain-containing protein
13 RWD-RK domain-containing protein
14 putative protein
15 putative protein
16 RWP-RK domain-containing protein
17 Histone-like TF CBF/NF
18 MCM8; DNA-dependent ATPase
19 Hypothetical protein
20 Ribosomal protein S23
21 Alpha/beta hydrolase fold
22 IQD2; calmodulin binding
List of predicted proteins
(Physical map)
ssr01
ssr15
TM2089
BM1994
Mapped interval
(Genetic linkage map)
3/802
1/802
Nber of recombinants:
ssr01
ssr15
TM2089
BM1994
Mapped interval
(Genetic linkage map)
3/802
1/802
Nber of recombinants:
71.0 cM
71.0 cM
Reference genome
(MG-20)
10 kb fragment of SL4618-12 gDNA (long
fragment PCR amplification)
Region where the
mutation maps
SNPs between
MG20 and Gifu
Sequenced genome: MG-20
Mutation in Gifu background
Reference genome
(MG-20)
10 kb fragment of SL4618-12 gDNA (long
fragment PCR amplification)
Reference genome
(MG-20)
10 kb fragment of SL4618-12 gDNA (long
fragment PCR amplification)
Region where the
mutation maps
SNPs between
MG20 and Gifu
Sequenced genome: MG-20
Mutation in Gifu background
Region where the
mutation maps
SNPs between
MG20 and Gifu
Sequenced genome: MG-20
Mutation in Gifu background
Figure 28. Fine mapping and mutation identification strategy of the mutation responsible for the mutant
phenotype of the forward screen mutant line SL4618-12.
A. Results of the final step of fine mapping of the mutation of the starch synthesis mutant from forward
screen SL4618-12. The mutation could be restricted by mapping to a ca. 150 kb genomic interval
delimited by the SSR markers ssr01 and ssr15. Twenty two genes are predicted in this genomic region
(annotation shown on the right). B. Illustration of the strategy chosen for the identification of the
mutation responsible for the mutant phenotype of SL4618-12 using the Illumina Solexa sequencing
technology (massively parallel sequencing).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
Mutant line Locus name Description Best At hit
SL5249-3 chr1.CM0982.360.nd, CM0982.410.nd 14-3-3 protein (GRF) AT5G65430.2
chr1.CM0036.130.nc Photosystem II oxygen evolving complex protein (PsbP) AT2G28605.1
SL5074-12 chr1.CM0104.280.nc Trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (TPP) AT1G35910.1
chr1.CM0104.340.nd, CM0104.350.nd Thioredoxin family protein (TRX), chloroplastic AT1G08570.1
SL5143-3 chr2.CM0177.660.nc Starch synthase V (SS5) AT5G65685.1
SL4841-4 chr1.CM0032.500.nc Disproportionating enzyme (DPE1) AT5G64860.1
chr1.LjT27C19.160.nd RSW3 (radial swelling 3) hydrolase AT5G63840.1
chr1.CM0982.360.nd, CM0982.410.nd 14-3-3 protein (GRF) AT4G24620.2
chr1.CM0248.240.nd Dual specificity protein phosphatase (DSP) AT3G10940.1
SL5035-7 chr1.LjT36I17.120.nd glycosyl hydrolase family 17 protein (GH17) AT3G07320.1
SL4618-12 chr1.CM0033.220.nd Adenosine kinase (ADK/ATPADK1) AT2G37250.1
chr1.CM0033.230.nd Thioredoxin-like fold (TRX), chloroplastic AT2G37240.1
chr1.CM0033.240.nd Unknown protein, chloroplastic AT3G53470.2
Table 17. List of putative candidate genes identified and sequenced for the yet uncharacterised
forward screen mutants.
For each of the gene listed, the full predicted coding region was sequenced using gene specific
primers. Sequences of these genes were retrieved from the Miyakogusa database
(http://www.kazusa.or.jp/lotus/). In each case, the sequence was submitted to the program COODLE to
check the correctness of this prediction, determine the gene structure (introns and exons) and the
region of the gene most likely to contain deleterious mutations. Multiple protein sequence alignment
using the program Clustal W2 was also carried out with sequences of their homologs from other plant
species to verify that the sequence was correctly predicted. In case of the DSP gene
(chr1.CM0248.240.nd), the predicted sequence was only partial (marked with an asterisk). Coding
sequences of all candidate genes but the ones of chr1.CM0104.280.nc and chr1.CM0104.340.nd were
sequenced. Several point mutations (not listed) were identified. However, systematic sequencing of the
gene sequence of both MG-20 and Gifu WT parents in comparison to the mutant revealed they were
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs; natural variants) between the two parents. No point mutation
likely to arise from the EMS mutagenesis and to be responsible for the mutant phenotype was
identified in the coding sequence of any of these candidate genes. Single nucleotide changes
corresponding to silent changes (e.g. either located in introns or not leading to amino acid changes)
were ignored. chr1.CM0982.360.nd and CM0982.410.nd; chr1.CM0036.130.nc; chr1.CM0982.360.nd
and CM0982.410.nd; and chr1.CM0248.240.nd are currently located outside of the mapped interval.
Table 18A
name position Forward primer (5'-3' sequence) Reverse primer (5'-3' sequence)
TM2089 1 CAGCTCCATTAACTTCCACC AACCTGAAAGAAGATGCCAC
ssr01 7353 CTCAATC ACCAC ACGATGCT TGGGGTTTTTCCGACCAAAA
ssr02 26995 AGTTTGTGCTATTCTTGTATATGTTT AGTCAGATATGGAGTTCATAAGTT
ssr11 35814 TACCTGCAAAAGATAGCGGG GCTATAGCTTAAGTTAATTTGTTCA
ssr03 40666 GAGGGCTAAAGTTGGGGAAC TCCAATCCAAGAGAAGCAAACA
snp01 43754 TTGACCACCAAGTCAATGTC ACTTGTTGTGCTCCATTCTC
ssr12 54427 TTGGTTCCTCCATTGTCACC GGAGGAGAGGGTAAAGGTGT
snp02 75206 AATGATGGCAGGAATTGCAT AATGTTGGTGAGAGAAGGGA
ssr04 83603 TGGTTACCCAAGGACTACACT ACGTTAGCACCGCATAACTG
ssr05 89894 TGGAACCGAAATGTTTGACAGA TGGCTGCTTCTTCTTTTGGG
ssr06 90201 AAAGGCATCCGGAAAAACCA TAGGCACC TGACTTTGGAGT
ssr07 105277 TGCATAAACCTGCTTGGTCA ATTTCGTACAAGGACTAGAAAAGA
ssr08 113260 TGCTGTGTAATATATTGGTGTGTG TCATTGGCTC ATTACTATTGTTTCT
ssr13 123704 TCATCTCAC TCACTCGCTCT GTGGACGGAACCCTAATCTG
ssr09 125311 CCCCTTTCCTTTGAAAAGCC AGATGTTTGTGTGTAGGGGG
snp03 126519 GTGGTAATCACGTGTGTTCT TAATCAACCCACCAACATCG
ssr14 140362 ACGGC CTCGTTTCTTTTTGA TTCACACAACACTTCCCCTC
snp04 141516 CGCCAAGACC GTCATTATTA TGTGC TTTATCAGTTCGAGG
snp05 148348 CACCAAGATTCAGGTCAGTC TCCTTCTCAACCCCTTCAAT
ssr10 152273 AGGGTTTCAATCTTCCTTTC GT AAACCTTCAGGATGCAGAGC
snp06 154239 TTTAACTGTACCACCGAAGC TACGTAAGTGTGAGGGGAAA
ssr15 158098 GAGAAAACAAACCCAACCGT CCGTGGGACTACAGTACAATC
BM1994 168887 AAACATGGATGGGGTCATAG CATGTTTAGCTTGAGAACCG
Table 18. List of primers designed for the identification of the mutation responsible for the mutant
phenotype of SL4618-12 using the Illumina Solexa sequencing technology.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
T ab le 18B
nam e position 5 '-3 ' sequence
1F  6365 CCTCTCCCA AGAGA CATT CTGC TC
1R_nested 11859 GG GAA TA G GTGG TT AG TG ACA TG C
1F_nested 11412 GG CT CT GCTAAA CCTTC CTCTG A T
1R 17210 GT AAC AAG GT AG CCGC ACTG G AAG
2F 16851 TG GACCA AACC TGCA CTATACAC C
2R-nested 22360 GACG GA GAGT GG G TG A CTTGA TC T
2F_nested 21924 CCCG A CGCCT TACAGA ACTT AG TG
2R 27669 GG TG GT CG CT GATACCTT AT TG GA
3F 27018 TCTCGCCG GT AATG GA GA ACTT
3R_nested 32754 GAGG A AAAA CACA TC GGA GT G GT C
3F_nested 31954 ATCA GTA TG A GAACCT GG CC TT GG
3R 37653 GT GG CAGAGA TG GA G AT CATTG T C
4F 36759 GG ACTT TCTCCACC CCAAC TCA
4R_nested 42250 GACA GG ACAC AG TACCAG C TC TTG A
4F_nested 41726 AA CCCT TG AG GCTT GAGG TAAG G T
4R 47396 ATCCA ATG AACC TG TG GT GT CCTC
5F 46476 AG A TGG A CTG TT TG AG GCTT GG AG
5R_nested 52359 GCTACA TT TAG G CC CAGT TTGG
5F_nested 51396 CG CT CCTCTT CACG A TC ACAA A
5R 57161 ACTTCG TT GCAG AG A G GTGA AG G A
6F 56532 CCCA TG CG AAA CAT GTA G ACAC CT
6R_nested 62167 TCGCCT CCTCAC GTA TGA TGA AAG
6F_nested 60748 TG AT ACCC AG TACCAT GCA A
6R 66725 GT GT TA TTT G ACC CCACG GT AT GG
7F 66273 GAA CCACT AA GG CT CTC CCAAT GA
7R_nested 71799 GCCT CCTCGCA G AAGA TG A TTAC
7F_nested 71231 TCCAGG A CTG AACA ACGT AACC TG
7R 77109 TCTTCCCG TCCT CCGATAGA AAGT
8F 76145 TTG TC ATCACCA CT CCCT CT CCTT
8R_nested 81877 TG GG AG GT TTGCGG A GAAA AT G
8F_nested 81004 TTTA G CTCCCCT TG CCCT CAC
8R 86943 TG TCTCTC GATCTCGCCCTAAA AC
9F 86138 GT TTA CACGA CACG CCA CAT CAC
9R_nested 91922 GT TG GACATT GAAG C CAG CCTCT
9F_nested 90940 CT CAA TC TC ACATCGG CA GCAA
9R 96717 CT CT GCAG TT TATG ACCCC CAAA C
10F 95976 CATG CA ACAG C TGCC TGT GAA A
10R_nested 101602 GCAG GG A AGT CT ACGAG CA AAGC
10F _nested 101267 TTTGC TT CA TCA G CCG TCTCAG
10R 106905 AA CAGG GT AG AT GG CA AG CAA GA G
11F 106334 CT ACA G CCCCGAC CGATAAC AG
11R_nested 112019 GT TAGCCAA CCT CT GG TG C CTC T
11F _nested 111338 ACC G GTGCTT CAC G TA CAGAGA TT
11R 117073 AG GG CG A TC TA TTG TCCA TT AC CC
12F 116640 CAC TGG TG GG AT AT GA GC AAAG TG
12R_nested 122618 TTG G TT TG TTG A CG CACG A C
12F _nested 121654 TTCCATATG CCA AG CG TG AACC
12R 127378 GCAT GT CAA CCCCT AT CCTT GG TA
13F 126928 TG TCGAGCAC CTTA TCGT A TGA CC
13R_nested 132429 TTTC G G CCAAA CTTTCA CG
13F _nested 131628 ACTTCCGG GT TG GCTATT GTTG
13R 137260 CCTG GT CAA CTC CT TCGC AAAT A C
14F 136426 GT TG ACTCAT ACC CCCACTT CG AC
14R_nested 142037 GCCA CATT GCCCACA TA AGT TACC
14F _nested 140964 GG CCA AGT TT GG GT TG G TTT AG A G
14R 146673 GACC AT CG TCGTTA CAGT CG TCAT
15F 146262 TCTCACGCC CAT GACATCTAGT TC
15R_nested 151984 ACC CGT GGC AAT GAA TCC AT GTA G
15F _nested 151467 GACT GA TG GCA G CT TC TCA G G TA A
15R 157113 CAC ACT CCAT CT TCTCCG AT TT CC
16F 156241 GCCT AC GGTG A G ACAT CAGC TT G
16R_nested 161843 GCCT CT GG TT TG A CACTT CT TC TG
16F _nested 161190 GT TTC CTG TCTCCC AT GCTT
16R 166732 CT GT TCAG GCAG CA GT TG TT AG GA
Table 18. List of primers designed for the identification of the mutation responsible for the mutant
phenotype of SL4618-12 using the Illumina Solexa sequencing technology. Continued.
The positions (in base pair; bp) given correspond to the position from the 5 of the SSR marker
TM2089 that is located at the position 56849 from the start of the complete sequence of the contig
CM0033. Sequence of this contig was retrieved from the Miyakogusa database. The primers ssr01 to
ssr15 designed for fine mapping of the mutation and listed in A were designed by Andreas Brachmann
(LMU, Munich) using the program SSRIT. Primers for the identification of the mutation by Illumina
Solexa sequencing technology are listed in B. These primers were designed using the program
Primer3 as described in Chapter 2, section 2.6.3.
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
PCR primers were designed using the Primer3 program with the criteria generally
recommended for the amplification of large amplicons: GC content above 50%, matched
melting temperature above 60 C, and primer sequence close to 24 nucleotides in length.
Furthermore, primers pairs were designed to assure a minimum of 300 bp overlap between
each amplified fragment. First, trials were made to determine the optimal size of DNA
fragments and the most efficient polymerase enzyme to use for their amplification. Genomic
Lotus DNA was amplified in a range of 5 to 15 kb DNA fragments. Different high fidelity
DNA polymerases were tested for the amplification of these fragments. This included the
TaKaRA Ex Taq polymerase (TaKaRA Biotechnology), the Expand Long Template PCR
system (Roche Diagnositics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany), the LongAmp Taq DNA
polymerase (New England Biolabs), the SequalPrep Long PCR Kit (Invitrogen), and the
Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes OY, Espoo, Finland). In each case,
PCR was performed according to the manufacturers instructions. PCR products were then
subjected to electrophoresis on a 0.5-1% agarose gel to check for specificity and yield of the
amplification products. The purification step of the PCR products was tested using several
PCR purification kits according to the manufacturers instructions. This included the kits
PureLink PCR Micro Kit (Invitrogen), the Nucleospin extract II (Macherey-Nagel
GmbH, Dren, Germany), and the QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN). Performance
of the purification kits was assessed by measuring the DNA concentration using a
Picodrop spectrophotometer.
At first, primers were designed to allow the amplification of PCR products 10 kb long.
However, robust amplification of such long DNA fragments proved to be difficult to obtain
for all the primers pairs with any of the polymerase enzymes tested above. In the meantime,
new advances in the use of the Illumina Solexa sequencing technology made possible the
use of DNA fragments of any size instead of the previous requirement of 10 kb-long
fragments. Taking advantage of this, additional, nested PCR primers were designed for the
coverage of the whole 150 kb region by a series of overlapping 5 kb fragments. In total, this
corresponded to the design of 32 primers pairs (Table 18) and the amplification of 640 PCR
products. The most efficient and robust amplification could be obtained using the Phusion
high-fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes). Highest DNA recovery and purity of the PCR
products were obtained with the QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN).
4.3. Discussion
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
4.3.1. Forward and reverse genetics to isolate starch metabolism mutants in L.
japonicus
In order to elucidate the pathway of starch synthesis and degradation in legumes and
discover its importance for plant growth and development in these species, a collection of
forward genetic mutants of the model legume L. japonicus was generated. This forward
genetic approach with map-based cloning was coupled with a reverse genetic approach using
TILLING. TILLING in model and crop legume species has largely been used so far for
functional genomics research, either to generate new mutants of genes encoding enzymes of
a pathway of interest and investigate their function (e.g. Horst et al., 2007; Welham et al.,
2009), or to confirm the effect of mutations identified in forward screen mutants and carry
out structure-function studies (e.g. Perry et al., 2009; Hofer et al., 2009). In this study,
TILLING was employed with success both to confirm the identity of forward screen
mutations thought to be responsible for the starch mutant phenotype, and to generate mutants
for additional genes encoding enzymes known to be involved in starch metabolism in other
species.
Put together, this work led to the characterisation of multiple mutations affecting five
enzymes of starch synthesis and two enzymes of starch degradation. In addition several more
mutants with altered starch metabolism from the forward screen remain to be characterised.
Arguably, this set of characterised forward screen mutants constitutes the most
comprehensive resource developed so far for the study of transitory and storage starch
metabolism in a species other than A. thaliana. These results illustrate the power of using the
forward and reverse genetic approaches employed in this study and the usefulness of
combining these two complementary approaches for the identification of mutants with
alteration in a biological process of interest.
Screening of the forward screen mutants for starch content was typically done by iodine
staining, however, quantitative measurements of starch content were also made during their
characterisation. Results obtained by both methods and the conclusions that could be drawn
from them correlated well with each other. For instance, organs of mutants that displayed a
clear yellowish colour following iodine staining always had starch content in these organs
below the level detectable by enzymatic assays. Hence, iodine staining constitutes a method
suitable, sensitive and robust enough for the screening of large population of mutants with
reduced starch content. However, the fact that the staining is saturated above a certain level
represents a major drawback for its use in screening mutants with starch excess phenotype in
species in which the basal starch content is naturally high (the case of L. japonicus plant over
six weeks old; Chapter 3, sections 3.2.4 and 3.3.5). Above this level, the organ or tissue
appears totally black and a starch-excess phenotype can no longer be detected visually.
However, it might be possible in this situation to screen the plants when still very young, or
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
to develop a screen with diluted iodine, or following decolourisation for a specific time in
water.
Screening for an alteration in leaf starch content was chosen over screening of other organs
because it was easy to perform, non destructive of the plant, and because we were interested
in identifying mutants altered in transitory leaf starch metabolism. However, it would be
interesting to extend this screen to alteration in starch content not only in leaves, but also in
other organs of the plants, such as the roots. Very little is known to date about the pathway
of starch accumulation and turnover in roots but there is evidence to suggest that significant
differences exist between the pathway of transitory and storage starch metabolism, and
between organs and tissues of the plants (Chapter 1 and references therein). Performing the
screen in roots may lead to the discovery of genes specifically important for the metabolism
of root starch and provide information for manipulating the metabolism of root/storage
starch to improve yield in crops.
Since the characterisation of the mutants required to generate progenies and backcrossing,
only mutant plants that were not too strongly affected in growth and development and were
fertile were selected for further analyses. Hence, the selection process was biased in favour
of mutant alleles conferring a starch phenotype without any strong deleterious effect on
growth and reproduction. It was not possible within the period of this study to characterise
mutant alleles that strongly affected growth and fertility. However, it is likely that, in the
future, technological advances, particularly those being made in sequencing technology,
would facilitate the characterisation of forward screen mutants strongly impaired in growth
and reproductive capacity by reducing the size of plant population required to identify
forward screen mutations.
4.3.2. Advantages and disadvantage of using EMS mutagenesis to generate mutant
collections
In this study, an EMS mutagenised population of L. japonicus was used for both forward
and reverse genetic approaches to isolate mutants altered in starch metabolism. Mutagenesis
with EMS offers several advantages as mentioned earlier (section 4.1.1). One main
advantage is that it can creates large number of point mutations per genome (the mutation
load is dependant of the EMS mutagen concentration used to generate the population),
therefore allowing the saturation of the genome to be achieved with a relatively small
population. The degree of saturation is an important criterion for effective mutagenesis and
TILLING since the mutation frequency is what determines the likelihood of obtaining
deleterious mutant alleles for any gene of interest. It has been estimated that the EMS
mutagenised population in L. japonicus contains, on average, over 900 mutations per
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
genome in addition to the mutations in specific genes of interest (Perry et al., 2009). The size
of this population (ca. 5000 independent M2 mutant lines) is sufficient for the saturation of
the L. japonicus genome with mutants (Perry et al., 2003). Another major advantage of EMS
is that it allows a range of allele strengths to be generated. An illustration of this can be
found in the collection of PGM1 mutants of this study; no plastidial PGM activity at all
could be detected in the starch-free mutants SL1837-1 and SL4725-4 (pgm1-3 and pgm1-4;
stop-codon and splice-site junction mutations, respectively) whereas a significant reduction
in enzyme activity and starch content could be observed for the intermediate mutant allele
SL4867-12 (pgm1-5; amino-acid change), and to a lesser extent for SL4490-1 (pgm1-1;
amino-acid change) (Figure 20 and Figure 22). Hence, the degree of loss of starch correlated
well with those of PGM enzyme activity and was consistent with the nature of the mutation
carried by these mutants.
One major disadvantage of using EMS mutagenesis, however, is that backcrosses are
necessary to minimise the number of these background mutations (Henikoff et al., 2004).
Given that the generation time of L. japonicus is about three months (Handberg and
Stougaard, 1992), and that several rounds of backcrossing are needed, backcrossing of the
mutant plants is time consuming. This is generally circumvented by including WT plants
from the segregating population into the analysis so as to minimize problems related to
background mutations, or by using one of the other alternatives mentioned in section 4.3.3.
The selected mutants in Gifu background were out-crossed and then successively
backcrossed at least once to the WT accession MG-20 (Table 7). These crosses were
performed for several reasons. Firstly, crossing was needed to reduce the number of
background mutations generated by EMS, and eliminate their possible effect on the mutant
phenotype. Theory suggests that, in the absence of heterosis, the genome of one mutant line
should be pure (i.e. almost completely homozygous for either one or the other parental
marker) at the F6 stage (i.e. after six successive backcrossings; Jiang and Gresshoff, 1997).
Secondly, out-crossing with another ecotype was needed to establish a mapping population
for the identification of the forward screen mutations. MG-20 was chosen as crossing partner
because it had been shown to have the highest level of polymorphism relative to Gifu (over
4%) among all the L. japonicus accessions analysed, a well as several desired phenotypic
traits. Furthermore, a genetic linkage map from a cross between these two accessions was
already well established at the start of this study (Kawasaki and Murakami, 2000; Hayashi et
al., 2001). Thirdly, crossing with MG-20 was performed because this accession is easier to
grow under most conditions, and has a relatively fast generation time as mentioned earlier
(Chapter 3, section 3.1.5).
This backcrossing had been initiated before the start of this PhD project, and was pursued
during it so that each mutant line had reached the second or third backcross stage (Table 7).
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
However, backcrossing resulted in the random segregation of the starch content trait in the
progeny, most likely to due to the large difference in the metabolism of starch I identified in
the course of this study between the two parents MG-20 and Gifu (Chapter 3, sections 3.2.4
and 3.2.5). Hence, backcrossing complicated the further characterisation of the mutants. To
circumvent this problem as well as minimize the problem of the background mutations, the
experiments reported in this study included, whenever possible, the WT plants from the
same segregating population as the mutants. More specifically, analyses were carried out
either by comparing the progeny (F3) of homozygous mutants and WT isolated from the
same segregating population, or by comparing the mutant, WT, and heterozygous segregants
of the same segregating population (F2). Yet, some differences in starch metabolism and in
growth and development independent of the mutation were still observed between genotypes
in the first case. Larger biological variation and the need to genotype large populations of
plants represented a major hurdle in the second case. Hence, outcrossing to an accession
different from the one mutagenised should be restricted to cases in which the trait of interest
is very similar in both parents and to the establishment of population for genetic mapping.
Preferably, alternative strategies to the use of backcrossing should be chosen to gain
compelling evidence that the mutation identified is indeed the one responsible for the mutant
phenotype. Such strategies are discussed below (section 4.3.3).
4.3.3. Approaches employed for the characterisation of L. japonicus mutants
A candidate enzyme approach was employed first to try and identify the mutations isolated
from the forward screen. This helped in the identification of the mutation responsible for the
starch phenotype of three of the mutant lines (pgm1-4, pgm1-5, apl1-1). Genetic linkage
mapping was then employed for the identification of the remaining mutations. I first
performed rough mapping of the forward screen mutations. This step could be successfully
achieved and fastened by carrying out bulk segregant analysis (Michelmore et al., 1991). I
then combined the results of this genetic linkage mapping with a candidate gene search and
the establishment of a molecular-function map of starch metabolism in L. japonicus. Use of
these methods allowed the rapid identification of five of the mutants isolated from forward
screen (namely, pgi1-1, pgi1-2, pgi1-3, gwd1-1, and gwd3-1). In addition, this mapping was
also used to validate the mutant loci I had identified via the candidate enzyme approach
(pgm1-5, apl1-1). More cost and time effective than following the candidate enzymes
approach and allelism tests, such a strategy also allowed me to determine whether mutants of
a collection were likely or not to carry mutations affecting the same gene (i.e. mutations of
independant mutant lines mapping in the same genome region) and/or to affect any key
genes already known to be involved in the physiological process in question (i.e. mutation
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
mapping in a region where a strong candidate gene  for starch metabolism in the case of
this study  is present). This therefore constitutes an excellent strategy to follow as a first
step toward the identification of mutations responsible for forward screen mutant phenotypes
in a species such as L. japonicus for which genome sequences are available.
Direct, compelling evidence that the mutation identified in these mutants is indeed
responsible for their mutant phenotype is required. Several strategies can be used for this
purpose. A first genetic test would be to analyse co-segregation between the genotype and
phenotype in a population segregating for the mutation. If complete co-segregation occurs,
the mutation causing the phenotype is likely to be identical to the mutation genotyped. A
second, more widely used, strategy consists of over-expressing a full-length cDNA of the
WT gene in the mutant plants. If transgenic plants containing the transferred DNA construct
are like the WT rather than the mutant plants (mutant phenotype complemented), then the
mutation identified is considered to be responsible for the mutant phenotype. Root
transformation by Agrobacterium rhizogenes can be very easily achieved in L. japonicus
(Jiang and Gresshoff, 1997), and is therefore largely used as a method to complement
mutants with altered nodule function. Complementation analysis at the whole plant level in
L. japonicus using Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation, however, is much
more difficult to achieve and a more lengthy procedure. A third approach is to generate
multiple mutant alleles in the gene under study. Confirmation that the phenotype observed is
indeed caused by the initial mutation identified is obtained if several independent alleles of
the same gene result in a similar phenotype. Complementation analysis between such
mutants is also generally performed for further confirmation. If no complementation occurs,
the statistical chance that the mutant plants carry a second site mutation responsible for the
phenotype is dramatically reduced.
To confirm that the mutations thus identified was indeed responsible for the mutant
phenotype, the strategy I employed in this study consisted in generating additional mutant
alleles of the gene by TILLING coupled with a series of analyses and assays at the genetic,
transcript, protein, and enzyme activity level. In addition, backcrossing was also performed
and, whenever possible, the phenotype of the mutants was compared with segregating WT
siblings with similar mutation load, so as to control the influence of the background
mutations generated by EMS. Altogether, this provided strong evidence that the mutations
identified were indeed the ones causing the mutant phenotype of interest.
Although the candidate gene approach proved very useful for the identification of several
of the forward screen mutants, it had limitations. One was that the genome of L. japonicus is
not yet fully sequenced. At the start of this study, the Miyakogusa database
(http://www.kazusa.or.jp/lotus/) was not up to date and less than half of the genome
sequences were available. Since May 2008, this database has been updated and the sequence
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
information has expanded. To date 67% of the genome of L. japonicus covering 91% of the
gene space has been sequenced (Sato et al., 2008). A second limit to this knowledge-based
strategy is that mutations responsible for the starch-less or starch-excess phenotypes may
also result from a secondary or pleiotropic changes. Indeed, one cannot exclude the
possibility that the change in starch content may be a pleiotropic effect of a mutation directly
affecting a different process. Possibly also, the mutated gene could encode a regulator (e.g.
transcription factor) able to control the metabolism of starch as well as other pathways. This
means that mutation in an unexpected rather than a strong candidate gene could be
responsible for the mutant phenotype. To avoid setting up time-consuming map-based
cloning in such cases or to provide help toward their characterisation, a metabolite profiling
approach may be performed beforehand. Such an approach has already been successfully
undertaken in A. thaliana by Messerli et al. (2007). By performing metabolite profiling
(using GC-MS) the authors were able to determine whether unknown mutants with altered
starch content were most likely to be genuinely affected in the starch metabolism pathway
rather than in the function of a protein with pleiotropic effects. Another alternative to map-
based cloning would be to perform transcript-based cloning using microarray technology
(Mitra et al., 2004; Gong et al., 2004). Such a strategy, however, is expected to have little
success for the characterisation of EMS mutants since only a small percentage of the
mutations generated by this mutagen result in null alleles.
4.3.4. Strategies for the identification of the uncharacterised mutations from the
forward screen
Mutations conferring the starch metabolism phenotypes of seven of the forward screen
mutants remain to be identified. Mutations of these uncharacterised mutants have been
mapped to regions of the L. japonicus genome ranging from 10 to less than 0.1 cM. Since no
strong candidate genes were identified in these regions, these mutations may affect the
function of novel proteins involved in the metabolism of starch. Candidate gene searches
were extended to any gene involved in carbohydrate metabolism and/or likely to have an
effect on starch metabolism according to the literature. The coding sequence of putative
candidate genes was sequenced (Table 17) but no mutations could be identified in any of
them. However, as mentioned above, the genome of L. japonicus is not yet fully sequenced,
and gaps are still present in most of these regions where the mutations map. Therefore,
comprehensive candidate gene searches could not be performed for these intervals.
For one of the mutant lines, SL4618-12, the mutation was mapped to a small interval of
less than 0.1 cM (150 kb). The sequence in this interval was complete and twenty-two genes
were predicted to be present (Figure 28). No strong candidate gene could be identified in this
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
region and none of the putative candidate genes sequenced to date carried a point mutation
that could have affected gene function and led to the mutant phenotype (Table 16). Since the
sequenced genome of Lotus is MG-20, and the mutation is in the Gifu background, my
approach to discover the mutated gene using the next generation, massively parallel
sequencing technology (Illumina Solexa) was to sequence both the genome of the
homozygous mutant in Gifu background, and the WT Gifu, using the genome of MG-20 as
reference. Alternatively, homozygous mutants isolated from the progeny of crosses with
MG-20 could have been used for the mutant genome. I reasoned, however, that the first
strategy was best since it allowed comparison of the genome of the WT Gifu with that of the
mutant without having to discriminate the point mutation of interest caused by EMS from
the numerous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) likely to be present between the
genome of the ecotypes Gifu and MG-20 (i.e. induced versus natural variation). More
precisely, the strategy I developed with the advice of Dr. Eric Kemen (Sainsubury
Laboratory, Norwich, UK) involved the independent amplification of the 10 biological
replicate samples with each primer pair, and for each of the two genotypes. Following
amplification, PCR products from the 10 biological replicate samples would be pooled at
equimolar concentration before being purified and submitted to the next steps of the
procedure. Amplification by PCR of this genomic region by overlapping 10 kb long
fragments proved problematic to obtain robustly. Promising results, however could be
obtained when amplifying 5 kb fragments. Unfortunately due to lack of time, amplification
of all these PCR fragments and their sequencing using the Solexa technology could not be
completed within the time frame of this PhD research project. Identification of the mutation
of this mutant line is currently being pursued in the laboratory of Dr. Trevor Wang.
Alternative strategies could include the sequencing of the whole mapped region (ca. 150 kb)
by amplifying 1 to 2 kb fragments using classical sequencing technologies. Alternatively,
finer mapping using larger segregating populations could be carried out in an attempt to
restrict further the mapped interval. In addition, comparison of the expression between the
mutants and WT segregants of each candidate gene in the interval could help identify the
mutated locus. This integration of linkage mapping with gene expression profiling has, for
instance, recently been employed in plants to identify genes underlying drought resistance in
maize (Marino et al., 2009).
The apparent enhanced recombination frequency observed in the mutants of SL4618-12 is
potentially very interesting as it suggests that the gene affected by the mutation in this line
may have a function in genome stability, and more particularly an anti-recombination
meiotic effect. To date, only one example of such gene in higher plant has been reported
(Emmanuel et al., 2006). The identification of genes having this function could potentially
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
lead to crop improvement applications by promoting gene transfer between distant plant
species.
4.3.5. Nature of the mutations identified in the starch metabolism mutants from
forward screen and TILLING
It is interesting to note that several of the mutant alleles of the PGI1 and PGM1 genes, and
one allele affected the AGPase enzyme could be recovered from forward screen while none
of the mutation identified so far affected any of the other enzymes known to be essential for
starch granule formation (e.g. SS3 and SS4; Chapter 2 and reference therein). Likewise, out
of the three starch degradation mutants characterised, two had mutations in GWD1 and one
in GWD3. ISA3, DPE2, and MEX1 are three other enzymes that have been shown to be
essential for starch degradation (Chapter 2 and reference therein). Results of the candidate
enzyme approach and mapping I performed on the forward screen mutant yet
uncharacterised show that none of them are likely to be affected in either DPE2 or MEX1.
However, it is still possible that one of them could be affected in the gene ISA3 since its
sequence has not yet been anchored to the genome (Table 6). A hypothesis that could be
advanced to explain the over-representation of forward screen mutants affected in PGI1 and
PGM1 genes is that selecting only the mutants that were fertile introduced a bias in the
screen. Hence, strong forward screen mutant alleles leading to defects in starch metabolism
as well as impaired growth and development such as the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 alleles
identified by TILLING would not have been retained for further analyses.
Several observations could be made regarding the nature of the mutations identified both
in the forward and reverse screens, and in particular from the results of the TILLING of the
targeted regions of the LjGWD1 and LjGWD3 genes. Although this analysis was based on
only three targets as opposed to 84 analysed in Perry et al. (2009), several interesting
differences could be noted. Firstly, the number of mutations obtained per kb varied
significantly from one targeted region to another, ranging from ca. 10 to 20 mutations per
kb. On average for the three targeted regions of these two genes, the number of mutations
identified per kb was ca. 14.7 (60 mutations obtained for a total fragment length of 4 kb).
This is much higher than the average of 5.8 mutation per kb obtained so far with the general
TILLING population of L. japonicus (576 mutations obtained for a total fragment length
TILLed of 100 kb; Perry et al., 2009) and could simply reflect a better, more careful
selection of the region of the gene of interest targeted by TILLING in the case of this study.
The percentage of silent and non silent changes, and of the different categories of non-silent
changes were also highly variable from one targeted region to another. In addition, the range
of changes obtained and their proportion were significantly different from the predictions
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
given by the CODDLE program. For instance, only three missense changes could be
detected in one of the targeted region of the LjGWD1 gene (PHD; 1183 bp) apart from silent
mutations (i.e. mutation not causing an amino acid change or mutation located within
intron). In contrast, two truncation changes (stop-codon mutations) and nine missense
changes, of which two were predicted to be deleterious, were obtained for the other targeted
region of the same gene (SBD2; 1578 bp). In both cases, this corresponded to a significant
deviation from the theoretical values (many fewer non-silent changes than expected
identified in the first case, and significantly more in the second case; Table 12 and Table 13).
Of the detected mutations, 100% were G/C to T/A transitions typically induced by EMS
(Greene et al., 2003). In addition, the G to A and C to T transitions were on average almost
equal in number among the mutant alleles, as expected for a random distribution. However,
a distorted ratio of homozygous versus heterozygous mutants of 12.7% on average was
found for the three targeted regions analysed (percentage ranging from ca. 8 to 18%; Table
12 and Table 13). This is in agreement with the result of the analysis done by Perry et al.,
2009 on a larger set of the mutants of the L. japonicus TILLING population. In their study, a
ratio of 1:10 was observed between homozygous and heterozygous mutations in the M2
progeny. This profoundly differs from the 1:2 homozygous to heterozygous ratio observed in
A. thaliana (Greene et al., 2003) and reveals a difference in germline genetics between these
two species, indicative of a difference in the number of genetically effective cells (Perry et
al., 2009). Interestingly, results of analyses performed by the authors also revealed a
significant bias for the replacement of glycine residues in functionally defective alleles.
Perry et al. (2009) suggested that this over-representation of amino acid changes affecting
glycine in defective mutant alleles could be explained by the propensity of this residue to
adopt exceptional conformations that are sterically forbidden for other amino acids. The
massive alteration in protein structure resulting from this is likely to lead to impaired protein
function. In the work presented here, missense change of a glycine residues to another or a
stop codon represented 15.6% of all the non-silent changes (10 out of 64 changes affected a
glycine residue) and 20.0% of the mutations predicted to be deleterious by the CODDLE
program (PSSM difference > 10; four out of 20 affected glycine) that could be identified
from both forward screen and TILLING across all the genes studied (splice junction
mutation excluded from the calculation; Table 11). This figure is very similar to the one
obtained by Perry et al. (2009): out of 47 potentially causative alleles of the NODPOP
population, 11 affected a glycine residue (i.e. 23.4%).
Several replicates of mutations (i.e. an identical mutation present in several independent
mutant lines) were identified among the forward screen and TILLING populations. In the
forward screen mutants, an identical mutation (E566K) was identified in the two mutant
lines SL5215-2 and SL5358-3 (gwd1-1 mutant allele). Similarly, some mutations were
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
identified in several independent mutant lines by TILLING, the most common being
duplicate mutations (Table 12 and Table 13). In an extreme case, the same mutation was
identified in five independent mutant lines (GWD1-PHD targeted region; Table 12 and
Table 13). A possible explanation for this would be seed contamination (and/or DNA in case
of the TILLING population). Alternatively, the replication could be the result of the
presence of hot spots in the genomic sequence that would be affected preferentially by the
mutagen. The results of TILLING would tend to support this hypothesis since significant
differences between theoretical and obtained values were observed for the mutation load of
the targeted regions (Table 13). These mutation hot spots may be explained by differences
in epigenetic changes (e.g. methylation) from one genomic region to another.
As mentioned earlier, the CODDLE program was used for the selection of the target region
to be TILLed since it allows one to determine the region most likely to bear deleterious
mutations when mutagenised. In addition to assessing the probability of obtaining
deleterious mutations, this program and the PARSESNP programs were used to predict the
effect of the mutations identified. A SIFT score smaller than 0.05 and a PSSM (Position-
Specific Scoring Matrix) difference score above 10 indicates a deleterious effect. My results
indicate that, although very useful, the accuracy of the predictions given by these programs
did not match the results obtained experimentally. For example, several of the mutations
from both the forward screen and TILLING that generated a PSSM < 10 still led to a mutant
phenotype, and, conversely, some mutations with a PSSM > 10 did not lead to a phenotype
(Table 11). Overall, the results of this analysis suggests that caution should be exercised
when using the results from these programs, and that, ideally, the phenotype of all the
mutations identified, or at least all the ones with a PSSM > 0 should be analysed to reduce
the risk of missing functionally defective mutant alleles. Furthermore, while mutations in
introns and silent mutations were automatically classed as non deleterious by these
programs, recent evidence in the literature suggests that such mutations may have an effect
on gene expression. For instance, a mutation located at an exon-intron junction could lead to
aberrant splicing and have an effect on protein function (e.g. Brand et al., 1996; Pohjanvirta
et al., 1998; Min et al., 2003). In fact, evidence shows that even synonymous mutations can
have an effect on protein function, although one may expect their effect to be relatively mild.
Synonymous substitutions and mutations affecting noncoding DNA are collectively known
as silent mutations, and the change is often assumed to be neutral. Several pieces of
evidence, however, suggest that this type of mutation may not be neutral. One reason is that
certain codons are translated more efficiently than others (Carlini et al., 2003). Another is
the fact that coding sequences at the vicinity of exon-intron borders function as RNA
splicing signals. If this splicing signal is destroyed by a synonymous mutation, an exon of
the final protein is skipped, resulting in the synthesis of a trunctated form of the protein. For
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
example, about a quarter of synonymous variations affecting exon 12 of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator gene result in that exon being skipped (Pagani et al.,
2005). Finally, synonymous mutations have also been shown to affect the stability of the
mRNA secondary structure in mammals (Chamary and Hurst, 2005). These discoveries may
have implications for the design of algorithms aimed at predicting the effect of point
mutations. Likewise, the recent discovery of the bias towards the amino acid changes
affecting glycine in deleterious mutant alleles (Perry et al., 2009) could also be used for
improving the algorithm for these programs.
4.3.6. The significance of the starch metabolism mutants of L. japonicus
The metabolism of starch is of central importance in plant growth and development. Yet,
very little is known to date about the metabolism in legumes. Previously, I provided
evidence that L. japonicus is a starch accumulating species and outlined our collection of
mutants. The analyses I carried out on this collection indicated that the pathways of starch
metabolism in L. japonicus are largely conserved with those of A. thaliana. Nevertheless,
some novel findings were made. In addition, some substantial difference between the two
species in the nature and the importance of this pathway for plant growth and development
were identified and are discussed below.
The reduced starch content of the pgi mutants was observed and/or measured in leaves but
not in embryos or roots (Figure 20). This suggests that the synthesis of starch in seed
embryos and roots is not dependent on PGI activity. The fact that none of the mutants
affected in seed starch accumulation that were isolated from extensive mutant screening in
cereals were shown to be deficient in the PGI activity (Yu et al., 2001) tends to suggest that
the absence of effect of the loss of PGI activity seen on seed starch content in L. japonicus is
common to other plant species. In contrast, the analyses of the starch content of the pgm1-4
mutant showed that this mutant is completely starch-free in all the tissues and organs
analysed, including leaves, stem, roots, seed embryos, and nodules (Figure 20 and following
chapter). This means that this plastidial isoform of the enzyme is essential for the synthesis
of starch in all these tissues and organs. The crucial role of this enzyme for the synthesis of
starch in leaves and embryos had already been reported in other species, including A.
thaliana and pea (Caspar et al., 1985; Harrison et al., 2000), but its importance for starch
synthesis in nodules constitutes a novel finding. Results of my analysis revealed that starch
in L. japonicus accumulates in all the root tissues. In contrast, in roots of A. thaliana and rice
WT plants starch is only found in the root cap cells (Yu et al., 2001; Tsai et al., 2009).
Further, in A. thaliana, starch is absent in the root cap cells of the pgm1 mutant, but present
in those of the pgi1 mutants (Yu et al., 2001). Similary in L. japonicus, results of my
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
analyses showed that the loss of LjPGM1, but not of LjPGI1 activity affected the
accumulation of starch in roots.
The apl1-1 mutant had a reduced-starch phenotype specifically in leaves, but no visible
reduction of starch accumulation in the embryos or in roots (Figure 20 and data not shown).
This strongly suggests that, as in A. thaliana, APL1 in L. japonicus is the main large subunit
isoform involved in the activity of the AGPase heterotetrameric enzyme in leaves. In
contrast, the starch content of the aps1-1 mutant was strongly reduced in all organs analysed
including leaves, roots, and embryos while none of the apl2 mutant lines displayed any clear
defect in starch content in any of the organs of the plant analysed, including leaves, roots,
and embryos suggesting that this large subunit isoform may not play a crucial role in starch
synthesis, at least under the growth conditions used. These results are in agreement with the
results of the characterisation of their homologs in A. thaliana (Lin et al., 1988a; Lin et al.,
1988b; Crevillen et al., 2003 and 2005) and are consistent with the tissue specific pattern of
expression found for these AGPase isoforms in L. japonicus (Chapter 3, section 3.2.3). Since
neither the loss of LjAPL1 and LjAPL2 led to a reduction in starch content in seeds, it is
likely that other isoforms encode the large subunit of AGPase in this organ. Results of the
analysis of transcript levels presented in Chapter 3 (section 3.2.3) suggest that LjAPL3 may
be the large subunit isoform responsible for the AGPase activity in association with LjAPS1
in this organ as well as in roots (LjAPL3 is the most highly expressed large subunit isoform
in these organs). Lastly, it is worth noting that the effect of the mutations identified in the
aps1-1 and apl1-1 mutants on starch content was found to be quite variable depending on the
growth conditions according to the results of iodine staining (data not shown). This suggests
that isoforms of the large subunit may, to a certain extent substitute for each other and
contribute to the AGPase activity under some specific conditions.
The leaf starch-excess phenotypes of all the defective mutant alleles of both GWD1 and
GWD3 strongly suggest that both these enzymes play an important role in the degradation of
starch in leaves of L. japonicus. It seems likely, therefore, that these two enzymes act
synergistically to phosphorylate the starch granule as a prerequisite for its degradation as in
A. thaliana (Ktting et al., 2005; Baunsgaard et al., 2005). Starch content in plants of the two
GWD1 null mutant alleles, gwd1-2 and gwd1-3, was altered in most organs analysed
including leaves, roots and nodules, albeit a much more pronounced effect in leaves than in
other organs (Figure 20 and following chapter). By comparison, an increase in starch content
could only be observed in leaves in the weaker gwd1-1 mutant plants (and in the gwd3
mutants), probably due to the difficulty of visualizing the starch-excess phenotype.
The characterisation of these starch synthesis and degradation mutants of L. japonicus
shows that their starch phenotypes are largely similar to those of the equivalent mutants in A.
thaliana, indicating that the pathways of starch metabolism are well conserved between the
Chapter 4: Isolation of starch metabolism mutants of Lotus japonicus
two species. However, their characterisation also revealed some interesting differences, in
particular relative to their importance in plant growth and development. These results are
presented and discussed in detail in the next chapter.
It would be interesting in the future to complete this collection by isolating mutants
affected in the other enzymes/proteins known to play a crucial role in leaf starch degradation
in A. thaliana. In particular it would be valuable to have mutants lacking BAM3, BAM4,
ISA3, DPE2, and MEX1 so that one could determine more precisely the degree of
conservation of the pathway of starch degradation between L. japonicus and A. thaliana.
Interestingly, no strong candidate genes were identified in the map regions of the unknown
mutants. Hence, this series of mutants provides the basis for the discovery of novel proteins
involved in the metabolism of starch. Moreover, the mutants covered in this study were
selected from a larger population of putative mutants impaired in starch metabolism.
Investigation of the full collection may allow the discovery of further novel proteins.
Put together this suite of mutants provides a strong platform for further investigations of
the partitioning of carbon and its importance for traits of agronomic importance in legumes
including symbiotic nitrogen fixation, seed storage product accumulation, and perenniality
and re-growth. Results of experiments aiming at exploring the importance of starch in such
traits together with novel information on some of the starch enzymes are presented and
discussed in the next two chapters as an illustration of the wealth of new information that
may be obtained from this collection of mutants.
CHAPTER 5
Functional characterisation of the mutants
I am a great believer in luck, and I find the harder I work, the more I have of it
Thomas Jefferson
CHAPTER 5: Functional characterisation of
the mutants
5.1. Introduction
5.1.1. Importance of carbohydrate metabolism for plant growth and reproduction, and
seed development
As discussed earlier (Chapter 1), the extent to which starch accumulates in leaves differs
between species. In A. thaliana, transitory starch is the major storage carbohydrate that
accumulates during the day and is degraded at night. Its importance for plant growth is
reflected in the phenotype of A. thaliana mutants unable to synthesize or to degrade it fully.
Hence, growth of the starch synthesis-deficient mutants pgm1, pgi1, and adg1 is impaired
under short day conditions in comparison to wild-type plants (Caspar et al., 1985; Lin et al.,
1988; Yu et al., 2000). Growth of the sex1 mutant that has reduced capacity to mobilize
starch in leaves at night is similarly affected unless it is grown under continuous light
(Caspar et al., 1991). In several plant species, starch also appears to be of importance in
aspects of flowering and reproduction. Hence, several A. thaliana mutants with defects in
leaf starch metabolism are late flowering (Caspar et al., 1985; Eimert et al., 1995; Yu et al.,
2000).
Recently, starch degradation has also been shown to be vital for normal pollen
development and germination in tomato plants (Nashilevitz et al., 2009). Pollen grains
develop in the anther where they are initially surrounded by the tapetum, a short-lived tissue
which mediates their growth and nutrition (Pacini and Viegi, 1995). Sugars supplied to the
pollen grains can either be rapidly utilized as energy source, or temporarily stored as starch
in the plastids. Depending on the species, one or two cycles of amylogenesis and amylolysis
occurs during pollen development. In addition, mature pollen grains are either starchy or
starchless (Pacini and Franchi, 1988; Franchi et al., 1996; Pacini, 1996). In tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum), starch is synthesised at early stages of pollen development
before being hydrolysed at later stages, so that the mature pollen grain is starchless (Pacini
and Franchi, 1988). In contrast, the pollen of a wild tomato relative L. pennelli is starchy,
whereas in A. thaliana pollen, starch is only partially hydrolyzed (Pacini and Franchi, 1988;
Franchi et al., 1996). A knockout of the LeGWD1 gene by transposon insertion in tomato led
to a starch-excess phenotype and a reduced level of sugars in the mature pollen grain that
was associated with a reduction in pollen germination, gametophytic lethality and male
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
sterility (Nashilevitz et al., 2009). This suggests that in species in which starch accumulates
and is fully remobilized during pollen development, the processes of starch phosphorylation
and its degradation are of central importance for the reproductive capacity of the plant. In
contrast in A. thaliana, no defect in pollen fertility has been reported for starch mutants,
including the gwd1 mutant sex1 (Caspar et al., 1991). Nevertheless, it was recently shown
that a deficiency in the plastidial glycolytic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase led
to male sterility in A. thaliana (Munoz-Bertomeu et al., 2010), suggesting a critical role
played by the metabolism of carbohydrates for pollen viability in this species.
In seeds, very different patterns of reserve accumulation are observed among legume
species. In pea seeds, the major component is starch (50% of the dry weight). In contrast,
starch content is very low (less than 1%) in mature seeds of several species, including
soybean, L. japonicus, and M. truncatula (Dam et al., 2009). In seeds of these species, starch
is either not synthesised in large amounts, or is completely degraded during seed maturation,
probably to provide carbon skeletons for the synthesis of other compounds (Gallardo et al.,
2008). Instead, these species have seeds with high protein contents (between 30 and 40%
depending on the species and genotypes; Djemel et al., 2005; Gallardo et al., 2008; Dam et
al., 2009). Levels of lipids, the third major component of mature legume seeds, also vary
significantly between species (ca. 20% in soybean, 7% in L. japonicus, and ca. 2% in pea;
Dam et al., 2009)
Thus far, what is known of the metabolism of carbohydrates in seeds largely comes from
studies carried out in pea. In this species, a suite of mutants in which starch synthesis is
reduced in developing seeds has been isolated. These are the rug4 (Susy), rug3 (plastidial
PGM), rug5 (SS2), r (SBE), and rb (AGPase) mutants (Bogracheva et al., 1999). In each
case, reduced flux of carbon into starch has extensive consequences for many other aspects
of seed metabolism and development. These include elevated level of sugars and reduced
sugar uptake, elevated level of lipids, altered ratios of storage protein, and wrinkled
appearance of the mature seeds (Wang et al., 2003). For instance, in the SBEI mutant (r
mutant) where the seed starch content is reduced by ca. 50%, the sucrose level is elevated by
180%, and the rate of sucrose uptake is reduced (Wang and Hedley, 1991; Edwards and ap
Rees, 1986). This tuning of the sucrose uptake fluxes by the size of the intracellular sugar
pool involves sugar transporter activities whose contribution to cotyledon growth rate and
biomass gain has been shown to be important (Patrick and Offler, 2001; Rosche et al., 2002;
Zhou et al., 2009). In addition, seeds of the starch synthesis mutants lacking SBEI and
AGPase (aka r and rb mutants, respectively) that display a reduced starch content were
found to have increased protein and lipid contents (Hughes et al., 2001; Wang et al., 1990).
This stimulative effect of a reduction in AGPase activity and starch accumulation on the
storage protein synthesis and fatty acid metabolism in pea embryos has recently been
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
confirmed by Weigelt et al. (2009). Decreased starch synthesis also led to an increased sugar
accumulation that appeared to stimulate cytokinin-mediated cell proliferation pathways
(Weigelt et al., 2009).
In contrast, in A. thaliana, an oil-seed species, a decreased rather than increased lipid
accumulation was observed in the seeds of the starch-free pgm1 mutant (40% reduction in oil
content in the mutant that lack starch completely compared with that of WT; Periappuram et
al., 2000). Similarly, an embryo-specific reduction of the AGPase activity in Brassica napus
(rape) seeds caused a marked decrease in lipid synthesis at the onset of oil accumulation.
This influence of AGPase on fatty acid accumulation, however, was largely compensated for
in the late stages of seed development (Vigeolas et al., 2004). This could be explained by the
fact that in A. thaliana and oilseed rape, starch accumulates only transiently during early
development. Starch is then hydrolyzed during phases of oil accumulation, and is absent
from mature seeds. Confirmation that clear, yet complex, interactions occur between the
pathway of starch metabolism and lipid synthesis in these oilseed species come from the
analysis of an A. thaliana mutant, sse1 (shrunken seed 1) whose reduced rate of fatty acid
synthesis was shown to lead to an increased accumulation of both starch and sugars (Lin et
al., 2006).
In comparison, very little is known about the importance of starch for seed metabolism and
development in seeds of legume species other than pea. Given the storage product
composition of seeds of soybean, L. japonicus, and M. truncatula described above, it may be
hypothesized that alteration of starch synthesis and turnover would lead to effects similar in
several respects to those observed in A. thaliana and oilseed rape, rather than to those
observed in pea. However, there is not yet any experimental evidence available on this.
Further, the nature of the starch metabolism pathway in seeds of these legume species still
remains to be determined.
5.1.2. Importance of carbohydrate metabolism for symbiotic nitrogen fixation
Symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) requires a supply of carbon from the plant to the
bacteroids in the root nodules. Nodules represent strong carbon sinks since they need
assimilates for N2 fixation and ammonium assimilation (between 12 and 17 g of
carbohydrate are needed per gram of nitrogen fixed; Vance and Gantt, 1992) as well as for
maintenance and growth. Several lines of evidence support an important role for the
metabolism of carbohydrate in this process. In pea, the rug4 mutant deficient in sucrose
synthase (Susy) activity is severely impaired in SNF (Gordon et al., 1999; Craig et al.,
1999). Consistent with this observation, the corresponding Susy gene was found to be a
member of a class of genes called nodulins that are uniquely or highly expressed in nodules
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
(Thummler and Verma, 1987). Mutants lacking this isoform of Susy (referred as nodule-
enhanced Susy) have since been studied in several other legume species, and the crucial role
of this enzyme in nodulation confirmed in every case (Horst et al., 2007; Baier et al., 2007).
Sucrose is required for nodulation not only as a source of energy for nodule metabolism
including the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen, but also as a source of carbon skeletons for
the assimilation of ammonium and its export from nodules. In addition to its role in the
provision of carbon skeletons to the nodules, the control of Susy gene expression may be a
way of regulating N2 fixation by acting on the supply of carbohydrate (Gordon et al., 1997).
In support of this hypothesis, it has been found that the gene encoding nodule-enhanced
Susy is quickly down-regulated in response to stresses that simultaneously reduce N fixation
in soybean (Gonzalez et al., 1995; Gordon et al., 1997). A high correlation between a decline
in N2 fixation and sucrose synthase downregulation is also observed under water stress
(Galvez et al., 2005). Alternatively, a decreased Susy expression and activity could be a
response to decreased N fixation.
Together with sucrose, starch represents the principal carbohydrate accumulated in nodules
(Kouchi and Yoneyama, 1984; Gordon et al., 1985; Walsh et al., 1987). Uninfected cells of
nodules tend to contain large starch granules while infected cells generally have few, if any
starch granules. Despite its widespread presence in most, if not all, root nodules of rhizobial
symbioses studied to date, very little is known about the importance of nodule starch for
SNF. It may be hypothesized that the formation of starch in nodules simply represents an
overflow for photosynthates supplied by the plant, or that conversion of incoming sucrose to
starch maintains the sink strength of the nodule. Alternatively, starch degradation may play a
crucial role in maintaining N2 fixation under normal conditions, during dark periods, and/or
during prolonged periods of cold during winter, or under stresses (e.g. nutrient, drought,
salt).
Results of analyses performed in soybean pointed toward a role for nodule starch under
stress conditions only. Walsh et al. (1987) examined the location and nature of the carbon
pool supporting the nodule activity under non-photosynthetic conditions, following the
observation that soybean nodules are able to maintain a constant rate of N2 fixation during
the night, if the temperature is held constant (Walsh and Layzell, 1986; Williams et al.,
1982). The starch pool in soybean leaves and roots showed diurnal fluctuations but the pool
in nodules and stems showed no variation. In this species, starch stored in leaves appeared to
be the major carbon pool used to support nodule function under normal, non-photosynthetic
conditions. The results of leaf excision, stem girdling, and stem chilling studies in soybean
further demonstrated that nodule respiration and nitrogenase activity were highly dependent
upon a constant supply of photosynthates from the shoot, and that, when forced to draw
upon its own reserves by stem girdling, soluble sugar pools in the nodule were initially
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
rapidly consumed (58% decrease over ca. 3 h). From 3 to 26 h after stem girdling, however,
the pool of soluble sugars was relatively stable, and the starch reserves declined to 47% of
their initial size (Walsh et al. 1987). Similarly, nodules of chickpea plants kept in the dark
for 48 h still possessed 40 and 74% of their initial soluble sugar and starch content,
respectively, and 69% of their rate of nitrogen fixation (measured by acetylene reduction
assay; Swarej et al., 1986). Put together, these results suggest that, at least in these species,
nodule carbohydrate reserves are only remobilized under severe stress conditions in which
external, phloem-supplied carbohydrates are severely restricted. When soybean plants were
maintained under continuous light, nodule starch and sugars accumulated but the rate of
nitrogenase activity was not significantly higher than in the control plants. This suggests that
under normal growth conditions, nodule activity is limited by the intrinsic nodule
metabolism (i.e. its ability to utilize the available photosynthates) rather than the supply of
carbohydrates by the plant (Walsh et al. 1987).
Important differences in the metabolism of nodule starch seem to exist between legume
species. Thus, while nodule carbohydrate levels fluctuated very little during light and dark
periods in soybean (Walsh et al., 1987), a significant diurnal variation was found in
carbohydrate levels in the nodules of other species (e.g. white clover, Gordon et al., 1986
and 1987; cowpea, Rainbird et al., 1983; pea, Michin and Pate, 1974). In white clover in
particular, both sucrose and starch increased during the 12 h light period and declined during
the subsequent dark period. Sucrose accumulation and degradation was completely in phase
with the light and dark period whereas starch turnover was out of phase by about 3-4 h
(Gordon et al., 1986 and 1987). It was estimated that this reserve of sugar and starch
accumulated during the photoperiod would be sufficient to maintain N2 fixation at the time
rates as during the day for three quarters of the dark period (Gordon et al., 1987).
Furthermore, in white clover, in contrast to soybean where the large majority (80%) of the
total carbon stored during the light period was as starch in the leaves (Kerr et al., 1985), half
of the starch accumulated in organs other than leaves. The continued export of the stored
carbon from these organs contributed to the uninterrupted nodule nitrogen fixation during
darkness (Gordon et al., 1987). Interestingly in white clover plants acclimated to a 12 h
photoperiod, shortening the light period by only a few hours caused an abrupt decline in
nodule metabolism toward the end of the dark period (Ryle et al., 1988). This suggests that
plants of this species are unable to accumulate sufficient reserves in either the nodules or
other organs to sustain SNF under unexpected change of conditions.
Evidence that starch may also play a role in nodules under non-stress growth conditions in
some plant species comes from the results of gene expression analyses. Transcript profiling
using cDNA arrays has been performed in L. japonicus (Colebatch et al., 2002 and 2004) to
help identify nodule-induced genes (also called nodulins) that are likely to play a critical role
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
during the SNF process. Primary metabolism constitutes the functional category containing
the largest number of nodule-induced genes. Interestingly, AGPase (APS1) was mentioned
as a nodule-induced metabolic gene by Colebatch et al., 2002 (ratio of expression level
nodule/root of 2.3); and starch phosphorylase (PHS1) and SEX1/GWD1 were also among
the nodule-induced genes (expression nodule/root ratio of 3.7 and 8.6, respectively). By
comparison, ESTs of the sucrose synthase genes encoding isoforms LjSUS1 and LjSUS3
known to be important for nodule function had a nodule/root ratio of expression of 3.9 and
8.3, respectively.
In an attempt to determine whether starch plays a role in nodule cold tolerance and winter
dormancy, seasonal changes in starch and soluble sugars were studied in the perennial root
nodules of beach pea (Lathyrus japonicus; Chinnasamy and Bal, 2003). Results revealed an
increase in starch reserves during the summer and a dramatic depletion (60%) during winter
in this species. It is believed that this remobilization of starch reserves plays a role in
keeping constant, elevated reducing sugar levels to help maintain high osmolarity in cells,
and thus prevent the dormant nodule from freezing during prolonged periods of cold during
winter.
Taken together, these results support the idea that storage carbohydrates in root nodules
should be considered as necessary rather than simply as excess photosynthates. However, the
means of ensuring continuous nitrogen fixation under photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic
conditions appears to be species dependent. Furthermore, it is clear from examples described
above that the importance of nodule starch metabolism and its regulation under normal
growth conditions varies from one species to another. In contrast, the results of several
studies all support an important role played by nodule starch as a source of carbon under
stress conditions and as a long term form of stored carbon.
Atypically high levels of starch are generally observed in nodules infected by different
mutant bacteria. For example, nodules infected by bacteroids with a deficiency in the
transport of dicarboxylic acids have high levels of starch and undergo premature senescence
(Finan et al., 1983). Similarly, both pea nodules infected by bacteroids defective for
aspartate amino transferase or for amino acid import/export (Lodwig et al., 2003) and alfalfa
nodules with bacteroids defective in glutathione synthesis (Harrison et al., 2005) were found
to accumulate high levels of starch. A common feature in these three examples is the fact
that bacteroids are not fully differentiated and have deficiencies in the import and processing
of carbon skeletons, amino acids, and antioxidants. As a consequence, nitrogen-fixing
activity is severely reduced or even abolished, and the photosynthates imported to the nodule
are stored as starch in the symbiosome instead of being metabolised. Consistent with these
observations, the activities of the carbon metabolism enzymes starch synthase (SS) and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) were altered in these cases.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
The commonly observed correlation between high starch accumulation and senescence is
still unclear, but the results presented above suggest that the accumulation of high level of
starch is more likely to be a result of an impaired nodule function and premature senescence
rather than the other way around (i.e. high level of starch causing a premature senescence).
5.1.3. Properties and structure-function relationships in three key enzyme of starch
metabolism: AGPase, GWD1, and GWD3
The AGPase enzymes from bacteria and cyanobacteria (involved in glycogen synthesis)
are homotetrameric. Conversely, AGPase in higher plants is a heterotetramer (2 2) 
composed of two small (APS, 2) and two large (APL, 2) subunits (Okita et al., 1990). 
Most plants possess one or two APS genes and several APL genes. In A. thaliana, one
functional APS gene (APS1) and four functional APL genes (APL1, APL2; APL3, APL4)
have been identified. A. thaliana also has another APS gene (APS2) that is a pseudogene.
Gene expression profiling of AGPase isoforms has been performed in several plant species
(Crevillen et al., 2005; Hirose et al., 2006; Ohdan et al., 2005). These studies have revealed
that the AGPase genes in plants are differentially expressed between tissues and organs
(Chen et al., 1998a and 1998b; Kim et al., 2001; Crevillen et al., 2005). In addition to this
tissue-specific pattern of expression, different APL isoforms have been shown to confer
distinct kinetic and regulatory properties to the heterotetrameric enzyme (Crevillen et al.,
2003).
Because AGPase catalyzes the first committed step in the starch biosynthetic pathway and
has long been thought to be rate limiting for starch synthesis, extensive studies have been
carried out on this enzyme. In particular, the mode of regulation of the plant AGPase
enzyme has received considerable attention, and many analyses of the catalytic and
regulatory properties of the different subunits, and of variants in a range of plant species and
organs have been performed (Chapter 1 and reference therein). Moreover, several extensive
phylogenetic analyses have also been performed for this enzyme as discussed earlier
(Chapter 3 and references therein).
Three main mechanisms have been shown to modulate its activity: allosteric regulation,
reductive activation, and thermal inactivation. Further, many residues important for the
overall activity of the AGPase enzyme or more specifically for its regulatory properties, heat
stability, and for the interaction between subunits have been determined (e.g. Ballicora et al.,
1998; Cross et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2007; Georgelis et al., 2009; Boehlein et al., 2008 and
2009).
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
As mentioned earlier, phosphorylation of starch is essential for its normal degradation at
night. Two isoforms of -glucan water, dikinase (GWD) are known to be involved in the 
phosphorylation of starch: GWD1 (aka SEX1 or R1 protein) and GWD3 (aka PWD). The
importance and role of these enzymes in starch degradation has been detailed earlier
(Chapter 1 and reference therein). Briefly, GWD1 catalyses the phosphorylation of the C6
position of glucose units of starch while GWD3 phosphorylates at the C3 position of the
glucose units (Ritte et al., 2006). The activity of GWD3 is dependent on starch being
phosphorylated by GWD1. Evidence also suggests that both dikinases work in cooperation
with the glucan phosphate phosphatase SEX4 in a cycle of phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation events occurring at the surface of the starch granules to allow its
degradation.
Both GWD1 and GWD3 proteins contain a C-terminal region homologous to a dikinase
activity domain (PPDK), consisting of a phospho-histidine and a nucleotide binding motif.
This domain is responsible for the transfer of the -phosphate of ATP to the glucan 
substrate. The two enzymes also possess a putative Starch Binding Domain (SBD) located at
the N terminus that allows them to bind to the surface of the starch granule. In GWD3, this
domain belongs to the well characterised Carbohydrate Binding Module (CBM) family 20
(CBM20) defined by the CAZy database (http://www.cazy.org). The N terminal region of
GWD1 contains two starch binding domains, SBD-1 and SBD-2, that have recently been
classified into a newly defined CBM family 45 (CBM45) in the CAZy database. Modules
belonging to this family are found in an extra-plastidial glucan, water dikinase of unknown
function (GWD2; Glaring et al., 2007) and in plastidial -amylases. However, in contrast to 
the GWD1 protein that possesses a tandem repeat of SBD, the -amylases contain only one 
copy of SBD in their N-terminal region. Expression of an N-terminally truncated form of the
A. thaliana plastidial -amylase AMY3 has established that this module is not required for 
the catalytic activity of this enzyme (Yu et al., 2005).
Many mutant alleles of GWD1 have been described in A. thaliana. All mutations identified
affected the dikinase activity domain only (i.e. deleterious amino acid/truncation change or
T-DNA insertion located in the C-terminal region of the protein; Yu et al., 2001) and,
consequently, not much is known about the function of the putative SBD and its importance
for the activity of the enzyme. The first evidence suggesting that this SBD may be required
for efficient starch phosphorylation comes from a study by Mikkelsen et al. (2006). The
authors performed limited proteolysis of the potato tuber GWD1 (StGWD1) with trypsin,
thereby producing two stable fragments. One corresponded to the N-terminal region
containing the first SBD only (termed SBD fragment) and the other (termed N11) contained
the remaining sequence (SBD-2 and C-terminus of StGWD). In-vitro starch phosphorylating
activity of the N11 fragment was altered (two fold higher specific activity) compared to the
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
WT StGWD1. Furthermore, deletion of the N-terminal region containing the first SBD motif
resulted in an enzyme with a higher preference for phosphorylating shorter amylopectin
chains. Information about the contribution of the second SBD to the substrate specificity and
the activity of starch phosphorylation is lacking.
5.1.4. Aims and Approaches
In the previous chapter, I described the isolation of mutants of L. japonicus with altered
starch synthesis or degradation. I showed that the suite contained allelic series for several
key enzymes of starch metabolism. This comprehensive collection of starch metabolism
mutants should provide a useful resource for further studies on the metabolism of transitory
and storage starch and the roles of starch in legumes (e.g. in nitrogen symbiotic fixation and
in seed storage product accumulation), and may also help to uncover new facets of the
metabolism of starch. To illustrate this, I present here the results of some phenotypic and
molecular analyses carried out on the mutants and show that they provide new information
about the structure-function relationships of the AGPase and glucan, water dikinase (GWD)
enzymes. In addition, functional analyses of the phenotypes of the pgm1-4 and gwd1-2/3
mutants of L. japonicus offer new insights into the metabolism of starch and its importance
for plant growth and development in legumes.
5.2. Results
5.2.1. Molecular characterisation of selected starch mutants
5.2.1.1 APL1 mutant alleles
In Chapter 3, I identified one gene encoding the small subunit isoform (named LjAPS1)
and five genes encoding the large subunit ioforms (named LjAPL1 to LjAPL5) in the genome
of L. japonicus. In addition, a duplicated copy of the APL2 gene (LjAPL2b) was also found.
Results of the gene expression and protein sequence analyses suggested that LjAPL2b and
LjAPL5 genes may not be functional (Chapter 3, sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3). As described in
the previous chapter, several mutants for the LjAPS1 and LjAPL2a gene were isolated by
TILLING. In addition, one of the mutants from the forward screen carried a mutation in the
LjAPL1 gene.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 29. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with those of
other species.
A. Comparison of two regions of the small and large subunits from L. japonicus (L.jap) genes carrying
the mutations aps1-1 and apl1-1 with homologs from species including bacteria [E. coli (E.col) and A.
tumefaciens (A.tum)], cyanobacteria [Anabena sp. (Anab)] and plants [Arabidopsis thaliana (A.tha) and
S. tuberosum (S.tub)]. GLGC is the single gene product responsible for AGPase activity in bacteria and
cyanobacteria. The alignment was made with the programs Clustal W2 (default settings) and
GeneDoc. Strictly conserved residues are highlighted in black, less conserved residues are in grey.
The positions of the aps1-1 and apl1-1 mutations are indicated by arrows. Residues marked in red
interact with the substrates ADPGlc and/or ATP in the S. tuberosum APS protein (Jin et al., 2005);
those marked in blue may be important in the regulatory properties of the enzyme (Kavakli et al., 2001;
2002). Residues marked in green are those involved in subunit interactions according to Jin et al.
(2005) Note that in this alignment the residue in the potato APS protein equivalent to L. japonicus S400
is S401. Jin et al. (2005) numbered this residue as S331; their numbering is used in Figure 30. The 55
amino-acid motif identified by Cross et al. (2005) as being critical for interaction between the small and
the large subunit corresponds to amino acids 368-468 in the potato APS sequence on our alignment.
An alignment of the full amino acid sequences is given in Figure A4. Accession numbers for the
sequences are: A.tha APL1, P55229; A.tha APL2, P55230; A.tha APL3, P55231; A.tha APL4, Q9SIK1,
S.tub APL1, Q00081 ; S.tub APL2, P55242; S.tub APL3, P55243; A.tha APS1, P55228; A.tha APS2,
Q7YKW3; S.tub APS, P23509; E.col GLGC, P046V1; A.tum GLGC, P39669: Anab GLGC, P30521. B.
Guide tree made with the Clustal W2 program, showing the phylogenetic relationships between the
AGPase proteins.
aps1-1 (A111T)
apl1-1 (S400L)
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
The mutation identified in the starch deficient mutant Ljaps1-1 (from SL529-1; Chapter 4,
section 4.2.3) results in a change of an amino acid adjacent to a highly conserved residue of
the small subunit of AGPase, known to interact with the substrate (Figure 29). It is therefore
not surprising that this mutation has an effect on the enzyme activity and leads to low starch
content in the mutant relative to the WT. Conversely, the nature of the mutation identified in
the LjAPL1 gene of the forward screen mutant line SL5127-5 was unexpected in the light of
our present understanding of the structure-function relationships of the enzyme. Leaves of
this mutant, Ljapl1-1, had only 7% of the AGPase activity of wild-type leaves (Table 16,
Chapter 4), suggesting that the mutation was likely to be a truncation change (i.e. splice-site
or stop-codon mutation) or to affect one of the residues involved in the catalytic and/or the
regulatory activity of the enzyme. The mutation identified in Ljapl1-1 however, led to an
amino acid change (S400L) not previously shown to be important for the AGPase enzyme
activity (Figure 29).
The crystal structure of the AGPase small subunit homotetramer from potato tubers has
been solved, both free and in complex with ATP and ADPGlc (Jin et al., 2005). Together
with mutagenesis studies (Ballicora et al., 1998; Greene et al., 1998; Kavakli et al., 2002),
analysis of its structure has enabled the identification of residues important for either
substrate affinity or sensitivity of the subunits to the allosteric effectors inorganic phosphate
(Pi) and 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA) (Figure 29 and Figure A4). No crystal structure of the
heterotetrameric enzyme is currently available. However, the strong sequence similarity
between the small and large subunits of AGPase (48% identity at the amino acid level
between LjAPL1 and StAPS) allowed the use of the crystal structure of the small subunit
homotetramer for analysing the impact of the mutation on LjAPL1.
The mutated residue (S400; equivalent to S331 in the potato small subunit) is positioned at
the interface between monomers (Figure 30), suggesting that this residue is crucial for
AGPase activity because it is involved in the interaction between the subunits. Consistent
with this finding, the residue equivalent to S400 in the potato large subunit has been
predicted to be involved in subunit interaction by homology modelling of the
heterotetrameric structure of the potato AGPase (Tuncel et al., 2008). Furthermore, Cross et
al. (2005) identified a 55-amino acid region of the potato small subunit including S331 that
is critical both for the catalytic and the allosteric properties of the enzyme by modulating
interaction between the subunits. This important role played by the residues at the interfaces
between the large and small subunits for the catalytic and allosteric properties of AGPase has
since been confirmed in several more recent studies (Georgelis et al., 2009; Boehlein et al.,
2009). However, the preliminary in silico analysis I carried out indicated that the change
from serine to leucine at this position is unlikely to affect subunit interaction (Figure 30, and
personal communication with Dr Faridoon Yousafzai, JIC); the backbone, rather than the
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
side-chain, of the residue at this position is involved in subunit interaction. Instead, the side-
chain of the serine S400 interacts with other amino acids in the -helix domain in which it is 
located. These interactions are lost when a leucine is substituted for this serine residue
(Figure 30). Hence, it may be hypothesized that the effect that the mutation identified in
Ljapl1-1 has on the activity of the enzyme results from a disruption of the heterotetramer
stability as a whole, rather than from a disruption of the interaction between subunits.
Figure 30. Predicted effect on AGPase function of the S400L amino acid change in the large subunit
found in the L. japonicus mutant apl1-1.
A. Position of S331, the residue equivalent to S400 of the L. japonicus APL1, in the three dimensional
structure of the small subunit of the potato tuber AGPase. The representation was generated by the
VMD program from the crystallographic structure obtained by Jin et al. (2005), entered on the RCSB
PDB databank with the PDB ID 1YP2. The residues at the interface between monomer A and B of the
small subunit homotetramer are highlighted in yellow and enlarged on the right. The residue S331 is
highlighted in green and indicted by arrows. B. Closer view of residues at the interface between
subunits. C. In silico mutagenesis of S331 using the program Swiss PDB Viewer. The serine 331
residue was replaced by a leucine residue to simulate the effect of the mutation identified in apl1-1.
The change brings about a disruption of the interaction of the side chain of this residue with other
residues of the -helix domain, suggesting a possible effect of the amino acid change S400L on the 
stability of this domain.
SER331SER331
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
AA BB
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
S331LS331L
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
AA BB
SER331SER331
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
AA BB
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
S331LS331L
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
AA BB
SER331SER331
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
AA BB
SER347SER347
HIS346HIS346
S331LS331L
THR329THR329
MET323MET323
AA BB
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
5.2.1.2 GWD1 mutant alleles
The Ljgwd1-1 mutation identified in two of the starch-excess mutant lines from the
forward screen (SL5215-2 and SL5358-3; see Chapter 4, section 4.2.4) leads to an amino
acid change, E566K, in the second of the two starch-binding domains (SBD-1 and SBD-2)
located in the N-terminal region of the GWD1 protein (Figure 31; Mikkelsen et al., 2006).
The importance of this second starch binding domain for GWD1 enzyme activity, and
therefore the phosphorylation and degradation of starch, has thus far not been studied. The
starch excess phenotype of the Ljgwd1-1 mutant was mild compared to those of Ljgwd1-2
and Ljgwd1-3 (premature stop codon mutants) isolated from TILLING (Chapter 4, section
4.2.4). Nevertheless, the starch-excess phenotype of the Ljgwd1-1 mutant strongly indicated
that the SBD-2 module plays an important role in the in vivo function of the enzyme. More
specifically, it may be hypothesized that the mutation in Ljgwd1-1 prevents the encoded
protein from binding to starch, and that the binding of GWD to the surface of the starch
granule is important for the activity of the enzyme, and hence for starch degradation in
leaves.
Multiple sequence alignment with GWD1 homologs shows that the glutamate residue at
position 566 is conserved at the equivalent position in GWD1 from other species, and lies in
a generally conserved region. (Figure 31). This conserved region (an alpha-helix domain) is
predicted to contain a coiled-coil domain according to the results of secondary structure
prediction (Figure 32). In silico mutation analysis on this secondary structure of LjGWD1
shows that the replacement of a glutamate residue by a lysine at position 566 affects the
predicted coiled-coil motif in which it lies (Figure 32). This suggests that this motif may be
important for the binding of GWD1 to starch and that the Ljgwd1-1 mutation may have an
impact on starch degradation by disrupting it. In order to explore this hypothesis, I carried
out in vitro and in vivo starch binding assays using crude protein extracts from leaves.
Despite several attempts, however, no clear band corresponding to the GWD1 protein bound
to starch could be detected by western blot even in the WT control (data not shown).
To further explore the hypothesis that the SBD2 domain of GWD1 is important for its
activity on starch, I also attempted to isolate lines carrying additional mutations deleterious
for this domain by TILLING. As detailed in the previous chapter, one mutant allele with the
change G549S (from SL6859-1) predicted to be deleterious and located within this SBD2
domain (amino acids 505-602) was identified. Unfortunately, plants carrying this mutant
allele could not be analysed since seeds of this mutant line were not available.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
gwd1-2
gwd1-3
gwd1-1
SBD1 SBD2 PHD NBDcTP 1463 AA
gwd1-1gwd1-3gwd1-2
gwd1-5
gwd1-4
gwd1-2
gwd1-3
gwd1-1
SBD1 SBD2 PHD NBDcTP 1463 AA
gwd1-1gwd1-3gwd1-2
SBD1 SBD2 PHD NBDcTP 1463 AA
gwd1-1gwd1-3gwd1-2
gwd1-5
gwd1-4
Figure 31. Protein domains of the LjGWD1 and comparison of its amino acid sequence with those of
other species.
A. Location of the putative protein domains of LjGWD1 as defined by Yu et al. (2001) for its homolog in
A. thaliana. cTP, chloroplast Transit Peptide (amino acids 1-75); SBD, Starch Binding Domain (amino
acids 132-247 and 505-602); PHD, Phospho-Histidine Domain (amino acids 963-1112); NBD,
Nucleotide Binding Domain (amino acids 1164-1462). B. Comparison of the region of GWD1 of L.
japonicus carrying the gwd1-1, gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutations with the corresponding amino acid
sequence in Solanum tuberosum (GWD1_SOLTU; Q9AWA5), Citrus reticulata (GWD1_CITRE;
Q8LPT9), and A. thaliana (GWD1_ARATH; Q9SAC6). The alignment was made with the programs
Clustal W2 (default settings) and GeneDoc. Strictly conserved residues are highlighted in black, less
conserved residues are in grey. Amino acids changed in plants carrying the gwd1-1, gwd1-2 and gwd1-
3 alleles and their equivalent residues in the GWD1 proteins of other species are boxed in red. It is
interesting to note that the gwd1-2 mutation (W303*) lies within a region predicted to be coding for
GWD1 from L. japonicus, S. tuberosum (potato) and C. reticulata, but non-coding for GWD1 from A.
thaliana. The fact that in L. japonicus this mutation leads to a strong degradation phenotype,
indistinguishable from the phenotype produced by another stop-codon mutant allele (gwd1-3; W456*)
demonstrates that, at least for this species, the region is indeed translated.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 32. Predicted effect of the gwd1-1 mutation on the secondary structure of LjGWD1.
A. Effect of the Ljgwd1-1 mutation on the secondary structure of LjGWD1 predicted in silico by the
program Jpred (http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/www-jpred/). The region of WT GWD1 protein of L.
japonicus (panel A) was aligned with those of other species and its predicted secondary structure was
compared to those given for the LjGWD1 protein carrying the E566K mutation (panel B; gwd1-1 mutant
allele; boxed in red). Note that the predicted coiled coil motif (indicated by a succession of the letter C
below the alignment) is lost when the glutamic acid (E) at position 566 was replaced by a lysine (K). In
this analysis, LjGWD1 (GWD1_LOTJA) was aligned with its homologous sequences in Solanum
tuberosum (GWD1_SOLTU, Q9AWA5), Citrus reticulata (GWD1_CITRE, Q8LPT9), Arabidopsis
thaliana (GWD1_ARATH, Q9SAC6). Homolog sequences of the A. thaliana GWD2 (GWD2_ARATH,
Q84W86) and Ostreococcus tauri SPR1b (SPR1b_OSTTA; Q6PYX7) were also included.
5.2.1.3 GWD3 mutant alleles
As described earlier (Chapter 4, section 4.2.4), I identified a point mutation in LjGWD3
(Ljgwd3-1; SL5104-12). This mutation (G7871) affects the 3 acceptor site of the splice site
junction between the 9
and 10
exon of the gene (Figure 33). I performed bioinformatic
analyses that suggested the mutation may lead to two different splicing variants, one
resulting from the skipping of the 10
exon (117 nt shorter, 3 splice site acceptor site of the
downstream exon 11 used instead), the other resulting from the use of an alternative 3
splicing site (21 nt longer, a cryptic site within the intron just upstream the mutation; Figure
To determine experimentally the effect of this splice-site junction mutation on the GWD3
transcript, I carried out RT-PCR analysis on total RNA preparations of homozygous mutant,
heterozygous and homozygous WT segregants of a F2 population of the Ljgwd3-1 mutant.
RT-PCR primers were designed on both sides of the mutation (sequence from exon 7 to
exon 14 covered) and were intron-spanning in order to avoid co-amplification of genomic
DNA. As predicted, RT-PCR results revealed the expression of at least one splicing variant
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
as a result of the mutation (Figure 33). Analysis of the RT-PCR product size suggested the
main splicing variant expressed in the mutant segregants was the result of the skipping of
exon 10. This was confirmed by sequencing the RT-PCR products of the homozygous
mutant, WT and heterozygote. RT-PCR results also showed that this variant was expressed
at a significantly lower level than the WT GWD3 transcript (Figure 33). Abolition of the
transcription of the exon 10 would lead to an in-frame deletion of 39 amino acids in the
encoded protein. Although these residues do not belong to any particular functional domain
of the protein, such a deletion is most likely to affect the functionality of the protein.
Furthermore, it seems that the mutation also leads to a second splicing variant that would
correspond to the use of an alternative 3' splicing site within the intron located upstream the
mutation and would give rise to an abnormal protein, 7 amino acids longer (Figure 33). The
very low level of expression of this transcript variant, however, did not allow for its
sequence to be successfully confirmed by sequencing despite several attempts.
Analysis of the genomic sequence of GWD3 in MG-20 revealed the insertion of a LTR-
retroelement (about 4.6 kb long) within the intron sequence in between exon 12 and 13
(Figure 33). PCR primers were designed to determine if this retrotransposon was also present
in Gifu. PCR results showed that this was not the case (data not shown). However, the results
of the RT-PCR analysis I performed on the GWD3 transcript of MG-20 and Gifu, showed
this insertion had no significant effect on its nature or expression level (Figure 33).
As already mentioned in Chapter 4, TILLING was also performed on LjGWD3 to obtain
additional mutant alleles of this gene. The targeted region contained the nucleotide binding
domain involved in the dikinase activity of the enzyme (NB domain; Ktting et al., 2005).
Out of the 19 mutant alleles identified, only one, gwd3-4 (from SL0639-1), had a clear starch
excess phenotype in leaves (Chapter 4, section 4.2.4). Consistent with this observation, the
mutation in this line is predicted to affect a residue (amino acid change G980E) that is
identical across all the predicted protein homologs of LjGWD3 I analyzed, and lies within a
conserved motif (GWD3_ARATH, Q6ZY51; GWD3_ORYSJ, NP_001066613; putative
homologs in Vitis vinifera, XP_002265211; Ricinus communis, XP_002518612, and
Sorghum bicolor, XP_002453659; Figure 34).
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 33. Predicted effects of the gwd3-1 splice-site junction mutation on LjGWD3 function.
A. Gene structure and protein domain of LjGWD3. B and C. Sequence analysis revealed that the
gwd3-1 mutation leads to the production of a splicing variant in which the 10th exon is skipped (B).
Production of this splicing variant as a result of the mutation was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis and
sequencing of the RT-PCR product. Results of the RT-PCR analysis of the LjGWD3 transcript
expression in homozygous mutant, homozygous WT, and heterozygous segregants of the forward
screen mutant line SL5104-12 (Ljgwd3-1 mutant allele; splice-site junction mutation G7871A) are
shown in C. For each genotype, three biological replicates from three individual plants were analysed.
The WT, mutant, and reference gene (EF-) transcripts are indicated by arrows (annotated 1, 2, and 3, 
respectively). Note that this variant was expressed at significantly lower level than the WT LjGWD3
transcript. It must be mentioned, however, that such results were not so clear for the third biological
replicate of the mutant for which it seems the normal transcript could also be detected (Panel C). This
is surprising since this individual undoubtedly scored WT and not heterozygous according to the
genotyping that had been performed twice, both by sequencing and restriction analysis. Sequences of
the primers used for this RT-PCR analysis can be found in Table 2C. Sequence analysis predicted the
expression of another splicing variant in the gwd3-1 mutant plants that resulted from the use of a
cryptic splicing site at position 7853 from the start codon on the genomic sequence (Transcript 21 bp
longer; panel D). A very faint band at about the expected size for this putative splicing variant was
observed but could not be sequenced (band indicated by an arrow labelled 3 in E). Note that a
retroelement is inserted within the LjGWD3 genomic sequence (panel A). PCR analysis using gene-
retroelement spanning primers revealed that this retroelement is present in MG-20 but not in Gifu WT
(data not shown). However, RT-PCR analyses suggested that this retroelement does not have any
impact on the nature and level of expression of the LjGWD3 transcript (band of identical size and
intensity obtained in MG-20 and Gifu WT; panel E). Abbreviations: biorep, biological replicate; EF-, 
elongation factor alpha; RNA C, control using the RNA sample as template; NTC, no template control.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 34. Comparison of the amino acid sequence of LjGWD3 with those of other species.
Comparison of the region of GWD3 of L. japonicus carrying the gwd3-4 mutation with the
corresponding amino acid sequence in Arabidopsis thaliana (GWD3_ARATH, Q6ZY51), Orysa sativa
(GWD3_ORYSA, NP_001066613); Vitis vinifera (GWD3-VITVI, XP_002265211; Ricinus communis
(GWD3_RICCO, XP_002518612, and Sorghum bicolor (GWD3_SORBI, XP_002453659). The
alignment was made with the programs Clustal W2 (default settings) and GeneDoc. Strictly conserved
residues are highlighted in black, less conserved residues are in grey. Amino acids changed in plants
carrying the gwd3-4 mutant allele (starch excess phenotype) and their equivalent residues in the
GWD3 proteins of other species are boxed in red, those of the gwd3-2 and gwd3-3 (PSSM>0; no
starch excess phenotype) are boxed in orange.
5.2.2. Physiological analysis of selected mutants
5.2.2.1 PGM1 mutants
I analysed the starch content of the pgm1-4 mutant by iodine staining and starch
quantification. This mutant is completely starch-free in all the tissues and organs analysed,
including leaves, stem, roots, seed embryos, and nodules (Chapter 4, Figure 20 and Figure
35). Interestingly, despite its inability to synthesis starch, the growth rate of this mutant was
indistinguishable from that of the WT, both under long days (16/8 h light dark period) and
under a 12 h photoperiod. This is consistent with the phenotype of the equivalent mutant in
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
pea (rug3; Harrison et al., 2000), but contrasts with the near- or completely starch-free
mutants of A. thaliana and other plant species whose growth is impaired under 12 h
photoperiod (Caspar et al., 1985; Hanson and McHale, 1988; Lin et al., 1988).
Figure 35. Phenotypes of the pgm1-4 mutant of L. japonicus.
A. Plants grown in 16 h light, 8 h dark (top) and 12 h light, 12 h dark (bottom). B-D. Root systems and
nodules of 3 month-old plants grown in 16 h light, 8 h dark and inoculated with Mesorhizobium loti at 6
weeks. Nodules are shown either whole (top left), cut open (bottom left) or cut open and stained with
iodine (right). The cortical zone and non-infected cells in WT nodules contain starch. Mutant nodules
contain no starch.
There is little information about the importance of starch stored in nodules for the rate of
Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation (SNF). Given the normal growth of starchless L. japonicus
plants, I decided to examine specifically whether a lack of starch affected nitrogen fixation in
Rhizobium-containing root nodules under nitrogen free conditions. As described above,
legume nodules generally contain starch in cortical cells and non-infected cells within the
infected zone (Gordon et al., 1992; Gordon and James, 1997; Szczyglowski et al., 1998). In
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
pgm1-4 mutants of L. japonicus inoculated with Mesorhizobium loti (M. loti), nodules had a
normal pink colour, and their size and number per root system were similar to those of wild-
type segregants (Figure 35B-D). In spite of the lack of starch in the nodules, assays for
nitrogen fixation (acetylene reduction) performed by Tracey Welham (JIC, Norwich, UK)
revealed no statistically significant differences (Students t-test p-value of 0.05) between
mutant, heterozygote and wild-type plants 36 days after inoculation with M. loti (0.57  0.06,
0.75  0.11, and 0.67  0.20 mol ethylene h
root system
, respectively; means  SE of 5
root systems).
5.2.2.2 GWD1 mutants
Iodine staining of the complete loss of function mutants gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 revealed a
very strong starch-excess phenotype in their leaves compared to those of the WT. A clear
starch excess phenotype was also visible in nodules, roots and pollen of the mutants,
although less pronounced than in leaves and nodules (Figure 20 and Figure 36A-D). Mutants
of both lines also showed severe-growth defects including an impaired growth, chlorosis and
premature senescence symptoms, and an almost complete failure to produce seeds (Figure
36H-J and Figure A6). Across all batches of segregating populations analysed, only a small
fraction of the mutant plants survived to maturity and produced flowers (ca. 20%), and did so
about two months later than wild-type plants in Gifu background (Table A4). Further, most
of these flowers did not produce pods, and when they did, pods and embryos aborted at early
stages of development, at what seemed to correspond to the beginning of the seed filling
stage. These characteristics were present regardless of the day length under which the plants
were grown. A similar phenotype was observed in the progeny plants of an outcross with the
wild-type accession MG-20 (Figure A6).
I explored further the causes of the loss of fertility in gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants. In the
progeny of plants heterozygous for gwd1-2 (in Gifu background; SL1833-1 mutant line),
segregation did not follow the Mendelian ratio of 1:2:1 mutant:heterozygote:WT. From 219
plants, 13 were mutants, 116 were heterozygotes and 90 were WT. Similarly for the mutant
line SL3001-1 (gwd1-3 mutant allele), I identified 15 mutants, 98 heterozygotes and 89 WT
out of a segregating population of 202 plants (Table A4). Three hypotheses can be advanced
to explain this low proportion (6-7%) of homozygous mutant plants: either (1) loss of GWD1
is lethal at the gametophyte stage, or (2) homozygous mutant embryos generally do not
survive to maturity, or (3) mutant seeds do not germinate as well as the heterozygous and
WT ones. In tomato, loss of GWD1 leads to pollen with an abnormally high starch content
that fails to germinate (Nashilevitz et al., 2009). However, two lines of evidence suggested
that pollen from L. japonicus gwd1 mutants is at least partially viable despite its high starch
content. First, heterozygote plants could be obtained in the F1 progeny of reciprocal crosses
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
made between heterozygote and WT plants  it should be mentioned, however, that a
paternal transmission ratio different to the 1:1 expected ratio of heterozygote:WT in the F1
progeny of the cross GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT was observed, suggesting a possible 
case of partial gametophytic lethality (Table A5). Second, staining the pollen with
acetocarmine, a dye used to assess whether pollen grains have matured, showed no
differences between WT, heterozygote, and homozygous mutants (Figure 36E. Similarly,
staining with FDA, another dye used to access pollen grain viability did not reveal any
visible difference between the WT and heterozygote (Figure 36F). Further, an in vitro
germination assay of the pollen grains was also performed that revealed the mutant pollen
grains with starch excess phenotype were still able to produce pollen tubes (Figure 36G).
Thus, in L. japonicus starch accumulation in pollen does not appear to prevent pollen
viability or germination, and may not account, at least fully, for the loss of fertility observed
in the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants.
Most gwd1-2/3 mutant flowers did not produce pods, and when they did, pods and
embryos usually aborted at an early stage of development (Figure 36K). However, fully
developed pods and seeds could be obtained from the mutants by detaching flowers and
placing the peduncles in MS liquid medium supplemented with 3% sucrose (Figure 36L).
These results suggested that the effect of the mutation on the production of viable seed was
maternal rather than due to a defect in embryo development. To examine this idea further, I
analyzed embryos and seeds from 40 pods each of wild-type (GWD1-2/GWD1-2) and
heterozygous (GWD1-2/gwd1-2) plants from the same segregating population (Table A4).
Both the number of seeds per pods and the average weight of the seeds produced were very
similar for the two lines (average number of seeds per pod and average seed weight were 9.1
and 1.0 mg for the heterozygote, and 10.2 and 1.0 mg for the WT, respectively). Similarly,
for the gwd1-3 mutation analysis of 20 pods gave an average number of seeds per pod and
seed weights of 15.9 and 1.0 mg, respectively, for the heterozygote (GWD1-3/gwd1-3), and
15.1 and 1.1 mg for WT (GWD1-3/GWD1-3), supporting the idea that reduced production of
viable seeds on homozygous mutant plants is a maternal effect. However, genotyping of each
individual mature embryo in pods from heterozygous plants (GWD1-2/gwd1-2 and GWD1-
3/gwd1-3) was not wholly consistent with a maternal effect. Out of 63 mature seeds
analysed, only seven contained homozygous mutant embryos (one in nine rather than the
expected one in four; Table A4). Thus mutant embryos were disadvantaged whether in
mutant or heterozygote pods.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 36. Phenotypes of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants of L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Figure 36. Phenotypes of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants of L. japonicus. Continued.
A-C. Iodine staining of root systems and of the interior of a nodule of the gwd1-2 mutant (right) and WT
segregant (left). Plants were grown in 16 h light, 8 h dark and were 6 months old. D and E. Pollen
grains from WT, heterozygote, and gwd1-2 mutant plants stained with iodine (D) and acetocarmine (E).
The mutation increases the starch content of pollen, but does not affect its viability. F and G. Pollen
grains from the heterozygote and WT segregant of the mutant line gwd1-2 harvested at anthesis and
stained with FDA (F), and with iodine following in vitro germination (G). Note that mutant pollen grains
from the heterozygote plant (ones with a starch excess phenotype; indicated with an arrow) were
capable of germinating in vitro as indicated by the production of a pollen tube. Pollen grains from the
homozygous mutants were not available at the time this experiment was performed, and therefore
could not be analysed together with the pollen grains of the heterozygote and WT segregants. H. Three
month-old WT, heterozygote and mutant segregants for gwd1-3 (left three plants) and gwd1-2 (right
three plants) grown in a controlled environment chamber. I. Phenotype of four month old gwd1-3
mutant (right) and WT segregant (left) plants grown in a greenhouse with supplemental lighting. J.
Phenotype of 2 to 3 month old gwd1-3 mutant (right) and WT segregant (left) plants grown in a
greenhouse under natural light conditions. H-J. Plants were grown under long day conditions (ca. 16 h
photoperiod). Detailed phenotypes of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 in Gifu and MG-20 background, including
photographs of the chlorosis and premature senescence symptome and of their root system and
nodules is shown in Figure A6. K-L. Nodule phenotype. K. Example of aborted pod and embryo of the
gwd1-2/3 mutants. L. In vitro culture of pods. Mature flowers were taken and their peduncles sterilised
with 10% bleach. Following several washes in sterile water they were placed in liquid Murashige and
Skoog medium supplemented with 3% sucrose, and cultured as described in Chapter 2 (section 2.1.4)
for ca. 4 weeks to produce mature seeds.
In order to determine if the embryo of the mutants had a starch excess phenotype that may,
at least partially, explain their impaired development, I stained the embryos and seeds of
GWD1-2/gwd1-2 and GWD1-3/gwd1-3 heterozygous pods and compared their starch content
to those of the homozygote WT segregants, as well as to seed embryos of homozygote
mutants of the forward screen mutant lines SL5215-2, SL5358-3 (gwd1-1 mutant allele) and
SL5104-12 (gwd3-1.mutant allele). A few of the embryos or seeds isolated from pods of
GWD1-2/gwd1-2 and GWD1-3/gwd1-3 heterozygote plants displayed a clear starch excess
phenotype (Figure 37). Unfortunately, since iodine staining and genotyping could not be
carried out on the same individual embryo and no embryos could be obtained from
homozygous mutants plant for this starch content analysis, I could not obtain compelling
evidence that the mutation indeed confers a embryo starch excess phenotype. However,
embryos of the gwd1-1 and gwd3-1 mutants displayed a very weak, but consistent starch
excess phenotype in comparison to their WT segregants (Figure 37).
Since root nodules of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants also presented a strong starch excess
phenotype in comparison to their WT segregants (Figure 36C), I examined, with the help of
Tracey Welham (JIC) whether the lack of starch turnover in these organs affected nitrogen
fixation. At two stages of nodule development, nodules on gwd1-2 plants contained about 15
times more starch than nodules on wild-type plants (Figure 38A). Nonetheless, mutant
nodules were capable of nitrogen fixation. In one batch of plants, nitrogen fixation (acetylene
reduction) was comparable in gwd1 mutants and their segregating wild-type and
heterozygous lines. In two further batches fixation was reduced in mutants relative to wild-
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
type and heterozygous plants but was above the threshold for detection in this assay (Figure
38B).
Figure 37. Iodine staining of the seed embryos of the gwd1-1 and gwd1-2/3 mutants.
Embryos of the heterozygote of the gwd1-2/3 mutant lines (A and B) and of the gwd1-1 (B and C) and
gwd3-1 mutants (left panels) in comparison to their WT segregants (right panels). Embryos were
extracted from dry seeds (the testa and endosperm were removed) and left to soak in water for some
time before they were decolorized and stained with iodine as described in Chapter 2, section 2.4.
Stained embryos were observed with a Leica MZ8 binocular (x10). Note that a few of the embryos
(indicated with an arrow) from a pod of a heterozygous plant of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutant lines
presented a starch excess phenotype. These embryos would need to be genotyped to test the
hypothesis that embryos with a starch excess phenotype correspond to those of gwd1-2/3 mutants.
The fact that embryos of the gwd1-1 and gwd3-1 mutants also appeared to have a slight starch excess
in comparison to WT segregants tends to favor this hypothesis.
/GWD1-2
/GWD1-3
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
BC1 M5
BC1 M5
Figure 38. Nodule phenotype of Ljgwd1 TILLING mutants.
A. Elevated starch contents of gwd1-2 nodules. Nodules were harvested from individual gwd1-2 plants
and segregating heterozygous and wild-type plants from the first outcross to MG-20 at 35 and 42 days
after inoculation (DAI) with Mesorhizobium loti, and assayed for starch content. Values are means  SE
of measurements on five plants, except for WT at 42 DAI for which four plants were used. B. Ethylene
released in an acetylene reduction assay for nitrogenase activity on root systems of gwd1-2 mutants
and their wild-type and heterozygous segregants. Plants were from lines derived either by outcrossing
to MG-20 (BC1), or directly from the original mutant in Gifu (M5).
5.3. Discussion
5.3.1. Functional characterisation of the mutants
The amino acid change identified in the apl1-1 mutant was unexpected given the marked
change in enzyme activity brought by the mutation. Since the mutated residue (S400;
equivalent to S331 in the potato small subunit) is positioned at the interface between
monomers (Figure 30), it is tempting to speculate that this residue has a dramatic impact on
the AGPase activity because it is crucial for the interaction between the subunits. However,
this did not appear to be the case from the analysis of the homotetrameric structure. Instead,
it appeared that this residue along with some other residues are important for the integrity of
the -helix domain and that a disruption in this domain may affects its interaction with the 
substrate binding domain, resulting in an almost complete loss of activity (Figure 30, and
personal communication with Dr Faridoon Yousafzai, JIC).
Results of genetic (mapping), biochemical and bioinformatic analysis combined with
recent literature evidence strongly suggest that mutation identified in APL1 gene is indeed
responsible for the mutant phenotype (chapter 4, section 4.2.3). However, additional
analyses would need to be performed to gain a better understanding of the molecular
mechanism by which the S400L amino acid change is able to disturb so drastically the
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
activity of the enzyme. More precisely, it would be useful to obtain a series of mutant alleles
affecting other residues of the -helix domain involved in maintaining its integrity and 
determine whether these mutations lead to a loss of activity and a mutant phenotype similar
to the one observed for Ljapl1-1. This may be achieved via site-directed mutagenesis or
TILLING. In addition, modelling of the heterotetramer and in-silico site-directed
mutagenesis would help determine the importance of the S400 residue to the stability of the
-helix domain. Such analyses may also rule out the possibly that the mutation affects the 
enzyme activity through a disruption of the interaction between subunits. Native PAGE gel
and western blot analysis could also be performed to explore the impact that the apl1
mutation has on the conformation of the AGPase heterotramer, since one may expect a
change in the migration of the protein if folding is altered or there is a loss of subunit
interaction.
I have reported here the isolation and characterisation of two Lotus japonicus gwd1
mutants that have a starch-excess phenotype in leaves. Interestingly, the mutation identified
in GWD1 as being responsible for the mutant phenotype led to a single amino acid change
(E566K) in the second putative starch binding domain (SBD2) of the protein (Figure 31).
This suggests an important role for this domain in the activity of the enzyme and the
phosphorylation of starch and, consequently, its normal degradation. Moreover, this suggests
that the residue E566 of SBD2 is crucial for the starch binding capacity of the enzyme.
Neverthless, the effect that the mutation in Ljgwd1-1 has on the functionality of the
LjGWD1 protein remains to be further investigated. In order to explore the effect that this
mutation could have on the functionality of the SBD2 domain, I carried out secondary
structure predictions. The results suggested that the mutation identified in LjGWD1 is
located within and may affect a predicted coiled-coiled motif of an alpha-helix domain
(Figure 32). However, generation of the three dimensional structure of this domain and in
silico mutagenesis would need to be performed to decipher the impact that the mutation has
on the LjGWD1 enzyme functionality. Unfortunately, the crystallographic structure of
CBM45 from GWD1 or any other member of this family of starch binding domains has yet
to be solved (http://www.cazy.org). By default, homology modelling of the CBM45 domain
using CBM20 as template was attempted, but the similarity of sequence between the two
was too low to obtain any satisfactory models.
Since the mutation identified in Ljgwd1-1 was located in SBD2 it may be hypothesized
that the starch-excess phenotype of this mutant results from an impaired capacity of its
GWD1 mutant enzyme to bind starch. In an attempt to gain such evidence, in vitro and in
vivo starch binding assays were carried out, but failed to generate any clear results. The
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
generation and use of a recombinant LjGWD1 protein (native and mutant versions) rather
than crude protein extracts may help obtain clearer results from such assays in the future.
Lastly, one approach that could be used to explore the impact of the mutation on GWD1
enzyme activity would be to measure the phosphate content of the starch. Unfortunately,
such measurements have proven to be difficult to achieve in the past (Alison Smith, JIC,
personal communication). A radiolabelling assay to quantify the starch-phosphorylating
enzyme activity in crude extracts of plant tissues has been established (Ritte et al., 2003) that
could be tried in the future. Alternatively, measuring -amylase activity and the release of 
maltose could be another, although indirect, way of measuring the effect of the mutation on
the functionality the GWD1 protein. Indeed, using purified recombinant enzymes, Edner et
al. (2007) were able to show that BAM1 and BAM3 activities are strongly stimulated by the
phosphorylation of the starch granule by GWD1. Hence, one may expect the activity of these
BAM enzymes to be decreased in this assay when using a mutated version of the
recombinant GWD1 protein with a reduced or a complete lack of GWD1 activity. More
particularly, it would be interesting to perform such assay on a GWD1 protein carrying an
equivalent mutation to E566K. One could envisage also testing in a same way the effect of
mutating other conserved residues of the SBD1 and SBD2 domains of GWD1.
Starch constitutes a major component of the human diet and an important material for
many industrial processes (Jobling, 2004). Chemical modification of starch, including
phosphorylation is often needed for these applications. Increasing the phosphate content in
starch in crops plants is therefore highly desired as it reduces the need for environmentally
unfriendly and expensive industrial processes (Blennow et al., 2002). Production of
recombinant GWD protein with enhanced dikinase activity and/or stronger binding on starch
could be a way to increase the level of starch phosphorylation. Hence, it would be of interest,
by using recombinant DNA technology and in vitro assays, to explore the phosphorylation
capacity, substrate specificity and binding capacity of the GWD1 enzyme either carrying
both, one of the two, and/or none of the two SBDs. Of great interest also would be to
determine if the two SBD have distinct, complementary or synergistic roles. Potentially
interesting as well from a biotechnological point of view would be to identify the residues
determinant for the properties mentioned above. Structure-function analyses including site-
directed mutagenesis may help achieve this. Lastly, the introduction into plants via
transformation of modified forms of GWD with different binding affinities for starch would
need to be performed to determine the effect of the SBDs of GWD1 on the starch content
and the fitness of the plant (e.g. does a weaker/stronger GWD1-starch interaction have a
beneficial effect on plant productivity?).
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Further mutant alleles conferring a starch-excess phenotype, namely gwd3-1 and gwd3-4,
were isolated during this study. Their characterisation indicated that another enzyme,
LjGWD3, played an important role in the degradation of starch in leaves of L. japonicus.
Hence, it seems likely that, as in A. thaliana, LjGWD3 acts in synergy with LjGWD1 to
phosphorylate the starch granule as a prerequisite for degradation (Ktting et al., 2005;
Baunsgaard et al., 2005). The mutation identified in Ljgwd3-1 affected the 3 acceptor site of
the splice site junction between the 9
and 10
exon of the gene (Figure 33). Splice site
junction mutations generally result in the production of an aberrant protein through the lost
of exon(s) or the retention of intron(s) and are therefore most likely to be deleterious.
Furthermore, when the mRNA does not encode a functional protein, non-sense mediated
decay of the transcript can occur (Chang et al., 2007). In the case of the Ljgwd3-1 mutant,
results of the RT-PCR analysis I carried out revealed that the mutation led to the production
of at least one splice-site variant. Most likely, the protein resulting from this splice-site
variant would not be functional, however, this remains to be experimentally tested. Firstly,
the presence and expression level of the GWD3 protein could be monitored by western blot 
unfortunately, antibodies against the GWD3 protein were not available and could not be
generated within the time frame of this study. Secondly, measurement of the phosphorylation
at the C3 positions of the glucose moieties of starch could be performed to indirectly
measure the activity of the GWD3 enzyme in the mutant in comparison to the WT (Ritte et
al., 2006).
Analysis of the genomic sequence of GWD3 in MG-20 revealed the insertion of a LTR-
retroelement (about 4.6 kb long) within the intron in between exon 12 and 13 (Figure 33).
Retrotransposons (RT) are mobile genetic elements that are ubiquitous in plants and
constitute the most abundant and widespread class of eukaryotic transposable elements (TE).
In several instances, the insertion of a retroelement has been shown to disturb gene
regulation and result in altered gene expression e.g. in the maize waxy gene it has been
shown to result in tissue-specific expression of alternatively-spliced transcripts (Marillonnet
and Wessler, 1997). However, the results of the RT-PCR I performed on the GWD3
transcript revealed that this insertion had no significant effect on its expression (Figure 33).
5.3.2. Importance of starch metabolism for plant growth and its regulation in legumes
The starchless phenotype of the pgm1-4 mutant (Figure 16 and Figure 35) indicates that
plastidial PGM (PGM1) is necessary for starch synthesis throughout the plant. Interestingly,
despite its inability to synthesize starch, this mutant grows normally even under relatively
short days (12 h light, 12 h dark; Figure 35). This is also true of the equivalent mutant in pea
(rug3; Harrison, 1996). In contrast, although the almost starchless pgm1 mutant of A.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
thaliana grows at approximately the same rate as the wild type under continuous light, it
grows much more slowly under 12-h light, 12-h dark conditions (Caspar et al., 1985). Thus,
complete loss of starch seems to have no deleterious consequences for the growth of L.
japonicus plants under normal conditions in contrast to the situation in A. thaliana. This
suggests that either a compensation mechanism exists in L. japonicus, or that the
impairement in growth seen in the starch-free mutant of A. thaliana but not in L. japonicus is
the result of difference in signalling or regulation between the two species, rather than the
direct consequence of the lack of starch. The pgm1 mutant of A. thaliana accumulates
increased level of soluble sugars during the day in comparison to the WT (Caspar et al.,
1985). This soluble sugar pool is rapidly consumed during the subsequent night, when
photosynthesis cannot take place. Under short day conditions, however, these reserves of
sugars are not sufficient to sustain growth and energy metabolism of the plant during the
entire dark period. This phase of carbon starvation is believed to be the cause of the impaired
growth of the pgm1 mutant of A. thaliana when grown under 12 h photoperiod and even
more so under shorter days/longer night cycles (Caspar et al., 1985; Gibon et al., 2004).
Compensatory mechanisms that could explain the capacity of the pgm1 mutant of L.
japonicus to cope with the absence of carbon stored as starch even under short day
conditions may involve similar, but more pronounced, responses to the ones seen in the
pgm1 mutant of A. thaliana. Thus, it may be hypothesized that Ljpgm1 is able to compensate
for the lack of starch by an increased accumulation of soluble sugars during the day in
comparison to the WT to serve as a supply of carbon during the night. This increased sugar
accumulation could potentially be fuelled by an increased rate of photosynthesis. If this
model is true, one would expect the pgm1 mutant of L. japonicus to be at least partially
impaired in growth under very short day conditions and/or under very low irradiance. Such
hypotheses remain to be tested.
Another feature of L. japonicus that contrasts with A. thaliana is provided by the stop-
codon mutant lines SL1833-1 and SL3001-1 (carrying the mutations gwd1-2 and gwd1-3,
respectively), which had a very strong starch-excess phenotype in leaves, roots, stems,
nodules and pollen (Figure 16 and Figure 36). These mutants showed severe growth defects
including leaf chlorosis, premature leaf senescence and, although showing some variation,
all the mutants isolated had a very impaired reproduction capacity (very poor or no seed set).
Only a small proportion of mutant plants in a given batch produced flowers, and did so about
two months later than WT plants. These characteristics were present regardless of the day
length under which the plants were grown. This is in contrast to the situation in A. thaliana,
in which gwd1 (sex1) knockout mutants display almost no growth phenotype under long
days although retaining very high starch contents, and can reproduce even under short days
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
when growth is significantly retarded (Caspar et al., 1991). Thus loss of GWD seems to have
much more serious consequences for L. japonicus than for A. thaliana. It is possible that the
variation observed in the Ljgwd1-2 and Ljgwd1-3 phenotypes might be caused by the
retrotransposon inserted at the 3 end of the genomic sequence encoding the GWD1 gene,
however this would require further investigation.
The starch-excess mutants show that the phosphorylation of starch via the glucan, water
dikinases GWD1 and GWD3 is essential for normal starch degradation in L. japonicus, and
that this, in turn, is crucial for normal growth. Remarkably, these mutants - together with the
growth phenotype of the pgm1-4 mutant  also show that while L. japonicus plants are able
to grow well in the absence of starch, they are very impaired in growth when not able to
degrade it. It is not clear why growth rates are reduced in some mutant plants impaired in
leaf starch synthesis or degradation, or why mutations in homologous starch metabolism
genes have different consequences for growth in L. japonicus and A. thaliana. Poor plant
growth may be due to a sequestration of carbon into starch preventing its use during the dark
period. Hence, in A. thaliana, genetic and environmental factors that reduce carbohydrate
availability at night can also cause temporary cessation of growth (Smith and Stitt, 2007;
Graf and al, 2010). Alternatively, plant growth may be restricted directly by the
accumulation of starch itself (e.g. physical impairment of the normal chloroplast function).
Lastly, a signalling mechanism compelling the plant to limit its growth more than it would
theoretically need to due to the lack of available starch may also take place. The fact that the
starch-free pgm1 mutant of L. japonicus does not show any impairment in growth and
development even when grown under 12 h photoperiod tends to support this last hypothesis.
Further, it may be hypothesised that the putative signalling that would lead to restricted
growth in case of failure to degrade starch involves a sensing of the phosphate status of
starch. The fact that a restricted growth is observed in most of the starch-excess mutants of
A. thaliana, however tends to rule out this possibility. In respect of this signalling and
sensing model, it is interesting to note that SnRK1, a SNF1-related protein kinase that plays
a key role in the global control of plant carbon metabolism, was found to interact with SEX4
(Fordham-Skelton et al., 2002). In the future, the identification of interactors of GWD1 and
other key starch degrading enzymes by yeast-two-hybrid (Y2H) or other protein-protein
interaction analysis methods may be carried out that would help shed light on the putative
signalling mechanism involved in regulating the plant growth response to carbon
availability.
5.3.3. Importance of starch for seed metabolism and development in legumes
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
Since L. japonicus seeds accumulate very little starch, it is unlikely that altering the
synthesis of this storage carbohydrate would have as much effect in L. japonicus as it does in
pea (Chapter 5, section 5.1.1 and references therein). In agreement with this, no visible
impairment in seed development including seed morphology, seed weight, germination
capacity, or early seedling growth could be observed in the starch-free pgm1-4 mutant of L.
japonicus in comparison to the WT, but these observations would need to be confirmed. It
cannot be ruled out that, as in leaves, the effect of the lack of starch in this organ may be
masked by some compensatory mechanisms (e.g. increase synthesis and storage of soluble
sugars). In this respect, analysis of other starch mutants of the collection, and in particular of
the mutants unable to degrade starch may prove very useful in determining the importance
played by starch in seed metabolism and development.
Segregation ratios in the offspring of a heterozygous plants of the two starch excess mutant
lines SL1833-1 and SL3001-1 did not follow the Mendelian ratio of 1:2:1 mutant:het:WT
(Table 8), suggesting a possible case of homozygote or gametophytic lethality. Recently, it
has been shown that the lack of GWD1 activity causes male gametophytic lethality in tomato
(Nashilevitz et al., 2009) but not in A. thaliana (Caspar et al., 1991). In L. japonicus, the
mutants were essentially infertile. Results of the in vitro pod culture I performed suggested
that the effect of the mutation on the seed production was maternal rather than intrinsic to the
development of the embryo. However, genotyping of the mature embryos in pods from
heterozygous plants revealed a segregation ratio significantly different from the expected
Mendelian ratio for a single recessive mutation. Reciprocal crosses were preformed that
suggested a possible case of partial gametophytic lethality. Failure to transmit the mutant
alleles by the paternal parent can be caused by defects in pollen viability, germination, pollen
tube growth, and fertilization (Nashilevitz et al., 2009). Several analyses of the pollen grains
were performed that included iodine, acetocarmine and FDA staining as well as in vitro
germination assays. Results of these preliminary analyses did not reveal any clear
impairment in the viability and germination capacity of the mutant pollen grains in
comparison to the WT. However, more extensive, quantitative analyses such as germinating
pollen grain number and pollen tube growth length between the mutant, heterozygote and
WT would need to be carried out to fully assess and define the extent of the male gamete-
and maternal-specific defects. Overall, the effect of the lack of GWD1 activity on the
fertility of L. japonicus plants appears to be complex, the data indicating that pollen,
embryos, and/or germinating seeds bearing mutant alleles may be at a competitive
disadvantage to those with WT alleles. Thus, gametophytic, maternal, and embryo effects
may all be involved.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
5.3.4. Importance of starch metabolism for nodule function and SNF in legumes
Comprehensive studies on sucrose synthase in several legume species have clearly
demonstrated the important role played by primary carbon metabolism in nodulation
(Gordon et al., 1999; Craig et al., 1999; Horst et al., 2007; Baier et al., 2007). Yet, with the
exception of this enzyme, remarkably little is known about the importance of the other
enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism in nodule function. In addition, the importance that the
supply and storage of carbon to/in the nodule may have in regulating the rate of N2
symbiotic fixation remains to be determined. In particular, relatively little is known about
the physiological role of starch in the SNF process despite several observations made on its
accumulation in root nodules. The importance and regulation of nodule starch metabolism
both under normal and stress conditions is still unclear, but seems to differ significantly from
one legume species to another (Chapter 5, section 5.1.2 and references therein). Almost
nothing is known to date about the metabolism of root nodule starch in the two model
legumes L. japonicus and M. truncatula. Firstly, identification of the enzymes involved in
this metabolism is needed. Secondly, the role of nodule starch metabolism in the SNF
process in L. japonicus and other legume species, both under normal and stress conditions
need to be established.
The functional characterisation I carried out on the starch metabolism mutants of L.
japonicus identified LjPGM1 and LjGWD1 as two important enzymes for the synthesis and
degradation of starch in L. japonicus leaves. Since analysis of the nodule starch content of
the pgm1-4 and gwd1-2/gwd1-3 mutants revealed a clear nodule starch-free and starch-
excess phenotype, respectively, I tested the hypothesis that the inability to synthesize starch
or to degrade it in root nodules could lead to impaired nodule function and to a decrease in
SNF efficiency. Acetylene reduction assays revealed no statistically significant difference in
the capacity to reduce acetylene into ethylene between the starch-free pgm1-4 mutants and
the WT segregants. Similarly, measurements done on the nodules of gwd1-2/gwd1-3 mutant
plants that were strongly impaired in their capacity to degrade starch revealed they were able
to fix nitrogen. Taken together, these data indicate that starch storage and normal starch
metabolism are not essential for nodule function under the growth conditions used. In case of
the nodules of gwd1-2/gwd1-3 mutants, the N2 fixation was found strongly reduced for two
of the three batches of plants analysed, however, because of the poor growth of the plants, it
is not possible to say whether this is a root starch nodule-specific effect, or an effect of poor
C supply from the plant to the nodule and organic N utilisation in the plant as a whole that
could be dependant on the plant genotype/growth conditions. In the future, grafting
experiments or RNA silencing of LjGWD1 by hairy root transformation could be performed
to help determine to what extent high starch/low turnover in nodule does directly prevent N2
fixation.
Chapter 5: Functional characterisation of the mutants
The regulation of the supply of carbohydrate to the nodule and the metabolism of nodule
starch may constitute an interesting area of research to explore further with respect to
increasing the rate of SNF. The fact that non-functioning nodules of alfalfa (Chapter 5,
section 5.1.2 and references therein) generally accumulate high levels of starch suggests two
things. The first is that starch is normally being turned over in functioning nodules. The
second is that the supply of carbon from the plant to the nodule is not tightly regulated nor is
it dependent on a demand from the nodule. It remains to be determined, however, if such a
model applies to all legume species, including L. japonicus. In this respect, it would be
interesting to determine the main organs from which starch is remobilized to supply the
nodule with carbon during the dark period in this species. More importantly, one needs to
determine whether the limiting factor in SNF is the supply of carbon or the intrinsic
metabolism of the nodule, as it has been established for soybean (Walsh et al., 1987). This
may be tested in L. japonicus by measuring the SNF efficiency (nitrogenase activity) of root
nodules fed with increased amount of carbon.
CHAPTER 6
Importance of starch for perenniality and re-
growth in Lotus
The best way to have a good idea is to have a lot of ideas
Linus Pauling
CHAPTER 6: Importance of starch for
perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
6.1. Introduction
6.1.1. Plant life form strategies and allocation of resources
Annual and perennial habits are two major strategies by which plants adapt to seasonal
environmental changes (Hu et al., 2003). Meristem indeterminacy and programmed
senescence have been suggested to be the two major determinants of perenniality (Chapter 1,
section 1.10.2 and reference therein). More particularly, the regulation of the duration of
flowering, the separation of reproductive development from whole-plant senescence, and the
conservation of viable axillary meristems following flowering and seed setting represent key
factors of perennial growth (Battey and Tooke, 2002; Munn-Bosh et al., 2008; Figure 39).
The partitioning of nutrient reserves may also be an important determinant of perenniality.
Indeed, in contrast to annual plants that tend to remobilize all their resources during seed
production, herbaceous perennials are believed to split their resources between sexual
reproduction (flowering and seed setting) and storage in persistent organs (e.g. root, bulbs,
rhizomes, stolons, or tubers) to sustain the vegetative re-growth and reproduction the
following season (Figure 39). The partitioning of carbon and nitrogen resources, in
particular, are expected to play an important role in this process, In support of this
hypothesis, starch content in roots was found to be higher in perennial than in annual cotton
(Gossypium hirsutum L.; De Souza and Da Silv, 1987). Interestingly as well, resprouting
shrubs accumulated more root starch than obligate seeding shrubs (plants killed by fire) in
fire-prone environments (Knox and Clarke, 2005). However, whether perennials across
species and plant families generally store more carbon as starch below ground than their
annual counterparts remains to be investigated.
So far, most experiments on the importance of root N and C reserves for re-growth vigour
in perennial species have been carried out in alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.), and in response to
defoliation. Some contradictory results between these studies and their interpretations render
it difficult to draw conclusions.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 39. Proposed model of the partitioning of carbon resources in monocarpic annual/biennial and
polycarpic perennial species.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 39. Proposed model of the partitioning of carbon resources in monocarpic annual/biennial and
polycarpic perennial species. Continued.
Meristem determinacy and the control of flowering time and senescence are key factors of the plant life
form strategy. Monocarpic plants flowers, set seeds, and then die. With the exception of monocarpic
perennials, these are short lived. In contrast in polycarpic perennials, flowering and seed production
occurs many times during their life and over many years, interspersed by period of vegetative growth.
Notably, the regulation of the flowering duration is different between the two. Evidence suggests that
the allocation of resources may also play an important role in assuring the success of the plant life form
strategy. While resources are mostly directed toward to reproduction in annual species, part of them is
also allocated to long-lived storage organs (e.g. roots) in perennials so as to assure the re-growth and
reproduction of the plant the following season.
The fact that starch degradation increased while shoot re-growth resumed during spring in
alfalfa (Volenec et al., 1991) suggests that root starch reserves may be important for re-
growth. In addition, the accumulation, after autumn harvest(s), of N reserves (in the form of
free amino acids and soluble proteins), of starch and of total non-structural carbohydrates in
the roots was found to be positively correlated to spring re-growth vigour in field-grown
alfalfa (Dhont et al., 2002 and 2006).
However, it was also found that shoot yield during re-growth in afalfa was higher in plants
with the highest N content and lowest level of starch content in the roots (Ourry et al., 1994).
The authors of this study concluded from this result that root N reserves are the major factor
that initiates and sustains new shoot growth and that, in contrast, there is no direct
relationship between starch accumulation in root tissues and shoot production during early
re-growth. Similarly Boyce and Volenec (1992) and Frankauser and Volenec (1989)
concluded from analyses done in alfalfa that root total non-structural carbohydrates may not
be the major source of energy for shoot re-growth.
Besides, although the apparent decline in root N reserves is generally small compared with
that of non-structural carbohydrate (Kim et al., 1993), several authors have suggested that
the decline in root carbohydrates during shoot re-growth may be primarily due to the use of
carbohydrates in the roots (Ta et al., 1990; Avice et al., 1996; Schnyder and De Visser,
1999). In a study by Avice et al. (1996), the flow of
N and
C from organs remaining after
defoliation to regrowing tissues as well as
C losses through root and shoot respiration were
assessed by pulse-chase labelling during re-growth in alfalfa. A total of 73% of labelled C
and 34% of labelled N were remobilized in source organs within 30 days. Although all the
N from source organ was recovered in the re-growing tissue, much of the
C was lost,
mainly as CO2 respired from the root (61%). Likewise, C and N steady state labelling was
performed to access the actual contribution of reserve-derived C and N to re-growth
following defoliation in plants of perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.; Schnyder and De
Visser, 1999). It was concluded by the authors that carbohydrate reserves were an
insignificant source of C for tiller growth although these carbohydrates may have contributed
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
indirectly to tiller re-growth via energy supply in shoot respiration and maintenance of root
integrity and function.
In summary, although the re-growth of perennial plants after grazing, cutting-back or
winter die-back must require a supply of carbon and nitrogen reserves for energy and
biosynthesis until the photosynthetic capacity of the plant has been restored, direct evidence
about the quantitative importance of the storage and remobilization of starch and other
resources for the vegetative re-growth capacity and the perennial lifestyle are still lacking.
An important approach to this problem, which has not been included in any studies so far,
would be to include the analysis of mutants impaired in the accumulation and/or
remobilization of root starch or nitrogen reserves. In addition, little use has been made so far
of natural variation. At best, natural variant analyses in alfalfa have involved only two
different cultivars (Dhont et al., 2002 and 2006). Therefore, it is still not clear to what extent
the mobilisation and flux of C and N reserves from storage organs to the new shoot are
controlling its re-growth capacity and vigour in perennial plants following either
overwintering or enforced re-growth.
6.1.2. Importance of the perenniality trait in agriculture: perennial to annuals, and now
back to perennials?
The worlds terrestrial biomes are primarily made up of a mixture of perennial plants. In
contrast, more than two-thirds of the land covered by crops consists of monocultures of
annual species (Cox et al., 2006). This is the result of intense and long term selection for
high yielding crops, favouring annual species (with an increased allocation of
photoassimilates to seeds) over their relatively low-seed yielding perennial counterparts.
However, with longer growing seasons, more extensive root systems (Figure 40), better
access to resources, and more conservative use of nutrients, perennial plants display many
desired characteristics. They have a higher efficiency in water management and nutrient-use
and provide more protection against soil erosion than annual crops. They also yield more
biomass above-ground, store more carbon below-ground, and are in general more resistant to
biotic and abiotic stresses than their annual relatives (Cox et al., 2006; Glover, 2005 and
2007). In addition, perennial crops are expected to be less detrimentally affected by climate
change (Brown et al., 2000; Glover et al., 2007) and their net values for global warming
potential are negative while those for annual crops are positive. Hence, through a greater
carbon storage, lower need for applied chemicals, and the possibility to grow them on
marginal lands that do not support the long term use of annual crops because of severe
erosion risk, perennial species offer the opportunity of a more sustainable agriculture system
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
(Cassman et al., 2003; Glover et al., 2010). For these reasons, perennial crops are currently
attracting attention from researchers and breeders.
Figure 40. Illustration of the annual versus perennial strategy.
From Cox et al. (2006). Root system of an annual wheat (on the left in each panel) and its wild
perennial relative, intermediate wheatgrass (Thinopyrum intermedium; on the right in each panel) at
four times of the year. The longer growing season, and consequently the greater access to resources
of the perennial variety, results in a greater below- and above-ground biomass production than in its
annual counterpart, which tends to give higher seed yield in a single year.
Breeding programs aiming at developing perennial grain crops have been initiated in
several species including wheat, wheatgrass, sorghum, rice, and sunflower. Some of the
grain crops  including rye, sorghum, and rice  can be hybridized with close perennial
relatives to attempt to transfer the pool of genes able to confer the perenniality trait into
annual, cultivated species. However, in other crops such as wheat, maize, soybean, and
sunflower, hybridization with more distantly related perennial species is required. Lastly,
some perennial species with relatively high grain yield are candidates for direct
domestication. This includes wheatgrass (Thinopyrum intermedium), Wildrye (Leymus
racemosus), Maximilian sunflower (Helianthus maximiliani), and Indian ricegrass
(Oryzopsis hymenoides). Programs on these perennial crops aim at developing new cultivars
able to produce high seed yields (Cox et al., 2002). Indeed, the major drawback of perennials
is their inability to yield as much seed as annual varieties. This may be because
carbohydrates produced by the plant are needed by the root system to survive the dormant
period in perennials while they normally end up in the grain in annuals. Therefore, the first
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
challenge for plant breeding consists of allocating more carbon to grain production. A major
difficulty, however, resides in the fact that the perenniality trait is expected to be multigenic
and to involve complex interactions with the environment. Annuality and perenniality,
indeed, have been proposed to be quantitative traits (Thomas et al., 2000). Evidence for this
comes from studies of crosses between annuals and perennials. In all the species studied to
date (e.g. rye, triticale, sorghum, maize and soybean), it is generally observed that plants
derived from inter-specific hybrids tend to be perennial only if 50% or more of their genes
are inherited from a perennial parent (Cox et al., 2002). This, along with a lack of success so
far in introducing a single gene or chromosome conditioning perenniality into an annual crop
genotype, attests to the complexity of the trait and suggests that perenniality is likely to be
governed by multiple loci. However, one exception to this can be found in the literature: a
single chromosome addition from a perennial wheat species was able to confer a polycarpic,
perennial growth habit to an annual wheat relative (Lammer et al., 2004). More recent
evidence suggests that the life form could be determined by a small number of genes as
mentioned earlier (Chapter 1, section 1.10.2).
As discussed above, breeding programs have thus far mainly concentrated on developing
perennial grain crops in grass varieties. However, perennial grasses such as Miscanthus and
switchgrass are also of great interest as feedstocks for the production of biofuels. Further,
because of their ability to perform symbiotic nitrogen fixation and their conservative growth
strategy, perennial legume grain and forage crops such as chickpea and alfalfa also offer the
opportunity to develop more sustainable agricultural systems. They are of current and
potential agronomic importance for forage, grain production and the production of biofuels.
6.1.3. Aims and Approaches
The genus Lotus comprises both annual and perennial species, several of which are
cultivated for forage (e.g. L. corniculatus, L. glaber and L. uliginosus). These species are
similar in structure and growth characteristics to more important forage legumes such as
alfalfa and clover. Recent development of genetic and genomic tools in the perennial legume
L. japonicus allows the study of the importance of carbon allocation to vegetative re-growth
and the perenniality trait. Almost nothing is known thus far about the importance of carbon
reserves in perenniality and vegetative re-growth. The capacity for vigorous re-growth
represents a key trait for the use of perennial plant species as forage crops. The collection of
starch metabolism mutants of L. japonicus presented in the previous chapters provides an
ideal resource for testing the hypothesis that starch storage in the roots is important for
vegetative re-growth in perennial species. If root starch turnover is indeed necessary and
limiting, re-growth in crops may be improved by manipulating this process.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
In this chapter, I describe the use of both natural and induced genetic variation to
investigate the role of root starch accumulation and remobilization for vegetative re-growth
and perenniality in the genus Lotus. In a first series of experiments, I used the collection of
starch metabolism mutants of the perennial species L. japonicus - the isolation and
characterisation of which has been presented in the previous chapters - to explore the
importance of starch for the capacity of the plant to re-grow after cutting-back. I show that,
although mutants of L. japonicus with strongly altered root starch content grow relatively
normally prior to cutting-back, they are impaired in their capacity to regenerate after a
harvest in which the photosynthetic parts of the plant are removed. In a second set of
analyses, I explored the hypothesis that root starch content may play an important role both
for re-growth vigour and the perenniality trait using a collection of perennial and annual
species of Lotus. Results of this analysis revealed a good correlation between their root
starch content and their ability to re-grow post cutting-back. The significance of this finding
in term of potential agricultural applications is also discussed.
6.2. Results
6.2.1. Mutants of L. japonicus with altered root starch content are impaired in their
ability to re-grow following cutting-back
As mentioned earlier, perenniality in plants refers to the capacity of the plants to persist
across seasons and over several years. In herbaceous perennial plant species such as L.
japonicus, this generally involves the ability of the plants to grow back following
overwintering. Given the difficulty of studying such phenomenon and the relatively short
time frame of this study, I chose instead to study the enforced re-growth capacity of the
plants and developed an assay in which the vegetative re-growth of L. japonicus plants was
monitored after cutting-back all the leafy shoots at the base of their stems. Hence, the term
re-growth capacity and re-growth vigour mentioned later on in this chapter refer to the
capacity and vigour of the plant to regenerate after a harvest in which all the photosynthetic
parts of the plants are removed. Such analyses are referred to as cutting-back experiments
elsewhere in the text. As well as mimicking grazing, I reasoned that this experiment would
be a good indicator of the perennial status and capacity of the plant to re-grow following
overwintering. Such cutting-back experiments were carried out on several of the starch
metabolism mutants of L. japonicus whose isolation and characterisation have been
described in the previous chapters (Chapter 4 and Chapter5).
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
One of these mutants, the pgm1-4 mutant does not accumulate any starch in any of its
organs and tissues (Chapter 4, Figure 20; Chapter 5, Figure 35). I hypothesized that, if
carbon allocation - and in particular starch accumulation - is indeed important for re-growth
in L. japonicus, this starch-free mutant would be expected to struggle to re-grow following
cutting-back. Similarly, starch excess mutants deficient in starch degradation in roots would
also be expected to struggle to re-grow because of their inability to remobilise the carbon
stored as starch. In contrast, the pgi mutant that displays a starch-free phenotype in leaves
but still accumulates starch in its root system may be expected to re-grow normally. To test
these hypotheses, I first carried out a preliminary analysis with plants of the pgm1-4 and
pgi1-1 mutants and the two WT accessions Gifu and MG-20. Importantly, and as presented
earlier (Chapter 4, section 5.2.2), neither the pgm1-4 nor the pgi1-1 mutant plants displayed
any impairment in growth under normal conditions. Under enforced vegetative re-growth,
however, the starch-free pgm mutant was severely impaired in its ability to re-grow in
comparison to the pgi mutant and the WTs (Figure 41), suggesting that root starch storage
and remobilisation may play an important role in vegetative re-growth.
Figure 41. Pilot cutting-back experiments performed on the L. japonicus starch mutants pgm1-4 and
pgi1-2.
A. Results of cutting-back experiment performed on four month old mutant plants (B1F3 generation) of
the mutant lines pgm1-4 and pgi1-2. Plants were grown under long day conditions in a greenhouse
supplemented with artificial light. Pictures of the plants were taken ca. 6 weeks post cutting. Root and
shoot samples of plants carrying the mutant alleles stained with iodine are displayed on the bottom
panels. B. Cutting-back experiment performed on the pgm1-4 mutants (B1F3 generation) in
comparison to the MG-20 and Gifu wild-types. Cutting-back was performed on three month old plants
grown in a greenhouse under natural light conditions between April and August 2007. A representative
biological replicate of each genotype photographed prior to cutting (top panel) and ca. six weeks post
cutting (middle panel). On the bottom panel is shown the results of iodine staining of the leaves of each
genotype.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
To further explore this finding, and discover whether the starch stored in roots is not only
necessary but also limiting as a source of carbon supply during re-growth, several cutting-
back experiments were performed on larger populations of mutant and WT segregants of
multiple mutant alleles of the PGM1 gene as well as mutants of several other starch
metabolism genes that displayed variation in the degree of alteration of their starch content.
The starch synthesis and degradation mutant alleles used for these cutting-back experiments
were pgi1-1, pgm1-1, pgm1-3, pgm1-4, pgm1-5, aps1-1, apl1-1, gwd1-1, and gwd3-1. Unless
otherwise indicated, these experiments were carried out on homozygous mutants, WT, and
heterozygous segregants of F2 segregating populations. Homozygous mutants, heterozygous
and homozygous WT plants were identified among the segregating population by
genotyping individual plants (either by sequencing or restriction analysis) as described in
Chapter 2, section 2.6.7. Some pilot cutting-back experiments were also performed on plants
of the generation F3. However, cases of hybrid vigour/heterosis with randomly segregated,
significant effects on their root and shoot biomass as well as starch content could be
observed in the progeny of outcrosses between Gifu (mutants were isolated in this
background) and MG-20. Hence, segregants from an F2 population were analysed in most
subsequent experiments in order to minimise this issue. Unless otherwise indicated, cutting-
back was performed on mature plants ca. 4-5 months old that were flowering and setting
seeds. Plants were cut at about 2 cm from above the base of the stem and the shoot fresh
weight measured. Following cutting-back, shoots of the cut plants were allow to re-grow for
ca. 6 to 7 weeks and fresh weight was measured again. Some root fresh weight
measurements and iodine staining were also performed before and after cutting-back. Details
on the protocol employed for these experiments are given in Chapter 2, section 2.2.
The results of this experiment showed that some of mutants had a strongly-reduced
capacity for re-growth following cutting-back (Figure 42). More particularly, statistically
significant differences in re-growth ratio (fresh weight of the new growth divided by the FW
of the initial growth, i.e. the shoots of mature plants measured just prior cutting-back) could
be observed between the pgm1-4, pgm1-3, pgm1-5, aps1-1 mutants and their WT segregants.
In addition, the heterozygotes of the mutant line pgm1-4 also displayed a reduced re-growth
capacity in comparison to the WT segregants. Hence, an overall correlation was found
between the lower amount of starch in the roots of the mutant plants and their reduced
capacity and vigour to re-growth in comparison to the WTs. Further, it is interesting to note
that significant difference in re-growth ratio was also observed between plants of the WT
accessions MG-20 and Gifu which also presented a clear difference in their root starch
content before cutting according to the results of iodine staining (Figure 42). More
particularly, and in agreement with the results presented above for the mutant lines, their
amount of root starch positively correlated with their extent of re-growth.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 42. Cutting -back experiment performed on the collection of L. japonicus starch metabolism
mutants.
Continued on next page.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 42. Cutting -back experiment performed on the collection of L. japonicus starch metabolism
mutants. Continued.
Root starch content and re-growth vigour were examined in a set of starch synthesis (A-H) and
degradation (I, J) mutants of Lotus japonicus. Plants of the mutant lines pgm1-4, pgm1-5, pgm1-1,
aps1-1, gwd1-1, and gwd1-3 were grown in a greenhouse from December until May 2008,
supplemented with artificial light until April, and were 4 to 5 months old at the time of cutting. Plants of
the mutant lines pgi1-1 and pgi1-3 that were ca. 4 months old at the time of cutting were grown under
natural light conditions (from April until August 2008). Plants of the two lines pgm1-3 and apl1-1 were
also grown in a greenhouse under natural light conditions and were ca. 10 months old at the time of
cutting. Re-growth biomass measurements were performed 6 weeks post cutting. The re-growth ratio
(in %) is defined as the fresh weight (FW) of the new growth (i.e. new shoot including stems and
leaves) divided by the FW of the shoot of mature plants measured just prior cutting. The values given
are mean values +/- standard error of mean. Students t tests (95% confidence interval) were
performed that revealed statistically significant difference (marked by an asterisk) of re-growth ratio
between the pgm1-4, pgm1-3, pgm1-5 mutants and their WT segregants. Difference of re-growth ratio
was also statistically significant between the aps1-1 mutants and the WT MG-20 and Gifu plants, and
between plants of these two WT accessions. Root and stem base starch contents were visualised by
iodine staining 6 weeks post cutting, with the exception of aps1-1 mutants and the WT MG-20 and Gifu
whose root starch content were examined at the time of cutting (harvesting at the end of the day from
biological replicates that were representative of the whole set in term of re-growth vigour). A net
reduction in the root starch content in the mutants compared to the heterozygotes and WTs can be
observed for plant carrying the mutant alleles pgm1-4, pgm1-3, aps1-1, and to a lesser extent, pgm1-5.
For all mutant lines, the analysis was performed on mutants, heterozygotes (abbreviated Het on the
figure), and WT segregants of a F2 population, with the exception of aps1-1 for which F3 mutants were
compared to plants of the two WT accessions MG20 and Gifu. Further, plants of all the genotypes
analysed were from a second cross of the mutant in Gifu background with MG-20, except for plants of
the mutant lines pgm1-4 and pgm1-3 which were at the B3 and B1 backcrossing stage, respectively.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
It should be mentioned here that when this experiment was repeated under other growth
conditions, the roots of the aps1-1 mutant plants were not starch-free according to the results
of iodine staining (instead, their root starch content phenotype was similar to that of the
pgm1-5 mutant), and consistently, their re-growth capacity was much less impaired (data not
shown). Concerning the other mutants analysed, including the starch degradation mutants
gwd1-1 and gwd3-1, neither any root starch excess/reduced starch phenotypes nor any
significant impairment in the vegetative re-growth capacity of the mutants were observed in
comparison to their heterozygous and WT segregants.
The re-growth vigour of the pgm1-4 mutant and heterozygote in comparison to their WT
segregants was analysed in more detail in relation to their starch content and PGM1 enzyme
activity. Interestingly, an intermediate phenotype (case of incomplete dominance) between
the pgm1-4 mutants and the PGM1-4 WT could be seen for the pgm1-4/PGM1-4
heterozygote, in terms of re-growth vigour (measured as a ratio of the fresh weight of shoot
prior and post cutting-back), leaf starch content, and enzyme activity (Figure 43). Leaf rather
than root starch contents were measured for this analysis, however, the results of iodine
staining across all the organs of these plants strongly suggest that the same is true for roots
(i.e. intermediate content of starch in the root of the heterozygous plants in comparison to its
mutant and WT segregants).
Overall, the results of all these analyses revealed a good correlation between root starch
content and vegetative re-growth capacity and vigour. It must been noted, however, that
when the cutting-back experiment was repeated in other greenhouses with different lighting
systems and light quality, and/or at other times of the year, the effect of the lack of root
starch on re-growth was much less clear (data not shown). Use of different greenhouses and
growth conditions from one experiment to another were mostly dictated by issue of
availability of space for plant growth. The clearest correlations between root starch content
and re-growth vigour were observed when the plants were grown in a greenhouse
supplemented with artificial lighting to give a photoperiod of ca.. 16 h (see Chapter 2,
section 2.1.3 for more details). Under these growth conditions, Lotus japonicus plants
produced more shoot and root biomass, and flowered later than when grown under natural,
long day conditions.
Lastly, the developmental stage of the plants seemed to be important. All experiments
mentioned above were performed on mature plants that were ca 4-5 months old. However,
pilot experiments were also performed on younger plants for several of the mutant lines
(pgm1-1, pgm1-3, pgm1-4, pgm1-5, aps1-1, apl1-1, gwd1-1, and gwd3-1). Interestingly, no
clear impairment in re-growth was seen for the mutants versus their WT segregants when the
experiment was performed on younger plants (ca 2 months old) that had not yet or only just
started to flower, and had not yet set seeds (data not shown).
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 43. Correlation between re-growth vigour following cutting-back, starch content, and enzyme
activity for the mutant line pgm1-4.
Cutting-back experiment was carried out as described in the legend of Figure 42. A. Phenotype of the
pgm1-4 mutant, heterozygous and WT segregants (only one individual representative of the one of at
least 6 biological replicates for each genotype is shown here) during re-growth, ca. six weeks post
cutting. B. Re-growth biomass measurement and ratio of re-growth as defined in the legend of Figure
42. C. Leaf starch content (in mg. eq. glucose per g of fresh weight) and D. Native PAGE of PGM1
(plastidial PGM isoform) and PGM2 (cysosolic PGM isoform) activity in leaves of the mutant,
heterozygote, and WT of pgm1-4. Notes that a clear, positive correlation is observed between the
PGM1 enzyme activity, the starch content, and the re-growth vigour across the three genotypes, with
the heterozygotes displaying an intermediate phenotype between those of wild types and homozygous
mutants. Interestingly, a difference in migration could be seen for the PGM2 isozyme (two lowest
bands) between the wild-type MG-20 and Gifu that segregated in the progeny from a cross between
the two accessions as illustrated in D.
6.2.2. Re-growth vigour positively correlates with root starch content in natural genetic
variants of Lotus
The results presented above indicated that the capacity of the plant to store and remobilize
its carbon stored as starch in the roots may determine its vegetative re-growth vigour
following cutting-back. If starch stored in roots indeed plays an important role for re-growth
vigour and the perenniality trait, I hypothesized that a good correlation would exist between
the root starch content of perennial species of Lotus and their capacity for re-growth post
cutting-back. In addition, since resources in annual species are mostly directed to
reproduction while they are also directed to storage organs in perennials, perennial species
would be expected to store more starch below ground than their annual counterparts. Lastly,
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
I hypothesized that if re-growth capacity following cutting-back was indeed a good indicator
of the perenniality trait (i.e. seasonal re-growth), annual species would not be expected to re-
grow following cutting-back, while perennials would.
In order to test these hypotheses, I established and used a unique collection of annual and
perennial Lotus species (Table 1 and Table 19). This collection consisted of 14 and 10
species recorded as annuals and perennials, respectively, in the USDA plant database (GRIN
NPGS, http://www.ars-grin.gov/npgs/). Apart from the recorded growth habit of the
accessions, other criteria including the phenotype, geoclimatic origin, and the phylogenetic
relationship of the accessions (Table 19 and Figure 44) were also taken into account so as to
generate a collection of natural variants with a high level of polymorphism. I rationalized
there would be a high chance that large variations in both root starch content and re-growth
vigour would exist among the species in such a collection. Cultivated species of Lotus were
also added to this suite of natural variants. Lastly, MG-20 and Gifu, the two most used
accessions for research in L. japonicus, were also included in this collection.
These plant species/accessions were submitted to phenotypic and physiological analyses
that included records on shoot and root height/length and biomass, taproot morphology,
length and diameter, extent of nodulation, flowering time and senescence as well as leaf,
stem, and root starch content estimation by iodine staining. Two sets of annual and perennial
species of Lotus were analysed. The first set that comprised the species L. arabicus, L burtii,
L. corniculatus var. corniculatus, L. edulis, L. glinoides, L. ornithopodioides, L. parviflorus,
L. peregrinus, L. subbiflorus, L. tenuis, and L. uliginosus was grown from November until
March in a greenhouse supplemented with artificial light to give a light period of
approximately 16 h ((see Chapter 2, section 2.1.3 for more details). The second set of Lotus
species, that included the species L. collinus, L. conimbricensis, L. denticulatus, L. gebelia,
L. halophilus, L. mearnsii, L. palustris, L. unifoliolatus, and L. weilleri were grown in a
greenhouse under natural light from May until September. L. japonicus MG-20 and Gifu
were grown in both sets.
Phenotypic analysis of the different Lotus species indicated that several of them (in
particular L. parviflorus, L subbiflorus, L. glinoides, and L. unifoliolatus) may have been
misclassified with regard to their growth habit (i.e. annual versus perennial). This is entirely
possible as the information on the species growth habit (aka life form) entered into GRIN is
generally based on the literature available for the species rather than from experimental
determination (personal communication from Stephanie Greene, USDA-GRIN germplasm
curator of the Lotus collection since 1995). Besides, it is believed that perennial and annual
habits can be different not only from one species to another within a genus, but also from
one ecotype/cultivar to another within a species (personal communication from Stephanie
Greene, USDA-GRIN). Hence, mis-annotations may have occurred. I therefore undertook
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
the experimental determination of the growth habit of all these species. For this analysis,
plants (at least five biological replicates of each genotype) were grown for ca. nine months
during which they were subjected to a winter period. Following this, plants that had died
versus those that were still alive and produced new basal branches were recorded. Since
some of the species did not flower and/or set seeds, the life form could not be attributed with
certainty to all of them. Nevertheless, this experimental testing clearly confirmed some cases
of wrong assignment of the growth habit of the species given by the USDA database. A new,
most likely correct classification is presented in Table 19. Further analysis and interpretation
of the results were carried out following this new classification.
Cutting-back experiments on the Lotus plant species were performed on ca. 3 month old
plants. Surprisingly, all Lotus species, both annual and perennial, were able to re-grow at
first (emergence of few leaves after only a couple of days post cutting-back) but this new
shoot growth stopped after a few days and eventually dried out and died for some of the
species. After about two weeks post cutting-back, large differences in re-growth vigour were
visible among the species (Figure 45). The results of root starch staining with iodine prior to
cutting-back and of shoot biomass measurement revealed a clear, positive correlation
between the amount of starch stored in the roots and the re-growth vigour (ratio of FW of the
new shoot/FW mature plant shoot expressed in %). On average, the re-growth ratios 15 days
post cutting-back of the annual species were 2.42 and 0.41 for the first and second set of the
species analysed respectively, versus 10.62 and 8.61 for the perennial species.
A clear correlation was also observed between the growth habit on one side, and the root
starch content and re-growth vigour following cutting-back on the other. Perennial species
generally had both higher root starch content and higher re-growth vigour than their annual
counterparts (Figure 45). A trend toward a higher root to shoot biomass ratio in the perennial
versus the annual species was also observed (Table A6). Apart from this, no clear
differences between the annual and perennial species were observed for any of the other
parameters measured/calculated that included the fresh weight and height/length of the
shoots and roots of the species as well as their specific root length (SRL; Table A6).
Root starch staining 15 days post cutting-back showed that a significant amount of starch
had been remobilized during re-growth in most of the species although careful examination
of the results revealed that some of the species had remobilized a larger amount of their root
starch during re-growth than others (e.g. L. burtii compared to L. glinoides). Overall, a good
correlation could be seen between the amount of starch remobilized in the species and their
re-growth vigour (Figure 45A). Hence, not only initial root starch content but also the ability
of the plant to remobilize it may be important for determining the re-growth vigour. This
reduction of root starch (estimated by iodine staining) was also accompanied by a net
reduction of the root biomass for most species (visible on Figure 45A).
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 44. Phylogenetic relationship of the species of the genus Lotus and their life form.
Modified from Degtjareva et al. (2006). Lotus species that were analysed in this study are framed.
Annual species are framed in green, perennial in red, and species for which the life form is uncertain
are in blue. Species included in my collection but not included in the phylogenetic analysis of
Degtjareva et al. (2006) are mentioned on the left bottom of the Figure. The annual and perennial
species are largely intermixed, suggesting that the switch of one life form to another may not require
major genetic changes.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Table 19. List of natural variants of the genus Lotus analysed in this study. Continued on next page.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Table 19. List of natural variants of the genus Lotus analysed in this study. Continued.
Seeds of all the annual and perennial species analysed in this study were ordered from the USDA
GRIN germaplasm with the exception of L. burtii and L.japonicus ecotypes Gifu and MG-20 which were
from the JIC seed store (Zopra dababase). The Clastidic group designed OW refers to Old World
species, and NW are New World species as determined in Arambarri et al., 2000a and 2000b. The
'UDSA life form' is the life form of the species according to the UDSA database (not experimentally
determined). The 'curated Life form' correspond to a consensus of its experimental determination and
on information from several plant species databases. The life form was experimentally tested by
recoding the phenotype (i.e. senescence/death and capacity to keep producing new tillers) of the Lotus
species grown in glasshouses over a period of at least nine months. Seeds of the Lotus species were
sown in November 2007 for the first set analysed, and in May 2008 for the second set analysed.
A relatively important variation between species was also observed in the extent to which
starch had disappeared and from which part of the root it had disappeared. For instance, in
species such as L. peregrinus, L. ornithopodioides, and L. edulis, a clear reduction of starch
content in the crown root and stem base could be seen between prior and two weeks post
cutting. In contrast, a clear reduction in starch content in L. glinoides and L. parviflorus was
visible in secondary roots, but not in the crown root and stem base. The re-growth vigour
appeared to correlate better with the amount of starch present in secondary roots (and stolon-
like structures as well, e.g. L. uliginosus) than with the amount of starch at the base of the
stem and in the crown root/primary root, although, as mentioned above, this starch too can
be remobilized (Figure 45A).
6.3. Discussion
6.3.1. Correlation between root starch content and re-growth vigour in starch
metabolism mutants of L. japonicus
I tested the hypothesis that starch stored in roots is necessary for re-growth in L. japonicus.
Consistent with this hypothesis, the pgm1-3, pgm1-3, pgm1-5 and aps1-1 mutants with
reduced root starch content displayed a significant impairment in their capacity to re-grow
following cutting-back in comparison to their WT segregants. In contrast, no significant
reduction in vegetative re-growth capacity could be observed in the starch degradation
mutants, including the two starch degradation mutant lines gwd1-1 and gwd3-1. Roots of
these mutants, however, did not display any visible reduced starch or starch-excess
phenotype. Hence, mutants more strongly affected in their capacity to degrade root starch
would need to be analysed to test the hypothesis that incapacity of the plant to remobilize the
carbon stored as starch in roots also affects its capacity to re-grow.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 45A. Cutting-back experiment performed on a collection of 24 natural variants of the genus
Lotus. Continued on next page.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 45B. Cutting-back experiment performed on a collection of 24 natural variants of the genus
Lotus. Continued on next page.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 45. Cutting-back experiment performed on a collection of 24 natural variants of the genus
Lotus. Continued.
Root and shoot biomass measurement, and iodine staining of the roots were performed both prior and
post cutting. Plants were grown in the greenhouse, under LD conditions and the analyses were
performed on ca. 3 month-old plants. Unless otherwise indicated, 4 to 5 biological replicates that were
good representatives of a set of about 20 plants were used for each species/accessions and for each
measurement. As for the cutting-back experiment performed on the starch metabolism mutants of L.
japonicus, plants were cut off at about 2 cm from the base of the tillers and re-growth was recorded
over time. 15 d (A and B) or 30 d (C) post cutting. Dry and fresh weights of the new shoots (leaves and
stems) were measured and the ratio of the new shoot to mature plant shoot biomass was calculated.
Another three biological replicates were used for iodine staining of the root. Details of the results
obtained, including the SE values are given in Table A6. A. Cutting-back experiment on this first set of
Lotus species was carried out on plants grown from November 2007 until March 2008 in a greenhouse
supplemented with artificial light (long day conditions). B. Plants of this second set of Lotus species
were grown in a greenhouse under natural light conditions, from May until September 2008. Note that
L. arabicus, L arenarius, L. corniculatus, L. glinoides, L. parviflorus, L. tenuis, and L. uliginosus
flowered but did not set seeds. L. colllinus, L. gebellia, and L palustris did neiher flower nor set seeds.
The root architecture of L. gebelia differs so significantly from the other Lotus species that there is
doubt as to whether this accession truly belongs to the species L. gebelia and the Lotus genus.
The capacity for strong, rapid re-growth is a particularly important trait in perennial crops
grown for silage, forage and the production of biofuel. It has been speculated that stores of
starch in roots, rhizomes and stems provide the carbon necessary for re-growth. However,
information about the importance of starch turnover in this process was lacking thus far.
Results of the cutting-back experiments I carried out on the collection of starch metabolism
mutants show that - at least under some growth conditions - the accumulation of root starch
and its remobilization are necessary for vegetative re-growth following cutting-back in a
perennial legume species such as L. japonicus. This constitutes an important new finding as
it suggests that, although meristem activity is crucial for the initiation of vegetative re-
growth as previously mentioned, the storage of carbon as starch in the roots is necessary to
sustain it.
Additional experiments could be performed to explore further this finding. First, the
quantification of starch on root samples of the mutant, heterozygous, and WT segregants
harvested prior and post cutting-back would need to be performed and the resulting starch
content data used for a correlation analysis with the shoot and new shoot biomass prior and
post cutting-back. Roots samples for these quantitative measurements have been harvested
that are waiting to be processed. Second, labelling experiments using C
isotopes
may be performed to monitor the flux of carbon from the roots to the new shoots being
produced during re-growth. Lastly, it would be interesting to confirm that the re-growth
impairment seen for some of the starch synthesis mutants is caused by the lack of sugars
derived from the degradation of starch. If the failure of the mutants to regenerate a new
shoot after cutting-back is indeed caused by the lack of sugars from starch degradation, one
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
would expect their altered re-growth capacity to be rescued upon the exogenous supply of
sugars.
As well as determining whether root starch is necessary for re-growth, it is also important
to determine whether starch is limiting for re-growth, and if so, to what extent. Results of the
analyses I performed strongly suggest that the accumulation of root starch and its
remobilization are both necessary and limiting for the vegetative re-growth vigour in L.
japonicus since both an intermediate root starch content and re-growth phenotype could be
observed for the pgm1-4/PGM1-4 heterozygous plants, and the pgm1-5 mutants (reduced
starch content) in comparison to the pgm1-4 mutants (starch-free) and the WTs. However,
this finding would need to be further explored. If starch turnover is indeed necessary and
limiting, manipulation of this process might offer an important route for the improvement of
re-growth characteristics in perennial crops. To explore further the control that root starch
exercises over the rate and extent of re-growth, both the root (and above-ground) starch
content and the shoot and root biomass prior cutting-back and during re-growth would need
to be quantified on a series of mutant alleles with different levels of root starch content.
From this, a control coefficient for starch content against re-growth could be calculated.
Performing this control analysis should allow determination of the extent to which root
starch content is important to the capacity and vigour of re-growth. More particularly, this
should help determine to what extent the carbon remobilized from starch degradation in the
roots accounts for the shoot biomass gain. Indeed, if root starch is sustaining the shoot
growth, then a quantitative relationship should exist between the amount of carbon lost from
root starch and the gain of new shoot biomass, at least in the early stages of re-growth.
Large variations of the effect of mutations on vegetative re-growth were observed,
depending on the age of the plant and the growth conditions used. Thus, no significant
differences in re-growth vigour were observed between the mutant and the WT when the
cutting-back experiment was performed on younger plants, before flowering and seed
setting. Therefore, flowering induction and seed production too may play a role in the
vegetative re-growth and perenniality trait by modifying the allocation of resources at the
whole plant level. The important change in starch storage in leaves observed around the
transition to flowering time in MG-20 and Gifu plants (Chapter 3, sections 3.2.4 and 3.2.5)
tends to support this hypothesis. It also seems likely that large changes in temperature and/or
day length and light quality influence the partitioning of the resources, and hence the
vegetative re-growth capacity of perennial plants. The analyses I performed would need to
be reproduced in field conditions to understand the extent to which my findings are relevant
to an agricultural situation.
Re-growth vigour might also be influenced by the number of basal branches (aka tillers). A
higher number of basal branches will be associated with a higher number of axillary buds
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
from which to initiate re-growth. In Lotus, meristematic sites (i.e. sites of re-growth giving
rise to new basal branches) could be observed both at the base of the branches (i.e. crown
root) and on the few cm of stems remaining after cutting-back. Plants of the accession Gifu
that had higher root starch content than MG-20 also had a significantly higher number of
basal branches at the time of cutting-back (visible on Figure 42B). Such characteristics
might have played a role in determining their more vigorous re-growth capacity compared to
MG-20 counterparts. Analysis of the mutants and their corresponding WT which only varied
in their starch content, however, suggest that this factor is unlikely to have been a major
determinant of the amount of new shoot biomass measured. In future, it would be necessary
to distinguish more precisely the contribution made by meristem activity from the
contribution made by root starch content in vegetative re-growth vigour. Most likely,
meristem activity is crucial for the initiation of re-growth following overwintering or under
enforced re-growth (e.g. cutting-back) while root starch is necessary, possibly with other
nutrient reserves, to sustain re-growth. This would be in agreement with the suggestion made
by Munn-Bosh et al. (2007) that growth in herbaceous perennials results from the activity
of apical meristems sustained by the nutrients found in underground organs.
6.3.2. Correlation between root starch content and re-growth vigour and the
perenniality trait in annual and perennial species of Lotus
Analysis of natural genetic variation for root starch content and re-growth vigour in Lotus
revealed a clear, positive correlation between root starch content and the rate and extent of
re-growth, suggesting that starch turnover is both necessary and limiting in this process.
Further, there was considerable variation between species in how much and from where the
starch had disappeared during their re-growth. Several had strikingly lost starch from the
crown root and stem base (e.g. L. peregrinus, L. edulis, L. tenuis) but remobilization of this
starch was apparently not correlated with the capacity for re-growth. Instead, re-growth
vigour correlated best with remobilization of starch in the secondary roots. Other species
such as L. burtii had a relatively high amount of root starch, but little of it appeared to have
been allocated to re-growth, and accordingly capacity of the plants of this species to re-grow
was limited (Figure 45A). This suggests that not only the capacity of the plant to accumulate
carbon reserves as starch in the roots, but also its capacity to remobilize it efficiently is
important in determining the re-growth vigour.
It must be mentioned, however, that some exceptions could be seen to this overall good
correlation between root starch and re-growth vigour following cutting-back. For example,
L. subbiflorus re-grew a reasonable amount while it was not clear that much of its root starch
had disappeared. Hence, other factors than root starch such as the accumulation of soluble
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
sugars and the metabolism of nitrogen, for instance, could also be important in determining
the vegetative re-growth capacity of the plants, the extent to which may be dependent of the
genotype (e.g. species, ecotypes) and the environmental conditions.
A good correlation was also found between root starch content and re-growth vigour on
one side, and the life form of the species/accession on the other (Figure 45). That is to say,
the perennial species of Lotus tended to have higher root starch content and a better re-
growth capacity following cutting-back than their annual counterparts. More specifically,
annual species generally had low root starch and were not able to sustain enforced re-growth
so that they died several days after cutting-back. This suggests that, at least for plants of the
genus Lotus, the re-growth capacity of mature plants following cutting-back (i.e. under
enforced re-growth) represents a good indicator of the perenniality trait.
Following this finding, it remains to be determined whether the capacity of the plants to
accumulate and remobilize their carbohydrate reserves stored in the roots is what governs
their life form strategy, or is rather a consequence of it. Evidence suggests that the
partitioning of reserves in plants differs between perennial and annual species with resources
generally directed mostly toward reproduction in annual species and toward the storage of
carbohydrate reserves in perennial species (De Souza and Da Silva, 1987). More generally, it
has been proposed that annual species tend to maximize resource acquisition, whereas
perennials rather maximize the conservation of resources (Aerts and Chapin, 2000; Poorter
and Garnier, 1999). In this regard, it would be interesting to perform a grafting experiment in
which the root system of a perennial accession  with a capacity to store high levels of
carbon reserves - would be grafted to the shoot of an annual relative - with high seed yield.
This may help establish whether a higher storage of carbon in the roots leads to an increased
life-span of the resulting graft plant in comparison to the shoot donor species. Of course, this
would be conditional on whether the roots of the perennial plant will still maintain their
capacity to store large amounts of carbon when grafted with the annual plant. Conversely, it
is not known whether the shoot of the annual will partition its carbon into the root to the
same extent that the perennial would. Ultimately, the aim is to develop high seed yielding,
perennial cultivars. A better knowledge of both the factors determining carbon sink/source
strength (including capacity to store carbon as starch) and the factors controlling the fluxes
of carbon between vegetative and reproductive organs would certainly help achieve this
goal.
In addition to performing a cutting-back experiment, I also examined the possibility that a
correlation may exist between root starch content and/or re-growth vigour, and the
geoclimatic origin of the Lotus species I analysed. More specifically, I aimed to test the
hypothesis that the capacity of the plant to store a large amount of starch may be of
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
competitive advantage under some environmental conditions. If this is the case, a positive
correlation may be expected between the root starch content of the accessions and more
extreme climate/harsher environments characterised notably by longer period of winter
dormancy. No clear correlations, however, could be seen between their root starch content,
re-growth vigour, and growth habit on one side, and their geoclimatic origin on the other
(Figure 46). This is consistent with the results of an earlier study performed by Suginobou
and collegues (1998) on different species of Lotus and different ecotypes of L. japonicus. In
this study, natural variation for a certain number of phenotypic traits including plant height
and weight, flowering time, autumn vigour and re-growth were analysed. No correlation was
found between the geographical distribution of the accessions and their phenotypes and the
degree of polymorphism between them. Similarly, a natural variation study performed on a
set of A. thaliana accessions revealed no correlation between their pattern of carbohydrate
accumulation in leaves and their geographical origin (El-Lithy et al., 2005), suggesting that
climatic conditions may not play a major role in driving evolutionary change in the carbon
allocation and life form strategy. However, it must be mentioned that in these studies, the
geoclimatic origin of the accessions were correlated with parameters measured in a set of
invariant, controlled conditions. Hence, these studies did not assess the ability of carbon
storage to respond to significant environmental changes and challenges.
It would be interesting in the future to examine the capacity of the mutants deficient in
starch turnover and/or natural variants for root starch content to regenerate after over-
wintering and compare these results with the results of the cutting-back study presented
above. This may give insight into the importance of change in temperature and photoperiod
conditions (eg; requirement of dormancy period) on the allocation of resources and the
perenniality trait. More generally, environmental factors may be important determinants of
root starch storage. It may be hypothesised, for instance, that some species would use their
capacity to store a large amount of root starch only when the environmental conditions
require it, while in some others the accumulation of storage starch in their roots may be more
constitutive. Reciprocal transplant experiments and measurements of phenotype under
different environments such as cold treatments could be performed to determine the
phenotypic plasticity of root starch storage capacity and identify trait x environment
interactions.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 46. Root starch content, re-growth vigour, life form, and geoclimatic origin of the Lotus natural
variants.
Geoclimatic origin (geographic origin as given by the USDA GRIN database), life form, root starch
content, and re-growth vigour following cutting of the the annual and perennial species of Lotus
analysed in the cutting-back experiment. Scores were attributed to the Lotus natural variants for their
root starch content and re-growth vigour based on results of biomass measurements and root iodine
staining as described in Figure 45. This allowed their classification into classes as shown in the legend
displayed on the left of the Figure.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
6.3.3. Study of the importance of starch for re-growth and perenniality in other
legumes and non-legume plant species
In the future, it would be interesting to determine whether, as observed in Lotus, variation
in root starch content correlates well with variation in vegetative re-growth vigour and the
growth habit in other annual and perennial species of legumes or even of other plant families
(e.g. grasses). More particularly, it would be interesting to determine whether the control
observed for root starch over re-growth in Lotus is restricted to the genus Lotus or rather
conserved across the plant kingdom. Ultimately, this may help the design of strategies aimed
at developing new crops with perennial characteristics in which the stored reserves of starch
would be made more available to reproductive tissues.
To this end, I also established a collection of both annual and perennial species of the
Medicago genus. In total, seeds of 24 species of Medicago were ordered from the USDA-
GRIN germplasm. Lists of the species selected and their phylogenetic relationship are
presented in Table 1 and Figure 47. It is interesting to note that whatever the plant genus
studied, annual and perennial species were found intermixed on the phylogenetic tree
(Figure 44 and 39). This suggests that a change from a life form habit to another requires
little genetic innovation. This idea is consistent with the results of recent studies performed
in A. thaliana and tomato (Chapter 1, section 1.10.2 and references therein). A preliminary
analysis of root starch content was also performed on the annual and perennial species
belonging to the same genus as A. thaliana (Table 1 and Figure 48). Seeds of eight species
of Arabidopsis were ordered from the NASC database and grown in a growth cabinet for ca
one month prior iodine staining their shoot and roots. In contrast to plants of the genus
Lotus, neither the annual nor the perennial Arabidopis species accumulated significant
amounts of root starch (Figure 49).
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Figure 47. Phylogenetic relationship of the species of the genus Medicago and their life form.
Modified from Bena et al. (2001). Annual species are framed in green and perennial species in red (Life
form as given by the USDA database). As observed for the Lotus species (Figure 44), the annual and
perennial species of Medicago genus are intermixed, suggesting that the switch of one life form to
another may not requires major genetic changes.
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
Arabidopsis arenosa
Arabidopsis suecica
Arabidopsis arenosaArabidopsis arenosa
Arabidopsis suecicaArabidopsis suecica
Figure 48. Phylogenetic relationship of the Arabidopsis species and their life form.
Modified from Clauss and Koch (2006). Annual species are framed in green and perennial species in
red, according to the life form information given in Al-Shehbaz and OKane (2002) and Clauss and
Koch (2006). Arabidopsis arenosa is closely related to Arabidopsis lyrata. Arabidopsis suecica (Sue1)
is derived from an Arabidopsis thaliana x Arabidopsis arenosa hybridization (Al-Shehbaz and OKane;
2002)
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
* ** *
Figure 49. Iodine staining of the shoot and root starch of annual and perennial species of Arabidopsis.
Iodine staining was performed at the end of day on ca 1 month old plants grown in a controlled
environment chamber, in a 16 h light, 8 h dark cycle. Bolting had started at the time this analysis was
performed in the species indicated with an asterisk (*). Results showed no visible variation in root
starch content between the species.
6.3.4. Genetic determinants of vegetative re-growth vigour and the perenniality trait in
Legumes
Analysis of the Lotus species revealed large variation in term of root starch content. In the
future, it would be interesting to try identifying the gene(s) responsible for such differences.
This may be achieved, for instance, by performing cross-species microarray transcript
profiling using the GeneChips available for L. japonicus.
Further study of the perennial species L. parviflorus (USDA accession PI 415815) is of
great potential interest. This species out-performed all the others studied, including the Lotus
species currently cultivated for forage (L. uliginous, L. corniculatus, and L. glaber) both for
the amount of starch stored in its roots (assessed by iodine staining only) and its re-growth
vigour following cutting-back (Figure 45). In addition, this species presented the highest root
biomass of all the species analysed and, together with L. glinoides, bore a high number of
naturally occurring nodules in comparison to all the other plant species grown under the
Chapter 6: Importance of starch for perenniality and re-growth in Lotus
same conditions (Table A6). These characteristics make it not only a very interesting
accession to study further in regard to the importance of starch for re-growth vigour and the
perenniality trait, but also a promising species in term of agricultural use for forage and
pasture, and as a rotation legume crop.
Lastly, the results of the analysis I performed showed that MG-20 has a faster growth rate
than Gifu, but its re-growth rate is slower (Chapter 6, section 6.2.1). QTL for vegetative re-
growth vigour and root starch content could be studied using the Recombinant Inbred (RI)
Lines available from a cross between the L. japonicus accessions MG-20 and Gifu (187 RI
lines available to date; http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/bean/lotusjaponicus/top/top.jsp). If root
starch content indeed plays a central role for re-growth vigour in Lotus, a positive correlation
should be observed between these two traits and the QTL for both should co-localize. The
resulting mapped QTL regions could then be searched for candidate genes and the genes
responsible for the variation eventually identified as described in Chapter 3, section 3.3.4.
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions and perspectives
The important thing is not to stop questioning
Albert Einstein
CHAPTER 7: Conclusions and perspectives
7.1. The metabolism of leaf starch in the model legume L. japonicus
Almost nothing was known about the metabolism of starch in the model legume L.
japonicus at the start of this PhD research project. Taking advantage of the new information
derived from the sequencing of its genome, I provided detailed information on the genes
involved in starch metabolism and generated the first molecular-function map for starch
metabolism in this species. The analyses I performed revealed a large conservation, but also
some significant differences with the metabolism of starch in A. thaliana and its regulation.
Results of this work set the basis for future experiments aiming at identifying key genes
controlling the metabolism of starch in L. japonicus.
In addition, I carried out starch and sugar measurements across organs, at several
developmental stages, and in different growth conditions to characterise the accumulation
and turnover of starch in the two L. japonicus accessions MG-20 and Gifu. My analyses
revealed significant differences in the metabolism of starch between plants of MG-20 and
Gifu, the two accessions of L. japonicus most commonly used for research. Plants of these
two accessions also displayed large differences in several other traits, including biomass
production. This finding is particularly interesting in the light of the recent demonstration
that rates of starch turnover are positively, causally linked to productivity in A. thaliana
(Sulpice et al., 2009). L. japonicus appears to be an excellent system with which to test the
wider applicability of this finding.
7.2. A Suite of Lotus japonicus Starch Mutants Reveals Both Conserved and Novel
Features of Starch Metabolism
Prior the start of this PhD research project, an EMS mutagenised population had been set
up and screened for mutants impaired in the synthesis and degradation of starch in L.
japonicus. I identified the mutations for several of these mutants from the forward screen by
genetic mapping. For mutations not yet identified, their positions on the genetic map coupled
with the results of candidate gene searches suggest that they are likely to affect novel
proteins involved in the metabolism of starch. In addition, TILLING was used to confirm
that the mutations identified were indeed responsible for the mutant phenotype and to obtain
additional mutations in genes known to affect leaf starch content in other species. During the
Chapter 7: Conclusions and perspectives
course of this research project, I linked the characterisation of these forward and reverse
genetic mutations and the mutant phenotypes. In total, several deleterious mutations
affecting seven genes encoding key enzymes of the starch metabolism pathway were
identified. Arguably, this represents the most comprehensive collection to date of forward
and reverse genetic mutants impaired in the synthesis and degradation of transitory starch in
any species other than A. thaliana.
This unique collection of mutants represents a significant resource for uncovering new
information about the properties of starch-metabolising enzymes. As an illustration, I
discovered new information about the structure-function relationships of two key enzymes:
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) and glucan, water dikinase (GWD1) from the
study of the mutations affecting them. Further, this collection of mutants also constitutes a
valuable new resource for further studies on the metabolism of transitory and storage starch
in general, and on its importance in legumes in particular.
Characterisation of the mutant phenotypes I performed revealed that, although the main
components of the pathways of starch metabolism in leaves of L. japonicus are similar to
those in A. thaliana leaves, the role and importance of leaf starch accumulation and turnover
clearly differs between the two species. Whereas the inability to synthesise starch has much
less effect in L. japonicus than in A. thaliana, loss of the capacity for starch degradation has
much more profound consequences for plant growth and development. Whereas starchless
A. thaliana plants lacking plastidial phosphoglucomutase (PGM1) grow slowly relative to
wild-type plants, the equivalent mutant of L. japonicus grows normally even in short days.
In contrast, the loss of glucan water dikinase 1 (GWD1), required for starch degradation, has
a far greater effect on plant growth and fertility in L. japonicus than it does in A. thaliana.
Further investigation of these differences may lead to a better understanding of the
regulatory mechanisms linking the metabolism of starch with plant growth. Characterisation
of these mutants also provided insight into the nature of the pathway and importance of
starch for symbiotic nitrogen fixation in L. japonicus.
These results highlight the limit of extrapolating findings gained from study of A. thaliana
to other plant species, and illustrate the importance of performing comparative and
translational studies of important plant processes in several other model species, and in
crops. Species of legumes that include important crop plants exhibit several traits of
agronomic importance that cannot be studied in A. thaliana: they possess the capacity to
assimilate nitrogen and phosphorus via symbiosis with rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhiza,
respectively (Oldroyd and Downie, 2008). In addition, they also have certain aspects of their
biology that are unique to them. This include some aspect of their development (e.g. floral
patterning and seed biology; Dong et al., 2005 and Le et al., 2007), primary and secondary
metabolism (e.g. Horst et al., 2007; Dixon and Sumner, 2003), and disease resistance
Chapter 7: Conclusions and perspectives
(Frugoli et al., 2001). The collection of starch metabolism mutants of the model legume L.
japonicus I characterised offers the opportunity to examine the partitioning of carbon in
relation to several legume crop traits of agronomic importance including symbiotic nitrogen
fixation, seed metabolism and filling, and perenniality and re-growth.
7.3. Carbon allocation, re-growth vigour and perenniality in Lotus
Plants possess a highly plastic metabolism that allows them to cope with an environment
under constant change (day-length, temperature, availability of nutrients, pathogen attack,
etc). Among the major strategies used by plants to adapt to seasonal environmental
conditions are annual and perennial habits. With longer growing seasons, perennials have
higher above-ground biomass and have a more extensive root systems than their annual
relatives. Furthermore, perennials also generally have better access to resources, a more
conservative use of nutrients and tend to be more resistant to biotic and abiotic stresses than
annual crops (Cox et al., 2006). Because of these characteristics, perennial crop species are
expected to be less detrimentally affected by climate change and the development of their
cultivation offers the opportunity of a more sustainable agriculture systems.
The capacity for a vigorous re-growth is also an important trait for the use of perennial
crops as forage or for the production of biofuels. Meristem determinacy and processes of cell
death have been suggested to be major determinants of perenniality (Thomas et al., 2000).
The allocation of resources may also play an important role in determining the lifespan and
the capacity for vegetative re-growth in perennial plants. This hypothesis has received little
attention so far and no conclusive evidence has been presented to support it. In this study, I
tested the hypothesis that the partitioning of carbon, and more particularly the storage of
starch in roots, may play an important role for re-growth and the perenniality trait in
perennial legume species. For this, I used both the collection of starch metabolism mutants
of L. japonicus mentioned above and a unique collection of annual and perennial species of
the genus Lotus that displayed large variation in root starch content and re-growth vigour.
I was able to show that, although mutants of L. japonicus with strongly reduced root starch
content grow normally prior to cutting, they are impaired in their capacity to regenerate after
a harvest in which the photosynthetic parts of the plant are removed. The results I obtained
also revealed a good correlation between the amount of root starch and the vigour of re-
growth as well as the annual versus perennial growth habit, suggesting that root starch
reserves may be necessary and limiting for re-growth vigour in Lotus.It would be interesting
in the future to identify the genetic basis of such variation (i.e. identification of the genes
responsible for high root starch content and re-growth vigour).
Chapter 7: Conclusions and perspectives
Last but not least, the analyses I carried out also identified L. parviflorus (USDA
accession PI 415815) as a very promising Lotus species to develop and use as legume crop
for forage and pasture given its outstanding re-growth vigour and capacity to store large
amounts of root starch. The imposing root system and the large numbers of naturally
occurring nodules found in its roots in the growth conditions tested also suggest that this
accession may be highly resistant to unfavourable growth conditions and stresses such as
drought as well as particularly efficient in performing symbiotic nitrogen fixation.
Appendix 1
List of Figures
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species,
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species,
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase
Figure A4. Leaf starch granule micrographs of the gwd1-1 mutants and the MG-20 and Gifu
Figure A5. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with
Figure A5. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with
Figure A6. Shoot and root phenotypes of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants of L. japonicus.
List of Tables
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L.
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L.
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several
Appendix 1
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several
Table A4. Results of genotyping and phenotyping of the SL1833-1 andSL3001-1 TILLING
Table A4. Results of genotyping and phenotyping of the SL1833-1 andSL3001-1 TILLING
Table A5. Results of reciprocal crosses between a heterozygote (GWD1-3/gwd1-3) offspring
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection
Appendix 1
-- 66
-- PP
-- 33
-- 33
-- 33
-- 33
-- 66
-- PP
-- ,,
-- 66
-- PP
-- 33
-- 33
-- 33
-- 33
-- 66
-- PP
-- ,,
PP PP
PP PP
PP PP
Figure A1. Detailed pathways of transitory starch metabolism in A. thaliana
Proposed pathways of starch synthesis and degradation in A. thaliana leaves. Factors involving in the
regulation of these pathways are in blue or pruple (post-translational regulations) and in green
(regulation at the transcriptional and/or translational level); known protein interactions are in red.
Appendix 1
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and absolute
transcript level values. Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and absolute
transcript level values. Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table 1A.B
Absolute transcript levels
Name Leaf Petiole Stem Root Nod0d Nod21d Flower Pod10d Pod14d Pod20d Seed10d Seed12d Seed14d Seed16d Seed20d
PGI1 2094,1 838,1 661,6 508,5 578 684,1 465,4 726,1 717,9 876,6 1189,3 1086,5 1000,1 1039,5 1329,1
PGM1 1716,2 746,2 536,8 215,1 227,4 693,3 293 533,9 543,6 1048,2 571,4 581,3 517,2 512,6 938,2
APS1 6582,8 3132,6 2854,7 930 969,8 3922,6 1860,2 2492,4 2223,3 2400,9 1719,5 1765,7 1638,8 1722,9 1799,3
APL1 958,1 252,8 152,9 16,9 15,35 17 114,2 56,05 46,15 32,85 27,65 26,3 24,3 22,9 24,2
APL2a 80,1 193,5 227,9 222,7 176,3 733,4 273,9 657,6 381,4 492,5 536,6 458,5 376,7 303,1 259,9
APL2b 10,25 9,75 9,3 9,1 8,8 9,6 10,65 10,15 10,25 10,05 12,15 11,4 11,05 11,35 10,8
APL3 387,5 586,8 938,4 640,6 859,4 2219,2 760,5 1308,8 772,7 920,5 1393,9 1128,8 899,4 816 838,6
APL4 83,5 67,9 97,2 59,5 87,8 56 80,3 91,9 70,7 83,9 85,4 70,2 60,6 56,3 43,5
APL5 21,2 48,1 54,3 23,1 21,9 19,4 17,5 25,4 18,2 18,4 16,3 16,2 15,9 15,9 20,3
SS1 1275,75 365,75 310,45 82,15 98,4 111,55 390 327,6 313,25 318,1 214,25 226,9 216,85 226,85 225,2
SS2a 653,5 318,6 273,7 147,9 153,4 215 218,5 180,7 164,6 140,4 294,1 330,4 271,8 290,6 193,8
SS2b 68,2 22,45 35 20,75 15,3 10,2 12,95 10,9 15,6 10,6 10,7 10,25 9,95 10,2 10,85
SS5 508,8 270,5 218 35,4 59,4 903,5 78 263,8 215,2 393,5 221,4 204,3 201,8 208,3 438,1
GBSS1a 4990,2 2620,3 1985,7 1172,8 1369,4 2845,6 1708,3 5454,8 4084,5 3150,4 6559,2 5894,1 5663,2 5351,2 4383,7
GBSS1b 1439,5 958,9 557,6 62,7 115,3 346,3 389,5 548,4 383,4 410,4 617,9 522,1 429,8 366,3 399,3
SBE1 674 533,4 574,4 307,9 370,4 947,8 296,4 969,4 656,8 510,4 858,2 783,1 718,7 658 674
ISA1 641,8 241,6 172,2 99,6 197 117,9 120,5 336,9 270,7 351,1 396,6 369 363,8 334,8 430,8
ISA2 483,4 178 165,4 118,7 134,6 202,1 142,7 198,2 170,7 182,6 207,1 206 238,7 249,4 207,6
LDA 180,3 70,75 83,9 32,65 34,6 56,85 48,75 87,7 109,8 157,65 107,65 111,9 112,9 121,35 192,45
GWD1 542,8 218,5 296,1 164,7 244,3 245 143,8 179 206,5 200,6 140,9 143,4 130,7 135,6 149,4
GWD3 437,9 138,1 122,8 75,9 90,1 46,7 112,8 82,9 86,5 63 81,4 91,7 84,1 93 66,7
AMY1 42,8 37,7 25,8 31,7 31 39 29,9 35,2 35,2 34,9 30,5 28,2 36,2 33,8 37
AMY2 694,4 289,1 420,6 81,2 117,6 48,9 687,2 178,5 353,7 343,6 51 60,6 51,8 59,7 160,5
AMY3a 580,2 382,7 309,4 290,7 320,8 537,4 274,1 200,5 208,3 276,8 395,4 402,4 354,6 323,8 275,5
AMY3b 34,8 29,4 41,6 42,9 50,5 31,1 34,3 37,6 48,2 55,9 59 73,8 61,4 78,2 52,3
BAM1 2961,9 492,3 639,5 765,15 875,2 223,8 531,4 254,7 437,15 715,85 537,55 602,45 565,15 537,7 514,8
BAM3a 81,6 34,8 41,05 124,2 26,5 292,25 29,5 37,45 135,9 199 34,5 40,95 39 38,15 59
BAM3b 36,8 68,9 81,2 33,4 42 35,1 273,9 508 154,8 169,2 155,9 148,9 131,6 91,2 60,4
BAM5 430,9 1058,8 1192,8 690,2 477,8 650,5 1300,8 10493,6 11607,2 6200,8 13779,5 14572,2 14730,5 13734,2 9890
BAM6 369,5 98,4 65,8 21,1 18,9 22,4 35,2 77,5 48,7 28,4 154,9 145,3 98,3 78,9 40,9
BAM7 143,35 97,05 93,2 103,4 115,4 137,45 101,7 148,75 142,85 159,45 175,85 167,85 150,05 144,6 184,75
BAM8 313,3 255,7 223,1 230,3 261,7 367 238,3 315,9 333 310,9 429 455,4 448,4 417,9 313,6
BAM9 758 321,2 514,8 763,8 947,1 540,8 1232,7 151,6 355,4 296 246,4 355,8 408,1 361,4 301,4
DPE1 390,8 406,9 288,8 315,7 371,9 542,6 111 262,1 262,9 278 228,8 266,3 256,7 298 337,2
DPE2 1285,95 552,95 626,25 282,75 398,3 592,55 377,7 527,25 510,55 496,55 621,15 657,55 646,1 596,05 544,7
PHS2a 1793,55 1179,85 1203,9 435,8 569,95 627,85 1220,3 1676,5 1269,6 1388,6 1197 1194 1044,05 969,3 980,55
PHS2b 703,1 352,3 302,8 169,4 205,6 250,7 346,3 288,4 262,3 182,8 285,4 301,4 263,8 272,2 156,6
MEX1 1688,9 481,3 405,9 191 225,3 225 258,5 353,7 331,1 500,9 431,6 471,1 419,8 416,5 602,7
SUS1 3547 9362,4 16322,5 14008,9 12599,8 9508,3 8877,3 11128,5 9270,7 3245,7 5114,7 5444,2 6651,2 7976,5 4788,9
SUS2 141,5 274 397,6 431,4 185,6 101,8 393,1 415,5 481,5 883,4 313 369,4 324,9 410,9 782,6
SUS3 714,6 4420,5 10221,1 13266,7 9139,9 17506,3 7509,3 6175,1 7173,7 5388 6052,8 6536 6061 6443,8 6892,8
SUS4 13,9 15,4 14,9 13,7 12,3 15,3 15,3 14,2 16,6 15,6 14,4 16,8 17,3 19,2 16,4
SE absolute transcript levels
Name Leaf Petiole Stem Root Nod0d Nod21d Flower Pod10d Pod14d Pod20d Seed10d Seed12d Seed14d Seed16d Seed20d
PGI1 63,2 37,8 21,4 26,2 27,2 37,1 24,4 3,9 36,6 22,3 6,5 21,1 61,5 9,6 42,8
PGM1 73,7 4,2 14,3 19,7 7,1 45,9 22,2 21,2 29,8 55,2 3,0 27,6 27,5 31,4 130,7
APS1 130,1 54,9 96,0 42,6 28,4 287,1 47,9 44,3 15,7 32,6 58,4 27,5 40,8 21,8 88,1
APL1 22,0 14,7 15,2 0,4 0,5 0,3 5,8 1,1 0,7 1,9 0,9 1,1 1,7 0,7 1,4
APL2a 8,8 6,1 3,5 18,6 18,1 5,0 14,9 16,0 5,7 43,7 23,9 28,3 74,2 46,2 13,4
APL2b 0,3 0,1 0,4 0,4 0,3 0,4 0,3 0,3 0,4 1,0 0,7 0,2 0,7 0,5 0,0
APL3 106,6 25,0 60,7 41,4 26,7 55,5 60,2 41,4 53,5 47,2 171,2 164,2 123,2 21,3 53,1
APL4 8,4 8,2 7,3 9,0 4,9 5,4 3,0 13,2 4,2 2,8 4,1 4,8 8,8 8,3 2,3
APL5 0,8 5,0 3,9 1,9 0,7 0,5 1,4 1,9 1,7 1,9 0,4 0,6 0,8 0,6 1,8
SS1 65,4 15,0 24,7 4,1 1,3 5,8 14,9 1,3 2,6 4,5 4,9 8,1 14,3 4,2 27,1
SS2a 17,9 7,9 21,2 11,5 10,7 21,3 5,5 9,8 9,8 6,0 15,8 22,6 22,9 0,7 16,9
SS2b 5,5 9,0 22,6 3,8 0,7 0,3 0,6 0,2 1,4 0,6 0,6 0,6 0,5 0,7 0,6
SS5 18,5 13,2 9,9 4,9 1,8 20,8 4,4 3,3 9,6 9,4 20,0 9,7 20,2 24,1 38,1
GBSS1a 741,7 264,9 78,5 105,3 48,1 162,8 65,6 61,0 12,3 159,9 205,8 147,6 251,3 143,4 113,9
GBSS1b 71,5 48,6 9,8 1,2 6,5 2,6 33,3 8,6 16,6 20,9 32,4 15,9 35,3 43,7 6,0
SBE1 130,1 43,5 29,8 13,0 27,5 20,0 17,1 7,1 7,6 15,3 44,7 53,3 53,5 18,0 85,1
ISA1 75,0 21,5 8,3 14,8 15,1 1,6 4,2 19,6 13,4 13,5 23,3 18,6 13,5 5,7 21,3
ISA2 47,9 10,8 8,4 5,6 9,2 14,5 4,0 6,5 3,5 8,9 3,6 6,3 6,7 1,8 4,7
LDA 16,6 3,7 12,5 3,0 2,7 2,5 1,5 2,9 4,8 13,7 4,2 3,1 4,0 11,5 1,6
GWD1 43,6 10,9 3,7 18,4 12,2 47,4 10,8 0,9 9,9 12,7 4,6 12,9 15,3 0,9 17,2
GWD3 13,1 0,7 9,8 1,6 2,8 7,2 6,1 3,0 2,5 0,9 5,0 7,6 5,3 8,3 9,4
AMY1 6,0 5,2 0,8 0,2 1,5 3,4 1,0 3,0 3,2 3,2 0,7 2,2 3,6 4,3 6,3
AMY2 53,8 13,3 3,3 2,7 2,9 4,7 29,3 9,4 11,8 23,1 1,5 5,5 3,9 6,3 12,9
AMY3a 20,6 44,5 20,2 22,6 21,7 16,2 6,8 3,9 3,1 24,7 10,3 41,7 24,2 7,7 46,4
AMY3b 2,0 0,9 3,1 1,4 1,0 4,4 1,4 3,2 2,4 6,4 2,7 7,0 4,1 3,3 10,8
BAM1 424,4 35,7 60,6 70,1 47,7 12,0 62,0 16,7 11,7 68,7 72,6 55,4 23,8 29,2 54,8
BAM3a 7,8 2,7 6,0 18,8 0,7 4,6 0,9 3,1 22,9 18,4 2,2 8,9 2,4 2,0 16,9
BAM3b 3,4 9,3 15,1 2,5 1,2 1,3 22,5 21,0 5,8 5,6 1,6 3,3 25,4 16,9 8,8
BAM5 18,2 70,0 7,8 26,6 53,7 22,9 13,6 158,4 167,8 440,7 21,4 362,0 599,2 421,2 1284,3
BAM6 19,0 7,7 11,4 0,6 1,1 1,4 2,0 1,6 3,4 2,4 2,9 4,2 8,0 2,2 4,8
BAM7 4,9 9,5 7,7 5,2 3,4 2,5 3,7 3,9 9,2 3,9 10,1 12,5 4,0 6,0 14,1
BAM8 14,6 23,3 11,3 16,0 16,8 5,6 7,4 15,0 27,0 12,4 19,1 24,8 17,9 5,9 18,2
BAM9 171,8 26,1 15,1 75,0 39,1 33,1 75,2 8,6 35,5 34,4 39,5 51,9 47,1 47,4 11,4
DPE1 25,4 32,9 4,7 6,0 13,6 49,5 5,0 0,7 10,0 7,7 16,7 6,0 12,1 17,1 15,4
DPE2 35,6 10,2 5,4 12,4 4,1 54,0 1,0 11,6 14,8 30,4 12,1 69,2 65,3 14,9 37,5
PHS2a 51,1 61,7 46,2 5,9 24,5 33,3 70,1 20,3 65,5 58,9 34,4 85,8 81,1 4,4 46,8
PHS2b 20,6 12,1 23,3 5,3 3,1 2,6 22,6 11,5 16,1 5,2 13,4 13,0 26,7 8,3 21,0
MEX1 39,6 46,2 12,6 16,5 22,3 14,8 13,7 21,1 22,5 36,0 20,4 65,6 11,2 9,5 6,3
SUS1 176,91 1303,19 257,01 319,46 233,06 620,81 2551,06 104,80 375,40 257,24 191,34 530,73 637,04 165,07 572,40
SUS2 16,48 25,40 20,71 10,91 3,37 12,41 107,14 14,24 45,52 48,22 7,84 19,24 7,83 50,11 102,34
SUS3 31,52 662,68 281,35 358,94 250,86 532,37 2893,84 120,62 328,44 225,18 58,27 790,53 579,93 127,59 507,10
SUS4 0,91 1,56 0,70 1,45 0,49 1,84 1,84 0,80 0,38 0,27 0,58 0,47 2,08 0,89 0,50
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and absolute
transcript level values.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table 1A.C
Log2 transcript levels
Name Leaf Petiole Stem Root Nod0d Nod21d Flower Pod10d Pod14d Pod20d Seed10d Seed12d Seed14d Seed16d Seed20d
PGI1 11,0 9,7 9,4 9,0 9,2 9,4 8,9 9,5 9,5 9,8 10,2 10,1 10,0 10,0 10,4
PGM1 10,7 9,5 9,1 7,7 7,8 9,4 8,2 9,1 9,1 10,0 9,2 9,2 9,0 9,0 9,9
APS1 12,7 11,6 11,5 9,9 9,9 11,9 10,9 11,3 11,1 11,2 10,7 10,8 10,7 10,8 10,8
APL1 9,9 8,0 7,3 4,1 3,9 4,1 6,8 5,8 5,5 5,0 4,8 4,7 4,6 4,5 4,6
APL2a 6,3 7,6 7,8 7,8 7,5 9,5 8,1 9,4 8,6 8,9 9,1 8,8 8,6 8,2 8,0
APL2b 3,4 3,3 3,2 3,2 3,1 3,3 3,4 3,3 3,4 3,3 3,6 3,5 3,5 3,5 3,4
APL3 8,6 9,2 9,9 9,3 9,7 11,1 9,6 10,4 9,6 9,8 10,4 10,1 9,8 9,7 9,7
APL4 6,4 6,1 6,6 5,9 6,5 5,8 6,3 6,5 6,1 6,4 6,4 6,1 5,9 5,8 5,4
APL5 4,4 5,6 5,8 4,5 4,5 4,3 4,1 4,7 4,2 4,2 4,0 4,0 4,0 4,0 4,3
SS1 10,3 8,5 8,3 6,4 6,6 6,8 8,6 8,4 8,3 8,3 7,7 7,8 7,8 7,8 7,8
SS2a 9,4 8,3 8,1 7,2 7,3 7,7 7,8 7,5 7,4 7,1 8,2 8,4 8,1 8,2 7,6
SS2b 6,1 4,5 5,1 4,4 3,9 3,4 3,7 3,4 4,0 3,4 3,4 3,4 3,3 3,4 3,4
SS5 9,0 8,1 7,8 5,1 5,9 9,8 6,3 8,0 7,7 8,6 7,8 7,7 7,7 7,7 8,8
GBSS1a 12,3 11,4 11,0 10,2 10,4 11,5 10,7 12,4 12,0 11,6 12,7 12,5 12,5 12,4 12,1
GBSS1b 10,5 9,9 9,1 6,0 6,8 8,4 8,6 9,1 8,6 8,7 9,3 9,0 8,7 8,5 8,6
SBE1 9,4 9,1 9,2 8,3 8,5 9,9 8,2 9,9 9,4 9,0 9,7 9,6 9,5 9,4 9,4
ISA1 9,3 7,9 7,4 6,6 7,6 6,9 6,9 8,4 8,1 8,5 8,6 8,5 8,5 8,4 8,8
ISA2 8,9 7,5 7,4 6,9 7,1 7,7 7,2 7,6 7,4 7,5 7,7 7,7 7,9 8,0 7,7
LDA 7,5 6,1 6,4 5,0 5,1 5,8 5,6 6,5 6,8 7,3 6,8 6,8 6,8 6,9 7,6
GWD1 9,1 7,8 8,2 7,4 7,9 7,9 7,2 7,5 7,7 7,6 7,1 7,2 7,0 7,1 7,2
GWD3 8,8 7,1 6,9 6,2 6,5 5,5 6,8 6,4 6,4 6,0 6,3 6,5 6,4 6,5 6,1
AMY1 5,4 5,2 4,7 5,0 5,0 5,3 4,9 5,1 5,1 5,1 4,9 4,8 5,2 5,1 5,2
AMY2 9,4 8,2 8,7 6,3 6,9 5,6 9,4 7,5 8,5 8,4 5,7 5,9 5,7 5,9 7,3
AMY3a 9,2 8,6 8,3 8,2 8,3 9,1 8,1 7,6 7,7 8,1 8,6 8,7 8,5 8,3 8,1
AMY3b 5,1 4,9 5,4 5,4 5,7 5,0 5,1 5,2 5,6 5,8 5,9 6,2 5,9 6,3 5,7
BAM1 11,5 8,9 9,3 9,6 9,8 7,8 9,1 8,0 8,8 9,5 9,1 9,2 9,1 9,1 9,0
BAM3a 6,4 5,1 5,4 7,0 4,7 8,2 4,9 5,2 7,1 7,6 5,1 5,4 5,3 5,3 5,9
BAM3b 5,2 6,1 6,3 5,1 5,4 5,1 8,1 9,0 7,3 7,4 7,3 7,2 7,0 6,5 5,9
BAM5 8,8 10,0 10,2 9,4 8,9 9,3 10,3 13,4 13,5 12,6 13,8 13,8 13,8 13,7 13,3
BAM6 8,5 6,6 6,0 4,4 4,2 4,5 5,1 6,3 5,6 4,8 7,3 7,2 6,6 6,3 5,4
BAM7 7,2 6,6 6,5 6,7 6,9 7,1 6,7 7,2 7,2 7,3 7,5 7,4 7,2 7,2 7,5
BAM8 8,3 8,0 7,8 7,8 8,0 8,5 7,9 8,3 8,4 8,3 8,7 8,8 8,8 8,7 8,3
BAM9 9,6 8,3 9,0 9,6 9,9 9,1 10,3 7,2 8,5 8,2 7,9 8,5 8,7 8,5 8,2
DPE1 8,6 8,7 8,2 8,3 8,5 9,1 6,8 8,0 8,0 8,1 7,8 8,1 8,0 8,2 8,4
DPE2 10,3 9,1 9,3 8,1 8,6 9,2 8,6 9,0 9,0 9,0 9,3 9,4 9,3 9,2 9,1
PHS2a 10,8 10,2 10,2 8,8 9,2 9,3 10,3 10,7 10,3 10,4 10,2 10,2 10,0 9,9 9,9
PHS2b 9,5 8,5 8,2 7,4 7,7 8,0 8,4 8,2 8,0 7,5 8,2 8,2 8,0 8,1 7,3
MEX1 10,7 8,9 8,7 7,6 7,8 7,8 8,0 8,5 8,4 9,0 8,8 8,9 8,7 8,7 9,2
SUS1 11,8 13,2 14,0 13,8 13,6 13,2 13,1 13,4 13,2 11,7 12,3 12,4 12,7 13,0 12,2
SUS2 7,1 8,1 8,6 8,8 7,5 6,7 8,6 8,7 8,9 9,8 8,3 8,5 8,3 8,7 9,6
SUS3 9,5 12,1 13,3 13,7 13,2 14,1 12,9 12,6 12,8 12,4 12,6 12,7 12,6 12,7 12,8
SUS4 3,8 3,9 3,9 3,8 3,6 3,9 3,9 3,8 4,1 4,0 3,8 4,1 4,1 4,3 4,0
SE Log2 transcript levels
Name Leaf Petiole Stem Root Nod0d Nod21d Flower Pod10d Pod14d Pod20d Seed10d Seed12d Seed14d Seed16d Seed20d
PGI1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0
PGM1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2
APS1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1
APL1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1
APL2a 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,3 0,2 0,1
APL2b 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0
APL3 0,4 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,2 0,2 0,0 0,1
APL4 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,2 0,1
APL5 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1
SS1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,2
SS2a 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1
SS2b 0,1 0,5 0,9 0,3 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1
SS5 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1
GBSS1a 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0
GBSS1b 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0
SBE1 0,3 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,2
ISA1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1
ISA2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0
LDA 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0
GWD1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,2 0,1 0,3 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,2
GWD3 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2
AMY1 0,2 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,2
AMY2 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1
AMY3a 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,3
AMY3b 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,3
BAM1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2
BAM3a 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,3 0,1 0,1 0,3 0,1 0,1 0,4
BAM3b 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,3 0,3 0,2
BAM5 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,2
BAM6 0,1 0,1 0,3 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,2
BAM7 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1
BAM8 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1
BAM9 0,3 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,2 0,2 0,2 0,2 0,2 0,1
DPE1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1
DPE2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,1
PHS2a 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1
PHS2b 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,2
MEX1 0,0 0,1 0,0 0,1 0,2 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,1 0,2 0,0 0,0 0,0
SUS1 0,07 0,22 0,02 0,03 0,03 0,10 1,34 0,01 0,06 0,12 0,05 0,14 0,14 0,03 0,16
SUS2 0,16 0,14 0,07 0,04 0,03 0,18 0,93 0,05 0,14 0,08 0,04 0,07 0,04 0,17 0,20
SUS3 0,06 0,22 0,04 0,04 0,04 0,04 1,45 0,03 0,07 0,06 0,01 0,17 0,14 0,03 0,10
SUS4 0,09 0,15 0,07 0,15 0,06 0,17 0,39 0,08 0,03 0,02 0,06 0,04 0,17 0,07 0,04
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and absolute
transcript level values.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A1. L. japonicus starch metabolism genes and their corresponding probe sets and absolute
transcript level values. Continued.
A. Genes and the name and transcript levels of their corresponding probe sets. Gene names followed
by _# (e.g. SS1_1, SS1_2 correspond to partial sequences of the same gene locus) while gene
names followed by a or b correspond to different isoforms. In cases where multiple probe sets
corresponded to a unique gene locus (highlighted in pale yellow), or when a gene had several
corresponding clones or LjSGA sequences, and therefore multiple corresponding probe sets
(highlighted in yellow), a median value (written in red) was calculated. B. Absolute transcript levels and
their associated standard error (SE) values (n=3). Coloured in grey are transcripts whose expression is
too low (below ca. 60) to be considered as significant. Above this threshold, transcripts with weak
(values between 60 and 200), medium (between 200 and 1000) and high level of expression (above
1000) are highlighted in white, yellow, and red, respectively. C. Absolute transcript levels and their
associated SE. Coloured in grey are transcripts whose expression is considered as background signal
(below ca. 6).
Appendix 1
A Plastidial PGI
non-plastidial PGI
A Plastidial PGI
non-plastidial PGI
Plastidial PGI
non-plastidial PGI
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
SBEII
SBEIII
SBEII
SBEIII
SBEII
SBEIII
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Eudicot
Monocot AMY1-like
Eudicot
Monocot AMY1-like
Eudicot
Monocot AMY1-like
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
BAM5/6
BAM5/6
BAM5/6
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
New PHS isoform ?
New PHS isoform ?
New PHS isoform ?
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A2. Phylograms of starch metabolism genes families in several plant species, including L.
japonicus. Continued.
Protein sequences were retrieved from NCBI and aligned using the program Clustal W2. The
phylogenetic trees were drawn using Dendroscope. Phylograms were drawn for of all the families of
starch metabolism genes for which homologs could be identified in the genome of L. japonicus (framed
in red). The name given for each sequence corresponds to the protein accession number followed by
the organism name. Their corresponding protein sequence, gene name and sequence together with
other links and depository informations can be readily obtained from browsing the NCBI database with
the accession number given on the phylograms. Genes and the name and transcript levels of their
corresponding probe sets. Gene names followed by _# (e.g. SS1_1, SS1_2 correspond to partial
sequences of the same gene locus) while gene names followed by a or b correspond to different
isoforms. A. PGI, phosphoglucoisomerase; B. PGM, phosphoglucomutase; C. AGPase, ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase; D. SS, starch synthase; E. SBE, starch branching enzyme; F. DBE, starch
debranching enzyme; G. GWD, glucan, water dikinase; H. AMY, alpha-amylase; I. BAM, beta-
amylases; J. DPE, disproportionating enzyme/transglucosidase; K. PHS, alpha-glucan phosphorylase;
L. MEX1, maltose transporter 1. Abbreviations of the plant species names: ARATH, Arabidopsis
thaliana; VITVI, Vitis vinifera; POPTR, Populus trichocarpa; LOTJA, Lotus japonicus; ORYSA, Orysa
sativa; SORBI, Sorghum bicolor.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A3. Comparison of the amino acid sequences encoded by L. japonicus AGPase subunits and
SS5 genes with those of other species. Continued.
A. AGPase proteins sequence alignment. The alignment was made with the programs Clustal W2
(default settings) and GeneDoc. Stricly conserved residues are highlighted in black, less conserved
residues are in grey. Residues framed in red are residues that are not conserved in a unique or small
group of protein sequences (their corresponding name on the left is highlighted in red) while showing a
high level of conservation across all other protein sequences analysed. Several of these residues have
been shown in previous studies to be important for the AGPase enzyme activity as described in
Chapter 4, and their change to another residues is likely to lead to a lost of protein function. B.
Alignment of the SS5 protein sequence of several plant species showing the absence of predicted
amino acid sequence in 3 and 5 of the A. thaliana and Orysa sativa proteins in comparison to those of
the other species analysed. Abbreviations: ARATH, Arabidopsis thaliana; VITVI, Vitis vinifera; POPTR,
Populus trichocarpa; LOTJA, Lotus japonicus; ORYSA, Orysa sativa; SORBI, Sorghum bicolor.
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
Protein Clone/LjSGA accession Status Sequence
LjPGI1 chr1.LjT29N14.30.nd Complete MASISGICSSSPTLNKYQNQTPSSTSFSIRRRTHLLPTFPTRTKLPLTRSVAREAPADLS
AVTKHRLEKNPAALWQRYVDWLYQHKDLGLYIDVSRVGFTDEFLLEMEPRFQAAFRAMAE
LEKGAIANPDEGRMVGHYWLRDSTRAPNSFLKAKIDDTLDAICRFADDIVSGKIKPPSSP
EGRFTQILSVGIGGSALGPQFVAEALAPDNPPLKIRFIDNTDPAGIDHQIAQLGSELAST
LVIVISKSGGTPETRNGLLEVQKAFREAGLSFPKQGVAITQENSLLDNTARIEGWLARFP
MFDWVGGRTSEMSAVGLLPAALQSIDIREMIAGASLMDEATRSTVIRNNPAALLALCWYW
ATDGVGSKDMVILPYKDSMLLFSRYLQQLVMESLGKEFDLDGNRVNQGLSVYGNKGSTDQ
HAYIQQLREGVHNFFATFIEVLRDRPPGHDWELEPGVTCGDYLFGMLQGTRSALYANDRE
SITVTVQEVTPRSVGALIALYERAVGIYASIVNINAYHQPGVEAGKKAAGEVLALQKRVL
TVLNEASCKEPVEPLTLEEVADRCHAPEDIEIIYKIIAHMAANDRALIAEGSCGSPRSIK
VFLGECNVDELYA
LjPGM1 chr5.CM0953.200.nc Complete MAFSSSSRLDHFNIISAFKPQNSILPPSLKPSSYLPSSSFKFRNLLPFRIRYASTIRATS
SSSSPSSPSTTIDQSDDGIKINSIPTKPIEGQKTGTSGLRKKVKVFMEENYLANWIQALF
NSLPPEDYKNGVLVLGGDGRYFNKEAAQIIIKIAAGNGVGKILVGKEGVLSTPAVSAVIR
KRKANGGFIMSASHNPGGPEYDWGIKFNYSSGQPAPESITDKIYGNTLSISEIKIADIPD
VYLSNVGVTEFGSFSVEVIDPVSDYLELLETVFDFQLIKGLLSRPDFRFIFDAMHAVTGA
YAKPIFVDKLGASPDSILNGIPLEDFGHGHPDPNLTYAKDLVNILYAENGPDFGAASDGD
GDRNMILGRSFFVTPSDSVAVIAANAKEAIPYFKNGVNGLARSMPTSGALDRVAEKLNLP
FFEVPTGWKFFGNLMDAGKLSICGEESFGTGSDHIREKDGIWAVLAWLSIIAHRNKDKKP
EEKLISVSDVMMEYWATYGRNFFSRYDYEECESEGANKMIAYLRETVSNSKPGDKYGSYV
LQFADDYTYTDPVDGSVVSKQGVRFVFTDGSRIIYRLSGTGSAGATVRVYIEQFEADVSK
HDVDAQIALKPLIDLALSVSKLKDFTGREKPTVIT
LjAPS1 chr2.CM0191.60.nc Complete MACMAAIGVLKVPCSSSSSSTSSNVGRKPTSRSLLSFSASQLSGDKVSGAVVAPGRGSSN
RRSPVIVSPKAVSDSQNSQTCLDPDASRSVLGIILGGGAGTRLYPLTKKRAKPAVPLGAN
YRLIDIPVSNCLNSNVSKIYVLTQFNSASLNRHLSRAYASNMGGYKNEGFVEVLAAQQSP
ENPNWFQGTADAVRQYLWLFEEHNVLEFLVLAGDHLYRMDYEKFIQAHRETDADITVAAL
PMDEQRATAFGLMKIDEEGRIIEFAEKPKGEQLKAMKVDTTILGLDDERAKEMPFIASMG
IYVVSKNVMLDLLREKFPGANDFGSEVIPGATSIGMRVQAYLYDGYWEDIGTIEAFYNAN
LGITKKPVPDFSFYDRSSPIYTQPRYLPPSKMLDADITDSVIGEGCVIKNCKIHHSVVGL
RSCVSEGAIIEDTLLMGADYYETDADKRFLAAKGSVPIGIGRNSHIKRAIIDKNARIGEN
VKIINTDNVQEAARETEGYFIKSGIVTVIKDALIPSGTVI
LjAPL1 chr4.CM0387.180.nc Complete MAVSAGGQIMLSSNVQLRGPTGLGCRNWRLVKFCDGEIMGRKLELQRGSGVTKNVKKQHI
SMSLTADVTSQSKLRDLDLEKRDARTVVAIILGGGAGTRLFPLTKRRAKPAVPIGGAYRL
IDVPMSNCINSGINKVYILTQFNSASLNRHISRAYNSGTGVTFGDGYVEVLAATQTPGEQ
GKNWFQGTADAVRQFHWLFEDARSKDIEDVLILSGDHLYRMDYMDFVQNHRESGADITLS
CLPMDDSRASDFGLMKIDNKGRVLSFSEKPKGADLKAMQVDTTVLGLSKDEAIKKPYIAS
MGVYVFKKEILLNLLRWRFPTANDFGSEVIPASAAEFYMKAYLFNDYWEDIGTIRSFFEA
NLALTEHPSKFSFYDAAKPMYTSRRNLPPSKIDNSKIVDSIIAHGSFLNNAFIEHSVVGI
RSRINSNVHLKDTVMLGADFYETETEAAALLAEGGVPVGIGENTKIRECIIDKNARIGKN
VIIANSEGIKEADRSSEGFYIRSGVTVVLKNSVIKDGLVI
LjAPL2a chr1.LjT34C24.40.nc Complete MSATNLVKVSEGAGRSTGSGFWGETTRGSQKASFLSIQSCKSKISQTHIKVRNFKPRGTG
VARAVITSDINEEESTAFQESHTFETSKADPKSVASIILGGGAGTRLFPLTSRRAKPAVP
IGGCYRLIDIPMSNCINSGIRKIFILTQFNSFSLNRHLARAYNFGNGMNFGNGFVEVLAA
TQTPGEAGKKWFQGTADAVRQFIWVFEDAKNKNVEHILILSGDHLYRMDYMDFVQKHIDT
NADITVSCLPMDDSRASDFGLMKIDKTGRIVQFAEKPKGSDLKAMHVDTTLLGLSPEEAK
NNPYIASMGVYVFRTEVLLKLLRWSHSSCNDFGSEIIPSAVSDHNVQAYLFNDYWEDIGT
IKSFFDANLALTEHPPKFEFYDPKTPFFTSPRFLPPSKVEKCKIVDAIISHGCFLRECNV
QHSIVGIRSRLESGVELQDTMMMGADYYQTETEIASLVAEGKVPIGVGENTKIRNCIIDK
NAKIGRNVVIANTDGVQEAERPKEGFYIRSGITVTLKNATIKDGTVI
LjAPL2b chr5.CM0077.680.nc Complete MDSAFATLNANLVITNKVSSFWGENTRGNFNTRFCSIPSCQSSKSRKSKPGLVYAVYTPD
INKESLTFQGPIIQSPKANPDNVAAIILGGGAGKRLFPLTSTRAKPAVPIGGCYRLIDIP
MSNCINSGIRKVYVLTQYNSFSLNGHLSRTYNFGNGVNFGDGFVEVLAATQTPGEAGKKW
FQGTADAVRQFIWVFEDAKNKNIEHIMIISGDHLCRMDYMKLLEKHIWTNSDITVSCVPM
DESHASDYDLLRIDRKGQIIQFAEKPKGSDLKAMHVDTTLLGLPAEEARKHPYIASMGVY
AFRTETLLKLLRWSCPSCNDFGSELIPSALRDHKVQAYLFRDYWKDIGTIKSFFDANLDL
TGQNPKFELYDSKTPFFTSPRFLPPTKVVKSKIVDAIISHGCFLSECSVQRSIVGVRSRL
ESGADLQDTMMMGADYYQTDSEVKSLLAEGKVPVGVGENTKIRNCIIDKNAKIGRNVVIV
NSDGVQEADKPTEGFYIRSGIVVIVKNATIKDGTTI
LjAPL3 chr1.CM0113.470.nd Corrected MASACVTLKANTTHLANSEKGFLFGQDNGFLGERVKGAWGMNQLGKCLTAQKRVKSGAVS
AVLTSNDAKEALTLQVPSFLRRKADPKNVISIILGGGPGTHLFPLTKRSATPAVPVGGCY
RLIDIPMSNCINSSLNKIFVLTQFNSASLNRHISRTYFGNGVNFGDGFVEVLAATQTPGE
AGKKWFQGTADAVRQFTWVFEDAKNRNVENVLILAGDHLYRMDYMDLVQSHVDRNADITV
SCAAVGNSRASDYGLVKVDDRGSIIQFSEKPKGADLKAMQADTSLLGLSLHDALESPYIA
SMGVYVFKTDVLLKLLKWRYPTSNDFGSEIIPSAVKEYDVQSYIFRDYWEDIGTIKSFYD
ANLALTEESPKFKFYDPKTPIFTSPGFLPPTKIDKCRVVDAIISHGCFLRECTVQHSIVG
ERSRLDYGVDLQDTIMMGADYYQTESEIASLLAEGKVPIGIGRNTKIRNCIIDKNAKIGK
DVIITNKDGVQEADRSEDGFYIRSGITIVMEKATIEDGTVI
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
LjAPL4 chr3.CM0216.100.nd Complete MVSAACVAWTTSSQLAKSKKDSTFLQDDGFLGERIIKGSLSYSPWINNQLATSWRGKESV
KKAKPGVVSAVLTSNDTKESLSIQVPTFLRRKADPKNVVSIILGERPGIQLLPLTKRAAT
PAVPVGGCYRLIDIPTSNCINSGINKVFVLTQFNSASLNRHISRTYFGNGINFGDGCVEV
LAATQTPGEAGKNWFQGTADAVRQFTWVFEDAKHTNIENVLILAGDHLYRMDYMDLVQSH
VDRNADITVSCAAVDDSRASDYGLVKVDGRGRIIQFSEKPKGSDLKEMQVDTSLFGLSPQ
EALKSPYIASMGVYVFKTDVLLNLLKWRYPTSNDFGSEIIPAAVKEYNVQGYFFGDYWED
IGTIKSFYDANMALTEENPMFKFYDPKTPIYTSPRFLPPTKIDKCRIVDAIISHGCFLRE
SSVQHSIVGERSRLDYGVELRDTIMMGADYYQTESEIASLLAEGKVPIGIGKNTKIRKCI
IDKNAKIGKDVIIMNKDGVQEADRAEDGFYIRSGIPIIMEKATIEDGRVI
LjAPL5 LjB06P23.100.nc Complete MLGSKRPYFHHGKVLSSSFSVSRVNLLHSKNAAFGFPSGKFSSVTQRKTTKRSLATSTLA
DVANEFMALRSARLGGPAANSKTVASIILCGGAGTRLFPLTQKRAKPAVPIGGCYRLVDI
PLSNCINSGINKIFVLTQFNSRSLNRHIARTYNLGGCVNFGGGFVEILAATQTPGESGNK
WFRGTADAVRQFLWMFEDAEHKNIENILILCGDQLYRMDYMELVQKHVNSCADISVSCLP
VDASRASDFGLVKVDERGRVRQFLEKPKGESLRSMHVDTSVFGLSAQEARKFPYIASMGI
YVFKIDVLLKLLRSSYPNANDFGSEVIPMAAKDFNVQACLFSGYWEDIGTIKSFFDANLA
LMDQPPKFQLYDQSRPIFTSPRFLPPSKMEKCQVLNSLISDGCFLRECSVEHSIVGIRSK
IDSGVQLKDTLMMGADYYQTEAEIAALLAAGNVPIGIGKNTKIMNCIIDKNARIGNNVII
ANKENVQEADRPSEGFYIRSGITVVLKDSVISNGTII
LjSS1_1 LjT38J19.80.nd Pseudo/partial MVWSTGMGVP*LGKGACS*HG*SCQLFEGAVVTADTDCNK*ARVIRGR*QLVKVDMVCMN
(encodes for C-term.) Y*AAEKVFSVVCL*TIFWITNGIDITEWDPSSDEHIACSYSADDLSGKVKCKIALQKELG
LPVRPDIPLIGFIGRLDYQKGIDLIREAIPELMEYDVQFVMLGSGSSIYEDWMRAAESSY
RDKFRGWVGFNVPVSHRITAGCDILLMPSIFEPCGLNQLYAMRYGTIPVVHETGGLRDTV
QSFNPFAEGGNAEGTGWTFSPLSKESMLVGLRHAIKTYTEYKSCWEGLMKRGMNRDYTWV
KAATQYEQIIEWAFMDPPY
LjSS1_2 LjT38J19.60.nd Pseudo/partial MESLQLGSPLLLRHPRTPAQAYANSRLMKIAQLGFPSFLKRAAKNANLRAFPVDNEGGVA
(encodes for N-term.) ASQDDPFAFEDEQVKALPLSTEMDDFGSIVGFHLGSENGKITEEDSTSDGVEEKAKARVC
YNIVFVTSEAAPYSKTGGLGDVCGSLPIALAARGHRVMVVSPRYIHGTPGDSKFSGAIDL
ERRINVPCFGGAQEVGFFHECREGVDWVFVDHPSFHRPGNPYGDKNGPFGDNQFRFTLLC
YAACEAPLVLHLGGLTYGEKCLFIVNDWHASLVPVLLAAKYRPHGVYKDARSVLVIHNIA
LjSS2a CM1835.140.nc Complete MASLSSAPFLVETHADTTVLLLHTSNLKIPVKFSTINASVFTRGFDRGRLKHRCSRGLLC
PWGTKHIRALGKSSGTSEEDKDESEDRIKATIAKGQKALALQRELLQQIAEGKKLVSSIS
SESIPEPDGNSVSYEPSGKSLSSDSDPQKASASRDKSFENQRGGIALTDYGNSRKKEIRK
VSSVSIDQDSDEADGEDNKFSPAEMTSSKQYFFDKGKEEGDKFSPAEVTSSKQYFNEQLK
TKRYEENSPKNLPNDRRNSIDSSSLKVESLKGVSQPNLKDVANDAESEGEKSPPLAGANV
MNVILVAAECAPWSKTGGLGDVAGSLPKALARRGHRVMIVAPRYGNYAEAQDMGVRKRYK
VDGQDMEVTYFHAYIDGVDFVFIDSPIFRHLEQNIYGGNRVDILRRMALFCKAAAEVCWH
VPCGGVCYGDGNLVFIANDWHTALLPVYLKAYYRDHGLMQYTRSVLVIHNIAHQGRGPLD
DFRIVDLPENYMDLFKFYDPLGGEHFNIFAAGLKTADRIVTVSHGYAWELKTSEGGWGLH
GIINENDWKFRGIVNGIDSKDWNPQFDVHLTSDGYTNYTLETLHSGKRQCKAALQKELGL
PVREDVPLIGFIGRLDHQKGVDLIAEAIPWMMDQDVQLIMLGTGRPDLEQMLRQFESQHR
DKVRGWVGFSVKTAHRITAGVDILLMPSRFEPCGLNQLYAMNYGTVPVVHAVGGLRDTVQ
AFNPFEESGLGWTFDSAEADKLIHALGNCLWTYREYKKSWEGLQKRGMSQDLSWDNAAQQ
YEEVLVAAKYQW
LjSS2b_1 chr1.CM0141.60.nd Pseudo/partial* GLGDVAGSLPKALARRGHRVMVVAPRYGNYAEPQDTGVRKTYSVDGHDMEVQYFQAYIDG
VDFVFIESPIFHHLDNNIYGGSRLDILKRMVLFCKAAVEVPWHVPCGGVCYGDGNLVFIA
NDWHTALLPVYLKAYYRDQGLMKYTRSVLVIHNIAHQGRGPVDDFFFVDLPEYYMDIFKL
YDPVGGEHFNIFAAGLKAADRVVTVSHGYAWELKTSEGGWGLNGIINDNGWKLRGIVNGI
DNKEWNPMHDVHLKSDGYTNYSLETLPVGKAQCKAALQKELGLPVNEDVPVIGFIGRLDN
QKGVDIIGEAIPWMMGQDVQLVMLGTGRPDLEHMLRQFENQHNDKIRGWVGFSVKMAHRI
TAGVDILLMPSRFEPCG*TNSMP*SMDKSSCTSCGG
LjSS2b_2 chr1.CM0141.220.nd Pseudo/partial* YCAAF*SFQ*SRLGWTFDSAESGKLIHALGNCLLTYREHKKSWEGIQRRGMMQDLSWDNA
AQLYEEVLVAAKYQ
LjSS5 chr2.CM0177.660.nc Complete MAAMGTFFMPLTLRLPLPSSSSSSSISKPKHTAPNNSPLFCLRNSGDAKGLHKKRLEDSK
NEDMSKPISGDHQNKKRGNIWQLFREAQQNILYLNNQRLVAIEELNKTNEENQLLLNKIK
KLEVEKQADADKLSICSELLLRIDSMVLSSLISPGEASKLRSSVASRRVSVANFFNAISQ
KSDSQLLGELRHFSDQSKKNGFHIIHICTEMTPLVPIGSVASYVTGISRALQRKGHLVEV
ILPKYACLNLAEVQGLREVNAVAYSYFDGQLHGNRIWTGVVCGIGVTLIEPLHYSSFFSR
EMIYGYPDDFERFLYFCRASLDYIVKCEKQPDVLHLHNWETAIVGPLFWDIFVNKGLGGT
RILLTCHGFNSQAIEQPEKLALCGLDPFSLHRPDRLQDNTNPQLVNILKGGVVYSNRVVI
MSSIHPKHTIIHSLSHKLEPTLNDHRDKLVISPYGVDKSIWDPSTDYFLPENFNAENMNG
KSVCKVALLQQLGLSENSSTILVGCIFSEGTNLDEKTVKDVILNSKKQHEVQFILMGIGE
SSVVNQAVESLQKELKDGNLKFVPAYNEELLHLFFAGSDIILCQSFVDPTDEIPLKALRY
GAVPIAVSPDASTNRTMPFDRSHEATKYSQLVNSNFRNMSLNLAIDGIRSNPSQWRRRIM
EAMKHDLTWDGECYEVHVAAYSAIKNI
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
LjGBSS1a chr5.LjT41L03.30.nd Pseudo/partial* MATVTASSYAVSRSACLNRHGRTDSAAAKVNSVTLGGHALVYDGLRSLNKLHVRSARAVK
GLSSTASDGGAARGKASGEVVCGMNLVFVGAEVGPWSKTGGLGDVLGGLPPALAGNGHRV
MTVSPRYDQYKDAWDTNVTVEVKVGDRVETVRFFHCYKRGVDRVFVDHPMFLEKVWGKTG
SKLYGPTAGVDYEDNQLRFSLLCQAALEAPRVLNLNSSKYFSGPYGEDVVFIANDWHTAL
LPCYLKSMYKSRGIYQNAKVAFCIHNIAYQGRNAFSDFSQLNLPNQFKSSFDFTDGYDKP
VKGRKINWMKAAILESNRVFTVSPYYAQELVSGEDRGVELDNIIRKTGITGIVNGMDIRE
WSPETDKFIDVHYDATTVTEAKSLLKEALQAEVGLPVDRNIPLIGFIGRLEEQKGSDILV
EAIPEFIDQNVQIIVLGTGKKIMEKQIEQLEETYPDKAIGVAKFNAPLAHKIIAGADFIV
IPSRFEPCGLVQLHAMPYGTVPIVSSTGGLVDTVKEGYTGFHTGAFNVECETVDPADVDK
LATTVKRALQTYGTPVLKEMIQNCMAQDFSWKGPAKQWKRRY*A*RLLVVKLE*MGKRLL
LLRRR
LjGBSS1b chr3.CM0208.40.nd Pseudo/partial* MNLIFLGTEVGPWSKTGGLGDVLGGLPPALAANGHRVMTIAPRYDQYKDAWDTSVTIEVK
VGDKTEKVGFFHCHKRGVDRVFVDHPIFLEKVWGKSGTKLYGPTAGEDYQDNQLRFSLFC
QAALEAPRVLNLTSNKYFSGPYGEDVIFIANDWHTALIPCYLKSMYQSIGIYKNARVVYC
IHNIAYQGRFAFADFQLLNLPDQFKSSFDFLDGHVKPVIGRKTNWMKAGILESDLVLTVS
PYYAEELVSGPDKGVELDNIIRRTGITGIVNGMDVQEWNPSTDKYLTVKYNASTVVEGKA
LLKEALQAEVGLPVDRNIPLIGFIGRLEEQKGSDILVAAIPQFIKENIQIVALGTGKKQM
EKQLEQLEIAYPDKARGVAKFNVPLAHMIIAGADFILIPSRFEPCGLIQLQAMRYGTVPI
VASTGGLVDTVKEGFTGFQMGSFNVECEAVDPADVDALAKTVKRALAVHGTLAFTEIIKN
CMAQDLSWKGPAKRWEEVLLSLGVPGSEAGIEGEEIAPQAKENLATP
LjSBE1 chr1.CM0178.250.nc Pseudo/partial MITSFSLQSFNIASTAHNSRNKQDLAKQNSVELVLGYRNPKGCNRFSFGSRRSIHERVST
GFKGVAVITDNKSAMSATEEDLENIGILHIDPAIKPFKDHFKCRLKRYIDQKKLIEEYEG
GLEEFAQGYLKFGFNREEGGIVYREWAPAAQEAQIIGDFNEWNGSNHPMEKNQFGVWSIK
IPDVAGNPAIPHNSRVKFRFRHGGVWADRIPAWIKYATVDPTKFAAPYDGVYWDPPLSER
YQFKYPRPPKPKAPRIYEAHVGMSSSEPRINSYKEFADDILPRIRANNYNTVQLMAVMEH
SYYASFGYHVTNFFAVSSRSGTPEDLKYLIDKAHSLGLHVLMDVVHSHASNNVTDGLNGF
DVGQVSQESYFHTGDRGYHKLWDSRLFNYANWEVLRFLLSNLRWWLEEFKFDGFRFDGVT
SMLYHHHGVNIAFSGDYNEYFSEATDVDAVVYLMLANSLIHNILPDATVIAEDVSGMPGL
GRPISEVGIGFDYRLAMAIPDKWIDYLKNKKDHEWSMKEISLSLTNRRYSEKCVSYAESH
DQSIVGDKTFSFLLMDEEIYSGMSCLADASPTIERGIALHKMIHFITMSLGGEGYLNFMG
NEFGHPEWIDFPREGNGWSYEKCRRQWSLVDTDHLRYKFMNAFDKAMNLLDDKFSFLAST
KQIVSSTNEEDKVIVFERGDLVFVFNFHPETTYEGYKVGCDLPGKYRVALDSDAREFGGH
GRVGHNVDHFTAPEGIPGVPESNFNNRPNSFKILSPPRTCVVYYRVDESQEENSISNLVG
VQETSTAADIVANIPDGSSASKEREVSNFNWTMETLAAANADVAKIPDELVPAAENEVFQ
DEVEDADE
LjISA1 chr4.CM0004.550.nc Complete MSILTFTHISSPPNLTFSLFPHSDSQCRVSLSKRVSEKHKSICSTTKILATGNGSGFETE
TTLVVDKPQLGGRFQVSRGYPAPFGATVRDGGVNFAIYSLNAVSATLCLFTLSDFQDNQV
TEYITLDPLMNKTGSVWHVFLKGDFGDMLYGYKFDGKFSPIEGHYYDSSLILLDPYAKAV
ISRGEFGSLGPDGNCWPQMAGMVPSNDDEFDWEGDLPLKYPQKDLIIYEMHVRGFTKHES
SKTKFPGTYLGVVEKLDHLKELGVNCIELLPCHEFNELEYFSYNSVQGDYRVNFWGYSTV
NYFSPMIRYSSAGIQNCGRDGINEVKFLIKEAHKRGIEVIMDVVFNHTVEGNENGPIISF
RGVDNSIYYMIAPKGEFYNYSGCGNTLNCNHPVVRQFIVDCLRYWVTEMHVDGFRFDLAS
IMTRSSSLWNGVNVFGTSIEGDLLATGTPLVSPPLIDLISNDPILHGVKLIAEAWDAGGL
YQVGTFPHWGIWSEWNGKYRDTVRQFVKGTDGFAGAFAECLCGSPNVYQGGGRKPWNSIN
FVCTHDGFTLADLVTYNNKHNLPNGEDNNDGENHNNSWNCGQEGEFASSSVKKLRKRQMR
NFFLSLMVSQGVPMIYMGDEYGHTKGGNNNTYCHDNYLNYFQWDIKEESSSDFFRFCCLM
TKFRYECESLGLDDFPTSDRLQWHGHFPGKPDWSETSRFVAFTMVDSVKREIYIAFNTSH
LPVTITLPERPGYRWEPLVDTGKSAPYDFLTPDLPGRDIAIQQYAQFLDANLYPMLSYSS
IILLRTPDENA
LjISA2 LjSGA_028198.1 Pseudo/partial **QWCGEACFGALIWILMSIGQATSGMSRLRVPGLL*DTVIASEELFGVGSMKNLGRLGQ
EPAFDWGDDYHLDLPMEKLVVYRLNVKRFTEHESSQLPSDLAGTFSGLAKKLQHFKDLGV
NAVLLEPVFTFDKEKGPYFPCHFFAPTSAYGPSSGPVSTITSMKEMVKAMHANGIEVLME
VVFSNTAEMAALQGIDDSSYYYDNGVGNLKLHNALNCNFPIVQNLILDSLRHWVTEFHID
GFSFINASHLLKGFHGEYLSRPPLVEAIAFDPVLSKTKIVADCWDPHGIAVAKENPFPHW
MRWAEINTKFCDDVRNFLRGENLLSNLATRLCGSGDMFSDGRGPAFSFNYISRNSRLSLV
DLVSFSNGDLAAELSWNCGEEGPTNNTTVLERRLKQIRNFLFILFVSLGVPVLNMGDESG
QSSGGSPAYGDIKPFNWSALKTGFGKQTMQFISFLTSLRIRRSDVLQSRCFLKEKNIEWS
GSDQALPKWEDPSCKFLAMTLKAEKLEFPENSTICDDGSGDLFIAFNADDKPETVVLPLL
PEGMSWYRLVDTALPFPGFFSTNGEFVPEQASGLTVYQMKSYSCTLFEVKHST
LjLDA chr5.CM0909.690.nc Pseudo/partial TSILESFPADSDQQQALITAIQNVDAYNWGYNPVLWGVPKGSYASNPNGPYRIIEFRKMI
QALNRTGLRIVLDTVYNHLQGSGPFDDHSVLDKIVPGYYLRRNTDGFIENSTCMNNTASE
HFMVERLILDDLVHWAVNYKIDGFRFDLMGHIMKSTMVKAKNALHCLRKEKDGVDGSSIY
IYGEGWDFGEVANNGRGINASQFNLSGTQIGSFNDRIRDAILGGSPFGHPLQQGFVTGLL
LQPNGHDHGTEANAKSMLATSMDHIQVGMAANLKDFVLTNSKGEEVKGSEVLTYGGTPVA
YASCPTDTINYVSAHDNETLFDIVSLKTPMDINVAERCRINHLATSIIALSQGIPFFHSG
DEILRSKSLDRDSYNSGDWFNRLDFTYNSNNWGVGLPPQEKNEKSWPLIKPRLADPSFKP
QKINILAALDNFLNLLRIRYSSPLFRLRTANAIQQRVCFHNTGPSLVDGVIVMSIEDGHE
GFPGLPQLDPIYSFIVVVVNAGPEEVSFVSPSLQSRSLQLHPILVTSSDELVKSSTYEAS
SGCFVVPRRTTAVFVEPRG
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
LjGWD1 chr4.LjT08E06.100.nc Corrected MSHSIFHQTLLCQTQTVAEHQSKVSSRGSTLFPALSVSKGKKLVLSTNLRGNRLCLRKRR
FAMGRNRNTVAIPRAVLTSNAASELSGKFNLDGNIELQVGVSSSGPGGATQVDIQVSNKS
GSLILHWGVLHESQGKWVLPSRHPDGTQVYKNRALRTPFVKSGSGSFLKIEIDDPAAQAI
EFLILDESQNKWFKNNGENFHIKLPGKDEGVQQGSVPEDLVQVQAYLRWERNGKQMYTPE
KEKEEYEAARQDLLKEVARGISVQDLRARLTNKANTAEVKQPSVSGTKNIPDELAQVQAY
IRWEKAGKPNYSPEQQLIEFEEARKELLGELEKGASLDEIRKKIVKGEVQTKVAKQLKTK
KYFHVERIQRKKRDWTELINRNVGENIVEQFVDVPKTMTVIQRYAKEKEEYDKGLILNRA
IYKLADNDLLVLVTKDAGNIKVHLATDSKSPVTLHWALSRSTPGEWLVPPASALPPGSVI
MDKAAETPFNPGSPSHPSFEVQSLDIEVDGDTFKGITFVTLSDGKWIKNNGSDFYVEFSE
KKKIQKASGDGKGTAKFLLDRIAEMESEAQKSFMHRFNIASELMDQAKNAGQLGLAGILV
WMRFMATRQLIWNKNYNVKPREISQAQDRLTDLLQDAYTSYPQYRELVRMILSTVGRGGE
GDVGQRIRDEILVIQRKNECKGGMMEEWHQKLHNNTSPDDVVICQALIDYINNDFDIGVY
WKTLNDNGITKERLLSYDRAIHSEPNFRRDQKEGLLRDLGNYMRTLKAVHSGADLESAIT
NCLGYKSEGQGFMVGVQINPVSGLPSGFPQQLVQFVMEHVEVKYVEPLLEGLLEARQELR
PSLNKSQSRLKDLLFLDVALDSTVRTAVERGYEELNNAGPEKIMYFIFLVLENLALSSDN
NEDLIYCLKGWEIALSMCKSKDTHWALYAKSVLDRTRLALATKSEEYHNILQPSAEYLGS
LLGVETWAVEIFTEEIIRAGSAASLSALLNRLDPVLRKTANLGSWQVISPVETIGYVVVV
DELLSVQNKSYERPTILIAKSVRGEEEIPDGAVAVLTPDMPDVLSHVSVRARNSKVCFAT
CFDPSILADLESKKGKLLSLKPTSAEVVYSEVNEGELIDEKSSHLNEVGSVPSISLVKKQ
FSGRYAVSSEEFTGEMVGAKSRNISYLKGKVPSWIGIPTSVALPFGVFEHVLSDKSNQVV
AEKVNVLKRKLTEGDFSALKDIRETVLQLNAPPQLVEELKTKMKSSGMPWPGDEGEQRWE
QAWKAIKKVWGSKWNERAYFSTRKVKLDHDYLSMAVLVQEVVNADYAFVIHTTNPSSGDS
SEIYTEVVKGLGETLVGAYPGRALSFICKKHDLDSPQVLGYPSKPIGLYIRRSIIFRSDS
NGEDLEGYAGAGLYDSVPMDEEEKVVLDYSSDPLIVDGSFRKSILSSIARAGNAIEELYG
SPQDIEGVIRDGKVYVVQTRPQM
LjGWD3 chr5.LjT42F22.140.nc Corrected MIRSGSRKKEKQLGGSSSSSSFSIHHLCRHTPHPLLLHRPKTVPHISAVSSTSTQTREER
and chr5.LjT42F22.160.nc NNKKKNKVRLRLRLNHQVEFGDHVVISGSAKELGSWKKPVPLDWTQEGWACYLDFQGSQQ
LEFKFIIVDKDNTLLWEAGDNRLLNLPEEGHFEMVATWNATRENMDLQPLELDFDGGEIQ
QEKDFSDAATNDAPLSQSEEPSPFVGQWQGNTVTFMQSNQHRTHETERKWDTTGLQGLPL
KLVQGDQNARNWWRKLDIVREIIAESLLGKDPLEALIYSAIYLKWINTGQITCFEDGGHH
RPNRHAEISRLIFRELERHTSQKDISPQEVLIVRKIHPCLPSFKAEFTASVPLTRIRDIA
HRNDIPHDLKTQIKHTIQNKLHRNAGPEDLVATEAMLAKITKNPGEYSETFVEQFKIFHR
ELKDFFNAGSLSEQLESIRESMDKYGISSLDSFLQCKQTMDSAADSTPGVEQEIKLLFKT
MESLIALRETFVKGLESGLRNDAPDSAIAMRQKWRLCEIGLEDYSFVLLSRFINVLEAMG
GAHWLAANLQSKNVNSWNDPLGALTIGVHQLKLSNWKPEECGAIENELIAWSARGLSERE
GNEDGKMIWALRLKATLDRSKRLTDEYTEELLKIFPQKVQTLGKALGIPENSVRTYTEAE
IRAGVIFQVSKLCILLLKAVRSTLGSDGWDVLVPGAVLGTLVQVERIVPGSLPSSVEGPI
ILLVNRADGDEEVTAAGRNIVGVILQQELPHLSHLGVRARQEKVAFVTCEDDEKIADVKS
LIGSCVRLDASAASVTLKLSSSVDSNGSFSVERASDDSFSGVEVPAFSAGGISNSNQDAS
SGGVILLPDAETQTSGAKAAACGRLSSLSAVSDKVYSDQGVPASFQVPSGAVLPFGSMEL
ELEKSNSTETFRSILDKIETAKLEGGELDGLCHQLQELVCSLKPSKDVIESIGRIFPSSA
CLIVRSSANVEDLAGMSAAGLYESIPNVSPSNPTVFGNAVSRVWASLYTRRAVLSRRAAG
VPQKEASMAILIQEMLSPDLSFVLHTVSPTNQDSNTVEAEIACGLGETLASGTRGTPWRI
SSGKFDGVVQTLAFANLSEELLVRGAGPADGEVIRLTVDYSKKPLTVDPVFRRQLGQRLC
AVGFFLERKFGSPQDVEGCLVGKDIYIVQTRPQPN
LjAMY1 chr5.CM0852.300.nc Corrected MDSLSWLSLFCLSFSHFPLFSSSALLFQGFNWESSGKGGWYNSLKNSIPDLANAGITHVW
LPPPSQSVASQGYLPGRLYDLDASKYGSKDELKSLIAAFHDKGIKCLADIVINHRTAERK
DGRGIYCIFEGGTPDASLDWGPSFICRDDTAYSDGKGNLDSGEGYDAAPDIDHLNPQVQR
ELSDWMNWLRNEVGFDGWRFDFVKGYAPSITKIYMEKTSPDFAVGEYWNSLSYGQDGKPN
FNQDAHRGELVNWVQSAGGAVNAFDFTTKGILQAAVQGELWRLKDSNGKPPGMIGVKPEN
AVTFVDNHDTGSTQRTWPFPDDKVMLGYVYILTHPGHPTIFYDHYIEWGLMEPIKKLTEI
RKRNGIKPTSTVNILAAEADLYMAEIDNKIITKIGPKQDLGNLLPPNVQVATSGQDYAVW
LjAMY2 LjSGA_020916.1 Pseudo/partial YEFQSQSYIHDPVASMHCLFQGKPDTGAIFQGFPNIDHTQDFVRKDIIGWLRWLRYNIGF
QDFRFDFAKGFSPKYVKEYIEEAKPLFSVGEYWDSCNYKGSALDYNQDSHRQRIINWIDG
TGQLSTAFDFTTKGILQEAVKGQFWRLRDPQGKPPGVVGWWPSRSVTFIDNHDTGSTQAH
WPFPKDHIMEGYAYILTHPGTPTVFYDHFYDWGNSFRNEIVKLIDIRKRQGIHSRSPIRI
LEANDNLYSAIIGEKVCMKIGDGSWCPSGREWTLSTCGYNYAVWQTVVALI
LjAMY3a chr1.CM0410.400.nd Pseudo/partial FQAFNWESWRRSWYLELSSKAADLSQCGVTAVWLPPPTNSVSPQGYMPSDLYNLNSSYGS
VEELKSCIEEMHSQDLVVLGDAVLNHRCAQKQSPNGVWNIFGGKLAWGPEAIVCDDPNFQ
GRGNPSSGDIFHAAPNIDHSQDFVRKDIKGWLNWLRNDIGFDGWRLDFVRGFSGTYVKEY
IEASNPVFAIGEYWDSLAYEHGSLCYNQDAHRQRIVNWINATGGTSSAFDITTKGILHSA
LHNEYWRLIDPQGKPTGVMGWWPSRAVTFLENHDTGSTQGHWPFPRDKLMQGYAYILTHP
GTPVIFYDHFYDFGIHDVITELIEARRRAGIHCRSSIKIIHAHNEGYVAQVGDALVMKLG
HFDWNPSKENQLEGSWQKFVDKGQDYQVWLR
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
LjAMY3b chr2.CM0608.610.nc Complete MSTVALEPLFFHLRRRETPIHLSKQNPFRPFFLISASSNLNLNLNASFTFRQPRMPALAA
SLTDTPIIDPLQCSDTFFTNTFPINTTQTVEGKVFVRLDHRKDLRDLELTVSCNLPGKWI
LHWGVTHGDDVGREWDQPSHDMIPPGSVSIKDCAIETPLMKSLLSTESDTFHEVRIDLKP
NNEISAINFVLKDEESGAWYRNQGRDFRVPLVNYLKADTNMIGTKRGFSLWPENLGQMPK
MFLKSKSGQDGSSKTRDPKQENTQPEGFYVEIPITKEVSINNFIRVSIKKCFESEAVKNL
LCLETDLPGDIVLHWGVCRDDSRKWEVPPAPYPPETITFKDKSLRTRLQPRGSGKGSSVL
ITLGEEFSGFLFVLKQNEKTWFKQMRNDFYIPLSSSGSLPIDGNREDQSGVQREAAEEAS
QGTSFFSFTDGIINEIRNLVTDNSSEKSRKTKSKKAQESILQEIERLAAEAYIFFKTSIP
YFSEATIAEPEAPIAEPEAASESEALALDPEICSGTGTGYEILCQGFNWESHKTGRWYME
LKEKASELASLGFTVVWLPPPTESVSPEGYMPKDLYNLNSRYGNTDELKDLVKRLHQVGI
RALGDAVLNHRCAHCQNQNGIWNIFGGRLNWDDCAVVADDPHFQGRGNNSSGDNFHAAPN
IDHSQEFVRKDLKEWLCWLRNEIGYDGWRLDFVRGFWGGYIKDYLDASEPYFAVGEYWDS
LSYTYGEMDCNQDAHRQRIVDWIKATNGTAGAFDVTTKGILHSALERCEYWRLSDQQGKP
PGVVGWWPSRAVTFIENHDTGSTQGHWRFPSGKEMEGYAYILTHPGTPSVFFDHIFSHYK
NEIASLVSCRKRNKIHCRSTVQICKAERDVYAAMIDEKIAMKIGPGHFEPPTGSHRWSLA
IGGRDYKIWEAL
LjBAM1 LjSGA_011445.1 Corrected MALSMTHQIGSLAGTPVTSESGSGETTASVSAAAVWKSPAMNLRCQVTRSEGATADGLSP
and LjSGA_032725.2 PMSPCRSPALRADLSAACQAFETAVVEKEHGTGAKGEGKGTGVPVYVMMPLDSVTMGNTV
NRRKAVNAAMAALRSAGVEGIMMDVWWGLVEREAPGEYNWGGYAELLEMAKKHGLKVQAV
MSFHQCGGNVVICTIPLPKWAVEEIEKDPDLAYTDQWGRRNYEYISLGCDTLPVLKGRTP
VQCYADFMRAFRDNFKHLLGDTVVEIQVGMGPAGELRYPSYPEQNGTWRFPGIGAFQCYD
KYMLSSLKAAAEAEGKQEWGSTGPTDAGEYNNWPEDTAFFRREGGGWDSHYGEFFLTWYS
QMLLDHGERILTSAKSIFDSTGVKISVKVAGIHWHYGTRSHAPELTAGYYNTRFRDGYLP
IAQMLARHGAVFNFTCIEMRDHEQPQDALCAPEKLVNQVALATQKAQVPLAGENALQRYD
EHAHEQILKSAQLNDDTEMCAFTYLRMNPQLFQPDNWRKFVSFVKKMKEGKGTHKCWEQV
EREAEHFVHVTRPLVQEAALM
LjBAM3a_1 chr2.CM0021.1150.nd Pseudo/partial GNTLRSAILR*QQRNQSF*LRSYKVVSFQK*KHHSSPSKEFHTRSTLEKQEWEEVHHAPL
(encodes for N-term.) VIHAPLVVHEHSDSKRVPVFVMLPLETVTVGGTLNKPRAMNASLMALKSAGVEGVMVDVW
WGLVEKDGPLNYNWEGYAELFQMVQKHGLKVQVVMSFHQCGGNVGDSCSIPLPPWVLEEI
GKNPDLVYTDRSGRRNPEYISLGCDSMPVLRGRSPLQVYSDYMRSFRDSFGDYMGSVIRL
QVGLGPCGERET
LjBAM3a_2 chr2.CM0021.1290.nd Pseudo/partial EVQVGLGPCGELRYPSYPESEGTWRFPGIGEFQCYDKYMKASLEASAEAIGKKDWGRSGP
(encodes for C-term.) HDSGQYNQFPEDTGFFKREGTWNTEYGHFFLEWYSNKLLEHGESILVAAKGIFQDSGVKL
SAKVAGIHWHYRARSHASELNAGYYNTRFHDGYLPIAQMFARHGVVLNFTCMEMKDREQP
EHANCSPEGLVHQVKNATTSAGAELAGENALERYDAGAFGQVLSTSNSGSGLGAFTYLRM
NKRLFEGDNWRHFAGFVRSMSEGGQRQRLPVSDSFGIKLYVGHIKGIEQKQDQEAALV
LjBAM3b chr2.CM0021.1220.nd Pseudo/partial MAEAPITLEKIHAPLAVHGLSDSKSVPSFVMLPLDTVTVGGTLNKPRVMNVSLMALKSAG
VEGVMVDVWWGLVEKDGPFKYNWEGYAELFQMVQKHGLKLQVVMSFHQCGGNVGDSCSIP
LPPWVLEEISENPDLVYTDRSGRRNPEYISLGCDSMPVLRGRTPLQEVQVGLGPCGELRY
PSYPESEGTWRFPGIGEFQCYDKYMRASLEASAEAIGKKDWGRSGPHDSGQYNQFPEDTG
FFKKEGTWNTEYGHFFLNWYSHKLLGHGDKILLSAKAIFQLTGVKLSAKVAGIHWHYKAR
SHATELTAGYYNTRFHDGYLPIAQMLARHGAVFNFTCMEMKDREQPEHANCSPEGLVHQV
QMAARTAGVELAGENALGRYDAGAFAQVLSTRNSVDGLGAFTYLRMNKRLFEGDNWRHFV
DFVRSMSEGGLIERLPEADSFGTDLYVGHIIKEIEKKKNQEAILV
LjBAM5 chr3.CM0152.120.nc Complete MATSERNMLLNYVPVFVMLPLGVVSVSNVFEDPAGLKEQLLQLRAAGVDGVMVDVWWGIT
EQKGPKQYDWGAYRSLFQLIQECGLKLQAIMSFHQCGGNVGDAVNIPIPQWVLDIGESNP
DIFYTDISGTRNKEYLTVGVDNERIFHGRTAIELYSDYMKSFRENMSDFLKSELIIDIEV
GLGPAGELRYPSYPQSQGWEYPGIGEFQCYDNYLKADFKAAATRAGHPEWELPDDAGKYN
DVPQSTEFFRSNGTYLTEKGKFFLTWYSNKLLNHGDQILDEANKAFLGCKVKLALKVSGI
HWWYKSESHAAELTAGYYNLGNRDGYRPIARMLSRHHAILNFTCLEMRDSEQRSDVDSGP
EELVQQVLSGGWREHIEVAGENALSRYDATAYNQIILNARPQGVNKDGPPKFRMYGVTYL
RLSDDLLQQSNFDIFRKFVQKMHADQDYCADPGKYGHIIPPLKRSGPKIPDDVLLKATEP
MPPFPWDSETDMEVDG
LjBAM6 LjSGA_030993.1 Pseudo/partial MADFLESELMIDIEVGLGPAGELRYPSYSYCTGWKFPGIGEFQCYDKYLEAQFKGAVAAL
GHPEWELPDNAGECNSTPESTEFFRSQGTYLTDQGIIFLTWYSSILVMHGDAIMDEANKA
FVGCKVKLAAKVSGIHWWYRTENHAAELTAGYYNLNYRDGYRPIARMLNRHGAILNFTCL
EMRNCEQVEEAKSGPQELVQQVLSTGWRENLEVAGENALPRYDREAYNQILLNARPNGVN
RHSPPKLRMYGVTYLRLTDELFQETNFQLFKTFVRRMHANQDYCSDPERYCHYTFPMQRS
KPYLGTLTHGTEPVLQPYPWNNETDMSIEGPGFFADIVAFIWRIFCNKKR
LjBAM7 LjT34L14.60.nc Complete MIEIDDGNGIQTAPGDNRFQQHQQFQELEEPGGGARRSRPLEEKERTKLRERRRRAITAR
ILAGLRRHGNYNLRVRADINDVIAALAREAGWVVLPDGTTFPSRSQGQRPDGGNSAPVTS
SSQVPSQQTPSASLRGVASGYGSPLEYNACQMKGVFMPAPSPYDLSSSSRSQTSIVGDGE
TQRDNIPGIGGSMNSVDEKQIADMPPRLPERDLAGTPYVPVYVMLPLGVINIKCELVDPD
GLLKQLRVLKSINVDGVMVDCWWGIVEAHAPQEYNWNGYKRLFQMVRELKLKLQVLMSFH
ECGGNFGDDVCIPLPHWVAEIGRSNPDIFFTDREGRHNPECLSWGIDKERVLRGRTAVEV
YFDFMRSFRVEFDEYFEDGFISMIEVGLGPCGELRYPSCPVKHGWRYPGIGEFQCYDQYM
LKSLRKAAEIRGHSIWARGPDNVGTYNSQPHETGFFCDGGDYDSFYGRFFLNWYSQVLVD
HGNRVLSLAKLAFEGSCIAAKLSGIYWWYKTASHAAELTAGYYNPCNRDGYASIMTMLKR
NGVSLNIPCVDLQTLNQHEGFPETFADPEGLVWQVLNAGWDVGLPVVSENALPCLNRVSY
NKVLDNAKPMNDPDGRHFSSFAYPRLSPLLMERQNFIEFERFVKRMHGKFNG
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued on next page.
LjBAM8 chr2.CM0803.520.nc Complete MKNTNDDVSAQDLDPQSDHSSDYLAHSHQLSQPQPRRPRGFAAAAAGVNSAGKGKKEREK
EKERTKLRERHRRAITSRMLAGLRQYGNFPLPARADMNDVLAALAREAGWVVDADGTTYR
QCPPPSHMGSFAAARSVETQLSAGSLRACSVKETLENQPPVLRIDECLSPASIDSVVLAE
RDSKSRKFASASPIDSVDCLEADQLMQVMHTGVHENDFTGTPYVPVYIKLPVGIINKFCQ
LIDPEGIRQELIHIKSLNIDGVVVDCWWGIVEGWSPQKYVWSGYRELFNIIREFKLNLQV
VMAFHECGGSDSSDALISLPQWVLDIGKDNQDIFFTDREGRRNTECLSWGIDKERVLKGR
TGIEVYFDMMRSFRTEFDDLFAEGLISSVEIGLGASGELKYPSFSERMGWRYPGIGEFQC
YDKYLQHSLRRAAKLRGHSFWARGPDNAGHYNSMPHETGFFCERGDYDNYYGRFFLHWYS
QTLVDHADNVLSLASLAFEETQIIVKVPAVYWWYKTPSHAAELTAGYHNPTNQDGYSPVF
EVLKKHAVTMKFVCLGFHLSSQEANESLVDPEGLSWQVLNSAWDRGLIAAGENALLCYDR
EGHKRLVEMAKPRNDPDRRHFSFFVYQQPSLLQGNPCLSELDFFIKCMHGEMTGDL
LjBAM9 chr6.LjT15B19.140.nd Complete MEVSVIGSSQAKLGKSDLVTREQGFCFVKESCRIENNRVSFGGNMRWKKDGLRFSLRAVH
HAEPVLEKKKKKSHSGSGTGSSNSVDGVRLFVGLPLDAVSYDCSSLNHSRAIAAGLRALK
LLGVEGVELPVWWGIVEKEAMGEYNWSGYLAIAEMVQKAGLKLHMTLCFHGSEKPNIPLP
KWVSKIGESQSSIFFTDRSGQRYNEYLSLAVDNLPVLDGKTPVQVYQSFCESFKSSFSAF
MGSTITGISMGLGPEGELRYPSHHHSNGKTQGVGEFQCYDQNMLQLLKQHAEASGNPLWG
LGGPHDVPTYDQPPHSNNFFKDGGSWESQYGDFFLSWYSNQLITHGDCLLSLAASTFGDT
GVTIHGKIPLMHTWYGTQSHPSELTAGFYNTANREGYEPVAKIFAKNSCKIMLPGLDLSD
ANQPSETRSSPESLLAQIMASCRNHGVRVSGQNSSVFGAPEGFDQIKKNLSGDNVLDLFT
YPKNGSIFLFSLTLFPLFPKLCSKP
LjDPE1 chr1.CM0032.500.nc Complete MALLTPSISVRFPQLQQHQQQWKFKPKPFFPRASSFTSTSLAQLSVGEDLPSNYGDWLPT
PDPHLRRRAGILLHPTSFRGPYGIGDLGDEAFRFVDWLHNAGCSLWQVLPLVPPGRKANE
EGSPYSGQDANCGNTLLISLQGLVDDGLLEKHELPQPIDAERVDFSVVADLKDPLITKAA
ERLISSKGELKTQLENFRKDPNISSWLEDAAYFAAIDDSLNTFSWYNWPEPLRNRHLVAL
ENIYEQKRDFINVFIAQQFLFQRQWQKVRDYAQSRGISIMGDMPIYVGYHSADVWANKNQ
FSLNRKGFPLLVSGVPPDAFSETGQLWGSPLYDWNAMEKEGYSWWIRRIQRAQNLYDEFR
IDHFRGLAGYWAVPSEAKVAMVGKWKVGPGISFFDAIFRAVGKVNIIAEDLGVITEDVVK
LRKSIGAPGMAVLQFGFGGGADNPHLPHNHEFNQVVYTGTHDNDTVKGWWEAMNQEEKSK
ALSYLSLTGEDDISWVLIQKVLASVAQTAVIPMQDVLGLGNSARMNIPATQFGNWGWRIA
SSVSFDNLEREAARLKDMLSMYGRL
LjDPE2_1 LjSGA_011298.1 Pseudo/partial MVNLGLFSSNKSVSSVKVTFRIPYFTQWGQSLLVCGSVPLLGSGNVKKGVLLSPSPQGSE
(encodes for N-term.) LVWSGSITVPRGFQCQYSYYVVDDNKNILRWEMGKKRELNLPEGLQNGQEVEFRDLWQTG
SDALPFRSAFKDVVFRQSWDSCITGVDHTNIEPEAESIVVQFKISCPNIEKDTSLCVIGS
NTKLGQWKVENGLKLNYFGESVWLAECVMQRSDFPIRYPFWTFHPEQYDELMLSGNSSIE
DGPNREVSINSSRNEAKYIFLSDGMMRGTPWRGAGVAIPMFSIRSESDLGVGEFLDLKLL
VDWAVASGFHLVQLLPINDTSVHGMWWDSYPYSSLSVCALHPLYLRVQALSENIPEEIKQ
EIEKAKQQLDG
LjDPE2_2 LjSGA_007380.1 Pseudo/partial IFIFPN*F*FKGDSTPEKKIASKLKTCSESFFLLESEDKMGRNLFDFLQNIVLIQDPEDP
(encodes for C-term.) RKFYPRFNLEDTSNFQALDDHSKNVLKRLYYDYYFHRQENLWRQNALKTLPALLNSSDML
ACGEDLGLIPSCVHPVMQELGLVGLRIQRMPNESDLEFGIPSRYSYMTVCAPSCHDCSPM
RAWWEEDEERRQRFFKDVVESDELAPDQCVPEVAHFIIRQHFEAPSMWAIFPLQDLLALK
EEYTKRPAAEETINDPTNPKHYWRYRVHVTLESLLKDNELKTSIKNLVRWSGRSFPHEDS
QVEASPVSASSVAEAVSDKKIAGAADKIRLPSESNGVQPRDHVAV
LjPHS2a LjB08M07.80.nc Complete MAAKVETNGGGGGGIASPASDKVPAVAHPLAEKPDEIASNISYHAQFSPHFSPFKFELEQ
AYYATAESVRDRLIRQWNETYLHFHKVDPKQTYYLSMEFLQGRALTNAIGNLNIQDAYAD
ALRKFGLELEEIVEQEKDAALGNGGLGRLASCFLDSMATLNLPAWGYGLRYRYGLFKQKI
TREGQEEVPEDWLEKFSPWEVVRHDILYPIRFFGNVEVNPNGSRKWVGGEVVQALAYDVP
IPGYQTKNTISLRLWEAKASAEDFNLFLFNDGHHESASVLHSRSEQICAVLYPGDATEGG
KLLRLKQQYFLCSASLQDIISRFKERRQGPWNWSEFPTKVAVQLNDTHPTLSIPELMRLL
MDDEGLGWDEAWDVTSKTIAYTNHTVLPEALEKWSQPVMWKLLPRHMEIIEEIDRRFIAM
ISKTRLDLEGELSTMRILDNNPQKPVVRMANLCVVSAHTVNGVAQLHSDILKAELFANYV
SIWPTKFQNKTNGITPRRWLSFCSPVLSRIITKWLKTDQWVTNLDLLTGLRQFADNEDLQ
AEWLSAKMANKQRLAQYILQVTGESIDPDSLFDIQVKRIHEYKRQLLNILGVIYRYKKLK
EMSPEERKSTTSRTVMIGGKAFATYTNAKRIVKLVNDVGAVVNSDPEVNSYLKVVFVPNY
NVTVAEVLIPGSELSQHISTAGMEASGTSNMKFALNGCLIIGTLDGANVEIREEVGEENF
FLFGATAEDVPRLRKERENGLFKPDPRFEEAKKFIRSGVFGSYDYNPLLDSLEGNSGYGR
GDYFLVGYDFPSYMDAQEKVDEAYRDKKRWLKMSILSTAGSGKFSSDRTISQYAKEIWNI
EECRVP
LjPHS2b chr2.CM0373.1170.nd Pseudo/partial RKWVGGEVVQALAYDVPIPGYQTKNTISLRLWEAKASAEDFNLFLFNDGHHESASVLHSR
SEQICAVLYPGDATEGGKLLRLKQQYFLCSASLQDIISRFKERRQGPWNWSEFPTKVAVQ
LNDTHPTLSIPELMRLLMDDEGLGWDEAWDVTSKTIAYTNHTVLPEALEKWSQPVMWKLL
PRHMEIIEEIDRRFIAMISKTRLDLEIELSTMRILDNNPQKPLFGT
LjMEX1 chr3.CM0127.650.nc Complete MAKSYYAASLPLHLTQHHHNRNPLHFKYLTFPRPPNISTAHRLFASPRRRHNFSLNALDS
DAPRPHQQGSVDIGRDESYQQWDSLTAKFSAAANVPFLLLQMPQILLNARNLAAGNKTAL
LAVPWLGMLTSLLGNLSLLSYFAKKKEKEAMVVQTLGVVSTYVVIAQLALAEAMPLPYFL
ATSVIVGSGLFLNFMNYFGLLNAGIWSFWEDFITVGGLSVLPQIMWSTFVPFIPNSILPG
ATAFVLAVLAVTMARTGKLSEEGVKFVGGISGWTATLLFMWMPVSQMWTNILNPENMKGL
SAFSMLLAMLGNGLLLPRALLIRDLMWFIGSSWATLFYGYGNLACLFVLNIISKEFFLAA
TVGLVAWIGMAFWRDSAVHGHNSPLASIRDLVFGYRDDKA
Appendix 1
Table A2. Predicted protein sequences of the core set of starch metabolism enzymes in L. japonicus.
Continued.
Protein sequences were retrieved from the Miyakogusa genome database developed by the Kasuza
DNA Research Institute (http://www.kazusa.jp/lotus/index.html; Sato et al., 2008). These sequences
were annotated, and in several cases corrected, as described in Chapter 2 (section 2.7.2) and Chapter
3 (section 3.2.1).
* Protein sequences of LjGBSSIa, LjGBSSIb,LjSS2a and LjSS2b retrieved from NCBI, from the work of Pan et al., 2009:
>gi|170676393|gb|ACB30384.1| granule bound starch synthase Ia precursor [Lotus japonicus]
MATVTASSYAVSRSACLNRHGRTDSAAAKVNSVTLGGHALVYDGLRSLNKLHVRSARAVKGLSSTASDGG
AARGKASGEVVCGMNLVFVGAEVGPWSKTGGLGDVLGGLPPALAGNGHRVMTVSPRYDQYKDAWDTNVTV
EVKVGDRVETVRFFHCYKRGVDRVFVDHPMFLEKVWGKTGSKLYGPTAGVDYEDNQLRFSLLCQAALEAP
RVLNLNSSKYFSGPYGEDVVFIANDWHTALLPCYLKSMYKSRGIYQNAKVAFCIHNIAYQGRNAFSDFSQ
LNLPNQFKSSFDFTDGYDKPVKGRKINWMKAAILESNRVFTVSPYYAQELVSGEDRGVELDNIIRKTGIT
GIVNGMDIREWSPETDKFIDVHYDATTVTEAKSLLKEALQAEVGLPVDRNIPLIGFIGRLEEQKGSDILV
EAIPEFIDQNVQIIVLGTGKKIMEKQIEQLEETYPDKAIGVAKFNAPLAHKIIAGADFIVIPSRFEPCGL
VQLHAMPYGTVPIVSSTGGLVDTVKEGYTGFHTGAFNVECETVDPADVDKLATTVKRALQTYGTPVLKEM
IQNCMAQDFSWKGPAQQWEKALLSLEVAGSEAGIDGEEIAPLAKENVPTP
>gi|170676395|gb|ACB30385.1| granule bound starch synthase Ib precursor [Lotus japonicus]
MAAVAASSNLVSSSSYIHHRSILSYESKAASTGLRSLRQTNTHNGLRILNLVDELLNRTPIQVKAVQARR
KGLQGKNVRPTGVIICGMNLIFLGTEVGPWSKTGGLGDVLGGLPPALAANGHRVMTIAPRYDQYKDAWDT
SVTIEVKVGDKTEKVGFFHCHKRGVDRVFVDHPIFLEKVWGKSGTKLYGPTAGEDYQDNQLRFSLFCQAA
LEAPRVLNLTSNKYFSGPYGEDVIFIANDWHTALIPCYLKSMYQSIGIYKNARVVYCIHNIAYQGRFAFA
DFQLLNLPDQFKSSFDFLDGHVKPVIGRKTNWMKAGILESDLVLTVSPYYAEELVSGPDKGVELDNIIRR
TGITGIVNGMDVQEWNPSTDKYLTVKYNASTVVEGKALLKEALQAEVGLPVDRNIPLIGFIGRLEEQKGS
DILVAAIPQFIKENIQIVALGTGKKQMEKQLEQLEIAYPDKARGVAKFNVPLAHMIIAGADFILIPSRFE
PCGLIQLQAMRYGTVPIVASTGGLVDTVKEGFTGFQMGSFNVECEAVDPADVDALAKTVKRALAVHGTLA
FTEIIKNCMAQDLSWKGPAKRWEEVLLSLGVPGSEAGIEGEEIAPQAKENLATP
>gi|221063674|gb|ACL98481.1| starch synthase IIa precursor [Lotus japonicus]
MASLSSAPFLVETHADTTVLLLHTSNLKIPVKFSTINASVFTRGFDRGRLKHRCSRGLLCPWGTKHIRAL
GKSSGTSEEDKDESEDRIKATIAKGQKALALQRELLQQIAEGKKLVSSISSESIPEPDGNSVSYEPSGKS
LSSDSDPQKASASRDKSFENQRGGIALTDYGNSRKKEIRKVSSVSIDQDSDEADGEDNKFSPAEMTSSKQ
YFFDKGKEEGDKFSPAEVTSSKQYFNEQLKTKRYEENSPKNLPNDRRNSIDSSSLKVESLKGVSQPNLKD
VANDAESEGEKSPPLAGANVMNVILVAAECAPWSKTGGLGDVAGSLPKALARRGHRVMIVAPRYGNYAEA
QDMGVRKRYKVDGQDMEVTYFHAYIDGVDFVFIDSPIFRHLEQNIYGGNRVDILRRMALFCKAAAEVCWH
VPCGGVCYGDGNLVFIANDWHTALLPVYLKAYYRDHGLMQYTRSVLVIHNIAHQGRGPLDDFRIVDLPEN
YMDLFKFYDPLGGEHFNIFAAGLKTADRIVTVSHGYAWELKTSEGGWGLHGIINENDWKFRGIVNGIDSK
DWNPQFDVHLTSDGYTNYTLETLHSGKRQCKAALQKELGLPVREDVPLIGFIGRLDHQKGVDLIAEAIPW
MMDQDVQLIMLGTGRPDLEQMLRQFESQHRDKVRGWVGFSVKTAHRITAGVDILLMPSRFEPCGLNQLYA
MNYGTVPVVHAVGGLRDTVQAFNPFEESGLGWTFDSAEADKLIHALGNCLWTYREYKKSWEGLQKRGMSQ
DLSWDNAAQQYEEVLVAAKYQW
>gi|221063676|gb|ACL98482.1| starch synthase IIb precursor [Lotus japonicus]
MLCHIIFWLLMATSIGSSPFVLETTTSSAQVFVVPESRRNRCLRLGWDWHKRGLLSKNIRAEANGSNGTN
EDEDGSEGVLHATTEKSKKVLAWQSNLLQQIAERKKPISYELIDKFPPNNSSPHNASTSGHNAVENQNGG
IVWRKYVNSSTYSDTIIESEGNSISHEGSNESNQQNGSISRVNAVETQKSGTFVRNYVHSNKGSLEVTSV
GINGGFDEVNEENVKIPTPKMSSSELYFTEQFKGKKYQAIKPDSDTLQAFLANGTETSSIKVENQEGMSE
TRSKLITEESSTVDGEGEISAPLAGTNVMNVILVAAECAPWSKTGGLGDVAGSLPKALARRGHRVMVVAP
RYGNYAEPQDTGVRKTYSVDGHDMEVQYFQAYIDGVDFVFIESPIFHHLDNNIYGGSRLDILKGMVLFCK
AAVEVPWHVPCGGVCYGDGNLVFIANDWHTALLPVYLKAYYRDQGLMKYTRSVLVIHNIAHQGRGPVDDF
FFVDLPEYYMDIFKLYDPVGGEHFNIFAAGLKAADRVVTVSHGYAWELKTSEGGWGLNGIINDNGWKLRG
IVNGIDNKEWNPMHDVHLKSDGYTNYSLETLPVGKAQCKAALQKELGLPVNEDVPVIGFIGRLDNQKGVD
IIGEAIPWMMGQDVQLVMLGTGRPDLEHMLRQFENQHNDKIRGWVGFSVKMAHRITAGVDILLMPSRFEP
CGLNQLYAMNYGTVPVVHAVGGLRDTVQPFDPFNESGLGWTFDSADSGKLIHALGNCLLTYREHKKSWEG
IQRRGMMQDLSWDNAAQLYEEVLVAAKYQW
Appendix 1
TargetP predictions Predotar predictions
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjPGI1_LOTJA 613 0.976 0.063 0.009 0.055 C 1 LjPGI1|LOTJA 0.04 0.91 0.00 0.09 plastid
NP_001051434.1_ORYSA 567 0.093 0.090 0.117 0.879 _ 2 NP_001051434.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.97 none
NP_001057316.1_ORYSA 567 0.094 0.106 0.106 0.852 _ 2 NP_001057316.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.97 none
NP_001062053.1_ORYSA 615 0.974 0.098 0.012 0.017 C 1 NP_001062053.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.97 0.00 0.03 plastid
NP_001063415.1_ORYSA 625 0.896 0.429 0.006 0.010 C 3 NP_001063415.1|ORYSA 0.08 0.97 0.02 0.03 plastid
NP_194193.2_PGI1_ARA 613 0.949 0.105 0.009 0.045 C 1 NP_194193.2|PGI1|ARATH 0.02 0.92 0.01 0.08 plastid
NP_199088.1_PGIC_ARA 560 0.097 0.069 0.061 0.922 _ 1 NP_199088.1|PGIC|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002282774.1_VITVI 568 0.073 0.073 0.086 0.927 _ 1 XP_002282774.1|VITVI 0.01 0.05 0.00 0.94 none
XP_002285696.1_VITVI 623 0.916 0.167 0.025 0.037 C 2 XP_002285696.1|VITVI 0.01 0.93 0.00 0.07 plastid
XP_002285697.1_VITVI 615 0.916 0.167 0.025 0.037 C 2 XP_002285697.1|VITVI 0.01 0.93 0.00 0.07 plastid
XP_002301084.1_POPTR 616 0.754 0.273 0.071 0.066 C 3 XP_002301084.1|POPTR 0.15 0.90 0.03 0.08 plastid
XP_002312387.1_POPTR 568 0.147 0.075 0.097 0.902 _ 2 XP_002312387.1|POPTR 0.01 0.04 0.00 0.95 none
XP_002462509.1_SORBI 615 0.784 0.469 0.012 0.011 C 4 XP_002462509.1|SORBI 0.20 0.97 0.10 0.02 plastid
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjPGM1_LOTJA 635 0.982 0.015 0.006 0.080 C 1 LjPGM1|LOTJA 0.01 0.93 0.00 0.07 plastid
NP_001051066.1_ORYSA 582 0.032 0.414 0.030 0.891 _ 3 NP_001051066.1|ORYSA 0.12 0.02 0.01 0.85 none
NP_001064271.1_ORYSA 609 0.772 0.658 0.011 0.002 C 5 NP_001064271.1|ORYSA 0.20 0.54 0.14 0.32 plastid
NP_173732.1_PGMC_ARA 583 0.059 0.313 0.077 0.919 _ 2 NP_173732.1|PGMC|ARATH0.01 0.40 0.00 0.60 possibly plastid
NP_177230.1_PGMC_ARA 585 0.088 0.216 0.074 0.879 _ 2 NP_177230.1|PGMC|ARATH0.01 0.63 0.01 0.36 plastid
NP_199995.1_PGM1_ARA 623 0.361 0.247 0.014 0.032 C 5 NP_199995.1|PGM1|ARATH 0.03 0.95 0.09 0.04 plastid
XP_002263813.1_VITVI 614 0.880 0.161 0.013 0.020 C 2 XP_002263813.1|VITVI 0.04 0.93 0.02 0.06 plastid
XP_002284729.1_VITVI 583 0.029 0.642 0.019 0.893 _ 4 XP_002284729.1|VITVI 0.05 0.13 0.00 0.83 none
XP_002311517.1_POPTR 582 0.069 0.317 0.020 0.928 _ 2 XP_002311517.1|POPTR 0.01 0.12 0.00 0.87 none
XP_002315869.1_POPTR 582 0.060 0.292 0.029 0.923 _ 2 XP_002315869.1|POPTR 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.91 none
XP_002318262.1_POPTR 631 0.839 0.143 0.001 0.018 C 2 XP_002318262.1|POPTR 0.13 0.72 0.01 0.24 plastid
XP_002322433.1_POPTR 551 0.179 0.105 0.085 0.894 _ 2 XP_002322433.1|POPTR 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002458166.1_SORBI 608 0.421 0.834 0.005 0.013 M 3 XP_002458166.1|SORBI 0.43 0.60 0.04 0.22 plastid
XP_002466576.1_SORBI 649 0.985 0.125 0.002 0.025 C 1 XP_002466576.1|SORBI 0.07 0.54 0.16 0.36 plastid
AGPase
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjAPL1_LOTJA 520 0.319 0.181 0.037 0.413 _ 5 LjAPL1|LOTJA 0.02 0.76 0.00 0.24 plastid
LjAPL2a_LOTJA 527 0.669 0.123 0.006 0.288 C 4 LjAPL2a|LOTJA 0.01 0.24 0.00 0.76 possibly plastid
LjAPL2b_LOTJA 516 0.788 0.030 0.039 0.297 C 3 LjAPL2b|LOTJA 0.01 0.19 0.02 0.80 none
LjAPL3_LOTJA 521 0.243 0.037 0.030 0.786 _ 3 LjAPL3|LOTJA 0.01 0.27 0.00 0.72 possibly plastid
LjAPL4_LOTJA 530 0.222 0.069 0.016 0.614 _ 4 LjAPL4|LOTJA 0.01 0.84 0.00 0.16 plastid
LjAPL5_LOTJA 517 0.359 0.393 0.003 0.017 M 5 LjAPL5|LOTJA 0.26 0.04 0.03 0.69 possibly mitochondrial
LjAPS1_LOTJA 520 0.987 0.027 0.004 0.016 C 1 LjAPS1|LOTJA 0.09 0.96 0.02 0.04 plastid
NP_001043654_ORYSA 518 0.282 0.231 0.019 0.629 _ 4 NP_001043654|ORYSA 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.97 none
NP_001051184_ORYSA 511 0.673 0.228 0.014 0.028 C 3 NP_001051184|ORYSA 0.19 0.58 0.04 0.33 plastid
NP_001056424_ORYSA 522 0.658 0.034 0.060 0.354 C 4 NP_001056424|ORYSA Discarding NP_001056424|ORYSA: no terminal Met
NP_001059276_ORYSA 509 0.745 0.271 0.031 0.083 C 3 NP_001059276|ORYSA 0.06 0.95 0.02 0.04 plastid
NP_001061603_ORYSA 479 0.584 0.119 0.044 0.207 C 4 NP_001061603|ORYSA 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.96 none
NP_001062808_ORYSA 500 0.585 0.135 0.022 0.038 C 3 NP_001062808|ORYSA 0.09 0.89 0.04 0.10 plastid
NP_172052_AtAPS2_ARA 476 0.457 0.120 0.021 0.219 C 4 NP_172052|AtAPS2|ARATH 0.02 0.19 0.01 0.79 none
NP_174089_AtAPL2_ARA 518 0.359 0.037 0.030 0.516 _ 5 NP_174089|AtAPL2|ARATH 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.96 none
NP_179753_AtAPL4_ARA 523 0.453 0.050 0.083 0.530 _ 5 NP_179753|AtAPL4|ARATH 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.92 none
NP_195632_AtAPL3_ARA 521 0.252 0.029 0.023 0.871 _ 2 NP_195632|AtAPL3|ARATH 0.01 0.32 0.00 0.68 possibly plastid
NP_197423_AtAPL1_ARA 522 0.923 0.031 0.003 0.072 C 1 NP_197423|AtAPL1|ARATH 0.03 0.60 0.00 0.39 plastid
NP_199641_AtAPS1_ARA 520 0.976 0.013 0.008 0.044 C 1 NP_199641|AtAPS1|ARATH 0.10 0.92 0.01 0.07 plastid
XP_002263255_VITVI 509 0.967 0.043 0.004 0.050 C 1 XP_002263255|VITVI 0.01 0.96 0.03 0.03 plastid
XP_002274245_VITVI 466 0.028 0.192 0.077 0.628 _ 3 XP_002274245|VITVI 0.57 0.00 0.03 0.42 mitochondrial
XP_002276188_VITVI 486 0.814 0.027 0.024 0.136 C 2 XP_002276188|VITVI 0.01 0.36 0.03 0.62 possibly plastid
XP_002281069_VITVI 520 0.259 0.202 0.029 0.359 _ 5 XP_002281069|VITVI 0.03 0.43 0.00 0.55 possibly plastid
XP_002281223_VITVI 524 0.401 0.084 0.015 0.631 _ 4 XP_002281223|VITVI 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.97 none
XP_002283855_VITVI 527 0.195 0.106 0.025 0.599 _ 3 XP_002283855|VITVI 0.01 0.04 0.01 0.94 none
XP_002300758_POPTR 528 0.143 0.033 0.108 0.637 _ 3 XP_002300758|POPTR 0.01 0.12 0.02 0.85 none
XP_002306116_POPTR 526 0.103 0.080 0.024 0.833 _ 2 XP_002306116|POPTR 0.01 0.11 0.00 0.89 none
XP_002307668_POPTR 475 0.051 0.115 0.246 0.736 _ 3 XP_002307668|POPTR Discarding XP_002307668|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002310375_POPTR 434 0.142 0.291 0.194 0.207 M 5 XP_002310375|POPTR Discarding XP_002310375|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002311802_POPTR 528 0.241 0.401 0.020 0.044 M 5 XP_002311802|POPTR 0.01 0.23 0.01 0.76 possibly plastid
XP_002313036_POPTR 527 0.212 0.039 0.016 0.845 _ 2 XP_002313036|POPTR 0.01 0.05 0.00 0.94 none
XP_002320247_POPTR 445 0.277 0.102 0.097 0.474 _ 5 XP_002320247|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002321214_POPTR 522 0.975 0.184 0.001 0.010 C 2 XP_002321214|POPTR 0.26 0.96 0.00 0.03 plastid
XP_002331645_POPTR 428 0.109 0.280 0.109 0.239 M 5 XP_002331645|POPTR Discarding XP_002331645|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002440313_SORBI 519 0.892 0.036 0.006 0.265 C 2 XP_002440313|SORBI 0.01 0.68 0.01 0.32 plastid
XP_002456012_SORBI 517 0.738 0.080 0.008 0.525 C 4 XP_002456012|SORBI 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.98 none
XP_002462140_SORBI 510 0.887 0.028 0.007 0.121 C 2 XP_002462140|SORBI 0.03 0.97 0.02 0.03 plastid
XP_002463921_SORBI 507 0.325 0.459 0.007 0.041 M 5 XP_002463921|SORBI 0.51 0.48 0.04 0.24 mitochondrial
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence Mitochond Plastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
ACB30384.1_LjGBSS1a_ 610 0.504 0.326 0.009 0.095 C 5 ACB30384.1|LjGBSS1a|LO 0.08 0.94 0.01 0.06 plastid
ACB30385.1_LjGBSS1b_ 614 0.878 0.144 0.028 0.034 C 2 ACB30385.1|LjGBSS1b|LO 0.06 0.93 0.00 0.06 plastid
ACL98481.1_LjSS2a_LO 792 0.632 0.015 0.179 0.442 C 5 ACL98481.1|LjSS2a|LOTJA 0.01 0.58 0.03 0.40 plastid
ACL98482.1_LjSS2b_LO 800 0.714 0.013 0.414 0.044 C 4 ACL98482.1|LjSS2b|LOTJA 0.02 0.04 0.99 0.01 ER
LjSS1_1_LOTJA 245 0.072 0.080 0.086 0.954 _ 1 LjSS1_1|LOTJA
LjSS1_2_LOTJA 304 0.176 0.815 0.007 0.079 M 2 LjSS1_2|LOTJA 0.04 0.06 0.01 0.90 none
LjSS5_LOTJA 687 0.808 0.297 0.024 0.033 C 3 LjSS5|LOTJA 0.04 0.04 0.91 0.09 ER
NP_001056881.1_ORYSA 641 0.946 0.145 0.006 0.030 C 1 NP_001056881.1|ORYSA 0.07 0.95 0.02 0.05 plastid
AAL16661.1_ORYSA 810 0.934 0.050 0.100 0.003 C 1 AAL16661.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.83 0.10 0.15 plastid
AAK81729.1_ORYSA 694 0.955 0.225 0.008 0.014 C 2 AAK81729.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.93 0.03 0.06 plastid
AAK64284.1_ORYSA 749 0.868 0.037 0.008 0.127 C 2 AAK64284.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.97 0.00 0.03 plastid
NP_001053933.1_ORYSA 1216 0.864 0.290 0.002 0.027 C 3 NP_001053933.1|ORYSA 0.02 0.62 0.02 0.37 plastid
NP_001044091.1_ORYSA 972 0.863 0.114 0.042 0.007 C 2 NP_001044091.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.88 0.02 0.12 plastid
NP_001056142.1_ORYSA 915 0.936 0.466 0.004 0.005 C 3 NP_001056142.1|ORYSA 0.25 0.90 0.03 0.08 plastid
NP_001048453.1_ORYSA 403 0.035 0.140 0.246 0.719 _ 3 NP_001048453.1|ORYSA
NP_001056704.1_ORYSA 609 0.948 0.084 0.005 0.022 C 1 NP_001056704.1|ORYSA 0.03 0.92 0.00 0.08 plastid
NP_001059450.1_ORYSA 608 0.220 0.291 0.009 0.358 _ 5 NP_001059450.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.25 0.00 0.74 possibly plastid
NP_197818.1_ATSS1_AR 652 0.938 0.165 0.005 0.027 C 2 NP_197818.1|ATSS1|ARAT 0.05 0.95 0.00 0.05 plastid
NP_186767.1_ATSS2_AR 792 0.938 0.162 0.011 0.032 C 2 NP_186767.1|ATSS2|ARAT 0.01 0.95 0.00 0.05 plastid
NP_172637.1_ATSS3_AR 1025 0.818 0.083 0.020 0.124 C 2 NP_172637.1|ATSS3|ARAT 0.10 0.01 0.00 0.89 none
NP_193558.3_ATSS4_AR 1040 0.779 0.113 0.051 0.033 C 2 NP_193558.3|ATSS4|ARAT 0.10 0.50 0.00 0.45 plastid
NP_569018.1_ATSS5_AR 460 0.812 0.265 0.035 0.070 C 3 NP_569018.1|ATSS5|ARAT 0.20 0.10 0.00 0.72 possibly mitochondrial
NP_174566.1_ATGBSS_A 610 0.910 0.048 0.006 0.032 C 1 NP_174566.1|ATGBSS|AR 0.04 0.92 0.00 0.07 plastid
Discarding LjSS1_1|LOTJA: no terminal Met
Discarding NP_001048453.1|ORYSA: no terminal Met
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several higher plant
species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
XP_002321996.1_POPTR 649 0.244 0.301 0.021 0.540 _ 4 XP_002321996.1|POPTR 0.01 0.47 0.00 0.53 possibly plastid
XP_002277372.1_VITVI 633 0.437 0.040 0.129 0.150 C 4 XP_002277372.1|VITVI 0.07 0.53 0.02 0.42 plastid
XP_002278470.1_VITVI 772 0.902 0.098 0.052 0.053 C 1 XP_002278470.1|VITVI 0.04 0.93 0.00 0.06 plastid
XP_002269011.1_VITVI 1140 0.351 0.304 0.019 0.209 C 5 XP_002269011.1|VITVI 0.01 0.21 0.00 0.79 possibly plastid
XP_002274716.1_VITVI 1011 0.907 0.331 0.007 0.012 C 3 XP_002274716.1|VITVI 0.19 0.64 0.00 0.29 plastid
ACD13789.1_VITVI 682 0.722 0.095 0.072 0.405 C 4 ACD13789.1|VITVI 0.01 0.14 0.01 0.85 none
XP_002273608.1_VITVI 614 0.801 0.180 0.012 0.204 C 3 XP_002273608.1|VITVI 0.02 0.69 0.00 0.30 plastid
XP_002279034.1_VITVI 605 0.879 0.073 0.004 0.148 C 2 XP_002279034.1|VITVI 0.02 0.93 0.00 0.07 plastid
XP_002324061.1_POPTR 742 0.787 0.042 0.048 0.591 C 5 XP_002324061.1|POPTR 0.01 0.77 0.00 0.22 plastid
XP_002305571.1_POPTR 1017 0.374 0.344 0.041 0.310 C 5 XP_002305571.1|POPTR 0.03 0.00 0.01 0.96 none
XP_002298514.1_POPTR 887 0.082 0.230 0.049 0.738 _ 3 XP_002298514.1|POPTR
XP_002310316.1_POPTR 669 0.748 0.116 0.149 0.106 C 3 XP_002310316.1|POPTR 0.01 0.26 0.02 0.72 possibly plastid
XP_002300507.1_POPTR 610 0.845 0.128 0.018 0.185 C 2 XP_002300507.1|POPTR 0.01 0.81 0.00 0.19 plastid
XP_002317054.1_POPTR 585 0.961 0.043 0.012 0.111 C 1 XP_002317054.1|POPTR 0.01 0.86 0.00 0.14 plastid
ACC86844.1_SORBI 743 0.899 0.081 0.054 0.004 C 1 ACC86844.1|SORBI 0.01 0.93 0.04 0.06 plastid
ACC86845.1_SORBI 704 0.951 0.134 0.024 0.002 C 1 ACC86845.1|SORBI 0.01 0.83 0.15 0.14 plastid
ABY27640.1_SORBI 765 0.907 0.025 0.035 0.081 C 1 ABY27640.1|SORBI 0.01 0.81 0.12 0.17 plastid
XP_002443985.1_SORBI 1664 0.492 0.431 0.002 0.038 C 5 XP_002443985.1|SORBI 0.29 0.52 0.22 0.26 plastid
XP_002448557.1_SORBI 1173 0.514 0.743 0.002 0.011 M 4 XP_002448557.1|SORBI 0.14 0.61 0.07 0.31 plastid
XP_002440128.1_SORBI 909 0.966 0.100 0.014 0.010 C 1 XP_002440128.1|SORBI 0.07 0.69 0.01 0.28 plastid
XP_002453009.1_SORBI 277 0.061 0.294 0.026 0.861 _ 3 XP_002453009.1|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002436418.1_SORBI 608 0.688 0.262 0.012 0.042 C 3 XP_002436418.1|SORBI 0.03 0.55 0.00 0.44 plastid
XP_002461889.1_SORBI 607 0.875 0.068 0.005 0.056 C 1 XP_002461889.1|SORBI 0.02 0.91 0.03 0.08 plastid
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence Mitochond Plastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjSBE1_LOTJA 848 0.918 0.064 0.023 0.088 C 1 LjSBE1|LOTJA 0.01 0.96 0.00 0.04 plastid
BAA82828.1_ORYSA 841 0.163 0.488 0.016 0.155 M 4 BAA82828.1|ORYSA 0.17 0.11 0.03 0.71 none
NP_001047009.1_ORYSA 825 0.935 0.178 0.004 0.018 C 2 NP_001047009.1|ORYSA 0.18 0.97 0.01 0.03 plastid
NP_001057611.1_ORYSA 903 0.973 0.135 0.005 0.049 C 1 NP_001057611.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.89 0.00 0.11 plastid
NP_001058629.1_ORYSA 820 0.931 0.029 0.049 0.036 C 1 NP_001058629.1|ORYSA 0.02 0.30 0.01 0.68 possibly plastid
NP_181180.1_SBE2.1_A 858 0.898 0.097 0.003 0.109 C 2 NP_181180.1|SBE2.1|ARA 0.11 0.63 0.01 0.32 plastid
NP_188679.2_BE1_ARAT 869 0.643 0.296 0.034 0.102 C 4 NP_188679.2|BE1|ARATH 0.06 0.33 0.00 0.63 possibly plastid
NP_195985.3_SBE2.2_A 805 0.511 0.427 0.009 0.083 C 5 NP_195985.3|SBE2.2|ARA 0.38 0.10 0.02 0.55 possibly mitochondrial
XP_002277213.1_VITVI 1068 0.180 0.169 0.256 0.113 S 5 XP_002277213.1|VITVI 0.33 0.17 0.14 0.47 possibly mitochondrial
XP_002278858.1_VITVI 866 0.933 0.099 0.019 0.061 C 1 XP_002278858.1|VITVI 0.03 0.89 0.00 0.10 plastid
XP_002284841.1_VITVI 817 0.222 0.272 0.066 0.558 _ 4 XP_002284841.1|VITVI 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.98 none
ABN05323.1_POPTR 896 0.692 0.058 0.485 0.009 C 4 ABN05323.1|POPTR 0.02 0.55 0.01 0.44 plastid
XP_002307789.1_POPTR 701 0.098 0.113 0.144 0.884 _ 2 XP_002307789.1|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002326414.1_POPTR 730 0.238 0.072 0.049 0.925 _ 2 XP_002326414.1|POPTR 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002439059.1_SORBI 668 0.968 0.101 0.009 0.034 C 1 XP_002439059.1|SORBI 0.04 0.58 0.04 0.39 plastid
XP_002447772.1_SORBI 827 0.804 0.220 0.011 0.045 C 3 XP_002447772.1|SORBI 0.20 0.67 0.02 0.26 plastid
XP_002453926.1_SORBI 803 0.685 0.249 0.020 0.096 C 3 XP_002453926.1|SORBI 0.35 0.53 0.02 0.30 plastid
XP_002455921.1_SORBI 906 0.650 0.131 0.005 0.118 C 3 XP_002455921.1|SORBI 0.01 0.21 0.14 0.68 possibly plastid
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjISA1_LOTJA 791 0.860 0.067 0.082 0.165 C 2 LjISA1|LOTJA 0.04 0.66 0.00 0.33 plastid
LjISA2_LOTJA 590 0.048 0.285 0.481 0.092 S 5 LjISA2|LOTJA Discarding LjISA2|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjLDA_LOTJA 559 0.106 0.077 0.135 0.835 _ 2 LjLDA|LOTJA Discarding LjLDA|LOTJA: no terminal Met
BAD19754.1_ORYSA 700 0.209 0.138 0.053 0.864 _ 2 BAD19754.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.98 none
NP_001052129.1_ORYSA 621 0.384 0.085 0.077 0.653 _ 4 NP_001052129.1|ORYSA Discarding NP_001052129.1|ORYSA: no terminal Met
NP_001055456.1_ORYSA 817 0.684 0.233 0.040 0.204 C 3 NP_001055456.1|ORYSA 0.03 0.61 0.01 0.38 plastid
NP_001062271.1_ORYSA 700 0.026 0.412 0.198 0.499 _ 5 NP_001062271.1|ORYSA Discarding NP_001062271.1|ORYSA: no terminal Met
NP_181522.1_ATISA1_A 783 0.659 0.061 0.034 0.232 C 3 NP_181522.1|ATISA1|ARATH0.02 0.13 0.00 0.85 none
NP_192641.2_ATISA3_A 764 0.976 0.011 0.016 0.112 C 1 NP_192641.2|ATISA3|ARATH0.01 0.32 0.01 0.67 possibly plastid
NP_196056.2_ATLDA_AR 965 0.903 0.053 0.004 0.023 C 1 NP_196056.2|ATLDA|ARATH0.31 0.97 0.01 0.02 plastid
NP_973751.1_ATISA2_A 882 0.859 0.069 0.017 0.116 C 2 NP_973751.1|ATISA2|ARATH0.03 0.85 0.00 0.15 plastid
XP_002265964.1_VITVI 742 0.108 0.170 0.290 0.272 S 5 XP_002265964.1|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.09 0.90 none
XP_002271798.1_VITVI 882 0.189 0.151 0.175 0.264 _ 5 XP_002271798.1|VITVI 0.04 0.11 0.02 0.84 none
XP_002271820.1_VITVI 907 0.007 0.239 0.605 0.557 S 5 XP_002271820.1|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.30 0.69 possibly ER
XP_002284042.1_VITVI 787 0.680 0.030 0.041 0.384 C 4 XP_002284042.1|VITVI 0.01 0.25 0.01 0.73 possibly plastid
XP_002301076.1_POPTR 819 0.773 0.021 0.153 0.116 C 2 XP_002301076.1|POPTR 0.01 0.06 0.00 0.93 none
XP_002308090.1_POPTR 826 0.666 0.133 0.028 0.184 C 3 XP_002308090.1|POPTR 0.02 0.12 0.00 0.87 none
XP_002315334.1_POPTR 893 0.055 0.274 0.242 0.617 _ 4 XP_002315334.1|POPTR 0.01 0.03 0.04 0.93 none
XP_002324659.1_POPTR 801 0.665 0.111 0.025 0.053 C 3 XP_002324659.1|POPTR 0.09 0.27 0.01 0.66 possibly plastid
XP_002441051.1_SORBI 800 0.884 0.318 0.019 0.056 C 3 XP_002441051.1|SORBI 0.02 0.96 0.00 0.04 plastid
XP_002445873.1_SORBI 784 0.672 0.341 0.010 0.033 C 4 XP_002445873.1|SORBI 0.24 0.29 0.03 0.53 possibly plastid
XP_002446086.1_SORBI 966 0.909 0.233 0.007 0.014 C 2 XP_002446086.1|SORBI 0.08 0.76 0.02 0.22 plastid
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjGWD1_LOTJA 1463 0.133 0.230 0.681 _ 3 LjGWD1|LOTJA 0.01 0.71 0.00 0.29 plastid
LjGWD3_LOTJA 1175 0.749 0.019 0.389 M 4 LjGWD3|LOTJA 0.06 0.00 0.01 0.93 none
NP_001057699.1_ORYSA 1414 0.939 0.015 0.109 M 1 NP_001057699.1|ORYSA Discarding NP_001057699.1|ORYSA: no terminal Met
NP_001066613.1_ORYSA 1206 0.677 0.031 0.364 M 4 NP_001066613.1|ORYSA 0.15 0.11 0.04 0.73 none
NP_194176.3_ATGWD2_A 1278 0.104 0.080 0.864 _ 2 NP_194176.3|ATGWD2|ARATH0.01 0.00 0.03 0.96 none
NP_198009.3_ATGWD3_A 1196 0.435 0.022 0.716 _ 4 NP_198009.3|ATGWD3|ARATH0.01 0.54 0.00 0.46 plastid
NP_563877.1_GWD1_ARA 1399 0.623 0.049 0.408 M 4 NP_563877.1|GWD1|ARATH0.12 0.04 0.00 0.84 none
XP_002265211.1_VITVI 1188 0.335 0.037 0.719 _ 4 XP_002265211.1|VITVI 0.05 0.21 0.00 0.76 possibly plastid
XP_002270485.1_VITVI 1470 0.521 0.058 0.452 M 5 XP_002270485.1|VITVI 0.16 0.03 0.00 0.81 none
XP_002315679.1_POPTR 1477 0.645 0.033 0.484 M 5 XP_002315679.1|POPTR 0.05 0.43 0.00 0.54 possibly plastid
XP_002438419.1_SORBI 1469 0.759 0.084 0.184 M 3 XP_002438419.1|SORBI 0.14 0.90 0.00 0.09 plastid
XP_002453659.1_SORBI 1212 0.695 0.047 0.281 M 3 XP_002453659.1|SORBI 0.01 0.10 0.01 0.88 none
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjAMY1_LOTJA 423 0.039 0.005 0.985 0.039 S 1 LjAMY1|LOTJA 0.01 0.03 0.97 0.03 ER
LjAMY2_LOTJA 291 0.065 0.102 0.213 0.867 _ 2 LjAMY2|LOTJA Discarding LjAMY2|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjAMY3a_LOTJA 391 0.045 0.580 0.026 0.191 M 4 LjAMY3a|LOTJA Discarding LjAMY3a|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjAMY3b_LOTJA 912 0.595 0.352 0.002 0.167 C 4 LjAMY3b|LOTJA 0.03 0.29 0.01 0.68 possibly plastid
NP_001044062.1_ORYSA 876 0.879 0.226 0.006 0.043 C 2 NP_001044062.1|ORYSA 0.17 0.73 0.05 0.21 plastid
NP_001048220_ORYSA 434 0.002 0.103 0.983 0.034 S 1 NP_001048220|ORYSA 0.01 0.00 0.72 0.27 ER
NP_001052697.1_ORYSA 469 0.056 0.409 0.044 0.619 _ 4 NP_001052697.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.97 none
NP_001058568_ORYSA 445 0.004 0.099 0.974 0.035 S 1 NP_001058568|ORYSA 0.05 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
NP_001062023_ORYSA 437 0.006 0.027 0.993 0.013 S 1 NP_001062023|ORYSA 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
NP_001062024_ORYSA 476 0.338 0.077 0.066 0.730 _ 4 NP_001062024|ORYSA 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.97 none
NP_001063367_ORYSA 440 0.002 0.050 0.994 0.026 S 1 NP_001063367|ORYSA 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
NP_001063368_ORYSA 438 0.004 0.033 0.995 0.014 S 1 NP_001063368|ORYSA 0.04 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
NP_001063369_ORYSA 437 0.003 0.027 0.995 0.024 S 1 NP_001063369|ORYSA 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
Discarding XP_002298514.1|POPTR: no terminal Met
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several higher plant
species.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
NP_177740.1_AMY2_ARA 413 0.166 0.073 0.092 0.923 _ 2 NP_177740.1|AMY2|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
NP_564977.1_AMY3_ARA 887 0.916 0.082 0.007 0.043 C 1 NP_564977.1|AMY3|ARATH 0.01 0.47 0.00 0.52 possibly plastid
NP_567714.1_AMY1_ARA 423 0.010 0.010 0.992 0.027 S 1 NP_567714.1|AMY1|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002270049.1_VITVI 901 0.796 0.222 0.003 0.124 C 3 XP_002270049.1|VITVI 0.04 0.13 0.01 0.83 none
XP_002282184_VITVI 425 0.039 0.002 0.991 0.078 S 1 XP_002282184|VITVI 0.01 0.01 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002284805.1_VITVI 459 0.590 0.223 0.016 0.462 C 5 XP_002284805.1|VITVI 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.98 none
XP_002285213_VITVI 424 0.042 0.003 0.980 0.095 S 1 XP_002285213|VITVI 0.01 0.01 0.98 0.01 ER
XP_002301187_POPTR 404 0.073 0.286 0.075 0.510 _ 4 XP_002301187|POPTR 0.01 0.11 0.04 0.85 none
XP_002301935.1_POPTR 406 0.052 0.222 0.100 0.862 _ 2 XP_002301935.1|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002327139_POPTR 423 0.008 0.013 0.984 0.025 S 1 XP_002327139|POPTR 0.01 0.01 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002444507_SORBI 443 0.001 0.135 0.982 0.026 S 1 XP_002444507|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002446386.1_SORBI 415 0.193 0.055 0.047 0.915 _ 2 XP_002446386.1|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002452881_SORBI 428 0.006 0.018 0.995 0.024 S 1 XP_002452881|SORBI 0.02 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002454601_SORBI 428 0.006 0.019 0.993 0.023 S 1 XP_002454601|SORBI 0.02 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002456247.1_SORBI 820 0.023 0.033 0.973 0.081 S 1 XP_002456247.1|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002460331_SORBI 437 0.005 0.021 0.996 0.020 S 1 XP_002460331|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002460332_SORBI 437 0.005 0.021 0.996 0.020 S 1 XP_002460332|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
XP_002462321_SORBI 435 0.004 0.088 0.975 0.009 S 1 XP_002462321|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.99 0.01 ER
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjBAM1_LOTJA 561 0.929 0.029 0.012 0.221 C 2 LjBAM1|LOTJA 0.01 0.64 0.00 0.36 plastid
LjBAM3a_LOTJA 249 0.187 0.869 0.003 0.055 M 2 LjBAM3a|LOTJA Discarding LjBAM3a|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjBAM3b_1_LOTJA 465 0.523 0.047 0.158 0.467 C 5 LjBAM3b_1|LOTJA 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.94 none
LjBAM3b_2_LOTJA 298 0.106 0.232 0.119 0.825 _ 3 LjBAM3b_2|LOTJA Discarding LjBAM3b_2|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjBAM5_LOTJA 496 0.006 0.052 0.953 0.159 S 2 LjBAM5|LOTJA 0.01 0.00 0.98 0.02 ER
LjBAM6_LOTJA 350 0.154 0.081 0.234 0.785 _ 3 LjBAM6|LOTJA 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.99 none
LjBAM7_LOTJA 652 0.409 0.034 0.035 0.903 _ 3 LjBAM7|LOTJA 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.99 none
LjBAM8_LOTJA 656 0.168 0.176 0.059 0.809 _ 2 LjBAM8|LOTJA 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
LjBAM9_LOTJA 505 0.211 0.067 0.043 0.698 _ 3 LjBAM9|LOTJA 0.01 0.51 0.01 0.48 plastid
NP_001059906_ORYSA 600 0.966 0.221 0.001 0.019 C 2 NP_001059906|ORYSA 0.02 0.93 0.05 0.06 plastid
NP_001063976_ORYSA 533 0.888 0.087 0.006 0.018 C 1 NP_001063976|ORYSA 0.15 0.46 0.38 0.29 plastid
NP_001065418_ORYSA 544 0.791 0.068 0.061 0.171 C 2 NP_001065418|ORYSA 0.01 0.72 0.00 0.28 plastid
NP_180788_BAM6_ARATH 577 0.357 0.181 0.014 0.600 _ 4 NP_180788|BAM6|ARATH 0.02 0.75 0.00 0.25 plastid
NP_182112_BAM7_ARATH 691 0.037 0.090 0.045 0.972 _ 1 NP_182112|BAM7|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
NP_189034_BAM1_ARATH 575 0.462 0.172 0.035 0.331 C 5 NP_189034|BAM1|ARATH 0.01 0.51 0.00 0.48 plastid
NP_191958.3_BAM2_ARA 542 0.870 0.227 0.031 0.017 C 2 NP_191958.3|BAM2|ARATH 0.36 0.72 0.02 0.17 plastid
NP_197368_BAM9_ARATH 536 0.205 0.228 0.011 0.235 _ 5 NP_197368|BAM9|ARATH 0.01 0.61 0.00 0.38 plastid
NP_199343_BAM8_ARATH 689 0.565 0.044 0.009 0.750 _ 5 NP_199343|BAM8|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
NP_567460_BAM5_ARATH 498 0.002 0.053 0.974 0.287 S 2 NP_567460|BAM5|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.91 0.09 ER
NP_567523_BAM3_ARATH 548 0.790 0.087 0.025 0.325 C 3 NP_567523|BAM3|ARATH 0.01 0.25 0.00 0.74 possibly plastid
NP_568829_BAM4_ARATH 531 0.289 0.099 0.003 0.597 _ 4 NP_568829|BAM4|ARATH 0.01 0.04 0.00 0.95 none
XP_002265698_VITVI 522 0.085 0.105 0.007 0.860 _ 2 XP_002265698|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002270680_VITVI 670 0.346 0.131 0.034 0.609 _ 4 XP_002270680|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002273843_VITVI 699 0.065 0.070 0.043 0.951 _ 1 XP_002273843|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002274612_VITVI 580 0.957 0.053 0.014 0.007 C 1 XP_002274612|VITVI 0.02 0.85 0.01 0.15 plastid
XP_002276777_VITVI 541 0.091 0.813 0.007 0.088 M 2 XP_002276777|VITVI 0.11 0.93 0.01 0.06 plastid
XP_002281003_VITVI 520 0.023 0.093 0.641 0.725 _ 5 XP_002281003|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.94 none
XP_002282871_VITVI 543 0.810 0.071 0.010 0.349 C 3 XP_002282871|VITVI 0.10 0.36 0.02 0.56 possibly plastid
XP_002285569_VITVI 573 0.772 0.054 0.018 0.336 C 3 XP_002285569|VITVI 0.02 0.64 0.01 0.35 plastid
XP_002304400_POPTR 701 0.483 0.035 0.005 0.740 _ 4 XP_002304400|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002311706_POPTR 562 0.862 0.036 0.009 0.311 C 3 XP_002311706|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002312750_POPTR 437 0.028 0.193 0.132 0.725 _ 3 XP_002312750|POPTR Discarding XP_002312750|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002314522_POPTR 472 0.111 0.151 0.180 0.831 _ 2 XP_002314522|POPTR Discarding XP_002314522|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002320794_POPTR 437 0.014 0.036 0.873 0.499 S 4 XP_002320794|POPTR Discarding XP_002320794|POPTR: no terminal Met
XP_002326690_POPTR 547 0.683 0.045 0.034 0.381 C 4 XP_002326690|POPTR 0.01 0.49 0.00 0.50 possibly plastid
XP_002327920_POPTR 519 0.009 0.089 0.761 0.686 S 5 XP_002327920|POPTR 0.01 0.00 0.46 0.54 possibly ER
XP_002329547_POPTR 548 0.412 0.392 0.006 0.092 C 5 XP_002329547|POPTR 0.48 0.43 0.02 0.29 mitochondrial
XP_002459849_SORBI 469 0.082 0.142 0.141 0.914 _ 2 XP_002459849|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002460819_SORBI 604 0.923 0.220 0.004 0.031 C 2 XP_002460819|SORBI 0.02 0.55 0.03 0.43 plastid
XP_002464915_SORBI 557 0.760 0.047 0.016 0.266 C 3 XP_002464915|SORBI 0.01 0.91 0.00 0.09 plastid
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjDPE1_LOTJA 565 0.761 0.374 0.017 0.052 C 4 LjDPE1|LOTJA 0.16 0.36 0.00 0.53 possibly plastid
LjDPE2_1_LOTJA 343 0.227 0.040 0.173 0.918 _ 2 LjDPE2_1|LOTJA Discarding LjDPE2_1|LOTJA: no terminal Met
LjDPE2_2_LOTJA 371 0.190 0.200 0.064 0.079 M 5 LjDPE2_2|LOTJA 0.33 0.10 0.04 0.58 possibly mitochondrial
NP_001043271.1_ORYSA 657 0.294 0.261 0.029 0.442 _ 5 NP_001043271.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.97 none
NP_001060342.1_ORYSA 601 0.772 0.288 0.027 0.028 C 3 NP_001060342.1|ORYSA 0.18 0.72 0.05 0.22 plastid
NP_201291.1_DPE1_ARA 576 0.702 0.261 0.028 0.019 C 3 NP_201291.1|DPE1|ARATH 0.76 0.84 0.06 0.03 plastid
NP_850336.1_DPE2_ARA 658 0.288 0.075 0.115 0.598 _ 4 NP_850336.1|DPE2|ARATH 0.01 0.26 0.01 0.72 possibly plastid
XP_002276109.1_VITVI 583 0.644 0.062 0.308 0.086 C 4 XP_002276109.1|VITVI 0.02 0.50 0.04 0.48 plastid
XP_002283436.1_VITVI 659 0.327 0.170 0.167 0.412 _ 5 XP_002283436.1|VITVI 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.97 none
XP_002283443.1_VITVI 669 0.232 0.253 0.176 0.451 _ 5 XP_002283443.1|VITVI 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.97 none
XP_002310024.1_POPTR 574 0.691 0.047 0.221 0.048 C 3 XP_002310024.1|POPTR 0.19 0.15 0.16 0.58 none
XP_002323217.1_POPTR 661 0.457 0.100 0.115 0.545 _ 5 XP_002323217.1|POPTR 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.97 none
XP_002455756.1_SORBI 652 0.206 0.317 0.027 0.419 _ 5 XP_002455756.1|SORBI 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.97 none
XP_002461064.1_SORBI 590 0.630 0.732 0.006 0.013 M 5 XP_002461064.1|SORBI 0.43 0.07 0.23 0.41 mitochondrial
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjPHS2a_LOTJA 846 0.192 0.081 0.119 0.881 _ 2 LjPHS2a|LOTJA 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.98 none
LjPHS2b_LOTJA 226 0.025 0.404 0.146 0.664 _ 4 LjPHS2b|LOTJA Discarding LjPHS2b|LOTJA: no terminal Met
NP_001044823.1_ORYSA 841 0.369 0.029 0.305 0.636 _ 4 NP_001044823.1|ORYSA 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.98 none
NP_001051330.1_ORYSA 629 0.119 0.359 0.033 0.620 _ 4 NP_001051330.1|ORYSA Discarding NP_001051330.1|ORYSA: no terminal Met
NP_189578.1_PHS1_ARA 962 0.615 0.035 0.015 0.259 C 4 NP_189578.1|PHS1|ARATH 0.01 0.24 0.00 0.76 possibly plastid
NP_190281.1_PHS2_ARA 841 0.124 0.046 0.272 0.840 _ 3 NP_190281.1|PHS2|ARATH 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002273615.1_VITVI 818 0.050 0.247 0.124 0.803 _ 3 XP_002273615.1|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002274575.1_VITVI 981 0.982 0.072 0.003 0.038 C 1 XP_002274575.1|VITVI 0.01 0.97 0.00 0.03 plastid
XP_002279075.1_VITVI 958 0.967 0.037 0.008 0.061 C 1 XP_002279075.1|VITVI 0.01 0.97 0.00 0.03 plastid
XP_002280732.1_VITVI 843 0.158 0.063 0.376 0.713 _ 4 XP_002280732.1|VITVI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
XP_002305114.1_POPTR 818 0.049 0.297 0.068 0.868 _ 3 XP_002305114.1|POPTR 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.96 none
XP_002305367.1_POPTR 949 0.298 0.234 0.064 0.193 C 5 XP_002305367.1|POPTR 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.95 none
XP_002313399.1_POPTR 853 0.767 0.108 0.167 0.115 C 2 XP_002313399.1|POPTR 0.01 0.79 0.00 0.20 plastid
XP_002316098.1_POPTR 953 0.923 0.147 0.026 0.016 C 2 XP_002316098.1|POPTR 0.05 0.84 0.00 0.15 plastid
XP_002458773.1_SORBI 838 0.208 0.067 0.134 0.820 _ 2 XP_002458773.1|SORBI 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.99 none
Name Len cTP mTP SP other Loc RC Sequence MitochondrialPlastid ER Elsewhere Prediction
LjMEX1_LOTJA 400 0.458 0.568 0.009 0.095 M 5 LjMEX1|LOTJA 0.19 0.56 0.04 0.34 plastid
NP_001053772_ORYSA 399 0.803 0.194 0.009 0.057 C 2 NP_001053772|ORYSA 0.34 0.24 0.03 0.48 possibly mitochondrial
NP_568349_MEX1_ARATH 415 0.940 0.046 0.006 0.083 C 1 NP_568349|MEX1|ARATH 0.01 0.29 0.00 0.71 possibly plastid
XP_002265122_VITVI 405 0.694 0.157 0.007 0.093 C 3 XP_002265122|VITVI 0.02 0.64 0.08 0.33 plastid
XP_002319239_POPTR 294 0.005 0.184 0.516 0.305 S 4 XP_002319239|POPTR 0.40 0.24 0.17 0.38 mitochondrial
XP_002448464_SORBI 401 0.819 0.361 0.004 0.039 C 3 XP_002448464|SORBI 0.15 0.37 0.03 0.52 possibly plastid
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several higher plant
species. Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A3. Subcellular localisation prediction of the starch metabolism protein from several higher plant
species. Continued.
Predictions were carried using the programs TargetP (left panel) and Predotar (right panel) as
described in Chapter 2, section 2.7.1. The sequences of the proteins analysed are given in Table A2.
Proteins predicted by both programs to be plastidial are highlighted in green and those predicted to be
mitochondrial or secreted are highlighted in pale yellow and pale red, respectively. Abreviations for the
results given by TargetP: Name, sequence name; Len, sequence length; cTP, mTP, SP, final score on
which the final localisation prediction (Loc) is based: C, Chloroplast (i.e. the sequence contains a cTP,
a chloroplast transit peptide), M, Mitochondrion (i.e. the sequence contains a mTP, a mitochondrial
targeting peptide, and S, Secretory pathway (i.e. the sequence contains a SP, a signal peptide); the
symbol _ refers to any other location. RC, reliability class (from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates the strongest
prediction).
Appendix 1
Figure A4. Leaf starch granule micrographs of the gwd1-1 mutants and the MG-20 and Gifu WTs.
A. Light microscopy (LM) sections of leaf material (pool of two mature leaves from the top of the plant
for each genotype) harvested at the end of the night from plants grown in a greenhouse in LD
conditions. LM sections were prepared by Sue Bunnewell (JIC, Norwich, UK). This microscopy
sections were then staining with either Toluidine blue or iodine solution prior observation and imaging
under a light microscope as described in Chapter 2, section 2.5. B. Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) sections performed on the same leaf material than the one used for the LM sections. TEM
sections were prepared and micrographs were taken by Sue Bunnewell.
Appendix 1
Figure A5. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with those of
other species (full length sequence alignment).
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Figure A5. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of L. japonicus AGPase subunits with those of
other species (full length sequence alignment). Continued.
Comparison of the full length sequence of the small and large subunits from L. japonicus (L.jap) genes
with homologs from species including bacteria [E. coli (E.col) and A. tumefaciens (A.tum)],
cyanobacteria [Anabena sp. (Anab)] and plants [Arabidopsis thaliana (A.tha) and S. tuberosum
(S.tub)]. The alignment was made with the programs Clustal W2 (default settings) and GeneDoc.
Strictly conserved residues are highlighted in black, less conserved residues are in grey. The positions
of the mutations identified from forward screen and TILLING in LjAPL1 and LjAPS1 are indicated by
arrows. Residues marked in red interact with the substrates ADPGlc and/or ATP in the S. tuberosum
APS protein (Jin et al., 2005); those marked in blue may be important in the regulatory properties of
the enzyme (Kavakli et al., 2001; 2002). Residues marked in green are those involved in subunit
interactions according to Jin et al. Note that in this alignment the residue in the potato APS protein
equivalent to L. japonicus S400 is S401. Accession numbers for the sequences are given in Figure 29.
Appendix 1
Figure A6. Shoot and root phenotypes of the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutants of L. japonicus.
A and B. Phenotype of the whole plant (A) and root system (B) of the gwd1-2 mutant from a first
outcross to MG-20 (B1F2 generation). B-F. Phenotype of the whole plant (C and E) and root system (D
and F) of the gwd1-2 (C, D) and gwd1-3 (E, F) mutants in the Gifu genotype background (M5). A-F WT,
heterozygote, and mutant segregant plants (left, middle, and right, respectively) that were grown in a
controlled environment room under long day conditions (16 h light, 8 h dark) and were ca. 3 month old
at the time the photographs were taken. A representative plant of a minimum of seven biological
replicates are shown for each genotype These plants were grown for an acetylene reduction assay as
described in Chapter 2, section 2.1.3. Despite a certain degree of variable expressivity of the mutant
phenotype, all the gwd1-2/3 mutants isolated so far presented a strong impairment in growth and
reproduction together with signs of chlorosis and premature senescence (zoom on this phenotype is
shown on the left corner of each A-C panel) but were still able to produce nodules and fix atmospheric
nitrogen. Plants were grown and genotyped by Tracey Welham, and photographed by Andrew Davis
(JIC, Norwich, UK).
Appendix 1
Table A4.A
SL1833-1 (gwd1-2 ) SL3001-1 (gwd1-3 )
screen # screen #
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a
2 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 K9904 yes n/a n/a n/a
3 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a 3 L2211 yes n/a n/a n/a
4 L1614 no no yes no L2212 yes n/a n/a n/a
L1643 no no no n/a L2221 yes n/a n/a n/a
L1644 no yes n/a n/a 4 L1660 yes n/a n/a n/a
5 L2271 no no yes no 5 L2236 yes n/a n/a n/a
L2272 no yes n/a n/a L2257 no yes n/a n/a
L2308 yes n/a n/a n/a L2259 no no yes no
6 L2899 no no no n/a L2263 no yes n/a n/a
L2914 no no no n/a L2267 no no no n/a
ratio: 2/8 6 L2932 no no yes yes (2)
in %: 25,0 ratio: 2/11
in %: 18,2
Class # Class #
Table A4.B
SL1833-1 (gwd1-2 )
genotype
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 sum in %
WT 9 4 0 8 21 11 37 90 41
Het 3 4 0 9 31 31 38 116 53
M 0 0 0 3 3 2 5 13 6
sum 12 8 0 20 55 44 80 219 100
SL3001-1 (gwd1-3 )
genotype
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 sum in %
WT 6 5 6 11 12 12 37 89 44
Het 7 5 8 19 21 11 27 98 49
M 0 1 3 1 5 1 4 15 7
sum 13 11 17 31 38 24 68 202 100
screen # Actual ratio
Actual ratioscreen #
Table A4.C
SL1833-1 (gwd1-2 )
genotype Line pod nber seed weight (in g) seed nber seed nber/pod average seed weight seed weight/pod
Het L2880 20 0,321 318,0 15,9 0,0010 0,016
WT L2910 20 0,338 301,0 15,05 0,0011 0,017
SL3001-1 (gwd1-3 )
genotype Line pod nber seed weight (in g) seed nber seed nber/pod average seed weight seed weight/pod
Het L2931 20 0,175 167,0 8,35 0,0011 0,009
WT L2922 20 0,243 216,0 10,8 0,0011 0,012
Het L2937 10 0,091 92,0 9,2 0,0010 0,009
Het L2944 10 0,103 104,0 10,4 0,0010 0,010
WT L2930 10 0,070 87,0 8,7 0,0008 0,007
WT L2934 10 0,102 104,0 10,4 0,0010 0,010
average Het 40 0,370 363,0 9,075 0,0010 0,009
WT 40 0,415 407,0 10,175 0,0010 0,010
Table A4.D
SL1833-1 (gwd1-2 ) SL3001-1 (gwd1-3 )
genotype observed in % expected genotype observed in % expected
M 4 11 25 M 3 12 25
Het 18 49 50 Het 11 42 50
WT 15 41 25 W T 12 46 25
total 37 100 100 total 26 100 100
CHITEST (df=2): 0,000139829 CHITEST (df=2): 1,91522E-06
Average W T:het:M ratio for the tw o lines
genotype observed in % expected
M 3,5 11 25
Het 14,5 46 50
WT 13,5 43 25
total 31,5 100 100
CHITEST (df=2): 3,06448E-05
Table A4. Results of genotyping and phenotyping of the SL1833-1 andSL3001-1 TILLING mutant
lines.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A4. Results of genotyping and phenotyping of the SL1833-1 andSL3001-1 TILLING mutant
lines. Continued.
A. Several screens of segregating populations were performed for the two mutant lines in different
growth conditions and the phenotype and genotype of the plants recorded. Screens # 1, 2, and 3 were
performed on plants grown in a greenhouse under natural light and long day conditions. Plants of
screens #4 and 5 were grown in a greenhouse with supplemental lighting under long day conditions.
Lastly, screens # 6 and 7 were performed on plants grown in a controlled environment chamber under
a 16 h and 12 h photoperiod, respectively. Classes are as follow: 1. number of mutants isolated per
screening; 2. mutants that died when still young (ca or less than one month old); 3. mutants that died
before reached maturity (between ca on month and 4 month old); 4. mutants that flowered albeit an
important flowering time delay (two to three months) in comparison to the heterozygote and WT
segregants; 5. mutants that gave pods. B. Results of CHITEST (df=2) reveal that the actual ratio of
mutants versus heterozygotes and WTs in the segregating populations analysed is statistically
significantly different (P<0.0001) from the expected mendelian ratio for a single recessive mutation
(mutant:heterozygote:WT ratio of 1:2:1) for both mutant lines. The actual ratios obtained suggest a
case of partial gametophytic lethality and/or homozygote mutant lethality (expected ratio between the
heterozygote and homozygote WT of 1:1 and 2:1 for these two mode of inheritance, respectively). C.
Detailed results of the seed weight measurements performed on seeds harvested from pods of
heterozygote and WT segregant plants for the gwd1-2 and gwd1-3 mutant alleles. D. Detailed results
of the genotyping of seed embryos from pods of GWD1-2/gwd1-2 and GWD1-3/gwd1-3 heterozygote
plants. The difference of the mutant:heterozygote:WT actual ratios obtained for each lines and the
average of both (43:46:11) were statistically significant to the expected mendelian ratio of 1:2:1
according to the results of CHITEST (df=2). Lxxxx corresponds to the Zopra number attributed to the
plant.
Appendix 1
A. GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT GWD1-3/gwd1-3  x MG-20 WT
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
A 80304, 1 80310, 1 80311, 6 80313, 2 80314, 1 80315, 8 80318, 2 80319, 1 80319, 9 80321, 3 80323, 1 80323, 9
B 80305, 1 80310, 2 80311, 7 80313, 3 80315,1 80316, 1 80318, 3 80319, 2 80319, 10 80321, 4 80323, 2 90324, 1
C 80305, 2 80310, 3 80312, 1 80313, 4 80315,2 80316, 2 80318, 4 80319, 3 80320, 1 80321, 5 80323, 3 90324, 2
D 80307, 1 80311, 1 80312, 2 80313, 5 80315,3 80316, 3 80318, 5 80319, 4 80320, 2 80321, 6 80323, 4 90324, 3
E 80307, 2 80311, 2 80312, 3 80313, 6 80315,4 80316, 4 80318, 6 80319, 5 80320, 3 80322, 1 80323, 5 90324, 4
F 80307, 3 80311, 3 80312, 4 80313, 7 80315,5 80316, 5 80318, 7 80319, 6 80320, 4 80322, 2 80323, 6 90324, 5
G 80307, 4 80311, 4 80312, 5 80313, 8 80315,6 80317, 1 80318, 8 80319, 7 80321, 1 80322, 3 80323, 7 90324, 6
H 80308, 1 80311, 5 80313, 1 80313, 9 80315,7 80318, 1 80318, 9 80319, 8 80321, 2 80322, 4 80323, 8
B. GWD1-3/gwd1-3  x MG-20 WT GWD1-3/gwd1-3  x MG-20 WT
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
A WT WT WT WT WT Het Het WT WT Het WT WT
B Het WT WT WT WT WT n/a WT Het Het WT WT
C WT WT WT WT n/a WT Het Het WT WT Het Het
D Het WT WT WT WT Het WT WT Het WT Het WT
E WT WT WT WT WT WT WT Het Het WT WT WT
F n/a WT WT WT Het Het Het WT WT WT Het WT
G WT WT WT WT Het Het Het Het Het Het Het WT
H WT WT WT WT n/a Het WT Het Het Het WT
Table A5. Results of reciprocal crosses between a heterozygote (GWD1-3/gwd1-3) offspring of line
SL3001-1 (in Gifu background) and MG-20 WT plants.
A. Because L. japonicus is capable of self-fertilisation, the hybrid nature of the F1 progeny from the
outcross was checked both using SSR markers (in this case, the SSR markers used were TM0193 and
TM0027) and based on the F1 plant phenotype (all plants from an outcross between a Gifu and MG-20
plants should have redish stem according to Kawaguchi et al., 2001; MG-20 plants, in contrast, have
fully green stem since they lack anthocyanin pigment in this tissue). This analysis allowed the
determination as to whether the F1 progeny originated from a true cross or not (in red and yellow,
respectively). The number given correspond to the Zopra number (seed bag number) given for the F1
seeds. Crosses were performed in both directions to test both the paternal and maternal transmission;
GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT crosses were performed by Tracey Welham, and GWD1-3/gwd1-3
x MG-20 WT crosses were performed by Ccile Vriet (JIC, Norwich, UK). Note that ambiguous 
results were obtained for the F1 progeny from the GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT cross with some 
plants originating from a single F1 pod scoring true cross, other not. B. The F1 progeny from the
reciprocal crosses were genotyped by PCR using gene-specific primers as described in Chapter 2,
section 2.6. 29 out of 60 F1 plants obtained from the cross GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT scored 
heterozygote (i.e. maternal transmission close to the expected ratio 1:1). In contrast, when taking into
account only unambiguous F1 progeny of this analysis and of a F1 pod previously obtained, only 2 out
11 F1 plants of the cross GWD1-3/gwd1-3 x MG-20 WT scored heterozygote, suggesting a case of 
partial gametophytic lethality.
Appendix 1
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
B. Regrowth vigor (15d post cutting-back)
1st set (continued on next page)
Database Exp. Biorep
FW new
shoot (g)
New shoot:shoot
biomass ratio ratio in %
L. japonicus-Gifu Perennial P 1 1,05
2 1,72
3 0,98
4 1,93
5 1,83
average 1,50 0,0937 9,37
SE 0,18
L. japonicus-MG20 Perennial P 1 0,45
2 0,23
3 0,94
4 1,28
5 0,05
average 0,59 0,0234 2,34
SE 0,23
L. edulis Annual A 1 0,16
2 0,02
3 0,97
4 0,11
5 0,06
average 0,26 0,0068 0,68
SE 0,18
L. arabicus Annual A 1 0,05
2 0,00
3 0,00
4 1,79
5 0,70
average 0,51 0,0230 2,30
SE 0,35
L. parviflorus Annual P 1 6,45
2 4,38
3 4,06
4 4,73
5 3,01
average 4,53 0,1581 15,81
SE 0,56
L. uliginosus Perennial P 1 5,05
2 4,64
3 2,86
4 2,45
5 3,92
average 3,78 0,1318 13,18
SE 0,50
L. burtii Perennial A? 1 1,47
2 1.5 (?)
3 1,69
4 0,79
5 1,17
average 1,28 0,0813 8,13
SE 0,15
Species name
Life form
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
B. Regrowth vigor (15d post cutting-back)
1st set (continued)
Database Exp. Biorep
FW new
shoot (g)
New shoot:shoot
biomass ratio ratio in %
L corniculatus Perennial P 1 1,22
2 2,81
3 3,25
4 2,89
5 2,69
average 2,57 0,1509 15,09
SE 0,35
L. tenuis (glaber) Perennial P 1 4,08
2 3,60
3 2,87
4 2,30
5 1,70
average 2,91 0,1534 15,34
SE 0,43
L.subbiflorus Annual (?) P 1 1,42
2 0,49
3 1,01
4 1,63
5 2,24
average 1,36 0,0525 5,25
SE 0,29
L. peregrinus Annual A 1 0,00
2 0,00
3 0,00
4 0,00
5 0,00
average 0,00 0,0000 0,00
SE 0,00
L. glinoides Annual P 1 2,59
2 2,71
3 3,20
4 2,52
5 2,51
average 2,71 0,0859 8,59
SE 0,13
L. ornithopodioides Annual A 1 0,52
2 0,00
3 0,00
4 0,11
5 0,58
average 0,24 0,0072 0,72
SE 0,13
Average 2,49 0,11 10,62
SE 0,46 0,02 1,79
Average 0,46 0,02 2,36
SE 0,22 0,01 1,49
Perennials
Annuals
Species name
Life form
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
B. Regrowth vigor (15d post cutting-back)
2nd set (continued on next page)
Database Exp. Biorep
FW new
shoot (g)
New shoot:shoot
biomass ratio ratio in % ratio in %
L. japonicus-Gifu perennial P 1 4,94 0,48
Gifu 2 5,84 0,49
3 4,72 0,26
4 4,45 0,49
5 4,69 0,71
6 5,2 0,48
average* 4,54 0,49 0,1069 10,69
SE 0,25
L. japonicus-MG20 perennial P 1 4,49 0,24
MG20 2 3,63 0,38
3 4,63 0,35
4 5,05 0,16
5 4,97 0,10
6 4,86 0,24
average* 5,33 0,25 0,0459 4,59
SE 0,21
L. unifoliolatus perennial A 1 12,21 0,00
uni 2 10,28 0,00
3 8,89 0,00
4 11,1 0,00
5 10,91 0,00
6 11,24 0,00
average* 11,03 0,00 0,0000 0,00
SE 0,35
L. arenarius annual? P 1 11,28 0,00
are 2 7,6 0,00
3 8,52 0,22
4 9,49 0,05
5 10,06 0,01
6 8,72 0,00
average* 9,85 0,05 0,0047 0,47
SE 0,38
L. conimbricensis annual A 1 8,54 0,24
con 2 7,9 0,03
3 9,57 0,05
4 7,36 0,10
5 7,37 0,07
6 5,5 0,00
average* 7,39 0,08 0,0110 1,10
SE 0,36
L. halophilus annual A 1 13,18 0,00
hal 2 16,04 0,00
3 7,33 0,00
4 8,11 0,00
5 12,02 0,20
6 11,36 0,00
average* 12,11 0,03 0,0028 0,28
SE 0,73
L. collinus annual? P 1 2,31 0,19
col 2 4,24 0,22
3 3,75 0,29
4 2,46 0,44
5 2,54 0,28
6 2,78 0,50
average* 2,90 0,32 0,1104 11,04
SE 0,30
Life form
Species name
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
B. Regrowth vigor (15d post cutting-back)
2nd set (continued)
Database Exp. Biorep
FW new
shoot (g)
New shoot:shoot
biomass ratio ratio in % ratio in %
L. gebelia perennial A 1 3,82 0,02
geb 2 4,55 0,02
3 4,82 0,12
4 4,34 0,21
5 4,41 0,02
6 5,21 0,11
average* 4,97 0,08 0,0168 1,68
SE 0,26
L. angustissimus annual A 1 3,77 0,00
ang 2 3,31 0,00
3 3,36 0,00
4 2,35 0,00
5 2,62 0,00
6 4,23 0,00
average* 5,17 0,00 0,0000 0,00
SE 0,76
L. denticulatus annual A 1 0,13 0,00
average* 0,99 0,00 0,0000 0,00
SE 0,45
L. mearnsii perennial P 1 6,65 0,18
mea 2 5,62 0,15
3 4,5 0,18
4 4,14 0,22
5 5,24 0,13
6 5,68 0,22
average* 4,78 0,18 0,0377 3,77
SE 0,31
L. weilleri annual A 1 9,79 0,00
wei 2 8,03 0,00
3 9,77 0,01
4 9,61 0,00
5 8,54 0,03
6 9,46 0,01
average* 10,28 0,01 0,0008 0,08
SE 0,87
L. palustris perennial P 1 2,43 0,96
pal 2 2,83 0,62
3 2,45 0,81
4 2,23 0,51
5 1,63 0,41
6 2,81 0,42
average* 2,89 0,62 0,2154 21,54
SE 0,21
Perennials Average 5,05 0,32 0,09 8,69
SE 1,05 0,09 0,03 3,07
Annuals Average 7,42 0,03 0,00 0,45
SE 1,51 0,01 0,00 0,25
Species name
Life form
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus.
Continued on next page.
Appendix 1
Table A6. Summary of the growth, re-growth, and starch content parameters of a collection of 24
natural variants of the genus Lotus. Continued.
These parameters were measured/recored prior (i.e. during initial growth; in A) and post cutting-back
(i.e. 15 d post cutting-back; in B). Biomass measurements and other physiological analyses including
root and shoot biomass measurement, scoring of root iodine staining results were performed prior and
post cutting-back on plants grown in the greenhouse, under LD conditions and the analyses were
performed on ca. 3 month-old plants. Two sets of annual and perennial species of Lotus together with
the L. japonicus ecotypes MG-20 and Gifu were analysed. Plants of the first set were grown from
November 2007 until March 2008 in a greenhouse supplemented with artificial light (long day
conditions) while plants of the second set of Lotus species were grown in a greenhouse under natural
light conditions, from May until September 2008. Life form 'database' corresponds to the life form of the
species (i.e. annual, perennial growth habit) as determined by the USDA database. Life form 'Exp.'
correspond to the life form of the species experimentally determined in this study as described in the
text of Chapter 6. Root starch content values were arbitrarily given from iodine starch staining results.
Note that the SRL (specific root length) parameter and the biomass root:shoot and new shoot:shoot
ratios were calculed on fresh weight (FW) rather than dry weight (DW), however, preliminary analysis
revealed that the DW was consistently equal to ca. 6 to 9% of the FW. Cutting-back experiment was
performed as detailed in the text of Chapter 6, and in Chapter 2, section 2.2.
Appendix 2
Parts of the results presented in this PhD thesis have been published in the journal Plant
Physiology:
Vriet C, Welham T, Brachmann A, Pike M, Pike J, Perry J, Parniske M, Sato S,
Tabata S, Smith AM, Wang TL (2010) A Suite of Lotus japonicus Starch Mutants Reveals
both Conserved and Novel Features of Starch Metabolism. Plant Physiology 154: 643-655
A copy of this publication is given in the following pages.
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Supplemental materials of Vriet et al, 2010.
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Appendix 2
Abbreviations
3PGA 3-phosphoglycerate
ABA abscisic acid
ADP adenosine 5-diphosphate
ADPGlc ADP-glucose
ADPGT ADP-glucose/ADP transporter
AGPase ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase
AM arbuscular mycorrhiza
AMY alpha-amylase
ARATH Arabidopsis thaliana
ATP adenosine 5-triphosphate
BAC bacterial artificial chromosome
BAM beta-amylase
BCIP/NBT 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/p-nitroblue tetrazolium
chloride
BE starch-branching enzyme
Bicine bis (2-hydroxyethyl) glycine
bp base pair
BSA bovine serum albumine
BSA bulk segregant analysis
C carbon
CBM carbohydrate-binding module
cDNA complementary DNA
CER controlled environment room
Chr chromosome
cM centiMorgan
CODDLE codons optimized to discover deleterious lesions
CTAB cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
d days
dap days after pollination
DBE starch debranching enzyme
dCAPS derived cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences
dH2O distilled water
DNA desoxyribonucleic acid
Abbreviations
DPE disproportionating enzyme (aka D-enzyme and ransglucosidase)
dpi days post inoculation
DSP4 dual-specificity protein phosphatase (aka PTPKIS1 and SEX4)
DTT dithiothreitol
DW dry weight
EC enzyme commission number
EDTA ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EF   elongation factor alpha 
EMS ethyl methane sulfonate
ENU N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
EOD end of the day
EON end of the night
EST expressed sequence tag
FDA fluorescein fluorescein diacetate
FK fructokinase
Fru fructose
Fru6P fructose-6-phosphate
FW fresh weight
G6PDH glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
G6PT glucose-6-phosphate/phosphate transporter
GBSS granule bound starch synthase
GC-MS gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GH glycoside hydrolases
Glc glucose
Glc1P glucose-1-phophate
Glc6P glucose-6-phophate
GRIN Germplasm Resource Information Network
GT glycosyl-transferases
GWD glucan water dikinase
HEPES 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid
HK hexokinase
HPAEC-PAD High Performance Anion Exchange Chromatography with Pulsed
Amperometric Detection
HPLC high peformance liquid chromatography
Inv invertase
ISA isoamylase (aka pullulanase)
JIC John Innes Centre
Abbreviations
Da Dalton
LD long day
LDA limit dextrinase
LM light microscopy
LMU Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitt
LOTJA Lotus japonicus (aka L. Japonicus)
LS large subunit
LSF1 LIKE SEX4 (aka PTPKIS2)
MALDI-ToF matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight
MEX1 maltose transporter 1
MOS malto-oligosaccharides
mRNA messenger RNA
MS Murashige & Skoog
Mya million years ago
N nitrogen
N2 atmospheric nitrogen
NAD, NADH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADP, NADPH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NEB New England Biolabs
NH4 ammonium
NIL Near Isogenic Line
NMD nonsense-mediated decay
nt nucleotide
ORYSA Orysa sativa
PAGE polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
PAR photosynthetically active radiation
PARSESNP project aligned related sequences and evaluate SNPs
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PEPC phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
PGI phosphoglucoisomerase
PGM phosphoglucomutase
PHD phospho-histidine domain
PHS alpha-glucan phosphorylase
Pi inorganic phosphate
PMSF phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride
POPTR Populus trichocarpa
PPi Inorganic pyrophosphate
Abbreviations
PSSM position-specific scoring matrix
PVPP polyvinylpolypyrrolidone
PWD phosphoglucan, water dikinase
qRT-PCR quantitative reverse transcription PCR
QTL Quantitative Trait Locus
RGR Relative Growth Rate
RIL Recombinant Inbred Line
RNA ribonucleic acid
RNAi RNA interference
RT room temperature
RT room temperature
RT-PCR reverse transcription PCR
SBD starch binding domain
SBE starch branching enzyme
SBE starch branching enzyme
SD short day
SD standard deviation
SDS sodium dodecyl sulfate
SE standard error of the mean
SEX starch excess
SGA selected genome assembly
SIFT sorting intolerant from tolerant
SNF symbiotic nitrogen fixation
SNP single nucleotide polymorphism
SNPs single nucleotide polymorphisms
SnRK1 sucrose non-fermenting-1-related protein kinase 1
SORBI Sorghum bicolor
SP starch phosphorylase
SS small subunit
SS starch synthase
SSR simple sequence repeat
SSRIT Simple Sequence Repeat Identification Tool
Susy sucrose synthase
T6P trehalose-6-phosphate
TAC transformation-competent artificial chromosome
TAE Tris Acetate EDTA
TBE Tris Borate EDTA
Abbreviations
T-DNA transfer DNA
TEM transmission electron microscopy
TEMED N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine
TILLING targeting induced local lesions in genomes
TP triose-phosphate
TPT triose-phosphate transporter
Tricine N-(tri(hydroxymethyl)methyl)glycine
Tris 3-N-tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
TSL The Sainsbury Laboratory
U Units of enzyme activity (one mol/min)
UBQ10 Ubiquitin 10
UDP Uridine diphosphate
UGPase UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase
USDA/ARS United States Department of Agriculture/Agriculture Research
Service
UV ultraviolet
V/v Volume by volume
VITVI Vitis vinifera
W/v Weight by volume
WGD whole genome duplication
WT wild-type
Bibliography
Aerts R, Chapin FS (2000) The mineral nutrition of wild plants revisited: A re-evaluation
of processes and patterns. Advances in Ecological Research, Vol 30 30: 1-67
Ainsworth EA, Rogers A, Leakey ADB, Heady L, Gibon Y, Stitt M, Schurr U
(2006). Does elevated atmospheric [CO2] alter diurnal C uptake and the balance
of C and N metabolites in growing and fully expanded soybean leaves? J Exp
Bot 58: 579-591
Ajjawi I, Lu Y, Savage LJ, Bell SM, Last RL (2010) Large-Scale Reverse Genetics in
Arabidopsis: Case Studies from the Chloroplast 2010 Project. Plant Physiology 152:
529-540
Akihiro T, Mizuno K, Fujimura T (2005) Gene expression of ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase and starch contents in rice cultured cells are cooperatively
regulated by sucrose and ABA. Plant and Cell Physiology 46: 937-946
Alonso-Blanco C, Koornneef M (2000) Naturally occurring variation in Arabidopsis: an
underexploited resource for plant genetics. Trends in Plant Science 5: 22-29
Al-Shehbaz, I.A., OKane Jr., S.L. (2002) Taxonomy and phylogeny of Arabidopsis
(Brassicaceae). In: Somerville, C.R., Meyerowitz, E.M. (Eds.), The Arabidopsis
Book. American Society of Plant Biologists, Rockville, MD, doi: 10.1199/tab.0009,
<www.aspb.org/publications/arabidopsis/>.
Anderson JM, Okita TW, Preiss J (1990) Enhancing carbon flow into starch: the role of
ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase. The molecular and cellular biology of the potato.:
159-180
Ap Rees T (1980) Assessment of the contributions of metabolic pathways to plant
respiration. Davies, D. D. (Ed.). the Biochemistry of Plants: a Comprehensive
Treatise, Vol. 2. Metabolism and Respiration. Xvi+687p. Academic Press, Inc.: New
York, N.Y., USA; London, England. Illus: P1-30
Ap Rees T (1985) The organization of glycolysis and the oxidative pentose phosphate
pathway in plants. Douce, R. and D. a. Day (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Plant Physiology
New Series, Vol. 18. Higher Plant Cell Respiration. Xvi+522p. Springer-Verlag:
Berlin, West Germany; New York, N.Y., USA. Illus: 391-417
Arambarri AM (2000) A cladistic analysis of the new world species of Lotus L.
(Fabaceae, Loteae). Cladistics-the International Journal of the Willi Hennig Society
16: 283-297
Bibliography
Arambarri AM (2000) A cladistic analysis of the Old World species of Lotus L.
(Fabaceae, Loteae). Canadian Journal of Botany-Revue Canadienne De Botanique
78: 351-360
Asamizu E, Nakamura Y, Sato S, Tabata S (2004) Characteristics of the Lotus
japonicus gene repertoire deduced from large-scale expressed sequence tag (EST)
analysis. Plant Molecular Biology 54: 405-414
Avice JC, Ourry A, Lemaire G, Boucaud J (1996) Nitrogen and carbon flows estimated
by N-15 and C-13 pulse-chase labeling during regrowth of alfalfa. Plant Physiology
112: 281-290
Baier MC, Barsch A, Kuster H, Hohnjec N (2007) Antisense repression of the
Medicago truncatula nodule-enhanced sucrose synthase leads to a handicapped
nitrogen fixation mirrored by specific alterations in the symbiotic transcriptome and
metabolome. Plant Physiology 145: 1600-1618
Ball K, Preiss J (1994) Allosteric sites of the large subunit of the spinach leaf adpglucose
pyrophosphorylase. Journal of Biological Chemistry 269: 24706-24711
Ball S, Guan HP, James M, Myers A, Keeling P, Mouille G, Buleon A, Colonna P,
Preiss J (1996) From glycogen to amylopectin: A model for the biogenesis of the
plant starch granule. Cell 86: 349-352
Ballicora MA, Fu YB, Nesbitt NM, Preiss J (1998) ADP-Glucose pyrophosphorylase
from potato tubers. Site-directed mutagenesis studies of the regulatory sites. Plant
Physiology 118: 265-274
Balmer Y, Koller A, del Val G, Manieri W, Schurmann P, Buchanan BB (2003)
Proteomics gives insight into the regulatory function of chloroplast thioredoxins.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
100: 370-375
Battey NH, Tooke F (2002) Molecular control and variation in the floral transition.
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 5: 62-68
Baunsgaard L, Lutken H, Mikkelsen R, Glaring MA, Pham TT, Blennow A (2005) A
novel isoform of glucan, water dikinase phosphorylates pre-phosphorylated alpha-
glucans and is involved in starch degradation in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 41: 595-
Bena G (2001) Molecular phylogeny supports the morphologically based taxonomic
transfer of the "medicagoid" Trigonella species to the genus Medicago L. Plant
Systematics and Evolution 229: 217-236
Benedito VA, Torres-Jerez I, Murray JD, Andriankaja A, Allen S, Kakar K,
Wandrey M, Verdier J, Zuber H, Ott T, Moreau S, Niebel A, Frickey T, Weiller
Bibliography
G, He J, Dai XB, Zhao PX, Tang YH, Udvardi MK (2008) A gene expression
atlas of the model legume Medicago truncatula. Plant Journal 55: 504-513
Bernier G, Havelange A, Houssa C, Petitjean A, Lejeune P (1993) Physiological
signals that induce flowering. Plant Cell 5: 1147-1155
Bhattacharyya MK, Smith AM, Ellis THN, Hedley C, Martin C (1990) The wrinkled-
seed character of pea described by mendel is caused by a transposon-like insertion in
a gene encoding starch-branching enzyme. Cell 60: 115-122
Bird AR, Brown IL, Topping DL (2000) Starches, resistant starches, the gut microflora
and human health. Curr Issues Intest Microbiol 1: 25-37
Blasing OE, Gibon Y, Gunther M, Hohne M, Morcuende R, Osuna D, Thimm O,
Usadel B, Scheible WR, Stitt M (2005) Sugars and circadian regulation make
major contributions to the global regulation of diurnal gene expression in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17: 3257-3281
Blauth SL, Kim KN, Klucinec J, Shannon JC, Thompson D, Guiltinan M (2002)
Identification of Mutator insertional mutants of starch-branching enzyme 1 (sbe1) in
Zea mays L. Plant Molecular Biology 48: 287-297
Blennow A, Engelsen SB, Nielsen TH, Baunsgaard L, Mikkelsen R (2002) Starch
phosphorylation: a new front line in starch research. Trends in Plant Science 7: 445-
Boehlein SK, Shaw JR, Stewart JD, Hannah LC (2008) Heat stability and allosteric
properties of the maize endosperm ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase are intimately
intertwined. Plant Physiology 146: 289-299
Boehlein SK, Shaw JR, Stewart JD, Hannah LC (2009) Characterization of an
Autonomously Activated Plant ADP-Glucose Pyrophosphorylase. Plant Physiology
149: 318-326
Bogracheva TY, Cairns P, Noel TR, Hulleman S, Wang TL, Morris VJ, Ring SG,
Hedley CL (1999) The effect of mutant genes at the r, rb, rug3, rug4, rug5 and lam
loci on the granular structure and physico-chemical properties of pea seed starch.
Carbohydrate Polymers 39: 303-314
Borisjuk L, Rolletschek H, Radchuk R, Weschke W, Wobus U, Weber H (2004) Seed
development and differentiation: A role for metabolic regulation. Plant Biology 6:
375-386
Borisjuk L, Rolletschek H, Walenta S, Panitz R, Wobus U, Weber H (2003) Energy
status and its control on embryogenesis of legumes: ATP distribution within Vicia
faba embryos is developmentally regulated and correlated with photosynthetic
capacity. Plant Journal 36: 318-329
Bibliography
Borovsky D, Smith EE, Whelan WJ (1975) Mechanism of branching enzyme action and
its influence on structure of amylopectin. Biochemical Society Transactions 3: 48-49
Boyce PJ, Volenec JJ (1992) Taproot carbohydrate concentrations and stress tolerance of
contrasting alfalfa genotypes. Crop Science 32: 757-761
Bradford MM (1976) Rapid and sensitive method for quantitation of microgram
quantities of protein utilizing principle of protein-dye binding. Analytical
Biochemistry 72: 248-254
Brand K, Dugi KA, Brunzell JD, Nevin DN, SantamarinaFojo S (1996) A novel A->G
mutation in intron I of the hepatic lipase gene leads to alternative splicing resulting
in enzyme deficiency. Journal of Lipid Research 37: 1213-1223
Brewin NJ (1991) Development of the legume root nodule. Annual Review of Cell
Biology 7: 191-226
Broughto.Wj, Dilworth MJ (1971) Control of leghaemoglobin synthesis in snake beans.
Biochemical Journal 125: 1075-&
Brown RA, Rosenberg NJ, Hays CJ, Easterling WE, Mearns LO (2000) Potential
production and environmental effects of switchgrass and traditional crops under
current and greenhouse-altered climate in the central United States: a simulation
study. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 78: 31-47
Buchanan BB, Balmer Y (2005) Redox regulation: A broadening horizon. Annual
Review of Plant Biology 56: 187-220
Burge C, Karlin S (1997) Prediction of complete gene structures in human genomic
DNA. Journal of Molecular Biology 268: 78-94
Burge CB (1998) Modeling dependencies in pre-mRNA splicing signals. Computational
Methods in Molecular Biology 32: 129-164
Burton RA, Bewley JD, Smith AM, Bhattacharyya MK, Tatge H, Ring S, Bull V,
Hamilton WDO, Martin C (1995) Starch branching enzymes belonging to distinct
enzyme families are differentially expressed during pea embryo development. Plant
Journal 7: 3-15
Bustos R, Fahy B, Hylton CM, Seale R, Nebane NM, Edwards A, Martin C, Smith
AM (2004) Starch granule initiation is controlled by a heteromultimeric isoamylase
in potato tubers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 101: 2215-2220
Calenge F, Saliba-Colombani V, Mahieu S, Loudet O, Daniel-Vedele F, Krapp A
(2006) Natural variation for carbohydrate content in Arabidopsis. Interaction with
complex traits dissected by quantitative genetics. Plant Physiology 141: 1630-1643
Cannon SB, Sterck L, Rombauts S, Sato S, Cheung F, Gouzy J, Wang XH, Mudge J,
Vasdewani J, Scheix T, Spannagl M, Monaghan E, Nicholson C, Humphray SJ,
Bibliography
Schoof H, Mayer KFX, Rogers J, Quetier F, Oldroyd GE, Debelle F, Cook DR,
Retzel EF, Roe BA, Town CD, Tabata S, Van de Peer Y, Young ND (2006)
Legume genome evolution viewed through the Medicago truncatula and Lotus
japonicus genomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 103: 14959-14964
Carlini DB, Stephan W (2003) In vivo introduction of unpreferred synonymous codons
into the Drosophila Adh gene results in reduced levels of ADH protein. Genetics
163: 239-243
Caspar T, Huber SC, Somerville C (1985) Alterations in growth, photosynthesis, and
respiration in a starchless mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana (L) deficient in chloroplast
phosphoglucomutase activity. Plant Physiology 79: 11-17
Caspar T, Lin TP, Kakefuda G, Benbow L, Preiss J, Somerville C (1991) Mutants of
arabidopsis with altered regulation of starch degradation. Plant Physiology 95: 1181-
Cassman KG, Dobermann A, Walters DT, Yang H (2003) Meeting cereal demand
while protecting natural resources and improving environmental quality. Annual
Review of Environment and Resources 28: 315-358
Chamary JV, Hurst LD (2005) Evidence for selection on synonymous mutations
affecting stability of mRNA secondary structure in mammals. Genome Biology 6
Chang YF, Chan WK, Imam JS, Wilkinson MF (2007) Alternatively spliced T-cell
receptor transcripts are up-regulated in response to disruption of either splicing
elements or reading frame. Journal of Biological Chemistry 282: 29738-29747
Chapman GW, Mendicin.J, Pallas JE (1972) Hydrolysis of maltodextrins by a beta-
amylase isolated from leaves of vicia-faba. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 276:
491-&
Chatterton NJ, Silvius JE (1981) Photosynthate partitioning into starch in soybean
leaves. Irradiance level and daily photosynthetic period duration effects. Plant
Physiology 67: 257-260
Chen BY, Janes HW, Gianfagna T (1998) PCR cloning and characterization of multiple
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase cDNAs from tomato. Plant Science 136: 59-67
Chen BY, Wang Y, Janes HW (1998) ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase is localized to
both the cytoplasm and plastids in developing pericarp of tomato fruit. Plant
Physiology 116: 101-106
Chen X, Salamini F, Gebhardt C (2001) A potato molecular-function map for
carbohydrate metabolism and transport. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 102: 284-
Bibliography
Chia T, Thorneycroft D, Chapple A, Messerli G, Chen J, Zeeman SC, Smith SM,
Smith AM (2004) A cytosolic glucosyltransferase is required for conversion of
starch to sucrose in Arabidopsis leaves at night. Plant Journal 37: 853-863
Chinnasamy G, Bal AK (2003) Seasonal changes in carbohydrates of perennial root
nodules of beach pea. Journal of Plant Physiology 160: 1185-1192
Chourey PS, Taliercio EW, Carlson SJ, Ruan YL (1998) Genetic evidence that the two
isozymes of sucrose synthase present in developing maize endosperm are critical,
one for cell wall integrity and the other for starch biosynthesis. Molecular and
General Genetics 259: 88-96
Clauss MJ, Koch MA (2006) Poorly known relatives of Arabidopsis thaliana. Trends in
Plant Science 11: 449-459
Colbert T, Till BJ, Tompa R, Reynolds S, Steine MN, Yeung AT, McCallum CM,
Comai L, Henikoff S (2001) High-throughput screening for induced point
mutations. Plant Physiology 126: 480-484
Colebatch G, Desbrosses G, Ott T, Krusell L, Montanari O, Kloska S, Kopka J,
Udvardi MK (2004) Global changes in transcription orchestrate metabolic
differentiation during symbiotic nitrogen fixation in Lotus japonicus. Plant Journal
39: 487-512
Colebatch G, Kloska S, Trevaskis B, Freund S, Altmann T, Udvardi MK (2002)
Novel aspects of symbiotic nitrogen fixation uncovered by transcript profiling with
cDNA arrays. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 15: 411-420
Comai L, Henikoff S (2006) TILLING: practical single-nucleotide mutation discovery.
Plant Journal 45: 684-694
Commuri PD, Keeling PL (2001) Chain-length specificities of maize starch synthase I
enzyme: studies of glucan affinity and catalytic properties. Plant Journal 25: 475-
Comparot-Moss S, Denyer K (2009) The evolution of the starch biosynthetic pathway in
cereals and other grasses. Journal of Experimental Botany 60: 2481-2492
Comparot-Moss S, Kotting O, Stettler M, Edner C, Graf A, Weise SE, Streb S, Lue
WL, MacLean D, Mahlow S, Ritte G, Steup M, Chen J, Zeeman SC, Smith AM
(2010) A Putative Phosphatase, LSF1, Is Required for Normal Starch Turnover in
Arabidopsis Leaves. Plant Physiology 152: 685-697
Cooper JL, Till BJ, Laport RG, Darlow MC, Kleffner JM, Jamai A, El-Mellouki T,
Liu S, Ritchie R, Nielsen N, Bilyeu KD, Meksem K, Comai L, Henikoff S (2008)
TILLING to detect induced mutations in soybean. BMC Plant Biology 8: Article
No.: 9
Bibliography
Corbesier L, Lejeune P, Bernier G (1998) The role of carbohydrates in the induction of
flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana: comparison between the wild type and a
starchless mutant. Planta 206: 131-137
Coruzzi G, Bush DR (2001) Nitrogen and carbon nutrient and metabolite signaling in
plants. Plant Physiology 125: 61-64
Coruzzi GM, Zhou L (2001) Carbon and nitrogen sensing and signaling in plants:
emerging 'matrix effects'. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 4: 247-253
Cox TS, Bender M, Picone C, Van Tassel DL, Holland JB, Brummer EC, Zoeller BE,
Paterson AH, Jackson W (2002) Breeding perennial grain crops. Critical Reviews
in Plant Sciences 21: 59-91
Cox TS, Glover JD, Van Tassel DL, Cox CM, DeHaan LR (2006) Prospects for
developing perennial-grain crops. Bioscience 56: 649-659
Craig J, Barratt P, Tatge H, Dejardin A, Handley L, Gardner CD, Barber L, Wang
T, Hedley C, Martin C, Smith AM (1999) Mutations at the rug4 locus alter the
carbon and nitrogen metabolism of pea plants through an effect on sucrose synthase.
Plant Journal 17: 353-362
Crevillen P, Ballicora MA, Merida A, Preiss J, Romero JM (2003) The different large
subunit isoforms of Arabidopsis thaliana ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase confer
distinct kinetic and regulatory properties to the heterotetrameric enzyme. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 278: 28508-28515
Crevillen P, Ventriglia T, Pinto F, Orea A, Merida A, Romero JM (2005) Differential
pattern of expression and sugar regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase-encoding genes. Journal of Biological Chemistry 280: 8143-
Critchley JH, Zeeman SC, Takaha T, Smith AM, Smith SM (2001) A critical role for
disproportionating enzyme in starch breakdown is revealed by a knock-out mutation
in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 26: 89-100
Cross JM, Clancy M, Shaw JR, Boehlein SK, Greene TW, Schmidt RR, Okita TW,
Hannah LC (2005) A polymorphic motif in the small subunit of ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase modulates interactions between the small and large subunits.
Plant Journal 41: 501-511
Cross JM, von Korff M, Altmann T, Bartzetko L, Sulpice R, Gibon Y, Palacios N,
Stitt M (2006) Variation of enzyme activities and metabolite levels in 24
arabidopsis accessions growing in carbon-limited conditions. Plant Physiology 142:
1574-1588
Dalmais M, Schmidt J, Le Signor C, Moussy F, Burstin J, Savois V, Aubert G,
Brunaud V, de Oliveira Y, Guichard C, Thompson R, Bendahmane A (2008)
Bibliography
UTILLdb, a Pisum sativum in silico forward and reverse genetics tool. Genome
Biology 9
Dam S, Laursen BS, Ornfelt JH, Jochimsen B, Staerfeldt HH, Friis C, Nielsen K,
Goffard N, Besenbacher S, Krusell L, Sato S, Tabata S, Thogersen IB, Enghild
JJ, Stougaard J (2009) The Proteome of Seed Development in the Model Legume
Lotus japonicus. Plant Physiology 149: 1325-1340
De Souza JG, Da Silva JV (1987) Partitioning of carbohydrates in annual and perennial
cotton Gossypium hirsutum L. Journal of Experimental Botany 38: 1211-1218
Degtjareva GV, Kramina TE, Sokoloff DD, Samigullin TH, Valiejo-Roman CM,
Antonov AS (2006) Phylogeny of the genus Lotus (Leguminosae, Loteae): evidence
from nrITS sequences and morphology. Canadian Journal of Botany-Revue
Canadienne De Botanique 84: 813-830
Dejardin A, Rochat C, Wuilleme S, Boutin JP (1997) Contribution of sucrose synthase,
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase and starch synthase to starch synthesis in
developing pea seeds. Plant Cell and Environment 20: 1421-1430
Delatte T, Trevisan M, Parker ML, Zeeman SC (2005) Arabidopsis mutants Atisa1 and
Atisa2 have identical phenotypes and lack the same multimeric isoamylase, which
influences the branch point distribution of amylopectin during starch synthesis. Plant
Journal 41: 815-830
Delatte T, Trevisan M, Parker ML, Zeeman SC (2006) Arabidopsis mutants Atisa1 and
Atisa2 have identical phenotypes and lack the same multimeric isoamylase, which
influences the branch point distribution of amylopectin during starch synthesis. (vol
41, pg 815, 2005). Plant Journal 45: 870-870
Delatte T, Umhang M, Trevisan M, Eicke S, Thorneycroft D, Smith SM, Zeeman SC
(2006) Evidence for distinct mechanisms of starch granule breakdown in plants.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 281: 12050-12059
Delvalle D, Dumez S, Wattebled F, Roldan I, Planchot V, Berbezy P, Colonna P, Vyas
D, Chatterjee M, Ball S, Merida A, D'Hulst C (2005) Soluble starch synthase I: a
major determinant for the synthesis of amylopectin in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves.
Plant Journal 43: 398-412
Denyer K, Barber LM, Edwards EA, Smith AM, Wang TL (1997) Two isoforms of the
GBSSI class of granule-bound starch synthase are differentially expressed in the pea
plant (Pisum sativum L.). Plant Cell and Environment 20: 1566-1572
Denyer K, Clarke B, Hylton C, Tatge H, Smith AM (1996) The elongation of amylose
and amylopectin chains in isolated starch granules. Plant Journal 10: 1135-1143
Bibliography
Denyer K, Dunlap F, Thorbjornsen T, Keeling P, Smith AM (1996) The major form of
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in maize endosperm is extra-plastidial. Plant
Physiology 112: 779-785
Desbrosses GG, Kopka J, Udvardi MK (2005) Lotus japonicus metabolic profiling.
Development of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry resources for the study of
plant-microbe interactions. Plant Physiology 137: 1302-1318
Deschamps P, Colleoni C, Nakamura Y, Suzuki E, Putaux JL, Buleon A, Haebel S,
Ritte G, Steup M, Falcon LI, Moreira D, Loffelhardt W, Raj JN, Plancke C,
d'Hulst C, Dauvillee D, Ball S (2008) Metabolic symbiosis and the birth of the
plant kingdom. Molecular Biology and Evolution 25: 536-548
Deschamps P, Moreau H, Worden AZ, Dauvillee D, Ball SG (2008) Early gene
duplication within chloroplastida and its correspondence with relocation of starch
metabolism to chloroplasts. Genetics 178: 2373-2387
Dhont C, Castonguay Y, Nadeau P, Belanger G, Chalifour FP (2002) Alfalfa root
carbohydrates and regrowth potential in response to fall harvests. Crop Science 42:
754-765
Dhont C, Castonguay Y, Nadeau P, Belanger G, Drapeau R, Laberge S, Avice JC,
Chalifour FP (2006) Nitrogen reserves, spring regrowth and winter survival of
field-grown alfalfa (Medicago sativa) defoliated in the autumn. Annals of Botany
97: 109-120
Dickinso.Db, Preiss J (1969) ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase from maize endosperm.
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 130: 119-&
Dixon RA, Sumner LW (2003) Legume natural products: Understanding and
manipulating complex pathways for human and animal health. Plant Physiology
131: 878-885
Djemel N, Guedon D, Lechevalier A, Salon C, Miquel M, Prosperi JM, Rochat C,
Boutin JP (2005) Development and composition of the seeds of nine genotypes of
the Medicago truncatula species complex. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 43:
557-566
Domoney C, Duc G, Ellis THN, Ferrandiz C, Firnhaber C, Gallardo K, Hofer J,
Kopka J, Kuster H, Madueno F, Munier-Jolain NG, Mayer K, Thompson R,
Udvardi M, Salon C (2006) Genetic and genomic analysis of legume flowers and
seeds. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 9: 133-141
Dong ZC, Zhao Z, Liu CW, Luo JH, Yang J, Huang WH, Hu XH, Wang TL, Luo D
(2005) Floral patterning in Lotus japonicus. Plant Physiology 137: 1272-1282
Bibliography
Doyle EA, Lane AM, Sides JM, Mudgett MB, Monroe JD (2007) An alpha-amylase
(At4g25000) in Arabidopsis leaves is secreted and induced by biotic and abiotic
stress. Plant Cell and Environment 30: 388-398
Doyle JJ, Luckow MA (2003) The rest of the iceberg. Legume diversity and evolution in
a phylogenetic context. Plant Physiology 131: 900-910
Dumez S, Wattebled F, Dauvillee D, Delvalle D, Planchot V, Ball SG, D'Hulst C
(2006) Mutants of Arabidopsis lacking starch branching enzyme II substitute
plastidial starch synthesis by cytoplasmic maltose accumulation. Plant Cell 18:
2694-2709
Edner C, Li J, Albrecht T, Mahlow S, Hejazi M, Hussain H, Kaplan F, Guy C, Smith
SM, Steup M, Ritte G (2007) Glucan, water dikinase activity stimulates breakdown
of starch granules by plastidial beta-amylases. Plant Physiology 145: 17-28
Edwards A, Borthakur A, Bornemann S, Venail L, Denyer K, Waite D, Fulton D,
Smith A, Martin C (1999) Specificity of starch synthase isoforms from potato.
European Journal of Biochemistry 266: 724-736
Edwards A, Vincken JP, Suurs LCJM, Visser RGF, Zeeman S, and Smith A, Martin
C (2002) Discrete forms of amylose are synthesized by isoforms of GBSSI in pea.
The Plant Cell 14: 1767-1785
Edwards J, ap Rees T (1986) Sucrose partitioning in developing embryos of round and
wrinkled varieties of pisum-sativum. Phytochemistry 25: 2027-2032
Egli DB, Leggett JE, Cheniae A (1980) Carbohydrate-levels in soybean leaves during
reproductive growth. Crop Science 20: 468-473
Eimert K, Wang SM, Lue WL, Chen JC (1995) Monogenic recessive mutations causing
both late floral initiation and excess starch accumulation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
7: 1703-1712
El-Lithy ME, Clerkx EJM, Ruys GJ, Koornneef M, Vreugdenhil D (2004)
Quantitative trait locus analysis of growth-related traits in a new Arabidopsis
recombinant. Plant Physiology 135: 444-458
El-Lithy ME, Rodrigues GC, van Rensen JJS, Snel JFH, Dassen H, Koornneef M,
Jansen MAK, Aarts MGM, Vreugdenhil D (2005) Altered photosynthetic
performance of a natural Arabidopsis accession is associated with atrazine
resistance. Journal of Experimental Botany 56: 1625-1634
Emmanuel E, Yehuda E, Melamed-Bessudo C, Avivi-Ragolsky N, Levy AA (2006)
The role of AtMSH2 in homologous recombination in Arabidopsis thaliana. Embo
Reports 7: 100-105
Fankhauser JJ, Volenec JJ (1989) Root vs shoot effects on herbage regrowth and
carbohydrate-metabolism of alfalfa. Crop Science 29: 735-740
Bibliography
Farrar JF, Williams ML (1991) The effects of increased atmospheric carbon-dioxide and
temperature on carbon partitioning, source-sink relations and respiration. Plant Cell
and Environment 14: 819-830
Fettke J, Hejazi M, Smirnova J, Hochel E, Stage M, Steup M (2009) Eukaryotic starch
degradation: integration of plastidial and cytosolic pathways. Journal of
Experimental Botany 60: 2907-2922
Fettke J, Malinova I, Eckermann N, Steup M (2009) Cytosolic heteroglycans in
photoautotrophic and in heterotrophic plant cells. Phytochemistry 70: 696-702
Finan TM, Wood JM, Jordan DC (1983) Symbiotic properties of C4-dicarboxylic acid
transport mutants of Rhizobium leguminosarum. Journal of Bacteriology 154: 1403-
Fincher GB (1989) Molecular and cellular biology associated with endosperm
mobilization in germinating cereal grains. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and
Plant Molecular Biology 40: 305-346
Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait J (1999) Preservation
of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative mutations. Genetics 151: 1531-
Fordham-Skelton AP, Chilley P, Lumbreras V, Reignoux S, Fenton TR, Dahm CC,
Pages M, Gatehouse JA (2002) A novel higher plant protein tyrosine phosphatase
interacts with SNF1-related protein kinases via a KIS (kinase interaction sequence)
domain. Plant Journal 29: 705-715
Franchi GG, Bellani L, Nepi M, Pacini E (1996) Types of carbohydrate reserves in
pollen: Localization, systematic distribution and ecophysiological significance. Flora
191: 143-159
Fritzius T, Aeschbacher R, Wiemken A, Wingler A (2001) Induction of ApL3
expression by trehalose complements the starch-deficient Arabidopsis mutant adg2-
1 lacking ApL1, the large subunit of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Plant
Physiology 126: 883-889
Frugoli J, Harris J (2001) Medicago truncatula on the move Plant Cell 13: 458-463
Fujita N, Taira T (1998) A 56 kDa protein is a novel granule-bound starch synthase
existing in the pericarps, aleurone layers, and embryos of immature seed in diploid
wheat (Triticum monococcum L.). Planta 207: 125-132
Fulton DC, Stettler M, Mettler T, Vaughan CK, Li J, Francisco P, Gil D, Reinhold H,
Eicke S, Messerli G, Dorken G, Halliday K, Smith AM, Smith SM, Zeeman SC
(2008) beta-AMYLASE4, a noncatalytic protein required for starch breakdown, acts
upstream of three active beta-amylases in Arabidopsis chloroplasts. Plant Cell 20:
1040-1058
Bibliography
Gallardo K, Le Signor C, Vandekerckhove J, Thompson RD, Burstin J (2003)
Proteomics of Medicago truncatula seed development establishes the time frame of
diverse metabolic processes related to reserve accumulation. Plant Physiology 133:
664-682
Gallardo K, Thompson R, Burstin J (2008) Reserve accumulation in legume seeds.
Comptes Rendus Biologies 331: 755-762
Galvez L, Gonzalez EM, Arrese-Igor C (2005) Evidence for carbon flux shortage and
strong carbon/nitrogen interactions in pea nodules at early stages of water stress.
Journal of Experimental Botany 56: 2551-2561
Garnier E, Laurent G (1994) Leaf anatomy, specific mass and water-content in
congeneric annual and perennial grass species. New Phytologist 128: 725-736
Geigenberger P, Kolbe A, Tiessen A (2005) Redox regulation of carbon storage and
partitioning in response to light and sugars. Journal of Experimental Botany 56:
1469-1479
Gentry MS, Dowen RH, Worby CA, Mattoo S, Ecker JR, Dixon JE (2006) An
Unexpected Link between Neuronal Degeneration in Lafora Disease Patients and
Starch Metabolism in Unicellular Eukaryotes and Kingdom Plantae. Molecular
Biology of the Cell 17
Gentry MS, Dowen RH, Worby CA, Mattoo S, Ecker JR, Dixon JE (2007) The
phosphatase laforin crosses evolutionary boundaries and links carbohydrate
metabolism to neuronal disease. Journal of Cell Biology 178: 477-488
Georgelis N, Braun EL, Hannah LC (2008) Duplications and functional divergence of
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase genes in plants. Bmc Evolutionary Biology 8
Georgelis N, Braun EL, Shaw JR, Hannah LC (2007) The two AGPase subunits evolve
at different rates in angiosperms, yet they are equally sensitive to activity-altering
amino acid changes when expressed in bacteria. Plant Cell 19: 1458-1472
Georgelis N, Shaw JR, Hannah LC (2009) Phylogenetic Analysis of ADP-Glucose
Pyrophosphorylase Subunits Reveals a Role of Subunit Interfaces in the Allosteric
Properties of the Enzyme. Plant Physiology 151: 67-77
Gepts P, Beavis WD, Brummer EC, Shoemaker RC, Stalker HT, Weeden NF, Young
ND (2005) Legumes as a model plant family. Genomics for food and feed report of
the cross-legume advances through genomics conference. Plant Physiology 137:
1228-1235
Ghosh HP, Preiss J (1966) Adenosine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase - a
regulatory enzyme in biosynthesis of starch in spinach leaf chloroplasts. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 241: 4491-&
Bibliography
Gibon Y, Blasing OE, Palacios-Rojas N, Pankovic D, Hendriks JHM, Fisahn J,
Hohne M, Gunther M, Stitt M (2004) Adjustment of diurnal starch turnover to
short days: depletion of sugar during the night leads to a temporary inhibition of
carbohydrate utilization, accumulation of sugars and post-translational activation of
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in the following light period. Plant Journal 39:
847-862
Gibon Y, Usadel B, Blaesing OE, Kamlage B, Hoehne M, Trethewey R, Stitt M (2006)
Integration of metabolite with transcript and enzyme activity profiling during diurnal
cycles in Arabidopsis rosettes. Genome Biology 7
Gibson SI (2005) Control of plant development and gene expression by sugar signaling.
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 8: 93-102
Giroux MJ, Hannah LC (1994) ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in shrunken-2 and
brittle-2 mutants of maize. Molecular & General Genetics 243: 400-408
Giroux MJ, Shaw J, Barry G, Cobb BG, Greene T, Okita T, Hannah LC (1996) A
single gene mutation that increases maize seed weight. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 93: 5824-5829
Glaring MA, Zygadlo A, Thorneycroft D, Schulz A, Smith SM, Blennow A,
Baunsgaard L (2007) An extra-plastidial alpha-glucan, water dikinase from
Arabidopsis phosphorylates amylopectin in vitro and is not necessary for transient
starch degradation. Journal of Experimental Botany 58: 3949-3960
Glover JD (2005) The necessity and possibility of perennial grain production systems.
Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 20: 1-2
Glover JD, Cox CM, Reganold JP (2007) Future farming: A return to roots? Scientific
American 297: 82-89
Golombek S, Rolletschek H, Wobus U, Weber H (2001) Control of storage protein
accumulation during legume seed development. Journal of Plant Physiology 158:
457-464
Gondo T, Sato S, Okumura K, Tabata S, Akashi R, Isobe S (2007) Quantitative trait
locus analysis of multiple agronomic traits in the model legume Lotus japonicus.
Genome 50: 627-637
Gong JM, Waner DA, Horie T, Li SL, Horie R, Abid KB, Schroeder JI (2004)
Microarray-based rapid cloning of an ion accumulation deletion mutant in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 101: 15404-15409
Gonzalez EM, Gordon AJ, James CL, Arreseigor C (1995) The role of sucrose
synthase in the response of soybean nodules to drought. Journal of Experimental
Botany 46: 1515-1523
Bibliography
Gordon AJ (1992) Carbon metabolism in the legume nodule. Carbon Partitioning : within
and between Organisms: 133-162
Gordon AJ, James CL (1997) Enzymes of carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism in
developing and mature nodules of white clover. Journal of Experimental Botany 48:
895-903
Gordon AJ, Minchin FR, James CL, Komina O (1999) Sucrose synthase in legume
nodules is essential for nitrogen fixation. Plant Physiology 120: 867-877
Gordon AJ, Minchin FR, Skot L, James CL (1997) Stress-induced declines in soybean
N-2 fixation are related to nodule sucrose synthase activity. Plant Physiology 114:
937-946
Gordon AJ, Mitchell DF, Ryle GJA, Powell CE (1987) Diurnal production and
utilization of photosynthate in nodulated white clover. Journal of Experimental
Botany 38: 84-98
Gordon AJ, Ryle GJA, Mitchell DF, Lowry KH, Powell CE (1986) The effect of
defoliation on carbohydrate, protein and leghemoglobin content of white clover
nodules. Annals of Botany 58: 141-154
Gordon AJ, Thomas BJ, James CL (1995) The location of sucrose synthase in root-
nodules of white clover. New Phytologist 130: 523-530
Graf A, Schlereth A, Stitt M, Smith AM (2010) Circadian control of carbohydrate
availability for growth in Arabidopsis plants at night. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107: 9458-9463
Graham PH, Vance CP (2003) Legumes: Importance and constraints to greater use. Plant
Physiology 131: 872-877
Greene EA, Codomo CA, Taylor NE, Henikoff JG, Till BJ, Reynolds SH, Enns LC,
Burtner C, Johnson JE, Odden AR, Comai L, Henikoff S (2003) Spectrum of
chemically induced mutations from a large-scale reverse-genetic screen in
arabidopsis. Genetics 164: 731-740
Greene TW, Hannah LC (1998) Adenosine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase, a
rate-limiting step in starch biosynthesis. Physiologia Plantarum 103: 574-580
Greene TW, Kavakli IH, Kahn ML, Okita TW (1998) Generation of up-regulated
allosteric variants of potato ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase by reversion genetics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
95: 10322-10327
Grime JP, Hunt R (1975) Relative growth-rate - its range and adaptive significance in a
local flora. Journal of Ecology 63: 393-422
Guan HP, Preiss J (1993) Differentiation of the properties of the branching isozymes
from maize (Zea-mays). Plant Physiology 102: 1269-1273
Bibliography
Hajirezaei MR, Bornke F, Peisker M, Takahata Y, Lerchl J, Kirakosyan A,
Sonnewald U (2003) Decreased sucrose content triggers starch breakdown and
respiration in stored potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum). Journal of Experimental
Botany 54: 477-488
Han Y, Sun FJ, Rosales-Mendoza S, Korban SS (2007) Three orthologs in rice,
Arabidopsis, and Populus encoding starch branching enzymes (SBEs) are different
from other SBE gene families in plants. Gene 401: 123-130
Handberg K, Stougaard J (1992) Lotus japonicus, an autogamous, diploid legume
species for classical and molecular-genetics. Plant Journal 2: 487-496
Handford MG, Carr JP (2007) A defect in carbohydrate metabolism ameliorates
symptom severity in virus-infected Arabidopsis thaliana. Journal of General
Virology 88: 337-341
Hansen PI, Spraul M, Dvortsak P, Larsen FH, Blennow A, Motawia MS, Engelsen SB
(2009) Starch Phosphorylation-Maltosidic Restrains upon 3 '- and 6 '-
Phosphorylation Investigated by Chemical Synthesis, Molecular Dynamics and
NMR Spectroscopy. Biopolymers 91: 179-193
Hanson KR, McHale NA (1988) A starchless mutant of nicotiana-sylvestris containing a
modified plastid phosphoglucomutase. Plant Physiology 88: 838-844
Harmer SL, Hogenesch LB, Straume M, Chang HS, Han B, Zhu T, Wang X, Kreps
JA, Kay SA (2000) Orchestrated transcription of key pathways in Arabidopsis by
the circadian clock. Science 290: 2110-2113
Harrison CJ (1996) The rug3 locus of pea. PhD thesis, University of East Anglia,
Norwich
Harrison CJ, Hedley CL, Wang TL (1998) Evidence that the rug3 locus of pea (Pisum
sativum L.) encodes plastidial phosphoglucomutase confirms that the imported
substrate for starch synthesis in pea amyloplasts is glucose-6-phosphate. Plant
Journal 13: 753-762
Harrison CJ, Mould RM, Leech MJ, Johnson SA, Turner L, Schreck SL, Baird KM,
Jack PL, Rawsthorne S, Hedley CL, Wang TL (2000) The rug3 locus of pea
encodes plastidial phosphoglucomutase. Plant Physiology 122: 1187-1192
Harrison J, Jamet A, Muglia CI, Van de Sype G, Aguilar OM, Puppo A, Frendo P
(2005) Glutathione plays a fundamental role in growth and symbiotic capacity of
Sinorhizobium meliloti. Journal of Bacteriology 187: 168-174
Hayashi M, Miyahara A, Sato S, Kato T, Yoshikawa M, Taketa M, Pedrosa A, Onda
R, Imaizumi-Anraku H, Bachmair A, Sandal N, Stougaard J, Murooka Y,
Tabata S, Kawasaki S, Kawaguchi M, Harada K (2001) Construction of a genetic
Bibliography
linkage map of the model legume Lotus japonicus using an intraspecific F2
population. DNA Research 8: 301-310
Hendriks JHM, Kolbe A, Gibon Y, Stitt M, Geigenberger P (2003) ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase is activated by posttranslational redox-modification in response
to light and to sugars in leaves of Arabidopsis and other plant species. Plant
Physiology 133: 838-849
Henikoff S, Till BJ, Comai L (2004) TILLING. Traditional mutagenesis meets functional
genomics. Plant Physiology 135: 630-636
Herbers K, Takahata Y, Melzer M, Mock HP, Hajirezaei M, Sonnewald U (2000)
Regulation of carbohydrate partitioning during the interaction of potato virus Y with
tobacco. Molecular Plant Pathology 1: 51-59
Hirose T, Ohdan T, Nakamura Y, Terao T (2006) Expression profiling of genes related
to starch synthesis in rice leaf sheaths during the heading period. Physiologia
Plantarum 128: 425-435
Hofer J, Turner L, Moreau C, Ambrose M, Isaac P, Butcher S, Weller J, Dupin A,
Dalmais M, Le Signor C, Bendahmane A, Ellis N (2009) Tendril-less Regulates
Tendril Formation in Pea Leaves. Plant Cell 21: 420-428
Hoffmann WA, Poorter H (2002) Avoiding bias in calculations of relative growth rate.
Annals of Botany 90: 37-42
Horst I, Welham T, Kelly S, Kaneko T, Sato S, Tabata S, Parniske M, Wang TL
(2007) TILLING mutants of Lotus japonicus reveal that nitrogen assimilation and
fixation can occur in the absence of nodule-enhanced sucrose synthase. Plant
Physiology 144: 806-820
Hossain MS, Umehara Y, Kouchi H (2006) A novel Fix(-) symbiotic mutant of Lotus
japonicus, Ljsym105, shows impaired development and premature deterioration of
nodule infected cells and symbiosomes. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 19:
780-788
Hu FY, Tao DY, Sacks E, Fu BY, Xu P, Li J, Yang Y, McNally K, Khush GS,
Paterson AH, Li ZK (2003) Convergent evolution of perenniality in rice and
sorghum. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 100: 4050-4054
Huang XH, Feng Q, Qian Q, Zhao Q, Wang L, Wang AH, Guan JP, Fan DL, Weng
QJ, Huang T, Dong GJ, Sang T, Han B (2009) High-throughput genotyping by
whole-genome resequencing. Genome Research 19: 1068-1076
Huber SC, Hanson KR (1992) Carbon partitioning and growth of a starchless mutant of
Nicotiana sylvestris. Plant Physiology 99: 1449-1454
Bibliography
Hughes RK, Desforges N, Selwood C, Smith R, Speirs I, Sinnaeve G, Gorton PG,
Wiseman J, Jumel K, Harding SE, Hill SE, Street V, Wang TL, Hedley CL
(2001) Genes affecting starch biosynthesis exert pleiotropic effects on the protein
content and composition of pea seeds. Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture 81: 877-882
Hussain H, Mant A, Seale R, Zeeman S, Hinchliffe E, Edwards A, Hylton C,
Bornemann S, Smith AM, Martin C, Bustos R (2003) Three isoforms of
isoamylase contribute different catalytic properties for the debranching of potato
glucans. Plant Cell 15: 133-149
Ihemere U, Arias-Garzon D, Lawrence S, Sayre R (2006) Genetic modification of
cassava for enhanced starch production. Plant Biotechnology Journal 4: 453-465
Imaizumi-Anraku H, Takeda N, Charpentier M, Perry J, Miwa H, Umehara Y,
Kouchi H, Murakami Y, Mulder L, Vickers K, Pike J, Downie JA, Wang T,
Sato S, Asamizu E, Tabata S, Yoshikawa M, Murooka Y, Wu GJ, Kawaguchi
M, Kawasaki S, Parniske M, Hayashi M (2005) Plastid proteins crucial for
symbiotic fungal and bacterial entry into plant roots. Nature 433: 527-531
Jander G, Norris SR, Rounsley SD, Bush DF, Levin IM, Last RL (2002) Arabidopsis
map-based cloning in the post-genome era. Plant Physiology 129: 440-450
Jenner HL, Winning BM, Millar AH, Tomlinson KL, Leaver CJ, Hill SA (2001) NAD
malic enzyme and the control of carbohydrate metabolism in potato tubers. Plant
Physiology 126: 1139-1149
Jiang QY, Gresshoff PM (1997) Classical and molecular genetics of the model legume
Lotus japonicus. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 10: 59-68
Jin XS, Ballicora MA, Preiss J, Geiger JH (2005) Crystal structure of potato tuber ADP-
glucose pyrophosphorylase. Embo Journal 24: 694-704
Jobling S (2004) Improving starch for food and industrial applications. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology 7: 210-218
Jobling SA, Schwall GP, Westcott RJ, Sidebottom CM, Debet M, Gidley MJ, Jeffcoat
R, Safford R (1999) A minor form of starch branching enzyme in potato (Solanum
tuberosum L.) tubers has a major effect on starch structure: cloning and
characterisation of multiple forms of SBE A. Plant Journal 18: 163-171
Jobling SA, Westcott RJ, Tayal A, Jeffcoat R, Schwall GP (2002) Production of a
freeze-thaw-stable potato starch by antisense inhibition of three starch synthase
genes. Nature Biotechnology 20: 295-299
Jones TWA, Gottlieb LD, Pichersky E (1986) Reduced enzyme-activity and starch level
in an induced mutant of chloroplast phosphoglucose isomerase. Plant Physiology 81:
367-371
Bibliography
Juliano BO, Varner JE (1969) Enzymic degradation of starch granules in cotyledons of
germinating peas. Plant Physiology 44: 886-&
Kavakli IH, Greene TW, Salamone PR, Choi SB, Okita TW (2001) Investigation of
subunit function in ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications 281: 783-787
Kavakli IH, Kato C, Choi SB, Kim KH, Salamone PR, Ito H, Okita TW (2002)
Generation, characterization, and heterologous expression of wild-type and up-
regulated forms of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase.
Planta 215: 430-439
Kawaguchi M, Motomura T, Imaizumi-Anraku H, Akao S, Kawasaki S (2001)
Providing the basis for genomics in Lotus japonicus: the accessions Miyakojima and
Gifu are appropriate crossing partners for genetic analyses. Molecular Genetics and
Genomics 266: 157-166
Kawaguchi M, Pedrosa-Harand A, Yano K, Hayashi M, Murooka Y, Saito K, Nagata
T, Namai K, Nishida H, Shibata D, Sato S, Tabata S, Harada K, Sandal N,
Stougaard J, Bachmair A, Grant WF (2005) Lotus burttii takes a position of the
third corner in the Lotus molecular genetics triangle. DNA Research 12: 69-77
Kawasaki S, Murakami Y (2000) Genome analysis of Lotus japonicus. Journal of Plant
Research 113: 497-506
Keiller D, Smith H (1989) Control of carbon partitioning by light quality mediated by
phytochrome. Plant Science 63: 25-29
Kerr PS, Rufty TW, Huber SC (1985) Changes in nonstructural carbohydrates in
different parts of soybean (glycine max L Merr) plants during a light dark cycle and
in extended darkness. Plant Physiology 78: 576-581
Kim D, Hwang SK, Okita TW (2007) Subunit interactions specify the allosteric
regulatory properties of the potato tuber ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 362: 301-306
Kim IJ, Noh SJ, Lee BH, Jo J, Kim YS, Chung WI (2001) Molecular characterization
of cDNA clones for ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase from Citrus. Biochimica Et
Biophysica Acta-Gene Structure and Expression 1518: 324-328
Kim TH, Ourry A, Boucaud J, Lemaire G (1993) Partitioning of nitrogen derived from
N2 fixation and reserves in nodulated Medicago sativa L. during regrowth. Journal
of Experimental Botany 44: 555-562
Kirchberger S, Leroch M, Huynen MA, Wahl M, Neuhaus HE, Tjaden J (2007)
Molecular and biochemical analysis of the plastidic ADP-glucose transporter
(ZmBT1) from Zea mays. Journal of Biological Chemistry 282
Bibliography
Kitajima A, Asatsuma S, Okada H, Hamada Y, Kaneko K, Nanjo Y, Kawagoe Y,
Toyooka K, Matsuoka K, Takeuchi M, Nakano A, Mitsui T (2009) The Rice
alpha-Amylase Glycoprotein Is Targeted from the Golgi Apparatus through the
Secretory Pathway to the Plastids. Plant Cell 21: 2844-2858
Kleczkowski LA (2000) Is leaf ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase an allosteric enzyme?
Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta-Protein Structure and Molecular Enzymology 1476:
103-108
Kleczkowski LA, Villand P, Lonneborg A, Olsen OA, Luthi E (1991) Plant ADP-
glucose pyrophosphorylase - recent advances and biotechnological perspectives (a
review). Zeitschrift Fur Naturforschung C-a Journal of Biosciences 46: 605-612
Knox KJE, Clarke PJ (2005) Nutrient availability induces contrasting allocation and
starch formation in resprouting and obligate seeding shrubs. Functional Ecology 19:
690-698
Koch K (2004) Sucrose metabolism: regulatory mechanisms and pivotal roles in sugar
sensing and plant development. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 7: 235-246
Koch KE, Nolte KD, Duke ER, McCarty DR, Avigne WT (1992) Sugar levels modulate
differential expression of maize sucrose synthase genes. Plant Cell 4: 59-69
Kolbe A, Tiessen A, Schluepmann H, Paul M, Ulrich S, Geigenberger P (2005)
Trehalose 6-phosphate regulates starch synthesis via posttranslational redox
activation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102: 11118-11123
Koornneef M, Alonso-Blanco C, Vreugdenhil D (2004) Naturally occurring genetic
variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Annual Review of Plant Biology 55: 141-172
Kotting O, Pusch K, Tiessen A, Geigenberger P, Steup M, Ritte G (2005)
Identification of a novel enzyme required for starch metabolism in Arabidopsis
leaves. The phosphoglucan, water dikinase. Plant Physiology 137: 242-252
Kotting O, Santelia D, Edner C, Eicke S, Marthaler T, Gentry MS, Comparot-Moss
S, Chen J, Smith AM, Steup M, Ritte G, Zeeman SC (2009) STARCH-EXCESS4
Is a Laforin-Like Phosphoglucan Phosphatase Required for Starch Degradation in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 21: 334-346
Kouchi H, Yoneyama T (1984) Dynamics of carbon photosynthetically assimilated in
nodulated soya bean-plants under steady-state conditions 1. Development and
application of 13CO2 assimilation system at a constant 13C abundance. Annals of
Botany 53: 875-882
Kruger NJ, ap Rees T (1983) maltose metabolism by pea chloroplasts. Planta 158: 179-
Bibliography
Kuchuk N, Komarnitski I, Shakhovsky A, Gleba Y (1990) Genetic-transformation of
medicago species by agrobacterium-tumefaciens and electroporation of protoplasts.
Plant Cell Reports 8: 660-663
Lacognata U, Willmitzer L, Mullerrober B (1995) Molecular cloning and
characterization of novel isoforms of potato ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase.
Molecular & General Genetics 246: 538-548
Laemmli UK, Beguin F, Gujerkel.G (1970) A factor preventing major head protein of
bacteriophage T4 from random aggregation. Journal of Molecular Biology 47: 69-&
Lammer D, Cai XW, Arterburn M, Chatelain J, Murray T, Jones S (2004) A single
chromosome addition from Thinopyrum elongatum confers a polycarpic, perennial
habit to annual wheat. Journal of Experimental Botany 55: 1715-1720
Le BH, Wagmaister JA, Kawashima T, Bui AQ, Harada JJ, Goldberg RB (2007)
Using genomics to study legume seed development. Plant Physiology 144: 562-574
Le Signor C, Savois V, Aubert G, Verdier J, Nicolas M, Pagny G, Moussy F, Sanchez
M, Baker D, Clarke J, Thompson R (2009) Optimizing TILLING populations for
reverse genetics in Medicago truncatula. Plant Biotechnology Journal 7: 430-441
Lee SK, Hwang SK, Han M, Eom JS, Kang HG, Han Y, Choi SB, Cho MH, Bhoo SH,
An G, Hahn TR, Okita TW, Jeon JS (2007) Identification of the ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase isoforms essential for starch synthesis in the leaf and seed
endosperm of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Molecular Biology 65: 531-546
Leister D, Varotto C, Pesaresi P, Niwergall A, Salamini F (1999) Large-scale
evaluation of plant growth in Arabidopsis thaliana by non-invasive image analysis.
Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 37: 671-678
Li X, Song YJ, Century K, Straight S, Ronald P, Dong XN, Lassner M, Zhang YL
(2001) A fast neutron deletion mutagenesis-based reverse genetics system for plants.
Plant Journal 27: 235-242
Lin TP, Caspar T, Somerville C, Preiss J (1988) Isolation and characterization of a
starchless mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana (L) Heynh lacking ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase activity. Plant Physiology 86: 1131-1135
Lin TP, Caspar T, Somerville CR, Preiss J (1988) A starch deficient mutant of
Arabidopsis thaliana with low ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity lacks one of
the 2 subunits of the enzyme. Plant Physiology 88: 1175-1181
Lin TP, Spilatro SR, Preiss J (1988) Subcellular-localization and characterization of
amylases in Arabidopsis leaf. Plant Physiology 86: 251-259
Lin Y, Ulanov AV, Lozovaya V, Widholm J, Zhang GR, Guo JH, Goodman HM
(2006) Genetic and transgenic perturbations of carbon reserve production in
Bibliography
Arabidopsis seeds reveal metabolic interactions of biochemical pathways. Planta
225: 153-164
Lizotte PA, Henson CA, Duke SH (1990) Purification and characterization of pea
epicotyl beta-amylase. Plant Physiology 92: 615-621
Lloyd JR, Landschutze V, Kossmann J (1999) Simultaneous antisense inhibition of two
starch-synthase isoforms in potato tubers leads to accumulation of grossly modified
amylopectin. Biochemical Journal 338: 515-521
Lodwig EM, Hosie AHF, Bordes A, Findlay K, Allaway D, Karunakaran R, Downie
JA, Poole PS (2003) Amino-acid cycling drives nitrogen fixation in the legume -
Rhizobium symbiosis. Nature 422: 722-726
Logendra S, Putman JD, Janes HW (1990) The influence of light period on carbon
partitioning, translocation and growth in tomato. Scientia Horticulturae 42: 75-83
Lorberth R, Ritte G, Willmitzer L, Kossmann J (1998) Inhibition of a starch-granule-
bound protein leads to modified starch and repression of cold sweetening. Nature
Biotechnology 16: 473-477
Lu Y, Gehan JP, Sharkey TD (2005) Daylength and circadian effects on starch
degradation and maltose metabolism. Plant Physiology 138: 2280-2291
Lu Y, Gehan JP, Sharkey TD (2005) Daylength and circadian effects on starch
degradation and maltose metabolism. Plant Physiology 138: 2280-2291
Lu Y, Sharkey TD (2004) The role of amylomaltase in maltose metabolism in the cytosol
of photosynthetic cells. Planta 218: 466-473
Lu Y, Sharkey TD (2006) The importance of maltose in transitory starch breakdown.
Plant Cell and Environment 29: 353-366
Lu Y, Steichen JM, Yao J, Sharkey TD (2006) The role of cytosolic alpha-glucan
phosphorylase in maltose metabolism and the comparison of amylomaltase in
Arabidopsis and Escherichia coli. Plant Physiology 142: 878-889
Ludewig F, Sonnewald U, Kauder F, Heineke D, Geiger M, Stitt M, Muller-Rober
BT, Gillissen B, Kuhn C, Frommer WB (1998) The role of transient starch in
acclimation to elevated atmospheric CO2. Febs Letters 429: 147-151
Macdonal.Pw, Strobel GA (1970) Adenosine diphosphate-glucose pyrophosphorylase
control of starch accumulation in rust-infected wheat leaves. Plant Physiology 46:
126-&
Magori S, Kawaguchi M (2009) Long-distance control of nodulation: Molecules and
models. Molecules and Cells 27: 129-134
Mansoor S, Amin I, Hussain M, Zafar Y, Briddon RW (2006) Engineering novel traits
in plants through RNA interference. Trends in Plant Science 11: 559-565
Bibliography
Marillonnet S, Wessler SR (1997) Retrotransposon insertion into the maize waxy gene
results in tissue-specific RNA processing. Plant Cell 9: 967-978
Marino R, Ponnaiah M, Krajewski P, Frova C, Gianfranceschi L, Pe ME, Sari-Gorla
M (2009) Addressing drought tolerance in maize by transcriptional profiling and
mapping. Molecular Genetics and Genomics 281: 163-179
Martin C, Smith AM (1995) Starch biosynthesis. Plant Cell 7: 971-985
Martindale W, Leegood RC (1997) Acclimation of photosynthesis to low temperature in
Spinacia oleracea L. 1. Effects of acclimation on CO2 assimilation and carbon
partitioning. Journal of Experimental Botany 48: 1865-1872
Matheson NK, Wheatley JM (1962) Starch changes in developing and senescing tobacco
leaves. Australian Journal of Biological Sciences 15: 445
Matheson NK, Wheatley JM (1963) Diurnal-nocturnal changes in starch of tobacco
leaves. Australian Journal of Biological Sciences 16: 70
Matt P, Schurr U, Klein D, Krapp A, Stitt M (1998) Growth of tobacco in short-day
conditions leads to high starch, low sugars, altered diurnal changes in the Nia
transcript and low nitrate reductase activity, and inhibition of amino acid synthesis.
Planta 207: 27-41
McCallum CM, Comai L, Greene EA, Henikoff S (2000) Targeting induced local
lesions in genomes (TILLING) for plant functional genomics. Plant Physiology 123:
439-442
McKibbin RS, Muttucumaru N, Paul MJ, Powers SJ, Burrell MM, Coates S, Purcell
PC, Tiessen A, Geigenberger P, Halford NG (2006) Production of high-starch,
low-glucose potatoes through over-expression of the metabolic regulator SnRK1.
Plant Biotechnology Journal 4: 409-418
Melzer S, Lens F, Gennen J, Vanneste S, Rohde A, Beeckman T (2008) Flowering-
time genes modulate meristem determinacy and growth form in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Nature Genetics 40: 1489-1492
Messerli G, Nia VP, Trevisan M, Kolbe A, Schauer N, Geigenberger P, Chen JC,
Davison AC, Fernie AR, Zeeman SC (2007) Rapid classification of phenotypic
mutants of Arabidopsis via metabolite fingerprinting. Plant Physiology 143: 1484-
Meyer RC, Steinfath M, Lisec J, Becher M, Witucka-Wall H, Torjek O, Fiehn O,
Eckardt A, Willmitzer L, Selbig J, Altmann T (2007) The metabolic signature
related to high plant growth rate in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104: 4759-4764
Michaels SD, Amasino RM (2000) Memories of winter: vernalization and the
competence to flower. Plant Cell and Environment 23: 1145-1153
Bibliography
Michelmore RW, Paran I, Kesseli RV (1991) Identification of markers linked to disease-
resistance genes by bulked segregant analysis - a rapid method to detect markers in
specific genomic regions by using segregating populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 88: 9828-9832
Mikkelsen R, Mutenda KE, Mant A, Schurmann P, Blennow A (2005) alpha-Glucan,
water dikinase (GWD): A plastidic enzyme with redox-regulated and coordinated
catalytic activity and binding affinity. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102: 1785-1790
Mikkelsen R, Suszkiewicz K, Blennow A (2006) A novel type carbohydrate-binding
module identified in alpha-glucan, water dikinases is specific for regulated plastidial
starch metabolism. Biochemistry 45: 4674-4682
Minchin FR, Pate JS (1974) Diurnal functioning of legume root nodule. Journal of
Experimental Botany 25: 295-308
Mine M, Brivet M, Touati G, Grabowski P, Abitbol M, Marsac C (2003) Splicing error
in E1 alpha pyruvate dehydrogenase mRNA caused by novel intronic mutation
responsible for lactic acidosis and mental retardation. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 278: 11768-11772
Mitra RM, Gleason CA, Edwards A, Hadfield J, Downie JA, Oldroyd GED, Long SR
(2004) A Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase required for symbiotic nodule
development: Gene identification by transcript-based cloning. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101: 4701-4705
Mooney BP (2009) The second green revolution? Production of plant-based biodegradable
plastics. Biochemical Journal 418: 219-232
Moore B, Zhou L, Rolland F, Hall Q, Cheng WH, Liu YX, Hwang I, Jones T, Sheen J
(2003) Role of the Arabidopsis glucose sensor HXK1 in nutrient, light, and
hormonal signaling. Science 300: 332-336
Morgan JAW, Bending GD, White PJ (2005) Biological costs and benefits to plant-
microbe interactions in the rhizosphere. Journal of Experimental Botany 56: 1729-
Munier-Jolain N, Salon C (2003) Can sucrose content in the phloem sap reaching field
pea seeds (Pisum sativum L.) be an accurate indicator of seed growth potential?
Journal of Experimental Botany 54: 2457-2465
Munne-Bosch S (2007) Aging in perennials. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 26: 123-
Munne-Bosch S (2008) Do perennials really senesce? Trends in Plant Science 13: 216-
Bibliography
Munoz-Bertomeu J, Cascales-Minana B, Irles-Segura A, Mateu I, Nunes-Nesi A,
Fernie AR, Segura J, Ros R (2010) The Plastidial Glyceraldehyde-3-Phosphate
Dehydrogenase Is Critical for Viable Pollen Development in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiology 152: 1830-1841
Myers AM, Morell MK, James MG, Ball SG (2000) Recent progress toward
understanding biosynthesis of the amylopectin crystal. Plant Physiology 122: 989-
Nakamura T, Vrinten P, Hayakawa K, Ikeda J (1998) Characterization of a granule-
bound starch synthase isoform found in the pericarp of wheat. Plant Physiology 118:
451-459
Nakamura Y, Takahashi J, Sakurai A, Inaba Y, Suzuki E, Nihei S, Fujiwara S,
Tsuzuki M, Miyashita H, Ikemoto H, Kawachi M, Sekiguchi H, Kurano N
(2005) Some cyanobacteria synthesize semi-amylopectin type alpha-polyglucans
instead of glycogen. Plant and Cell Physiology 46: 539-545
Nashilevitz S, Melamed-Bessudo C, Aharoni A, Kossmann J, Wolf S, Levy AA (2009)
The legwd mutant uncovers the role of starch phosphorylation in pollen development
and germination in tomato. Plant Journal 57: 1-13
Neuhaus HE, Stitt M (1990) Control analysis of photosynthate partitioning - impact of
reduced activity of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase or plastid phosphoglucomutase
on the fluxes to starch and sucrose in Arabidopsis thaliana (L) Heynh. Planta 182:
445-454
Neuhaus HE, Wagner R (2000) Solute pores, ion channels, and metabolite transporters in
the outer and inner envelope membranes of higher plant plastids. Biochimica Et
Biophysica Acta-Biomembranes 1465: 307-323
Niittyla T, Comparot-Moss S, Lue WL, Messerli G, Trevisan M, Seymour MDJ,
Gatehouse JA, Villadsen D, Smith SM, Chen JC, Zeeman SC, Alison MS (2006)
Similar protein phosphatases control starch metabolism in plants and glycogen
metabolism in mammals. Journal of Biological Chemistry 281: 11815-11818
Niittyla T, Messerli G, Trevisan M, Chen J, Smith AM, Zeeman SC (2004) A
previously unknown maltose transporter essential for starch degradation in leaves.
Science 303: 87-89
Nishi A, Nakamura Y, Tanaka N, Satoh H (2001) Biochemical and genetic analysis of
the effects of amylose-extender mutation in rice endosperm. Plant Physiology 127:
459-472
Ohdan T, Francisco PB, Sawada T, Hirose T, Terao T, Satoh H, Nakamura Y (2005)
Expression profiling of genes involved in starch synthesis in sink and source organs
of rice. Journal of Experimental Botany 56: 3229-3244
Bibliography
Okita TW, Nakata PA, Anderson JM, Sowokinos J, Morell M, Preiss J (1990) The
subunit structure of potato tuber ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase. Plant Physiology
93: 785-790
Olcer H, Lloyd JC, Raines CA (2001) Photosynthetic capacity is differentially affected
by reductions in sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase activity during leaf development
in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Physiology 125: 982-989
Oldroyd GED, Downie JA (2004) Calcium, kinases and nodulation signalling in legumes.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 5: 566-576
Oldroyd GED, Downie JM (2008) Coordinating nodule morphogenesis with rhizobial
infection in legumes. Annual Review of Plant Biology 59: 519-546
Ourry A, Kim TH, Boucaud J (1994) Nitrogen reserve mobilization during regrowth of
Medicago sativa L. (relationships between availability and regrowth yield). Plant
Physiology 105: 831-837
Ozga JA, van Huizen R, Reinecke DM (2002) Hormone and seed-specific regulation of
pea fruit growth. Plant Physiology 128: 1379-1389
Pacini E (1996) Types and meaning of pollen carbohydrate reserves. Sexual Plant
Reproduction 9: 362-366
Pacini E, Franchi GG (1988) Amylogenesis and amylolysis during pollen grain
development. In Cresti, M., P. Gori and E. Pacini (Ed.). Sexual Reproduction in
Higher Plants; Tenth International Symposium, Siena, Italy, May 30-June 4, 1988.
Xiii+502p. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.: Secaucus, New Jersey, USA; Berlin,
West Germany. Illus: 181-186
Pacini E, Viegi L (1995) Total polysaccharide content of developing pollen in 2
angiosperm species. Grana 34: 237-241
Pagani F, Raponi M, Baralle FE (2005) Synonymous mutations in CFTR exon 12 affect
splicing and are not neutral in evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102: 6368-6372
Pan XX, Tang YY, Li MR, Wu GJ, Jiang HW (2009) Isoforms of GBSSI and SSII in
Four Legumes and Their Phylogenetic Relationship to Their Orthologs from Other
Angiosperms. Journal of Molecular Evolution 69: 625-634
Panitz R, Borisjuk L, Manteuffel R, Wobus U (1995) Transient expression of storage-
protein genes during early embryogenesis of vicia faba - synthesis and
metabolization of vicilin and legumin in the embryo, suspensor and endosperm.
Planta 196: 765-774
Park SW, Chung WI (1998) Molecular cloning and organ-specific expression of three
isoforms of tomato ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase gene. Gene 206: 215-221
Bibliography
Patrick JW, Offler CE (2001) Compartmentation of transport and transfer events in
developing seeds. Journal of Experimental Botany 52: 551-564
Patron NJ, Keeling PJ (2005) Common evolutionary origin of starch biosynthetic
enzymes in green and red algae. Journal of Phycology 41: 1131-1141
Paul MJ, Stitt M (1993) Effects of nitrogen and phosphorus deficiencies an levels of
carbohydrates, respiratory enzymes and metabolites in seedlings of tobacco and their
response to exogenous sucrose. Plant Cell and Environment 16: 1047-1057
Periappuram C, Steinhauer L, Barton DL, Taylor DC, Chatson B, Zou JT (2000) The
plastidic phosphoglucomutase from Arabidopsis. A reversible enzyme reaction with
an important role in metabolic control. Plant Physiology 122: 1193-1199
Perry J, Brachmann A, Welham T, Binder A, Charpentier M, Groth M, Haage K,
Markmann K, Wang TL, Parniske M (2009) TILLING in Lotus japonicus
Identified Large Allelic Series for Symbiosis Genes and Revealed a Bias in
Functionally Defective Ethyl Methanesulfonate Alleles toward Glycine
Replacements. Plant Physiology 151: 1281-1291
Perry J, Welham T, Cheminant S, Parniske M, Wang T (2005) Tilling. Springer
Perry JA, Wang TL, Welham TJ, Gardner S, Pike JM, Yoshida S, Parniske M (2003)
A TILLING reverse genetics tool and a web-accessible collection of mutants of the
legume Lotus japonicus. Plant Physiology 131: 866-871
Petreikov M, Shen S, Yeselson Y, Levin I, Bar M, Schaffer AA (2006) Temporally
extended gene expression of the ADP-Glc pyrophosphorylase large subunit (AgpL1)
leads to increased enzyme activity in developing tomato fruit. Planta 224: 1465-
Pohjanvirta R, Wong JMY, Li W, Harper PA, Tuomisto J, Okey AB (1998) Point
mutation in intron sequence causes altered carboxyl-terminal structure in the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor of the most 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-resistant rat
strain. Molecular Pharmacology 54: 86-93
Poorter H, Garnier E (1999) Ecological significance of inherent variation in relative
growth rate and its components. In: Pugnaire FI & Valladares F (eds). Handbook of
Plant Functional Ecology. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 81-120.
Poorter H, van Rijn CPE, Vanhala TK, Verhoeven KJF, de Jong YEM, Stam P,
Lambers H (2005) A genetic analysis of relative growth rate and underlying
components in Hordeum spontaneum. Oecologia 142: 360-377
Porch TG, Blair MW, Lariguet P, Galeano C, Pankhurst CE, Broughton WJ (2009)
Generation of a Mutant Population for TILLING Common Bean Genotype BAT 93.
Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science 134: 348-355
Bibliography
Preiss J, Sivak MN (1998) Biochemistry, molecular biology and regulation of starch
synthesis. Genetic Engineering 20: 177-223
Rainbird RM, Atkins CA, Pate JS (1983) Diurnal-variation in the functioning of cowpea
nodules. Plant Physiology 72: 308-312
Remington DL, Ungerer MC, Purugganan MD (2001) Map-based cloning of
quantitative trait loci: progress and prospects. Genetics Research 78: 213-218
Ritte G, Heydenreich M, Mahlow S, Haebel S, Kotting O, Steup M (2006)
Phosphorylation of C6- and C3-positions of glucosyl residues in starch is catalysed
by distinct dikinases. Febs Letters 580: 4872-4876
Ritte G, Lloyd JR, Eckermann N, Rottmann A, Kossmann J, Steup M (2002) The
starch-related R1 protein is an alpha-glucan, water dikinase. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99: 7166-7171
Ritte G, Lorberth R, Steup M (2000) Reversible binding of the starch-related R1 protein
to the surface of transitory starch granules. Plant Journal 21: 387-391
Ritte G, Scharf A, Eckermann N, Haebel S, Steup M (2004) Phosphorylation of
transitory starch is increased during degradation. Plant Physiology 135: 2068-2077
Ritte G, Steup M, Kossmann J, Lloyd JR (2003) Determination of the starch-
phosphorylating enzyme activity in plant extracts. Planta 216: 798-801
Rohde A, Bhalerao RP (2007) Plant dormancy in the perennial context. Trends in Plant
Science 12: 217-223
Roldan I, Wattebled F, Lucas MM, Delvalle D, Planchot V, Jimenez S, Perez R, Ball
S, D'Hulst C, Merida A (2007) The phenotype of soluble starch synthase IV
defective mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana suggests a novel function of elongation
enzymes in the control of starch granule formation. Plant Journal 49: 492-504
Rolland F, Baena-Gonzalez E, Sheen J (2006) Sugar sensing and signaling in plants:
Conserved and novel mechanisms. Annual Review of Plant Biology 57: 675-709
Rolland F, Moore B, Sheen J (2002) Sugar sensing and signaling in plants. Plant Cell 14:
S185-S205
Rolletschek H, Borisjuk L, Radchuk R, Miranda M, Heim U, Wobus U, Weber H
(2004) Seed-specific expression of a bacterial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in
Vicia narbonensis increases protein content and improves carbon economy. Plant
Biotechnology Journal 2: 211-219
Rosche E, Blackmore D, Tegeder M, Richardson T, Schroeder H, Higgins TJV,
Frommer WB, Offler CE, Patrick JW (2002) Seed-specific overexpression of a
potato sucrose transporter increases sucrose uptake and growth rates of developing
pea cotyledons. Plant Journal 30: 165-175
Bibliography
Rosti S, Rudi H, Rudi K, Opsahl-Sorteberg HG, Fahy B, Denyer K (2006) The gene
encoding the cytosolic small subunit of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in barley
endosperm also encodes the major plastidial small subunit in the leaves. Journal of
Experimental Botany 57: 3619-3626
Rozen S, Skaletsky H (2000) Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist
programmers. Methods Mol Biol 132: 365-386
Ryle GJA, Powell CE, Gordon AJ (1988) Responses of N2 fixation-linked respiration to
host-plant energy status in white clover acclimated to a controlled environment.
Journal of Experimental Botany 39: 879-887
Salanoubat M, Belliard G (1989) The steady-state level of potato sucrose synthase
messenger-rna is dependent on wounding, anaerobiosis and sucrose concentration.
Gene 84: 181-185
Sandal N, Krusell L, Radutoiu S, Olbryt M, Pedrosa A, Stracke S, Sato S, Kato T,
Tabata S, Parniske M, Bachmair A, Ketelsen T, Stougaard J (2002) A genetic
linkage map of the model legume Lotus japonicus and strategies for fast mapping of
new loci. Genetics 161: 1673-1683
Sandal N, Petersen TR, Murray J, Umehara Y, Karas B, Yano K, Kumagai H,
Yoshikawa M, Saito K, Hayashi M, Murakami Y, Wang XW, Hakoyama T,
Imaizumi-Anraku H, Sato S, Kato T, Chen WL, Hossain MS, Shibata S, Wang
TL, Yokota K, Larsen K, Kanamori N, Madsen E, Radutoiu S, Madsen LH,
Radu TG, Krusell L, Ooki Y, Banba M, Betti M, Rispail N, Skot L, Tuck E,
Perry J, Yoshida S, Vickers K, Pike J, Mulder L, Charpentier M, Muller J,
Ohtomo R, Kojima T, Ando S, Marquez AJ, Gresshoff PM, Harada K, Webb J,
Hata S, Suganuma N, Kouchi H, Kawasaki S, Tabata S, Parniske M,
Szczyglowski K, Kawaguchi M, Stougaard J (2006) Genetics of symbiosis in
Lotus japonicus: Recombinant inbred lines, comparative genetic maps, and map
position of 35 symbiotic loci. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 19: 80-91
Sanwal GG, Greenber.E, Hardie J, Cameron EC, Preiss J (1968) Regulation of starch
biosynthesis in plant leaves: activation and inhibition of ADPglucose
pyrophosphorylase. Plant Physiology 43: 417-427
Sato S, Nakamura Y, Kaneko T, Asamizu E, Kato T, Nakao M, Sasamoto S,
Watanabe A, Ono A, Kawashima K, Fujishiro T, Katoh M, Kohara M, Kishida
Y, Minami C, Nakayama S, Nakazaki N, Shimizu Y, Shinpo S, Takahashi C,
Wada T, Yamada M, Ohmido N, Hayashi M, Fukui K, Baba T, Nakamichi T,
Mori H, Tabata S (2008) Genome Structure of the Legume, Lotus japonicus. DNA
Research 15: 227-239
Bibliography
Sato S, Tabata S (2006) Lotus japonicus as a platform for legume research. Current
Opinion in Plant Biology 9: 128-132
Satoh H, Nishi A, Yamashita K, Takemoto Y, Tanaka Y, Hosaka Y, Sakurai A, Fujita
N, Nakamura Y (2003) Starch-branching enzyme I-deficient mutation specifically
affects the structure and properties of starch in rice endosperm. Plant Physiology
133: 1111-1121
Satoh H, Shibahara K, Tokunaga T, Nishi A, Tasaki M, Hwang SK, Okita TW,
Kaneko N, Fujita N, Yoshida M, Hosaka Y, Sato A, Utsumi Y, Ohdan T,
Nakamura Y (2008) Mutation of the plastidial alpha-glucan phosphorylase gene in
rice affects the synthesis and structure of starch in the endosperm. Plant Cell 20:
1833-1849
Schafer G, Heber U, Heldt HW (1977) Glucose-transport into spinach-chloroplasts. Plant
Physiology 60: 286-289
Schaffer R, Landgraf J, Accerbi M, Simon V, Larson M, Wisman E (2001) Microarray
analysis of diurnal and circadian-regulated genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13: 113-
Schauser L, Handberg K, Sandal N, Stiller J, Thykjaer T, Pajuelo E, Nielsen A,
Stougaard J (1998) Symbiotic mutants deficient in nodule establishment identified
after T-DNA transformation of Lotus japonicus. Molecular and General Genetics
259: 414-423
Schauser L, Roussis A, Stiller J, Stougaard J (1999) A plant regulator controlling
development of symbiotic root nodules. Nature 402: 191-195
Scheidig A, Frohlich A, Schulze S, Lloyd JR, Kossmann J (2002) Downregulation of a
chloroplast-targeted beta-amylase leads to a starch-excess phenotype in leaves. Plant
Journal 30: 581-591
Schneegurt MA, Sherman DM, Sherman LA (1997) Composition of the carbohydrate
granules of the cyanobacterium, Cyanothece sp strain ATCC 51142. Archives of
Microbiology 167: 89-98
Schnyder H, de Visser R (1999) Fluxes of reserve-derived and currently assimilated
carbon and nitrogen in perennial ryegrass recovering from defoliation. The
regrowing tiller and its component functionally distinct zones. Plant Physiology 119:
1423-1435
Schuelke M (2000) An economic method for the fluorescent labeling of PCR fragments.
Nature Biotechnology 18: 233-234
Schulze J (2004) How are nitrogen fixation rates regulated in legumes? Journal of Plant
Nutrition and Soil Science-Zeitschrift Fur Pflanzenernahrung Und Bodenkunde 167:
125-137
Bibliography
Schulze W, Stitt M, Schulze ED, Neuhaus HE, Fichtner K (1991) A quantification of
the significance of assimilatory starch for growth of Arabidopsis thaliana L Heynh.
Plant Physiology 95: 890-895
Senoura T, Isono N, Yoshikawa M, Asao A, Hamada S, Watanabe K, Ito H, Matsui H
(2004) Characterization of starch synthase I and II expressed in early developing
seeds of kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.). Bioscience Biotechnology and
Biochemistry 68: 1949-1960
Servaites JC, Geiger DR (2002) Kinetic characteristics of chloroplast glucose transport.
Journal of Experimental Botany 53: 1581-1591
Shalit A, Rozman A, Goldshmidt A, Alvarez JP, Bowman JL, Eshed Y, Lifschitz E
(2009) The flowering hormone florigen functions as a general systemic regulator of
growth and termination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 106: 8392-8397
Shannon JC, Pien FM, Cao HP, Liu KC (1998) Brittle-1, an adenylate translocator,
facilitates transfer of extraplastidial synthesized ADP-glucose into amyloplasts of
maize endosperms. Plant Physiology 117: 1235-1252
Shaw CR, Prasas R (1970) Starch gel electrophoresis of enzymes - A compilation of
recipes. Biochemical Genetics 4: 297-320
Singh RJ, Chung GH, Nelson RL (2007) Landmark research in legumes. Genome 50:
525-537
Singh S, Choi SB, Modi MK, Okita TW (2002) Isolation and characterization of cDNA
clones encoding ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) large and small
subunits from chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.). Phytochemistry 59: 261-268
Sissons MJ, Lance RCM, Wallace W (1994) Bound and free forms of barley limit
dextrinase. Cereal Chemistry 71: 520-521
Sissons MJ, Macgregor AW (1994) Hydrolysis of barley starch granules by alpha-
glucosidases from malt. Journal of Cereal Science 19: 161-169
Slade AJ, Knauf VC (2005) TILLING moves beyond functional genomics into crop
improvement. Transgenic Research 14: 109-115
Smeekens S (2000) Sugar-induced signal transduction in plants. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 51: 49-81
Smidansky ED, Clancy M, Meyer FD, Lanning SP, Blake NK, Talbert LE, Giroux
MJ (2002) Enhanced ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity in wheat endosperm
increases seed yield. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 99: 1724-1729
Bibliography
Smidansky ED, Martin JM, Hannah LC, Fischer AM, Giroux MJ (2003) Seed yield
and plant biomass increases in rice are conferred by deregulation of endosperm
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Planta 216: 656-664
Smidansky ED, Meyer FD, Blakeslee B, Weglarz TE, Greene TW, Giroux MJ (2007)
Expression of a modified ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase large subunit in wheat
seeds stimulates photosynthesis and carbon metabolism. Planta 225: 965-976
Smith AM (2001) The biosynthesis of starch granules. Biomacromolecules 2: 335-341
Smith AM (2008) Prospects for increasing starch and sucrose yields for bioethanol
production. Plant Journal 54: 546-558
Smith AM, Stitt M (2007) Coordination of carbon supply and plant growth. Plant Cell
and Environment 30: 1126-1149
Smith AM, Zeeman SC (2006) Quantification of starch in plant tissues. Nature Protocols
1: 1342-1345
Smith AM, Zeeman SC, Smith SM (2005) Starch degradation. Annual Review of Plant
Biology 56: 73-98
Smith AM, Zeeman SC, Thorneycroft D, Smith SM (2003) Starch mobilization in
leaves. Journal of Experimental Botany 54: 577-583
Smith MW, Doolittle RF (1992) Anomalous phylogeny involving the enzyme glucose-6-
phosphate isomerase. Journal of Molecular Evolution 34: 544-545
Smith SM, Fulton DC, Chia T, Thorneycroft D, Chapple A, Dunstan H, Hylton C,
Zeeman SC, Smith AM (2004) Diurnal changes in the transcriptome encoding
enzymes of starch metabolism provide evidence for both transcriptional and
posttranscriptional regulation of starch metabolism in arabidopsis leaves. Plant
Physiology 136: 2687-2699
Smithwhite BJ, Preiss J (1992) Comparison of proteins of ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase from diverse sources. Journal of Molecular Evolution 34: 449-
Sokolov LN, Dejardin A, Kleczkowski LA (1998) Sugars and light/dark exposure trigger
differential regulation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase genes in Arabidopsis
thaliana (thale cress). Biochemical Journal 336: 681-687
Sokolov LN, Dominguez-Solis JR, Allary AL, Buchanan BB, Luan S (2006) A redox-
regulated chloroplast protein phosphatase binds to starch diurnally and functions in
its accumulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 103: 9732-9737
Sonnewald U, Basner A, Greve B, Steup M (1995) A 2nd L-type isozyme of potato
glucan phosphorylase - cloning, antisense inhibition and expression analysis. Plant
Molecular Biology 27: 567-576
Bibliography
Sonnewald U, Willmitzer L (1992) molecular approaches to sink-source interactions.
Plant Physiology 99: 1267-1270
Stark DM, Timmerman KP, Barry GF, Preiss J, Kishore GM (1992) Regulation of the
amount of starch in plant-tissues by adp glucose pyrophosphorylase. Science 258:
287-292
Stinard PS, Robertson DS, Schnable PS (1993) Genetic isolation, cloning, and analysis
of a mutator-induced, dominant antimorph of the maize amylose extender1 locus.
Plant Cell 5: 1555-1566
Stitt M (1996) Metabolic regulation of photosynthesis. Advances in Photosynthesis;
Photosynthesis and the environment: 151-190
Stitt M, ap Rees T (1980) carbohydrate breakdown by chloroplasts of Pisum sativum.
Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 627: 131-143
Stitt M, Bulpin PV, Rees TA (1978) Pathway of starch breakdown in photosynthetic
tissues of pisum-sativum. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 544: 200-214
Stitt M, Heldt HW (1981) Physiological rates of starch breakdown in isolated intact
spinach chloroplasts. Plant Physiology 68: 755-761
Stitt M, Krapp A (1999) The interaction between elevated carbon dioxide and nitrogen
nutrition: the physiological and molecular background. Plant Cell and Environment
22: 583-621
Sturm A, Tang GQ (1999) The sucrose-cleaving enzymes of plants are crucial for
development, growth and carbon partitioning. Trends in Plant Science 4: 401-407
Sturre MJG, Shirzadian-Khorramabad R, Schippers JHM, Chin-A-Woeng TFC,
Hille J, Dijkwel PP (2009) Method for the identification of single mutations in large
genomic regions using massive parallel sequencing. Molecular Breeding 23: 51-59
Sugimoto T, Tanaka K, Monma M, Kawamura Y, Saio K (1989) Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase level in soybean seed highly correlates to its contents of protein and
lipid. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry 53: 885-887
Sulpice R, Pyl ET, Ishihara H, Trenkamp S, Steinfath M, Witucka-Wall H, Gibon Y,
Usadel B, Poree F, Piques MC, Von Korff M, Steinhauser MC, Keurentjes JJB,
Guenther M, Hoehne M, Selbig J, Fernie AR, Altmann T, Stitt M (2009) Starch
as a major integrator in the regulation of plant growth. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106: 10348-10353
Sun Z, Henson CA (1990) Degradation of native starch granules by barley alpha-
glucosidases. Plant Physiology 94: 320-327
Sweetlove LJ, Trethewey RN, Muller-Rober B, Hill SA (1998) High flux control
coefficient for potato tuber ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase. Journal of Experimental
Botany 49: 61-62
Bibliography
Szczyglowski K, Shaw RS, Wopereis J, Copeland S, Hamburger D, Kasiborski B,
Dazzo FB, de Bruijn FJ (1998) Nodule organogenesis and symbiotic mutants of the
model legume Lotus japonicus. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 11: 684-697
Szydlowski N, Ragel P, Raynaud S, Lucas MM, Roldan I, Montero M, Munoz FJ,
Ovecka M, Bahaji A, Planchot V, Pozueta-Romero J, D'Hulst C, Merida A
(2009) Starch Granule Initiation in Arabidopsis Requires the Presence of Either
Class IV or Class III Starch Synthases. Plant Cell 21: 2443-2457
Ta TC, Macdowall FDH, Faris MA (1990) Utilization of carbon and nitrogen reserves of
alfalfa roots in supporting N2-fixation and shoot regrowth. Plant and Soil 127: 231-
Tadege M, Wang TL, Wen JQ, Ratet P, Mysore KS (2009) Mutagenesis and Beyond
Tools for Understanding Legume Biology. Plant Physiology 151: 978-984
Takeda Y, Guan HP, Preiss J (1993) Branching of amylose by the branching isoenzymes
of maize endosperm. Carbohydrate Research 240: 253-263
Taliercio EW, Romano G, Scheffler J, Ayre BG (2009) Expression of genes associated
with carbohydrate metabolism in cotton stems and roots. BMC Plant Biology 9:
Article No.: 11
Tarrago JF, Nicolas G (1976) Starch degradation in cotyledons of germinating lentils.
Plant Physiology 58: 618-621
Tauberger E, Fernie AR, Emmermann M, Renz A, Kossmann J, Willmitzer L,
Trethewey RN (2000) Antisense inhibition of plastidial phosphoglucomutase
provides compelling evidence that potato tuber amyloplasts import carbon from the
cytosol in the form of glucose-6-phosphate. Plant Journal 23: 43-53
Temnykh S, DeClerck G, Lukashova A, Lipovich L, Cartinhour S, McCouch S (2001)
Computational and experimental analysis of microsatellites in rice (Oryza sativa L.):
Frequency, length variation, transposon associations, and genetic marker potential.
Genome Research 11: 1441-1452
Tetlow IJ, Morell MK, Emes MJ (2004) Recent developments in understanding the
regulation of starch metabolism in higher plants. Journal of Experimental Botany 55:
2131-2145
Tetlow IJ, Wait R, Lu ZX, Akkasaeng R, Bowsher CG, Esposito S, Kosar-Hashemi B,
Morell MK, Emes MJ (2004) Protein phosphorylation in amyloplasts regulates
starch branching enzyme activity and protein-protein interactions. Plant Cell 16:
694-708
Thimm O, Blasing O, Gibon Y, Nagel A, Meyer S, Kruger P, Selbig J, Muller LA,
Rhee SY, Stitt M (2004) MAPMAN: a user-driven tool to display genomics data
Bibliography
sets onto diagrams of metabolic pathways and other biological processes. Plant
Journal 37: 914-939
Thomas H, Howarth CJ (2000) Five ways to stay green. Journal of Experimental Botany
51: 329-337.
Thomas H, Thomas HM, Ougham H (2000) Annuality, perenniality and cell death.
Journal of Experimental Botany 51: 1781-1788
Thorbjornsen T, Villand P, Denyer K, Olsen OA, Smith AM (1996) Distinct isoforms
of ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase occur inside and outside the amyloplasts in
barley endosperm. Plant Journal 10: 243-250
Thummler F, Verma DPS (1987) Nodulin-100 of soybean is the subunit of sucrose
synthase regulated by the availability of free heme in nodules. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 262: 14730-14736
Tiessen A, Prescha K, Branscheid A, Palacios N, McKibbin R, Halford NG,
Geigenberger P (2003) Evidence that SNF1-related kinase and hexokinase are
involved in separate sugar-signalling pathways modulating post-translational redox
activation of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in potato tubers. Plant Journal 35:
490-500
Till B, Colbert TG, Tompa R, Steine M, McCallum CM, Henikoff S, Reynolds SH,
Comai L (2001) A high-throughput method for identifying induced point mutations
in plants. Plant Biology (Rockville) 2001: 181
Till BJ, Cooper J, Tai TH, Colowit P, Greene EA, Henikoff S, Comai L (2007)
Discovery of chemically induced mutations in rice by TILLING. BMC Plant
Biology 7: Article No.: 19
Till BJ, Reynolds SH, Weil C, Springer N, Burtner C, Young K, Bowers E, Codomo
CA, Enns LC, Odden AR, Greene EA, Comai L, Henikoff S (2004) Discovery of
induced point mutations in maize genes by TILLING. BMC Plant Biology 4
Till BJ, Reynolds SH, Weil C, Springer N, Burtner C, Young K, Bowers E, Codomo
CA, Enns LC, Odden AR, Greene EA, Comai L, Henikoff S (2004) Discovery of
induced point mutations in maize genes by TILLING. BMC Plant Biology 4
Tjaden J, Mohlmann T, Kampfenkel K, Henrichs G, Neuhaus HE (1998) Altered
plastidic ATP/ADP-transporter activity influences potato (Solanum tuberosum L.)
tuber morphology, yield and composition of tuber starch. Plant Journal 16: 531-540
Tomlinson KL, Lloyd JR, Smith AM (1997) Importance of isoforms of starch-branching
enzyme in determining the structure of starch in pea leaves. Plant Journal 11: 31-43
Trethewey RN, Smith AM, Leegood RC, Kennedy R (2000) Starch metabolism in
leaves. Photosynthesis: Physiology and metabolism: 205-231
Bibliography
Tsai HL, Lue WL, Lu KJ, Hsieh MH, Wang SM, Chen J (2009) Starch Synthesis in
Arabidopsis Is Achieved by Spatial Cotranscription of Core Starch Metabolism
Genes. Plant Physiology 151: 1582-1595
Tuncel A, Kavakli IH, Keskin O (2008) Insights into subunit interactions in the
heterotetrameric structure of potato ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. Biophysical
Journal 95: 3628-3639
Udvardi MK, Tabata S, Parniske M, Stougaard J (2005) Lotus japonicus: Legume
research in the fast lane. Trends in Plant Science 10: 222-228
Usadel B, Blasing OE, Gibon Y, Retzlaff K, Hoehne M, Gunther M, Stitt M (2008)
Global transcript levels respond to small changes of the carbon status during
progressive exhaustion of carbohydrates in Arabidopsis rosettes. Plant Physiology
146: 1834-1861
Van Laere AS, Nguyen M, Braunschweig M, Nezer C, Collette C, Moreau L,
Archibald AL, Haley CS, Buys N, Tally M, Andersson G, Georges M,
Andersson L (2003) A regulatory mutation in IGF2 causes a major QTL effect on
muscle growth in the pig. Nature 425: 832-836
Vance CP, Gantt JS (1992) Control of nitrogen and carbon metabolism in root-nodules.
Physiologia Plantarum 85: 266-274
Varshney RK, Close TJ, Singh NK, Hoisington DA, Cook DR (2009) Orphan legume
crops enter the genomics era Current Opinion in Plant Biology 12: 202-210
Vigeolas H, Mohlmann T, Martini N, Neuhaus HE, Geigenberger P (2004) Embryo-
specific reduction of ADP-Glc pyrophosphorylase leads to an inhibition of starch
synthesis and a delay in oil accumulation in developing seeds of oilseed rape. Plant
Physiology 136: 2676-2686
Volenec JJ, Boyce PJ, Hendershot KL (1991) Carbohydrate-metabolism in taproots of
Medicago sativa L during winter adaptation and spring regrowth. Plant Physiology
96: 786-793
Vriet C, Welham T, Brachmann A, Pike M, Pike J, Perry J, Parniske M, Sato S,
Tabata S, Smith AM, Wang TL (2010) A Suite of Lotus japonicus Starch Mutants
Reveals both Conserved and Novel Features of Starch Metabolism. Plant Physiology
154: 643-655
Vrinten PL, Nakamura T (2000) Wheat granule-bound starch synthase I and II are
encoded by separate genes that are expressed in different tissues. Plant Physiology
122: 255-263
Walsh KB, Layzell DB (1986) Carbon and nitrogen assimilation and partitioning in
soybeans exposed to low root temperatures. Plant Physiology 80: 249-255
Bibliography
Walsh KB, Vessey JK, Layzell DB (1987) Carbohydrate supply and N2 fixation in
soybean - the effect of varied daylength and stem girdling. Plant Physiology 85:
137-144
Wang D, Shi J, Carlson SR, Cregan PB, Ward RW, Diers BW (2003) A low-cost,
high-throughput polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis system for genotyping with
microsatellite DNA markers. Crop Science 43: 1828-1832
Wang D-K, Sun Z-X, Tao Y-Z (2006) Application of TILLING in plant improvement.
Acta Genetica Sinica 33: 957-964
Wang RH, Farrona S, Vincent C, Joecker A, Schoof H, Turck F, Alonso-Blanco C,
Coupland G, Albani MC (2009) PEP1 regulates perennial flowering in Arabis
alpina. Nature 459: 423-U138
Wang SJ, Yeh KW, Tsai CY (2001) Regulation of starch granule-bound starch synthase I
gene expression by circadian clock and sucrose in the source tissue of sweet potato.
Plant Science 161: 635-644
Wang SM, Chu B, Lue WL, Yu TS, Eimert K, Chen JC (1997) adg2-1 represents a
missense mutation in the ADPG pyrophosphorylase large subunit gene of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 11: 1121-1126
Wang TL, Bogracheva TY, Hedley CL (1998) Starch: As simple as A, B, C? Journal of
Experimental Botany 49: 481-502
Wang TL, Domoney C, Hedley CL, Casey R, Grusak MA (2003) Can we improve the
nutritional quality of legume seeds? Plant Physiology 131: 886-891
Wang TL, Hadavizideh A, Harwood A, Welham TJ, Harwood WA, Faulks R, Hedley
CL (1990) An analysis of seed development in Pisum-sativum .XIII. The chemical
induction of storage product mutants. Plant Breeding 105: 311-320
Wang, T.L., and Hedley, C. (1991) Seed development in peas: Knowing your three "r"s
(or four, or five). Seed Sci. Res. 1:3-14.
Wardlaw IF (1990) Tansley review no 27 - the control of carbon partitioning in plants.
New Phytologist 116: 341-381
Wattebled F, Dong Y, Dumez S, Delvalle D, Planchot R, Berbezy P, Vyas D, Colonna
P, Chatterjee M, Ball S, D'Hulst C (2005) Mutants of Arabidopsis lacking a
chloroplastic isoamylase accumulate phytoglycogen and an abnormal form of
amylopectin. Plant Physiology 138: 184-195
Wattebled F, Dong Y, Dumez S, Delvalle D, Planchot R, Berbezy P, Vyas D, Colonna
P, Chatterjee M, Ball S, D'Hulst C (2005) Mutants of Arabidopsis lacking a
chloroplastic isoamylase accumulate phytoglycogen and an abnormal form of
amylopectin. Plant Physiology 138: 184-195
Bibliography
Wattebled F, Planchot V, Dong Y, Szydlowski N, Pontoire B, Devin A, Ball S, D'Hulst
C (2008) Further Evidence for the Mandatory Nature of Polysaccharide
Debranching for the Aggregation of Semicrystalline Starch and for Overlapping
Functions of Debranching Enzymes in Arabidopsis Leaves. Plant Physiology 148:
1309-1323
Weber A, Servaites JC, Geiger DR, Kofler H, Hille D, Groner F, Hebbeker U, Flugge
UI (2000) Identification, purification, and molecular cloning of a putative plastidic
glucose translocator. Plant Cell 12: 787-801
Weber H, Borisjuk L, Heim U, Buchner P, Wobus U (1995) Seed coat-associated
invertases of fava-bean control both unloading and storage functions - cloning of
cdnas and cell-type-specific expression. Plant Cell 7: 1835-1846
Weber H, Borisjuk L, Wobus U (2005) Molecular physiology of legume seed
development. Annual Review of Plant Biology 56: 253-279
Weeden NF, Gottlieb LD (1982) Dissociation, reassociation, and purification of plastid
and cytosolic phosphoglucose isomerase isozymes. Plant Physiology 69: 717-723
Weigelt K, Kuster H, Rutten T, Fait A, Fernie AR, Miersch O, Wasternack C, Emery
RJN, Desel C, Hosein F, Muller M, Saalbach I, Weber H (2009) ADP-Glucose
Pyrophosphorylase-Deficient Pea Embryos Reveal Specific Transcriptional and
Metabolic Changes of Carbon-Nitrogen Metabolism and Stress Responses. Plant
Physiology 149: 395-411
Weise SE, Weber APM, Sharkey TD (2004) Maltose is the major form of carbon
exported from the chloroplast at night. Planta 218: 474-482
Welham T, Pike J, Horst I, Flemetakis E, Katinakis P, Kaneko T, Sato S, Tabata S,
Perry J, Parniske M, Wang TL (2009) A cytosolic invertase is required for normal
growth and cell development in the model legume, Lotus japonicus. Journal of
Experimental Botany 60: 3353-3365
Wienkoop S, Saalbach G (2003) Proteome analysis. Novel proteins identified at the
peribacteroid membrane from Lotus japonicus root nodules. Plant Physiology 131:
1080-1090
Williams LE, Dejong TM, Phillips DA (1982) Effect of changes in shoot carbon-
exchange rate on soybean root nodule activity. Plant Physiology 69: 432-436
Wingler A, Fritzius T, Wiemken A, Boller T, Aeschbacher RA (2000) Trehalose
induces the ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase gene, ApL3, and starch synthesis in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 124: 105-114
Wingler A, Purdy S, MacLean JA, Pourtau N (2006) The role of sugars in integrating
environmental signals during the regulation of leaf senescence. Journal of
Experimental Botany 57: 391-399
Bibliography
Worby CA, Gentry MS, Dixon JE (2006) Laforin, a dual specificity phosphatase that
dephosphorylates complex carbohydrates. Journal of Biological Chemistry 281:
30412-30418
Wuriyanghan H, Zhang B, Cao WH, Ma BA, Lei G, Liu YF, Wei W, Wu HJ, Chen
LJ, Chen HW, Cao YR, He SJ, Zhang WK, Wang XJ, Chen SY, Zhang JS
(2009) The Ethylene Receptor ETR2 Delays Floral Transition and Affects Starch
Accumulation in Rice. Plant Cell 21: 1473-1494
Yan HB, Pan XX, Jiang HW, Wu GJ (2009) Comparison of the starch synthesis genes
between maize and rice: copies, chromosome location and expression divergence.
Theoretical and Applied Genetics 119: 815-825
Yano M, Sasaki T (1997) Genetic and molecular dissection of quantitative traits in rice.
Plant Molecular Biology 35: 145-153
Yeh RF, Lim LP, Burge CB (2001) Computational inference of homologous gene
structures in the human genome. Genome Research 11: 803-816
Young ND, Cannon SB, Sato S, Kim D, Cook DR, Town CD, Roe BA, Tabata S
(2005) Sequencing the genespaces of Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus.
Plant Physiology 137: 1174-1181
Yu SK, Blennow A, Bojko M, Madsen F, Olsen CE, Engelsen SB (2002) Physico-
chemical characterization of floridean starch of red algae. Starch-Starke 54: 66-74
Yu TS, Kofler H, Hausler RE, Hille D, Flugge UI, Zeeman SC, Smith AM, Kossmann
J, Lloyd J, Ritte G, Steup M, Lue WL, Chen JC, Weber A (2001) The
Arabidopsis sex1 mutant is defective in the R1 protein, a general regulator of starch
degradation in plants, and not in the chloroplast hexose transporter. Plant Cell 13:
1907-1918
Yu TS, Lue WL, Wang SM, Chen JC (2000) Mutation of arabidopsis plastid
phosphoglucose isomerase affects leaf starch synthesis and floral initiation. Plant
Physiology 123: 319-325
Yu TS, Zeeman SC, Thorneycroft D, Fulton DC, Dunstan H, Lue WL, Hegemann B,
Tung SY, Umemoto T, Chapple A, Tsai DL, Wang SM, Smith AM, Chen J,
Smith SM (2005) alpha-Amylase is not required for breakdown of transitory starch
in Arabidopsis leaves. Journal of Biological Chemistry 280: 9773-9779
Zeeman SC, Ap Rees T (1999) Changes in carbohydrate metabolism and assimilate
export in starch-excess mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell and Environment 22:
1445-1453
Zeeman SC, Delatte T, Messerli G, Umhang M, Stettler M, Mettler T, Streb S,
Reinhold H, Kotting O (2007) Starch breakdown: recent discoveries suggest
distinct pathways and novel mechanisms. Functional Plant Biology 34: 465-473
Bibliography
Zeeman SC, Northrop F, Smith AM, ap Rees T (1998) A starch-accumulating mutant of
Arabidopsis thaliana deficient in a chloroplastic starch-hydrolysing enzyme. Plant
Journal 15: 357-365
Zeeman SC, Smith SM, Smith AM (2004) The breakdown of starch in leaves. New
Phytologist 163: 247-261
Zeeman SC, Smith SM, Smith AM (2007) The diurnal metabolism of leaf starch.
Biochemical Journal 401: 13-28
Zeeman SC, Thorneycroft D, Schupp N, Chapple A, Weck M, Dunstan H,
Haldimann P, Bechtold N, Smith AM, Smith SM (2004) Plastidial alpha-glucan
phosphorylase is not required for starch degradation in Arabidopsis leaves but has a
role in the tolerance of abiotic stress. Plant Physiology 135: 849-858
Zeeman SC, Tiessen A, Pilling E, Kato KL, Donald AM, Smith AM (2002) Starch
synthesis in Arabidopsis. Granule synthesis, composition, and structure. Plant
Physiology 129: 516-529
Zeeman SC, Umemoto T, Lue WL, Au-Yeung P, Martin C, Smith AM, Chen J (1998)
A mutant of Arabidopsis lacking a chloroplastic isoamylase accumulates both starch
and phytoglycogen. Plant Cell 10: 1699-1711
Zeng Y, Wu Y, Avigne WT, Koch KE (1998) Differential regulation of sugar-sensitive
sucrose synthases by hypoxia and anoxia indicate complementary transcriptional and
postranscriptional responses. Plant Physiology (Rockville) 116: 1573-1583
Zhang X, Szydlowski N, Delvalle D, D'Hulst C, James MG, Myers AM (2008)
Overlapping functions of the starch synthases SSII and SSIII in amylopectin
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biology 8: Article No.: 96
Zhang XL, Myers AM, James MG (2005) Mutations affecting starch synthase III in
arabidopsis alter leaf starch structure and increase the rate of starch synthesis. Plant
Physiology 138: 663-674
Zhang YH, Shewry PR, Jones H, Barcelo P, Lazzeri PA, Halford NG (2001)
Expression of antisense SnRK1 protein kinase sequence causes abnormal pollen
development and male sterility in transgenic barley. Plant Journal 28: 431-441
Zhang YHP, Evans BR, Mielenz JR, Hopkins RC, Adams MWW (2007) High-yield
hydrogen production from starch and water by a synthetic enzymatic pathway. PLoS
One 2: e456
Zheng GH, Han HL, Bhatty RS (1998) Physicochemical properties of zero amylose hull-
less barley starch. Cereal Chemistry 75: 520-524
Zhou YC, Chan K, Wang TL, Hedley CL, Offler CE, Patrick JW (2009) Intracellular
sucrose communicates metabolic demand to sucrose transporters in developing pea
cotyledons. Journal of Experimental Botany 60: 71-85
Bibliography
Zrenner R, Salanoubat M, Willmitzer L, Sonnewald U (1995) Evidence of the crucial
role of sucrose synthase for sink strength using transgenic potato plants (Solanum
tuberosum L). Plant Journal 7: 97-107
