Microsoft Word - Thesis_CORRECTED_changesaccepted_2.docx
Nuclear Size Control and Homeostasis in Fission Yeast 
Helena Rose Cantwell 
University College London 
The Francis Crick Institute 
PhD Supervisor: Sir Paul Nurse 
A thesis submitted for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
University College London 
October 2017 
Declaration 
I, Helena Rose Cantwell, confirm that the work presented in this thesis is my own. 
Where information has been derived from other sources, I confirm that this has 
been indicated in the thesis. 
Abstract 
Despite it being recognised as a problem worthy of consideration over a century 
ago, we have little mechanistic understanding of how the size of a cells nucleus is 
determined. The simply shaped fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is 
genetically tractable and undergoes a closed mitosis, making it a useful system in 
which to probe mechanisms of nuclear size control. In S. pombe cells, nuclear 
volume scales with cell volume, and not DNA content, across a wide range of cell 
volumes and throughout the cell cycle, maintaining a constant nuclear volume to 
cell volume (N/C) ratio. This thesis explores the mechanisms by which this scaling 
is achieved, using physiological, genetic and biochemical approaches. 
N/C ratio is perturbed and resultant nuclear and cellular growth rates of individual 
cells are assessed. N/C ratio homeostasis is observed. Both high and low aberrant 
N/C ratios correct rapidly in individual cells. Analysis of the kinetics of N/C ratio 
recovery is carried out and mathematical models of nuclear size control are 
proposed. To identify molecular components and biological processes with roles in 
nuclear size control mechanisms, a genetic screen for deletion mutants with 
aberrant nuclear size and biochemical analysis of a nuclear size mutant are carried 
out. Ribosome biogenesis, RNA processing and nucleocytoplasmic transport are all 
implicated in nuclear size control. 
Impact statement 
The work presented in this thesis addresses an unresolved problem of cell biology, 
how a cell determines the size of its nucleus. Despite much work on membrane 
trafficking and growth, very little is known about how the overall size of membrane 
bound organelles is determined. The study of nuclear size control in fission yeast 
described here exploits a simple system to provide novel insights into this complex 
problem, that could be relevant to a wide range of systems. 
New methodologies have been developed during the course of this work including 
an approach that allows recovery from perturbation of nuclear scaling to be 
monitored in individual cells, a method for phenotypically screening a subset of 
S. pombe essential gene deletion mutants and a workflow for proteomic analysis of 
nucleus enriched cell extracts. Some of these approaches could be usefully 
employed in future fission yeast studies focussed on different areas. 
This work describes, for the first time, homeostasis of nuclear volume to cell 
volume (N/C) ratio in a large population of cells. This analysis gives insight into 
potential general models of nuclear size control that could be employed by cells. 
This study also identifies molecular components and biological processes with 
roles in nuclear size control in fission yeast. This provides a useful resource for 
further studies of nuclear size control, and perhaps organelle size control more 
generally, in fission yeast and also in other systems. 
Aberrant nuclear size is characteristic of many human diseases including cancer. 
Whether nuclear size perturbation contributes to disease pathology or is 
downstream of it remains to be determined; lack of understanding of the 
mechanisms that control nuclear size has prevented the effect of its perturbation 
being assessed. Therefore, basic biological studies of nuclear size control, such as 
the one presented in this thesis, are essential precursors to the assessment of its 
clinical relevance. 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Paul for the opportunity to join his lab, for giving me the 
freedom, and the confidence, to drive my own project, and for supporting me every 
step of the way. Thank you for the countless discussions of size control, for 
entertaining every idea, however unconventional, for encouraging me to explore 
ever more interesting and challenging questions and for making the last four years 
so enjoyable. Your mentoring has been invaluable, helping me to develop a skill 
set, and a mindset, that I hope will serve me well for many more years of research 
to come. 
To members of Pauls lab, both past and present, thank you for all the discussions 
and for making the last four years so much fun. Jacky, thank you for sharing your 
infinite knowledge of S. pombe and for always finding the time to discuss new ideas 
and experimental approaches. Jess, thank you for making me question every detail 
and for recognising when I needed support, often before I did myself. Francisco, 
Pilar and Matthew, thank you for your sage, honest advice from the start. James, it 
has been great fun sharing the last four years with you, thank you for being such a 
good friend and excellent company all the way Corinne, the lab really wouldnt 
have been the same without you. Specific thanks are also due to Jess and Saz for 
taking the time to critically read this thesis and to Kazu for many interesting 
discussions of subcellular size control. 
I would like to thank Cancer Research UK and The Francis Crick Institute for 
funding this project and for providing such engaging, supportive environments to 
work in, the Proteomics facility for their support with aspects of this work, and my 
Thesis Committee, Barry Thompson and Takashi Toda, for all their advice. 
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for being there for me 
throughout, celebrating each small victory, and reminding be of the bigger picture 
after each failure, along the way. Mum, Dad, Lou and Joe, thank you for 
encouraging me to do something I really love and for always listening, and caring, 
or at least pretending to care, about nuclear size control as much as I do 
Table of Contents 
2.5 Nuclear growth rate and cellular growth rate are not always directly 
2.6 Nuclear growth rate correlates with cell volume and N/C ratio, and 
cellular growth rate correlates with nucleus volume and cell volume ... 60 
2.9.2 N/C ratio correction is observed in cells with aberrant N/C ratios ... 81 
3.1 Nuclear protein accumulation occurs in rae1-167 mutant cells at 
3.3 Accumulation of many different proteins is observed in the nuclei 
3.4 The proteins accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei are enriched for 
3.5 Identification of proteins that move into the nucleus both when 
rae1-167 cells are shifted to high temperature and when wild type cells 
Chapter 4. An essential gene screen for novel nuclear size mutants .. 109 
4.1 A third of essential gene deletion mutants form microcolonies 
4.6 Nuclear size mutants identified are enriched for RNA processing 
4.7 Network analysis highlights interactions between genes with 
4.9.2 Asymmetric nuclear division observed in smn1td and fta2ts cells .. 128 
4.9.4 Low interphase N/C ratio phenotype observed in sad1 mutant cells 
4.10 Mutation of another component of the P-TEFb complex that 
5.2 Identifying biological processes important for N/C ratio control . 141 
5.4.1 Functional significance of N/C ratio at specific transitions and for 
6.2.4 Nuclear and cellular size measurement and Vnuc/Vcell (N/C) ratio, 
Table of figures 
Figure 2.1 Vnuc/Vcell, and not SAnuc/SAcell or SAnuc/Vcell, is maintained during 
Figure 2.2 SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell, but not Vnuc/Vcell, ratio is higher in 
Figure 2.7 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed within 100 minutes of septation of 
Figure 2.8 Recovery of both high and low N/C ratios is observed in the 200 minutes 
Figure 2.9 N/C ratio homeostasis would be observed in a population if nuclear 
Figure 2.10 Nuclear growth rate is not always directly coupled to cellular growth 
Figure 2.11 Nuclear growth rate distribution mirrors cell volume and cellular growth 
Figure 2.12 Nuclear growth rate correlates with cell volume and not nuclear 
Figure 2.13 A population of wild type cells displays N/C ratio homeostasis without 
Figure 2.14 Nucleus volume and not cell volume correlates with N/C ratio at start of 
Figure 2.17 Interdependent growth rates model displays trend of N/C ratio recovery 
Figure 2.20 Limiting components model displays trend of N/C ratio recovery 
Figure 3.1 Nuclear protein accumulation is observed in rae1-167 cells exhibiting 
Figure 3.2 Nuclear protein accumulation in rae1-167 cells is suppressed by 
Figure 3.3 Nuclear protein accumulation in rae1-167 cells is suppressed by thiolutin 
Figure 3.4 Nuclear protein accumulation is observed in wild type cells treated with 
Figure 3.5 Nuclear enrichment of differentially labelled wild type and rae1-167 cells
Figure 3.6 SILAC analysis indicates that many proteins accumulate in rae1-167 
Figure 3.7 2D enrichment analysis indicates that proteins accumulating in rae1-167 
Figure 4.1 More than a third of S. pombe essential gene deletion mutants form 
Figure 4.3 Ish1-yEGFP can be used to mark the nuclear envelope of mutant cells
Figure 4.4 25 gene deletion mutants with aberrant N/C ratios identified by genetic 
Figure 4.7 Network analysis displays reported interactions between nuclear size 
Figure 4.8 Relationships between cellular volume and nuclear volume and N/C 
Figure 4.9 Temperature sensitive mutants of uaf2 and prp4 show nuclear 
Figure 4.10 Conditional mutants of fta2 and smn1 exhibit asymmetric nuclear 
Figure 4.11 Conditional mutant slp1-362 cells display mitotic defects at the 
Figure 4.14 Extension of interphase suppresses low N/C ratio phenotype of sad1.1 
Figure 7.1 Representative images of aberrant N/C ratio mutants identified by 
List of tables 
Table 3.1 Nucleus-localised proteins are enriched and cytosol-localised proteins 
Table 3.2 Proteins enriched more than 1.25 fold in rae1-167 relative to wild type . 99 
Table 3.3 Proteins that accumulate both in rae1-167 nuclei at 36C and in wild type 
Table 3.4 ORFeome and GO categories enriched in genes listed in Table 3.3 ... 105 
Table 7.1 Proteins enriched in rae1-167 nucleus enriched samples relative to wild 
Table 7.2 N/C ratios and product functions of genes deleted in strains screened by 
 Abbreviations 
BAF Barrier-to-autointegration factor 
COV Coefficient of variation 
cPKC Conventional protein kinase C 
CYH Cycloheximide 
DAmP Decreased abundance by mRNA perturbation 
DAPI 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole 
DiOC6 3,3-dihexyloxacarbocyanine iodide 
EMM Edinburgh minimal media 
ER Endoplasmic reticulum 
FDR False discovery rate 
FITC Fluorescein isothiocyanate 
GOBP Gene ontology biological process 
GOCC Gene ontology cellular component 
GOMF Gene ontology molecular function 
GRcell Cellular growth rate 
GRnuc Nuclear growth rate 
HU Hydroxyurea 
IFT Intraflagellar transport 
INM Inner nuclear membrane 
KASH Klarischt-ANC-1/SYNE homology 
LC-MS/MS Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
LEM LAP2-emerin-MAN1 
LINC Linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton 
LMB Leptomycin B 
MBT Midblastula transition 
MTOC Microtubule organising centre 
N/C Nuclear volume to cell volume 
NE Nuclear envelope 
NEBD Nuclear envelope breakdown 
NES Nuclear export sequence 
NLS Nuclear localisation sequence 
NPC Nuclear pore complex 
OD Optical density 
ONM Outer nuclear membrane 
PMSF Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride 
r Radius 
RNP Ribonucleoprotein 
SA Surface area 
SAcell Cell surface area 
SAnuc Nuclear surface area 
SD Standard deviation 
SILAC Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture  
SPB Spindle pole body 
SUN Sad1/UNC-84 homology 
td Temperature-degron 
Thio Thiolutin 
ts Temperature sensitive 
UPR Unfolded protein response 
V Volume 
Vcell Cell volume 
Vnuc Nuclear volume 
WT Wild type 
YE4S Supplemented yeast extract media 
yEGFP Yeast enhanced GFP 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
Recognised as a problem worthy of consideration by Theodor Boveri more than a 
century ago (Boveri, 1905), nuclear size has long been observed to correlate with 
cell size, but we have little mechanistic insight into how this scaling is achieved. 
This introduction outlines the factors that must be considered when thinking about 
how nuclear size control could be maintained in growing cells. It begins with a 
discussion of scaling in biology then describes previously proposed models for 
organelle scaling and examples of organelle scaling where mechanistic details 
have been determined. A description of nuclear and subnuclear structure and 
function is then followed by discussion of what is known about nuclear size control 
in different systems and what remains to be uncovered. 
1.1 Scaling in biology 
Everywhere Nature works true to scale, and everything has its proper size 
accordingly. 
DArcy Wentworth Thompson, 1945 
In biology, the size of a substructure in relation to that of other substructures and of 
the structure as a whole, its scaling, can be of great importance. Scaling is 
observed at many different levels within and between organisms. These include 
scaling of organ size between organisms of different size (Lapicque, 1907, Polilov 
and Makarova, 2017), scaling of the sizes of different organs within an organism 
(Huxley, 1924, Huxley, 1932), scaling of cell size with metabolic rate and organism 
size (Savage et al., 2007) and scaling of subcellular organelle size with cell size 
(Chan and Marshall, 2010, Uppaluri et al., 2016). 
Scaling relationships can be described mathematically by power-law relationships 
(Thompson, 1917), in which: 
  %  
where  and  are measurable size parameters, and  and  are constants. 
Determination of these scaling relationships can aid our understanding of the 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
underlying biological mechanisms that maintain them. Allometry is the quantitative 
comparison of relative growth of biological structures (Huxley and Teissier, 1936) 
and is defined by power-law relationships in a wide range of biological systems 
(Huxley, 1932, Chan and Marshall, 2010). Isometric growth is a special case of 
allometric growth in which  = 1 in the equation above so that  is maintained 
proportional to  as they increase (Huxley and Teissier, 1936) and is relevant to the 
discussion of nuclear size control presented in this thesis. 
1.2 Organelle scaling 
Eukaryotic cells contain a multitude of compartments and structures with 
specialised functions: organelles. Organelles are inherited from mother cells rather 
than synthesised de novo; they then grow or proliferate in order to scale function 
with demand (Nunnari and Walter, 1996, Heald and Cohen-Fix, 2014). Organelle 
function is likely to scale with size. This is exemplified by specialised cells in which 
high demand for the function of a specific organelle is correlated with its enlarged 
size, for example adipocytes contain enlarged lipid droplets and secretory cells 
contain an enlarged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and golgi apparatus (Marshall, 
2012). 
Generally, as cells grow larger, their demand for organelle function increases, 
giving rise to organelle scaling (Reber and Goehring, 2015). How this scaling of 
organelle size with cell size is achieved remains an unsolved problem for many 
organelles. Initially, it is important to consider what is meant by organelle size. The 
size parameter of an organelle that scales with cell size is likely to be different for 
different organelles and reflect their diverse structures and functions. Organelle 
linear dimensions, volume, surface area or number could all scale with cell size. 
For linear structures such as the mitotic spindle it is relatively easy to hypothesise 
that function scales with length and imagine mechanisms by which length scaling 
with cell size could be achieved. For more complex organelles the problem is more 
complicated; does the volume of a membrane bound organelle scale with cell size 
or is it instead the surface area or even the linear distance from the organelle to the 
cell periphery? This distinction affects the scaling laws that define organelle growth; 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
for a spherical organelle, its surface area (SA) and volume (V) are proportional to 
its radius (r) raised to different powers: 
	  	 - 
	  	 / 
Consequently, study of the relative growth of organelles and cells is required to 
determine the scaling parameter for each organelle. Consideration of the ways in 
which different organelles grow is also required to understand their scaling with cell 
size. Some membrane bound organelles grow by isotropic expansion in three 
dimensions but others, including the distributed networks of mitochondria and 
tubular ER in some cell types, grow by extension of a linear network in one 
dimension or, for multicopy organelles like peroxisomes, growth can be achieved 
by increase in number (Chan and Marshall, 2010). Though much is now known 
about mechanisms of membrane trafficking and growth in cells (van Meer et al., 
2008), remarkably little is known about what determines the overall size of 
membrane bound organelles or how lipids are moved between organelles (Nunnari 
and Walter, 1996). 
A few models of organelle size control have been proposed and these are 
discussed below, as are studies that have contributed to our understanding of the 
size control of specific organelles.  
1.2.1 Cellular growth 
To consider how organelle size is scaled with cell size, it is important to first 
consider cell size and the parameters of cells that change, as well as those that 
dont, as cell size increases during cell growth. On a simple level, cellular growth 
results in increased cell linear dimensions, cell surface area and cell volume; the 
scaling relationships between these parameters depends on cell shape. 
Biosynthesis rate generally scales with cell size (Schmoller and Skotheim, 2015). 
Amounts of protein (Williamson and Scopes, 1961, Crissman and Steinkamp, 
1973, Newman et al., 2006), total RNA (Williamson and Scopes, 1961, Zhurinsky et 
al., 2010) and mRNA (Schmidt and Schibler, 1995) are proportional to cell size. 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Notably, DNA content does not scale with cell size, instead it doubles during S 
phase. 
1.2.2 Models of organelle scaling 
A number of general models of organelle scaling have been proposed and are 
outlined below, beginning with apparently simple models then progressing to 
models involving more complex feedback control. 
1.2.2.1 Limiting components 
In perhaps the most intuitive of organelle scaling models, limiting cytoplasmic pools 
of organelle precursors have been proposed to be sufficient to generate organelle 
size scaling with cytoplasmic volume (Goehring and Hyman, 2012, Marshall, 2015). 
Larger cells contain proportionally increased protein amounts. Consequently, the 
larger the cell, the more of a given organelle precursor it will contain. If an organelle 
forms by simple aggregation, a larger cell will, due to the larger pool of precursors it 
contains, form a larger organelle. The rate of formation of the organelle would scale 
with substrate concentration. If precursors are limiting, then formation of the 
structure will, unless the cytoplasmic pool is replenished by cellular growth, deplete 
the cytoplasmic pool, leading to a reduction in concentration of precursor and so 
reduced organelle growth rate. This model predicts self-correcting organelle size 
control. Cell size determines absolute organelle growth rate so that an organelle 
that is inappropriately small in a cell will undergo percentage size increase faster 
than an appropriately sized organelle. The inverse is true for inappropriately large 
organelles; percentage size increase would be slower in these cells than in cells 
with appropriately sized organelles. This therefore provides a simple model for 
organelle size homeostasis. 
This simple model in which precursor concentration correlates with growth rate is 
applicable to simple linear structures, for example rate of microtubule formation is 
reported to be dependent on free tubulin dimer concentration (Borisy and Olmsted, 
1972), where association and dissociation of subunits only occurs at the ends and 
so their rates are not affected by the size of the structure. For more complex three-
dimensional structures, the rate of association and dissociation of subunits might 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
reasonably be expected to be influenced by the size of the structure as a whole, as 
the surface area to volume ratio of the structure changes as it grows. 
What does this model predict for multicopy organelles? If multiple structures are 
formed from the same limiting pool of precursors, the growth of each will deplete 
the cytoplasmic pool. If the precursor is freely, rapidly diffusible, then the individual 
structures should grow at equal rates, with total growth rate determined by the 
cytoplasmic precursor concentration. This means, however, that if the structures 
begin with different sizes, equalisation is not possible. Again, this relationship will 
be more complex if the structures are of a shape in which association and 
dissociation of subunits is affected by the size of the structure; in this situation, if 
the individual structures begin with unequal sizes then their growth rates could 
differ. If the precursors are not freely, rapidly diffusible then this could also generate 
local changes in precursor concentration leading to unequal growth rates. 
One organelle that appears to conform with the limiting components model of size 
control is the centrosome (Goehring and Hyman, 2012). It has long been reported 
that centrosome size scales with cell size (Conklin, 1912, Wilson, 1925), and in the 
C. elegans embryo, this is proposed to be the result of maternal loading of a 
limiting pool of centrosomal components that is divided between cells during the 
rapid divisions of embryogenesis. Consequently, as cell size is reduced 
centrosomal size would also decrease (Goehring and Hyman, 2012). Consistent 
with this model, as cell size decreased so did centrosomal growth rate, and 
overexpression of a centrosomal component, SPD-2, was sufficient to increase 
centrosomal size (Decker et al., 2011). 
Though length-dependent control mechanisms are likely important for the 
regulation of flagellar length (Marshall et al., 2005, Engel et al., 2009), flagellar 
severing experiments provided a system in which to test the limiting components 
model. When severed, Chlamydomonas flagella usually grow back to their original 
length. However, when protein synthesis was inhibited, flagella grew back to half 
their original length, and when severed again, to a quarter of their original length 
(Rosenbaum et al., 1969). This suggests that limiting the precursor pool is sufficient 
to limit flagellar length and that the pool is not exhausted by flagellar growth but 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
must instead be reduced to a specific level or concentration at which flagellar 
growth ceases. 
1.2.2.2 Restricted growth rate 
An alternative mechanism by which scaling could be achieved between cell and 
organelle size is by both the cell and organelle maintaining a constant growth rate 
(Marshall, 2012) (Figure 1.1A). The difference in growth rates would determine the 
resultant power-law scaling (Huxley, 1932). However, this mechanism would not 
allow cells to alter their growth rate in response to external stimuli and so could not 
be applicable to all physiological situations. 
A more generally applicable growth rate based scaling mechanism would be the 
maintenance of organelle growth rate as a constant proportion of cellular growth 
rate (Figure 1.1B). In such a model organelle scaling would be maintained even in 
periods of fast or slow cellular growth. Additionally, this would allow for recovery of 
aberrant organelle size as the same absolute growth rate, determined by cell 
growth rate, would contribute a greater percentage size increase to an undersized 
organelle than to an appropriately sized one. 
Figure 1.1 Restricted growth rate models of organelle scaling 
Schematic of constant growth rate (A) and proportional growth rate (B) models of 
organelle size control. 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2.2.3 Feedback of size information 
Directly measuring the size of an organelle then altering organelle growth rate in 
response is another mechanism by which organelle size control can be achieved. 
This requires a cellular mechanism for organelle size measurement. For linear 
structures that assemble by growth in a single direction, specific molecules that act 
as molecular rulers have been proposed; organelle length is established 
proportional to the length of the molecular ruler protein (Figure 1.2). An example of 
this is control of the length of the tail of bacteriophage  by molecular ruler protein 
gpH (Cornelis et al., 2006), deletions and duplications in the gene encoding gpH 
lead to shorter or longer forms of the protein and proportional tail length alterations 
(Katsura and Hendrix, 1984, Katsura, 1987). It is proposed that gpH acts as a 
scaffold for the growing tail, when the length of the tail exceeds the length of the 
scaffold, polymerisation ceases and a growth-terminating protein, gpU, locks tail 
length for connection to a head (Katsura, 1990). Molecular ruler mechanisms have 
also been proposed for bacterial injectosomes (Wagner et al., 2009, Wee and 
Hughes, 2015) and flagellar hooks (Kawagishi et al., 1996), but examples in 
eukaryotic cells are limited, perhaps due to the lack of flexibility in this type of size 
control mechanism preventing rapid organelle size alterations, the fact that the  
Figure 1.2 Molecular ruler model of organelle size control 
Schematic of molecular ruler model of nuclear size control for growth of a linear 
structure. Growth of organelle (green) continues until its length equals that of the 
molecular ruler (blue). Altering the length of the molecular ruler protein would alter 
the length of the organelle produced. 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
sizes of most eukaryotic organelles could not be spanned by a single protein and 
as this mechanism is only likely to be relevant to structures that grow in a single 
linear dimension. 
An alternative example of size dependent feedback on growth rate was reported for 
microtubule length control in budding yeast. The kinesin-8 family motor protein Kip3 
disassembles microtubules at the plus end in a length dependent manner. 
Disassembly of long microtubules is more rapid than that of short microtubules 
giving rise to a mechanism of microtubule length control (Varga et al., 2006). 
For more complex structures, which grow in more than one dimension, direct size 
measurement would be more challenging. Molecular gradients can be used to 
measure length. Well characterised at the much larger scale of morphogen 
gradients across tissues, this sort of mechanism could be employed at the 
subcellular level (Reber and Goehring, 2015). It has been proposed that for 
membrane bound organelles, maintenance of ion channels in an organelle 
membrane at a specific density could generate surface area dependent ion fluxes 
that are a readout of organelle size (Marshall, 2012). 
An alternative organelle scaling model requiring input of size information involves 
direct sensing of the distance between the organelle and the cell boundary, and 
appropriate adjustment of organelle growth rate. Such a model requires the cell 
boundary, or factors localised to it, to either promote or inhibit organelle growth 
(Reber and Goehring, 2015). Altering cell shape might be expected to affect 
organelle growth rate if such a model were employed. 
1.2.2.4 Feedback of functional information 
Instead of physically measuring organelle size, the functional output of an organelle 
could be measured and its growth rate adjusted accordingly. This model is 
particularly relevant for biosynthetic organelles in which size is directly correlated 
with rate of production of a specific molecule or class of molecules. As well as 
giving a mechanism by which organelle size could be increased to satisfy the 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
increasing demands of a growing cell, and therefore generate organelle scaling, a 
mechanism based on functional output also allows organelle size to be enlarged or 
diminished to alter function in response to a specific physiological situation that 
alters a cells needs. ER expansion during the unfolded protein response (UPR) 
provides an example of this. The UPR detects unfolded proteins in the ER and 
leads to activation of a transcriptional programme that increases membrane 
biogenesis and leads to ER expansion; UPR induction can lead to a five fold 
expansion of ER volume in budding yeast (Cox et al., 1997, Bernales et al., 2006, 
Brewer and Jackowski, 2012). 
1.2.3 Examples of organelle size control mechanisms 
The models of organelle scaling described above are not mutually exclusive, the 
structure and function of an individual organelle will define the mechanism, or 
combination of mechanisms, by which its scaling is achieved. Whether or not an 
organelle is membrane bound, its copy number and its shape are all factors that 
will affect its scaling. Size control mechanisms that have been proposed for specific 
organelles, and illustrate this, are outlined below. These examples also highlight 
the many gaps in our knowledge regarding organelle scaling, even within these 
relatively well studied systems. 
1.2.3.1 Flagella 
The flagella of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii are linear structures with a well 
characterised assembly mechanism. Wild type Chlamydomonas cells are 
biflagellate, with two evenly sized flagella (Rosenbaum et al., 1969). Flagellar size 
control is proposed to occur by a mechanism that is a combination of the limiting 
components model and length dependent assembly factor dilution (Marshall et al., 
2005). The contribution of a limiting component was demonstrated by the severing 
experiments discussed in Section 1.2.2.1. Flagellar assembly requires intraflagellar 
transport (IFT); kinesin pulling protein complexes, IFT particles, transport cargoes, 
including tubulin, to the growing tip (Scholey, 2003, Hao et al., 2011, Bhogaraju et 
al., 2013, Bhogaraju et al., 2014). IFT is required for flagella to grow, and also for 
their steady state size to be maintained as they are subject to constant 
disassembly (Marshall et al., 2005). The number of IFT particles per flagellum is 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
independent of flagellar length, so they are more dilute on longer flagella than on 
shorter ones (Marshall et al., 2005, Engel et al., 2009). Consequently, the longer 
the flagellum, the slower cargoes are delivered to the growing tip, and so the lower 
the assembly rate. When flagella reach a certain length the assembly rate no 
longer exceeds the disassembly rate and so growth ceases, yielding size control 
(Marshall and Rosenbaum, 2001). This model requires that IFT particle number is 
independent of flagellar length, which, as the time taken by an IFT particle to travel 
along the flagellum is proportional to flagellar length (L), requires IFT particles to be 
injected into the flagella at a rate proportional to 1/L (Marshall, 2015); an injection 
rate proportional to 1/L was observed experimentally (Ludington et al., 2013). 
Therefore, this mechanism relies on length dependent alteration of IFT particle 
injection rate and the mechanism by which this is achieved remains unclear 
(Marshall, 2015, Ishikawa and Marshall, 2017). 
1.2.3.2 Mitotic spindle 
Spindle length has been observed to correlate with cell volume during development 
in a range of systems from invertebrates to mammals (Wuhr et al., 2008, Hara and 
Kimura, 2009, Greenan et al., 2010, Courtois et al., 2012). Interspecies scaling of 
spindle size between the larger-celled pseudotetraploid Xenopus laevis and the 
smaller-celled diploid Xenopus tropicalis was also observed. X. tropicalis egg 
extracts generated smaller spindles than those of X. laevis; p60 katanin with higher 
microtubule severing activity in X. tropicalis contributed to this scaling (Loughlin et 
al., 2011). Spindle length appears to have an upper limit, in the very large cells of 
early divisions in both Xenopus (Wuhr et al., 2008) and mouse (Courtois et al., 
2012) embryos, spindle length doesnt scale with cell volume and but remains 
constant across multiple divisions before decreasing, scaling with cell size in the 
smaller cells of later divisions. This suggests that spindle size is limited by cell 
volume until a threshold cell volume is reached above which spindle size is limited 
by a factor independent of cell volume. 
Spindle length scaling with cell volume could theoretically be achieved by a variety 
of mechanisms implicating cytoplasmic factors or a physical constraint determined 
by cell volume or shape (Dumont and Mitchison, 2009, Goshima and Scholey, 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
2010). Spindles formed in Xenopus egg extract cytoplasmic droplets formed using 
microfluidics devices were studied to assess the influence of cytoplasmic volume 
and shape on spindle size (Good et al., 2013, Hazel et al., 2013). Changing droplet 
volume was sufficient to cause a change in spindle size, and droplet shape did not 
influence spindle size, indicating that cytoplasmic volume determines spindle size. 
This was true for both X. laevis and X. tropicalis spindles, and for both meiotic and 
mitotic spindles (Good et al., 2013). As observed in embryos, spindle length 
plateaued at 40-45 m in droplets with diameters greater than 80 m (Good et al., 
2013, Hazel et al., 2013). Tubulin density in the spindle did not alter with size, but 
free tubulin concentration in the droplet scaled with droplet size, giving rise to a 
limiting component model in which free tubulin concentration was proportional to 
spindle length. Though the modelled spindle length values fitted experimental data 
well, overexpression of tubulin did not increase spindle length, indicating that 
tubulin is necessary, but not sufficient, for spindle growth. This led to proposition of 
a general limiting components model in which molecules important for spindle 
assembly, including tubulin, are present in the cytoplasm in amounts proportional to 
cytoplasmic volume and limit spindle size, except in very large cells in which they 
are in excess so spindle scaling is not observed (Good et al., 2013).  
Additional factors that influence spindle size have been identified including the 
microtubule polymerase XMAP215 (Reber et al., 2013), microtubule severing 
protein katanin (Loughlin et al., 2011) and microtubule destabilising kinesin kif2a in 
concert with nucleocytoplasmic transport protein importin a (Wilbur and Heald, 
2013). These factors may influence spindle size by altering the activity or 
concentration of the cytoplasmic scaling factors described above and so alter 
minimum and maximum spindle size (Good et al., 2013).  
1.2.3.3 Nucleolus 
The nucleolus is a subnuclear non-membrane bound organelle that is the site of 
rRNA synthesis, an essential step in ribosome biogenesis. Nucleolar size scales 
with cell volume in fission (Neumann and Nurse, 2007) and budding (Jorgensen et 
al., 2007) yeast cells and in human sensory ganglia neurons (Berciano et al., 2007) 
as well as during the reductive divisions of 8-stage to 64-stage C. elegans embryos 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
(Weber and Brangwynne, 2015). When RNAi knockdown of specific genes was 
used to reduce or increase embryo and cell size, though nucleolar size scaled with 
cell size within each RNAi condition it was inversely scaled with cell size between 
conditions (Weber and Brangwynne, 2015). This relationship was the result of 
loading of a fixed number of nucleolar components into each oocyte, rather than a 
fixed concentration as is the case for centrosome and spindle components, so that 
smaller embryos had higher concentrations of nucleolar components in each cell 
than larger embryos did (Weber and Brangwynne, 2015). Nucleoli are reported to 
behave as liquid phase ribonucleoprotein droplets (Brangwynne et al., 2011), 
consequently a phase transition model (Hyman and Simons, 2012, Weber and 
Brangwynne, 2012, Brangwynne, 2013) for nucleolar assembly is proposed in 
which nucleolar components partition between a condensed droplet phase and a 
soluble nucleoplasmic pool (Weber and Brangwynne, 2015). This model is 
consistent with limiting components models described in Section 1.2.2.1 as 
nucleolar growth rate would be determined by the nuclear concentration of 
nucleolar components. 
Genetic studies in C. elegans have implicated a regulatory cascade in affecting 
nucleolar size by altering the amount of nucleolar component FIB-1 (fibrillarin); the 
translational repressor NCL-1 suppressed translation of FIB-1 and the let-7 
microRNA inhibited ncl-1 expression (Yi et al., 2015). 
1.2.3.4 Mitochondria 
Mitochondria are membrane bound organelles critical to cellular ATP production. 
They are usually found in branched linear networks in cells, though sometimes 
isolated or as aggregates instead (Chan and Marshall, 2010). Mitochondria are 
dynamic, subject to frequent fission and fusion events (Sebastian et al., 2017). 
Mitochondrial number alters in response to changes in cellular energy demand 
(Hood, 2001, Devin and Rigoulet, 2004). These changes involve complex signalling 
networks to achieve coordinate regulation of hundreds of genes, some encoded by 
nuclear, and others mitochondrial, DNA (Devin and Rigoulet, 2004). 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Linear scaling of mitochondrial size with cell size has been reported in many 
systems (Posakony et al., 1977, Kitami et al., 2012, Rafelski et al., 2012, Miettinen 
and Bjorklund, 2016). In HeLa cells number, outer membrane surface area and 
volume of mitochondria all scaled with cytoplasmic volume throughout the cell cycle 
(Posakony et al., 1977). Length of the mitochondrial network scaled with cell 
volume in S. cerevisiae (Rafelski et al., 2012). How these scaling relationships are 
achieved remains to be determined. Interestingly, in mammalian cells, despite 
isometric scaling of mitochondrial amount with cell size, non-linear allometric 
scaling of mitochondrial function with cell size was observed, leading to a reduced 
cellular growth rate in very large cells and the proposition of an optimal cell size at 
which cellular fitness and proliferation are maximised (Miettinen and Bjorklund, 
2016). 
1.2.3.5 Golgi apparatus 
The golgi apparatus is a membrane bound organelle, a ribbon-like structure 
composed of stacks of flattened cisternal membranes, with many roles including 
the processing of synthesised proteins and lipids (Sengupta and Linstedt, 2011). 
The golgi apparatus doubles in size during the cell cycle of mammalian cells 
(Shima et al., 1997, Sin and Harrison, 2016) and Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells 
(Kondylis et al., 2007), and scales with cell volume (Shorter and Warren, 2002). 
This increase in size appears to be achieved by increasing the length of the ribbon 
structure by increasing the number of stacks of cisternae (Sengupta and Linstedt, 
2011). 
How this scaling is achieved remains unknown though the dynamics of trafficking 
between the golgi apparatus and the ER could play a role. In HeLa cells, inhibition 
of golgi apparatus to ER trafficking led to increases in golgi apparatus volume and 
surface area (Burman et al., 2010). 
1.2.3.6 Vacuole 
The budding yeast vacuole is an example of a membrane bound organelle for 
which a restricted growth rate model of size control is proposed (Chan et al., 2016). 
Composed of multiple dynamic compartments and subject to fission and fusion 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
(Desfougeres et al., 2016), the size of the budding yeast vacuole has been 
reported to scale with cell size. Vacuolar surface area scales with cell volume and 
is sensitive to changes in the rate of membrane trafficking to or from the vacuole 
(Chan and Marshall, 2014). Vacuole scaling was perturbed using mutants 
displaying defective vacuole partitioning during inheritance; resultant instantaneous 
vacuole growth rates suggested that vacuole growth rate is independent of both 
cell and vacuole size (Chan et al., 2016). No correlation between cell size and 
vacuolar growth rate was observed indicating that there is no feedback between 
cell size and vacuolar growth rate, unless the components deleted in the 
inheritance mutants studied are involved in the feedback mechanism. Therefore, it 
was proposed that scaling of the budding yeast vacuole is achieved by 
maintenance of a vacuolar growth rate as either a constant or a constant proportion 
of cellular growth rate (Chan et al., 2016). How this growth rate relationship is 
established and maintained remains to be determined. 
1.2.4 Probing organelle size control mechanisms 
The above models and examples of how organelle scaling is achieved for specific 
organelles illustrate the complexities involved in achieving a seemingly simple 
phenomenon: scaling of cell and organelle size. They also highlight some 
methodologies that could prove useful in determining scaling mechanisms. Initially, 
the scaling parameters of organelle and cell size must be identified by 
measurement and analysis of correlations. Analysis of growth rates of organelles in 
specific physiological situations would then help to decipher mechanism; assessing 
relative growth rates of multiple copies of an organelle in a cell and of organelles in 
cells in which scaling has been perturbed would be informative, as different models 
of organelle size control predict different growth rates in these situations. In order to 
move towards a molecular understanding of the scaling mechanism, identifying 
factors required for the maintenance of scaling will be important. 
1.3 The nucleus 
A large and complex organelle of eukaryotic cells, the nucleus contains the cells 
genomic DNA and is the site of its transcription into RNA for translation in the 
cytoplasm. Many structural constituents of the nucleus are conserved across 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
eukaryotes; a notable exception is the nuclear lamina (Devos et al., 2014). Diverse 
roles for nuclear components are being uncovered, with many playing regulatory 
roles in processes such as chromatin structure organisation, gene expression and 
mitosis in addition to their previously characterised structural roles and functions 
(Rout and Karpen, 2014). 
1.3.1 Nuclear envelope 
The nucleus is delimited by a specialised compartment of the ER, the nuclear 
envelope (NE). The NE is composed of two adjacent phospholipid bilayer 
membranes, the inner nuclear membrane (INM) and outer nuclear membrane 
(ONM), separated by a luminal space; it is perforated by nuclear pore complexes 
(NPCs), which facilitate transport between the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm, and 
microtubule organising centres (MTOCs), and bridged by linker of nucleoskeleton 
and cytoskeleton (LINC) complexes (Hetzer, 2010, Mekhail and Moazed, 2010, 
Ungricht and Kutay, 2017) (Figure 1.3). In addition to its role as a barrier separating 
the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm, roles for the NE and its components in genome 
organisation and stability and gene expression have been described, notably 
transcriptional repression and activation are both frequent in the nuclear periphery 
(Mekhail and Moazed, 2010). 
In growing cells, nuclear volume doubles during interphase, accompanied by 
constant NE expansion (Dultz and Ellenberg, 2010, Maeshima et al., 2010). How 
membrane insertion into the NE is regulated during interphase remains unclear. 
Disruption of the connection between nuclei and peripheral ER in vitro prevented 
nuclear expansion (D'Angelo et al., 2006) suggesting that membrane flows into the 
ONM from ER tubules (Hetzer, 2010). The NE is dynamic, with its components 
undergoing homeostasis; most INM and ONM proteins are synthesised and 
inserted into the membrane in the ER then diffuse to the NE (Ungricht and Kutay, 
2017). How INM proteins are inserted is not fully understood, but is thought to be 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Figure 1.3 Schematic of nuclear envelope structure 
Schematic of structure of nuclear envelope (NE), a specialised compartment of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) composed of an inner nuclear membrane (INM) and an 
outer nuclear membrane (ONM). The NE separates the nucleoplasm from the 
cytoplasm and is lined by the nuclear lamina (LAMINA), a network of filamentous 
proteins, in metazoan cells. Example LINC complexes bridging the NE and nuclear 
pore complex (NPC) embedded in the NE are shown. Not to scale.  
by transport from the ONM through the nuclear pore, subject to an NPC imposed 
size restriction; their retention in the INM is proposed to be dependent on 
interactions with chromatin or lamina components (Ungricht et al., 2015). The 
insertion of newly synthesised NPCs into the NE requires assembly of large 
multiprotein complexes and fusion of the INM and ONM without disturbing nuclear 
integrity. How this is achieved is yet to be fully determined; it has been proposed in 
one model that immature NPCs are inserted into the INM from the nucleoplasm 
then membrane fusion occurs, and alternatively, in another model, that membrane 
fusion may be the initial step driving NPC insertion (Ungricht et al., 2015).  
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Extensive remodelling of the NE is required for both the closed and semi-closed 
mitotic strategies of yeasts and the open mitosis of higher eukaryotes. For the 
closed mitosis of S. pombe, spindle pole body (SPB) insertion into fenestrae of the 
NE (Tamm et al., 2011) and rapid expansion of the NE, mediated by CDK 
phosphorylation of the lipin Ned1 (Makarova et al., 2016), to allow for spindle 
elongation, take place. In the open mitosis of higher eukaryotes, regulated nuclear 
envelope breakdown (NEBD) at the onset of mitosis with dispersal of NE 
components into the ER, and reassembly of the NE following chromosome 
segregation, is required (Ungricht and Kutay, 2017).  
1.3.2 Nuclear lamina 
The nuclear lamina is a mesh-like network of filamentous proteins that underlies 
the INM providing mechanical stability and acting as a binding site for proteins and 
chromatin. The main constituents of the metazoan lamina are lamin proteins, 
60-80 kDa intermediate filament proteins that are subject to high-order 
polymerisation and extensive post-translational modification (Dittmer and Misteli, 
2011, de Leeuw et al., 2018). Mutations in genes encoding lamins and lamin 
associated proteins have been implicated in a range of human diseases 
(Gruenbaum et al., 2005). Defects in the nuclear lamina lead to reduction of the 
mechanical stability of the nucleus, making it more fragile and susceptible to 
deformation (Dittmer and Misteli, 2011), and the nuclear lamina has been 
implicated in mechanotransduction (Swift et al., 2013, Miroshnikova et al., 2017). 
A range of lamin associated proteins localised to the INM and nuclear periphery 
contribute to nuclear structure, chromatin organisation, regulation of gene 
expression, cell cycle control and signalling (de Leeuw et al., 2018). A well-
characterised family of lamin associated proteins, LAP2-emerin-MAN1 (LEM) 
domain proteins are located in the INM and link chromatin to the nuclear periphery; 
they contain domains that facilitate direct binding to lamins and chromatin, as well 
as indirect binding to chromatin via interaction with histone and DNA binding 
protein Barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) (Barton et al., 2015). LEM domain 
proteins have been implicated in regulation of gene expression via interactions with 
signalling factors and histone deacetylases (Berk et al., 2013, Barton et al., 2015). 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
The lamin associated protein lamin B receptor (LBR) is also reported to play a role 
in chromatin organisation, interacting with lamin A/C to facilitate heterochromatin 
formation in the nuclear periphery (Solovei et al., 2013). SUN (Sad1/UNC-84 
homology) domain proteins, INM constituents of the LINC complexes that bridge 
the NE connecting the cytoskeleton to the nucleoskeleton, also interact with lamins 
(de Leeuw et al., 2018). Roles for lamin associated proteins in establishing 
appropriate spacing between NPCs have also been proposed (Liu et al., 2000). 
Lamins were thought to be restricted to metazoan cells, however lamin-like proteins 
have been identified in amoebozoa suggesting that they are likely to have earlier 
evolutionary origins (Devos et al., 2014). Plants dont contain direct orthologues of 
lamins but have an analogous network of filamentous proteins underlying the NE 
(Ciska and Moreno Diaz de la Espina, 2014). There is no evidence of a filamentous 
structure underlying the nuclear envelope or direct orthologues of lamins or BAF in 
yeast, but orthologues of lamin associated proteins have been identified that 
perform some of the roles carried out by the lamina in metazoan cells. S. pombe 
INM proteins Lem2 and Man1 are orthologues of the LEM domain family proteins 
that interact with chromatin, anchoring it to the nuclear periphery (Gonzalez et al., 
2012). 
1.3.3 LINC complexes 
The nuclear envelope is bridged by LINC complexes that connect the cytoskeleton 
to the nucleoskeleton (Starr and Fridolfsson, 2010, Rothballer et al., 2013). LINC 
complexes are composed of highly conserved INM localised SUN domain 
transmembrane proteins and ONM localised KASH (Klarischt/ANC-1/SYNE 
homology) domain transmembrane proteins that interact in the NE lumen. SUN 
domain proteins interact with chromatin and the nuclear lamina and KASH domain 
proteins interact with cytoskeletal components. SUN-KASH complexes are, 
therefore, central to the transmittance of forces between the nucleoplasm and the 
cytoplasm (Rothballer et al., 2013) and play a role in mechanotransduction (Tapley 
and Starr, 2013). It is possible that SUN-KASH complexes also have a role in 
determining the distance between the INM and ONM (Rothballer et al., 2013). 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
SUN-KASH complexes have been implicated in nuclear positioning; interactions 
between KASH domain proteins and dynein and kinesin motor proteins facilitate 
nuclear movement along microtubules, and KASH proteins also interact with actin 
filaments, tethering nuclei to the moving actin network (Tapley and Starr, 2013). 
An intriguing proposal is that SUN-KASH complexes may have a role in membrane 
fusion, or at least in maintaining nuclear integrity whilst membrane fusion occurs. 
The insertion of NPCs and MTOCs into the NE requires fusion of the INM and 
ONM. SUN-KASH complexes have been reported to cluster at NPCs in mammalian 
cells, transiently interacting with the nucleoporin POM121, and also to localise to 
SPBs in yeast (Rothballer et al., 2013). 
1.3.4 Nucleocytoplasmic transport 
Selective nucleocytoplasmic transport between the nucleoplasm and the cytoplasm 
maintains functional differentiation between the two cellular compartments. The 
vast majority of nucleocytoplasmic transport occurs through large, highly conserved 
multiprotein nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) embedded in the NE. 
NPCs are located at openings in the NE where the INM and the ONM are fused. 
They are composed of ~30 different nucleoporin proteins and display eight fold 
rotational symmetry (Knockenhauer and Schwartz, 2016). A central scaffold is 
embedded in the NE, and anchored to it by transmembrane nucleoporins 
(Onischenko et al., 2009, Eisenhardt et al., 2014). On the nucleoplasmic side, eight 
rod shape extensions are connected by a distal ring to form a basket structure 
(Allen et al., 2000) and eight flexible fibrils protrude on the cytoplasmic side. The 
permeability barrier in the central pore is composed of disordered elements; a 
subset of nucleoporins contain long extensions of phenylalanine-glycine (FG) 
repeats (Terry and Wente, 2009) thought to form a selectively permeable hydrogel 
in the pore (Labokha et al., 2013, Bestembayeva et al., 2015). The ability of a 
cargo to permeate the pore depends on its size and surface properties (Tu and 
Musser, 2011). It was thought molecules smaller than ~40 kDa could freely diffuse 
through the pore while larger molecules required active transport, however, a 
recent study (Wuhr et al., 2015) suggests that this limit may be at a higher 
molecular mass (~100 kDa), with smaller molecules retained in the nucleoplasm or 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
cytoplasm by passive retention due to their incorporation into large complexes. 
Cargoes requiring active transport through the NPC contain nuclear export 
sequences (NESs) or nuclear localisation sequences (NLSs) that are recognised 
by nuclear transport receptors, importins and exportins, that interact with the 
nucleoporins lining the central pore of the NPC to facilitate transport of the cargo. 
The cycling of nuclear transport receptors between the nucleoplasm and the 
cytoplasm is driven by gradients of Ran-GTP and Ran-GDP across the NE (Tu and 
Musser, 2011). 
Interestingly, a vesicle-based mechanism for the nucleocytoplasmic transport of 
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules too large to pass through the NPC has been 
proposed. Observed in D. melanogaster neuromuscular junctions (Speese et al., 
2012), the mechanism for this transport remains unclear but is proposed to involve 
torsin ATPases (Jokhi et al., 2013, Ungricht and Kutay, 2017). 
1.3.5 Chromatin 
Within the nucleus, genomic DNA is arranged into a complex, dynamic, three-
dimensional structure, the topology of which is important for the regulation of its 
replication and transcription (Cavalli and Misteli, 2013, Gibcus and Dekker, 2013). 
Individual chromosomes are localised to chromosome territories (Lichter et al., 
1988, Pinkel et al., 1988, Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009) with gene dense 
chromosomes generally localised towards the centre of the nucleus and less gene 
dense ones nearer the periphery (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009, Zhang et al., 
2012). Specific regions of chromatin localise to specific subnuclear locations. 
Chromatin connected to the nuclear lamina by interaction with lamin associated 
proteins is enriched for transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin whereas 
chromatin associated with NPCs is enriched for transcriptionally active euchromatin 
(Gibcus and Dekker, 2013). Additionally, ribosomal DNA arrays and active RNA 
polymerase III transcribed genes localise in and around the nucleolus (Gibcus and 
Dekker, 2013) and actively transcribed genes colocalise with transcription factories, 
foci enriched with RNA polymerase and transcriptional regulators (Osborne et al., 
2004). 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3.6 The nucleolus 
Within the nucleoplasm, membrane-less subnuclear organelles, nuclear bodies, are 
dynamic steady-state structures that alter in response to changes to the 
physiological state of the cell. These include Cajal bodies, the site of snRNP 
assembly and modification, nuclear speckles, that contain splicing machinery and 
transcription factors, and the nucleolus (Mao et al., 2011). The nucleolus, which 
contains the cells ribosomal DNA (rDNA) is the site of the initial steps of ribosome 
biogenesis: rDNA transcription, pre-rRNA processing and the initial stages of pre-
ribosome assembly and maturation (Pederson, 2011). Additionally, the nucleolus 
has been implicated in the synthesis of some RNPs, post-translational modification 
of some nuclear proteins, cell cycle regulation, by sequestration of regulatory 
proteins, and the cellular stress response (Mao et al., 2011). 
1.4 Nuclear size control 
Study of membrane bound organelle scaling and size control is often hampered by 
complex organelle morphologies that complicate accurate measurement of 
organelle size. The nucleus is relatively large, simply shaped, usually 
approximately spherical, and generally present in single copy in cells, providing a 
useful system in which to probe organelle scaling. 
1.4.1 Nucleocytoplasmic ratio 
The constant, which we must accept as something given and not at present further 
analyzable, is the fixed proportion between nuclear volume and protoplasmic 
volume, namely, the karyoplasmic ratio. 
Theodor Boveri, 1905  
More than a century ago, study of sea urchin embryos led Hertwig to propose the 
Kern-Plasma-relation theory, suggesting that the ratio between nuclear size and 
cell size, the karyoplasmic or nucleocytoplasmic ratio, is a constant in all cell types 
(Hertwig, 1903). Since then, a constant ratio between nuclear and cell size has 
been reported in many cell types from unicellular yeast and tetrahymena to cells of 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
multicellular animals and plants; in multicellular organisms, the nucleocytoplasmic 
ratio can vary between cell types but is restricted to a narrow range for cells of 
each type (Boveri, 1905, Conklin, 1912, Wilson, 1925, Gregory, 2005, Jorgensen et 
al., 2007, Neumann and Nurse, 2007, Hara and Kimura, 2009, Levy and Heald, 
2010, Edens et al., 2013). Mechanisms by which this ratio is maintained remain 
unclear. 
1.4.2 Nucleoskeletal theory 
Observation that nuclear size and cell size both usually correlate with cell ploidy 
(Wilson, 1925, Gregory, 2005) led to the proposal of the nucleoskeletal theory for 
determination of nuclear size (Cavalier-Smith, 1982, Gregory, 2005). In this model, 
it was proposed that DNA content determines nuclear size. It was suggested that 
the bulk DNA content of a cell sets a range for nuclear size and that within this 
range nuclear size is determined by the degree of compaction of DNA, which is 
regulated by specific proteins. The nuclear lamina and NPCs were then proposed 
to associate with the appropriately folded DNA, with their level dependent on its 
size, and the lamina to recruit the phospholipid NE giving rise to a nuclear size 
determined by DNA content (Cavalier-Smith, 1982). Although this model accounts 
for interspecies scaling of nuclear volume, where higher ploidy organisms have 
larger nuclei, it doesnt explain intraspecies variations in nuclear size where a 
range of nuclear sizes are observed in cells with the same ploidy (Altman and Katz, 
1976).  
1.4.3 Cell volume, not DNA content, determines nuclear volume 
Several lines of evidence support the proposition that nuclear volume is determined 
by cell volume, or a factor related to it, and not directly by DNA content. The widely 
observed correlations between nuclear size and DNA content are likely due to the 
fact that increased ploidy does result in an increase in nuclear size, but this is 
mediated by an increase in cell volume.  
Nuclear volume correlates with cell volume across a wide range of cell sizes in both 
budding (Jorgensen et al., 2007) and fission (Neumann and Nurse, 2007) yeasts. 
In fission yeast, genetic mutations and nutritional states were used to generate 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
cells displaying a 35 fold range of cell volumes; nuclear volume correlated with cell 
volume across this range, maintaining a nuclear volume to cell volume (N/C) ratio 
of approximately 8% (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). Nuclear volume increased 
steadily as cell volume increased during the cell cycle, maintaining a constant N/C 
ratio throughout interphase; no sudden increase in nuclear size accompanied DNA 
replication in S phase (Jorgensen et al., 2007, Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
Gradual nuclear growth during interphase was also observed in HeLa cells 
(Maeshima et al., 2011). This suggested that DNA content did not directly 
determine nuclear volume. Even a 16 fold increase in DNA content was insufficient 
to alter the N/C ratio of fission yeast cells that had undergone rereplication 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
Further evidence that nuclear volume is causally dependent on cell volume and not 
DNA content was provided by re-examination of the results of nuclear transfer 
experiments. Transfer of the nucleus of a hen erythrocyte into the cytoplasm of a 
larger HeLa cell resulted in an increase in nuclear volume (Harris, 1967), as did 
transfer of HeLa cell nuclei into the cytoplasm of a larger Xenopus oocyte (Gurdon, 
1976). More recently, nuclear volume was reported to increase concomitantly with 
cell volume following treatment of murine hepatocytes with c-Myc (Kim et al., 
2000), and to scale with cell volume during the reductive divisions of post-16 cell 
stage C. elegans embryogenesis (Hara and Kimura, 2009). In all of these 
situations, DNA content remained constant but nuclear volume responded to 
changes in cell volume. 
1.4.4 Cytoplasmic factors influence nuclear volume 
The mechanism by which cell volume determines nuclear volume remains 
somewhat elusive. Important contributions to our understanding have come from in 
vivo studies as well as from in vitro studies of reconstituted nuclei in cytoplasmic 
extracts. Cell volume could theoretically place structural constraints on the nucleus, 
determining its volume, or, alternatively, factors required for, or that regulate, 
nuclear size control could do so in a cell volume dependent manner. 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
In centrifuged embryos of the sea snail Crepidula plana, nuclear size correlated 
with cytoplasmic volume instead of being affected by changes to cell dimensions 
(Conklin, 1912). In multinucleate S. pombe cells, nuclear volume correlated with 
the local cytoplasmic volume surrounding each nucleus; closely spaced nuclei grew 
at a slower rate than isolated nuclei, an effect that was independent of position in 
the cell (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). Similarly, in the nuclear transfer experiment 
described above, when a cluster of HeLa cell nuclei was injected into the cytoplasm 
of a Xenopus oocyte, those on the edges of the cluster expanded faster than those 
closely packed in the middle (Gurdon, 1976). Therefore, diffusible cytoplasmic 
factors are likely to influence nuclear size, rather than structural constraints of cell 
volume. 
Study of nuclear assembly in Xenopus egg extracts of two differentially sized 
species, the larger-celled pseudotetraploid X. laevis and the smaller-celled diploid 
X. tropicalis, provided important insights (Levy and Heald, 2010). The size of 
reconstituted nuclei was dependent on the species of origin of the cytoplasmic 
extract used rather than that of the DNA, suggesting that a diffusible cytoplasmic 
factor, and not ploidy, determines nuclear size or limits nuclear growth rate in this 
system. GFP-NLS accumulated at a faster rate in the larger nuclei derived from X. 
laevis egg extracts than those assembled in X. tropicalis extracts, leading the 
authors to propose that nucleocytoplasmic transport contributed to the difference in 
nuclear assembly rates in these in vitro extracts. The nucleocytoplasmic transport 
factors importin a2 (Impa2) and Ntf2 were found at higher and lower levels in X. 
laevis extracts than X. tropicalis extracts respectively. Increasing Impa2 level 
increased nuclear size, both in vitro, in egg extracts, and in vivo, in Xenopus 
embryos. Increasing the level of a cargo of Impa2, Lamin B3, also led to increased 
nuclear size in vitro leading the authors to propose that nucleocytoplasmic 
transport of Lamin B3 into the nucleus by Impa2 is central to nuclear size control. A 
subsequent study demonstrated that total lamin concentration, rather than that of 
Lamin B3 specifically, influences nuclear size both in vitro in Xenopus egg extracts 
and in vivo in Xenopus embryos and mammalian cells (Jevtic et al., 2015). Recent 
studies have demonstrated that conventional protein kinase C (cPKC) mediated 
Lamin B3 phosphorylation, which increases nuclear lamina dynamics, is important 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
for the rapid reductions in nuclear size observed during early Xenopus 
embryogenesis and influences nuclear size in mammalian cells (Edens and Levy, 
2014, Edens et al., 2017). These studies demonstrate that nuclear lamina 
dynamics are important for nuclear size control in metazoan cells, and may provide 
an added layer of flexibility required for the complex demands of development. 
However, yeast cells lack lamins yet display nuclear scaling. Consequently, there 
must be factors, other than lamins, that are important for nuclear size control. In 
addition to lamins, other nuclear structural components have been proposed to limit 
nuclear growth in specific circumstances. When nuclei were assembled in Xenopus 
egg extracts subject to spatial constraint in a microfluidics device, the size of a 
microtubule domain surrounding each nucleus limited its growth rate by limiting 
dynein-based accumulation of membrane (Hara and Merten, 2015). Therefore, 
these studies suggest that structural components of the nucleus including NE and 
nuclear lamina components can limit nuclear growth. 
Nucleocytoplasmic transport has also been implicated more generally in nuclear 
size control. Perturbation of nuclear protein export, by inhibition of the exportin 
Crm1, led to nuclear size increase in both fission yeast (Neumann and Nurse, 
2007) and mammalian cells (Ganguly et al., 2016). It has also been proposed that 
altering the cellular osmoticum alters nuclear size in bovine chondrocytes (Irianto et 
al., 2013) suggesting the balance of osmotica between the nucleus and cytoplasm 
may play a role in nuclear size control. 
1.4.5 Why is nuclear size control important? 
Due to a lack of mechanistic understanding of the process of nuclear size control, 
the effects of its perturbation have not been extensively explored. It is possible that 
maintaining a constant N/C ratio enables cells to maintain coordination between 
transcription in the nucleoplasm and translation in the cytoplasm. Rapid changes in 
N/C ratio have been reported to be important for specific developmental transitions 
including the midblastula transition (MBT) of Xenopus embryogenesis (Jevtic and 
Levy, 2015) and T cell activation (Gupta et al., 2012). Additionally, aberrant nuclear 
size is associated with many diseases, most notably cancer, suggesting that 
appropriate nuclear size control may be important for maintaining cell physiology 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
(Zink et al., 2004); whether nuclear size alteration is a contributor to, or 
downstream effect of, the disease pathologies does however remain to be 
determined. The importance of nuclear size control is discussed in greater detail in 
Chapter 5 below. 
1.4.6 Studying nuclear size control in S. pombe 
The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a useful system in which to 
study nuclear size control in vivo. S. pombe cells have a regular geometry 
facilitating calculation of cell volume from measurements of cell length and width; 
rod-shaped cells are contained within a rigid cell wall and grow by linear tip 
extension (Mitchison, 1957). The nucleus of S. pombe cells is generally single copy 
and simply shaped; its volume can be approximated as a prolate spheroid 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). Unlike metazoa, S. pombe undergoes a closed 
mitosis, during which the NE remains intact, allowing study of nuclear size 
throughout the cell cycle without the complications of nuclear envelope breakdown 
and reformation. S. pombe has a short generation time, of as little as two hours in 
high nutrient conditions (Mitchison, 1957), allowing cell physiology to be assessed 
over multiple generations by timelapse microscopy. It is a genetically tractable 
system; a gene deletion collection spans 99% of S. pombe open reading frames 
facilitating near genome-wide systematic genetic screens. Finally, the isometric 
scaling of nuclear volume with cell volume in S. pombe cells is well characterised 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
1.5 Aims of this thesis 
Though the phenomenon of nuclear scaling has been described in S. pombe 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007), we have little mechanistic understanding of how this 
scaling is achieved. This thesis describes, and attempts to integrate, three 
approaches employed to gain insight into the cellular mechanisms of nuclear 
scaling.  
Initially, a physiological approach is taken, assessing the response of individual 
cells to perturbation of nuclear scaling. The kinetics of recovery from perturbation 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
are then used as the basis to probe, by development of mathematical models, 
potential general mechanisms of nuclear scaling employed by S. pombe cells. To 
identify biological processes and molecular components central to the scaling 
mechanism, two approaches are then utilised. Biochemical analysis of a nuclear 
size mutant is carried out and a genetic screen for mutants exhibiting perturbed 
nuclear scaling is performed. 
Each results chapter begins with a brief, specific introduction and is concluded by a 
brief discussion. A more comprehensive discussion, integrating the results from all 
three approaches, follows. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Chapter 2. Nuclear size homeostasis 
Using a variety of genetic mutants and nutritional states, nuclear volume was 
shown to correlate with cell volume in S. pombe cell populations displaying a 35 
fold range of mean cell volumes; nuclear volume to cell volume ratio (N/C ratio) 
was maintained at approximately 8% across this range (Neumann and Nurse, 
2007). How this population level N/C ratio homeostasis is achieved remains an 
interesting question. If a cell in the population has an aberrant N/C ratio is it able to 
correct towards the population mean? If recovery takes place, can the kinetics of 
recovery inform us about the nuclear size control mechanisms employed by cells? 
This chapter describes a series of studies designed to probe these questions. 
Initially, the size parameters undergoing homeostasis are examined, then N/C ratio 
is perturbed and subsequent N/C ratio changes are monitored and analysed, and 
finally potential models for N/C ratio homeostasis are proposed. 
2.1 Nucleus to cell volume ratio is maintained  
Scaling of organelle size with cell size is likely to be achieved in different manners 
for different organelles; for organelle function to scale with cell size, different 
organellar parameters, determined by the structure and function of each organelle, 
will be required to scale with cell size. Organelle linear dimensions, surface area, 
volume or number could scale with cell size. Studies in both fission (Neumann and 
Nurse, 2007) and budding (Jorgensen et al., 2007) yeast indicated that nuclear 
volume (Vnuc) scales with cell volume (Vcell) throughout the cell cycle. Contrastingly, 
the size of another membrane bound organelle, the vacuole, scales with cell size 
with a constant vacuolar surface area to cell volume ratio maintained in budding 
yeast (Chan et al., 2016). A nuclear scaling model in which nuclear surface area 
scaled with cell size would not be consistent with previously described data 
illustrating that Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained (Jorgensen et al., 2007, Neumann and 
Nurse, 2007). However, this principle forms the basis of nuclear size control and 
would heavily influence any models and mechanisms proposed in this thesis, so 
the hypothesis that nuclear volume scales with cell volume instead of nuclear 
Chapter 2 Results 
surface area scaling with cell size was further tested. Ratios of nuclear surface 
area (SAnuc) to cell volume (Vcell) and cell surface area (SAcell) were compared to 
Vnuc/Vcell ratios. 
2.1.1 Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained through interphase 
Nuclear size was previously monitored across the cell cycle by timelapse 
microscopy and subsequent measurement of a small number of cells (n = 5); the 
mean of the moving average Vnuc/Vcell ratio of these cells was maintained at 
approximately 8% throughout the cell cycle but their average SAnuc/Vcell ratio 
decreased during interphase as cells increased in size (Neumann and Nurse, 
2007). This suggested that Vnuc/Vcell, and not SAnuc/Vcell, ratio is maintained 
throughout interphase in wild type S. pombe cells. To assess this relationship in a 
larger number of wild type cells, and additionally to assess changes in SAnuc/SAcell 
ratio during interphase, timelapse microscopy was carried out on wild type cells 
with the nuclear envelope marked by Cut11-GFP. Cut11 is the S. pombe Ndc1 
orthologue which transiently associates with the SPB during mitosis (West et al., 
1998), forming visible foci in mitotic cells containing GFP tagged Cut11. For 100 
cells, nuclear size was measured early in interphase (first image following division 
of parent cell) and again at the end of interphase (last image before Cut11-GFP 
focus visible) (Figure 2.1). In wild type S. pombe cells Vnuc/Vcell, and not SAnuc/SAcell 
or SAnuc/Vcell, was the same following cell growth during interphase as it was at the 
beginning of interphase; this suggests that interphase nuclear size control does 
indeed act to maintain a constant Vnuc/Vcell ratio. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.1 Vnuc/Vcell, and not SAnuc/SAcell or SAnuc/Vcell, is maintained during 
interphase 
(A-C) Nucleus volume to cell volume ratio (Vnuc/Vcell) (A), nuclear surface area to 
cellular surface area ratio (SAnuc/SAcell) (B) and nuclear surface area to cell volume 
ratio (SAnuc/Vcell) (C) of wild type cells early and late in interphase. n = 100 cells per 
condition. Box delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers 
represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. 
Paired student t-tests carried out to determine significance. Cells were measured 
from timelapse microscopy images of wild type cells, with nuclear envelope marked 
by Cut11-GFP, grown in CellASICs microfluidics plate at 25C (5 minute time 
intervals). Each cell was measured early and late in interphase. Early interphase 
was timepoint of first image following cell division of parent cell. Late interphase 
was timepoint before first image displaying a Cut11-GFP focus. 
(D) Representative images of a cell from timelapse described in (A). Time in 
minutes following early interphase timepoint indicated. Brightfield (magenta), 
Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. * Early interphase. ** Late interphase. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.1.2 Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained in multinucleate cells 
Multinucleate cells provide an extreme system, where nuclear volume and surface 
area are less similar than in mononucleate cells, in which to further probe the 
relationships between nuclear volume and surface area and cell size. Following 
shift to the restrictive temperature, cdc11-119 cells undergo repeated nuclear 
division without septation, giving rise to multinucleated elongated cells (Nurse et 
al., 1976). The nuclear envelope of cdc11-119 cells was visualised using nuclear 
envelope marker Cut11-GFP; cells were grown at the permissive temperature 
(25C) then shifted to the restrictive temperature (37C) and imaged every hour 
from 0 h to 7 h after temperature shift. Number of nuclei per cell was determined; 
percentage of cells that were mononucleates peaked after 1 h, and octonucleates 
after 7 h, at 37C (Figure 2.2A and B). Vnuc/Vcell, SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell ratios 
were determined for mononucleate (selected from 1 h timepoint images) and 
octonucleate (selected from 7 h timepoint images) cells. Intriguingly, though both 
SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell ratios were significantly higher in octonucleate cells than 
in mononucleate cells (p<0.0001), Vnuc/Vcell ratio was not significantly different in 
mononucleate and octonucleate cells (Figure 2.2C). These data support the 
hypothesis that cells maintain a constant Vnuc/Vcell ratio (N/C ratio) and not models 
where SAnuc/SAcell or SAnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained instead. 
The term N/C ratio is used to describe the ratio of nucleus volume to cell volume in 
the remainder of this thesis. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.2 SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell, but not Vnuc/Vcell, ratio is higher in 
octonucleate cells than in mononucleate cells 
(A) Representative images of cdc11-119 cells grown at the permissive temperature 
(25C) then incubated at the restrictive temperature (37C) for time indicated. 
Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) Percentage of cells in population of cdc11-119 cells containing 1, 2, 4 or 8 
nuclei over time following shift from 25C to 37C. n > 400 cells per timepoint. 
(C) Nuclear volume to cell volume ratio (Vnuc/Vcell), nuclear surface area to cellular 
surface area ratio (SAnuc/SAcell) and nuclear surface area to cell volume ratio 
(SAnuc/Vcell) of mononucleate (1) and octonucleate (8) cdc11-119 cells. All ratios 
normalised to respective mean ratio of mononucleate population. n = 100 cells per 
condition. For both mononucleates and octonucleates, Vnuc/Vcell, SAnuc/SAcell and 
SAnuc/Vcell ratios displayed were calculated from measurements of the same 100 
cells. Box delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers 
represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. 
Unpaired student t-tests carried out to determine significance. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.2 N/C ratio is conserved between related fission yeast 
species 
A wild type N/C ratio of 8% is reported for S. pombe cells (Neumann and Nurse, 
2007) and of 7% for S. cerevisiae cells (Jorgensen et al., 2007); these species are 
predicted, using a molecular clock calibrated by multicellular organism 
comparisons, to have diverged evolutionarily 502 million years ago (Rhind et al., 
2011) yet display remarkably similar N/C ratios. The fission yeast species S. 
japonicus is predicted to have diverged evolutionarily from S. pombe 221 million 
years ago (Rhind et al., 2011). The two species display different cell sizes; the 
mean cell volume of the S. japonicus cells measured was 134 m3, more than 2.5 
fold greater than the S. pombe value of 47 m3. Additionally, the two species have 
divergent mitotic strategies likely due to differentially regulated lipid synthesis 
(Makarova et al., 2016); S. pombe cells undergo a closed mitosis whereas S. 
japonicus cells display a semi-open mitosis (Gu et al., 2012). The interphase N/C 
ratio of S. pombe and S. japonicus cells was determined using the Cut11-GFP 
nuclear envelope marker. The interphase N/C ratios of the two species were not 
significantly different; the S. pombe population had a mean interphase N/C ratio of 
0.078 and the S. japonicus population had a mean of 0.076 (Figure 2.3). Therefore, 
unlike cell size and mitotic strategy, N/C ratio is conserved between S. pombe and 
S. japonicus suggesting that maintaining an N/C ratio of approximately 0.08 may be 
important for cell viability or that an N/C ratio of 0.08 was established in the last 
common ancestor of S. pombe and S. japonicus and has been evolutionarily 
conserved. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.3 S. pombe and S. japonicus N/C ratios are not significantly different 
(A) Representative images of S. pombe and S. japonicus cells grown at 32C. 
Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) Interphase N/C ratio of S. pombe and S. japonicus cells grown at 32C (n = 80 
cells per species). Box delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. 
Whiskers represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked 
as dots. Unpaired student t-tests carried out to determine significance. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.3 N/C ratio correction is observed in individual S. pombe 
cells 
N/C ratio is maintained throughout interphase, in multinucleate cells and is 
conserved between related fission yeast species. To determine how N/C ratio 
homeostasis is achieved, and whether or not an interphase nuclear size control 
mechanism corrects aberrant N/C ratios, a system with cells displaying a range of 
aberrant N/C ratios was required. Cells in which the dual-specificity tyrosine-
phosphorylation-regulated kinase Pom1 is deleted undergo symmetric nuclear 
division and asymmetric cell division; >80% of pom1 cells, and only <5% of wild 
type cells, divide asymmetrically (Bahler and Pringle, 1998). Consequently, at birth, 
pom1 cells exhibit a large range of N/C ratios. 
Timelapse microscopy of pom1 cells in which the nuclear envelope was marked 
by Cut11-GFP was carried out at 32C. For individual cells displaying asymmetric 
cell division, nucleus volume and cell volume was measured at five minute time 
intervals from nuclear division of the mother cell to nuclear division of the daughter 
cell, and N/C ratio was calculated (Figure 2.4). N/C ratio change in individual cells 
over the cell cycle was assessed. 156 cells were measured; birth N/C ratio had a 
mean value of 0.084 and ranged from 0.053 to 0.132. 
The asymmetric cell divisions of pom1 cells lead to a range of cell sizes at birth 
and consequently (Fantes and Nurse, 1977) a large range of cell cycle durations. 
Therefore, data was cell cycle time normalised to allow comparison of data from 
cells with differing cycle times. Cycle time normalised N/C ratio change of the 10 
cells with the highest and 10 with the lowest birth N/C ratios is shown in Figure 
2.5A and B. Average N/C ratio in the final bin measured for both these groups of 
cells was significantly closer to the population mean of 0.08 than average N/C ratio 
of the first bin measured (Figure 2.5C). Therefore, both high and low N/C ratios 
were observed to recover towards the population mean within one cell cycle. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.4 N/C ratio recovery is observed in a pair of cells 
(A) Schematic of asymmetric cell division of pom1 cell producing large daughter 
cell with low N/C ratio and small daughter cell with high N/C ratio. 
(B) Selected images from timelapse microscopy (CellASICs microfluidics plate, 
32C) of representative pair of cells measured. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP 
(yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. Binucleate mother (blue), large daughter (green) and 
small daughter (orange) indicated by stars. 
(C) Cell volume, nucleus volume and N/C ratio measurements of cells in (B). Cells 
were measured in every image (5 min time interval) from nuclear division of mother 
cell to nuclear division of daughter cells. Measurements binned into 20 minute bins. 
Binucleate mother (blue), large daughter (green) and small daughter (red). 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.5 Both high and low N/C ratios recover towards the population mean 
(A) N/C ratio plotted against cycle time for the 10 cells measured born with most 
extreme high N/C ratios. Calculated from measurements binned into 20 minute 
time bins. Cycle time 0 is the time of first time bin after cell birth. Dashed line 
represents wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08. Linear regression lines calculated 
using Prism 7.0. 
(B) N/C ratio plotted against cycle time for the 10 cells measured with most 
extreme low N/C ratios. Calculated and plotted as in (A). 
(C) Scatter plot of N/C ratio measurements of first and last time bins for cells 
represented in (A) (HIGH) and (B) (LOW). Lines represent means and error bars 
standard deviation. Dotted line represents wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08. 
Significance of differences calculated using paired student t-tests. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.4 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed at the population level 
To analyse N/C ratio change at the population level, the 156 pom1 cells described 
above were cohorted by initial N/C ratio (N/C ratio of first 20 minute time bin). Cycle 
time normalised N/C ratios of cohorts of cells cohorted by birth N/C ratio displayed 
population level homeostasis towards the wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08 (Figure 
2.6). 
Figure 2.6 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed at the population level 
N/C ratio plotted against cycle time for pom1 cells grown at 32C (n = 156 cells). 
Cells cohorted by initial N/C ratio (n  10 cells per cohort). Linear regression line for 
each cohort calculated using Prism 7.0 default parameters. Dashed line represents 
wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08. 
In order to examine the kinetics of N/C ratio change during interphase in more 
detail, a further experiment was performed, analysing nuclear and cellular volumes 
of pom1 cells at greater time resolution for a larger number of cells. Timelapse 
microscopy of pom1 cells was carried out at a lower temperature (25C), 
elongating the cell cycle to allow greater time resolution. When a mother cell 
divides asymmetrically to give differently sized daughter cells, the environment 
experienced by each daughter nucleus is different from the time of septation rather 
than completion of cell division. Therefore, it is possible that N/C ratio correction 
begins at septation rather than cell birth. To address this, cells and nuclei were 
measured for 200 minutes from septation of the mother cell (or until nuclear 
division if this was sooner). For septated cells, cell volume described below is 
Chapter 2 Results 
approximate volume of the part of the cell, from septum to cell tip, housing the 
nucleus being measured.  
Again, a range of initial N/C ratios (ranging from 0.049 to 0.164) and N/C ratio 
homeostasis at the population level was observed (Figure 2.7). Cells were 
measured at 5 minute time intervals and measurements binned into 20 minute time 
bins. Mean N/C ratio of the first 20 minute time bin was 0.082 and remained within 
the 0.080-0.082 range over the next five time bins as both mean cell volume and 
mean nucleus volume increased (Figure 2.7A). Contrastingly, whilst nucleus 
volume and cell volume coefficient of variation (COV) were maintained, COV of 
N/C ratio decreased from 28.3% to 21.5% over the 67.5 minutes following 
septation, then appeared to stabilise around 21.5%, indicating that N/C ratio 
homeostasis towards the population mean was taking place over this time period 
(Figure 2.7B). 
Figure 2.7 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed within 100 minutes of septation of 
pom1 cells grown at 25C 
(A) Normalised mean value (normalised by division by mean value of first time bin) 
of cell volume, nucleus volume and N/C ratio of population of pom1 cells grown at 
25C in a microfluidics plate (n = 180 cells). Cells were measured at 5 minute time 
intervals from septation of mother cells for 200 minutes (or until nuclear division if 
sooner than 200 minutes after septation). Measurements binned into 20 minute 
time bins. Time bins in which all 180 cells are represented shown. 
(B) Coefficient of variation of cell volume, nucleus volume and N/C ratio of 
population of pom1 cells described in (A). 
Chapter 2 Results 
The 180 cells measured were cohorted by initial N/C ratio; N/C ratio of both high 
and low N/C ratio cohorts corrected towards the wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08 in 
the 200 minutes following septation of the mother cell (Figure 2.8A). Plots of cell 
volume and nucleus volume against time for each cohort indicate that average 
cellular growth rate over this time period is greater for cells with low N/C ratios (as 
expected due to their larger cell size) than for those with high N/C ratios (Figure 
2.8B); average nuclear growth rates for each cohort over this time period generally 
mirrored cohort cellular growth rates (Figure 2.8C). Regression lines (Figure 2.8D) 
and raw data (Figure 2.8E) of N/C ratio measurements of individual cells in the 
highest and lowest cohort shown in (Figure 2.8A) display N/C ratio recovery in 
individual cells with high and low N/C ratios. For each cohort of cells in (Figure 
2.8A), the average N/C ratio change rate (gradient of regression line in Figure 
2.8A) was calculated and plotted against average initial N/C ratio of cells in that 
cohort (Figure 2.8F). Generally, N/C ratio change rate decreased with increasing 
initial N/C ratio, indicating that for both high and low N/C ratios, the more aberrant a 
cells initial N/C ratio is, the greater its N/C ratio change rate over the first 200 
minutes following septation will be. The x-intercept of a cubic regression line of the 
data points (r2 = 0.95), indicating the initial N/C ratio at which no N/C ratio 
correction is observed, was, at 0.076, very similar to the wild type population mean 
of 0.08. 
It is of note that here, and indeed later in this chapter, I use the terms cellular and 
nuclear growth rate to refer to increase in cell or nuclear volume respectively per 
unit of time. I appreciate that the term cellular growth rate can be used to describe 
cell mass increase per unit time and this does not correlate with cell volume 
increase at all cell cycle stages. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.8 Recovery of both high and low N/C ratios is observed in the 200 
minutes following septation of pom1 cells grown at 25C 
Nucleus and cell volumes measured for 200 minutes after septation (5 minute 
intervals, 20 minute bins) (n = 180 cells) from timelapse microscopy (microfluidics 
plate) of pom1 cells at 25C. Dashed line represents wild type N/C ratio of 0.08. 
(A-C) Data cohorted by initial bin N/C ratio (10 cells per cohort). Linear regression 
(Prism 7.0) of cohort N/C ratio (A), cell volume (B) and nucleus volume (C) shown. 
Coloured by cohort average initial N/C ratio (red:high - green:low). 
(D-E) Individual cells of most extreme high and low initial N/C ratio cohort 
described in (A). Linear regression (Prism 7.0) (D) and connected raw data points 
(E) for each cell in cohort. 
(F) Average N/C ratio change rate (gradient of regression line in (A)) for each 
cohort of cells in (A). Cubic regression (Prism 7.0) (r2 = 0.95). 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.5 Nuclear growth rate and cellular growth rate are not always 
directly coupled 
A simple model by which N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved is direct 
coupling of nuclear growth rate to cellular growth rate; if nuclear growth rate was 
maintained at 8% of cellular growth rate then N/C ratio values in a population would 
converge on a value of 0.08, albeit at a slower rate than if a more complex 
correction mechanism involving feedback was in place. This simple model is 
defined by the following equation where GRnuc represents nuclear growth rate and 
GRcell represents cellular growth rate: 
234
4566
= 0.08 
Changes to N/C ratios with an initial range of 0.04 to 0.16, over 10 doublings in cell 
volume, that this model predicts, were simulated and demonstrate homeostatic 
behaviour; N/C ratios converge on a wild type value of 0.08 (Figure 2.9A).  
To determine whether the N/C ratio homeostasis kinetics predicted by this model 
are similar to those observed experimentally, the experimental data described in 
Figure 2.6 was compared to modelled values. Linear regression lines of N/C ratio 
of cohorts of pom1 cells over ~0.8 cell cycles (described in section 2.4 above) 
were compared to the N/C ratio change predicted for each cohort over 0.8 cell 
cycles by this model (Figure 2.9B). For all high N/C ratio cohorts and five of seven 
low N/C ratio cohorts, the N/C ratio recovery towards the population mean over 0.8 
cell cycles observed experimentally was more rapid than that predicted by the 
model. Therefore, direct coupling of nuclear growth rate to cellular growth rate does 
not appear to be sufficient to account for the kinetics of N/C ratio homeostasis 
observed experimentally, suggesting an alternative, more rapid, homeostatic 
mechanism is in place. The differences between experimental and modelled N/C 
ratio change rate were generally greater at high N/C ratio than at low N/C ratio. As 
cells born with high N/C ratios are smaller than cells born with low N/C ratios in this 
population, they have longer cell cycles. It is possible that this data averaged 
across the cell cycle does not reflect faster recovery of high N/C ratios in absolute  
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.9 N/C ratio homeostasis would be observed in a population if nuclear 
growth rate and cellular growth rate were directly coupled 
(A) Simulated N/C ratios of cells with initial N/C ratios ranging from 0.04 to 0.16 
over 11 generations. Cell volume doubles between successive generations. 
Nuclear growth rate (GRnuc) is directly coupled to cellular growth rate (GRcell); GRnuc 
is maintained at 8% of GRcell. 
(B) Comparison of experimental data for cohorts of pom1 cells described in Figure 
2.6 (black lines), which spans ~0.8 cell cycles for each cohort, to N/C ratio change 
that would be predicted over 0.8 cell cycles by model (grey dotted lines) in which 
GRnuc is maintained at 8% of GRcell. 
time. In cells born with low N/C ratio, N/C ratio may correct rapidly at the beginning 
of the cell cycle and then plateau so that averaging data over the whole cycle 
underestimates their recovery rate. To address this, the kinetics of N/C ratio 
change in the greater time resolution data from the population of pom1 cells 
described in Figure 2.7 and Figure 2.8 was assessed as a factor of absolute time 
and compared to N/C ratio change values predicted by this model. 
The kinetics of N/C ratio homeostasis and the parameters affecting it in individual 
cells at specific times as they correct, were analysed at the level of individual time 
bins. Each bin is a 20 minute time period between two adjacent data points that are 
each the average of four measurements from images taken at five minute time 
intervals. For each individual 20 minute time bin for each cell, cellular growth rate, 
nuclear growth rate and N/C ratio change rate were calculated. These parameters 
Chapter 2 Results 
for each bin were then analysed with respect to the properties of the cell at the 
beginning that bin. 1514 20 minute time bins from 180 cells were analysed. 
N/C ratio change rate was calculated for each time bin, and bins were cohorted by 
N/C ratio at start of bin; this indicated that correction towards an N/C ratio of 0.079 
occurred, and that the more aberrant an N/C ratio was at the start of a bin the more 
rapidly it corrected during that bin (Figure 2.10A). Experimental N/C ratio change 
rate values were compared to modelled values assuming direct coupling of nuclear 
growth rate to cellular growth rate (Figure 2.10A). Modelled values were calculated 
using experimental cell volume and nucleus volume at start of bin and cellular 
growth rate measurements and assuming that nuclear growth rate was 8% of 
cellular growth rate (using the equation described above). The experimental mean 
value was not within the 95% confidence intervals of the modelled mean in any of 
the 15 cohorts. In both cells with high and cells with low N/C ratios, N/C ratio 
change rate observed was faster in experimental than in modelled data indicating 
that nuclear growth rate and cellular growth rate are unlikely to be directly coupled 
(Figure 2.10A); indeed, when bins were cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin, 
GRnuc/GRcell was not constant but instead decreased with increasing N/C ratio at 
start of bin (Figure 2.10B). Therefore, the N/C ratio homeostasis observed is not 
likely to be a result of direct coupling between nuclear and cellular growth rates so 
an alternative mechanism is likely to be in place.  
It does, however, remain possible that direct coupling of nuclear and cellular growth 
rates could form part of an N/C ratio homeostasis mechanism, acting within a 
specific range of N/C ratios. The experimentally observed N/C ratio change rates 
were broadly similar to modelled values for mid-range N/C ratios (0.06-0.1). 
Therefore, it is possible that nuclear and cellular growth rates are coupled in cells 
with N/C ratios within this range and more rapid correction mechanisms involving 
feedback act in cells with more extreme N/C ratios. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.10 Nuclear growth rate is not always directly coupled to cellular growth 
Experimental (blue) and modelled (grey) mean N/C ratio change rate (error bars: 
95% confidence intervals) (A) and mean nuclear growth rate to cellular growth rate 
ratio (GRnuc/GRcell) (B) of individual 20 minute time bins from pom1 data described 
in Figure 2.8 cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin (n = 1514 time bins,  100 time 
bins per cohort). Modelled data calculated from experimental cell and nuclear 
volumes at start of bins and cellular growth rates assuming that nuclear growth rate 
is 8% of cellular growth rate. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.6 Nuclear growth rate correlates with cell volume and N/C 
ratio, and cellular growth rate correlates with nucleus 
volume and cell volume 
Having established that nuclear and cellular growth rates are not always directly 
coupled, and an alternative control mechanism must be in play, at least at extreme 
N/C ratios, the relationships between growth rates and parameters of the cells were 
assessed to gain understanding of how N/C ratio homeostasis is achieved. 
Average cellular and nuclear growth rates and volumes were calculated for cohorts 
of time bins cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin (Figure 2.11). Intriguingly, the 
nuclear growth rate distribution (Figure 2.11A) generally mirrored cell volume at 
start of bin (Figure 2.11B) and the cellular growth rate distribution (Figure 2.11C) 
was similar to that of nucleus volume at start of bin (Figure 2.11D). 
Nuclear growth rate correlated near-linearly with N/C ratio at start of bin in both 
cells with low and cells with high N/C ratios, decreasing with increasing N/C ratio 
(Figure 2.11A); it did not mirror nucleus volume at start of bin (Figure 2.11D), 
indicating that nuclear growth rate is not determined by nucleus volume. Nuclear 
growth rate intercepts the x-axis at an N/C ratio approximately 50% higher than the 
N/C ratio at which no correction is observed (0.079) indicating that it is possible that 
at very high N/C ratios nuclear growth ceases. 
In cells with N/C ratios between ~0.065 and ~0.10, cellular growth rate decreased 
with increasing N/C ratio, and appeared to plateau at higher N/C ratios and plateau 
then decrease at lower N/C ratios (Figure 2.11C). It is of note that the most 
extreme N/C ratio cohorts contain some bins representing septated cells that are in 
the mitotic phase of the cycle in which cell elongation ceases (Mitchison, 1957) and 
this may contribute to the plateau in cellular growth rate observed at low N/C ratio. 
However, it remains possible that low N/C ratio, or low nuclear volume, limits 
cellular growth rate of cells with low N/C ratio.  
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.11 Nuclear growth rate distribution mirrors cell volume and cellular 
growth rate mirrors nucleus volume 
Nucleus and cell volumes measured for 200 minutes after septation (5 minute 
intervals, 20 minute bins) (n = 180 cells) from timelapse microscopy (microfluidics 
plate) of pom1 cells at 25C (data described in Figure 2.8). Mean nuclear growth 
rate (A), cell volume at start of bin (B), cellular growth rate (C) and nucleus volume 
at start of bin (D) of individual 20 minute time bins cohorted by N/C ratio at start of 
bin (n = 1514 time bins,  100 time bins per cohort). Dashed line represents N/C 
ratio at start of bin at which no N/C ratio change is observed (determined from data 
described in Figure 2.10). 
Chapter 2 Results 
To further probe the relationships between nuclear and cellular growth rates and 
cell and nucleus volumes, average cellular and nuclear growth rates were 
calculated for cohorts of time bins cohorted by nucleus or cell volume at start of bin 
(Figure 2.12). Cellular growth rate correlated with both cell volume at start of bin 
(Figure 2.12A) and nucleus volume at start of bin (Figure 2.12B). Nuclear growth 
rate correlated with cell volume at start of bin (Figure 2.12C) but did not correlate 
with nucleus volume at start of bin (Figure 2.12D). Therefore, nuclear growth rate is 
not determined by nuclear volume but instead correlates with cell volume. If nuclear 
growth rate were directly proportional to cell volume at start of bin then the linear 
regression line in Figure 2.12C would pass through the origin; 0 is indeed within the 
95% confidence limits of both the x-intercept (-18.91-18.65) and the y-intercept (-
0.006-0.004) indicating that nuclear growth rate could be directly proportional to cell 
volume. Similarly, for the regression line of cellular growth rate against nucleus 
volume, 0 is within 95% confidence limits of both the x-intercept (-1.50-2.31) and 
the y-intercept (-0.15-0.061); this is also true of the regression line of cellular 
growth rate against cell volume though 0 is nearer the 95% confidence limits in this 
case (x-intercept: -65.0-2.02, y-intercept: -0.007-0.15). Therefore, when 
considering models of nuclear size control, it is possible that nuclear growth rate is 
maintained at a rate either directly proportional to cell volume or negatively 
correlated with N/C ratio, and that cellular growth rate is maintained at a rate 
directly proportional to either cell volume or nucleus volume. As aberrant N/C ratios 
were generated by asymmetric cell division, N/C ratio correlates near-linearly with 
cell volume (Figure 2.11B) in the population described above, so distinguishing 
between these possibilities is challenging; a population containing aberrant N/C 
ratios in which cell volume does not correlate with N/C ratio would be helpful to 
clarify the influences that cell volume, nucleus volume and N/C ratio have on 
nuclear and cellular growth rates. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.12 Nuclear growth rate correlates with cell volume and not nuclear 
volume, cellular growth rate correlates with cell volume and nuclear volume 
Nucleus and cell volumes measured for 200 minutes after septation (5 minute 
intervals, 20 minute bins) (n = 180 cells) from timelapse microscopy (microfluidics 
plate) of pom1 cells at 25C (data described in Figure 2.8). Cellular growth rate 
(A) and (B), and nuclear growth rate (C) and (D) of individual 20 minute time bins 
cohorted by cell volume ((A) and (C)) or nucleus volume ((B) and (D)) at start of bin 
(n = 1514 time bins,  100 time bins per cohort). Linear regression lines fitted (and 
r2 goodness of fit values calculated) using Prism 7.0 default parameters. 
Regression line for (D) not shown as r2 < 0.2. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.7 N/C ratio homeostasis is also observed in wild type cells 
The asymmetric division of pom1 cells has facilitated study of N/C ratio 
homeostasis in a large population of cells displaying a range of aberrant N/C ratios 
and allowed analysis of the kinetics of recovery. To confirm that the N/C ratio 
homeostasis observed is not unique to pom1 cells but is also observed in wild 
type cells, I assessed changes in nucleus volume, cell volume and N/C ratio over 
time in wild type cells born with aberrant N/C ratios. 
Timelapse microscopy of wild type cells in which the nuclear envelope was marked 
by Cut11-GFP was carried out at 25C. Cells born with aberrant N/C ratios were 
visually selected; 44 cells with aberrant birth N/C ratios were identified. All 44 
resulted from asymmetric nuclear division in the mother cell, and not from 
asymmetric cell division; this asymmetric nuclear division (Figure 2.13A) was 
observed in 2.9% of cell divisions assessed. For individual cells displaying aberrant 
birth N/C ratios, nucleus volume and cell volume were measured at five minute 
time intervals from septation of the mother cell to nuclear division of the daughter 
cell and N/C ratio was calculated. Data was binned into 20 minute time bins. Mean 
N/C ratio of the first time bin was 0.085 and was not significantly different in the last 
time bin (paired student t-test), however N/C ratio standard deviation was reduced 
from 0.20 in the first time bin to 0.12 in the last time bin. Therefore, N/C ratio 
homeostasis was observed in this population of 44 wild type cells, indicating that 
N/C ratio homeostasis is not unique to pom1 cells (Figure 2.13). Average N/C 
ratio of cohorts of cells cohorted by initial N/C ratio and normalised by cycle time, 
indicate that generally, as for pom1 cells, the more aberrant an N/C ratio is the 
more rapidly, in terms of cycle time, it corrects (Figure 2.13B). 
As the aberrant N/C ratios in this population were the result of asymmetric nuclear 
division instead of asymmetric cell division (as was the case for the pom1 
population described above), it provided, despite its smaller sample size, a useful 
system in which to assess the kinetics of N/C ratio recovery. Again, to further probe 
the kinetics of N/C ratio homeostasis, parameters of individual 20 minute time bins 
for individual cells were assessed. To allow comparison to pom1 data described 
above, time bins from septation to 200 minutes following septation (or nuclear  
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.13 A population of wild type cells displays N/C ratio homeostasis 
without direct coupling of nuclear and cellular growth rates 
(A) Representative image of a wild type cell that has undergone asymmetric 
nuclear division. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) N/C ratio plotted against cycle time for wild type cells born with aberrant N/C 
ratios grown at 25C (n = 44). Cells cohorted by initial N/C ratio (4 cells per cohort). 
Regression line for each cohort fitted using Prism 7.0 default parameters. Dashed 
line represents wild type N/C ratio value of 0.08. 
(C) Experimental (blue) and modelled (grey) mean N/C ratio change rate (error 
bars: 95% confidence intervals) of individual 20 minute time bins from wild type 
data described in (B) cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin (n = 368 time bins, 46 
time bins per cohort). Modelled data calculated from experimental cell and nucleus 
volumes at start of bins and cellular growth rates assuming that nuclear growth rate 
is 8% of cellular growth rate. 
Chapter 2 Results 
division if sooner) for each cell were analysed. 368 time bins were cohorted into 8 
cohorts. N/C ratio change rate was calculated for each time bin then bins were 
cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin (Figure 2.13C); as for the pom1 population, 
the distribution of N/C ratio changes was not the same as that of modelled data 
calculated from experimental cell volume, nucleus volume and cellular growth rate 
measurements assuming that nuclear and cellular growth rates are directly linked 
(with GRnuc/GRcell = 0.08). Again, modelled and experimental values were similar 
for mid-range N/C ratios but at both low and high N/C ratio extremes N/C ratio 
correction towards the population mean was faster than would be expected if 
growth rates were directly linked. Therefore, in wild type cells, like in pom1 cells, 
N/C ratio homeostasis is likely to be achieved by a mechanism that is not just direct 
coupling of nuclear growth rate to cellular growth rate. Growth rates could be 
coupled in cells with mid-range N/C ratios but in cells with extreme values 
alternative mechanisms must be in play. 
This wild type dataset differs from the pom1 dataset in its cell volume and nucleus 
volume distributions and can therefore provide useful insights into how N/C ratio 
homeostasis is achieved. Nucleus volume at start of bin, and not cell volume at 
start of bin, correlated with N/C ratio at start of bin (Figure 2.14). As for the pom1 
population, nuclear growth rate was high in cells with low N/C ratios and low in 
those with high N/C ratios (Figure 2.14A) but the near-linear relationship (Figure 
2.11A) was not observed in this population, indicating that cell volume, rather than 
N/C ratio, may determine nuclear growth rate. When the two most extreme N/C 
ratio cohorts were removed, no correlation was observed between nuclear growth 
rate and N/C ratio at start of bin, as was observed for cell volume (Figure 2.14B). 
Therefore, it is possible that cell volume determines nuclear growth rate within a 
range of mildly aberrant N/C ratios and but at more extreme high N/C ratios nuclear 
growth ceases and at low N/C ratios is accelerated. Indeed, whilst the distribution 
of nuclear growth rate with respect to N/C ratio at start of bin for the pom1 
population shown in (Figure 2.11) mirrored that of cell volume for the majority of 
N/C ratio cohorts, it was again observed that nuclear growth rate was higher than 
expected (in a model where cell volume determines nuclear growth rate) in 
extremely low N/C ratios and lower than expected in extremely high N/C ratios. 
Chapter 2 Results 
As was observed for the pom1 population, the distribution of cellular growth rate 
with respect to N/C ratio at start of bin (Figure 2.14C) again mirrored that of 
nucleus volume (Figure 2.14D), which in this population, unlike the pom1 
population, increased with increasing N/C ratio at start of bin. Although the 
correlation between cellular growth rate and N/C ratio at start of bin was a lot 
weaker than that between nucleus volume and N/C ratio at start of bin, this 
supports the suggestion that nucleus volume may influence cellular growth rate. 
Figure 2.14 Nucleus volume and not cell volume correlates with N/C ratio at start 
of bin in wild type cell population 
Nuclear growth rate (A), cell volume at start of bin (B), cellular growth rate (C) and 
nucleus volume at start of bin (D) of individual 20 minute time bins from data 
described in Figure 2.13 cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin (n = 368 time bins, 46 
time bins per cohort). Linear regression lines fitted (and r2 goodness of fit values 
calculated) using Prism 7.0 default parameters. Dashed line represents wild type 
N/C ratio of 0.08. Regression line for (B) not shown as r2 < 0.2. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Average cellular and nuclear growth rates were calculated for cohorts of time bins 
cohorted by nucleus or cell volume at start of bin (Figure 2.15). As was observed 
for pom1 cells (Figure 2.12B), cellular growth rate correlated with nucleus volume 
at start of bin (Figure 2.15B). A much weaker correlation was observed between 
cellular growth rate and cell volume (Figure 2.15A); as many time bins in this 
population will represent cells in which N/C ratio correction has already happened 
with wild type N/C ratios (and so have correlated cell and nucleus volumes) this 
correlation is not unexpected. As for pom1 cells, nuclear growth rate again 
correlated with cell volume, although with a much weaker correlation, and not with 
nucleus volume (Figure 2.15C and D). 
Figure 2.15 Cellular growth rate correlates with nuclear volume 
Cellular growth rate (A) and (B), and nuclear growth rate (C) and (D) of individual 
20 minute time bins from data described in Figure 2.13 cohorted by cell volume ((A) 
and (C)) or nucleus volume ((B) and (D)) at start of bin (n = 368 time bins, 46 time 
bins per cohort). Linear regression lines fitted (and r2 goodness of fit values 
calculated) using Prism 7.0 default parameters. Regression line for (D) not shown 
as r2 < 0.2. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.8 Models of N/C ratio homeostasis 
In this section, two possible mathematical models of N/C ratio homeostasis, based 
on the physiological data described above, are proposed and tested. Their 
biological implications and potential cellular mechanisms by which they could be 
achieved are discussed in section 2.9.3 and, in light of the genetic and biochemical 
data presented below, in my general discussion (Chapter 5). 
The data described above monitoring instantaneous nuclear and cellular growth 
rates and resultant N/C ratio change rates has illustrated that nuclear growth rate 
and cellular growth rate are not always maintained as constants, as would be 
predicted by a constant growth rate model of nuclear scaling. Nor are they always 
directly coupled, as would be the case if a proportional growth rate model of 
organelle scaling was employed. Whilst it is possible that nuclear and cellular 
growth rates are coupled in cells with mid-range N/C ratios, an alternative 
mechanism must be in place to achieve N/C ratio homeostasis, at least in cells with 
extreme N/C ratios. Assessment of the kinetics of nuclear and cellular growth and 
N/C ratio homeostasis was carried out and has led to the proposition of two 
potential models by which N/C ratio homeostasis, with the kinetics observed 
experimentally, could be achieved. 
2.8.1 Interdependent growth rates model 
Analysis of instantaneous growth rates as a factor of various cellular parameters in 
both wild type and pom1 cells revealed correlations, and likely direct 
proportionality, between cellular growth rate and nucleus volume, and also between 
nuclear growth rate and cell volume, making these possible constraints of the 
homeostatic mechanism. To test whether such a model would be sufficient to 
generate N/C ratio homeostasis with the kinetics observed experimentally, I 
compared modelled parameters to those experimentally observed. 
Assumptions of this model were that homeostasis occurred towards an N/C ratio of 
0.08, so that when the ratio of nucleus volume (Vnuc) to cell volume (Vcell) was 0.08, 
Chapter 2 Results 
the ratio of nuclear growth rate (GRnuc) to cellular growth rate (GRcell) was also 
0.08, and that where  and  are constants: 
234 = 	4566 
4566 = 234  
so that: 
234
4566
4566
= 0.08- = 0.0064 
so that: 
234 = 0.0064	
4566	4566	
4566 = 	
0.0064
234	234
	4566
Experimental values for Vcell, Vnuc and either GRcell or GRnuc of individual 20 minute 
time bins from the pom1 dataset described in Figure 2.8 were used as inputs and 
resultant GRnuc or GRcell values respectively predicted by the model were compared 
to experimentally observed values (Figure 2.16). The modelled mean was within 
95% confidence limits of the experimental mean in 11 of 15 cohorts for both 
nuclear growth rate and cellular growth rate, indicating that the model fits the 
experimental data well. The experimental data still diverges somewhat from the 
modelled data in the most extreme high N/C ratio cohort; nuclear growth rate is 
lower than, and cellular growth rate higher than, predicted by the model. This 
suggests an additional mechanism may correct extreme large N/C ratios, perhaps 
involving nuclear growth ceasing to allow more rapid N/C ratio correction. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.16 Modelled and experimental nuclear and cellular growth rates 
Modelled (grey) and experimental (blue) mean nuclear growth rate (A) and mean 
cellular growth rate (B) of cohorts of time bins of population described in Figure 2.8 
(15 cohorts,  100 time bins per cohort). Error bars represent 95% confidence 
limits. Modelled values calculated from experimental cell volume, nucleus volume 
and either cell growth rate (A) or nuclear growth rate (B) values assuming that 
nuclear growth rate is proportional to cell volume, cellular growth rate is 
proportional to nucleus volume and no N/C ratio correction is observed when N/C 
ratio is 0.08. 
The kinetics of N/C ratio change predicted by this model were compared to 
experimental data and to those predicted by the alternative model described above 
(Section 2.5, Figure 2.10) in which nuclear growth rate is directly coupled to cellular 
growth rate (Figure 2.17). Mean N/C ratio change rate and GRnuc/GRcell were 
calculated for time bins cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin. For both N/C ratio 
change rate and GRnuc/GRcell values, the model described here better represents 
the experimental data than direct coupling of growth rates does. For both 
parameters, the most extreme high N/C ratio cohort diverges from the model. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.17 Interdependent growth rates model displays trend of N/C ratio 
recovery observed in pom1 cells 
Experimental (blue), modelled using interdependent growth rates model described 
here (light grey) and modelled assuming GRnuc/GRcell = 0.08 (dark grey) mean N/C 
ratio change rate (error bars: 95% confidence intervals) (A) and mean nuclear 
growth rate to cellular growth rate ratio (GRnuc/GRcell) (B) of individual 20 minute 
time bins. Time bins of pom1 data described in Figure 2.8 cohorted by N/C ratio at 
start of bin (n = 1514 time bins,  100 time bins per cohort). Modelled data (light 
grey) calculated from experimental cell and nuclear volume at start of bins and 
cellular growth rates assuming that nuclear growth rate is proportional to cell 
volume, cellular growth rate is proportional to nucleus volume and no N/C ratio 
correction is observed when N/C ratio is 0.08. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Therefore, the data presented here suggests that a model of N/C ratio homeostasis 
in which low and most high aberrant N/C ratios are corrected due to cellular 
growth rate being maintained directly proportional to nucleus volume and nuclear 
growth rate being maintained directly proportional to cell volume is possible. At 
extremely high N/C ratios, more rapid correction is observed suggesting that 
nuclear growth may slow or cease entirely; this would require a separate 
mechanism. This model would have interesting biological implications, these are 
discussed further below (2.9.3 and Chapter 5). 
2.8.2 Limiting components model 
The observation that at extremely high N/C ratios (>0.12) nuclear growth rate 
ceases (Figure 2.11A) suggested an alternative possible model by which N/C ratio 
homeostasis could be achieved. It is possible that at N/C ratios higher than 0.12 
nuclear growth is prevented because a factor, or factors, required for nuclear 
growth is limiting, giving rise to a limiting components model for nuclear scaling. In 
such a model, the amount of a component that is required for nuclear growth would 
be determined by cell volume. Nuclear growth rate would scale with free cellular 
concentration of the component until a threshold concentration was reached, below 
which nuclear growth would cease. In cells with low N/C ratios, the component 
would not be limiting, so nuclear growth rate would be high, decreasing as the pool 
of excess component was depleted. In cells with mid-range N/C ratios, nuclear 
growth rate would generally scale with cellular growth rate, as the pool of limiting 
component was replenished by cellular growth. In cells with extremely high N/C 
ratios, the cellular concentration of the limiting component would be lower than that 
required for nuclear growth, so nuclear growth would cease. 
This model can be represented by simple mathematical relationships, allowing the 
homeostasis it predicts to be compared to that experimentally observed, but only if 
multiple assumptions are made; these are described below. The first assumption is 
that the limiting component is incorporated into the nucleus at a rate dependent on 
the concentration of unincorporated component in the cell. Experimentally, I did not 
observe nuclear shrinkage; nuclei in cells with extremely high N/C ratio stopped 
Chapter 2 Results 
growing but did not reduce in size. Based on this, a second assumption is made; it 
is assumed that the rate at which the limiting component is removed from the 
nucleus is 0, its incorporation is irreversible. Where  represents the total number 
of limiting component units in the cell,  represents the number incorporated into 
the nucleus and 4566 represents cell volume, the concentration of free units of 
limiting component in the cell is given by ?@AB
CDEFF
G. Where I2 is the association rate 
constant for incorporation of units of component into the nucleus, the change in 
number of nucleus incorporated units of component per unit time, ?JB
G, is given by: 
= I2 N
  
4566
Assuming that  is directly proportional to cell volume, and  is directly proportional 
to nuclear volume, when  and  are constants, gives: 
234
= I2 N
4566  234
4566
which can be rearranged to: 
234
4566
(4566  234) 
I know from experimental data (Figure 2.11A) that when CSTD
CDEFF
= 0.12, J%CSTD
= 0, so: 
4566
234 =
4566
4566 
4566
Chapter 2 Results 
Combining this with equation (2) gives: 
234
= I2 N
4566  234
4566
234
= I2 N
4566
234
= I2 N0.12 
4566
Therefore, this model predicts that there should be a linear correlation between 
nuclear growth rate ?JCSTD
G and ?0.12  CSTD
CDEFF
G with a gradient of I2. In the pom1 
dataset described in Figure 2.8, a linear correlation was indeed observed 
(r2 = 0.932), with the gradient of a regression line that passed through the origin 
being 0.73 (Figure 2.18A). If I2 is 0.73: 
234
= 0.73N0.12 
4566
Figure 2.18 Derivation of constants from experimental data 
Data derived from pom1 dataset described in Figure 2.8. 
(A) Mean nuclear growth rate (GRnuc) cohorted by ?0.12 
CDEFF
(B) Mean cellular growth rate (GRcell) cohorted by cell volume (Vcell). 
Mean with 95% confidence limits (error bars) for each cohort shown (15 cohorts, 
 100 time bins per cohort). Linear regression lines fitted (and r2 goodness of fit 
values calculated) using Prism 7.0 default parameters. 
Chapter 2 Results 
In order to determine whether this model gives rise to the kinetics of N/C ratio 
homeostasis observed experimentally, cellular growth rate must also be modelled. I 
observed experimentally that cellular growth rate correlated with both cell volume 
and nucleus volume (Figure 2.12). It is more likely that cellular growth rate is 
determined by cell volume than by nucleus volume; this logic could not be followed 
for the interdependent growth rates model described in section 2.8.1 as it would 
have resulted in direct coupling of nuclear and cellular growth rates. Here, cellular 
growth rate is assumed to be directly proportional to cell volume, so where g is a 
constant: 
4566
= g	4566 
The value of g can be determined from experimental data; it will be the gradient of a 
regression line of a graph of cellular growth rate ?JCDEFF
G plotted against cell volume 
(4566) that passes through the origin (Figure 2.18B). The experimental data from 
the pom1 dataset described in Figure 2.8 gave: 
g	 = 	0.0036 
4566
= 0.0036	4566 
Therefore, this limiting components model predicts that: 
234 = 0.73N0.12 
4566
4566 = 0.0036	4566 
Chapter 2 Results 
Using these equations, mean nuclear and cellular growth rates predicted by this 
model were calculated for time bins cohorted by N/C ratio at start of bin and 
compared to experimental values from the pom1 dataset described in Figure 2.8 
(Figure 2.19). For both nuclear and cellular growth rates, the modelled mean was 
within the 95% confidence limits of the experimental mean in 13 of 15 N/C ratio 
cohorts. For cellular growth rate, the modelled mean was not within the 95% 
confidence limits of the experimental mean for the most extreme high and most 
extreme low N/C ratio cohorts. 
Figure 2.19 Modelled and experimental nuclear and cellular growth rates 
Modelled (grey) and experimental (blue) mean nuclear growth rate (A) and mean 
cellular growth rate (B) of cohorts of time bins of population described in Figure 2.8 
(15 cohorts,  100 time bins per cohort). Error bars represent 95% confidence 
limits. Modelled values calculated from experimental cell volume and nucleus 
volume values assuming that 234 = 0.73?0.12 
CDEFF
G and 4566 = 0.0036	4566. 
Chapter 2 Results 
The kinetics of N/C ratio change predicted by this model were compared to 
experimental data and to those predicted by the alternative models described 
above in which nuclear growth rate is directly coupled to cellular growth rate 
(Section 2.5 (Figure 2.10)) or nuclear growth rate is proportional to cell volume and 
cellular growth rate is proportional to nuclear volume (Section 2.8.1 (Figure 2.17)). 
Mean N/C ratio change rate and GRnuc/GRcell were calculated for time bins cohorted 
by N/C ratio at start of bin (Figure 2.20). For both N/C ratio change rate and 
GRnuc/GRcell values, the limiting components model describes the experimental data 
trends well. It predicts N/C ratio correction towards a value of ~0.08, which was not 
a constraint placed on the system in this model. The modelled mean N/C ratio 
change rate is within 95% confidence intervals of the experimental mean in 14 of 
15 N/C ratio cohorts. In cells with extremely high N/C ratios, the limiting 
components model better represents the experimental data than the alternative 
models do; for cells with mid-range and low N/C ratios, the N/C ratio change rates 
predicted by the limiting components and interdependent growth rates models are 
similar. 
Therefore, it is possible that the N/C ratio homeostasis observed in pom1 cells is 
the result of a limiting components model in which concentration of a nuclear 
component limits nuclear growth rate. The biological implications of the 
assumptions inherent to this model, and potential limiting components, are 
discussed further below (2.9.3 and Chapter 5). 
Chapter 2 Results 
Figure 2.20 Limiting components model displays trend of N/C ratio recovery 
observed in pom1 cells 
Experimental (blue), modelled using limiting components model described here 
(purple), modelled using interdependent growth rates model described in section 
2.8.1 (light grey) and modelled assuming GRnuc/GRcell = 0.08 (dark grey) mean N/C 
ratio change rate (error bars: 95% confidence intervals) (A) and mean nuclear 
growth rate to cellular growth rate ratio (GRnuc/GRcell) (B) of individual 20 minute 
time bins. Time bins of pom1 data described in Figure 2.8 cohorted by N/C ratio at 
start of bin (n = 1514 time bins,  100 time bins per cohort). Modelled data (purple) 
calculated from calculated from experimental cell volume and nucleus volume 
values assuming that 234 = 0.73?0.12 
CDEFF
G and 4566 = 0.0036	4566. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.9 Discussion 
The data in this chapter demonstrates that Vnuc/Vcell (N/C) ratio is maintained and 
that it undergoes homeostasis in individual cells in which it is aberrant. Analysis of 
the kinetics with which this homeostasis is observed led to the proposition of 
models by which N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved. 
2.9.1 Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained 
It is possible to imagine various mechanisms by which nuclear size could be 
coordinated with cell size. For example, if nuclear growth rate were determined 
only by rate of synthesis of structural components of the nuclear envelope, it would 
be plausible that nuclear surface area would scale with the synthetic capacity, and 
so volume, of the cell, leading to maintenance of SAnuc/Vcell ratio. If structural 
components, for example membrane precursors, required for both nuclear and 
cellular surface expansion were limiting in the cell, a constant SAnuc/SAcell ratio 
would be maintained. Alternatively, Vnuc/Vcell ratio could be maintained; such 
models are likely to involve both rate of synthesis of structural components of the 
nucleus scaling with cell volume and also perhaps nucleocytoplasmic transport 
rates scaling with either cell volume or N/C ratio. It is demonstrated here that 
Vnuc/Vcell ratio, and not SAnuc/Vcell ratio or SAnuc/SAcell ratio, is maintained through 
interphase and in the extreme situation of multinucleate cells. Maintenance of 
Vnuc/Vcell (N/C) ratio, and not SAnuc/Vcell ratio, through the cell cycle was previously 
observed in a small population of S. pombe cells (n = 5) (Neumann and Nurse, 
2007). Additionally, conservation of interphase N/C ratio value between the related 
fission yeast species S. pombe and S. japonicus was observed despite their 
divergent mitotic strategies (Gu et al., 2012); a similar N/C ratio was also previously 
reported in S. cerevisiae cells (Jorgensen et al., 2007). This suggests that the N/C 
ratio being ~0.08 may be important for physiological properties of growing cells, or 
that N/C ratio was established with a value ~0.08 in the last common ancestor of S. 
pombe, S. japonicus and S. cerevisiae. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.9.2 N/C ratio correction is observed in cells with aberrant N/C ratios 
Having established that an N/C ratio of ~8% is maintained in populations of S. 
pombe cells, how this population level homeostasis is achieved was addressed. 
Aberrant N/C ratios in individual cells could correct towards 8% to maintain 
population level homeostasis or aberrant N/C ratios could be lethal. Evidence of 
N/C ratio correction was previously described for a small number of cells; 
cdc11-119 klp2 cells subject to a block and release and centrifugation before 
septation were used to generate cells with aberrant N/C ratios and N/C ratio in 
three cells with low N/C ratio and three with high N/C ratio was monitored 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). Both low and high N/C ratios were observed to 
correct, however, the low n value of the population and the fact that low N/C ratio 
cells were mononucleate but high N/C ratio cells were binucleate, and so diploid, 
made analysis of the kinetics of recovery difficult. Therefore, the question was 
revisited here using larger populations of mononucleate haploid cells with a range 
of N/C ratios. 
N/C ratio was assessed over time in individuals of a pom1 cell population (n = 156 
cells) in which symmetric nuclear division followed by asymmetric cell division 
yielded a large range of aberrant N/C ratios at cell birth. Both high and low N/C 
ratios were observed to correct towards the population mean. Recovery of both 
high and low N/C ratios was also observed in wild type cells with aberrant N/C 
ratios that resulted from asymmetric nuclear division followed by symmetric cell 
division, demonstrating that the N/C ratio homeostasis observed is a phenomenon 
that is not unique to pom1 cells. 
The pom1 population provided a large number of individual cells with aberrant 
N/C ratios in which to assess the kinetics of N/C ratio homeostasis, however, N/C 
ratio was correlated with cell volume in this population making dissecting the 
influence of each of these parameters challenging. Though a smaller population, 
due to the low frequency of asymmetric divisions in wild type cells, the wild type cell 
population was also used for kinetic analysis as N/C ratio did not correlate with cell 
volume in this population and so the effects of each could be assessed. 
Chapter 2 Results 
2.9.3 Models of N/C ratio homeostasis 
Instantaneous nuclear and cellular growth rates, and N/C ratio change rates were 
assessed to determine mathematical models by which N/C ratio homeostasis could 
be achieved. A simple model of organelle scaling is the constant growth rate model 
in which organelle and cellular growth rates are both constant, generating scaling 
between organelle and cell volume. The instantaneous growth rates observed 
experimentally indicated that this is not the mechanism employed by cells to 
generate nuclear size scaling; neither nuclear or cellular growth rates were 
constant, instead they varied with N/C ratio. 
Another simple mechanism by which N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved in a 
population is direct coupling of nuclear and cellular growth rates; if nuclear growth 
rate were 8% of cellular growth rate, cells would correct N/C ratio towards 8%. 
Instantaneous nuclear and cellular growth rates were calculated for individuals of 
experimental pom1 and wild type cell populations. Neither the pom1 nor the wild 
type cells displayed direct coupling of nuclear growth rate to cellular growth rate at 
all N/C ratios. Though direct coupling of nuclear and cellular growth rates could be 
relevant for cells with mid-range N/C ratios, both very low and very high N/C ratios 
corrected more rapidly than would be expected if growth rates were directly 
coupled. Therefore, an alternative mechanism, is likely to facilitate N/C ratio 
homeostasis, at least in cells with extreme N/C ratios. 
Instantaneous growth rates were assessed as a factor of various cell properties; 
this analysis suggested that nuclear growth rate is likely to be directly proportional 
to cell volume and cellular growth rate is likely to be directly proportional to nucleus 
volume. Placing just these two constraints on the system, and assuming that no 
N/C ratio correction is observed when N/C ratio is 0.08, generated modelled N/C 
ratio correction rates very similar to those observed in pom1 and wild type cells. 
Therefore, N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved by coupling of cellular growth 
rate to nucleus volume and nuclear growth rate to cell volume, an interdependent 
growth rates model. This is a novel suggestion and the implications it has on 
cellular growth control and potential models of nuclear size control are discussed in 
Chapter 5. 
Chapter 2 Results 
This interdependent growth rates model for N/C ratio homeostasis, assumes that 
cellular growth rate is directly proportional to nucleus volume and nuclear growth 
rate is directly proportional to cell volume. As nuclear volume is usually correlated 
with cell volume, this suggests that cellular growth rate increases exponentially with 
increasing cell volume in a wild type cell population. This issue is addressed further 
in my general discussion (Chapter 5). How cellular growth rate could be maintained 
proportional to nucleus volume is also explored in my general discussion (Chapter 
5) in light of the genetic data presented below. If transcription, translation or 
ribosomal synthesis rate were proportional to nuclear volume it is possible that 
cellular synthetic capacity, and therefore cellular growth rate, would be proportional 
to nuclear volume; it would be interesting to assess transcription, translation and 
ribosome synthesis rates and also measure nucleolar volume in cells with aberrant 
N/C ratios.  
At very high N/C ratios, experimental data diverged from the predictions of this 
interdependent growth rates model. Nuclear growth rate was lower than expected. 
When nuclear growth rate was plotted against N/C ratio at start of bin, the linear 
regression line intersected the x-axis at an N/C ratio of ~0.12 suggesting that when 
N/C ratio is more than ~1.5 fold higher than the wild type value nuclear growth 
ceases. This inhibition of nuclear growth at high N/C ratio was previously reported 
in cells with high N/C ratio from the centrifuged cdc11-119 klp2 population 
described above; nuclear growth was reported to be inhibited in cells with an N/C 
ratio two fold higher than the wild type value, resuming only once the N/C ratio had 
been corrected to 1.5 fold higher than wild type (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
Further study of nuclear growth rate in cells with N/C ratios >0.12, perhaps utilising 
a mutant exhibiting asymmetric nuclear division, would be interesting to further 
address this issue. It is possible that a proportional or independent growth rates 
model generates N/C ratio homeostasis in cells with low and mid-range N/C ratios 
and that in extremely high N/C ratios a separate mechanism is triggered that 
inhibits nuclear growth, perhaps by preventing flow of membrane into the nuclear 
envelope. Alternatively, this cessation of nuclear growth at high N/C ratio could be 
indicative of a limiting components model of N/C ratio homeostasis. 
Chapter 2 Results 
Modelling a simple limiting components model of nuclear size control did predict 
N/C ratio homeostasis towards a value of 0.08 with similar kinetics to those 
observed experimentally, even in cells with very high N/C ratios, providing an 
alternative model by which N/C ratio homeostasis could be maintained in growing 
cells. However, this model required many assumptions to be made, limiting the 
biological mechanisms by which it could be achieved. Additionally, it remains to be 
determined if N/C ratio homeostasis would be observed with the experimentally 
observed kinetics if multiple components required for nuclear growth, all usually 
maintained in an amount proportional to cell volume, had the potential to be 
limiting. Potential biological manifestations of this model are discussed, in light of 
the biochemical and genetic data presented below, in Chapter 5. 
Therefore, analysis of the kinetics of N/C ratio recovery observed in pom1 and 
wild type cells in which nuclear scaling had been perturbed led to the proposition of 
mathematical models by which this homeostasis could be achieved. These are not 
mutually exclusive and it is possible that different nuclear size control mechanisms 
are relevant in cells displaying different ranges of N/C ratios. To identify molecular 
components and biological processes implicated in such control mechanisms, 
biochemical analysis of a nuclear size mutant (Chapter 3) and a genetic screen for 
nuclear size mutants (Chapter 4) were carried out and are described below. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Chapter 3. Assessing nuclear content in a nuclear 
size mutant 
To identify novel candidate factors and processes with roles in nuclear size control, 
a systematic genetic screen of S. pombe non-essential gene deletion mutants for 
those exhibiting abnormal N/C ratios was carried out by Kazunori Kume (Kume et 
al., 2017). A collection of 2,969 viable gene deletion mutants was screened (~80% 
of viable S. pombe gene deletion mutants) (Kim et al., 2010). 14 gene deletion 
strains displaying an N/C ratio at least 15% higher than the wild type value of 0.081 
were identified. Eight of these mutants still exhibited a significant increase of N/C 
ratio when blocked in G2 phase indicating that they were defective in interphase 
nuclear size control. Among these were two strains carrying a deletion of a gene 
encoding a component of the Dss1-Mlo3 complex; dss1 and mlo3. It was striking 
that two components of the same complex were identified independently by this 
unbiased screen and so I decided to pursue further investigation of the role of this 
complex in nuclear size control. This investigation is detailed in this chapter. 
The RNA binding protein Mlo3 (S. cerevisiae YRA1, H. sapiens ALYREF) and 
mRNA export factor Dss1 (S. cerevisiae SEM1, H sapiens DSS1) are components 
of a complex involved in nuclear mRNA export; they are targeted to the nuclear 
pore by a third component of the complex, Rae1 (S. cerevisiae GLE2, H. sapiens 
RAE1) (Thakurta et al., 2005). Rae1 is encoded by an essential gene so was not 
included in the screen of non-essential gene deletion mutants, however, a 
conditional, temperature sensitive allele of the rae1 gene, rae1-167, exhibits an 
N/C ratio increase of more than 50% following shift from the permissive (25C) to 
the restrictive (36C) temperature for 4 hours (Kume et al., 2017). This conditional 
mutant was used as a tool to study the nuclear size defects exhibited by these 
mRNA export defective mutants as it could be expected to have a more extreme 
phenotype. 
Chapter 3 Results 
3.1 Nuclear protein accumulation occurs in rae1-167 mutant 
cells at the restrictive temperature 
Rae1-167 cells have been reported to exhibit nuclear poly(A)+ RNA accumulation 
following shift to the restrictive temperature (Brown et al., 1995, Kume et al., 2017). 
This accumulation is observed soon after temperature shift, apparent even within 
15 minutes (Kume et al., 2017). This accumulation of poly(A)+ RNA is 
accompanied by nuclear accumulation of poly(A)-binding protein (PABP); indeed, 
nuclear accumulation of PABP-GFP was observed in 100% of rae1-167 cells after 
1 hour at the restrictive temperature (Kume et al., 2017). Deletion of the pabp gene 
did not suppress the N/C increase observed in rae1-167 cells so PABP 
accumulation is not necessary to cause this phenotype (Kume et al., 2017). 
The distribution of protein, more generally, in these cells was assessed using the 
protein-staining fluorescent dye fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). Nuclei were 
identified by 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining. Wild type cells exhibited 
uniform protein distribution between nucleus and cytoplasm at both 25C and 36C, 
as did rae1-167 cells at 25C. However, following shift to 36C, rae1-167 cells 
exhibited nuclear protein accumulation (Figure 3.1A and B). This accumulation was 
observed within 30 minutes of temperature shift (Figure 3.1A) and accompanied 
N/C ratio increase (Figure 3.1C).  
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.1 Nuclear protein accumulation is observed in rae1-167 cells exhibiting 
nuclear enlargement 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.1 Nuclear protein accumulation is observed in rae1-167 cells exhibiting 
nuclear enlargement (continued)  
(A) Protein distribution in wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells (25C or 36C, 30 
mins, 1 h or 2 h) stained with FITC. DAPI staining used to identify nuclear area. 
Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) Quantification of FITC fluorescence distribution along the long cell axis, 
normalised by cell length, in wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells (25C or 36C, 1 h, 
n = 100 cells per condition). 
(C) N/C ratio of wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells grown at 25C then 36C for 0 h 
or 2 h. n > 100 cells per condition. Box delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th 
percentile. Whiskers represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this 
range marked as dots. Unpaired student t-tests carried out to determine 
significance. 
Treatment of cells with 100 g/ml cycloheximide (CYH) has been reported to inhibit 
protein synthesis in wild type cells (Polanshek, 1977). Despite having no effect on 
N/C ratio in wild type cells, CYH suppresses the N/C ratio increase observed in 
rae1-167 cells (Kume et al., 2017). This suggests that continued protein synthesis 
is required for the N/C ratio increase observed in rae1-167 cells. CYH treatment 
suppresses not only the rae1-167 N/C ratio increase phenotype but also the 
nuclear protein accumulation phenotype; when treated with 100 g/ml CYH, 
rae1-167 cells exhibit uniform protein distribution between the nucleus and 
cytoplasm even after 2 hours at 36C (Figure 3.2). CYH treatment does not affect 
the protein distribution in wild type cells (Figure 3.2). 
Similarly, treatment with 15 g/ml thiolutin, which blocks RNA synthesis in wild type 
cells (Mendell et al., 2000, Grigull et al., 2004) suppresses both the N/C ratio 
increase (Kume et al., 2017) and the nuclear protein accumulation (Figure 3.3) 
phenotype of rae1-167 cells, yet does not affect N/C ratio or protein distribution of 
wild type cells. Therefore, continued synthesis of both RNA and protein appear to 
be necessary for both the N/C ratio increase and nuclear protein accumulation 
observed in rae1-167 cells at the restrictive temperature.  
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.2 Nuclear protein accumulation in rae1-167 cells is suppressed by 
cycloheximide treatment 
Protein distribution in wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells treated with 100 g/ml 
cycloheximide (CYH) or DMSO (25C or 36C, 30 mins, 1 h or 2 h) stained with 
FITC. DAPI staining used to identify nuclear area. Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.3 Nuclear protein accumulation in rae1-167 cells is suppressed by 
thiolutin treatment 
Protein distribution in wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells 15 g/ml thiolutin (Thio) or 
DMSO (25C or 36C, 30 mins, 1 h or 2 h) stained with FITC. DAPI staining used to 
identify nuclear area. Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 3 Results 
The correlation between nuclear protein accumulation and N/C increase observed 
in these situations suggests there may be a causative link between the two. This is 
supported by previous observations that treatment of wild type cells with leptomycin 
B (LMB), which inhibits the nuclear protein export factor exportin Crm1 (Kudo et al., 
1999, Matsuyama et al., 2006), results in nuclear protein accumulation (Matsuyama 
et al., 2006) and also N/C ratio increase (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). Nuclear 
protein accumulation is observed by FITC staining within 1 hour of addition of 
50 ng/ml LMB and not in ethanol treated control cells (Figure 3.4A). The N/C ratio 
of cells treated with 50 ng/ml LMB for 2 hours is 0.097  0.023, and significantly 
higher than that (0.080  0.015) of ethanol treated control cells (Figure 3.4B). 
Interestingly, when nuclear enlargement phenotypes were observed in rae1-167 
cells at the restrictive temperature and LMB treated wild type cells, in addition to 
the nuclear protein accumulation phenotype observed, decompaction of nuclear 
chromatin was observed by DAPI staining (Figure 3.1A, Figure 3.4A). It is possible 
that this phenotype contributes to the nuclear enlargement observed however, 
whilst the nuclear enlargement and nuclear protein accumulation phenotypes were 
both suppressed by CYH treatment, the decompaction of nuclear chromatin was 
not (Figure 3.2) suggesting that chromatin decompaction is not sufficient to lead to 
nuclear enlargement and also that it is unlikely to occur as a result of enlargement. 
To probe the relationship between nuclear protein accumulation and N/C ratio 
increase further, the identity of the proteins accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei was 
assessed using stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) mass 
spectrometry. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.4 Nuclear protein accumulation is observed in wild type cells treated 
with leptomycin B exhibiting nuclear enlargement 
(A) Protein distribution in wild type cells treated with 50 ng/ml leptomycin B (+LMB) 
or ethanol (-LMB) (30 mins, 1 h or 2 h) stained with FITC. DAPI staining used to 
identify nuclear area. Scale bar: 10 m.  
(B) N/C ratio of wild type cells treated with 50 ng/ml leptomycin B (+LMB) or 
ethanol (-LMB) for 2 h. n  100 cells per condition. Box delimited by 25th percentile, 
median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data 
points outside this range marked as dots. Unpaired student t-test carried out to 
determine significance. 
Chapter 3 Results 
3.2 Nuclear enrichment of rae1-167 and wild type cell samples 
In order to characterise proteins accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei at the restrictive 
temperature, SILAC mass spectrometry was carried out. Samples were enriched 
for nuclei in order to increase the chance of detecting low abundance nuclear 
proteins. For this, a nuclear enrichment protocol based on (Shimizu et al., 1991) 
and experiment 18 (Alfa et al., 1993) was carried out. Cells were harvested from a 
1 litre culture by centrifugation and washed. Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride and b-
mercaptoethanol were added and cell walls digested by incubation with Zymolyase. 
Dounce homogenisation was followed by centrifugation, firstly into a glycerol-ficoll 
cushion and then in a ficoll buffer, to yield a nucleus enriched pellet. This protocol 
is described in full in Chapter 6. 
To confirm that this protocol enriches for nuclei, SILAC mass spectrometry 
comparing nucleus enriched samples to whole cell extracts, for both wild type and 
rae1-167 cells grown at 25C then shifted to 36C for 1 hour, was performed. For 
each strain, heavy labelled whole cell extract was mixed 1:1 by protein 
concentration with light labelled nucleus enriched sample (inverse mixes also 
produced and analysed). Mixes were analysed by SILAC mass spectrometry 
yielding average log2 nucleus enriched/whole cell ratios for individual proteins. Data 
was annotated with ORFeome localisation data (Matsuyama et al., 2006) and 2D 
enrichment analysis was carried out. Nucleus enriched samples from both wild type 
and rae1-167 cells were enriched for proteins reported to localise to the nucleus 
and depleted for those reported to localise to the cytosol (Table 3.1). 
Chapter 3 Results 
Table 3.1 Nucleus-localised proteins are enriched and cytosol-localised proteins 
depleted by nuclear enrichment protocol 
2D enrichment analysis (Cox and Mann, 2012) of average log2 nucleus 
enriched/whole cell ratios from SILAC comparison of nucleus enriched sample to 
whole cell sample. 2D enrichment score and P value for nucleus-localised and 
cytosol-localised proteins shown for wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells following 1 h 
incubation at 36C. Nucleus-localised and cytosol-localised categories from 
S. pombe ORFeome localisation data (Matsuyama et al., 2006). Benjamini-
Hochberg FDR truncation threshold: 0.02.  
In order to identify proteins accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei relative to wild type at 
36C and not at 25C, I directly compared proteins in rae1-167 and wild type 
nucleus enriched samples at each temperature. Wild type and rae1-167 cells were 
mixed 1:1 by OD prior to nuclear enrichment to eliminate technical error from 
nuclear enrichment protocol efficiency variability. This approach is valid if, when 
mixed with wild type cells, rae1-167 cells undergo nuclear enrichment at similar 
efficiencies at 25C and 36C. If rae1-167 cells were to undergo nuclear enrichment 
at higher efficiency at high temperature, when exhibiting nuclear enlargement, than 
at low temperature, false positive rae1-167 accumulated proteins may be obtained. 
Nuclear enrichment of differentially labelled wild type and rae1-167 cells was used 
to confirm that the two strains undergo nuclear enrichment at similar efficiencies at 
25C and 36C (Figure 3.5). Wild type cells containing nuclear envelope marker 
Cut11-GFP and rae1-167 cells containing nuclear envelope marker Cut11-mCherry 
were mixed 1:1 by OD prior to nuclear enrichment. Inversely labelled cells were 
also mixed to allow the effect of the marker used to be accounted for. Efficiency of 
nuclear enrichment was measured by comparing, by microscopy and subsequent 
image analysis, the number of each class of nucleus following the enrichment 
protocol to that prior to it. Once normalised for the % of each nucleus type present 
Chapter 3 Results 
prior to nuclear enrichment, 54% of nuclei prepared by nuclear enrichment of mixed 
culture at 25C, and 45% at 36C, were rae1-167 nuclei, indicating that rae1-167 
nuclei are enriched with similar efficiency at the two temperatures (Figure 3.5B). 
Indeed, the slight reduction in efficiency of rae1-167 nuclear enrichment relative to 
wild type at 36C compared to 25C may lead to false negatives but means I can be 
confident using this approach that false positives should not be encountered. 
Therefore, mixing rae1-167 and wild type cultures 1:1 by OD prior to nuclear 
enrichment is a valid approach to determine enrichment of proteins in rae1-167 
nuclei relative to wild type at 25C and 36C, and will allow us to compare the 
phenotypes at the two temperatures. The main source of variability in efficiency of 
the nuclear enrichment protocol in this experiment appears to have arisen from the 
identity of the marker used to label the nuclear envelope (Figure 3.5C) rather than 
whether or not the cells carried a rae1-167 mutation (Figure 3.5B). No nuclear 
envelope markers are used in further experiments performed involving nuclear 
enrichment. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.5 Nuclear enrichment of differentially labelled wild type and rae1-167 
cells 
(A) Representative images of samples pre (whole cell) and post (nucleus enriched) 
nuclear enrichment protocol. Samples are mixes of the two strains indicated grown 
separately into exponential growth at 25C, incubated at 25C or 36C for 1 h then 
mixed 1:1 by OD immediately before imaging and beginning the enrichment 
protocol. GFP (yellow) and mCherry (magenta) tagged Cut11 was used as a 
nuclear envelope marker to distinguish wild type (WT) from rae1-167 cells as 
indicated. Inverse experiments were performed to account for the effect of the tag 
used. Additionally, nucleus enriched samples were stained with DAPI to allow 
identification of complete nuclear envelopes around a DNA mass. Scale bars: 
10 m.  
(B) Quantification of data described in (A). % rae1-167 and WT nuclei following 
nuclear enrichment protocol normalised by % prior to protocol for each mix and 
average % value.  
(C) Data shown in (B) categorised by nuclear envelope marker.  
Chapter 3 Results 
3.3 Accumulation of many different proteins is observed in the 
nuclei of rae1-167 cells following shift to the restrictive 
temperature 
SILAC mass spectrometry allows comparative quantification of the proteome of 
differentially labelled samples (Ong and Mann, 2005, de Godoy et al., 2008). 
Cultures to be compared are differentially labelled with stable lysine and arginine 
isotopes and protein extracts from these are mixed, digested into peptides and 
analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 
Identical peptides from the different cultures will give spectra that differ only in that 
the spectrum of the heavy labelled sample is shifted in mass/charge ratio (m/z), 
allowing the relative abundance of each peptide in the heavy and light samples to 
be determined. This approach was used to determine relative protein levels in 
rae1-167 and wild type whole cell extracts and nucleus enriched samples in order 
to identify proteins accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei at 36C when nuclear 
enlargement is observed. 
Fission yeast cells were metabolically labelled by disrupting lysine and arginine 
synthesis (arg1-230, lys3-37) and reducing arginine conversion by disrupting 
arginine catabolism (car2) then culturing in media containing heavy (H) or light (L) 
labelled arginine and lysine (Bicho et al., 2010). Wild type and rae1-167 cells were 
cultured in labelling media for >8 generations at 25C then incubated at 25C or 
36C for 1 hour. Inversely labelled wild type (WT) and rae1-167 cells at each 
temperature were mixed 1:1 by OD then whole cell extract and nucleus enriched 
sample preparation carried out and trypsin digestion then LC-MS/MS performed 
(Figure 3.6A). Log2 transformed rae1-167/WT ratios for each mix (Figure 3.6B) and 
average log2 transformed rae1-167/WT ratios for each temperature (Figure 3.6C) 
were calculated. 
22.4% of proteins detected in the nucleus enriched sample at 36C were enriched 
>1.25 fold in rae1-167 compared to wild type in contrast to only 1.3% at 25C and 
5% in the whole cell sample (Figure 3.6C, Table 3.2). 500 proteins were enriched  
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.6 SILAC analysis indicates that many proteins accumulate in rae1-167 
nuclei 
(A) Schematic of sample preparation and SILAC workflow to quantify relative 
protein levels in rae1-167 and wild type (WT) whole cell and nucleus enriched 
samples.  
(B) SILAC mass spectrometry log2 transformed rae1-167/WT ratios for individual 
proteins at 25C and 36C in whole cell and nucleus enriched samples. Inversely 
labelled samples (light/heavy (L/H) and heavy/light (H/L)) on x and y axis for each 
condition. 
(C) Average log2 transformed rae1-167/WT ratios for individual proteins at 25C 
and 36C in whole cell and nucleus enriched samples calculated from data in (B). 
1.25 fold higher protein level in rae1-167 cells than WT indicated by dotted line. 
Values indicate percentage of proteins exceeding this level at 36C (red) and 25C 
(blue). 
Chapter 3 Results 
>1.25 fold in rae1-167 nucleus enriched samples relative to wild type at 36C and 
not at 25C. These are listed in Appendix I. Therefore, bulk accumulation of many 
different proteins is observed in rae1-167 nuclei at 36C, and not accumulation of 
just one or a few potentially scaling cargoes that specifically increase nuclear size. 
Table 3.2 Proteins enriched more than 1.25 fold in rae1-167 relative to wild type 
Number and % of proteins enriched more than 1.25 fold in rae1-167 relative to wild 
type (WT) in samples indicated. Values determined by analysis of average log2 
transformed rae1-167/WT ratios from SILAC experiment described in Figure 3.6. 
Chapter 3 Results 
3.4 The proteins accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei are enriched 
for nuclear proteins 
To determine whether the accumulated proteins are enriched for any specific classes 
of proteins, 2D enrichment analysis (Cox and Mann, 2012) was carried out on nucleus 
enriched sample data described in Figure 3.6C (Figure 3.7). Analysis of data annotated 
with ORFeome localisation categories (Matsuyama et al., 2006) indicated that the 
accumulated proteins are significantly enriched for proteins reported to be localised to 
the nucleus and subnuclear structures (Figure 3.7A). 2D enrichment analysis was also 
carried out on data annotated with Gene Ontology (GO) categories (Figure 3.7B-D). As 
rae1-167 accumulates poly(A)+ RNA in the nucleus at 36C (Brown et al., 1995, Kume 
et al., 2017), it may be expected that RNA binding proteins are likely to be among the 
accumulated proteins. Indeed, enrichment analysis of data annotated with GO 
molecular function (GOMF) categories indicated that proteins enriched in rae1-167 
nucleus enriched samples relative to wild type at 36C and not at 25C are enriched for 
RNA binding proteins; they are also enriched for nucleic acid binding proteins more 
generally (Figure 3.7B). It is of note that among the most highly enriched GO biological 
process (GOBP) categories are those related to RNA processing and ribonucleoprotein 
complex assembly and many GO cellular component (GOCC) categories referring to 
ribonucleoprotein complexes, such as the spliceosome and preribosome, are also 
highly enriched. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.7 2D enrichment analysis indicates that proteins accumulating in 
rae1-167 nuclei are enriched for nuclear proteins 
2D enrichment analysis (Cox and Mann, 2012) of SILAC data for nucleus enriched 
samples described in Figure 3.6C. Benjamini-Hochberg FDR truncation threshold: 
0.02.  
(A) Data annotated with categories from ORFeome localisation data (Matsuyama et 
al., 2006).  
(B-D) Data annotated with Gene Ontology terms (default Perseus GO annotation 
lists): molecular function (GOMF) (B), cellular component (GOCC) (C) and slim 
biological process (GOBP) (D). 
Chapter 3 Results 
3.5 Identification of proteins that move into the nucleus both 
when rae1-167 cells are shifted to high temperature and 
when wild type cells are treated with LMB 
Two different situations that lead to nuclear enlargement are shift of rae1-167 cells to 
the restrictive temperature (Figure 3.1C) and treatment of wild type cells with LMB 
(Figure 3.4B). 500 proteins enriched in rae1-167 nucleus enriched samples relative to 
wild type at the restrictive temperature are described above. 285 proteins that 
relocalise on treatment with LMB have previously been reported (Matsuyama et al., 
2006). Comparison of these lists of proteins revealed that 28 proteins are present in 
both datasets (Figure 3.8A) suggesting they may play a role in the nuclear enlargement 
observed. These 28 proteins were categorised into change in localisation categories 
based on their reported localisation prior to and post LMB treatment (Matsuyama et al., 
2006); all could be categorised as moving into the nucleus, out of it, relocalising within 
it or more than one of these (Figure 3.8B). 
The 22 proteins that are both enriched in rae1-167 nucleus enriched samples 
relative to wild type at 36C and not 25C and also move into the nucleus on 
treatment of wild type cells with LMB are listed in Table 3.3. These are enriched, 
relative to all S. pombe protein coding genes, for proteins reported to be localised 
to the nucleolus and for proteins with roles in RNA processing and ribosome 
biogenesis (Table 3.4). 
Chapter 3 Results 
Figure 3.8 Proteins that accumulate in both rae1-167 and LMB treated nuclei 
(A) Venn diagram depicting overlap between list of proteins enriched in rae1-167 
nuclei relative to wild type at 36C and not at 25C (Appendix I) (rae1-167) and 
proteins reported to change localisation on treatment with LMB (Matsuyama et al., 
2006) (LMB). 
(B) Venn diagram depicting distribution of changes in localisation of the 28 proteins 
in the overlap in (A) on treatment with LMB (Matsuyama et al., 2006). From 
reported description of localisation before and after LMB treatment, proteins were 
categorised as moving into the nucleus (in), out of the nucleus (out), relocalising 
within the nucleus (relocalised within) or more than one of these. 
Chapter 3 Results 
Table 3.3 Proteins that accumulate both in rae1-167 nuclei at 36C and in wild 
type nuclei following LMB treatment 
Systematic ID and name of gene encoding each protein and description of their 
function or predicted function as annotated on PomBase (Wood et al., 2012). 
SPAC16C9.03 nmd3 export adaptor Nmd3 (predicted)
SPAC1F7.02c has1 ATP-dependent RNA helicase Has1 (predicted)
SPAC23G3.10c ssr3 SWI/SNF and RSC complex subunit Ssr3
SPAC29A4.04c cbf5 pseudouridylate synthase Cbf5 (predicted)
SPAC2G11.15c tgs1 rRNA methyltransferase Tgs1
SPAC3F10.13 ucp6 UBA domain protein Ucp6
SPAC823.08c rrp3 ATP-dependent RNA helicase Rrp3 (predicted)
SPAC8F11.04 SPAC8F11.04 U3 snoRNP-associated protein Cic1/Utp30 family (predicted)
SPACUNK4.16c tps3 alpha,alpha-trehalose-phosphate synthase (predicted)
SPBC106.14c sda1 SDA1 family protein (predicted)
SPBC14C8.14c pol5 DNA polymerase phi
SPBC1711.16 pwp1 WD repeat protein Pwp1 (predicted)
SPBC17D1.06 dbp3 ATP-dependent RNA helicase Dbp3 (predicted)
SPBC2D10.10c fib1 fibrillarin, rRNA methyltransferase
SPBC336.02 SPBC336.02 18S rRNA dimethylase (predicted)
SPBC36.05c clr6 histone deacetylase (class I) Clr6
SPBC646.10c nop56 U3 snoRNP protein Nop56 (predicted)
SPBC660.07 ntp1 alpha,alpha-trehalase Ntp1
SPBC713.04c pwp2 U3 snoRNP-associated protein Utp1 (predicted)
SPBC800.06 brx1 ribosome biogenesis protein Brx1 (predicted)
SPBC947.07 rrp1402 ribosome biogenesis protein Rrp14 (predicted)
SPCC1494.06c dbp9 ATP-dependent RNA helicase Dbp9 (predicted)
Gene nameGene ID Protein description
Chapter 3 Results 
Table 3.4 ORFeome and GO categories enriched in genes listed in Table 3.3 
Enrichment analysis of 22 genes listed in Table 3.3 compared to all S. pombe 
protein coding genes carried out using AnGeLi (Bitton et al., 2015b). ORFeome 
localisation (ORFeome), gene ontology cellular component (GOCC) and gene 
ontology biological process (GOBP) categories enriched (p < 0.1) listed. No gene 
ontology molecular function categories were enriched (p < 0.1). 
Fold enrichent P value
Nucleolus>>nucleus 16.98 2.76E-03
Nucleolus 16.10 2.76E-03
nucleolus (GO:0005730) 10.35 1.07E-11
nuclear lumen (GO:0031981) 4.40 8.53E-08
intracellular organelle lumen (GO:0070013) 3.75 6.84E-07
organelle lumen (GO:0043233) 3.75 6.84E-07
membrane-enclosed lumen (GO:0031974) 3.66 8.34E-07
nuclear part (GO:0044428) 3.41 2.28E-06
non-membrane-bounded organelle (GO:0043228) 3.08 9.62E-06
intracellular non-membrane-bounded organelle (GO:0043232) 3.08 9.62E-06
rRNA modification (GO:0000154) 43.77 9.12E-03
rRNA processing (GO:0006364) 16.38 7.76E-10
rRNA metabolic process (GO:0016072) 15.74 8.61E-10
ribosome biogenesis (GO:0042254) 11.01 2.18E-10
ncRNA processing (GO:0034470) 10.53 6.86E-08
ncRNA metabolic process (GO:0034660) 9.48 3.48E-08
ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis (GO:0022613) 9.39 7.76E-10
RNA processing (GO:0006396) 6.57 2.48E-06
cellular component biogenesis (GO:0044085) 4.39 1.63E-05
RNA metabolic process (GO:0016070) 3.67 4.38E-05
nucleic acid metabolic process (GO:0090304) 2.94 9.54E-04
gene expression (GO:0010467) 2.82 1.48E-03
nucleobase-containing compound metabolic process (GO:0006139) 2.55 5.54E-03
cellular component organization or biogenesis (GO:0071840) 2.50 9.54E-04
cellular aromatic compound metabolic process (GO:0006725) 2.43 9.34E-03
heterocycle metabolic process (GO:0046483) 2.41 9.83E-03
Category
ORFeome
Chapter 3 Results 
3.6 Discussion 
The data presented in this chapter demonstrates that the temperature sensitive 
interphase nuclear size mutant rae1-167 exhibits nuclear protein accumulation 
concomitantly with nuclear size increase following shift to the restrictive 
temperature. Rae1 has previously been implicated in nuclear export of mRNA in S. 
pombe (Brown et al., 1995), a role that is conserved in human cells (Bharathi et al., 
1997). The nuclear accumulation of protein observed following temperature shift 
suggests that Rae1 may also have a role in nuclear export of protein or that the 
disruption of nuclear export of mRNA may have an effect on nucleocytoplasmic 
protein transport. Inhibition of either protein synthesis, by cycloheximide treatment, 
or transcription, by thiolutin treatment, suppressed both the nuclear size increase 
(Kume et al., 2017) and also the nuclear protein accumulation, suggesting that 
continued RNA and protein synthesis are required for both phenotypes. 
Having observed nuclear protein accumulation, it was possible that the 
accumulation was of one, or a few, potentially scaling cargoes that specifically 
increase nuclear size, or was in fact indicative of a more general transport effect. 
SILAC analysis indicated that the proteins accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei at the 
restrictive temperature were not many copies of a few specific proteins, or a 
specific class of proteins, but instead bulk accumulation of many different proteins 
was observed. These accumulated proteins were enriched for proteins previously 
reported to be localised to the nucleus and sub-nuclear structures (Matsuyama et 
al., 2006); I did not observe clear mislocalisation to the nucleus of proteins 
excluded from it in wild type cells. The general accumulation observed suggests 
that if nuclear protein accumulation influences nuclear size, it is likely to be a bulk 
transport effect, but does not rule out the possibility that from within the many 
proteins accumulated one protein, or a small number of proteins, effects the 
nuclear size increase. 
The rae1-167 nuclear size increase can be suppressed by impairment of fatty acid 
metabolism by cut6-621 mutation, indicating that new membrane synthesis is 
required for the rae1-167 nuclear size increase (Kume et al., 2017). Nuclear protein 
accumulation alone is not, therefore, sufficient to cause the rae1-167 nuclear size 
Chapter 3 Results 
increase but may be the driver of it, perhaps stimulating new membrane 
incorporation.  
Nuclear enlargement was previously reported in wild type cells treated with LMB 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). LMB inhibits the exportin Crm1 (Nishi et al., 1994, 
Kudo et al., 1999). Proteins that change localisation on LMB treatment were 
previously reported (Matsuyama et al., 2006). Comparative analysis identified 22 
proteins that I identified as accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei and also were reported 
to move into the nucleus on LMB treatment. I propose that this makes them 
candidates to be nuclear scaling cargoes that specifically increase nuclear size on 
movement into the nucleus, however it is likely that I am instead observing a bulk 
transport effect in both nuclear enlargement situations with these 22 common 
proteins being susceptible to accumulation in both cases. These proteins were 
enriched for proteins reported to localise to the nucleolus and with roles in 
ribosome biogenesis. This accumulation of ribosome biogenesis factors could be 
indicative of ribosome biogenesis defects. Ribosome biogenesis requires import of 
ribosomal proteins into, and ribosomal subunits out of the nucleus and is prevalent 
in rapidly growing yeast cells; it was estimated that in growing S. cerevisiae cells 
each nuclear pore must import nearly 1000 ribosomal proteins and export ~25 
ribosomal subunits per minute (Warner, 1999). With this frequency of 
nucleocytoplasmic transport required, it is possible that perturbing ribosome 
biogenesis could disrupt nucleocytoplasmic transport more generally. 
Interestingly, chromatin decompaction was observed in rae1-167 cells and LMB 
treated wild type cells. Unlike the protein accumulation and nuclear size 
phenotypes, cycloheximide did not suppress the chromatin decompaction of 
rae1-167 cells. This implies that chromatin decompaction cannot be downstream of 
the nuclear size increase nor can it be sufficient to cause it. 
The work presented here describes bulk nuclear accumulation of proteins 
concomitantly with nuclear size increase in a nuclear size mutant. The effect 
observed required continued RNA and protein synthesis; it is possible that bulk 
transport effects were overlooked in previous studies of nuclear size control as 
Chapter 3 Results 
these have mostly been carried out in cell free systems without ongoing 
transcriptional and translational processes. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Chapter 4. An essential gene screen for novel 
nuclear size mutants 
We have little mechanistic understanding of how the maintenance of a constant 
N/C ratio through the cell cycle is achieved. A screen of non-essential gene 
deletion mutants revealed that both nucleocytoplasmic transport and membrane 
synthesis are biological processes central to accurate interphase nuclear size 
control (Kume et al., 2017). 8 interphase nuclear size control deletion mutants were 
identified; all of these displayed enlarged N/C ratios. We hypothesised that no low 
N/C ratio mutants or mutants with more severe phenotypes were identified by this 
screen of viable deletion strains as these may be sufficiently deleterious to be lethal 
(Kume et al., 2017). To identify novel candidate factors central to the control of 
nuclear size during interphase, I carried out a screen of essential gene deletion 
mutants. 
4.1 A third of essential gene deletion mutants form 
microcolonies allowing phenotypic screening 
I screened essential gene deletion mutants from a near genome-wide 
heterozygous gene deletion collection that represents 99% of S. pombe open 
reading frames (Kim et al., 2010, Spirek et al., 2010). Of the 4,865 genes 
represented, 1,264 (26.0%) are reported to be essential for cell viability. Haploid 
deletion mutants of 427 (33.8%) of these, formed by sporulation of heterozygous 
diploids, divide a limited number of times following germination to form 
microcolonies of 4-20 cells, allowing their haploid deletion mutant phenotype to be 
assessed, at least immediately after spore germination (Kim et al., 2010, Spirek et 
al., 2010) (Figure 4.1). 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.1 More than a third of S. pombe essential gene deletion mutants form 
microcolonies allowing their deletion phenotype to be assessed 
(A) Pie chart illustrating stratification of S. pombe gene deletion collection into 
viable and essential deletion mutants. Essential gene deletion mutants are then 
categorised by ability to form microcolonies (col) (Kim et al., 2010, Spirek et al., 
2010). 
(B) Representative image of wild type (WT) colony and microcolony grown on solid 
YE4S agar from spores from heterozygous deletion mutant diploid (40 h, 32C). 
Scale bar: 100 m. 
4.2 A three stage screen for nuclear size mutants 
I visually screened microcolony-forming essential gene deletion mutants for those 
that exhibit aberrant N/C ratios, and so may play a role in nuclear size control, in 
three stages (Figure 4.2A). Heterozygous deletion mutants of each of the 427 
genes were sporulated following transformation with pON177 plasmid. Resultant 
spores were germinated by incubation at 32C in YE4S liquid media for 22-24 
hours then screened visually using the lipophilic fluorescent dye DiOC6 to visualise 
cellular and nuclear membranes (Figure 4.2B). 152 strains were provisionally 
identified that appeared to display an N/C ratio greater than or smaller than wild 
type and were subject to a second round of visual screening in liquid using DiOC6. 
The previously described 5300 control strain in which the KanR deletion cassette is 
inserted in pseudogene SPAC212.05c was used as a control for this and 
subsequent screening stages (Moris et al., 2016). 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.2 Screen for N/C ratio mutants 
(A) Schematic of three stage screen. Two visual screens in liquid media using the 
lipophilic dye DiOC6 identified 60 potential N/C ratio mutant candidates. Imaging 
and measurement of N/C ratio in strains containing nuclear envelope (NE) marker 
Ish1-yEGFP led to the identification of 25 N/C ratio mutant candidates. 
(B) Wild type cells with nuclear and cellular envelopes visualised using lipophilic 
dye DiOC6. Cells incubated with 5 g/ml DiOC6 for 3 minutes then washed prior to 
imaging. Scale bar: 10 m. 
60 strains that displayed an aberrant N/C ratio were screened a third time following 
integration of a nuclear envelope marker. The nuclear envelope protein Ish1 was 
C-terminally tagged with yEGFP (Janke et al., 2004) to mark the nuclear envelope; 
I confirmed that the N/C ratio of cells with Ish1-yEGFP integrated at the native ish1 
locus is not significantly different from that of cells containing the alternative nuclear 
envelope marker Cut11-GFP integrated at its native locus (Figure 4.3A and B). 
Sporulation of the heterozygous diploid deletion mutants gives rise to asci 
containing two wild type and two deletion spores; thus, germination of spores from 
these asci in liquid generates a mixed population of wild type and deletion mutant 
cells. It was not possible to use antibiotic selection to select mutant cells as the 
phenotype of wild type cells following antibiotic treatment can be similar to that of 
the mutant cells. To distinguish mutant from wild type cells, and thus accurately 
measure the N/C ratio of each deletion mutant, I integrated the nuclear envelope 
Chapter 4 Results 
marker Ish1-yEGFP into the deletion cassette of the heterozygous diploid strains 
(Figure 4.3C). In the resultant asci and mixed haploid cell populations, mutants 
could be identified as they contained marked nuclear envelopes whilst wild type 
spores and cells did not (Figure 4.3D).  
Imaging was carried out and N/C ratio measured for each strain (Figure 4.4). Mean, 
standard deviation and coefficient of variation of N/C ratio were calculated for each 
strain and the significance of the difference of each population from a wild type 
population was determined using a student t-test (with Welchs correction when an 
F test indicated that the variances of the two populations were significantly 
different) (Appendix II). The function of the product of each gene is also listed 
(Appendix II). 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.3 Ish1-yEGFP can be used to mark the nuclear envelope of mutant cells 
(A) Wild type haploid cells with nuclear envelopes marked with Cut11-GFP or Ish1-
yEGFP as indicated. Brightfield (magenta), GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) N/C ratio of cell populations described in (A). n = 150 cells per condition. Box 
delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th 
and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. Unpaired 
student t-test carried out. 
(C) Schematic of nuclear envelope marker construct. Kanamycin resistance marker 
(KanR) homologous sequence flanks the ish1 open reading frame (ish1 ORF) and 
upstream sequence (Pish1), yEGFP coding sequence (yEGFP) and hygromycin 
resistance marker (HygR) regulated by the AgTEF promoter (PAgTEF) and CYC1 
terminator (tCYC1).  
(D) Asci and haploid cells derived from heterozygous diploids containing nuclear 
envelope marker construct. Mutant spores and cells contain nuclear envelope 
marker, wild type do not. Brightfield (magenta), GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.3 25 novel nuclear size mutants identified 
23 strains with a mean N/C ratio more than one standard deviation greater than or 
smaller than the wild type population mean and significantly different from the wild 
type population mean with a p value 0.0002, and two further strains with a mean 
N/C ratio within one standard deviation of the wild type mean but significantly 
different from the wild type population mean with a p value <0.0001, were identified 
as candidates with aberrant N/C ratios indicative of nuclear size control defects 
(Figure 4.4A). 17 of the candidates identified displayed an N/C ratio higher than 
that of wild type cells. Additionally, my essential genes screen identified 8 mutants 
with N/C ratios lower than that of wild type. Cell length, cell width, cell volume and 
nucleus volume measurements for all 25 candidates, and for the wild type control, 
are shown in Table 4.1. Representative images of the most extreme high and low 
N/C ratio candidates and wild type cells are shown in Figure 4.4B and of all 
candidates in Appendix III. The most extreme low N/C ratio phenotype observed, 
which was 42% smaller than the wild type value, was in cells carrying a deletion in 
the pcm1 gene that encodes the P-TEFb-cap methyltransferase Pcm1. An N/C 
ratio 62% greater than the wild type value was observed in cells in which the gene 
that encodes the nucleoporin Nup107 was deleted. 
It is of note that the wild type control strain in which the Ish1-yEGFP construct is 
integrated into the deletion cassette deleting the 5300 pseudogene displayed an 
N/C ratio of 0.05 in my screen, with other strains distributed around this value 
(Figure 4.4). When Ish1-yEGFP was used to mark the nuclear envelope of haploid 
cells an N/C ratio of 0.08 was observed (Figure 4.3). Therefore, the screening 
process led to either a reduction of or underestimation of N/C ratio. As the native 
ish1 locus is undisrupted in these strains, it is possible that the introduction of an 
additional copy of ish1 is sufficient to cause N/C ratio reduction. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.4 25 gene deletion mutants with aberrant N/C ratios identified by genetic 
screen 
(A) N/C ratio of wild type cells (red) and 60 gene deletion mutants in third screen 
with nuclear envelope marker Ish1-yEGFP integrated in deletion cassette. Mean 
plotted for each strain (n = 50 cells per strain). Error bars represent one standard 
deviation above and below the mean. Dashed line represents wild type cell 
population mean. Dotted lines represent one standard deviation above and below 
the wild type (WT) mean. Wild type strain used is the 5300 control strain (red). 
Aberrant N/C ratio candidates (grey background). 
(B) Representative images of wild type (5300 control) (WT) cells and strains 
carrying deletions in pcm1 and nup107. Brightfield (magenta), Ish1-yEGFP 
(yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Table 4.1 N/C ratio mutants identified by genetic screen 
Cell length, cell width, cell volume, nucleus volume and N/C ratio measurements 
for the 25 N/C ratio mutant candidates identified in screen and the wild type control 
strain (WT). Mean  standard deviation. n = 50 cells per strain. 
Gene deleted Cell length 
Cell width 
Cell volume 
(m3)
Nucleus 
volume 
(m3)
N/C ratio
pcm1 16.0  4.9 4.9  0.5 275.3  100.8 7.6  2.5 0.029  0.009
SPAC1B3.09c 9.9  1.9 5.4  0.6 192.2  72.1 6.2  2.3 0.035  0.013
slp1 10.9  2.0 5.1  0.6 192.3  69.8 7.0  2.8 0.037  0.008
sad1 9.9  2.2 4.5  0.5 139.9  49.8 5.4  2.0 0.040  0.010
rps1601 9.9  1.8 4.8  0.5 151.7  47.3 6.0  2.5 0.040  0.009
nop9 10.5  2.2 4.6  0.5 152.4  52.0 6.0  2.0 0.040  0.010
rpl8 9.7  1.7 4.6  0.4 136.4  32.9 5.5  1.5 0.041  0.009
dfg10 8.2  1.6 4.8  0.5 120.6  47.9 4.7  1.3 0.041  0.010
nop10 7.1  2.0 3.0  0.8 49.1  36.0 3.0  2.3 0.060  0.015
rrp6 8.9  2.1 4.2  0.5 107.3  37.6 6.4  2.9 0.061  0.021
smg1 12.7  3.3 5.0  0.5 213.7  59.7 12.9  5.0 0.061  0.018
uaf2 10.8  2.2 5.0  0.4 181.2  60.7 11.0  3.5 0.062  0.012
msl1 13.3  4.0 4.9  0.6 224.4  88.6 13.6  5.4 0.062  0.016
cft2 7.9  2.1 4.4  0.4 98.0  35.0 6.0  2.6 0.062  0.018
prp38 9.4  2.0 3.8  0.5 91.7  30.6 5.7  2.4 0.063  0.017
dfr1 6.8  2.7 3.3  0.9 61.8  57.9 3.9  4.1 0.063  0.013
tfb4 8.5  2.9 3.1  0.8 69.6  56.4 4.3  3.7 0.063  0.015
sfb3 8.6  1.9 4.3  0.5 106.2  37.0 6.5  1.9 0.064  0.015
fta2 6.3  2.5 3.1  0.9 53.2  59.9 3.0  2.8 0.065  0.024
asa1 5.7  1.8 3.3  1.0 50.2  46.4 2.9  2.2 0.066  0.022
prp4 7.3  2.4 3.4  1.0 68.4  65.9 4.4  4.0 0.067  0.014
kms2 9.8  2.9 4.4  0.5 125.9  53.2 8.6  3.5 0.071  0.020
smn1 13.5  3.9 4.8  0.6 212.2  76.2 14.8  6.3 0.071  0.019
rib5 5.9  1.9 2.9  0.9 40.2  34.8 3.1  2.7 0.077  0.017
nup107 9.5  2.4 4.8  0.7 150.8  73.8 11.1  4.6 0.081  0.032
WT 8.3  1.4 4.2  0.3 98.6  26.1 4.8  1.3 0.050  0.009
Chapter 4 Results 
4.4 Mutants with aberrant nuclear shape 
My essential genes screen not only identified nuclear size mutants, but also 
identified deletion mutants displaying nuclear shape defects. In the three stage 
screening process, mutants were progressed to the next stage on basis of their 
potential nuclear size defects and therefore these results are not representative of 
an exhaustive screen for nuclear shape defect mutants; despite this, the mutants I 
identified with nuclear shape defects provide insight into determinants of nuclear 
shape. Nuclear shape defects observed included membrane blebbing, indicative of 
overproliferation of the nuclear envelope, and local invaginations and protrusions, 
suggestive of defective attachments between the nuclear envelope and the 
cytoskeleton or spindle microtubules. Six mutants with nuclear shape defects were 
identified (Figure 4.5); these were strains with kms2, ndc80, med7, snf21, mis17 or 
spc24 deleted. Kms2 cells exhibit both enlarged nuclear size and nuclear shape 
defects, the other five mutants do not display detectable significantly increased or 
diminished nuclear size.  
The outer nuclear membrane (ONM) KASH domain protein Kms2 is part of the 
SUN-KASH LINC complex which links chromatin to the cytoskeleton. Kms2 has 
been implicated in SPB insertion into the nuclear envelope; my observation of 
nuclear shape defects is consistent with reported observation that knockdown of 
Kms2 leads to mitotic delay in anaphase B and persistent nuclear envelope 
blebbing (Walde and King, 2014).  
Ndc80 and Spc24 are components of the kinetochore Ndc80 complex which has 
been implicated in ensuring spindle microtubule kinetochore attachment (Hsu and 
Toda, 2011) and mitotic chromosome segregation, and is conserved from fission 
yeast to humans (Kniola et al., 2001). Mutation of a third component of this 
complex, Nuf2, was reported to cause nuclear shape defects, both aberrant aspect 
ratios and local invaginations, and this was hypothesised to be due to disruption of 
the SUN-KASH mediated connection between chromatin and the cytoskeleton 
leading to reduced ability of the nucleus to buffer microtubule forces on the nuclear 
envelope (King et al., 2008). Mis17 is a kinetochore protein of the Mis6-Sim4 
complex orthologous to human CENP-U and involved in CENP-A containing 
Chapter 4 Results 
chromatin organisation (Shiroiwa et al., 2011). I observed nuclear tethers indicative 
of defective microtubule-SPB attachment (Castagnetti et al., 2015) in spc24 and 
mis17 cells (Figure 4.5). 
Snf21 is a DNA helicase of the RSC complex implicated in chromatin remodelling 
and regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoters; a conditional 
mutant of snf21 displays chromosome segregation defects and it has been 
Figure 4.5 Nuclear shape mutants identified by screen 
Representative images of strains carrying deletions in the genes indicated 
identified as having nuclear shape defects during screen. Nuclear tethers in spc24 
and mis17 cells labelled by white triangles. Brightfield (magenta), Ish1-yEGFP 
(yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 4 Results 
hypothesised to play a role in centromeric chromatin (Yamada et al., 2008). Med7 
is a component of the mediator complex involved in regulation of transcription from 
RNA polymerase II transcribed genes that has been suggested to be involved in 
growth control in Candida albicans (Tebbji et al., 2014). 
4.5 Mutants displaying asymmetric nuclear division 
My screen for nuclear size mutants also identified two mutants exhibiting 
asymmetric nuclear division (Figure 4.6). These were kms2 and nup107; both 
were identified in my screen as enlarged nuclear size mutants with N/C ratios 42% 
and 62% larger than the wild type strain respectively. As no low N/C ratio mutants 
were identified by the non-essential gene screen (Kume et al., 2017) we have 
previously speculated that a low N/C ratio may be sufficiently deleterious to be 
lethal. Therefore, it is possible that these mutants are false positive nuclear size 
mutants displaying enlarged N/C ratios due to aberrant, asymmetric nuclear 
division and subsequent death of the daughter with a low N/C ratio rather than true 
interphase nuclear size control defects. 
Though asymmetric nuclear division has not been reported in Kms2 mutant cells, 
nuclear shape defects and SPB insertion defects have (Walde and King, 2014); it is 
possible that the asymmetric nuclear division I observe in kms2 cells is an 
extreme effect of these defects. 
Nup107 is a conserved nucleoporin of the outer nuclear pore Nup107-Nup120 
complex. The Nup107-Nup120 complex has been implicated in nuclear poly(A)+ 
RNA export and also reported to be required for nuclear accumulation of Ran (Bai 
et al., 2004). When the Ran system is perturbed asymmetric nuclear division is 
observed (Gonzalez et al., 2009), therefore it is possible a defective Ran system in 
nup107 cells is responsible for the asymmetric nuclear division I observe. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.6 Asymmetric nuclear division observed in screen candidates 
Images of asymmetric nuclear division in strains with genes indicated deleted. 
Brightfield (magenta), Ish1-yEGFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
4.6 Nuclear size mutants identified are enriched for RNA 
processing factors and nucleus-localised proteins 
In order to assess whether specific categories of genes are enriched in the genes 
deleted in nuclear size mutants identified in S. pombe, gene ontology (GO) 
enrichment analysis was carried out on the list of genes deleted in nuclear size 
mutants identified by my essential genes screen (Table 4.1) and also by a non-
essential genes screen (Kume et al., 2017) (Table 4.2). Relative to the background 
of all genes screened, the 33 genes deleted in nuclear size mutants are enriched 
for genes with products annotated in the GO biological process (GOBP) categories 
mRNA metabolic process, mRNA processing, RNA processing and gene 
expression. The greatest GOBP annotation fold enrichment (8.64-fold) was 
observed for mRNA processing genes. Additionally, the GO cellular component 
(GOCC) categories LINC complex, Nem1-Spo7 phosphatase complex, intracellular 
ribonucleoprotein complex, ribonucleoprotein complex, nuclear part, 
macromolecular complex and protein complex categories were enriched in nuclear 
size mutants. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.7 Network analysis highlights interactions between genes 
with nuclear size mutant deletion phenotypes 
To gain insight into potential roles of the candidates identified by screening in 
nuclear size control, I assessed their interactions. Previously reported interactions 
between genes with nuclear size mutant phenotypes identified by my essential 
genes screen (Figure 4.4) and a non-essential gene screen (Kume et al., 2017) 
were identified by network analysis (Bean et al., 2014) (Figure 4.7). Two 
components of the Dss1-Mlo3 mRNA export complex and two components of the 
Nem1-Spo7 phosphatase, involved in lipid biogenesis, were identified by the non-
essential gene screen; the roles of these complexes in nuclear size control were 
previously investigated (Kume et al., 2017). Another reported interactor of Nem1, 
protein kinase Prp4, which is reported to negatively genetically interact with Nem1, 
and Nup107, a nucleoporin reported to physically interact with Dss1, were both 
identified as nuclear size mutants by my essential genes screen.  
Interestingly, two components of the LINC complex, Kms2 and Sad1, were 
identified by my essential genes screen. Additionally, both Tfb4, of the TFIIH 
complex, and Pcm1, of the P-TEFb-cap methyltransferase complex, were 
identified; these proteins both have roles in transcription, interacting as part of the 
DNA-directed RNA polymerase II holoenzyme. Nuclear proteasome tether Cut8 
and anaphase promoting complex (APC) coactivator Slp1 were both identified as 
having deletion mutants with aberrant nuclear size and interact genetically, 
displaying synthetic lethality (Tatebe and Yanagida, 2000). Four spliceosomal 
proteins Smn1, Uaf2, Smg1, Prp38 and Msl1 were identified as nuclear size 
mutants by my essential genes screen; each is reported to physically interact with 
two or three of the others. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.7 Network analysis displays reported interactions between nuclear size 
mutant genes 
(A) Network analysis carried out using esyN software (Bean et al., 2014) with 
PomBase curated interactions (Wood et al., 2012).  
(B) Network analysis carried out using esyN software (Bean et al., 2014) with 
BioGRID curated interactions (Chatr-Aryamontri et al., 2017). 
Purple edge: intracomplex physical interaction. Orange edge: physical interaction. 
Green edge: genetic interaction. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.8 Analysis of cellular volumes of strains screened 
N/C ratio is influenced by nuclear volume and cellular volume. To confirm the 
mutants I identified were not cells with wild type sized nuclei in aberrantly sized 
cells, perhaps caused by vacuolar expansion, but instead were strains with nuclear 
size control defects, I assessed the relationships between cellular volume and 
nuclear volume and N/C ratio in my screen candidates (Figure 4.8A and B). A wide 
range of mean nuclear volumes was observed in the strains I imaged and 
measured, ranging from 2.22 m3 to 14.85 m3. The mean nuclear volume for the 
wild type strain was 4.83 m3. Cellular volume ranged from 40.22 m3 to 275.31 
m3 and was 98.59 m3 in the wild type strain. Though all 8 low N/C ratio mutants 
displayed cellular volumes higher than that of the wild type strain, ranging from 
120.59 m3 to 275.31 m3, the 17 high N/C ratio mutants displayed cellular 
volumes greater and smaller than that of wild type, ranging from 40.22 m3 to 
224.36 m3. For the N/C ratio mutants, I then analysed the cellular volume and N/C 
ratio measurements for individual cells within the populations. For all except two of 
the high N/C ratio and low N/C ratio strains I analysed there is a mild negative 
correlation between cellular volume and N/C ratio, as there is in wild type cells, 
however the gradient of the regression line of this does not correlate with mean 
N/C ratio of the population (Figure 4.8C). Therefore, the N/C ratio mutants I 
identified do not generate aberrantly sized cells with wild type sized nuclei, but 
instead a range of nuclear volumes is observed. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.8 Relationships between cellular volume and nuclear volume and N/C 
ratio 
(A) Mean nuclear volume plotted against mean cellular volume for each of the 60 
strains imaged with an integrated nuclear envelope marker and wild type cells (n = 
50 cells per strain). High (green) and low (blue) N/C ratio mutants and wild type 
control strain (red) coloured. 
(B) Mean N/C ratio plotted against mean cellular volume for each of the 60 strains 
imaged with nuclear envelope marker and wild type cells (n = 50 cells per strain). 
High (green) and low (blue) N/C ratio mutants and wild type control strain (red) 
coloured. 
(C) Gradient of the regression line between cellular volume and N/C ratio within 
population of 50 cells for each of 17 high N/C ratio (green), low N/C ratio (blue) and 
wild type control strain (red) cells plotted against mean N/C ratio of each strain. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.9 Conditional mutant analysis 
As the aberrant nuclear size mutants I identified in my screen carry deletions in 
essential genes, a conditional system was required to further assess the nuclear 
size and related phenotypes of cells carrying deletions or mutations of these genes. 
I initially sought to characterise nuclear size phenotypes of previously reported 
conditional alleles of the candidate genes. Reported conditional alleles were 
identified for 2 of the 8 low N/C ratio candidate genes identified, slp1 and sad1, and 
5 of the 17 high N/C ratio candidates, smn1, kms2, prp4, fta2 and uaf2. Nuclear 
envelope morphology was previously described for the kms2 conditional allele 
Kms2 DAmP; nuclear envelope deformation was reported in a fifth of Kms2 DAmP 
mitoses and hypothesised to be due to disorganised microtubule polymerisation 
(Walde and King, 2014). To assess the nuclear size and nuclear envelope 
morphology phenotypes of the other conditional mutants, the nuclear envelope 
marker Cut11-GFP was introduced and imaging carried out. 
4.9.1 Nuclear separation defects observed in prp4ts and uaf2ts cells 
Both prp4 and uaf2 cells exhibited enlarged N/C ratios; the products of both of 
these genes have been implicated in splicing. The temperature sensitive mutant 
prp4-73 (Rosenberg et al., 1991) was reported to accumulate pre-mRNA and 
undergo cell cycle arrest following shift to the restrictive temperature (Schmidt et al., 
1999). The uaf2 mutant ods2-1 was reported to display splicing defects and exon 
skipping following shift to the restrictive temperature (Haraguchi et al., 2007). In 
ods2-1 cells, after shift to the restrictive temperature an increased percentage of 
binucleate cells was observed (Figure 4.9), similar to the observed increase in cdc11-
119 cells following a short shift to the restrictive temperature indicative of possible 
septation initiation network (SIN) defects (Figure 2.2). In these binucleates, nuclei 
were often close together, suggestive of a possible defect in separation of nuclei; 
though a reduction in binucleation was observed on shift of prp4-73 cells to the 
restrictive temperature, suggestive of cell cycle arrest, in binucleates similar possible 
nuclear separation defects were observed (Figure 4.9). 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.9 Temperature sensitive mutants of uaf2 and prp4 show nuclear 
separation defects and altered binucleate frequency 
(A) Representative images of wild type (WT) and temperature sensitive mutant 
cells of uaf2 (ods2-1) and prp4 (prp4-73) at 25C and after 3.5 h (WT and prp4-73) 
or 2.5 h (ods2-1) at 36C. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 
10 m. 
(B) % of mononucleate (1), binucleate (2), trinucleate (3) and tetranucleate (4) cells 
in populations of each condition shown in (A). WT: n = 392 cells (25C), n = 327 
cells (36C). ods2-1: n = 644 cells (25C), n = 447 cells (36C). prp4-73: n = 222 
cells (25C), n = 339 cells (36C). 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.9.2 Asymmetric nuclear division observed in smn1td and fta2ts cells 
Two more high N/C ratio mutants identified were smn1 and fta2. In a 
temperature sensitive mutant of the gene encoding kinetochore protein Fta2, fta2-
291 (Kerres et al., 2006), I observed asymmetric nuclear division at the restrictive 
temperature and not at the permissive temperature (Figure 4.10A), consistent with 
reported mitotic defects and unequal chromosome segregation. A temperature-
degron allele of smn1, which encodes a spliceosomal component and displays 
splicing defects, smn1td (Campion et al., 2010), displayed both asymmetric nuclear 
division and nuclear shape defects at the restrictive, but not at the permissive, 
temperature (Figure 4.10B).  
Figure 4.10 Conditional mutants of fta2 and smn1 exhibit asymmetric nuclear 
division at the restrictive temperature 
(A) Representative images of fta2 mutant fta2-291 at permissive (25C) and 
restrictive (36C, 4.5 h) temperatures.  
(B) Representative images of smn1 temperature degron mutant smntd at 
permissive (25C) and restrictive (37C, 5 h) temperatures. 
Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. White triangles 
indicate asymmetric nuclear divisions. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.9.3 Mitotic defects observed in slp1ts cells 
One of the low N/C ratio candidates from my screen was slp1, in which the gene 
encoding CDC20 orthologue Slp1 is deleted. A temperature sensitive allele of this 
gene, slp1-362, shows mitotic defects with a metaphase-to-anaphase delay 
(Matsumoto, 1997). By introduction of the nuclear envelope marker Cut11-GFP, I 
observed cut cell phenotypes and mitotic defects leading to a range of nuclear 
sizes in slp1-362 cells at the restrictive temperature (Figure 4.11). 
Figure 4.11 Conditional mutant slp1-362 cells display mitotic defects at the 
restrictive temperature 
Representative images of wild type (WT) and slp1 conditional mutant slp1-362 at 
permissive (25C) and restrictive (36C, 2 h) temperatures. Brightfield (magenta), 
Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
4.9.4 Low interphase N/C ratio phenotype observed in sad1 mutant cells 
A further low N/C ratio mutant I identified was sad1. The sad1 gene encodes an 
inner nuclear membrane protein which binds to Kms2 in the LINC complex. A 
temperature sensitive mutant of sad1, sad1.1 (Hagan and Yanagida, 1990), has 
Chapter 4 Results 
been reported to display spindle formation and function defects (Hagan and 
Yanagida, 1995). Unlike wild type cells, sad1.1 mutant cells displayed an N/C ratio 
in interphase cells significantly lower at the restrictive temperature, 36C, than at 
25C (Figure 4.12). At 36C, cells with enlarged abnormally shaped nuclei with 
multiple Cut11 foci indicative of aberrant mitoses were also observed (Figure 4.12). 
It was possible that the observed low interphase N/C ratio was caused by either a 
defective interphase nuclear size control or was due to a previous aberrant mitosis. 
I assessed the growth, N/C ratio and nuclear morphology phenotypes of sad1.1 
cells grown at semipermissive temperatures to determine whether the low N/C ratio 
phenotype could be separated from the aberrant mitotic phenotype (Figure 4.13). 
Cell growth was observed to be the same for sad1.1 and wild type cells 25C, 28C 
and 30C. At 34C and 36C, sad1.1 cell growth was much reduced relative to wild 
type and at 32C intermediate growth between this level and the lower temperature 
phenotype was observed in sad1.1 cells (Figure 4.13A). N/C ratio was assessed  
Figure 4.12 Low N/C ratio phenotype observed in interphase sad1.1 cells 
(A) N/C ratio of interphase wild type (WT) and sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then 
maintained at 25C or shifted to 36C for 2 h. n  100 cells per condition. Box 
delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th 
and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. Unpaired 
student t-tests carried out to determine significance. 
(B) Representative images of wild type (WT) and sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then 
maintained at 25C or shifted to 36C for 2 h. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP 
(yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. White triangles indicate cells undergoing an aberrant 
mitosis. 
Chapter 4 Results 
following incubation for two and five hours (Figure 4.13B). N/C ratio was 
significantly reduced from the permissive temperature (25C) value when cells were 
grown at 32C, 34C or 36C for two hours; at this timepoint, aberrant mitotic 
divisions were observed in cells grown at 34C and 36C but not in those grown at 
32C (Figure 4.13C). However, when incubation time was increased to five hours at 
32C aberrant mitotic divisions were observed (Figure 4.13C) illustrating that 
phenotypic separation had not been achieved. 
To determine whether the low N/C ratio phenotype was due to defective interphase 
nuclear size control or was due to a previous aberrant mitotic division, I cell cycle 
arrested cells and assessed their N/C ratio; if cells are not defective in interphase 
nuclear size control then their N/C ratio should recover to a wild type value when 
interphase is extended. Indeed, cell cycle arrest of sad1.1 cells by treatment with 
hydroxyurea (HU) suppressed the low N/C ratio phenotype observed in interphase 
sad1.1 cells following shift to the restrictive temperature (Figure 4.14). A significant 
difference was observed between the N/C ratio of untreated wild type and sad1.1 
cells after 2 hours growth at 36C (p<0.0001), but when treated with 11 mM HU no 
significant difference was observed after 2 hours or 6 hours growth at 36C. 
Therefore, interphase extension is sufficient to suppress the aberrant N/C ratio 
phenotype of sad1.1 cells and so the low N/C ratio phenotype I observe is a result 
of aberrant mitoses rather than an interphase nuclear size control defect. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.13 Phenotypes of sad1.1 mutant at semipermissive temperatures 
(A) Serial dilution growth assay to assess growth of sad1.1 cells relative to wild 
type (WT) on YE4S and YE4S + Phloxin B agar plates incubated at 25C, 28C, 
30C, 32C, 34C or 36C for 3 days. 10 fold serial dilutions from 2 x107 cells/ml 
plated. 
(B) N/C ratio of sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then shifted to 25C, 28C, 30C, 32C, 
34C or 36C for 2 h or 5 h. n  50 cells per condition. Box delimited by 25th 
percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th and 90th 
percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. Dashed line represents 
mean N/C ratio of cells grown at 25C for 2 h. Unpaired student t-tests carried out 
to determine significance (significance threshold: p=0.05). 
(C) Representative images of sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then shifted to 25C, 
28C, 30C, 32C, 34C or 36C for 2 h or 5 h. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP 
(yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.14 Extension of interphase suppresses low N/C ratio phenotype of 
sad1.1 cells 
(A) Representative images of sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then shifted to 36C for 2 
or 6 h treated with 11 mM hydroxyurea (HU) or untreated. HU was added at time of 
temperature shift. Brightfield (magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
(B) N/C ratio of sad1.1 cells grown at 25C then shifted to 36C for 2 or 6 h (as 
indicated) treated with 11 mM hydroxyurea and untreated. HU was added at time of 
temperature shift. n  50 cells per condition. Box delimited by 25th percentile, 
median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th and 90th percentiles. Data 
points outside this range marked as dots. Unpaired student t-tests carried out to 
determine significance. WT and sad1.1 populations were not significantly different 
in cells treated with HU. Untreated cells 6 h after temperature shift not shown as 
mitotic defects were widespread complicating N/C ratio measurement. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.10  Mutation of another component of the P-TEFb complex 
that contains Pcm1 leads to nuclear size defects 
The most extreme low N/C ratio mutant identified by my essential genes screen 
was a mutant with a deletion of the gene encoding Pcm1, displaying an N/C ratio 
only 58% of the wild type value. No conditional mutants of Pcm1 are reported. The 
methyltransferase Pcm1 forms the P-TEFb methyltransferase complex, with cyclin 
dependent kinase (CDK) Cdk9 and cyclin Pch1, required for 7-methylguanosine 
capping of mRNA (Saha et al., 1999). A C-terminal truncation of Cdk9 (Cdk9C) 
retains kinase activity but loses the ability to bind to Pcm1; lack of this interaction 
reduces recruitment of both Cdk9 and Pcm1 to chromatin (St Amour et al., 2012); I 
hypothesised that if Pcm1s role in the P-TEFb methyltransferase complex is 
required for appropriate nuclear size control, then Cdk9C cells should, like pcm1 
cells, display aberrant nuclear size. I observed an N/C ratio significantly lower than 
that of wild type cells in Cdk9C cells (Figure 4.15). A Cdk9 T loop mutant, 
Cdk9T212A, in which Cdk9 activation by CDK-activating kinase (CAK) is perturbed 
(St Amour et al., 2012) also displayed an N/C ratio significantly lower than that of 
wild type cells (Figure 4.15) suggesting that the recruitment of Cdk9 to chromatin 
by Pcm1, and Cdk9 activity more generally, may be important for appropriate 
nuclear size control. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Figure 4.15 Cdk9 mutants display low N/C ratio phenotypes 
(A) N/C ratio of wild type (WT) and Cdk9 C terminal truncation (Cdk9C) and T-
loop (Cdk9T212A) mutant cells grown at 25C. n  100 cells per condition. Box 
delimited by 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile. Whiskers represent 10th 
and 90th percentiles. Data points outside this range marked as dots. Unpaired 
student t-tests with Welchs correction carried out to determine significance.  
(B) Representative images of wild type (WT) and Cdk9 C terminal truncation 
(Cdk9C) and T-loop (Cdk9T212A) mutants cells grown at 25C. Brightfield 
(magenta), Cut11-GFP (yellow). Scale bar: 10 m. 
Chapter 4 Results 
4.11  Discussion 
In this chapter I describe a systematic genetic screen of S. pombe essential genes 
for those with deletion mutants that display interphase nuclear size defects and so 
encode factors that may have roles in nuclear size control. This screen identified 25 
potential nuclear size mutants, including 8 with low N/C ratios. This is the first 
report of mutants displaying low interphase N/C ratios. A previously reported 
genetic screen of S. pombe non-essential genes identified 8 deletion mutants with 
aberrant N/C ratios, all of these displayed enlarged N/C ratios (Kume et al., 2017) 
suggesting that a low N/C ratio phenotype may be disadvantageous or even lethal. 
The essential genes screen described here identified not only low N/C ratio 
phenotype mutants but also mutants with more extreme high N/C ratio phenotypes; 
the highest N/C ratio observed in the non-essential gene deletion mutant was 48% 
higher than the wild type value (Kume et al., 2017) but in the essential gene 
deletion mutants I observed somewhat more extreme N/C ratio phenotypes, 54% 
and 58% higher than the wild type value. My essential genes screen has identified 
novel candidates with roles in nuclear size control including those that display 
diminished and extreme N/C ratio deletion phenotypes. 
I carried out GO enrichment and network analysis on the nuclear size mutants 
identified by both my essential genes screen and the previously reported non-
essential genes screen (Kume et al., 2017). Nuclear size mutants were enriched for 
genes encoding products with roles in RNA processing, and gene expression more 
generally. As processing of mRNAs into mRNPs is required for their nuclear export 
(Okamura et al., 2015), it is possible that mutants defective in RNA processing 
could accumulate defective RNA in the nucleus in a similar manner to the mRNA 
export defective mutant rae1-167 that displays an enlarged N/C ratio (Chapter 3). 
Additionally, nuclear size mutant gene products were enriched for proteins 
localised to the nucleus and ribonucleoprotein complexes. Nuclear-localised 
proteins were also enriched in the proteins accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei at the 
restrictive temperature (Chapter 3). The largest group of interactors identified by 
network analysis was a group of spliceosomal proteins suggesting that this 
ribonucleoprotein complex, or the appropriate regulation of its synthesis or 
nucleocytoplasmic transport, may be important for accurate nuclear size control.  
Chapter 4 Results 
Both GO enrichment and network analysis implicated the LINC complex and 
Nem1-Spo7 phosphatase complex in nuclear size control. The role of the Nem1-
Spo7 complex in the regulation of lipid synthesis for nuclear size control was 
previously discussed (Kume et al., 2017) but the potential role of the LINC 
complex, a direct link between the chromatin in the nucleoplasm and cytoplasmic 
cytoskeleton, in nuclear size control in S. pombe was not; both Kms2 and Sad1 
were identified as nuclear size mutants in my essential genes screen. However, the 
nuclear size defects displayed by a Sad1 temperature sensitive mutant were 
observed to be due to aberrant mitotic divisions rather than a defect in interphase 
nuclear size control, and nuclear protrusions indicative of aberrant mitosis were 
reported in cells in which Sad1 is mildly overexpressed (Hagan and Yanagida, 
1995), so further study will be required to assess whether this is the case for the 
sad1 mutant and also for the kms2 mutant which did display nuclear shape 
defects that can be indicative of aberrant mitotic division. 
One of the large N/C ratio mutants identified was prp4. Network analysis 
highlighted the negative genetic interaction between the kinase Prp4 and Nem1, 
suggesting that Prp4 may influence nuclear size via Nem1 and perturbation of lipid 
biosynthesis regulation. However, it is of note that Prp4 also regulates splicing and 
the temperature sensitive mutant prp4-73 displays splicing defects and nuclear 
poly(A)+RNA accumulation at the restrictive temperature (Schmidt et al., 1999); in 
light of the large number of splicing factors among the identified nuclear size 
mutants and the enlarged N/C ratio of rae1-167 cells which exhibit nuclear 
poly(A)+RNA accumulation (Chapter 3) it is possible that the nuclear size 
phenotype of prp4 cells results from these splicing defects. 
The strain identified with the lowest N/C ratio was pcm1. Pcm1 forms part of the 
P-TEFb-methyltransferase complex, another example of a ribonucleoprotein, which 
is required for 5 capping of mRNA. Mutants of Cdk9, another component of this 
complex also displayed a low N/C ratio suggesting that it is Pcm1s role in this 
complex that influences nuclear size. Further analysis is required to understand 
why some mRNA processing defective mutants lead to enlarged, and others 
diminished, N/C ratios. 
Chapter 4 Results 
Though not the main focus of my study, the screening process also identified 
deletion mutants with previously unreported nuclear shape defects and asymmetric 
nuclear division phenotypes. Six mutants with nuclear shape defects were 
identified; interestingly, among these were three kinetochore proteins, Ndc80, 
Spc24 and Mis17, and the LINC complex protein Kms2, giving credence to a 
proposed model where chromatin is connected to the NE via LINC complexes and 
buffers inward forces from microtubules on the nuclear envelope (King et al., 2008). 
Two mutants were observed to display asymmetric nuclear division, kms2, in 
which mitotic defects were previously described (King et al., 2008), and a strain 
carrying a deletion of the gene encoding the nucleoporin Nup107. Mitotic defects 
have previously been reported in mutants of other components of the Nup107-120 
complex, as have defects in Ran nuclear transport (Bai et al., 2004); either of these 
perturbations could lead to asymmetric nuclear division. 
This unbiased genetic screen has identified roles for many essential gene products 
in nuclear size control, shape determination and nuclear division, a useful resource 
for future research. It identified mutants with previously elusive low and extreme 
N/C ratio phenotypes. However, as the genes deleted are essential, stable 
conditional systems in which to study removal of function of these genes is 
required. Use of previously reported conditional mutants has given insight into the 
phenotypes of some mutants however, as these mutants were not developed 
selecting for the nuclear size phenotype I cannot assume that the nuclear size 
phenotype of these mutants is analogous to that of their respective deletion 
mutants. Therefore, further work to develop suitable conditional systems to study 
each of the 25 proteins of interest is required. Enrichment and network analysis has 
given insight into the biological processes important for accurate nuclear size 
control. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
The work described in this thesis exploits the simple geometry, closed mitosis and 
genetic tractability of S. pombe cells to probe mechanisms of nuclear size control 
and scaling. This work has demonstrated that a constant nuclear volume (Vnuc) to 
cell volume (Vcell) ratio (N/C ratio) is maintained through interphase and in 
multinucleate cells, and that N/C ratio homeostasis is observed in populations of 
S. pombe cells, with aberrant N/C ratios of individual cells correcting towards a wild 
type value of 0.08. The homeostasis observed was more rapid than would be 
expected if nuclear and cellular growth rates were always directly coupled, and 
study of the kinetics led to proposition of possible mathematical models by which 
N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved. To identify molecular candidates and 
biological pathways that could have roles in these mechanisms, a genetic screen 
for mutants with aberrant nuclear size, and biochemical analysis of a known 
nuclear size mutant, was carried out. These analyses implicated in N/C ratio control 
proteins localised to the nucleolus and LINC complexes, and those with roles in 
ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing. This discussion aims to contextualise 
the physiological, biochemical and genetic data presented here and propose ways 
in which they could be integrated in N/C ratio control. 
5.1 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed in S. pombe cells 
5.1.1 Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained 
Organelle size control ensures the scaling of organelle function with cell size as 
cells grow. Consequently, different organelles will scale with cell size in different 
ways depending on the parameters that affect their function. Determining the 
scaling parameters is an essential prerequisite to understanding the possible 
mechanisms by which scaling of a particular organelle could be achieved. The data 
presented here demonstrates that Vnuc/Vcell ratio is maintained through interphase 
and in multinucleate cells, a system where nuclear volume and surface area are 
more dissimilar than in mononucleates. For nuclear volume to scale with cell 
volume, a mechanism regulating both expansion of the nuclear envelope and 
nucleocytoplasmic transport is likely. Interestingly, Vnuc/Vcell ratio value appears to 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
be conserved in related species, suggesting it could have functional significance; a 
wild type value of 0.080 is observed in S. pombe and 0.079 in the related fission 
yeast S. japonicus. A similar wild type N/C ratio of 0.070 was previously reported in 
S. cerevisiae (Jorgensen et al., 2007). 
5.1.2 N/C ratio homeostasis is observed 
To achieve population level N/C ratio homeostasis, maintaining scaling, cells born 
with aberrant N/C ratios must either never arise in a population, be removed from 
the population by lethality or have the ability to correct their N/C ratio during 
subsequent cell cycles. Prior to the work presented in this thesis, evidence for N/C 
ratio correction was limited to one study of cdc11-119 klp2 S. pombe cells in 
which N/C ratio correction was observed in three haploid cells with low N/C ratio 
and three diploid cells with high N/C ratio (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
To assess whether the N/C ratios of individual cells in a population born with 
aberrant N/C ratios are able to correct, N/C ratio was monitored over time in a 
population of pom1 cells. Symmetric nuclear division of pom1 cells is followed by 
asymmetric cell division, generating a population of cells with a wide range of N/C 
ratios at birth. Aberrant N/C ratio was not immediately lethal; instead, both high and 
low N/C ratios were observed to correct towards the population mean within one 
cell cycle. This phenomenon of N/C ratio correction in individual cells to generate 
population level N/C ratio homeostasis was also observed in wild type cells born 
with aberrant N/C ratios due to asymmetric nuclear divisions, suggesting that ability 
to correct aberrant N/C ratios is likely to be a general physiological property of S. 
pombe cells. To gain understanding of the molecular mechanisms and biological 
processes likely to achieve this homeostasis, the kinetics of N/C ratio recovery 
were assessed, and genetic and biochemical analyses were carried out. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
5.2 Identifying biological processes important for N/C ratio 
control 
Two approaches were used to identify molecules and biological processes that 
may play a role in the size control mechanisms that ensure N/C ratio homeostasis. 
A genetic screen for fission yeast mutants displaying aberrant N/C ratios was 
carried out, and biochemical analysis of a mutant displaying a high N/C ratio was 
performed. 
A previous screen of S. pombe non-essential gene deletion mutants for those 
exhibiting aberrant N/C ratios was carried out by Kazunori Kume and identified 
nucleocytoplasmic transport and membrane synthesis as biological processes 
important for nuclear size control (Kume et al., 2017). No mutants with low N/C 
ratios were identified, suggesting this phenotype may be sufficiently detrimental to 
be lethal and some key regulators of nuclear size control may be encoded by 
essential genes. A screen of S. pombe essential gene deletion mutants was, 
therefore, carried out for those exhibiting aberrant N/C ratios. Bioinformatic analysis 
was carried out on the candidates identified by both screens to identify enriched 
biological process, molecular function and cellular localisation categories. 
The mutant rae1-167 displays an enlarged N/C ratio and nuclear protein 
accumulation at the restrictive temperature. SILAC analysis was carried out to 
identify proteins accumulating in rae1-167 nuclei following temperature shift. To 
identify potentially key regulators, this list was compared to that of proteins 
previously reported to move into the nucleus following treatment of wild type cells 
with LMB (Matsuyama et al., 2006), another situation in which an enlarged N/C 
ratio is observed. 
Both the candidates identified by genetic screening and proteins accumulated in 
rae1-167 nuclei at the restrictive temperature were enriched for proteins reported to 
localise to the nucleus and subnuclear structures, especially the nucleolus; proteins 
with reported roles in RNA processing and components of ribonucleoprotein 
complexes were also enriched in both groups (Matsuyama et al., 2006, Wood et 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
al., 2012). These two approaches have identified classes of proteins, and biological 
processes, likely to be important for N/C ratio control, these are discussed below. 
5.2.1 Nucleocytoplasmic transport 
Nucleocytoplasmic transport was known to influence nuclear size. Perturbation of 
nucleocytoplasmic transport by treatment with LMB, which inhibits the exportin 
CRM1 (Kudo et al., 1999), was reported to increase nuclear size in S. pombe 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007) and mammalian cells (Ganguly et al., 2016). The data 
presented here suggests that bulk nucleocytoplasmic transport may affect N/C 
ratio. Nuclear protein accumulation was observed in rae1-167 mutant cells 
concomitantly with an increase in N/C ratio; both phenotypes were suppressed by 
inhibition of transcription or protein synthesis. More than 500 different proteins 
accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei. The accumulated proteins were enriched for 
proteins reported to localise to the nucleus and subnuclear structures in wild type 
cells (Matsuyama et al., 2006) and not mislocalised cytoplasmic proteins. Though it 
remains possible that one, or a few, of these proteins specifically effects the 
nuclear size increase observed, the accumulation of so many different proteins is 
likely indicative of a bulk accumulation effect resulting from widely disrupted 
nucleocytoplasmic transport. 
Though perturbation of nucleocytoplasmic transport has been observed to 
influence N/C ratio and nuclear size in a range of systems, often a mechanism 
involving nuclear import of specific structural components of the nuclear envelope 
or associated nuclear lamina, rather than bulk transport effects, has been 
proposed. Depletion of nucleoporin Nup188 in Xenopus egg extracts led to nuclear 
size increase due to increased trafficking of integral membrane proteins through 
the nuclear pore (Theerthagiri et al., 2010). Study of nuclear growth in Xenopus 
egg extracts of two differentially sized species, indicated that the transport factors 
Imp2 and Ntf2 determine nuclear scaling in this system by regulating import of 
lamin B3 (Levy and Heald, 2010). The effect mediated by Ntf2 was later shown to 
be dependent on its interaction with Ran (Vukovic et al., 2016b). Additionally, it was 
demonstrated that total lamin concentration, rather than the concentration of a 
specific lamin, influences nuclear size in Xenopus egg extracts and mammalian 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
cells, with increased lamin concentration having different effects at different 
developmental stages, sometimes increasing nuclear size and sometimes 
decreasing it (Jevtic et al., 2015). It is also reported that developmental changes in 
nuclear size may involve nuclear shrinking; lamin B3 phosphorylation by cPKC 
leads to its dissociation from the nuclear envelope and a reduction in nuclear size, 
leading to the proposal that the balance between nuclear expansion and shrinkage 
establishes nuclear size homeostasis (Edens and Levy, 2014, Edens et al., 2017). 
Yeast cells lack lamins yet they display N/C ratio homeostasis, indicating that there 
must be other factors central to nuclear size control that are present in yeast. The 
rate of nucleocytoplasmic transport of structural components of the nucleus may 
limit its growth under specific conditions in vitro and in vivo during development, 
allowing the additional levels of regulation required for an open mitosis and 
metazoan development. These extra controls may mask the bulk transport effects 
that were observed here in growing yeast cells and were dependent on continued 
transcription and translation. Indeed, limiting new membrane synthesis by mutation 
of the acetyl-CoA carboxylase Cut6 is sufficient to suppress the nuclear size 
increase of rae1-167 cells (Kume et al., 2017). 
5.2.2 Transcription and RNA processing 
Proteins with roles in RNA processing were enriched in those accumulated in 
rae1-167 nuclei and genes encoding proteins with functions in gene expression 
and RNA processing were enriched in genes deleted in N/C ratio mutants identified 
by genetic screening. This indicates that transcription and RNA processing are 
likely to play roles in the mechanisms regulating N/C ratio. Perturbed RNA 
processing could lead to nuclear accumulation of defective mRNA transcripts and 
N/C ratio alteration by bulk effects analogous to those observed in rae1-167 mutant 
cells. Alternatively, it is possible that accumulation of the proteins themselves 
influences N/C ratio; proteins with these functions are often found as part of large 
complexes comprised of many protein and RNA components. Perturbing the 
stoichiometry or localisation of a large complex of this kind could influence 
nucleocytoplasmic transport more generally by affecting the distribution of transport 
factors between the nucleus and cytoplasm and thus preventing the 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
nucleocytoplasmic transport of other proteins. A further possibility is that altering 
gene expression or mRNA processing influences expression level of specific RNAs 
and proteins important for N/C ratio control; in mutants with low N/C ratio, perhaps 
the level of expression of genes encoding proteins required for lipid synthesis is 
reduced, limiting nuclear size. It is estimated that in rapidly growing S. cerevisiae 
cells ~50% of mRNA synthesis and 90% of splicing reactions take place to 
synthesise ribosomal proteins (Warner, 1999). Though this proportion is likely to be 
more modest in S. pombe, as a greater fraction of genes contain introns (Bitton et 
al., 2015a, Fair and Pleiss, 2017), it is possible that perturbation of mRNA 
synthesis or mRNA processing directly influences the number of working 
ribosomes produced and so influences cellular growth rate, thereby altering N/C 
ratio. Alternatively, it is possible that global transcription rate scales with nuclear 
volume, this idea is explored further in Section 5.3.2.2.2 below. 
5.2.3 The nucleolus and ribosome biogenesis 
Both proteins accumulated in rae1-167 nuclei and proteins encoded by genes 
deleted in nuclear size mutants were enriched for proteins reported to localise to 
the nucleolus and involved in ribosome biogenesis. It is possible that ribosome 
biogenesis rate or nucleolar size scales with nuclear size. 
Accumulation of proteins with roles in ribosome biogenesis in rae1-167 cells and 
LMB treated wild type cells, which display enlarged N/C ratios, could be indicative 
of upregulation of expression of these proteins as part of a feedback mechanism as 
a result of reduced protein synthesis due to reduced RNA export. Fib1 was one of 
the nucleolar proteins with roles in ribosome biogenesis accumulated in the 
nucleus of rae1-167 cells and LMB treated wild type cells with enlarged N/C ratios. 
Interestingly, the C. elegans orthologue of Fib1 has been implicated as the effector 
of a control network regulating nucleolar size and rRNA production in response to 
cellular metabolic state (Yi et al., 2015). This suggests that N/C ratio could be 
sensitive to changes in nucleolar structure and function or nucleocytoplasmic 
transport of nucleolus-localised proteins. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
5.2.4 LINC complexes 
LINC complexes are conserved protein complexes that bridge the nuclear 
envelope, connecting nuclear chromatin to the cytoskeleton (Rothballer et al., 
2013). In S. pombe, the KASH domain containing integral outer nuclear membrane 
protein Kms2 and the SUN domain containing integral inner nuclear membrane 
protein Sad1 form these bridging complexes (King et al., 2008). Intriguingly, both 
kms2 and sad1 were identified as N/C ratio mutant candidates by genetic 
screening, suggesting that connection of chromatin to the cytoskeleton by LINC 
complexes is important for N/C ratio control. It has been suggested that LINC 
complexes buffer forces on the nuclear envelope preserving nuclear morphology 
(King et al., 2008), it is possible that they also act to constrain nuclear expansion 
preserving nuclear size control. 
This proposal is supported by data from mammalian cells. Mammalian cells contain 
multiple KASH domain containing proteins. Four of them are nesprins containing a 
N-terminal actin binding domain (ABD) separated from a C-terminal 
transmembrane KASH domain by an extended domain of spectrin repeats, and 
these are thought to, through interchain interactions, form a filamentous network on 
the cytoplasmic face of the nuclear envelope (Lu et al., 2012). In HaCaT cells, 
disruption of these interchain interactions by overexpression of the ABD of Nesprin-
2 increased nuclear size and expression of reduced length Nesprin-2 decreased 
nuclear size, demonstrating that the interactions between KASH domain proteins is 
important for nuclear size control in these cells. 
5.2.5 Membrane expansion 
Nuclear growth requires expansion of the nuclear envelope. Dysregulation of 
membrane synthesis by deletion of the gene encoding the catalytic, Nem1, or 
regulatory, Spo7, subunit of the phosphatase complex that regulates the Lipin 
family phosphatidic acid phosphatase, Ned1, led to overexpansion of the nuclear 
envelope and increased nuclear volume, indicating that accurate regulation of 
membrane expansion is important for nuclear size control in S. pombe (Kume et 
al., 2017). Combination of the nem1 membrane synthesis mutant with the rae1-
167 nucleocytoplasmic transport mutant led to a greater N/C ratio than that 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
observed in either single mutant, indicating that these are two distinct biological 
processes with roles in nuclear size control (Kume et al., 2017). 
The outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
and it has been proposed that nuclear envelope expansion is counteracted by 
conversion of ER membrane sheets to tubules by reticulon proteins. 
Overexpression of reticulon Rtn4 in U2OS cells was sufficient to limit nuclear 
expansion but its depletion was not sufficient to accelerate it (Anderson and Hetzer, 
2008). It would be interesting to assess whether depleting reticulons and increasing 
new membrane synthesis concomitantly is sufficient to accelerate nuclear growth. 
5.3 Models of nuclear scaling and N/C ratio homeostasis 
Study of the kinetics of N/C ratio recovery from perturbation led to the proposition 
of models by which N/C ratio homeostasis could occur in growing cells. These are 
discussed below in light of the results of the genetic and biochemical analyses 
carried out. 
5.3.1 Proportional growth rates model 
If nuclear and cellular growth rates were directly coupled, N/C ratio correction 
would be observed in individual cells generating population level homeostasis. It is 
possible to imagine biological mechanisms by which such a direct coupling of 
growth rates could be achieved, perhaps with a limiting component or components 
required for both nuclear growth and cellular growth partitioned with 8% of the 
quantity employed in cellular growth employed in nuclear growth. However, the 
kinetics of N/C ratio correction predicted by direct coupling of growth rates were 
slower than experimentally observed N/C ratio correction rates for cells with both 
low and high N/C ratios. Therefore, I propose that alternative, more rapid, 
mechanisms of N/C ratio correction must be in play in cells, likely involving some 
level of feedback between nucleus and cell volumes. It does however remain 
possible that direct coupling of nuclear growth rates is observed in cells with mildly 
aberrant N/C ratios and more rapid correction mechanisms are triggered in cells 
with extreme N/C ratios. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
5.3.2 Interdependent growth rates model 
Assessment of instantaneous nuclear and cellular growth rates suggested that 
nuclear growth rate may be directly proportional to cell volume, and cellular growth 
rate directly proportional to nucleus volume, forming the basis of a mathematical 
model for nuclear size control. The assumptions of this model are that no correction 
is observed when N/C ratio is 0.08, that nuclear growth rate is directly proportional 
to cell volume and that cellular growth rate is directly proportional to nucleus 
volume. As nuclear growth rate is a determinant of nucleus volume and cellular 
growth rate of cell volume this model incorporates inherent feedback between 
nucleus and cell volumes. N/C ratio homeostasis kinetics predicted by this model 
were similar to those observed experimentally at low N/C ratios and most high N/C 
ratios. However, at N/C ratios >1.5 fold higher than the wild type value, observed 
N/C ratio correction was more rapid than that predicted by the model, suggesting 
that an alternative mechanism may be in place to ensure rapid correction of 
extremely high N/C ratios. The biological implications of this model would be 
significant and are discussed further below. 
5.3.2.1 Cellular growth rate appears to be exponential 
In this thesis, I use the term growth rate to refer to increase in volume per unit time. 
In a wild type population of cells, nucleus volume and cell volume are correlated. 
Therefore, if cellular growth rate were directly proportional to nucleus volume, as 
predicted by this model, then in a population displaying no N/C ratio aberrancy, 
cellular growth rate would also be directly proportional to cell volume. This is 
represented by the following equations when a and k are constants and t is time: 
4566
= 4566 
4566 = ZK 
Therefore, the proposed interdependent growth rates model predicts that wild type 
S. pombe cells should display exponential growth profiles. Though exponential 
growth has been proposed (Cooper, 2013) for S. pombe cells, it is generally 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
accepted that pseudoexponential bilinear growth is observed, with two linear 
growth periods separated by a rate change point (Mitchison and Nurse, 1985, 
Sveiczer et al., 1996, Baumgartner and Tolic-Norrelykke, 2009). It has also been 
suggested that cell growth profiles may be heterogeneous in a population of cells, 
though the majority of cells display bilinear growth patterns (Miyata et al., 1988, 
Horvath et al., 2013). Analysis of growth profiles of cells at different temperatures 
indicated that at 25C, the rate change point is subtler than at higher temperatures 
(Baumgartner and Tolic-Norrelykke, 2009), giving a near-exponential appearance. 
The experimental measurements on which the models of N/C ratio homeostasis 
proposed here are based were made at 25C; therefore, the models are likely to 
accurately represent N/C homeostasis at 25C but in order to model N/C ratio 
homeostasis in cells growing at higher temperatures, they may need to be adapted 
to account for bilinear growth. 
5.3.2.2 Cellular growth rate is directly proportional to nucleus volume 
The interdependent growth rates model presented here proposes that cellular 
growth rate is directly proportional to nucleus volume. Though a novel suggestion, 
this could be achieved if a component or components required for cellular growth 
were synthesised, or transported to their functional cellular destination, at a rate 
proportional to nucleus volume. Contenders for this could be ribosomes or RNA 
transcripts, as both are required for the new protein synthesis necessary for cellular 
growth, and were implicated in N/C ratio control by genetic screening and 
biochemical analysis, though it is possible that different factors are limiting for 
cellular growth at different N/C ratios. 
5.3.2.2.1 Could ribosome biogenesis scale with nuclear volume? 
Protein synthesis is intrinsically required for cell growth. It was proposed following 
study of bacterial growth in fast-growth conditions that cellular growth rate is 
determined by the number of ribosomes in the cell (Maale and Kjeldgaard, 1966), 
but later work demonstrated that ribosomes are not limiting for cell growth in slow-
growth conditions (Koch and Deppe, 1971). It is possible that in small pom1 cells, 
with high N/C ratios, ribosome number is limiting for cell growth, but in large pom1 
cells, with low N/C ratios, it is not, as more ribosomes were inherited from the 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
mother cell; at low N/C ratio, it is likely that an alternative factor limits cell growth. 
Ribosome biogenesis is heavily dependent on nucleocytoplasmic transport 
machinery for both import of ribosomal proteins and export of ribosomal subunits 
(Thomson et al., 2013). If nucleocytoplasmic transport capacity were limiting for 
ribosome biogenesis and increased with nuclear size then scaling between nuclear 
size and functional ribosome production would be achieved. 
Nucleocytoplasmic transport occurs through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), large 
protein complexes, consisting of multiple copies of ~30 nucleoporin proteins in S. 
pombe (Asakawa et al., 2014), that perforate the inner and outer nuclear 
envelopes. In HeLa cells, the number of NPCs on the nuclear surface has been 
shown to increase during the cell cycle as the nucleus grows (Maul et al., 1972). 
However, though both nuclear volume and NPC density increase gradually during 
interphase, they do so at different rates, suggesting separate control mechanisms 
are likely; indeed, NPC density increase, but not nuclear growth, was suppressed 
by cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) inhibition (Maeshima et al., 2010, Maeshima et 
al., 2011). Though NPC formation is not the only factor affecting nucleocytoplasmic 
transport rate, different N/C ratios are also likely to generate different concentration 
gradients of transport cargoes, it is an important player. Therefore, if similar cell 
cycle regulation of NPC formation takes place in S. pombe cells, it is unlikely that 
nuclear volume and nucleocytoplasmic transport capacity are directly scaled. 
The primary stages of ribosomal biogenesis take place in a subnuclear organelle: 
the nucleolus (Thomson et al., 2013). Pre-rRNA synthesis rate correlates with 
nucleolar volume (Vazquez Nin et al., 1986) and is limiting for ribosome biogenesis 
(Mayer and Grummt, 2006). Nucleolar volume was observed to correlate with both 
nuclear and cellular volume in S. pombe cells (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). It 
would be interesting to assess whether nucleolar volume correlates with nucleus or 
cell volume in cells with aberrant N/C ratios; if nucleolar volume scales with nucleus 
volume then this would provide a mechanism by which ribosome biogenesis rate 
could scale with nucleus volume. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
5.3.2.2.2 Does global transcription rate scale with nuclear volume? 
An alternative mechanism by which nuclear volume could determine cellular growth 
rate would be by maintenance of global transcription rate proportional to nuclear 
volume. Global cellular transcription rate scales with cell volume in S. pombe cells 
displaying a range of cell sizes (Zhurinsky et al., 2010, Marguerat and Bahler, 
2012) and mammalian cells (Padovan-Merhar et al., 2015); as nuclear volume 
usually scales with cell volume, global transcription rate also scales with nuclear 
volume. It was proposed that global cellular transcription rate is limiting for cellular 
growth rate in S. pombe following identification of multiple RNA polymerase 
subunits as regulators of cellular growth rate that are independent of nutrient 
availability (Weston et al., 2017). Additionally, six RNA polymerase subunits were 
reported to be haploinsufficient for cell growth (Kim et al., 2010). As ~50% of 
mRNA, and ~60% of total RNA, synthesised in growing budding yeast cells is 
dedicated to ribosome biogenesis (Warner, 1999, Chikashige et al., 2015) it is likely 
that much of the influence that global transcription rate has on cellular growth rate 
is through altering ribosome biogenesis rate. 
How scaling between nucleus volume and global cellular transcription rate could be 
achieved remains an interesting question. As proposed for ribosome biogenesis, 
transcription rate could scale with nucleocytoplasmic transport rate if nuclear import 
of specific factors is required for, or accelerates, transcription. In S. cerevisiae, it 
has been reported that some RNA polymerase subunits are small enough to diffuse 
through the NPC into the nucleus and others require nuclear import pathways; a 
major RNA polymerase II import pathway involves nucleocytoplasmic cycling of the 
transporter Iwr1 which is conserved from yeast to humans (Gomez-Navarro and 
Estruch, 2015). Overexpression of iwr1 in S. pombe cells in a meiotic arrest is, like 
that of most RNA polymerase II subunits, sufficient to promote some cellular growth 
(Weston et al., 2017), presumably by increasing the rate of nuclear import of RNA 
polymerase II or its subunits. Interestingly, treatment of U2OS cells with LMB, 
which causes nuclear enlargement in S. pombe cells, led to cytoplasmic 
accumulation of newly synthesised molecules of RNA polymerase II subunit Rpb1, 
suggesting that export of a nuclear import factor required for Rpb1 import is 
prevented by CRM1 inhibition (Boulon et al., 2010). It would be interesting to 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
assess whether this occurs in S. pombe cells treated with LMB, and indeed in 
mutants displaying enlarged nuclear size, as it could be indicative of a feedback 
loop between transcription rate and nuclear volume. 
Alternatively, it is possible to imagine mechanisms in which chromatin structure is 
altered as the nucleus grows, increasing transcription rate. It would be interesting 
to assess whether chromatin compaction is altered in larger nuclei. It has been 
proposed that nuclear volume could drive chromatin organisation (Jevtic et al., 
2014). The bulk of transcription occurs in the euchromatin rich nuclear interior with 
many silent genes localised to the heterochromatin rich nuclear peripheral region 
(Steglich et al., 2013). The larger a nucleus is, the lower its surface area to volume 
ratio is; this may lead to a reduction in proportion of chromatin peripheral to the 
nuclear envelope, and so enhance transcription rate, as the nucleus grows. 
5.3.2.3 Nuclear growth rate is directly proportional to cell volume 
The notion that cell volume could influence nuclear growth rate is not a new one 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007, Goehring and Hyman, 2012), but how could this be 
achieved mechanistically? In centrifuged embryos of the sea snail Crepidula plana 
nuclear size correlated with cytoplasmic volume, suggesting cytoplasmic factors, 
rather than structural constraints of the cell influence nuclear growth rate (Conklin, 
1912). The results of nuclear transfer experiments support this suggestion; 
erythrocyte nuclei injected into the cytoplasm of larger HeLa cells, and similarly 
HeLa cell nuclei injected into the cytoplasm of larger Xenopus oocytes, rapidly 
increased in volume (Harris, 1967, Gurdon, 1976). In multinucleate S. pombe cells, 
nuclear growth rate correlated with the local cytoplasmic volume surrounding each 
nucleus; closely spaced nuclei grew more slowly than more isolated nuclei 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007). 
One proposal for how this coordination could be achieved is by a limiting pool of 
cytoplasmic factors required for nuclear growth (Goehring and Hyman, 2012). In 
such a model, nuclear growth would deplete the cytoplasmic pool, leading to a 
reduction in nuclear growth rate unless the pool was replenished by cellular growth. 
Closely spaced nuclei would likely experience a reduced local pool, causing their 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
growth to be slower than that of isolated nuclei. An in vitro study of the effect of 
spatial constraints on growth of reconstructed nuclei in Xenopus egg extracts, 
determined that the size of a microtubule domain surrounding each nucleus limited 
its growth rate; dynein-based accumulation of membranes along microtubules was 
limiting for nuclear growth rate (Hara and Merten, 2015). Therefore, microtubules, 
dynein and membrane may be limiting cytoplasmic factors under specific 
physiological conditions (Hara and Merten, 2015). 
5.3.2.4 An additional mechanism halts nuclear growth in cells with very high 
N/C ratios 
At very high N/C ratio, when the N/C ratio exceeded 0.12 (1.5 fold higher than wild 
type), N/C ratio correction was observed at a faster rate than was predicted by this 
interdependent growth rates model. Analysis of instantaneous nuclear growth rates 
suggested that nuclear growth ceases in these cells until the N/C ratio has 
recovered to 0.12, at which point it resumes. This cessation of nuclear growth at 
high N/C ratio was also previously observed in three S. pombe cells with N/C ratios 
greater than 0.12 generated by centrifugation of cdc11-119 klp2 cells (Neumann 
and Nurse, 2007). How could this cessation of nuclear growth be achieved? An 
active mechanism could sense N/C ratio, and, when it exceeds 0.12, suppress 
nuclear growth, for example by preventing membrane flow into the nuclear 
envelope. Alternatively, 0.12 could represent a tipping point of concentration 
gradients. Perhaps, below this N/C ratio value, net flow of a limiting factor is into 
the nucleus, leading to nuclear growth, but above 0.12, concentration is higher 
inside than outside the nucleus so nuclear growth ceases. Nuclei were not 
observed to shrink at high N/C ratio. This suggests the presence of a mechanism 
that prevents nuclear volume decreasing, perhaps nuclear growth involves the 
irreversible incorporation of nuclear structural components. 
5.3.3 Limiting components model 
Continuing this line of thought, whether or not a more general limiting components 
model would be sufficient to generate the kinetics of N/C ratio homeostasis 
observed at all N/C ratios, rather than just at extremely high N/C ratios, was then 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
tested. This led to the proposition of an alternative mathematical model by which 
N/C ratio homeostasis could be achieved. It was based on three experimental 
observations from study of pom1 cells: that nuclear growth rate ceased at N/C 
ratios above 0.12, that nuclear size reduction was not observed and that cellular 
growth rate correlated with cell volume. These were used as constraints in the 
model. It was assumed that a component required for nuclear growth was present 
in the cell in an amount proportional to cell volume and was incorporated into the 
nucleus at a rate determined by its free cellular concentration. This model predicted 
N/C ratio recovery towards a value of 0.08, with kinetics similar to those 
experimentally observed, in cells with low and high N/C ratios, even at very high 
N/C ratios. However, this model required assumptions about the system to be 
made, the feasibility of these is discussed here, as are the biological implications of 
this model. 
5.3.3.1 Assumptions of the limiting components model 
The first assumption made by this model is that the amount of a factor required for 
nuclear growth is directly proportional to cell volume. This is not implausible as 
biosynthesis rate (Schmoller and Skotheim, 2015) and amount of protein 
(Williamson and Scopes, 1961, Crissman and Steinkamp, 1973, Newman et al., 
2006) generally scale with cell size. 
The other assumptions made are more challenging biologically. The model 
assumes that the amount of the limiting factor in the nucleus is proportional to 
nuclear volume and that the rate of its incorporation into the nucleus is determined 
by its free cellular concentration. Whilst this is easy to imagine for incorporation of 
subunits into a linear structure, for a membrane bound organelle such as the 
nucleus that grows isotropically, this is more complicated. It might be expected that 
the size of the nucleus itself, in addition to the free cellular concentration of the 
component, might influence incorporation rate, as nuclear surface area to volume 
ratio changes as the nucleus grows. Whilst many characterised structural nuclear 
components form part of the nuclear surface area, the limiting factor would have to 
scale with nuclear volume. 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
5.3.3.2 Biological implications of the limiting components model 
One biological implication of the proposed limiting components model is that 
cellular growth rate is exponential. This is discussed above (Section 5.3.2.1) as it 
was also an implication of the interdependent growth rates model. A further 
implication is that no separate control mechanism inhibiting nuclear growth at very 
high N/C ratios is necessary. This model does, however, like the interdependent 
growth rates model, imply that nuclear growth is irreversible, which in itself may 
require regulation. For example, a mechanism may be required to prevent 
membrane flowing out of the nuclear envelope into the ER in cells with high N/C 
ratios. This could perhaps be achieved by the stabilisation of membrane within the 
nuclear envelope by interaction with chromatin, as is proposed for the retention of 
transmembrane proteins in the INM (Ungricht et al., 2015). Components of such a 
mechanism that prevents nuclear size reduction would not necessarily be identified 
by a genetic screen for deletion mutants displaying aberrant N/C ratios as their 
deletion may not lead to an aberrant N/C ratio phenotype unless N/C ratio is 
perturbed. 
Central to this model is the implication that there is a component that is limiting for 
nuclear growth. If a component is limiting for nuclear growth then reducing its level 
should lead to a reduction of N/C ratio. Its overexpression would only lead to an 
increase in N/C ratio if it were sufficient for nuclear growth. It would be interesting 
to assess whether reducing the expression level of any of the candidate genes 
observed to have low N/C ratio deletion mutant phenotypes by screening is 
sufficient to limit nuclear growth rate. It has been demonstrated that accumulation 
of membranes along microtubules can be limiting for nuclear growth in Xenopus 
egg extracts (Hara and Merten, 2015) however, while NE expansion is required for 
nuclear growth, incorporation of membrane would scale with nuclear surface area 
rather than nuclear volume so could not be the sole limiting factor in the model 
proposed above. Study of the rae1-167 nuclear size mutant suggested a role for 
bulk nucleocytoplasmic transport of nucleus-localised proteins in control of N/C 
ratio. Could this bulk transport limit nuclear growth? This would lead to a situation 
where no one protein was limiting for nuclear growth but instead the total amount of 
a class of proteins was limiting. Consequently, depletion of a single protein would 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
be insufficient to limit nuclear growth. Perturbing nuclear export is sufficient to 
cause nuclear enlargement (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). It would be interesting to 
assess whether perturbation of nuclear import is sufficient to limit nuclear growth 
rate. 
5.3.4 Distinguishing between and testing the models 
The models I have proposed based on physiological observations could explain the 
biological phenomenon of N/C ratio homeostasis; their implications are significant 
and determine the possible mechanisms by which homeostasis could be achieved. 
Therefore, extensive testing will be required in order to confirm which, if any, of 
these models accurately represents N/C ratio homeostasis in growing cells. It 
would be interesting to measure cellular growth rates in a larger number of cells 
with extremely aberrant N/C ratios, perhaps utilising a mutant that displays 
asymmetric nuclear division, to further probe the relationship between nucleus 
volume and cellular growth rate, as the relationships between these variables 
predicted by the different models differ. Additionally, measurement of nuclear 
growth rate in a larger population of cells with N/C ratios exceeding 0.12 would be 
helpful to confirm and further characterise the cessation of nuclear growth rate 
observed. It would be interesting to assess whether overexpression of any of the 
candidate N/C ratio control factors identified by genetic screening and biochemical 
analysis is sufficient to suppress this cessation of growth and thus is a candidate 
limiting component. 
In light of the results of genetic screening, to gain understanding of the 
mechanisms involved in N/C ratio homeostasis, it would be interesting to probe the 
relationships between N/C ratio and rate of transcription and ribosome biogenesis. 
Examination of transcription rate in cells with a range of N/C ratios to assess 
whether or not it correlates with nucleus volume would be informative, as would 
assessing the effects of perturbing transcription rate on N/C ratio homeostasis. It is 
possible to perturb S. pombe ribosome biogenesis by treatment with a specific 
inhibitor (Kawashima et al., 2016), assessment of the effect this treatment has on 
N/C ratio could be illuminating. Additionally, it would be informative to assess 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
nucleolar size, chromatin structure and NPC density in cells with a range of N/C 
ratios. 
5.4 Why is N/C ratio so tightly controlled? 
The data presented here indicates that N/C ratio is a precisely controlled property 
of cells, with mechanisms in place to correct it rapidly when it is perturbed. This 
suggests that it is important for cell functionality that an appropriate N/C ratio is 
maintained. Studies regarding the function of N/C ratio are limited due to our limited 
understanding of, and therefore ability to manipulate, its control mechanisms. The 
biological processes that my genetic screen has implicated in N/C ratio control are 
central to, and essential for, many aspects cell physiology; this makes perturbing 
N/C ratio in a controlled way challenging and may have contributed to the scarcity 
of studies that have achieved this.  
Compartmentalisation of the nucleoplasm from the cytoplasm by the nuclear 
envelope separates genomic material and nucleoplasmic chemical reactions from 
the chemical reactions occurring in the cytoplasm. It provides an additional level of 
regulation not present in prokaryotic cells; the regulation of a wide range of cellular 
processes, in response to internal and external stimuli, has been reported to 
involve nucleocytoplasmic transport of specific proteins (Karin and Hunter, 1995, 
Nigg, 1997, Hopper, 1999). Perturbing N/C ratio could have general effects, 
altering the cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic concentrations of proteins and 
substrates, influencing chemical reaction rates in each compartment and affecting 
regulation mechanisms that involve nucleocytoplasmic transport. Crucially, 
transcription occurs in the nucleus and protein synthesis in the cytoplasm, and 
maintaining an appropriate N/C ratio could be instrumental in ensuring the co-
regulation of these two processes required for efficient synthesis of the new 
materials required for cell growth. The functional significance of N/C ratio in specific 
cell types and at specific developmental transitions has been reported and is 
discussed below. Aberrant N/C ratios have been observed in, and often serve as 
diagnostic markers for, many disease states, most notably cancer; whether N/C 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
ratio alteration contributes to or is a result of the disease pathologies remains to be 
determined. 
5.4.1 Functional significance of N/C ratio at specific transitions and for 
subnuclear organisation 
The tight regulation of N/C ratio observed may be indicative of its functional 
significance in cells. Biological processes that are dependent on N/C ratio 
maintenance, or rapid changes in it, have been reported. A role for N/C ratio in 
control of developmental timing has been proposed. In Xenopus embryogenesis, 
the midblastula transition (MBT), and triggering of zygotic gene transcription, is 
associated with a rapid increase in N/C ratio; altering N/C ratio was sufficient to 
lead to a premature MBT (Jevtic and Levy, 2015). Nuclear elongation was also 
shown to be required for alteration of gene expression during T cell activation 
(Gupta et al., 2012). Additionally, in neuronal cells, global transcription rate is 
reported to correlate with nuclear size, with methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 
regulating both of these parameters (Yazdani et al., 2012). A role for N/C ratio in 
cell cycle control has also been described. It has been proposed that the N/C ratio 
determines spindle size in early mouse embryos, to ensure accurate chromosome 
segregation (Novakova et al., 2016). 
N/C ratio, or nuclear size, is also likely to be important for subnuclear organisation. 
Nuclear size reduction during C. elegans embryogenesis was observed to correlate 
with increased mitotic chromosome compaction (Hara et al., 2013). Nuclear volume 
is likely to influence chromatin structure more generally (Jevtic et al., 2014) and 
correlates with nucleolar volume (Neumann and Nurse, 2007) suggesting that N/C 
ratio could play a role maintaining nucleolar volume proportional to cell volume. 
5.4.2 Aberrant N/C ratio and nuclear structure in disease 
Aberrant N/C ratio and nuclear morphology is associated with many disease states. 
Increased nuclear size and altered nuclear shape are associated with many 
cancers; these properties of cancer cells have been used diagnostically for more 
than 150 years (Zink et al., 2004). As nuclear size is not determined by ploidy 
(Neumann and Nurse, 2007, Levy and Heald, 2010) this increased nuclear size is 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
not likely to be caused by altered DNA content associated with the aneuploidy that 
is characteristic of cancer cells (Gordon et al., 2012). Whether nuclear size 
increases contribute to tumourigenesis or are secondary to it remains to be 
determined, though observation of enlarged nuclei in the cells surrounding tumours 
has led to the suggestion that nuclear enlargement may take place at an early 
stage in transformation (Edens et al., 2013). Alterations to nuclear structure that 
reduce its stiffness are thought to be necessary for metastasis (Denais and 
Lammerding, 2014) and could be associated with nuclear size changes. Changes 
to nuclear size could lead to structural rearrangements of chromatin or increased 
ribosome biogenesis required for enhanced cellular growth rate. Defects in 
nucleocytoplasmic transport have been associated with many types of cancer 
(Kohler and Hurt, 2010, Simon and Rout, 2014) and may be associated with 
nuclear size alteration. 
Mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 lead to Rett syndrome, an 
autism spectrum disorder. Depletion of MeCP2 in embryonic stem cells 
differentiated into neurons led to both reduced nuclear growth rate and reduced 
global transcription rate, suggesting that nuclear size defects may contribute to the 
disease pathology (Yazdani et al., 2012). Expansion of repeats in a non-coding 
region of C9orf72 leads to the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia; nuclear protein import is impaired and 
abnormal nuclear structure is observed (Freibaum et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2015). 
In C. elegans, nucleolar size inversely correlates with longevity; reduced fibrillarin 
expression led to reduced nucleolar size and ribosome biogenesis rate (Tiku et al., 
2016). Correlations were also observed between nucleolar size, ribosome 
biogenesis rate and longevity in fruit flies and mice, and between nucleolar size 
and metabolic health in humans, indicating that this effect is conserved (Tiku et al., 
2016). Conversely, nucleolar expansion and increased protein translation rate is 
associated with progeria; Hutchison-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a 
laminopathy caused by an autosomal dominant mutation in the gene encoding 
lamin A, and is characterised by nuclear distortion, sequestration of nuclear 
proteins, nucleolar expansion and elevated protein translation rate (Buchwalter and 
Hetzer, 2017). Other nuclear envelopathies, diseases caused by mutations in 
Chapter 5. General discussion 
genes encoding nuclear envelope proteins and associated with altered nuclear 
structure, lead to a range of disorders including lipodystrophy, cardiomyopathy and 
muscular dystrophy (Vukovic et al., 2016a). Whether N/C ratio changes contribute 
to these disease pathologies remains to be determined. 
5.5 Concluding remarks 
Despite being recognised as a conserved property of cells, aberrant in multiple 
disease states and likely important for cellular physiology for many years, we have 
little mechanistic understanding of the control of N/C ratio. Developing an 
understanding of the basis of N/C ratio control is critical to allow assessment of its 
importance in development and disease. The simple shape, closed mitosis and 
genetic tractability of S. pombe has allowed exploration of this problem in vivo. 
The work presented in this thesis demonstrates that N/C ratio undergoes 
homeostasis in a population and that this occurs by rapid correction of aberrant 
ratios in individual cells. The kinetics of this recovery were analysed and models for 
how this homeostasis could be achieved are proposed. A genetic screen for 
deletion mutants with aberrant N/C ratios and biochemical analysis of an enlarged 
N/C ratio mutant have implicated specific biological processes in the N/C ratio 
control network, moving us closer to a mechanistic understanding of this complex 
problem. 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
6.1 Fission yeast growth conditions and genetics 
S. pombe media and methods used were as described previously (Moreno et al., 
1991); strains were grown in YE4S media unless otherwise indicated. The 
S. japonicus strain used was grown in YE4S media at 32C. 
6.1.1 Strain construction 
Fission yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table 6.1 and  
Table 6.2. Strains were constructed by genetic crossing followed by random spore 
analysis. Genetic crosses were carried out on malt extract agar supplemented with 
adenine, leucine, histidine and uracil at 25C then spores harvested by incubation 
with -glucuronidase from Helix pomatia at 29C. Gene tagging was performed 
using PCR-based methods described previously (Bahler et al., 1998) and verified 
by colony PCR. The following alleles were previously reported: prp4-73 (Rosenberg 
et al., 1991), ods2-1 (Haraguchi et al., 2007), fta2-291 (Kerres et al., 2006), smn1td 
(Campion et al., 2010), slp1-362 (Matsumoto, 1997), sad1-1 (Hagan and Yanagida, 
1990), cdk9C (St Amour et al., 2012) and cdk9T212A (St Amour et al., 2012). 
6.1.2 S. pombe growth for SILAC experiments 
For SILAC mass spectrometry experiments, cells were grown in SILAC media 
(EMM (6 mM ammonium chloride) + 0.25 mg/ml leucine + 0.15 mg/ml uridine + 
0.04 mg/ml arginine + 0.03 mg/ml lysine (Bicho et al., 2010)). Heavy labelled 
samples were cultured for at least 8 generations in SILAC media supplemented 
with heavy arginine (L-Arginine:HCL (U13C6, 99%)) and heavy lysine 
(L-Lysine:2HCl (U13C6, 99%)) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc.). 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
Strain Genotype Origin 
PN3779 cut11-GFP::ura4+ leu1-32 ura4-D18 h+ Lab collection 
PN3803 cdc11-119 cut11-GFP::ura4+ leu1-32 ura4-D18 h-  Lab collection 
PN10423 pom1::ura4+ cut11-GFP::ura4+ h- Lab collection 
PN1 972 h- Lab collection 
PN10465 rae1-167 ura4-D18 leu1-32 h- (Yoon et al., 1997) 
HC68 rae1-167 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6 h- Lab collection 
HC20 cut11-mCherry::NatR ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6 h-  Lab collection 
HC179 rae1-167 cut11-mcherryR::NatR ura4-D18 leu1-32 ade6 h?  This study 
PN5466 car2::hphMX6 arg1-230 lys3-37 ura4-D18 h? Lab collection 
HC70 rae1-167 car2::hphMX6 arg1-230 lys3-37 ura4-D18 h? This study 
HC58 ish1-yeGFP::hphNT1 h? This study 
HC180 pcm1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/pcm1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC181 SPAC1B3.09c::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/SPAC1B3.09c+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, 
leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC182 slp1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/slp1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC183 sad1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sad1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC184 rps1601::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rps1601+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC185 nop9::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/nop9+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC186 rpl8::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rpl8+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC187 dfg10::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/dfg10+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC188 pmo25::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/pmo25+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC189 rpl701::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rpl701+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC190 SPAC11E3.02c::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/SPAC11E3.02c+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC191 rpa49::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rpa49+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC192 sac3::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sac3+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC193 red5::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/red5+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC194 mcs6::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/mcs6+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC195 spc24::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/spc24+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC196 erg11::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/erg11+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC197 usp101::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/usp101+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC198 ndc80::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/ndc80+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC199 taf10::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/taf10+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC200 pci2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/pci2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC201 SPAPB1E7.01c::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/SPAPB1E7.01c+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC202 prp2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/prp2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC203 sec59::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sec59+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
HC204 ned8::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/ned8+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC205 mis17::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/mis17+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC206 sfc3::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sfc3+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC207 pss1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/pss1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC208 dys1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/dys1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC209 usp103::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/usp103+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC210 vph2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/vph2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC211 orc1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/orc1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC212 taf8::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/taf8+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC213 snf21::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/snf21+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC214 hem13::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/hem13+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC215 mis19::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/mis19+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC216 cut9::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/cut9+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC217 fol1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/fol1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC218 med7::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/med7+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC219 nnf1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/nnf1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC220 taf9::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/taf9+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC221 lcp5::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/lcp5+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC222 sfc1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sfc1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC223 nop10::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/nop10+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC224 rrp6::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rrp6+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC225 smg1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/smg1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC226 uaf2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/uaf2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC227 msl1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/msl1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC228 cft2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/cft2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC229 prp38::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/prp38+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC230 dfr1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/dfr1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC231 tfb4::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/tfb4+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC232 sfb3::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/sfb3+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, 
ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ 
This study 
HC233 fta2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/fta2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC234 prp4::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/prp4+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC235 asa1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/asa1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC236 kms2::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/kms2+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC237 smn1::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/smn1+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC238 rib5::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/rib5+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
HC239 nup107::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/nup107+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC240 SPAC212.05c::ish1-yeGFP-hphNT1/SPAC212.05c+, ade6-M210/ade6-M216, leu1-32/leu1-32, ura4-D18/ura4-D18, h+/h+ This study 
HC116 ods2-1 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 h? This study 
HC115 prp4-73 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 h? This study 
HC108 fta2-291::his3+ cut11-GFP::ura4+ ade6-M210 leu1-132 h?  This study 
HC119 smn1td::KanMX6 cut11-GFP::ura4+ leu1-32 ura4-D18 h? This study 
HC120 slp1-362 leu1-32 cut11-GFP::ura4+ This study 
HC55 sad1-1 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 leu1-32 h-  Lab collection 
HC110 cdk9CKanMX6 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 h?  This study 
HC111 cdk9T212A::KanMX6 cut11-GFP::ura4+ ura4-D18 h+ This study 
Table 6.1 S. pombe strains used in this study 
Genotype and origin of S. pombe strains used in this study. 
Strain Genotype Origin 
HC120 mat6j-2017 cut11-GFP::natR h+ (Aoki et al., 2011) 
Table 6.2 S. japonicus strain used in this study 
Genotype and origin of S. japonicus strain used in this study. 
6.1.3 Serial dilution growth assay 
Cells were grown into exponential growth in YE4S then diluted to 2 x107 cells/ml. 
Serial dilutions of cultures to be compared were performed simultaneously in a 96-
well plate using a multichannel pipette. The 2 x107 cells/ml cultures, and five 10 fold 
serial dilutions of them were then spotted onto agar plates (YE4S and YE4S + 
Phloxin B) using a pin tool. Plates were incubated at indicated temperatures for 3 
days then photographed using a Sony Alpha NEX-5 camera. 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
6.2 Imaging and image analysis 
6.2.1 Microscopy 
Fluorescence imaging was carried out using a DeltaVision Elite microscope 
(Applied Precision) comprised of an Olympus IX71 wide-field inverted fluorescence 
microscope, an Olympus Plan APO 60X, 1.4 NA oil objective and a Photometrics 
CoolSNAP HQ2 camera (Roper Scientific) in an IMSOL imcubator Environment 
Control System. Imaging was carried out at 25C unless otherwise stated. Images 
were acquired in 0.2 m or 0.4 m z-sections over 4.4 m, with a brightfield 
reference image in the middle of the sample, and deconvolved using SoftWorx 
(Applied Precision). Representative images shown are maximum intensity 
projections of deconvolved images. 
Imaging of fixed and live cells was carried out in liquid media on glass slides or, for 
timelapse microscopy in a microfluidic chamber. Timelapse microscopy was carried 
out using a CellASIC ONIX Microfluidic Platform with Y04C microfluidics plates 
(Merck). Cells were imaged in the 3.5 m and 4.5 m height chambers in YE4S. 
50 l of exponentially growing cells (1.26 x106 cells/ml) was loaded into the plate at 
a flow rate of 8 psi, untrapped cells were washed out at a flow rate of 5 psi, then a 
flow rate of 3 psi was maintained for the duration of the experiment. 
Colonies growing on solid agar plates were imaged using a Zeiss Axioskop 40 
microscope with 10X Nikon objective, 2.5X Zeiss Optovar and Sony Alpha NEX-5 
camera. 
6.2.2 FITC and DAPI staining 
For each sample, 5 ml of exponential cell culture was fixed with ice cold 70% 
ethanol and incubated at 4C for at least 30 minutes. Cells were then washed in 
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended in PBS + 1 g/ml fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC) (Invitrogen) + 1 g/ml 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) 
for imaging. FITC intensity quantification carried out using ImageJ (NIH). 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
6.2.3 DiOC6 staining 
For imaging, 5 g/ml 3,3-Dihexyloxacarbocyanine Iodide (DiOC6) was added to 
1 ml of exponential cell culture and incubated at room temperature for 3 minutes 
before imaging. For visual screening as part of genetic screen, 5 g/ml DiOC6 was 
added to 50 l of cells then incubated at room temperature for 1 minute before 
visualisation using a Zeiss Axioskop 40 microscope with a 63X, 1.4 NA objective. 
6.2.4 Nuclear and cellular size measurement and Vnuc/Vcell (N/C) ratio, 
SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell ratio calculation 
Fluorescence images displaying nuclear envelopes were overlaid on brightfield 
images displaying cell outlines. The ImageJ Pointpicker plugin (NIH) was used to 
determine coordinates of points on the cellular and nuclear surfaces (Figure 6.1) 
then distance between these points was calculated to determine cell length, cell 
width and nucleus axial and equatorial diameters.  
Figure 6.1 Diagram of cell and nuclear size measurement 
Diagram of cell (grey) and nucleus (green) outline. Points marked using ImageJ 
Pointpicker plugin (NIH) shown by black crosses. Linear distances between these 
points calculated shown by letters (a: cell length, b: cell width, c: axial nuclear 
diameter, d: equatorial nuclear diameter). 
From these linear measurements, nuclear volume to cell volume (N/C) ratio, 
nuclear surface area to cellular surface area ratio (SAnuc/SAcell) and nuclear surface 
area to cellular volume (SAnuc/Vcell) ratio were calculated assuming radial 
symmetries using the formulae shown below which approximate the cell as a rod 
and the nucleus as a prolate ellipsoid (Neumann and Nurse, 2007). For 
multinucleate cells, individual nuclei were measured, then their volumes or surface 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
areas summed for calculation of whole cell N/C, SAnuc/SAcell and SAnuc/Vcell ratios. 
To measure the volume of each part of a septated cell (either side of the septum), 
the length from cell tip to septum (L) and cell width (w) were measured and volume 
approximated as a cylinder (of diameter w and height (L- (w/2)) joined to a 
hemisphere with diameter w. 
The following formulae were used to calculate cellular volume (Vcell), nuclear 
volume (Vnuc), cellular surface area (SAcell) and nuclear surface area (SAnuc). The 
parameters a, b, c and d are as described in Figure 6.1. 
4566 =
+  N
(  ) 
234 =
4566 = 4 N
+ 2 N
P (  ) 
234 = 2 N
` ln N
1 + 
1  
 = c1  d
6.2.5 Counting nuclei in multinucleate cells 
Nuclei were counted in images of multinucleate cells using the Cell Counter plugin 
of ImageJ (NIH). All z-slices of each deconvolved image were analysed to ensure 
nuclei in all z-planes were counted. 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
6.3 Sample preparation for mass spectrometry 
6.3.1 Whole cell sample preparation 
Cell cultures were quenched by addition of ice cold 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid 
to a final concentration of 10%. Following incubation on ice for at least 20 minutes, 
cells were pelleted, washed in ice cold acetone and stored at -80C. Cells were 
then washed and resuspended in 100 l of lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium 
bicarbonate, 8 M urea, 5 mM EDTA and cOmplete Mini EDTA-free phosphatase 
inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). 0.4 mm diameter acid washed glass beads (Sigma) 
were added and cells broken by beating (FastPrep120). Cell debris was pelleted 
and protein extract supernatant recovered and stored at -80C. 
6.3.2 Nucleus enriched sample preparation 
Nucleus enriched samples were produced using a protocol based on (Shimizu et 
al., 1991) and experiment 18 (Alfa et al., 1993). 1 L cell cultures were harvested by 
centrifugation and washed in S buffer (1.4 M sorbitol, 40 mM HEPES and 0.5 mM 
MgCl2 at pH 6.5) then resuspended in S buffer + 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl 
fluoride (PMSF) + 10 mM -mercaptoethanol and incubated for 10 mins at 32C. 
Cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in S buffer + 1 mM PMSF + 
20 mg/g cell pellet Zymolyase 100T (Amsbio) and incubated at 32C until SDS lysis 
indicated cell wall digestion was complete. The following steps were performed on 
ice. Cells were pelleted, washed in S buffer four times then resuspended in 20 ml F 
buffer (18% Ficoll 400 (w/v), 20 mM PIPES and 0.5 mM MgCl2) + 1 mM PMSF. 
Cells were then lysed using a dounce homogeniser and the lysate was layered on 
20 ml GF buffer (20% glycerol, 7% Ficoll 400 (w/v), 20 mM PIPES and 0.5 mM 
MgCl2) and centrifuged (20,000 g, 30 mins). The resultant pellet was resuspended 
in 20 ml F buffer and centrifuged (3,000 g, 15 mins). The supernatant was then 
centrifuged (20,000 g, 25 mins). The resultant nucleus enriched pellet was 
resuspended in 250 l 2X Laemmli buffer (20% glycerol, 4% SDS, 100 mM TRIS 
(pH 6.8) and 0.2 M dithiothreitol) and heated to 99C for 10 mins then centrifuged. 
The protein extract supernatant was recovered and stored at -80C. 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
6.3.3 Protein concentration determination 
Protein concentration was determined using the DC Protein Assay (Bio-rad) 
following manufacturers instructions. 
6.4 Mass spectrometry and data analysis 
6.4.1 Analysis by LC-MS/MS 
The following analysis was performed by The Francis Crick Institute Protein 
Analysis and Proteomics Science Technology Platform. 
Each SILAC sample was loaded onto a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 1.0 mm, 10-well Protein 
Gel (Thermo Fisher) for in-gel digestion. Samples were allowed to migrate through 
the gel before coomasie blue staining. A Janus liquid handling system (Perkin-
Elmer) was used to prepare polyacrylamide gel slices for mass spectrometric 
analysis. Each gel lane was excised into eight equally sized pieces, destained with 
50% acetonitrile + 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced by treatment with 
10 mM dithiothreitol then alkylated by treatment with 55 mM iodoacetamide. 
Proteins were then digested by incubation overnight at 37C with 6 ng/l trypsin 
and peptides extracted in 2% formic acid/1% acetonitrile. 
For LC-MS/MS analysis, an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC 
system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation was used for data acquisition. 
The peptide samples were separated by a 70 min gradient elution on a 75 m x 
50 cm C18 column using the activation method collision-induced dissociation (CID). 
6.4.2 Data processing 
Only primary data processing and quantification using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 was 
performed by The Francis Crick Institute Protein Analysis and Proteomics Science 
Technology Platform. Default MaxQuant parameters with the following adjustments 
were used: Lys6 and Arg6 heavy labels were used, Filter labelled amino acids 
was deselected, Re-quantify was selected with instruction to keep low-scoring 
versions of the identified peptides within parameter groups and Match between 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
runs was selected. Data was searched against a UniProt extracted S. pombe 
FASTA file amended to supplemented with common contaminants. 
Perseus 1.4.0.2 was used to analyse normalised H/L ratios. Average log2 ratios 
were calculated. Data was annotated with Gene Ontology (GO) terms (default 
Perseus lists) and S. pombe ORFeome localisation data (Matsuyama et al., 2006). 
2D enrichment analysis was carried out using a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR 
truncation threshold of 0.02 (Cox and Mann, 2012). 
6.5 Genetic screen 
6.5.1 Primary and secondary visual screening 
Strains from a near genome-wide heterozygous gene deletion collection carrying 
deletions of essential genes and reported to form haploid microcolonies (Kim et al., 
2010, Spirek et al., 2010) were screened. 427 strains were screened in a primary 
screen for aberrant N/C ratio mutants. 
Heterozygous diploids were patched from glycerol stocks onto YE agar + 250 mg/L 
uracil + 250 mg/L leucine + 100 g/ml G418 and incubated at 32C for 3 days then 
grown into stationary phase in 200 l YE +250 mg/L uracil + 250 mg/L leucine + 
250 mg/L adenine liquid media in 96-well plates. Cells were then transformed with 
pON177 sporulation plasmid (mat1-M mating cassette marked with ura4) (gift from 
Olaf Nielsen). Cells were harvested by centrifugation (2,500 rpm, 3 mins) and 
resuspended in 20 l water. 20 g boiled herring sperm DNA, 1.5 g pON177 DNA 
and 200 l PEG-LiAC-TE (40% (w/v) PEG4000, 0.1 M LiAc, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM 
TRIS at pH 7.5) were added then cells incubated at 25C for 3 days. Cells were 
harvested by centrifugation (2,500 rpm, 3 mins), washed and then transformants 
selected on EMM agar + 250 mg/L leucine. 
To induce sporulation, transformants were inoculated into EMM (without NH4Cl) 
+ 1 mg/ml glutamic acid + 250 mg/L adenine + 250 mg/L leucine and incubated at 
25C for 3 days. Spores were harvested by treatment with 1:50 -glucuronidase 
from Helix pomatia and stored in water at 4C. 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
For screening, spores were resuspended in YE4S and incubated at 32C for 22-24 
hours then imaged. Cells were stained with DiOC6 for visual screening using a 
Zeiss Axioskop 40 microscope. 152 potential aberrant N/C ratio mutants were 
identified and subject to a secondary round of screening as described for the 
primary screen. 60 potential N/C aberrant ratio mutants, identified in both primary 
and secondary screens, were carried forward for tertiary screening. 
6.5.2 Tertiary screening 
For tertiary screening, heterozygous diploid gene deletions were first transformed 
with a nuclear envelope (NE) marker construct designed to integrate into the 
KanMX4 deletion cassette. Nuclear envelope protein Ish1 was tagged with yeGFP 
(marked with HygR selection marker with pAgTEF promoter and tCYC1 terminator) 
at its native locus in wild type cells using the pYM25 plasmid and the PCR-based 
transformation method previously described (Janke et al., 2004). gDNA was 
isolated from transformants using the MasterPure Yeast DNA Purification Kit 
(Epicentre) and manufacturers instructions and a DNA fragment (Fragment A) with 
the ish1 ORF and 1 kb upstream sequence, yeGFP and HygR marker was 
amplified by PCR. Two synthetic DNA fragments, each with 400 bp homology to 
KanMX4 (Integrated DNA technologies (gBlocks)), with Fragment A between them, 
were cloned into a linearised pUC19 vector backbone using a Gibson Assembly 
Cloning Kit (NEB). The plasmid was digested with KpnI-HF (NEB) and SphI-HF 
(NEB) to yield the NE marker construct which was transformed into heterozygous 
deletion mutants as described for pON177 transformation above. 2 g fragment 
DNA was used for each transformation and transformants were selected on YE4S 
+ hygromycin B agar plates. Integration of the NE marker construct into the KanX4 
deletion cassette was confirmed by colony PCR and by microscopy; heterozygous 
diploids were sporulated and asci confirmed to contain two spores containing 
Ish1-yeGFP and two wild type spores. 
Transformation with pON177, sporulation and harvesting of spores was carried out 
as described for the primary screen. As in the primary screen, spores were 
resuspended in YE4S and incubated at 32C for 22-24 hours then imaged. Cells 
were imaged using a DeltaVision Elite microscope (Applied Precision) as described 
Chapter 6. Materials and methods 
above. N/C ratio of each strain was measured as described above. 25 aberrant N/C 
ratio mutants were identified. The gene deletions in these mutants were confirmed 
by colony PCR using CP3 and CP5 gene specific primers (Kim et al., 2010) with 
primers internal to the NE marker construct. 
6.6 Bioinformatic analysis and statistical tests 
6.6.1 Statistical tests of significance 
Unless otherwise indicated, two-tailed unpaired student t-tests were used to 
determine significance of difference between two populations of N/C ratio 
measurements. Welchs correction was used where indicated when an F test 
indicated that the variances of the two populations were significantly different. For 
paired N/C ratio measurements described in section 2.1.1, two-tailed paired 
student t-tests were used to determine significance. p = 0.01 significance threshold 
used unless otherwise indicated. 
6.6.2 Gene list enrichment analysis 
Gene lists were analysed for enrichment of specific annotation categories using 
AnGeLi (Bitton et al., 2015b) or GO::TermFinder (Boyle et al., 2004) as indicated, 
with default parameters.  
6.6.3 Network analysis 
Network analysis was carried out using esyN software (Bean et al., 2014) with 
PomBase curated interactions (Wood et al., 2012) or BioGRID curated interactions 
(Chatr-Aryamontri et al., 2017) as indicated. Default parameters, with High and 
Low setting for BioGRID interactions selected, were used. 
Appendix 
Chapter 7. Appendix 
7.1 Appendix I  
Table 7.1 Proteins enriched in rae1-167 nucleus enriched samples relative to wild 
type (>1.25 fold) at 36C and not at 25C 
Uniprot protein ID, protein name and average log2 rae1-167/WT ratios for each 
protein at 36C and 25C. Proteins ordered by average log2 rae1-167/WT ratio at 
36C. 
Protein ID 
(Uniprot) Protein name 
log2 rae1-
167/WT 
(36C) 
log2 rae1-
167/WT 
(25C) 
P53693 Protein rds1 2.031958 -0.1527555 
O74478 Phosphoglucomutase-2 1.866418 -0.01235701 
Q10356 Uncharacterised protein C22E12.03c 1.807138 0.167305 
G2TRQ9 Uncharacterised protein tam10 1.495655 0.06088224 
O14368 Heat shock protein 16 1.466594 -0.009152962 
P22189 Calcium-transporting ATPase 3 1.42603 0.04305796 
P55306 Catalase 1.393005 0.3086143 
P50521 Hexokinase-2 1.309591 -0.129791 
O74460 Uncharacterised protein C16C4.16c 1.2875 0.1866762 
A9ZLL8 Protein lsd90 1.25805 -0.1433911 
P40900 Sexual differentiation process protein isp4 1.247487 0.08928603 
P22192 Double-strand-specific pac1 ribonuclease 1.200259 -0.06819221 
O14307 tRNA (adenine(58)-N(1))-methyltransferase catalytic subunit trm61 1.183187 -0.03204522 
Q10342 Protein sda1 1.183179 0.1214029 
O14293 Putative aldehyde dehydrogenase-like protein C9E9.09c 1.1787 -0.1115134 
O13351 Ubiquitin-like protein pmt3/smt3 1.15106 -0.634463 
Q8WZJ8 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit rpc31 1.093759 0.04532825 
O74966 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein G 1.090981 -0.02852858 
P78814 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor srp2 1.084723 -0.005287684 
Q10752 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor ATP-dependent RNA helicase-like protein cdc28 1.055538 -0.3644474 
Q9USU5 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase gas2 1.053391 -0.03117139 
Q9UTN3 Poly(A) RNA polymerase cid14 1.047152 -0.1099132 
Appendix 
O13956 Ribosome biogenesis protein tsr1 homolog 1.041738 -0.06853679 
P24782 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp2 1.035402 0.0233599 
Q09330 mRNA export protein mlo3 1.033118 -0.02596474 
O94641 Heat shock protein 104 1.030412 0.1791875 
O74764 ATP-dependent rRNA helicase spb4 1.029703 0.08216863 
O94268 Putative ribosomal RNA methyltransferase nop2 1.01734 0.002400886 
P87151 Uncharacterised protein C25H2.10c 1.006557 -0.064247 
Q9UTE3 Rpb7-binding protein seb1 1.0027 -0.04125987 
Q9UU79 Ribosome biogenesis protein nsa2 0.9956108 -0.1028243 
O94326 Zinc finger protein C725.08 0.9928784 -0.1545532 
Q10107 Probable ribosomal RNA small subunit methyltransferase mra1 0.9727743 -0.04638633 
Q9P775 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C17D11.16 0.9702143 0.005155474 
O14139 Chromodomain helicase hrp3 0.9677857 -0.1500875 
Q9HGL4 tRNA (adenine(58)-N(1))-methyltransferase non-catalytic subunit trm6 0.9635471 -0.07699315 
Q10175 Probable peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase C27F1.06c 0.9545732 -0.08195579 
P36594 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit rpb1 0.950683 -0.01415413 
Q9USR5 Uncharacterised THOC5 family protein 0.9409256 0.01020597 
O60164 Pescadillo homolog 0.9393337 -0.01678039 
O74918 Exosome complex component rrp45 0.9301587 0.1123519 
O13835 U3 small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein protein imp3 0.9283749 0.04089866 
O59678 Ribosome biogenesis regulatory protein homolog 0.9255673 -0.114209 
Q9P783 Ribosome assembly protein rrb1 0.920231 -0.1211587 
P04909 Histone H2A-alpha 0.9141186 -0.08716191 
P37382 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit RPB3 0.9115316 0.1422527 
P87137 Uncharacterised protein C57A7.06 0.9087133 -0.1997673 
P09988;P1
0651 Histone H3.1/H3.2;Histone H3.3 0.9079323 -0.07844944 
Q10309 Putative phospholipid-transporting ATPase C6C3.06c 0.9043741 0.04498141 
Q09867 rRNA-processing protein efg1 0.8971449 -0.01227314 
O14036 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein Sm D2 0.8930008 0.002124652 
O74393 ATP-dependent RNA helicase mak5 0.8916674 -0.01257619 
P28745 Protein pim1 0.8820993 -0.04120785 
Appendix 
Q09702 Negative regulator of differentiation 1 0.8792515 -0.05686849 
O14236 Nucleolar GTP-binding protein 2 0.8691174 -0.04785343 
Q9P7E8 Protein app1 0.8661314 0.08565587 
Q09799 Protein kri1 0.8645322 -0.03603296 
O74343 Putative pseudouridine synthase C1A4.09 0.8627301 -0.002776463 
O14253 Nuclear cap-binding protein subunit 1 0.8585898 0.002488002 
P52890 Transcription factor atf1 0.8582752 0.1145775 
Q9URY0 Ribosome biogenesis protein ytm1 0.8564993 -0.02435547 
Q10237 Uncharacterised protein C4G9.04c 0.8543674 -0.0473242 
O74555 Branchpoint-bridging protein 0.8542876 0.02395756 
O42872 Exosome complex component ski6 0.8532863 -0.06787236 
Q9UU96 Polynucleotide 5-hydroxyl-kinase grc3 0.8503405 -0.08455513 
O74454 Protein sts5 0.8498791 0.008049353 
Q09903 ATP-dependent RNA helicase drs1 0.8477729 -0.02912364 
Q9C106 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit rpc3 0.8447564 0.03610477 
O14327 Polyadenylate-binding protein 2 0.8441607 -0.170887 
P17937 60S ribosomal protein L7-A 0.8418088 -0.06608193 
Q1MTQ9 60S ribosome subunit biogenesis protein nip7 0.8417884 -0.02635058 
Q9P7L8 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor sap62 0.8395854 0.007182945 
Q7LL14 Probable U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein B 0.8384543 0.0997943 
Q9USY2 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C1861.04c 0.8377409 -0.3718199 
Q10205 Exosome complex component rrp43 0.8349916 -0.01159357 
O74191 FK506-binding protein 39 kDa 0.8319818 -0.07394277 
O14030 Uncharacterised protein C29B12.08 0.8315036 -0.02469154 
O14180 Brix domain-containing protein C4F8.04 0.829936 -0.07845037 
Q09779 Uncharacterised protein C1D4.14 0.8295528 -0.01301789 
Q10422 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C25G10.01 0.828489 -0.001019552 
Q9USZ4 DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit rpa34 0.8243757 0.03421089 
Q09745 Uncharacterised protein C12C2.04 0.8224939 -0.0567781 
Q9UR27 54S ribosomal protein L31, mitochondrial 0.8198766 0.008454604 
Q9USX8 U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein A 0.8165989 0.09692638 
O60080 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp9 0.8161736 0.000856087 
Q9UTE6 Protein mak16 0.8115711 -0.05082117 
Appendix 
P36629 Splicing factor U2AF 59 kDa subunit 0.811306 -0.08101094 
O42661 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein Sm D1 0.8111181 -0.06745335 
Q9P7R9 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf3 0.8103642 -0.1602136 
Q10163 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein-associated protein B 0.8100746 -0.1521061 
O94396 tRNA pseudouridine synthase 1 0.8079344 -0.08462659 
O94267 FACT complex subunit spt16 0.8065425 -0.08557827 
P08096 DNA topoisomerase 2 0.8044558 -0.01291433 
O14176 Pre-mRNA-processing protein prp40 0.8038632 0.03096385 
O13704 Thioredoxin domain-containing protein C13F5.05, mitochondrial 0.8030212 0.04705421 
O14206 Brix domain-containing protein C1B9.03c 0.8027048 -0.1417686 
O74958 YTH domain-containing protein mmi1 0.8026987 0.1951966 
O42861 Uncharacterised ATP-dependent helicase C25A8.01c 0.801854 -0.05505725 
Q9USZ6 mRNA turnover protein 4 homolog 0.8006492 0.01669379 
Q9UT32 Putative ribosome biogenesis protein C8F11.04 0.7983897 -0.07532217 
Q9C0W8 Protein transport protein tip20 0.7912626 0.1054451 
Q09915 Transcription elongation factor spt6 0.7890009 -0.05965526 
Q9C1W3 Probable squalene monooxygenase 0.7876648 0.01367598 
O74835 rRNA biogenesis protein rrp5 0.7856318 -0.03136489 
Q9Y7Z1 Nucleolar protein 16 0.7854068 -0.1214738 
Q10222 mRNA cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor complex subunit pta1 0.7852924 -0.03420708 
Q9UUM2 Mating-type switching protein swi1 0.784567 0.04259717 
Q9URT2 Uncharacterised protein P25A2.03 0.7838418 0.0126175 
O74415 Uncharacterised protein C14G10.02 0.7798271 0.0445125 
Q9P7M5 H/ACA ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 3 0.7785395 -0.06770569 
Q09804 Probable nucleolar pre-ribosomal-associated protein 2 0.7768197 -0.07326376 
O13936 Transcription elongation factor spt5 0.7761317 -0.003358366 
O74970 Pre-mRNA-processing factor 39 0.7755564 -0.08893144 
Q10106 Probable U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 11 0.7746497 -0.1126857 
O74400 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C4F6.14 0.7741525 0.01597451 
Q9Y7X8 Actin-like protein arp5 0.7722331 -0.02611587 
Q9UUC6 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein Sm D3 0.7719992 -0.06311918 
O74825 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit rpb4 0.7713689 0.02397839 
Appendix 
Q9USZ5 Transport protein particle 20 kDa subunit 0.7665196 0.1814697 
Q92399 DNA-directed RNA polymerases I, II, and III subunit RPABC3 0.761556 -0.005337099 
Q9P7W7 Uncharacterised ARM-like repeat-containing protein C1703.03c 0.7580613 0.05923755 
O94514 Nucleolar protein 56 0.7553579 -0.03587869 
Q10193 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor srp1 0.7526244 0.03133021 
Q9P383 Nuclear cap-binding protein subunit 2 0.7503136 -0.000809435 
O13877 DNA-directed RNA polymerases I, II, and III subunit RPABC5 0.7486726 0.06476875 
O74399 Ribosome biogenesis protein erb1 0.7459055 -0.08626043 
Q9HGL6 Ribosome biogenesis protein brx1 0.7423741 -0.07327393 
O94718 Pre-rRNA-processing protein ipi1 0.741545 -0.19816 
P41891 Protein gar2 0.7414287 -0.07817251 
O36021 Uncharacterised protein C4F10.09c 0.7397802 -0.02151352 
O94259 Probable U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 16 0.7390083 -0.1278268 
O13802 Probable rRNA-processing protein ebp2 0.7363119 0.05320284 
O94311 UPF0743 protein C215.06c 0.7336769 0.006765183 
O60124 Exosome complex component rrp42 0.7335514 -0.05221554 
O60182 Replication factor C subunit 1 0.7333755 -0.03611303 
O94403 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C126.11c 0.7315215 0.0669086 
O94522 Chromatin structure-remodelling complex subunit rsc7 0.7306786 -0.09338561 
Q92355 Helicase sen1 0.7280036 -0.01096546 
Q9Y7Y3 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C365.04c 0.7267255 -0.03851021 
O14232 ATP-dependent RNA helicase mtr4 0.7253238 0.05552038 
Q9P6P0 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 3 0.7244654 -0.05721106 
Q09100 RNA-binding protein rnp24 0.7157747 0.03411754 
Q10202 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp3 0.7147805 -0.02936037 
O42964 Transcription factor iws1 0.7146943 -0.07001486 
Q9P7G0 Uncharacterised NOC2 family protein C1142.04 0.713935 -0.0543232 
O74814 UPF0400 protein C337.03 0.7124141 -0.09018017 
P49777 ARS-binding protein 1 0.7123775 -0.03702157 
O94697 Replication factor C subunit 5 0.7119533 -0.09731504 
P15398 DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit rpa1 0.7096223 0.01739357 
Appendix 
O74855 Ribosome assembly protein C18.05c 0.7091987 0.0314667 
O14081 Putative alpha,alpha-trehalose-phosphate synthase [UDP-forming] 106 kDa subunit 0.7090398 0.05672582 
Q8WZK0 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C839.10 0.7088944 0.002497218 
Q10412 Chromatin structure-remodelling complex subunit rsc58 0.702722 -0.0445944 
P40847 Switch-activating protein 1 0.7021753 -0.1069975 
P09322 Histone H4 0.7019833 -0.1343993 
Q9P6R2 Uncharacterised protein C13E7.08c 0.6990175 0.1533618 
Q09191 DNA-directed RNA polymerases I, II, and III subunit RPABC1 0.6959302 0.0320545 
Q9Y824 Uncharacterised protein C1105.01 0.694342 -0.02987007 
Q09904 Nucleoporin nup124 0.6940665 -0.01191171 
Q9UTQ5 Uncharacterised J domain-containing protein C1071.09c 0.6922657 -0.06449752 
O13671 Importin-alpha re-exporter 0.6915106 0.01989879 
Q09916 ATP-dependent RNA helicase has1 0.690004 -0.04469896 
O13903 Exosome complex component rrp40 0.6878686 -0.03388499 
Q9P7S4 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 4 0.6875089 -0.08454621 
P87312 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf4 0.6850893 0.1471257 
O42643 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor ATP-dependent RNA helicase prp22 0.684956 0.02996991 
Q9UU76 Pumilio homology domain family member 6 0.6830753 0.0225299 
Q9UUG1 Ribosome production factor 2 homolog 0.6809311 -0.09565922 
Q9P6Q6 mRNA-capping enzyme subunit beta 0.6808316 -0.05474723 
O13722 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 12 0.6801131 -0.09354462 
O60094 DNA polymerase V 0.6797655 -0.01845565 
O43030 Hsp70 nucleotide exchange factor fes1 0.6775094 -0.1068214 
Q9US05 Protein bfr2 0.6771224 -0.1595606 
O94375 RNA exonuclease 4 0.6767812 0.009515524 
Q9UTJ2 Phosphomannomutase 0.675823 0.03924561 
O74356 Putative ATP-dependent RNA helicase C25D12.06 0.6757202 -0.2430359 
Q96WV9 Probable cyclin-dependent kinase 9 0.6736307 -0.1298339 
Q9P7R3 Exosome complex component mtr3 0.6732429 0.04690777 
Q9P7S1 PDZ domain-containing protein C23G3.12c 0.671787 -0.05861678 
O14082 Uncharacterised protein UNK4.17 0.6701341 0.2235856 
Appendix 
Q03319 Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase prh1 0.6700263 -0.02367094 
Q1K9C4 Probable E3 ubiquitin protein ligase C167.07c 0.6697389 -0.03981446 
P87243 Uncharacterised protein C4G3.18 0.6664762 -0.03398094 
Q06975 H/ACA ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 1 0.6660758 -0.06183635 
O74968 U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein usp102 0.6628777 -0.03764703 
O60179 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 10 0.6628677 -0.001452042 
O94529 FACT complex subunit pob3 0.6625869 0.02656164 
O13823 U3 small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein protein imp4 0.659915 -0.1248317 
O94676 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 22 0.6588223 -0.04553925 
O13986 Uncharacterised protein C26H5.04 0.6577491 0.0338548 
O14086 DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit rpa49 0.6570597 0.01993731 
O42936 LAS1-like protein 0.6541456 -0.05957707 
P35551 rRNA 2-O-methyltransferase fibrillarin 0.6516854 -0.04674356 
O60059 Pumilio domain-containing protein C56F2.08c 0.6490848 0.06310447 
O74635 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit RPB9 0.6485837 -0.1756278 
Q9P7X8 Probable DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit RPA2 0.6466584 0.02750631 
O13878 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 17 0.6465135 -0.04775558 
O74733 Protein cft1 0.6461899 -0.07628638 
O43051 Probable nucleolar complex protein 14 0.6451085 0.006556693 
Q92359 Pumilio domain-containing protein C6G9.14 0.644749 0.03341358 
Q09788 Alkali-sensitive linkage protein 1 0.643204 -0.04417862 
O14187 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor spp42 0.6424754 -0.04032905 
Q09176 Splicing factor U2AF 23 kDa subunit 0.6418234 -0.2435788 
Q10366 Uncharacterised PI3/PI4-kinase family protein C22E12.16c 0.6417581 -0.06907846 
Q09719 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp10 0.6406127 -0.01758961 
P00046 Cytochrome c 0.6395175 0.04657002 
O74319 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit taf73 0.6385086 -0.09305236 
P37202 Exosome complex exonuclease dis3 0.6380963 -0.01951461 
O94508 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf11 0.6370041 0.01533338 
Q9UUI4 Uncharacterised protein C22F8.09 0.633792 -0.02102248 
O59734 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein F 0.633103 0.243303 
Appendix 
Q9P4X3 Probable U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 7 0.6329693 -0.03651629 
O42668 Tetratricopeptide repeat protein 1 0.6323272 -0.0513591 
Q9US25 Chromodomain helicase hrp1 0.6321827 0.03405419 
Q02061 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit RPB2 0.6303999 -0.007800017 
O94288 Nucleolar complex-associated protein 3 0.6283919 -0.08732169 
O74333 Non-classical export protein 2 homolog 0.6278245 0.05417925 
O60071 Uncharacterised protein C13G1.09 0.6276369 -0.01972302 
O94620 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf17 0.6266136 0.02764542 
O74535 Cleavage and polyadenylation factor complex subunit C74.02c 0.6251444 0.1748702 
Q9P7W8 Chromatin structure-remodelling complex subunit rsc9 0.6247431 0.01092 
O43036 DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit rpa43 0.6243641 -0.02171391 
O42877 rRNA-processing protein fcf2 0.6236134 0.08702379 
O13971 Suppressor of glycerol defect protein 1 0.6232474 -0.06494101 
O74690 13 kDa ribonucleoprotein-associated protein 0.6211308 0.04759008 
P40848 5-3 exoribonuclease 2 0.6195204 -0.04896178 
O74880 mRNA cap guanine-N7 methyltransferase 0.6191545 -0.2275822 
Q9P7S7 Nucleolar protein 58 0.6171646 -0.04085552 
O14007 H/ACA ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 4 0.6135044 -0.04301951 
O59743 Uncharacterised protein C530.07c 0.6134712 -0.2173667 
O94372 Uncharacterised protein C1604.06c 0.6124995 0.03276706 
P87239 DnaJ homolog 1, mitochondrial 0.6117764 0.1199531 
O13834 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase ptr1 0.611528 -0.01382986 
Q10295 Poly(A) polymerase pla1 0.6112916 -0.06049824 
Q10272 Pre-rRNA-processing protein crb3/ipi3 0.6111486 -0.0445407 
O74888 Bax inhibitor 1 0.6094527 -0.01447234 
O94621 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C1289.12 0.6070769 -0.006768665 
Q9HE11 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 5 0.6066366 -0.06495478 
Q9UTD7 Ribosomal RNA-processing protein 15 0.6059872 0.01286941 
P87115 UPF0202 protein C20G8.09c 0.6053993 -0.00552851 
P87126 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf2 0.6041583 -0.1128288 
O14233 mRNA 3-end-processing protein rna14 0.6041263 0.06687849 
Q9UTN6 Chromatin structure-remodelling complex subunit snf21 0.6010958 -0.1136856 
Appendix 
Q10494 Uncharacterised oxidoreductase C26F1.07 0.6005182 -0.1736193 
Q9P6K9 Deoxyhypusine hydroxylase 0.6002023 -0.1204131 
Q9USP9 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C902.04 0.599991 -0.1010036 
O74862 rRNA-processing protein utp23 0.5989423 -0.1076806 
O13641 Uncharacterised protein C8D2.16c 0.5987411 -0.1683376 
Q10483 Uncharacterised protein C17C9.11c 0.5980123 -0.04591363 
O74948 Transcription initiation factor IIA subunit 2 0.5972869 -0.1201632 
Q10195 Uncharacterised protein C11C11.06c 0.5960387 0.03250441 
O94683 Ribosomal RNA-processing protein 7 0.5952367 -0.01065632 
Q9USL1 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C18B5.10c 0.594249 0.1333284 
O74978 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C1827.05c 0.5936537 -0.05946571 
Q9P7S3 SWI/SNF and RSC complexes subunit ssr3 0.5923334 0.03296389 
Q9P6N8 ATP-dependent rRNA helicase rrp3 0.5879591 0.04223246 
O14021 RbAp48-related WD40 repeat-containing protein prw1 0.5818596 -0.1840742 
O13620 Multiple RNA-binding domain-containing protein 1 0.5802926 0.204431 
O13282 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 5 0.5799356 -0.06432413 
Q9P7H0 H/ACA ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 2 0.5794724 -0.03178904 
O60180 Probable metalloprotease arx1 0.5794601 -0.0408721 
Q9USX1 Aminopeptidase 1 0.5784721 -0.1720844 
O94646 Mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 8 0.5782391 -0.1440462 
O94523 Probable acyl-CoA desaturase 0.5765708 -0.01926747 
O60161 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 4 0.5758573 -0.0628592 
Q9P7S2 Probable 26S proteasome regulatory subunit rpn6 0.5758002 -0.0224867 
Q9P7C0 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C2E1P5.05 0.575018 0.004773984 
Q9P7X7 Actin-related protein 4 0.5730187 -0.02664513 
O94365 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 15 0.5726666 -0.01871923 
O14230 Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase 0.5717182 -0.03494516 
Q9P6N2 Uncharacterised phosphatase C823.14 0.5709558 0.01627813 
O14423 CENP-B homolog protein 1 0.5697196 -0.05799628 
P87058 La protein homolog 0.5680587 -0.03070027 
O94436 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 14 0.5674455 0.03176774 
Appendix 
Q76PD3 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp6 0.5663456 -0.02685069 
O94659 Probable nucleolar GTP-binding protein 1 0.5650727 -0.05283445 
O59715 Dihydroceramide delta(4)-desaturase 0.5649048 0.08809724 
Q92368 Cell differentiation protein rcd1 0.5639712 0.05939235 
P36603 Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase small chain 0.5634651 -0.08905625 
O13741 Nucleolar protein 12 0.5629974 0.009189226 
O94435 Meiotically up-regulated gene 35 protein 0.5610602 0.0627363 
O14290 Uncharacterised protein C9E9.04 0.560203 0.08214723 
O14003 Replication factor C subunit 3 0.5560122 -0.08165826 
O74462 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 6 0.5534 0.05720252 
Q1MTQ0 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase brl1 0.5530227 -0.08435208 
Q09849 SWI/SNF and RSC complexes subunit arp42 0.5526492 -0.1442785 
Q09875 Uncharacterised protein C12G12.12 0.5510929 -0.08533591 
O14018 Serine-tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic 0.5510756 -0.1088234 
Q10178 U2 snRNP component prp10 0.550872 0.04795351 
Q9HDY4 Putative ATP-dependent RNA helicase PB1A10.06c 0.549441 0.1356264 
Q10257 Ribosomal RNA-processing protein 8 0.5462956 -0.01831486 
O14088 Uncharacterised oxidoreductase C2F3.05c 0.5456754 -0.07708433 
O74563 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase brl2 0.5440668 -0.120917 
O43082 Ribosomal RNA-processing protein 14-C 0.543923 -0.1878104 
P87177 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C3D6.12 0.5436257 -0.09828016 
O74755 Paired amphipathic helix protein pst3 0.5429348 0.008679697 
O13874 Uncharacterised NOC2 family protein C1B3.09c 0.5417644 0.04562287 
Q02787 Adenylosuccinate synthetase 0.5411658 -0.03493294 
Q9UUE7 Cell division control protein 73 0.5406094 -0.03731207 
O94666 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit rpc1 0.5402607 0.05979865 
Q9UTT2 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor prp12 0.5392562 -0.04793273 
Q9US06 RNA polymerase II-associated protein 1 homolog 0.5382119 -0.0820272 
O94285 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit rpc8 0.5376631 -0.03243656 
O14102 Spliceosome-associated protein 49 0.5367461 0.07269653 
O74503 Upstream activation factor subunit spp27 0.5366759 -0.07001449 
Appendix 
O74974 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 25 0.5354049 -0.007598882 
Q9UTH9 tRNA-dihydrouridine(47) synthase [NAD(P)(+)] 0.5294225 -0.01339647 
Q9HFF5 Sister chromatid cohesion protein pds5 0.529294 0.05465871 
P14068 Exportin-1 0.527163 0.06271914 
O43065 Probable helicase mot1 0.5271496 0.1164516 
Q9UTK6 G-patch domain-containing protein C1486.03 0.5263333 -0.06746723 
P23880 Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1-2 0.5262558 -0.05539691 
P49373 Transcription elongation factor S-II 0.525321 -0.5284612 
O13953 Chromatin modification-related protein eaf3 0.5245891 0.07714951 
O59711 Saccharopine dehydrogenase [NADP(+), L-glutamate-forming] 0.521547 -0.01177478 
Q9P7P1 DNA-directed RNA polymerase I subunit rpa14 0.520627 -0.06207564 
Q09177 DNA-directed RNA polymerases I and III subunit RPAC2 0.5195893 -0.267148 
O42832 AdoMet-dependent rRNA methyltransferase spb1 0.5184376 -0.1919435 
Q9UT24 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor brr2 0.5153819 -0.0440274 
O60055 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 20 0.5150945 0.01636915 
O14340 Oxysterol-binding protein homolog C2F12.05c 0.5114976 0.06264697 
Q9Y7X5 Uncharacterised protein C365.14c 0.5094645 0.09873351 
Q09750 Paired amphipathic helix protein pst1 0.5090347 -0.2414626 
O94432 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C660.15 0.5080688 -0.2759174 
Q9USN3 Probable U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 13 0.5061074 -0.06711378 
P41878 26S proteasome regulatory subunit rpn11 0.5037291 0.03661089 
Q09741 Spermidine synthase 0.5034359 -0.1344183 
P49740 Nucleoside diphosphate kinase 0.4984878 -0.1891017 
O74627 Cyclin pch1 0.4969878 -0.05516749 
Q9Y7N1 Uncharacterised protein C1450.03 0.4969487 -0.3121032 
Q09795 Uncharacterised peptidase C22G7.01c 0.4967688 0.06058909 
O14044 Pre-rRNA-processing protein pno1 0.4966137 -0.02134283 
B8Y7Y5 INO80 complex subunit 5 0.4964671 -0.2741155 
Q1MTS0 Uncharacterised protein C3B8.09 0.4949871 0.03227174 
Q9UT97 Probable proteasome subunit alpha type-5 0.4948683 -0.0185365 
Q9P3A9 Uncharacterised protein C1565.05 0.4945126 0.000449412 
Appendix 
Q9P785 LisH domain-containing protein C1711.05 0.4944282 -0.1985993 
O14075 Putative 2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase UNK4.10 0.4927894 -0.1356391 
Q9HFE8 Transcription-associated protein 1 0.4927384 -0.05450589 
P40373 ATP phosphoribosyltransferase 0.4927082 0.04679872 
P40375 NAD-dependent malic enzyme 0.4920163 -0.02694021 
P87121 Transcription initiation factor TFIID subunit 2 0.4898651 0.0776997 
Q9UT39 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C824.04 0.4893413 -0.1202247 
Q9Y7M6 Ribosomal RNA-processing protein 1 homolog 0.4893309 -0.09531076 
O13942 Uncharacterised protein C23H3.12c 0.4893078 0.09620251 
Q9C1X1 Periodic tryptophan protein 2 homolog 0.489017 -0.02257656 
Q9UTE8 Chromatin-remodelling complex subunit ies6 0.4885477 0.1438857 
Q9UTM1 Uncharacterised protein C144.01 0.4884215 0.1848822 
O13759 RNA-binding post-transcriptional regulator csx1 0.4853261 -0.04559954 
O74887 Peroxiredoxin tpx1 0.4829895 -0.1892581 
Q9UTQ7 SWI/SNF and RSC complexes subunit arp9 0.4802748 0.1334645 
Q9P6I2 Cys-Gly metallodipeptidase dug1 0.4772245 0.02670337 
Q9C0X9 Phosphatidylglycerol/phosphatidylinositol transfer protein 0.4761671 0.07661141 
O43026 Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2 0.4729384 -0.1795596 
O94449 Replication factor C subunit 4 0.4728893 0.01499609 
O94671 Probable homoserine dehydrogenase 0.4714571 -0.2244706 
O13873 Protein CSN12 homolog 0.4711125 -0.1955964 
Q9P7T1 Hydroxamate-type ferrichrome siderophore peptide synthetase 0.4658508 -0.0285897 
Q10064 Uncharacterised PI3/PI4-kinase family protein C1F5.11c 0.4636593 -0.02232359 
O43071 Pre-mRNA-processing factor 17 0.4630003 -0.03295682 
P78753 Probable asparagine synthetase [glutamine-hydrolysing] 0.4616926 -0.2042127 
Q09841 Probable proteasome subunit beta type-7 0.4615657 -0.05643144 
O94616 DNA-directed RNA polymerases I and III subunit RPAC1 0.4606757 0.04550652 
Q12126 Serine/threonine-protein kinase crk1 0.4594452 -0.1986384 
O74842 Uncharacterised ATP-dependent helicase fft2 0.4572969 0.02786149 
O60176 Uncharacterised RNA-binding protein C23E6.01c 0.4572486 -0.00529889 
Appendix 
Q09834 Uncharacterised mitochondrial carrier C4G8.08 0.4562781 0.1019595 
Q9P7G9 Adenylyl-sulfate kinase 0.4562732 -0.2886637 
O14099 Uncharacterised RING finger protein C2F3.16 0.4558327 0.1496172 
O59702 Histone deacetylase clr6 0.4523616 0.1039929 
O94316 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor cwf10 0.4512792 -0.01296531 
O43004 60S ribosomal protein L16-C 0.450738 -0.07834473 
P21696 Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase [NAD(+)] 1 0.4500485 -0.02718931 
P78750 Probable U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 18 0.4491602 -0.000996389 
O94505 3(2),5-bisphosphate nucleotidase 0.448624 -0.2175561 
O42894 Exosome complex component rrp46 0.4459412 -0.530347 
P08094 60S acidic ribosomal protein P2-alpha 0.4449235 -0.01271192 
O14148 Putative DNA helicase ino80 0.4445 -0.1171108 
O14470 SWI/SNF and RSC complexes subunit ssr2 0.4430999 0.01926138 
Q09704 Exosome complex component rrp4 0.4426296 -0.0973528 
P40370 Enolase 1-1 0.4417897 -0.1586093 
Q9US13 Probable 26S proteasome regulatory subunit rpn9 0.4367747 0.03881711 
O94653 Ribosome biogenesis protein bms1 0.4341285 -0.04143098 
Q00472 4-nitrophenylphosphatase 0.4338002 -0.1308615 
O13935 Putative tRNA (cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase C23C4.17 0.4334381 -0.3059256 
Q9UTL3 Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase 0.4329469 -0.02094679 
P36580 Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase 0.4329352 -0.1758215 
Q10315 DNA polymerase epsilon subunit C 0.4329045 0.1200878 
Q10187 UBA domain-containing protein 6 0.4321601 0.1260437 
Q9UTK0 20S-pre-rRNA D-site endonuclease nob1 0.4316983 0.1124534 
O14459 DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit rpb7 0.4313949 0.000585977 
P28748 GTP-binding nuclear protein spi1 0.4288239 -0.003741192 
Q9C0V4 Uncharacterised protein PB7E8.02 0.4281787 0.08702835 
O74777 KRR1 small subunit processome component homolog 0.4265363 -0.03952186 
Q9HGM5 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp8 0.4264192 -0.03669306 
P87294 Putative RNA polymerase II transcriptional coactivator 0.4256967 0.05419981 
O74879 Ribosome biogenesis protein enp2 homolog 0.4220488 0.03619891 
Appendix 
O14311 Protein spt3 0.4217328 -0.1038471 
O14053 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C1672.07 0.4215797 0.004182081 
O94517 Probable proteasome subunit alpha type-6 0.4203937 -0.02718647 
Q09843 Replication factor C subunit 2 0.417385 0.0908156 
Q09775 ATP-dependent RNA helicase rok1 0.4153904 -0.01534314 
Q9UTP9 ATP-dependent RNA helicase dbp4 0.4114645 -0.01050044 
O74529 Uncharacterised methyltransferase C70.08c 0.4089603 -0.3543338 
Q09912 Protein psi1 0.4087241 0.1128593 
O13794 Endoribonuclease ysh1 0.4083103 -0.1025765 
O74424 Nucleoporin nup211 0.4082584 -0.1374877 
O74340 Protein sof1 0.4077622 -0.001256419 
Q10168 Nucleoporin nsp1 0.4057619 -0.1421466 
O60188 U3 small nucleolar RNA-associated protein 6 0.4056993 -0.147763 
O59815 Putative malic acid transport protein 0.4010876 -0.3769754 
P30316 DNA polymerase delta catalytic subunit 0.4010317 -0.05829305 
Q10153 
Uncharacterised CDP-alcohol 
phosphatidyltransferase class-I family 
protein C1D4.08 
0.3979149 0.04196817 
O94476 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 6 0.3967829 -0.1397952 
P78833 Uncharacterised protein C21B10.08c 0.3963495 -0.318464 
P78974 Delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase 0.3946236 0.2689947 
O94248 Midasin 0.3945579 0.02704005 
Q09814 Trimethylguanosine synthase 0.3945025 -0.06848214 
Q9P7X0 Succinate dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] cytochrome b small subunit, mitochondrial 0.3927555 0.003066331 
Q92353 Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 6 0.3924402 -0.038275 
O14192 Aromatic amino acid aminotransferase C56E4.03 0.3911041 -0.2488041 
Q9P7M8 Nucleoporin nup184 0.3903056 -0.007809103 
P50524 26S proteasome regulatory subunit rpn12 0.3892608 0.00152961 
P78929 Cofilin 0.3881405 -0.04393945 
O74791 GTPase grn1 0.3880623 0.01328997 
O13691 NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase 24 kDa subunit homolog C11E3.12, mitochondrial 0.388052 -0.3238 
Q10233 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit RPC2 0.3879078 -0.0638279 
O14301 Uncharacterised WD repeat-containing protein C9G1.05 0.3861576 -0.06283332 
Appendix 
Q9URX9 Protein pxr1 0.3859622 0.04996441 
Q9USQ9 Probable proteasome subunit beta type-4 0.3851967 -0.040048 
O94639 Zinc-regulated transporter 1 0.3840051 0.1543346 
O74959 Uncharacterised oxidoreductase C736.13 0.3836513 0.01864108 
Q9US07 Probable actin-related protein 8 0.383247 -0.09414417 
Q9UU90 Ribonucleases P/MRP protein subunit POP5 0.3829079 0.07343739 
Q92373 Replication factor A protein 2 0.3822225 -0.1851713 
Q9UQY2 Probable proteasome subunit beta type-1 0.3821821 -0.08101416 
O74984 Heat shock protein homolog C338.06c 0.3805132 0.1488877 
O13791 Protein slt1 0.3796514 0.2822227 
Q9Y7R7 Putative ribosome biogenesis protein C306.07c 0.3775491 0.0846779 
O94337 Probable deoxyhypusine synthase 0.376986 -0.303872 
Q92347 Nucleolar protein 9 0.3768654 0.04766761 
P78810 Vacuolar transporter chaperone 4 0.3768103 0.08510461 
O14169 Phosphatidylglycerol phospholipase C 0.3759864 0.1957579 
Q9C0X8 Putative ribosomal RNA-processing protein 12 0.3729205 -0.001483984 
O14105 Ribulose-phosphate 3-epimerase 0.3726232 -0.1040989 
O13991 Uncharacterised oxidoreductase C26H5.09c 0.3699029 -0.03416381 
O14215 DNA primase small subunit 0.3682483 -0.08721892 
O94286 1,2-dihydroxy-3-keto-5-methylthiopentene dioxygenase 0.3679652 0.06460886 
P78780 Probable aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase 0.3676426 -0.1807322 
O59855 Probable heat shock protein ssa2 0.3648369 -0.04364602 
O42945 Probable pre-mRNA-splicing factor ATP-dependent RNA helicase prp43 0.3647974 -0.01557817 
Q09899 Porphobilinogen deaminase 0.3645689 0.2702886 
Q9Y819 Transmembrane 9 superfamily protein C1105.08 0.3645654 -0.1563961 
O13871 Uncharacterised methyltransferase C1B3.06c 0.3641353 0.1646894 
Q10066 Arginase 0.363657 -0.1150722 
Q09817 60S ribosomal export protein nmd3 0.3607112 -0.1034352 
Q9HDV4 Lid2 complex component lid2 0.3605794 -0.02812186 
Q09848 KH domain-containing protein C23D3.08 0.3591463 -0.08433086 
O13848 NAD/NADP-dependent indole-3-acetaldehyde reductase 0.3557384 -0.03170333 
Appendix 
P36621 Adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 0.3555012 -0.1381766 
O60184 General transcriptional corepressor ssn6 0.3551739 -0.1917325 
Q9Y709 Suppressor of kinetochore protein 1 0.3540786 -0.1036272 
O42893 Neutral trehalase 0.3533063 0.06266285 
Q9C0X6 RuvB-like helicase 1 0.3528248 -0.03056786 
O74364 Adhesion defective protein 1 0.3524535 -0.08969429 
O13731 E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase ubr11 0.3517785 -0.06901202 
O94443 Uncharacterised exonuclease C637.09 0.349826 -0.01632638 
P79081 N-acetyltransferase ats1 0.3486029 0.1957762 
P28040 DNA polymerase alpha catalytic subunit 0.348473 -0.04256166 
O43046 V-type proton ATPase subunit F 0.3477926 0.1175975 
O74975 Probable choline-phosphate cytidylyltransferase 0.3474646 -0.1127202 
O14273 Meiotically up-regulated protein C8C9.04 0.3471074 0.1326571 
P78812 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, decarboxylating 0.3463118 -0.1384813 
O74740 Cleavage factor two protein 2 0.3451542 0.02770082 
Q92372 Replication factor A protein 1 0.3440229 0.02033904 
O74857 DNA-directed RNA polymerase III subunit rpc4 0.3425304 0.1914042 
Q9URM2 Probable transketolase 0.3424355 -0.1664086 
O14027 Probable pyridoxine biosynthesis PDX1-like protein 0.3421986 -0.1599731 
O74770 Probable phosphoketolase 0.341644 -0.05138888 
O74435 Cell division control protein 31 0.3410155 -0.01444011 
Q9UT05 Tripeptidyl-peptidase 2 homolog 0.3404152 -0.0129484 
Q09682 Probable proteasome subunit alpha type-4 0.3398016 -0.08142919 
P87051 Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase ppi1 0.3396893 0.2310059 
Q9US45 Mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 6 0.3379107 0.09184441 
Q9UR09 Cell wall synthesis protein psu1 0.335211 0.01080738 
Q9USU2 Dimethyladenosine transferase 0.3346741 0.2418528 
Q09748 Dynamin-like protein C12C2.08 0.334484 0.01912683 
Q09751 Lactoylglutathione lyase 0.3339902 -0.08098203 
Q9USJ7 Negative regulator of ofd1 0.3324705 -0.09437364 
Q9P7B3 Putative cation exchanger C521.04c 0.3323743 0.1731918 
Q92375 Thioredoxin reductase 0.3305139 -0.2106036 
O74402 Heat shock protein 78, mitochondrial 0.3304275 0.01329592 
Appendix 
P19117 Inorganic pyrophosphatase 0.3303938 -0.1633726 
O42888 Uncharacterised oxidoreductase C8E4.04 0.3294997 -0.1151919 
O94581 Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 6B 0.328089 0.05142324 
O13774 GTP cyclohydrolase 1 0.3267241 -0.00508421 
Q12381 Pre-mRNA-splicing factor prp1 0.3249204 0.004139751 
Q9UUJ7 COP9 signalosome complex subunit 7 0.3248163 0.05571023 
Q09717 Ran-specific GTPase-activating protein 1 0.3237589 -0.07193079 
Q9Y7Z5 Tetra-spanning protein 1 0.3230367 0.05523741 
Appendix 
7.2 Appendix II 
Table 7.2 N/C ratios and product functions of genes deleted in strains screened 
by insertion of nuclear envelope marker and imaging 
aCode and name of deleted gene. U: unassigned. 
bMean, standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of variation (COV) of N/C ratio 
measurements for each strain (n = 50 cells per strain).  
cSignificance (P value) of difference between each population and wild type (WT) 
population tested by student t-test with Welchs correction.  
dFunction of product of gene (Wood et al., 2012). 
Gene deleteda N/C ratiob 
P valuec Functiond 
Code Name Mean SD COV 
SPCC330.10 pcm1 0.0292 0.0085 0.2928 <0.0001 P-TEFb-cap methyltransferase  
SPAC1B3.09c U 0.0361 0.0136 0.3772 <0.0001 
Noc2p-Noc3p 
complex subunit 
(predicted) 
SPAC821.08c slp1 0.0367 0.0076 0.2078 <0.0001 
substrate-specific 
mitotic metaphase/ 
anaphase APC 
coactivator 
SPBC12D12.01 sad1 0.0397 0.0102 0.2570 <0.0001 spindle pole body SUN domain protein  
SPBC18H10.14 rps1601 0.0400 0.0090 0.2238 <0.0001 
40S ribosomal 
protein S16 
(predicted) 
SPAC6G9.02c nop9 0.0404 0.0097 0.2393 <0.0001 
pumilio family RNA-
binding protein 
(predicted) 
SPBC29A3.04 rpl8 0.0410 0.0088 0.2134 <0.0001 
60S ribosomal 
protein L7a/L8 
(predicted) 
SPAC7D4.09c dfg10 0.0412 0.0099 0.2393 <0.0001 
3-oxo-5-alpha-
steroid 4-
dehydrogenase 
(predicted) 
SPAC1834.06c pmo25 0.0419 0.0124 0.2956 0.0004 mo25 family protein 
SPBC18H10.12c rpl701 0.0427 0.0137 0.3212 0.0027 
60S ribosomal 
protein L7a involved 
in ribosome 
biogenesis 
SPAC11E3.02c U 0.0444 0.0133 0.3002 0.0174 C2 domain protein 
SPAC2F3.03c rpa49 0.0449 0.0120 0.2668 0.0188 
DNA-directed RNA 
polymerase I 
complex subunit 
(predicted) 
SPCC576.05 sac3 0.0450 0.0132 0.2933 0.0305 nuclear export factor (predicted) 
SPBC337.12 red5 0.0452 0.0120 0.2651 0.0267 human ZC3H3 homolog 
Appendix 
SPBC19F8.07 mcs6 0.0456 0.0123 0.2687 0.048 
TFIIH associated 
cyclin-dependent 
protein kinase 
SPBC336.08 spc24 0.0457 0.0141 0.3089 0.0764 NMS complex subunit 
SPAC13A11.02c erg11 0.0459 0.0129 0.2820 0.0751 
sterol 14-
demethylase 
(predicted) 
SPAC19A8.13 usp101 0.0460 0.0148 0.3220 0.1076 U1 snRNP-associated protein 
SPBC11C11.03 ndc80 0.0471 0.0232 0.4922 0.4267 NMS complex subunit  
SPBC21H7.02 taf10 0.0472 0.0187 0.3968 0.3597 
complex/transcriptio
n factor TFIID 
complex subunit 
SPBC1105.07c pci2 0.0473 0.0089 0.1884 0.1472 TREX complex subunit (predicted) 
SPAPB1E7.01c U 0.0475 0.0114 0.2394 0.2358 conserved fungal family 
SPBC146.07 prp2 0.0476 0.0199 0.4194 0.4426 U2AF large subunit (U2AF-59) 
SPCC63.10c sec59 0.0478 0.0108 0.2256 0.2938 dolichol kinase (predicted) 
SPBC12D12.08c ned8 0.0493 0.0093 0.1886 0.7074 ubiquitin-like protein modifier for cullin 
SPBC21.01 mis17 0.0500 0.0172 0.3434 0.9765 kinetochore protein, CENP-U orthologue 
SPBC336.07 sfc3 0.0507 0.0174 0.3438 0.8009 
transcription factor 
TFIIIC complex B 
box binding subunit 
SPAC110.04c pss1 0.0513 0.0128 0.2499 0.5468 heat shock protein 
SPBC1271.04c dys1 0.0518 0.0146 0.2815 0.4479 
eIF-5A-
deoxyhypusine 
synthase 
(predicted) 
SPBP35G2.09 usp103 0.0528 0.0103 0.1958 0.1521 U1 snRNP-associated protein 
SPCC757.10 vph2 0.0532 0.0116 0.2174 0.1243 
ER membrane 
protein involved in 
assembly of the V-
ATPase (predicted) 
SPBC29A10.15 orc1 0.0537 0.0145 0.2705 0.13 origin recognition complex subunit 
SPCC1259.06 taf8 0.0539 0.0108 0.2012 0.0545 
transcription factor 
TFIID complex 
subunit 8 
(predicted) 
SPAC1250.01 snf21 0.0549 0.0150 0.2731 0.0508 ATP-dependent DNA helicase 
SPAC222.11 hem13 0.0550 0.0127 0.2312 0.0266 
coproporphyrinogen 
III oxidase 
(predicted) 
SPBC27B12.02 mis19 0.0550 0.0151 0.2752 0.0475 centromere protein 
Appendix 
SPAC6F12.15c cut9 0.0553 0.0130 0.2354 0.0204 
anaphase-
promoting complex, 
TPR lobe 
subcomplex subunit  
SPBC1734.03 fol1 0.0560 0.0113 0.2013 0.0041 
trifunctional 
dihydropteroatesynt
hase/2-amino-4-
hydroxy-6-
hydroxymethyldihyd
ropteridinediphosph
okinase/dihydroneo
pterin aldolase 
(predicted) 
SPBC14F5.08 med7 0.0562 0.0161 0.2871 0.0196 mediator complex subunit 
SPAC29E6.04 nnf1 0.0563 0.0154 0.2741 0.0149 NMS complex subunit 
SPAC12G12.05c taf9 0.0570 0.0197 0.3455 0.0255 
SAGA complex/ 
transcription 
initiation factor 
SPAC18B11.06 lcp5 0.0570 0.0142 0.2497 0.0042 
U3 snoRNP-
associated protein 
(predicted) 
SPAC6F12.11c sfc1 0.0579 0.0109 0.1885 0.0002 
transcription factor 
TFIIIC complex A 
box associated 
subunit 
SPAP27G11.13c nop10 0.0601 0.0151 0.2507 0.0001 
snoRNP 
pseudouridylase 
box H/ACA snoRNP 
complex protein 
(predicted) 
SPAC1F3.01 rrp6 0.0607 0.0213 0.3508 0.0017 
exosome 3'-5' 
exoribonuclease 
subunit (predicted) 
SPBC4B4.05 smg1 0.0610 0.0180 0.2951 0.0002 Sm snRNP core protein 
SPAP8A3.06 uaf2 0.0617 0.0122 0.1983 <0.0001 U2AF small subunit (U2AF-23) 
SPBC8D2.09c msl1 0.0620 0.0161 0.2595 <0.0001 
U2 snRNP-
associated protein 
(predicted) 
SPBC1709.15c cft2 0.0622 0.0180 0.2889 <0.0001 
cleavage factor two 
Cft2/polyadenylatio
n factor CPSF-73 
(predicted) 
SPBC19C2.08 prp38 0.0628 0.0171 0.2717 <0.0001 
U4/U6 x U5 tri-
snRNP complex 
subunit 
SPCC1223.08c dfr1 0.0630 0.0132 0.2096 <0.0001 
dihydrofolate 
reductase/ serine 
hydrolase family 
fusion protein 
SPBC30B4.07c tfb4 0.0632 0.0147 0.2323 <0.0001 
transcription factor 
TFIIH complex 
subunit 
SPBC4.03c sfb3 0.0639 0.0148 0.2309 <0.0001 
COPII-coated 
vesicle component 
(predicted) 
Appendix 
SPAC1783.03 fta2 0.0649 0.0239 0.3684 0.0001 kinetochore protein, CENP-P ortholog 
SPCC777.14 prp4 0.0655 0.0150 0.2295 <0.0001 serine/threonine protein kinase 
SPAC1006.02 asa1 0.0660 0.0216 0.3267 <0.0001 Astra associated protein 1 
SPBC947.12 kms2 0.0706 0.0204 0.2883 <0.0001 spindle pole body protein 
SPAC2G11.08c smn1 0.0709 0.0185 0.2613 <0.0001 SMN family protein  
SPCC1450.13c rib5 0.0766 0.0170 0.2221 <0.0001 riboflavin synthase  
SPBC428.01c nup107 0.0809 0.0319 0.3945 <0.0001 Nucleoporin 
WT N/A 0.0500 0.0092 0.1834 N/A N/A 
Appendix 
7.3 Appendix III 
Figure 7.1 Representative images of aberrant N/C ratio mutants identified by 
genetic screen 
Representative images of wild type 5300 control strain and strains carrying a 
deletion in the gene indicated. Strains are categorised into wild type, low N/C ratio 
mutants and high N/C ratio mutants. Within these categories strains are in order of 
increasing N/C ratio. Brightfield (magenta), ish1-yEGFP (yellow). Scale bars: 
10 m. Wild type, pcm1 and nup107 as in Figure 4.4. 
Appendix 
Appendix 
Appendix 
Reference List 
Reference List 
ALFA, C., FANTES, P., HYAMS, J., MCLEOD, M. & WARBRICK, E. 1993. 
Experiments with Fission Yeast: A Laboratory Course Manual, New York, USA, 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 
ALLEN, T. D., CRONSHAW, J. M., BAGLEY, S., KISELEVA, E. & GOLDBERG, M. W. 
2000. The nuclear pore complex: mediator of translocation between nucleus 
and cytoplasm. J Cell Sci, 113 ( Pt 10), 1651-9. 
ALTMAN, P. L. & KATZ, D. D. 1976. Cell biology, Bethesda, Federation of American 
Societies for Experimental Biology. 
ANDERSON, D. J. & HETZER, M. W. 2008. Reshaping of the endoplasmic reticulum 
limits the rate for nuclear envelope formation. J Cell Biol, 182, 911-24. 
AOKI, K., HAYASHI, H., FURUYA, K., SATO, M., TAKAGI, T., OSUMI, M., KIMURA, A. 
& NIKI, H. 2011. Breakage of the nuclear envelope by an extending mitotic 
nucleus occurs during anaphase in Schizosaccharomyces japonicus. Genes 
Cells, 16, 911-26. 
ASAKAWA, H., YANG, H. J., YAMAMOTO, T. G., OHTSUKI, C., CHIKASHIGE, Y., 
SAKATA-SOGAWA, K., TOKUNAGA, M., IWAMOTO, M., HIRAOKA, Y. & 
HARAGUCHI, T. 2014. Characterization of nuclear pore complex components 
in fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nucleus, 5, 149-62. 
BAHLER, J. & PRINGLE, J. R. 1998. Pom1p, a fission yeast protein kinase that 
provides positional information for both polarized growth and cytokinesis. 
Genes Dev, 12, 1356-70. 
BAHLER, J., WU, J. Q., LONGTINE, M. S., SHAH, N. G., MCKENZIE, A., 3RD, 
STEEVER, A. B., WACH, A., PHILIPPSEN, P. & PRINGLE, J. R. 1998. 
Heterologous modules for efficient and versatile PCR-based gene targeting in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Yeast, 14, 943-51. 
BAI, S. W., ROUQUETTE, J., UMEDA, M., FAIGLE, W., LOEW, D., SAZER, S. & 
DOYE, V. 2004. The fission yeast Nup107-120 complex functionally interacts 
with the small GTPase Ran/Spi1 and is required for mRNA export, nuclear pore 
distribution, and proper cell division. Mol Cell Biol, 24, 6379-92. 
BARTON, L. J., SOSHNEV, A. A. & GEYER, P. K. 2015. Networking in the nucleus: a 
spotlight on LEM-domain proteins. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 34, 1-8. 
BAUMGARTNER, S. & TOLIC-NORRELYKKE, I. M. 2009. Growth pattern of single 
fission yeast cells is bilinear and depends on temperature and DNA synthesis. 
Biophys J, 96, 4336-47. 
BEAN, D. M., HEIMBACH, J., FICORELLA, L., MICKLEM, G., OLIVER, S. G. & 
FAVRIN, G. 2014. esyN: network building, sharing and publishing. PLoS One, 
9, e106035. 
BERCIANO, M. T., NOVELL, M., VILLAGRA, N. T., CASAFONT, I., BENGOECHEA, 
R., VAL-BERNAL, J. F. & LAFARGA, M. 2007. Cajal body number and 
nucleolar size correlate with the cell body mass in human sensory ganglia 
neurons. J Struct Biol, 158, 410-20. 
BERK, J. M., TIFFT, K. E. & WILSON, K. L. 2013. The nuclear envelope LEM-domain 
protein emerin. Nucleus, 4, 298-314. 
BERNALES, S., MCDONALD, K. L. & WALTER, P. 2006. Autophagy counterbalances 
endoplasmic reticulum expansion during the unfolded protein response. PLoS 
Biol, 4, e423. 
BESTEMBAYEVA, A., KRAMER, A., LABOKHA, A. A., OSMANOVIC, D., 
LIASHKOVICH, I., ORLOVA, E. V., FORD, I. J., CHARRAS, G., FASSATI, A. & 
HOOGENBOOM, B. W. 2015. Nanoscale stiffness topography reveals structure 
Reference List 
and mechanics of the transport barrier in intact nuclear pore complexes. Nat 
Nanotechnol, 10, 60-64. 
BHARATHI, A., GHOSH, A., WHALEN, W. A., YOON, J. H., PU, R., DASSO, M. & 
DHAR, R. 1997. The human RAE1 gene is a functional homologue of 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe rae1 gene involved in nuclear export of Poly(A)+ 
RNA. Gene, 198, 251-8. 
BHOGARAJU, S., CAJANEK, L., FORT, C., BLISNICK, T., WEBER, K., TASCHNER, 
M., MIZUNO, N., LAMLA, S., BASTIN, P., NIGG, E. A. & LORENTZEN, E. 
2013. Molecular basis of tubulin transport within the cilium by IFT74 and IFT81. 
Science, 341, 1009-12. 
BHOGARAJU, S., WEBER, K., ENGEL, B. D., LECHTRECK, K. F. & LORENTZEN, E. 
2014. Getting tubulin to the tip of the cilium: one IFT train, many different tubulin 
cargo-binding sites? Bioessays, 36, 463-7. 
BICHO, C. C., DE LIMA ALVES, F., CHEN, Z. A., RAPPSILBER, J. & SAWIN, K. E. 
2010. A genetic engineering solution to the "arginine conversion problem" in 
stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Mol Cell 
Proteomics, 9, 1567-77. 
BITTON, D. A., ATKINSON, S. R., RALLIS, C., SMITH, G. C., ELLIS, D. A., CHEN, Y. 
Y., MALECKI, M., CODLIN, S., LEMAY, J. F., COTOBAL, C., BACHAND, F., 
MARGUERAT, S., MATA, J. & BAHLER, J. 2015a. Widespread exon skipping 
triggers degradation by nuclear RNA surveillance in fission yeast. Genome Res, 
25, 884-96. 
BITTON, D. A., SCHUBERT, F., DEY, S., OKONIEWSKI, M., SMITH, G. C., 
KHADAYATE, S., PANCALDI, V., WOOD, V. & BAHLER, J. 2015b. AnGeLi: A 
Tool for the Analysis of Gene Lists from Fission Yeast. Front Genet, 6, 330. 
BORISY, G. G. & OLMSTED, J. B. 1972. Nucleated assembly of microtubules in 
porcine brain extracts. Science, 177, 1196-7. 
BOULON, S., PRADET-BALADE, B., VERHEGGEN, C., MOLLE, D., BOIREAU, S., 
GEORGIEVA, M., AZZAG, K., ROBERT, M. C., AHMAD, Y., NEEL, H., 
LAMOND, A. I. & BERTRAND, E. 2010. HSP90 and its R2TP/Prefoldin-like 
cochaperone are involved in the cytoplasmic assembly of RNA polymerase II. 
Mol Cell, 39, 912-924. 
BOVERI, T. 1905. Zellenstudien V. ber die Abhngigkeit der Kerngrsse und 
Zellenzahl bei Seeigellarven von der Chromosomenzahl der Ausganszellen. 
Jenaische Zeitschrift fr Naturwissenschaft, 39, 445524. 
BOYLE, E. I., WENG, S., GOLLUB, J., JIN, H., BOTSTEIN, D., CHERRY, J. M. & 
SHERLOCK, G. 2004. GO::TermFinder--open source software for accessing 
Gene Ontology information and finding significantly enriched Gene Ontology 
terms associated with a list of genes. Bioinformatics, 20, 3710-5. 
BRANGWYNNE, C. P. 2013. Phase transitions and size scaling of membrane-less 
organelles. J Cell Biol, 203, 875-81. 
BRANGWYNNE, C. P., MITCHISON, T. J. & HYMAN, A. A. 2011. Active liquid-like 
behavior of nucleoli determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 108, 4334-9. 
BREWER, J. W. & JACKOWSKI, S. 2012. UPR-Mediated Membrane Biogenesis in B 
Cells. Biochem Res Int, 2012, 738471. 
BROWN, J. A., BHARATHI, A., GHOSH, A., WHALEN, W., FITZGERALD, E. & DHAR, 
R. 1995. A mutation in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe rae1 gene causes 
defects in poly(A)+ RNA export and in the cytoskeleton. J Biol Chem, 270, 
7411-9. 
BUCHWALTER, A. & HETZER, M. W. 2017. Nucleolar expansion and elevated protein 
translation in premature aging. Nat Commun, 8, 328. 
Reference List 
BURMAN, J. L., HAMLIN, J. N. & MCPHERSON, P. S. 2010. Scyl1 regulates Golgi 
morphology. PLoS One, 5, e9537. 
CAMPION, Y., NEEL, H., GOSTAN, T., SORET, J. & BORDONNE, R. 2010. Specific 
splicing defects in S. pombe carrying a degron allele of the Survival of Motor 
Neuron gene. EMBO J, 29, 1817-29. 
CASTAGNETTI, S., BOZIC, B. & SVETINA, S. 2015. Mechanical and molecular basis 
for the symmetrical division of the fission yeast nuclear envelope. Phys Chem 
Chem Phys, 17, 15629-36. 
CAVALIER-SMITH, T. 1982. Skeletal DNA and the evolution of genome size. Annu 
Rev Biophys Bioeng, 11, 273-302. 
CAVALLI, G. & MISTELI, T. 2013. Functional implications of genome topology. Nat 
Struct Mol Biol, 20, 290-9. 
CHAN, Y. H. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2010. Scaling properties of cell and organelle size. 
Organogenesis, 6, 88-96. 
CHAN, Y. H. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2014. Organelle size scaling of the budding yeast 
vacuole is tuned by membrane trafficking rates. Biophys J, 106, 1986-96. 
CHAN, Y. H., REYES, L., SOHAIL, S. M., TRAN, N. K. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2016. 
Organelle Size Scaling of the Budding Yeast Vacuole by Relative Growth and 
Inheritance. Curr Biol, 26, 1221-8. 
CHATR-ARYAMONTRI, A., OUGHTRED, R., BOUCHER, L., RUST, J., CHANG, C., 
KOLAS, N. K., O'DONNELL, L., OSTER, S., THEESFELD, C., SELLAM, A., 
STARK, C., BREITKREUTZ, B. J., DOLINSKI, K. & TYERS, M. 2017. The 
BioGRID interaction database: 2017 update. Nucleic Acids Res, 45, D369-
D379. 
CHIKASHIGE, Y., ARAKAWA, S., LEIBNITZ, K., TSUTSUMI, C., MORI, C., 
OSAKADA, H., MURATA, M., HARAGUCHI, T. & HIRAOKA, Y. 2015. Cellular 
economy in fission yeast cells continuously cultured with limited nitrogen 
resources. Sci Rep, 5, 15617. 
CISKA, M. & MORENO DIAZ DE LA ESPINA, S. 2014. The intriguing plant nuclear 
lamina. Front Plant Sci, 5, 166. 
CONKLIN, E. G. 1912. Cell size and nuclear size. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 12, 
1-98. 
COOPER, S. 2013. Schizosaccharomyces pombe grows exponentially during the 
division cycle with no rate change points. FEMS Yeast Res, 13, 650-8. 
CORNELIS, G. R., AGRAIN, C. & SORG, I. 2006. Length control of extended protein 
structures in bacteria and bacteriophages. Curr Opin Microbiol, 9, 201-6. 
COURTOIS, A., SCHUH, M., ELLENBERG, J. & HIIRAGI, T. 2012. The transition from 
meiotic to mitotic spindle assembly is gradual during early mammalian 
development. J Cell Biol, 198, 357-70. 
COX, J. & MANN, M. 2012. 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method 
integrating quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 13 Suppl 16, S12. 
COX, J. S., CHAPMAN, R. E. & WALTER, P. 1997. The unfolded protein response 
coordinates the production of endoplasmic reticulum protein and endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane. Mol Biol Cell, 8, 1805-14. 
CRISSMAN, H. A. & STEINKAMP, J. A. 1973. Rapid, simultaneous measurement of 
DNA, protein, and cell volume in single cells from large mammalian cell 
populations. J Cell Biol, 59, 766-71. 
D'ANGELO, M. A., ANDERSON, D. J., RICHARD, E. & HETZER, M. W. 2006. Nuclear 
pores form de novo from both sides of the nuclear envelope. Science, 312, 440-
DE GODOY, L. M., OLSEN, J. V., COX, J., NIELSEN, M. L., HUBNER, N. C., 
FROHLICH, F., WALTHER, T. C. & MANN, M. 2008. Comprehensive mass-
Reference List 
spectrometry-based proteome quantification of haploid versus diploid yeast. 
Nature, 455, 1251-4. 
DE LEEUW, R., GRUENBAUM, Y. & MEDALIA, O. 2018. Nuclear Lamins: Thin 
Filaments with Major Functions. Trends Cell Biol, 28, 34-45. 
DECKER, M., JAENSCH, S., POZNIAKOVSKY, A., ZINKE, A., O'CONNELL, K. F., 
ZACHARIAE, W., MYERS, E. & HYMAN, A. A. 2011. Limiting amounts of 
centrosome material set centrosome size in C. elegans embryos. Curr Biol, 21, 
1259-67. 
DENAIS, C. & LAMMERDING, J. 2014. Nuclear mechanics in cancer. Adv Exp Med 
Biol, 773, 435-70. 
DESFOUGERES, Y., NEUMANN, H. & MAYER, A. 2016. Organelle size control - 
increasing vacuole content activates SNAREs to augment organelle volume 
through homotypic fusion. J Cell Sci, 129, 2817-28. 
DEVIN, A. & RIGOULET, M. 2004. Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in 
eukaryotic cells. Toxicol Mech Methods, 14, 271-9. 
DEVOS, D. P., GRAF, R. & FIELD, M. C. 2014. Evolution of the nucleus. Curr Opin 
Cell Biol, 28, 8-15. 
DITTMER, T. A. & MISTELI, T. 2011. The lamin protein family. Genome Biol, 12, 222. 
DULTZ, E. & ELLENBERG, J. 2010. Live imaging of single nuclear pores reveals 
unique assembly kinetics and mechanism in interphase. J Cell Biol, 191, 15-22. 
DUMONT, S. & MITCHISON, T. J. 2009. Force and length in the mitotic spindle. Curr 
Biol, 19, R749-61. 
EDENS, L. J., DILSAVER, M. R. & LEVY, D. L. 2017. PKC-mediated phosphorylation 
of nuclear lamins at a single serine residue regulates interphase nuclear size in 
Xenopus and mammalian cells. Mol Biol Cell, 28, 1389-1399. 
EDENS, L. J. & LEVY, D. L. 2014. cPKC regulates interphase nuclear size during 
Xenopus development. J Cell Biol, 206, 473-83. 
EDENS, L. J., WHITE, K. H., JEVTIC, P., LI, X. & LEVY, D. L. 2013. Nuclear size 
regulation: from single cells to development and disease. Trends Cell Biol, 23, 
151-9. 
EISENHARDT, N., REDOLFI, J. & ANTONIN, W. 2014. Interaction of Nup53 with Ndc1 
and Nup155 is required for nuclear pore complex assembly. J Cell Sci, 127, 
908-21. 
ENGEL, B. D., LUDINGTON, W. B. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2009. Intraflagellar transport 
particle size scales inversely with flagellar length: revisiting the balance-point 
length control model. J Cell Biol, 187, 81-9. 
FAIR, B. J. & PLEISS, J. A. 2017. The power of fission: yeast as a tool for 
understanding complex splicing. Curr Genet, 63, 375-380. 
FANTES, P. & NURSE, P. 1977. Control of cell size at division in fission yeast by a 
growth-modulated size control over nuclear division. Experimental cell research, 
107, 377-86. 
FREIBAUM, B. D., LU, Y., LOPEZ-GONZALEZ, R., KIM, N. C., ALMEIDA, S., LEE, K. 
H., BADDERS, N., VALENTINE, M., MILLER, B. L., WONG, P. C., 
PETRUCELLI, L., KIM, H. J., GAO, F. B. & TAYLOR, J. P. 2015. GGGGCC 
repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature, 
525, 129-33. 
GANGULY, A., BHATTACHARJEE, C., BHAVE, M., KAILAJE, V., JAIN, B. K., 
SENGUPTA, I., RANGARAJAN, A. & BHATTACHARYYA, D. 2016. 
Perturbation of nucleo-cytoplasmic transport affects size of nucleus and 
nucleolus in human cells. FEBS Lett, 590, 631-43. 
GIBCUS, J. H. & DEKKER, J. 2013. The hierarchy of the 3D genome. Mol Cell, 49, 
773-82. 
Reference List 
GOEHRING, N. W. & HYMAN, A. A. 2012. Organelle growth control through limiting 
pools of cytoplasmic components. Curr Biol, 22, R330-9. 
GOMEZ-NAVARRO, N. & ESTRUCH, F. 2015. Different pathways for the nuclear 
import of yeast RNA polymerase II. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1849, 1354-62. 
GONZALEZ, Y., MEERBREY, K., CHONG, J., TORII, Y., PADTE, N. N. & SAZER, S. 
2009. Nuclear shape, growth and integrity in the closed mitosis of fission yeast 
depend on the Ran-GTPase system, the spindle pole body and the 
endoplasmic reticulum. J Cell Sci, 122, 2464-72. 
GONZALEZ, Y., SAITO, A. & SAZER, S. 2012. Fission yeast Lem2 and Man1 perform 
fundamental functions of the animal cell nuclear lamina. Nucleus, 3, 60-76. 
GOOD, M. C., VAHEY, M. D., SKANDARAJAH, A., FLETCHER, D. A. & HEALD, R. 
2013. Cytoplasmic volume modulates spindle size during embryogenesis. 
Science, 342, 856-60. 
GORDON, D. J., RESIO, B. & PELLMAN, D. 2012. Causes and consequences of 
aneuploidy in cancer. Nat Rev Genet, 13, 189-203. 
GOSHIMA, G. & SCHOLEY, J. M. 2010. Control of mitotic spindle length. Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol, 26, 21-57. 
GREENAN, G., BRANGWYNNE, C. P., JAENSCH, S., GHARAKHANI, J., JULICHER, 
F. & HYMAN, A. A. 2010. Centrosome size sets mitotic spindle length in 
Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. Curr Biol, 20, 353-8. 
GREGORY, T. 2005. Genome size evolution in animals. In: GREGORY, T. (ed.) The 
Evolution of the Genome. London: Elsevier Academic Press. 
GRIGULL, J., MNAIMNEH, S., POOTOOLAL, J., ROBINSON, M. D. & HUGHES, T. R. 
2004. Genome-wide analysis of mRNA stability using transcription inhibitors 
and microarrays reveals posttranscriptional control of ribosome biogenesis 
factors. Mol Cell Biol, 24, 5534-47. 
GRUENBAUM, Y., MARGALIT, A., GOLDMAN, R. D., SHUMAKER, D. K. & WILSON, 
K. L. 2005. The nuclear lamina comes of age. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 6, 21-31. 
GU, Y., YAM, C. & OLIFERENKO, S. 2012. Divergence of mitotic strategies in fission 
yeasts. Nucleus, 3, 220-5. 
GUPTA, S., MARCEL, N., SARIN, A. & SHIVASHANKAR, G. V. 2012. Role of actin 
dependent nuclear deformation in regulating early gene expression. PLoS One, 
7, e53031. 
GURDON, J. B. 1976. Injected nuclei in frog oocytes: fate, enlargement, and chromatin 
dispersal. J Embryol Exp Morphol, 36, 523-40. 
HAGAN, I. & YANAGIDA, M. 1990. Novel potential mitotic motor protein encoded by 
the fission yeast cut7+ gene. Nature, 347, 563-6. 
HAGAN, I. & YANAGIDA, M. 1995. The product of the spindle formation gene sad1+ 
associates with the fission yeast spindle pole body and is essential for viability. 
J Cell Biol, 129, 1033-47. 
HAO, L., THEIN, M., BRUST-MASCHER, I., CIVELEKOGLU-SCHOLEY, G., LU, Y., 
ACAR, S., PREVO, B., SHAHAM, S. & SCHOLEY, J. M. 2011. Intraflagellar 
transport delivers tubulin isotypes to sensory cilium middle and distal segments. 
Nat Cell Biol, 13, 790-8. 
HARA, Y., IWABUCHI, M., OHSUMI, K. & KIMURA, A. 2013. Intranuclear DNA density 
affects chromosome condensation in metazoans. Mol Biol Cell, 24, 2442-53. 
HARA, Y. & KIMURA, A. 2009. Cell-size-dependent spindle elongation in the 
Caenorhabditis elegans early embryo. Curr Biol, 19, 1549-54. 
HARA, Y. & MERTEN, C. A. 2015. Dynein-Based Accumulation of Membranes 
Regulates Nuclear Expansion in Xenopus laevis Egg Extracts. Dev Cell, 33, 
562-75. 
Reference List 
HARAGUCHI, N., ANDOH, T., FRENDEWEY, D. & TANI, T. 2007. Mutations in the 
SF1-U2AF59-U2AF23 complex cause exon skipping in Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe. J Biol Chem, 282, 2221-8. 
HARRIS, H. 1967. The reactivation of the red cell nucleus. J Cell Sci, 2, 23-32. 
HAZEL, J., KRUTKRAMELIS, K., MOONEY, P., TOMSCHIK, M., GEROW, K., OAKEY, 
J. & GATLIN, J. C. 2013. Changes in cytoplasmic volume are sufficient to drive 
spindle scaling. Science, 342, 853-6. 
HEALD, R. & COHEN-FIX, O. 2014. Morphology and function of membrane-bound 
organelles. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 26, 79-86. 
HERTWIG, R. 1903. Ueber die Korrelation von Zell-und Kerngrsse und ihre 
Bedeutung fr die Geschlechtliche Differenzierung und die Teilung der Zelle. 
Biologisches Centralblatt, 4-62. 
HETZER, M. W. 2010. The nuclear envelope. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 2, 
a000539. 
HOOD, D. A. 2001. Invited Review: contractile activity-induced mitochondrial 
biogenesis in skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol (1985), 90, 1137-57. 
HOPPER, A. K. 1999. Nucleocytoplasmic transport: Inside out regulation. Curr Biol, 9, 
R803-6. 
HORVATH, A., RACZ-MONUS, A., BUCHWALD, P. & SVEICZER, A. 2013. Cell length 
growth in fission yeast: an analysis of its bilinear character and the nature of its 
rate change transition. FEMS Yeast Res, 13, 635-49. 
HSU, K. S. & TODA, T. 2011. Ndc80 internal loop interacts with Dis1/TOG to ensure 
proper kinetochore-spindle attachment in fission yeast. Curr Biol, 21, 214-20. 
HUXLEY, J. 1932. Problems of Relative Growth, New York, Lincoln MacVeagh, The 
Dial Press. 
HUXLEY, J. S. 1924. Constant Differential Growth-Ratios and their Significance. 
Nature, 114, 895-896. 
HUXLEY, J. S. & TEISSIER, G. 1936. Terminology of Relative Growth. Nature, 137, 
780-781. 
HYMAN, A. A. & SIMONS, K. 2012. Cell biology. Beyond oil and water--phase 
transitions in cells. Science, 337, 1047-9. 
IRIANTO, J., SWIFT, J., MARTINS, R. P., MCPHAIL, G. D., KNIGHT, M. M., 
DISCHER, D. E. & LEE, D. A. 2013. Osmotic challenge drives rapid and 
reversible chromatin condensation in chondrocytes. Biophys J, 104, 759-69. 
ISHIKAWA, H. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2017. Testing the time-of-flight model for flagellar 
length sensing. Mol Biol Cell, 28, 3447-3456. 
JANKE, C., MAGIERA, M. M., RATHFELDER, N., TAXIS, C., REBER, S., MAEKAWA, 
H., MORENO-BORCHART, A., DOENGES, G., SCHWOB, E., SCHIEBEL, E. & 
KNOP, M. 2004. A versatile toolbox for PCR-based tagging of yeast genes: 
new fluorescent proteins, more markers and promoter substitution cassettes. 
Yeast, 21, 947-62. 
JEVTIC, P., EDENS, L. J., LI, X., NGUYEN, T., CHEN, P. & LEVY, D. L. 2015. 
Concentration-dependent Effects of Nuclear Lamins on Nuclear Size in 
Xenopus and Mammalian Cells. J Biol Chem, 290, 27557-71. 
JEVTIC, P., EDENS, L. J., VUKOVIC, L. D. & LEVY, D. L. 2014. Sizing and shaping 
the nucleus: mechanisms and significance. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 28, 16-27. 
JEVTIC, P. & LEVY, D. L. 2015. Nuclear size scaling during Xenopus early 
development contributes to midblastula transition timing. Curr Biol, 25, 45-52. 
JOKHI, V., ASHLEY, J., NUNNARI, J., NOMA, A., ITO, N., WAKABAYASHI-ITO, N., 
MOORE, M. J. & BUDNIK, V. 2013. Torsin mediates primary envelopment of 
large ribonucleoprotein granules at the nuclear envelope. Cell Rep, 3, 988-95. 
Reference List 
JORGENSEN, P., EDGINGTON, N. P., SCHNEIDER, B. L., RUPES, I., TYERS, M. & 
FUTCHER, B. 2007. The size of the nucleus increases as yeast cells grow. Mol 
Biol Cell, 18, 3523-32. 
KARIN, M. & HUNTER, T. 1995. Transcriptional control by protein phosphorylation: 
signal transmission from the cell surface to the nucleus. Curr Biol, 5, 747-57. 
KATSURA, I. 1987. Determination of bacteriophage lambda tail length by a protein 
ruler. Nature, 327, 73-5. 
KATSURA, I. 1990. Mechanism of length determination in bacteriophage lambda tails. 
Adv Biophys, 26, 1-18. 
KATSURA, I. & HENDRIX, R. W. 1984. Length determination in bacteriophage lambda 
tails. Cell, 39, 691-8. 
KAWAGISHI, I., HOMMA, M., WILLIAMS, A. W. & MACNAB, R. M. 1996. 
Characterization of the flagellar hook length control protein fliK of Salmonella 
typhimurium and Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol, 178, 2954-9. 
KAWASHIMA, S. A., CHEN, Z., AOI, Y., PATGIRI, A., KOBAYASHI, Y., NURSE, P. & 
KAPOOR, T. M. 2016. Potent, Reversible, and Specific Chemical Inhibitors of 
Eukaryotic Ribosome Biogenesis. Cell, 167, 512-524 e14. 
KERRES, A., JAKOPEC, V., BEUTER, C., KARIG, I., POHLMANN, J., PIDOUX, A., 
ALLSHIRE, R. & FLEIG, U. 2006. Fta2, an essential fission yeast kinetochore 
component, interacts closely with the conserved Mal2 protein. Mol Biol Cell, 17, 
4167-78. 
KIM, D. U., HAYLES, J., KIM, D., WOOD, V., PARK, H. O., WON, M., YOO, H. S., 
DUHIG, T., NAM, M., PALMER, G., HAN, S., JEFFERY, L., BAEK, S. T., LEE, 
H., SHIM, Y. S., LEE, M., KIM, L., HEO, K. S., NOH, E. J., LEE, A. R., JANG, Y. 
J., CHUNG, K. S., CHOI, S. J., PARK, J. Y., PARK, Y., KIM, H. M., PARK, S. 
K., PARK, H. J., KANG, E. J., KIM, H. B., KANG, H. S., PARK, H. M., KIM, K., 
SONG, K., SONG, K. B., NURSE, P. & HOE, K. L. 2010. Analysis of a genome-
wide set of gene deletions in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. 
Nat Biotechnol, 28, 617-623. 
KIM, S., LI, Q., DANG, C. V. & LEE, L. A. 2000. Induction of ribosomal genes and 
hepatocyte hypertrophy by adenovirus-mediated expression of c-Myc in vivo. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 97, 11198-202. 
KING, M. C., DRIVAS, T. G. & BLOBEL, G. 2008. A network of nuclear envelope 
membrane proteins linking centromeres to microtubules. Cell, 134, 427-38. 
KITAMI, T., LOGAN, D. J., NEGRI, J., HASAKA, T., TOLLIDAY, N. J., CARPENTER, 
A. E., SPIEGELMAN, B. M. & MOOTHA, V. K. 2012. A chemical screen probing 
the relationship between mitochondrial content and cell size. PLoS One, 7, 
e33755. 
KNIOLA, B., O'TOOLE, E., MCINTOSH, J. R., MELLONE, B., ALLSHIRE, R., 
MENGARELLI, S., HULTENBY, K. & EKWALL, K. 2001. The domain structure 
of centromeres is conserved from fission yeast to humans. Mol Biol Cell, 12, 
2767-75. 
KNOCKENHAUER, K. E. & SCHWARTZ, T. U. 2016. The Nuclear Pore Complex as a 
Flexible and Dynamic Gate. Cell, 164, 1162-1171. 
KOCH, A. L. & DEPPE, C. S. 1971. In vivo assay of protein synthesizing capacity of 
Escherichia coli from slowly growing chemostat cultures. J Mol Biol, 55, 549-62. 
KOHLER, A. & HURT, E. 2010. Gene regulation by nucleoporins and links to cancer. 
Mol Cell, 38, 6-15. 
KONDYLIS, V., VAN NISPEN TOT PANNERDEN, H. E., HERPERS, B., FRIGGI-
GRELIN, F. & RABOUILLE, C. 2007. The golgi comprises a paired stack that is 
separated at G2 by modulation of the actin cytoskeleton through Abi and 
Scar/WAVE. Dev Cell, 12, 901-15. 
Reference List 
KUDO, N., MATSUMORI, N., TAOKA, H., FUJIWARA, D., SCHREINER, E. P., 
WOLFF, B., YOSHIDA, M. & HORINOUCHI, S. 1999. Leptomycin B inactivates 
CRM1/exportin 1 by covalent modification at a cysteine residue in the central 
conserved region. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 96, 9112-7. 
KUME, K., CANTWELL, H., NEUMANN, F. R., JONES, A. W., SNIJDERS, A. P. & 
NURSE, P. 2017. A systematic genomic screen implicates nucleocytoplasmic 
transport and membrane growth in nuclear size control. PLoS Genet, 13, 
e1006767. 
LABOKHA, A. A., GRADMANN, S., FREY, S., HULSMANN, B. B., URLAUB, H., 
BALDUS, M. & GORLICH, D. 2013. Systematic analysis of barrier-forming FG 
hydrogels from Xenopus nuclear pore complexes. EMBO J, 32, 204-18. 
LAPICQUE, L. 1907. Tableau gnral des poids somatique et encphalique dans les 
espces animales. Bulletins et Mmoires de la Socit danthropologie de 
Paris, 8, 248-270. 
LEVY, D. L. & HEALD, R. 2010. Nuclear size is regulated by importin alpha and Ntf2 in 
Xenopus. Cell, 143, 288-98. 
LICHTER, P., CREMER, T., BORDEN, J., MANUELIDIS, L. & WARD, D. C. 1988. 
Delineation of individual human chromosomes in metaphase and interphase 
cells by in situ suppression hybridization using recombinant DNA libraries. Hum 
Genet, 80, 224-34. 
LIEBERMAN-AIDEN, E., VAN BERKUM, N. L., WILLIAMS, L., IMAKAEV, M., 
RAGOCZY, T., TELLING, A., AMIT, I., LAJOIE, B. R., SABO, P. J., 
DORSCHNER, M. O., SANDSTROM, R., BERNSTEIN, B., BENDER, M. A., 
GROUDINE, M., GNIRKE, A., STAMATOYANNOPOULOS, J., MIRNY, L. A., 
LANDER, E. S. & DEKKER, J. 2009. Comprehensive mapping of long-range 
interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome. Science, 326, 289-
LIU, J., ROLEF BEN-SHAHAR, T., RIEMER, D., TREININ, M., SPANN, P., WEBER, 
K., FIRE, A. & GRUENBAUM, Y. 2000. Essential roles for Caenorhabditis 
elegans lamin gene in nuclear organization, cell cycle progression, and spatial 
organization of nuclear pore complexes. Mol Biol Cell, 11, 3937-47. 
LOUGHLIN, R., WILBUR, J. D., MCNALLY, F. J., NEDELEC, F. J. & HEALD, R. 2011. 
Katanin contributes to interspecies spindle length scaling in Xenopus. Cell, 147, 
1397-407. 
LU, W., SCHNEIDER, M., NEUMANN, S., JAEGER, V. M., TARANUM, S., MUNCK, 
M., CARTWRIGHT, S., RICHARDSON, C., CARTHEW, J., NOH, K., 
GOLDBERG, M., NOEGEL, A. A. & KARAKESISOGLOU, I. 2012. Nesprin 
interchain associations control nuclear size. Cell Mol Life Sci, 69, 3493-509. 
LUDINGTON, W. B., WEMMER, K. A., LECHTRECK, K. F., WITMAN, G. B. & 
MARSHALL, W. F. 2013. Avalanche-like behavior in ciliary import. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, 110, 3925-30. 
MAALE, O. & KJELDGAARD, N. 1966. Control of macromolecular synthesis; a study 
of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis in bacteria, New York, W.A. Benjamin. 
MAESHIMA, K., IINO, H., HIHARA, S., FUNAKOSHI, T., WATANABE, A., 
NISHIMURA, M., NAKATOMI, R., YAHATA, K., IMAMOTO, F., HASHIKAWA, 
T., YOKOTA, H. & IMAMOTO, N. 2010. Nuclear pore formation but not nuclear 
growth is governed by cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) during interphase. Nat 
Struct Mol Biol, 17, 1065-71. 
MAESHIMA, K., IINO, H., HIHARA, S. & IMAMOTO, N. 2011. Nuclear size, nuclear 
pore number and cell cycle. Nucleus, 2, 113-8. 
MAKAROVA, M., GU, Y., CHEN, J. S., BECKLEY, J. R., GOULD, K. L. & 
OLIFERENKO, S. 2016. Temporal Regulation of Lipin Activity Diverged to 
Account for Differences in Mitotic Programs. Curr Biol, 26, 237-43. 
Reference List 
MAO, Y. S., ZHANG, B. & SPECTOR, D. L. 2011. Biogenesis and function of nuclear 
bodies. Trends Genet, 27, 295-306. 
MARGUERAT, S. & BAHLER, J. 2012. Coordinating genome expression with cell size. 
Trends Genet, 28, 560-5. 
MARSHALL, W. F. 2012. Organelle size control systems: from cell geometry to 
organelle-directed medicine. Bioessays, 34, 721-4. 
MARSHALL, W. F. 2015. Subcellular size. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 7, 
a019059. 
MARSHALL, W. F., QIN, H., RODRIGO BRENNI, M. & ROSENBAUM, J. L. 2005. 
Flagellar length control system: testing a simple model based on intraflagellar 
transport and turnover. Mol Biol Cell, 16, 270-8. 
MARSHALL, W. F. & ROSENBAUM, J. L. 2001. Intraflagellar transport balances 
continuous turnover of outer doublet microtubules: implications for flagellar 
length control. J Cell Biol, 155, 405-14. 
MATSUMOTO, T. 1997. A fission yeast homolog of CDC20/p55CDC/Fizzy is required 
for recovery from DNA damage and genetically interacts with p34cdc2. Mol Cell 
Biol, 17, 742-50. 
MATSUYAMA, A., ARAI, R., YASHIRODA, Y., SHIRAI, A., KAMATA, A., SEKIDO, S., 
KOBAYASHI, Y., HASHIMOTO, A., HAMAMOTO, M., HIRAOKA, Y., 
HORINOUCHI, S. & YOSHIDA, M. 2006. ORFeome cloning and global analysis 
of protein localization in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nat 
Biotechnol, 24, 841-7. 
MAUL, G. G., MAUL, H. M., SCOGNA, J. E., LIEBERMAN, M. W., STEIN, G. S., HSU, 
B. Y. & BORUN, T. W. 1972. Time sequence of nuclear pore formation in 
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocytes and in HeLa cells during the cell 
cycle. J Cell Biol, 55, 433-47. 
MAYER, C. & GRUMMT, I. 2006. Ribosome biogenesis and cell growth: mTOR 
coordinates transcription by all three classes of nuclear RNA polymerases. 
Oncogene, 25, 6384-91. 
MEKHAIL, K. & MOAZED, D. 2010. The nuclear envelope in genome organization, 
expression and stability. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 11, 317-28. 
MENDELL, J. T., MEDGHALCHI, S. M., LAKE, R. G., NOENSIE, E. N. & DIETZ, H. C. 
2000. Novel Upf2p orthologues suggest a functional link between translation 
initiation and nonsense surveillance complexes. Mol Cell Biol, 20, 8944-57. 
MIETTINEN, T. P. & BJORKLUND, M. 2016. Cellular Allometry of Mitochondrial 
Functionality Establishes the Optimal Cell Size. Dev Cell, 39, 370-382. 
MIROSHNIKOVA, Y. A., NAVA, M. M. & WICKSTROM, S. A. 2017. Emerging roles of 
mechanical forces in chromatin regulation. J Cell Sci, 130, 2243-2250. 
MITCHISON, J. M. 1957. The growth of single cells. I. Schizosaccharomyces pombe. 
Exp Cell Res, 13, 244-62. 
MITCHISON, J. M. & NURSE, P. 1985. Growth in cell length in the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. J Cell Sci, 75, 357-76. 
MIYATA, H., MIYATA, M. & JOHNSON, B. F. 1988. Pseudo-exponential growth in 
length of the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Can J Microbiol, 34, 
1338-43. 
MORENO, S., KLAR, A. & NURSE, P. 1991. Molecular genetic analysis of fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Methods Enzymol, 194, 795-823. 
MORIS, N., SHRIVASTAVA, J., JEFFERY, L., LI, J. J., HAYLES, J. & NURSE, P. 
2016. A genome-wide screen to identify genes controlling the rate of entry into 
mitosis in fission yeast. Cell Cycle, 15, 3121-3130. 
NEUMANN, F. R. & NURSE, P. 2007. Nuclear size control in fission yeast. J Cell Biol, 
179, 593-600. 
Reference List 
NEWMAN, J. R., GHAEMMAGHAMI, S., IHMELS, J., BRESLOW, D. K., NOBLE, M., 
DERISI, J. L. & WEISSMAN, J. S. 2006. Single-cell proteomic analysis of S. 
cerevisiae reveals the architecture of biological noise. Nature, 441, 840-6. 
NIGG, E. A. 1997. Nucleocytoplasmic transport: signals, mechanisms and regulation. 
Nature, 386, 779-87. 
NISHI, K., YOSHIDA, M., FUJIWARA, D., NISHIKAWA, M., HORINOUCHI, S. & 
BEPPU, T. 1994. Leptomycin B targets a regulatory cascade of crm1, a fission 
yeast nuclear protein, involved in control of higher order chromosome structure 
and gene expression. J Biol Chem, 269, 6320-4. 
NOVAKOVA, L., KOVACOVICOVA, K., DANG-NGUYEN, T. Q., SODEK, M., 
SKULTETY, M. & ANGER, M. 2016. A Balance between Nuclear and 
Cytoplasmic Volumes Controls Spindle Length. PLoS One, 11, e0149535. 
NUNNARI, J. & WALTER, P. 1996. Regulation of organelle biogenesis. Cell, 84, 389-
NURSE, P., THURIAUX, P. & NASMYTH, K. 1976. Genetic control of the cell division 
cycle in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Mol Gen Genet, 146, 
167-78. 
OKAMURA, M., INOSE, H. & MASUDA, S. 2015. RNA Export through the NPC in 
Eukaryotes. Genes (Basel), 6, 124-49. 
ONG, S. E. & MANN, M. 2005. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics turns 
quantitative. Nat Chem Biol, 1, 252-62. 
ONISCHENKO, E., STANTON, L. H., MADRID, A. S., KIESELBACH, T. & WEIS, K. 
2009. Role of the Ndc1 interaction network in yeast nuclear pore complex 
assembly and maintenance. J Cell Biol, 185, 475-91. 
OSBORNE, C. S., CHAKALOVA, L., BROWN, K. E., CARTER, D., HORTON, A., 
DEBRAND, E., GOYENECHEA, B., MITCHELL, J. A., LOPES, S., REIK, W. & 
FRASER, P. 2004. Active genes dynamically colocalize to shared sites of 
ongoing transcription. Nat Genet, 36, 1065-71. 
PADOVAN-MERHAR, O., NAIR, G. P., BIAESCH, A. G., MAYER, A., SCARFONE, S., 
FOLEY, S. W., WU, A. R., CHURCHMAN, L. S., SINGH, A. & RAJ, A. 2015. 
Single mammalian cells compensate for differences in cellular volume and DNA 
copy number through independent global transcriptional mechanisms. Mol Cell, 
58, 339-52. 
PEDERSON, T. 2011. The nucleolus. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 3, a000638. 
PINKEL, D., LANDEGENT, J., COLLINS, C., FUSCOE, J., SEGRAVES, R., LUCAS, J. 
& GRAY, J. 1988. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with human chromosome-
specific libraries: detection of trisomy 21 and translocations of chromosome 4. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 85, 9138-42. 
POLANSHEK, M. M. 1977. Effects of heat shock and cycloheximide on growth and 
division of the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. With an Appendix. 
Estimation of division delay for S. pombe from cell plate index curves. J Cell 
Sci, 23, 1-23. 
POLILOV, A. A. & MAKAROVA, A. A. 2017. The scaling and allometry of organ size 
associated with miniaturization in insects: A case study for Coleoptera and 
Hymenoptera. Sci Rep, 7, 43095. 
POSAKONY, J. W., ENGLAND, J. M. & ATTARDI, G. 1977. Mitochondrial growth and 
division during the cell cycle in HeLa cells. J Cell Biol, 74, 468-91. 
RAFELSKI, S. M., VIANA, M. P., ZHANG, Y., CHAN, Y. H., THORN, K. S., YAM, P., 
FUNG, J. C., LI, H., COSTA LDA, F. & MARSHALL, W. F. 2012. Mitochondrial 
network size scaling in budding yeast. Science, 338, 822-4. 
REBER, S. & GOEHRING, N. W. 2015. Intracellular Scaling Mechanisms. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol, 7, a019067. 
Reference List 
REBER, S. B., BAUMGART, J., WIDLUND, P. O., POZNIAKOVSKY, A., HOWARD, J., 
HYMAN, A. A. & JULICHER, F. 2013. XMAP215 activity sets spindle length by 
controlling the total mass of spindle microtubules. Nat Cell Biol, 15, 1116-22. 
RHIND, N., CHEN, Z., YASSOUR, M., THOMPSON, D. A., HAAS, B. J., HABIB, N., 
WAPINSKI, I., ROY, S., LIN, M. F., HEIMAN, D. I., YOUNG, S. K., FURUYA, 
K., GUO, Y., PIDOUX, A., CHEN, H. M., ROBBERTSE, B., GOLDBERG, J. M., 
AOKI, K., BAYNE, E. H., BERLIN, A. M., DESJARDINS, C. A., DOBBS, E., 
DUKAJ, L., FAN, L., FITZGERALD, M. G., FRENCH, C., GUJJA, S., HANSEN, 
K., KEIFENHEIM, D., LEVIN, J. Z., MOSHER, R. A., MULLER, C. A., 
PFIFFNER, J., PRIEST, M., RUSS, C., SMIALOWSKA, A., SWOBODA, P., 
SYKES, S. M., VAUGHN, M., VENGROVA, S., YODER, R., ZENG, Q., 
ALLSHIRE, R., BAULCOMBE, D., BIRREN, B. W., BROWN, W., EKWALL, K., 
KELLIS, M., LEATHERWOOD, J., LEVIN, H., MARGALIT, H., MARTIENSSEN, 
R., NIEDUSZYNSKI, C. A., SPATAFORA, J. W., FRIEDMAN, N., DALGAARD, 
J. Z., BAUMANN, P., NIKI, H., REGEV, A. & NUSBAUM, C. 2011. Comparative 
functional genomics of the fission yeasts. Science, 332, 930-6. 
ROSENBAUM, J. L., MOULDER, J. E. & RINGO, D. L. 1969. Flagellar elongation and 
shortening in Chlamydomonas. The use of cycloheximide and colchicine to 
study the synthesis and assembly of flagellar proteins. J Cell Biol, 41, 600-19. 
ROSENBERG, G. H., ALAHARI, S. K. & KAUFER, N. F. 1991. prp4 from 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, a mutant deficient in pre-mRNA splicing isolated 
using genes containing artificial introns. Mol Gen Genet, 226, 305-9. 
ROTHBALLER, A., SCHWARTZ, T. U. & KUTAY, U. 2013. LINCing complex functions 
at the nuclear envelope: what the molecular architecture of the LINC complex 
can reveal about its function. Nucleus, 4, 29-36. 
ROUT, M. P. & KARPEN, G. H. 2014. Editorial overview: Cell nucleus: the nucleus: a 
dynamic organelle. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 28, iv-vii. 
SAHA, N., SCHWER, B. & SHUMAN, S. 1999. Characterization of human, 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Candida albicans mRNA cap 
methyltransferases and complete replacement of the yeast capping apparatus 
by mammalian enzymes. J Biol Chem, 274, 16553-62. 
SAVAGE, V. M., ALLEN, A. P., BROWN, J. H., GILLOOLY, J. F., HERMAN, A. B., 
WOODRUFF, W. H. & WEST, G. B. 2007. Scaling of number, size, and 
metabolic rate of cells with body size in mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 
104, 4718-23. 
SCHMIDT, E. E. & SCHIBLER, U. 1995. Cell size regulation, a mechanism that 
controls cellular RNA accumulation: consequences on regulation of the 
ubiquitous transcription factors Oct1 and NF-Y and the liver-enriched 
transcription factor DBP. J Cell Biol, 128, 467-83. 
SCHMIDT, H., RICHERT, K., DRAKAS, R. A. & KAUFER, N. F. 1999. spp42, identified 
as a classical suppressor of prp4-73, which encodes a kinase involved in pre-
mRNA splicing in fission yeast, is a homologue of the splicing factor Prp8p. 
Genetics, 153, 1183-91. 
SCHMOLLER, K. M. & SKOTHEIM, J. M. 2015. The Biosynthetic Basis of Cell Size 
Control. Trends Cell Biol, 25, 793-802. 
SCHOLEY, J. M. 2003. Intraflagellar transport. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol, 19, 423-43. 
SEBASTIAN, D., PALACIN, M. & ZORZANO, A. 2017. Mitochondrial Dynamics: 
Coupling Mitochondrial Fitness with Healthy Aging. Trends Mol Med, 23, 201-
SENGUPTA, D. & LINSTEDT, A. D. 2011. Control of organelle size: the Golgi complex. 
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol, 27, 57-77. 
Reference List 
SHIMA, D. T., HALDAR, K., PEPPERKOK, R., WATSON, R. & WARREN, G. 1997. 
Partitioning of the Golgi apparatus during mitosis in living HeLa cells. J Cell 
Biol, 137, 1211-28. 
SHIMIZU, M., ROTH, S. Y., SZENT-GYORGYI, C. & SIMPSON, R. T. 1991. 
Nucleosomes are positioned with base pair precision adjacent to the alpha 2 
operator in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. EMBO J, 10, 3033-41. 
SHIROIWA, Y., HAYASHI, T., FUJITA, Y., VILLAR-BRIONES, A., IKAI, N., TAKEDA, 
K., EBE, M. & YANAGIDA, M. 2011. Mis17 is a regulatory module of the Mis6-
Mal2-Sim4 centromere complex that is required for the recruitment of 
CenH3/CENP-A in fission yeast. PLoS One, 6, e17761. 
SHORTER, J. & WARREN, G. 2002. Golgi architecture and inheritance. Annu Rev Cell 
Dev Biol, 18, 379-420. 
SIMON, D. N. & ROUT, M. P. 2014. Cancer and the nuclear pore complex. Adv Exp 
Med Biol, 773, 285-307. 
SIN, A. T. & HARRISON, R. E. 2016. Growth of the Mammalian Golgi Apparatus 
during Interphase. Mol Cell Biol, 36, 2344-59. 
SOLOVEI, I., WANG, A. S., THANISCH, K., SCHMIDT, C. S., KREBS, S., ZWERGER, 
M., COHEN, T. V., DEVYS, D., FOISNER, R., PEICHL, L., HERRMANN, H., 
BLUM, H., ENGELKAMP, D., STEWART, C. L., LEONHARDT, H. & JOFFE, B. 
2013. LBR and lamin A/C sequentially tether peripheral heterochromatin and 
inversely regulate differentiation. Cell, 152, 584-98. 
SPEESE, S. D., ASHLEY, J., JOKHI, V., NUNNARI, J., BARRIA, R., LI, Y., ATAMAN, 
B., KOON, A., CHANG, Y. T., LI, Q., MOORE, M. J. & BUDNIK, V. 2012. 
Nuclear envelope budding enables large ribonucleoprotein particle export 
during synaptic Wnt signaling. Cell, 149, 832-46. 
SPIREK, M., BENKO, Z., CARNECKA, M., RUMPF, C., CIPAK, L., BATOVA, M., 
MAROVA, I., NAM, M., KIM, D. U., PARK, H. O., HAYLES, J., HOE, K. L., 
NURSE, P. & GREGAN, J. 2010. S. pombe genome deletion project: an 
update. Cell Cycle, 9, 2399-402. 
ST AMOUR, C. V., SANSO, M., BOSKEN, C. A., LEE, K. M., LAROCHELLE, S., 
ZHANG, C., SHOKAT, K. M., GEYER, M. & FISHER, R. P. 2012. Separate 
domains of fission yeast Cdk9 (P-TEFb) are required for capping enzyme 
recruitment and primed (Ser7-phosphorylated) Rpb1 carboxyl-terminal domain 
substrate recognition. Mol Cell Biol, 32, 2372-83. 
STARR, D. A. & FRIDOLFSSON, H. N. 2010. Interactions between nuclei and the 
cytoskeleton are mediated by SUN-KASH nuclear-envelope bridges. Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol, 26, 421-44. 
STEGLICH, B., SAZER, S. & EKWALL, K. 2013. Transcriptional regulation at the yeast 
nuclear envelope. Nucleus, 4, 379-89. 
SVEICZER, A., NOVAK, B. & MITCHISON, J. M. 1996. The size control of fission 
yeast revisited. J Cell Sci, 109 ( Pt 12), 2947-57. 
SWIFT, J., IVANOVSKA, I. L., BUXBOIM, A., HARADA, T., DINGAL, P. C., PINTER, 
J., PAJEROWSKI, J. D., SPINLER, K. R., SHIN, J. W., TEWARI, M., 
REHFELDT, F., SPEICHER, D. W. & DISCHER, D. E. 2013. Nuclear lamin-A 
scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix-directed differentiation. 
Science, 341, 1240104. 
TAMM, T., GRALLERT, A., GROSSMAN, E. P., ALVAREZ-TABARES, I., STEVENS, 
F. E. & HAGAN, I. M. 2011. Brr6 drives the Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
spindle pole body nuclear envelope insertion/extrusion cycle. J Cell Biol, 195, 
467-84. 
TAPLEY, E. C. & STARR, D. A. 2013. Connecting the nucleus to the cytoskeleton by 
SUN-KASH bridges across the nuclear envelope. Curr Opin Cell Biol, 25, 57-
Reference List 
TATEBE, H. & YANAGIDA, M. 2000. Cut8, essential for anaphase, controls localization 
of 26S proteasome, facilitating destruction of cyclin and Cut2. Curr Biol, 10, 
1329-38. 
TEBBJI, F., CHEN, Y., RICHARD ALBERT, J., GUNSALUS, K. T., KUMAMOTO, C. A., 
NANTEL, A., SELLAM, A. & WHITEWAY, M. 2014. A functional portrait of 
Med7 and the mediator complex in Candida albicans. PLoS Genet, 10, 
e1004770. 
TERRY, L. J. & WENTE, S. R. 2009. Flexible gates: dynamic topologies and functions 
for FG nucleoporins in nucleocytoplasmic transport. Eukaryot Cell, 8, 1814-27. 
THAKURTA, A. G., GOPAL, G., YOON, J. H., KOZAK, L. & DHAR, R. 2005. Homolog 
of BRCA2-interacting Dss1p and Uap56p link Mlo3p and Rae1p for mRNA 
export in fission yeast. EMBO J, 24, 2512-23. 
THEERTHAGIRI, G., EISENHARDT, N., SCHWARZ, H. & ANTONIN, W. 2010. The 
nucleoporin Nup188 controls passage of membrane proteins across the nuclear 
pore complex. J Cell Biol, 189, 1129-42. 
THOMPSON, D. W. 1917. On growth and form, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press. 
THOMSON, E., FERREIRA-CERCA, S. & HURT, E. 2013. Eukaryotic ribosome 
biogenesis at a glance. J Cell Sci, 126, 4815-21. 
TIKU, V., JAIN, C., RAZ, Y., NAKAMURA, S., HEESTAND, B., LIU, W., SPATH, M., 
SUCHIMAN, H. E. D., MULLER, R. U., SLAGBOOM, P. E., PARTRIDGE, L. & 
ANTEBI, A. 2016. Small nucleoli are a cellular hallmark of longevity. Nat 
Commun, 8, 16083. 
TU, L. C. & MUSSER, S. M. 2011. Single molecule studies of nucleocytoplasmic 
transport. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1813, 1607-18. 
UNGRICHT, R., KLANN, M., HORVATH, P. & KUTAY, U. 2015. Diffusion and retention 
are major determinants of protein targeting to the inner nuclear membrane. J 
Cell Biol, 209, 687-703. 
UNGRICHT, R. & KUTAY, U. 2017. Mechanisms and functions of nuclear envelope 
remodelling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 18, 229-245. 
UPPALURI, S., WEBER, S. C. & BRANGWYNNE, C. P. 2016. Hierarchical Size 
Scaling during Multicellular Growth and Development. Cell Rep, 17, 345-352. 
VAN MEER, G., VOELKER, D. R. & FEIGENSON, G. W. 2008. Membrane lipids: 
where they are and how they behave. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 9, 112-24. 
VARGA, V., HELENIUS, J., TANAKA, K., HYMAN, A. A., TANAKA, T. U. & HOWARD, 
J. 2006. Yeast kinesin-8 depolymerizes microtubules in a length-dependent 
manner. Nat Cell Biol, 8, 957-62. 
VAZQUEZ NIN, G. H., ECHEVERRIA, O. M., ZAVALA, G., JIMENEZ-GARCIA, L. F., 
GONZALEZ, M. A. & PARRA, R. 1986. Relations between nucleolar 
morphometric parameters and pre-rRNA synthesis in animal and plant cells. 
Acta Anat (Basel), 126, 141-6. 
VUKOVIC, L. D., JEVTIC, P., EDENS, L. J. & LEVY, D. L. 2016a. New Insights into 
Mechanisms and Functions of Nuclear Size Regulation. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol, 
322, 1-59. 
VUKOVIC, L. D., JEVTIC, P., ZHANG, Z., STOHR, B. A. & LEVY, D. L. 2016b. Nuclear 
size is sensitive to NTF2 protein levels in a manner dependent on Ran binding. 
J Cell Sci, 129, 1115-27. 
WAGNER, S., SORG, I., DEGIACOMI, M., JOURNET, L., DAL PERARO, M. & 
CORNELIS, G. R. 2009. The helical content of the YscP molecular ruler 
determines the length of the Yersinia injectisome. Mol Microbiol, 71, 692-701. 
WALDE, S. & KING, M. C. 2014. The KASH protein Kms2 coordinates mitotic 
remodeling of the spindle pole body. J Cell Sci, 127, 3625-40. 
Reference List 
WARNER, J. R. 1999. The economics of ribosome biosynthesis in yeast. Trends 
Biochem Sci, 24, 437-40. 
WEBER, S. C. & BRANGWYNNE, C. P. 2012. Getting RNA and protein in phase. Cell, 
149, 1188-91. 
WEBER, S. C. & BRANGWYNNE, C. P. 2015. Inverse size scaling of the nucleolus by 
a concentration-dependent phase transition. Curr Biol, 25, 641-6. 
WEE, D. H. & HUGHES, K. T. 2015. Molecular ruler determines needle length for the 
Salmonella Spi-1 injectisome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 112, 4098-103. 
WEST, R. R., VAISBERG, E. V., DING, R., NURSE, P. & MCINTOSH, J. R. 1998. 
cut11(+): A gene required for cell cycle-dependent spindle pole body anchoring 
in the nuclear envelope and bipolar spindle formation in Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe. Mol Biol Cell, 9, 2839-55. 
WESTON, L., GREENWOOD, J. & NURSE, P. 2017. Genome-wide screen for cell 
growth regulators in fission yeast. J Cell Sci, 130, 2049-2055. 
WILBUR, J. D. & HEALD, R. 2013. Mitotic spindle scaling during Xenopus 
development by kif2a and importin alpha. Elife, 2, e00290. 
WILLIAMSON, D. H. & SCOPES, A. W. 1961. The distribution of nucleic acids and 
protein between different sized yeast cells. Exp Cell Res, 24, 151-3. 
WILSON, E. B. 1925. The Cell in Development and Heredity, New York, Macmillan. 
WOOD, V., HARRIS, M. A., MCDOWALL, M. D., RUTHERFORD, K., VAUGHAN, B. 
W., STAINES, D. M., ASLETT, M., LOCK, A., BAHLER, J., KERSEY, P. J. & 
OLIVER, S. G. 2012. PomBase: a comprehensive online resource for fission 
yeast. Nucleic Acids Res, 40, D695-9. 
WUHR, M., CHEN, Y., DUMONT, S., GROEN, A. C., NEEDLEMAN, D. J., SALIC, A. & 
MITCHISON, T. J. 2008. Evidence for an upper limit to mitotic spindle length. 
Curr Biol, 18, 1256-61. 
WUHR, M., GUTTLER, T., PESHKIN, L., MCALISTER, G. C., SONNETT, M., 
ISHIHARA, K., GROEN, A. C., PRESLER, M., ERICKSON, B. K., MITCHISON, 
T. J., KIRSCHNER, M. W. & GYGI, S. P. 2015. The Nuclear Proteome of a 
Vertebrate. Curr Biol, 25, 2663-71. 
YAMADA, K., HIROTA, K., MIZUNO, K., SHIBATA, T. & OHTA, K. 2008. Essential 
roles of Snf21, a Swi2/Snf2 family chromatin remodeler, in fission yeast mitosis. 
Genes Genet Syst, 83, 361-72. 
YAZDANI, M., DEOGRACIAS, R., GUY, J., POOT, R. A., BIRD, A. & BARDE, Y. A. 
2012. Disease modeling using embryonic stem cells: MeCP2 regulates nuclear 
size and RNA synthesis in neurons. Stem Cells, 30, 2128-39. 
YI, Y. H., MA, T. H., LEE, L. W., CHIOU, P. T., CHEN, P. H., LEE, C. M., CHU, Y. D., 
YU, H., HSIUNG, K. C., TSAI, Y. T., LEE, C. C., CHANG, Y. S., CHAN, S. P., 
TAN, B. C. & LO, S. J. 2015. A Genetic Cascade of let-7-ncl-1-fib-1 Modulates 
Nucleolar Size and rRNA Pool in Caenorhabditis elegans. PLoS Genet, 11, 
e1005580. 
YOON, J. H., WHALEN, W. A., BHARATHI, A., SHEN, R. & DHAR, R. 1997. Npp106p, 
a Schizosaccharomyces pombe nucleoporin similar to Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae Nic96p, functionally interacts with Rae1p in mRNA export. Mol Cell 
Biol, 17, 7047-60. 
ZHANG, K., DONNELLY, C. J., HAEUSLER, A. R., GRIMA, J. C., MACHAMER, J. B., 
STEINWALD, P., DALEY, E. L., MILLER, S. J., CUNNINGHAM, K. M., 
VIDENSKY, S., GUPTA, S., THOMAS, M. A., HONG, I., CHIU, S. L., 
HUGANIR, R. L., OSTROW, L. W., MATUNIS, M. J., WANG, J., SATTLER, R., 
LLOYD, T. E. & ROTHSTEIN, J. D. 2015. The C9orf72 repeat expansion 
disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature, 525, 56-61. 
ZHANG, Y., MCCORD, R. P., HO, Y. J., LAJOIE, B. R., HILDEBRAND, D. G., SIMON, 
A. C., BECKER, M. S., ALT, F. W. & DEKKER, J. 2012. Spatial organization of 
Reference List 
the mouse genome and its role in recurrent chromosomal translocations. Cell, 
148, 908-21. 
ZHURINSKY, J., LEONHARD, K., WATT, S., MARGUERAT, S., BAHLER, J. & 
NURSE, P. 2010. A coordinated global control over cellular transcription. Curr 
Biol, 20, 2010-5. 
ZINK, D., FISCHER, A. H. & NICKERSON, J. A. 2004. Nuclear structure in cancer 
cells. Nat Rev Cancer, 4, 677-87. 
