Liability Assessment: A Tool for Mine 
Closure Planning 
Hernani Mota de Lima, M.Sc. 
A thesis submitted in candidature for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
University of Wales, Aberystwyth 
Dedaration 
This work has not previously been accepted in substance for any degree and is not 
being concurrently submitted in candidature for any degree. 
Statement 1 
This thesis is the result of my own investigatiofis, except where otherwise stated. 
Other sources are acknowledged by footnotes giving explicit references. A 
bibliography is appended. 
Statement 2 
I hereby give consent for my thesis, if accepted, to be available for photocopying 
and for inter-library loans, and for the title and summary to be made available to 
outside organisations. 
oJc; II 1o~ 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
A number of people have provided invaluable help in this project and I would like 
gratefully to acknowledge their assistance. I greatly appreciate their time, expertise, 
encouragement, :friendship and support given during the completion of this work. Firstly, 
I would like to thank to professor Peter Wathem for his guidance and advice. 
I am grateful to Minera~oes Brasileiras Reunidas (MBR) who agreed to carry out a case 
study for this research at Aguas Claras Mine. I would like to thank all the staff of the 
Aguas Claras Mine, especially Paulo Franca, who mediated the proposal of research with 
MBR and provided constant help during the fieldwork and writing up of the results of this 
study. Without the collaboration of MBR, the methodology developed in/ this research 
would remain unproven. I am deeply grateful for this cooperation. 
In acknowledging those who have contributed most to the completion of this research, I 
cannot forget to mention Joan Anthony-Jones. Her willingness in reading and correcting 
my writing was crucial to conclude this study. I greatly appreciate her kind and 
enthusiastic assistance. 
I would also like to thank my friends in Aberystwyth who have directly or indirectly 
contributed to the successful completion of my research. Especially, Michael Gilbert, 
Nigel Thomas, Mary Dimambro, Rocio Diaz and Steve Wade. I will not forget the 
assistance provided by the families Jaurena and Di Marco Barros in many ways. Their 
:friendship ensured a warm stay in Aberystwyth for my family. 
My work for the doctoral degree was funded by the Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnol6gico (CNPq) of Brazil, for which I am most 
grateful for the financial support and the study leave granted. 
Finally, this work is dedicated to my family Claudia and Lais who have been a constant 
source of encouragement and inspiration in completing this work. 
ABSTRACT 
Mine closure is seen as an inevitable and problematic consequence of the nature of the 
mining industry. In many countries, the public image of mining is still one of abandoned 
mine sites and lasting environmental liabilities. In addition to this legacy, lack in planning 
for mine closure has caused social and economic disruption in mining regions. 
Responsible planning for closure is a major ongoing issue for the mining industry around 
the world. It should involve a technical review of the operations, an assessment of mine 
closure liabilities and a cost benefit analysis from both engineering and environmental 
perspectives. At present, there is a growing concern over the long-term environmental 
liabilities of a mine closure process. Despite this concern, no comprehensive research has 
been carried out on the relevance of a liability assessment for mine closure planning. 
The present research has focussed on the development of a liability assessment 
programme to assist mining companies in planning for mine closure. The research / 
covered the major themes. First, a review of sustainable development in mining, current 
practices on mine closure and current regulatory systems on mine closure in the US, 
Canada, Australia, South Africa and Brazil. Secondly, this research concentrated on the 
development of a new approach to closure planning based on environmental audit 
procedures. Finally, the developed approach was applied on a case study mine in Brazil to 
test the methodology. 
The research revealed the feasibility of using the liability assessment programme as a tool 
for mine closure planning. The programme showed to be practical for use within an 
environmental management system. Establishing robust environmental management 
systems, supported by liability assessment, will place the industry in a sound position to 
meet the mine closure challenge. Finally, this research provided a recommended strategy 
for mine closure in Brazil and suggestions for further research. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS Pages 
TilLE 
DECLARATION 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
ABSTRACT 
LIST OF TABLES 
LIST OF FIGURES 
LIST OF PLATES 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER 2 MINING AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
\ xii 
SUSTAINABLE 
INTRODUCTION 8 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS IN MINING 9 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 12 
MINING AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 15 
International Context of Mining and Sustainable Development 19 
The Role of International Organisations 20 
The Role ofNational Governments 23 
Commitment of Mining Industry Associations 24 
Sustainable Development Actions of Mining Companies 26 
The Impact of Mine Closure on Sustainability and the Sustainability of Mining 
Projects 28 
CHAPTER 3 - MINE CLOSURE 
INTRODUCTION 
KEY IMP ACTS TO BE ADDRESSED IN MINE CLOSURE 
CLOSURE PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS 
STAKEHOLDER INVOLVEMENT 
PLANNING FOR CLOSURE 
Mine Closure Plan Management and Implementation 
Monitoring and Maintenance 
Risk Assessment 
Typical Contents of a Closure Plan 
CLOSURE COSTS 
Closure costs cash flow 
Cost Estimate 
FINANCIAL PROVISION 
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE FOR MINE CLOSURE 
Financial guarantee instruments 
COMPLETION CRITERIA 
RELINQUISHMENT 
CHAPTER 4 - MINE CLOSURE POLICY, LEGISLATIONS 
AND REGULATIONS 
Pages 
INTRODUCTION 62 
OVERVIEW OF BRAZILIAN LEGISLATION GOVERNNING MINING 62 
Environmental Laws and Regulations 64 
Chronology of the Environmental Policy and Legislation in Brazil 64 
The Mining Code 65 
Environmental Legislation Governing Mining Activities 66 
RESULTS OF THE PRADS ANALYSIS 68 
MINE CLOSURE LEGISLATION AND REGULATION 73 
The Role of the Brazilian Government in Mining Closure 79 
Mine Closure Legislation and Regulation in Brazil 80 
Steps for Achieving Sustainable Development Succeeding Mine Closure 82 
A Proposed Framework for the Brazilian Mine Closure Programme 84 
CHAPTER 5 - LIABILITY ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME 
FOR MINE CLOSURE PLANNING 
Il",rfRODUCTION 
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT - BRIEF HISTORY AND DEFINITION 
LIABILITY ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME FOR MINE CLOSURE 
PLANNING 
Commitment 
Auditors 
Objectives 
Liability Assessment Scope 
Criteria for Liability Assessment 
Liability Assessment Procedures 
Planned, Organised and Supervised On-Site/Field Work 
Documentation 
Liability Assessment Report 
Liability Assessment Follow-up 
CHAPTER 6 -ANALYSIS AGUAS CLARAS MINE LIABILITY 
ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME 
Pages 
Liability Assessment Scope and Protocol 116 
Audit Criteria for the Aguas Claras Mine Liability Asses~ent Programme 118 
Dates and Duration of Major Liability Assessment Activities 119 
Identification of Audit-team Members 119 
Schedule of Meetings Held with Management 121 
Mine Site Interviews 121 
Documents Reviewed 122 
The Aguas Claras Mine Liability Assessment Follow-up 122 
SUMMARY 123 
CHAPTER 7 - AGUAS CLARAS MINE LIABILITY ASSESSMENT 
PROGRAMME 
AGUAS CLARAS MINE HISTORY 124 
Location ofMBR Operations 125 
Environmental Setting 127 
Geology of the Aguas Claras Mine 128 
AGUAS CLARAS MINE OPERATIONS, COMPONENTS AND FACILITIES 129 
Pages 
Aguas Claras Mine Pit 13 0 
Waste Dumps 133 
Tailings Dams 133 
Ore Processing Plant 13 5 
Buildings 136 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 138 
Rehabilitation Programme 140 
Monitoring 141 
DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS 142 
The Mine Pit 142 
Waste Dumps 146 
Tailings Dams 149 
Long-term Stability Concerns for Waste Dumps and Tailings Dams 151 
The Aguas Claras Ore Processing Plant 153 
Infrastructure of the Aguas Claras Mine 154 
The MBR's Environmental Management System 157 
SUMARY OF POTENTIAL CLOSURE ISSUES AND LIABILITIES AT 
AGUAS CLARAS MINE 159 
Suggested Risk Assessment 163 
CHAPTER 8 - SUMMARY, RECOMMENDATIONS AND 
CONCLUSION 
MINE CLOSURE ISSUES 164 
A RECOMMENDED STRATEGY FOR MINE CLOSURE IN BRAZIL 166 
CONCLUSION 168 
Suggestions for Further Research 172 
REFERENCES 174 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX I - PRE-AUDIT QUESTIONNAIRE 
APPENDIX II - LIST OF DOCUMENTS REVIWED 
LIST OF TABLES Pages 
Table 1 Mining Project Phases, Planning, Environmental Management and 
Closure Actions 33 
Table2 Typical Contents of a Closure Plan 43 
Table 3 Closure Guarantee Factors 56 
Table 4 Financial Guarantee Principles 56 
Table 5 Financial Guarantee Instruments 58 
Table 6 A Comparison of Contents of a Closure Plan and a PRAD 70 
Table 7 Provisions for Mine Closure in some Countries and their Respective 
Provinces, Territories and States 75 
Table 8 Details of Liability in Different Territories 77 
Table 9 Framework on Mine Closure: Summary of Objectives and Principles 85 
Table 10 Key Elements of an Effective Environmental Audit Programme 97 
Table 11 General Protocol of the Liability Assessment IOI 
Table 12 Potential Control Technologies for Chemical Stability 103 
Table 13 Closure Objectives and Measures for Open Pit 104 
Table 14 Closure Objectives and Measures for Water Management 105 
Table 15 Closure Objectives and Measures for Waste Rock and Overburden 
Piles 106 
Table 16 Closure Objectives and Measures for Tailings lmpoundment Systems 107 
Table 17 Closure Objectives and Measures for Buildings and Equipment 108 
Table 18 Closure Objectives and Measures for Landfills and other Wastes 109 
Table 19 General Liability Assessment Issues for Mine Components 111 
Table 20 Pit Geometry at Aguas Claras Mine 131 
Table 21 MBR's Environmental Policy 138 
Table 22 Summary of Closure Issues and Liabilities at Aguas Claras Mine 159 
Table 23 Closure Measures to Achieve Physical Stability and Public Security 160 
Table 24 Expected Closure Performance at Aguas Claras Mine 162 
LIST OF FIGURES Pages 
Figure 1 Cash Flow Scenarios for a Mining Project 48 
Figure 2 Planned Closure Costs Through a Mining Project Life. 49 
Figure 3 Size Distribution of Brazilian Mines 63 
Figure 4 Contribution of Mineral Substances to Brazilian Mineral Production 63 
Figure 5 Aguas Claras Mine Production between 1973 and 2001 125 
Figure 6 General Location ofMBR Operations in Brazil 126 
Figure 7 Detail of MBR Operations in the Iron Quadrangle 126 
Figure 8 Aguas Claras Mine - Geological Section 129 
Figure 9 Geomechanical Sectors of the Aguas Claras Pit 132 
Figure 10 Aguas Claras Mining and Ore Processing General Flowsheet 136 
Figure 11 Layout of Aguas Claras Village 158 
LIST OF PLATES Pages 
Plate 1 Aguas Claras Mine aerial view showing Belo Horizonte City, the pit, 
waste dumps Grota 2 and 3, the PFF Dike and part of the Jambreiro 
Forest. 127 
Plate 2 General Aerial View of the Aguas Claras Mine Pit from the Top of 
Curral Mountain. 132 
Plate 3 Aerial View of Aguas Claras Tailings Dam 5. 134 
Plate 4 Aerial View of the PFF Pond. 135 
Plate 5 Aerial View of the Aguas Claras Main Facilities. 137 
Plate 6 Steep Slopes Revegetation Process on the North Wall of the Aguas 
Claras Pit. 144 
Plate 7 The Final Configuration of the Pit's Lake. 145 
Plate 8 Pit Lake Partially filled - Picture taken in March 2002 146 
Plate 9 Top of the Waste Dump Grota 1, under construction at the Rim of the 
Pit. 148 
Plate 10 View of the Waste Dump Grota 1, Six Month after the Site Visit. 148 
Plate 11 Botdes and Other Rubbish Thrown into the Lake at the Sedimentation 
Pond. 149 
Plate 12 General View of the Tailings Dam 5. 150 
Plate 13 View of the Aguas Claras Ore Processing Plant 154 
Plate 14 View of the Downstream Slope of the Transgotonica Road where 
Cracks were Observed 155 
Plate 15 View of Loading Loop of the Aguas Claras Railway Terminal. 156 
CHAPTER 1- GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
Mine closure is seen as an inevitable and problematic consequence of the nature of the 
mining industry. The public image of mining is still one of abandoned mine sites and 
lasting environmental liabilities. In addition to this legacy, mine closure has caused social 
and economic disruption in mining regions (see for example Neil et al., 1992; Warhurst et 
al., 1999). This is true throughout the world. Responsible planning for mine closure and 
rehabilitation of mine sites are major ongoing issues for the mining industry around the 
world. Some countries including the United States (US), Canada, Australia and, recently, 
South Africa have developed regulatory systems and guidelines which now require 
mining companies to deal with the challenge of controlling environmental and legal 
liabilities associated with closure (see for example BLM, 1994; Champigny and van 
Heerden, 1995; Doran and McIntosh, 1995; Greeff, 1995; Morgan, 1995; Boraussa; 1996; 
Cowan, 1996; Jones, 1996; Overholt and Downs, 1996; MCA, 1997; ANZMEC, 1999; 
Clark, 1999; Danielson and Nixon, 1999). Brazil is in the process of introducing similar 
regulations. 
There is no controversy about the necessity and importance of planning for closure. 
Proper planning for closure should come during the pre-feasibility study, the design and 
permitting phase and be upgraded during the operational life of a mine project. The lack 
of an up-to-date mine closure plan results in severe environmental, socio-economic and 
cultural consequences (see for example Keyes, 1992; Wolfe, 1992; CDPHE, 1998). 
Therefore, closure should be integral to the whole of a mine's life plan. 
Current practice is to require two types of closure plan during the life of a mining project 
- a conceptual closure plan (project life) and the final closure plan ( at the end of 
operational phase). Conceptual closure plan, required during the licensing process, should 
ensure that closure is technically, economically and socially feasible without incurring 
long-term liabilities. The dynamic nature of mining, however, requires regular and critical 
reviews to reflect the changing circumstances that may arise from, for example, new 
policies. Similarly, closure plans will also need to be upgraded or modified because of 
operational changes, new regulation or new technology and should remain sufficiently 
flexible to cope with unexpected events. The final closure plan therefore, comprises a 
number of subsidiary plans, which can be modified as the plan evolves. These typically 
include a rehabilitation plan, a decommissioning plan and a maintenance and monitoring 
plan. 
The aspects to be covered by a closure plan are generally dictated by r~gulatory agencies 
(see for example, BLM, 1994; Doran and McIntosh, 1995; Ontario, 1995; Daigneault and 
Rosenstein, 1996; Jones, 1996; Overholt and Downs, 1996; Manitoba, 2001a; Manitoba, 
2001b). In general, the elements of a closure plan are divided into four categories. They 
include an introductory section, subsidiary closure plans, an estimate of costs and 
technical appendices. An introductory section consists of an executive summary; a 
background to closure, including the history of the company and the mining operation, 
objectives of closure, closure criteria and after-use of the site; a description of the mine 
components and a description of the environmental and social resources of the area 
around the mine. Subsidiary plans mainly consist of methods to decommission and 
rehabilitate each mine component; measures proposed to minimise adverse effects; details 
of active and passive care programmes; details of any expected long-term management 
and maintenance, as well as proposed arrangements to undertake this. An estimate of 
closure expenditure should address costs based on expected activities required by the 
plan, a schedule of quantities and standard rates. Technical appendices provide details of 
any specialist investigations, techniques, methods or innovative research undertaken or 
proposed (Ricks, 1997). 
Most Latin American mining countries, particularly Brazil, lack legislation and regulatory 
system to address mine closure issues. In Brazil, environmental impact assessment (EIA) 
is the principal tool of environmental management. EIA has functioned as the permitting 
document and a plan for rehabilitation of degraded areas (PRAD is the Portuguese 
acronym) must be included in an EIA. 
The first objective of this research was to evaluate the Brazilian legislation regarding 
mining to assess whether PRADs can provide a basic engineering concept for a 
comprehensive mine closure programme. 
Many mines in Brazil are today in an early stage of closure. Despite the absence of 
closure regulations, many mining companies are still attempting to adopt best practice 
and are facing the challenge of closing a mine properly instead of simply complying with 
current legislation or abandoning the mine site. The reasons why planning for closure is 
becoming more widespread include, inter alia, the increasing emphasis on environmental 
conditions attached to the provision of credit for mining projects; minimising tensions and 
conflicts with local communities; reducing the risk of future more stringent regulations; 
improving a company's profile and track record through "greener" operations and 
corporate policy. The main challenge for mine operators has been how to develop a 
technically, economically and socially feasible closure plan without incurring long-term 
liabilities. 
This research has focussed on the situation in Brazil, because the absence of directives for 
mine closure has created many constraints for both operators, in coping with closure, and 
regulators, as protectors of the public interest. This lack of a regulatory :framework for 
addressing closure matters can also lead to delays in developing projects and investments 
in the mining industry. There is also an absence of professionals capable of dealing with 
the wide spectrum of mine closure challenges, which, in the final stages of operations, 
involve costly time-consuming tailor-made closure solutions on a case-by-case basis. 
Mine closure plans are prepared in accordance with applicable laws, guidelines and 
closure criteria established by regulatory authorities. Therefore, legislation and clear 
guidelines in closure matters are paramount. 
Thus, the second objective of this study has been to outline possible key elements of a 
strategic :framework for mine closure that could be adopted in Brazil. 
Closure plans are often prepared by external consuhants, particularly where there is a 
requirement for an independent report, but they are increasingly being developed by in-
house environmental personnel (see for example, Dahlstrand, 1995; Smith and Hillis, 
1996; Ricks, 1997; Hordley, 1998; Milson and Purtill, 1998). However, a review of 
literature shows that both consultants and in-house environmental personnel have 
encountered difficulties in planning for closure (see for example, Scales, 1991; McArthur, 
1994; Dahlstrand, 1995~ White, 1996; Barnes et al., 1999). Most of these difficulties are 
related to a lack of assessment of mine closure liabilities, lack of qualified personnel, lack 
of environmental data and poor knowledge of environmental regulations and lack of 
community participation. As a result, mine closures have incurred unexpected long-term 
liabilities and closure costs that exceed earlier estimates. To overcome these implications, 
planning for closure should involve a technical review of the operations, an assessment of 
mine closure liabilities and a cost benefit analysis from both engineering and 
environmental perspectives. 
At present, there is a growing concern over the long-term environmental liabilities of a 
mine closure process. Despite this concern, no comprehensive research has been carried 
out on the relevance of liability assessment for mine closure planning. Liability 
assessment has been used for property evaluation before financial transaction, to establish 
innocent acquisition during purchase, takeover and merger (see for example, Holliday, 
1993; Martella, 1993; Petts and Eduljee, 1994; Bosco, Hickey et al., 1996; Withers and 
Dubyk, 1996). Regarding mine closure, the management of environmental liability during 
mining closure and post-utilization of the mine site has also been addressed at property 
transfer (Anderson, 1995). 
Assessment of mine closure liabilities should be seen as an important and necessary 
activity for closure planning. Indeed, assessment of mine closure liability is much like 
environmental audit. The similarity lies in the fact that liability assessment for mine 
closure purposes should focus on controlling environmental impact which is typically the 
most costly component of meeting closure objectives. Furthermore, by definition, 
environmental audit "involves the collection, examination and evaluation of evidence to 
form verifiable conclusions based on evidence collected" (EPA, 1996; ISO 14010, 1996). 
Background knowledge as a mining engineer about liability assessment methodology 
applied to assess mine closure liability indicates that it is comparable to an environmental 
audit procedure. The main difference is that the scope should be broader to include all 
mine closure objectives. In this way, liability assessment for mine closure purpose must 
consider future changes which may occur at a mine site and provide rehabilitation 
measures to address long-term concerns. Typically, closure objectives should include the 
protection of public health and safety, minimising environmental impact and provisions 
for the post-mining use of the land. Liability assessment for this purpose would involve a 
description of mine site conditions, operations and the environmental management system 
in place; identification of the main environmental and socio-economic issues related to 
mine operations as well as to mine closure; review of compliance records and reports; 
interviews with regulatory personnei mine managers and employees as well as with 
representative members of the -eommu.nities involved. So called ''front-end" assessment, 
compilation of existing environmental management and operating files and compliance 
data, are the approaches adopted to identify current and anticipated. 1ong"'.term closure 
liabilities and the rehabilitation measures required for planning for closure. 
The final objective of this study is expressed as the hypothesis, that it is possible to use a 
liability assessment programme to provide a framework for mine closure planning in 
Brazil. The results of the investigations undertaken to address this hypothesis would 
demonstrate the applicability of liability assessment for mine closure planning purposes 
and the form it would take to achieve best results. 
A review of the literature concermng sustainable development principles within the 
context of the mining industry, the main issues involved in mine closure plans, the 
regulations and policies governing mine closure, environmental audit techniques leading 
to the development of a liability assessment programme formed the first phase of this 
study. The second stage focussed on the application of this programme in a case study. 
The outcome was the preparation of an audit report and its submission to the company 
followed by implementation of the recommended actions by the company. The Aguas 
Claras Mine, owned by MBR provided the case study. The mine, in Brazil, is scheduled 
to cease its mining operations in September 2001. Therefore, the period of closure 
planning related well to the period of this study. The final stage of the study involved the 
development of general conclusions from and recommendations for future research in 
mining closure matters. 
This thesis compnses seven additional chapters. Chapter 2 focuses on the issues 
concerning the mining industry, the environment and sustainable development. As such, it 
provides a view of the issues involved in the concept of sustainable development in the 
context of the mining industry. The chapter gives a historical review of environmental 
issues concerning mining activities since the early discussion of mining by the scholar 
Agricola in the sixteen century. The concept of sustainable development is examined 
taking particular account of the role of international organisations and local governments 
as well as the commitments of mining associations in establishing policies to achieve 
sustainability. Some actions of the mining companies promoting sustainable development 
are examined especially adoption of the so-called ''triple bottom line" principle 
integrating economic, environmental and socio-cultural considerations into business 
strategies. Minimising the impact of mine closure through appropriate plans is discussed 
with respect to its crucial role in ensuring sustainable development by minimising the 
environmental, socio-economic and cultural burdens on future generations. 
Chapter 3 evaluates how mine closure can be best designed by the mining industry in 
order to contribute to long-term sustainable development of a given region. The key 
impacts to be addressed in mine closure planning are reviewed. Following, a set of 
objectives and principles grouped under six key areas (stakeholder involvement, planning, 
closure cost and financial provision, financial guarantee, closure criteria and 
relinquishment) of a comprehensive mine closure programme are discussed. 
Chapter 4 presents an overview of the Brazilian legislation pertaining to mining, the 
mining code, environmental laws and regulations applied to mining. Following, results of 
an analysis of some Plans for Rehabilitation of Degraded Areas (PRAD) are presented in 
order to assess the quality and importance of these plans for a comprehensive mine 
closure programme. This is followed by an summary of mine closure policy, legislation 
and regulations in a number of selected countries and an assessment of the evolving 
nature of government responsibilities with regard to mine closure. This overview serves 
as a base to discuss the main problems facing mine closure in Brazil and to propose the 
increasing range of issues that must be accounted for in the Brazilian policy, legislation 
and regulations on achieving comprehensive mine closure and sustainable development. 
To conclude a framework for mine closure programmes in Brazil is proposed. 
Chapter 5 contains an analysis of the environmental auditing programmes that appear 
most appropriate to mine closure. These are mainly, "Phase 1 Liability Assessments", 
Regulatory Compliance Audits and Environmental Management System Audits. The 
Chapter focuses on the design and execution of an environmental audit programme as 
well as on implementing the audit recommendations and outcomes of an environmental 
audit. In addition, a liability assessment programme, developed to assist mmmg 
companies in planning for closure and based on the results of this review, is also 
presented. The objectives of this programme are to identify the current and potential long-
term liabilities of a mine project and to estimate the measures needed to meet mine 
closure objectives. Audit guidelines have been prepared based on the rehabilitation and 
closure measures that appear to be commonly required. These guidelines represent a plan 
of how the auditor would accomplish the objectives of an audit. 
Chapter 6 chapter presents an analysis of the liability assessment approach adopted at 
Aguas Claras Mine by comparing with the theoretical method presented in Chapter 5. It 
begins with the discussion of the reasons for selecting Aguas Claras Mine as a case study 
following by an analysis of the MBR top management commitment, scope of the liability 
programme, auditors' team, mine site interviews and audit follow-up issues experienced 
when conducting the liability assessment are provided. Outcomes of the research 
conducted at the Aguas Claras Mine are also discussed. 
The findings from the case study are presented in Chapter 7. This chapter begins with a 
review of Aguas Claras Mine in the context ofMBR and the surrounding area. It follows 
by a description of the liability assessment findings and it concludes with a summary of 
the main liabilities emerged from the assessment. The results of this case study were 
submitted to the mining company as a liability assessment report. It can be stated that the 
company's response to the measures suggested was favourable since MBR conducted a 
phase 2 liability assessment and a risk assessment as recommended by this study. In 
addition, by the end of 2001 MBR submitted the final closure plan to the environmental 
agency for appreciation. 
Chapter 8 assesses the importance of planning for mine closure today and the challenge 
faced by both mine operators and regulatory authorities in coping with closure. A 
recommended strategy for a mine closure programme applicable to Brazil is presented 
with emphasis on the role of the mining industry in contributing to this process. 
Following these recommendations, the conclusions provide a summary of the Aguas 
Claras Mine project, the case study used in this research, as well as the constraints and 
challenges in adopting the liability assessment programme for mine closure planning. The 
extent to which the resuhs of this investigation demonstrate the applicability of liability 
assessment as a tool to assist mining companies, which have operating mines, in planning 
for closure is discussed. Finally, issues for further investigation are suggested. 
CHAPTER 2 - MINING AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, the expression "sustainable 
development~ bas been widely used in every possible context. In the context of the 
mining industry, sustainable development is still controversial. Indeed, sustainable mining 
appears to be an oxymoron. Mineral deposits are fmite in size and non-renewable for 
unlike biological resources, minerals cannot be replaced. By definition, therefore, mining 
of a deposit cannot be sustained indefinitely. 
On the other hand, from a global perspective mining as an industry has, in itself, been 
sustainable. It has been continuously sustained since humans found they could recover 
resources from the ground. At a local scale, however, it is not. For example, there are 
today no longer any metal mines in Germany. Around Chemnitz and the famed 
Ertzgeberge (ore mountains), a prolific mining area since when Agricola first published 
the mining treatise "De Re Mettalica" in 1556, there are today only mining museums to 
remind us of this once prosperous industry and the world's largest rehabilitation project at 
the Wismut Uranium Mine, mined for the Russian nuclear programme (E&Mj, 1998). 
Despite depleting mineral resources, the mining industry has promoted, in a general 
sense, economic development in some, but not all, countries where it takes place. 
The issue now, is how mining can promote sustainable development. Historically, mining 
has promoted perception as an unsustainable industry by defining its environmental, 
social and economic responsibilities narrowly. Where costs could be externalised, they 
frequently have been. The legacy and, in many places, current practice is one of 
abandoned mines, scarred landscapes, ghost towns, air and water pollution and so on. In 
addition, when mines are closed, apart from the disturbed natural environment, their 
direct economic value comes to an end with traumatic economic and social implications 
for those affected. 
To promote sustainable development, mining companies must integrate the economic, 
social and environmental dimensions of their activities (Mikesell, 1994 ). They must shift 
their focus from an end-of-pipe environmental response to a more socially accountable 
and responsive approach. A partnership with the community must also be forged based on 
a supply-side approach, whereby the productive and cultural potential of the community 
is recognised and devoted to improving members' living standards and income (Epps and 
Brett, 2000). Finally, because mines do not last for ever, mining companies should use 
their financial capacity to stimulate the local government into facilitating non-mining 
economic development (Khanna, 2000). This will help increase the infrastructure of 
services, absorbing excess labour and, as a result, reducing the political and social 
pressure on the mine. 
Cragg (1998) defends the adoption of sustainable development principles at the core of 
mine planning, operation and closure as a means of making mining an industrial activity 
defensible and credible over the long term. This, therefore, constitutes the way ahead and 
the most significant challenge for the mining industry today. In addition, as noted by 
James (2000), for the mining industry to become a sustainable industry, it should manage 
its business with attention to the "triple bottom line", which means integrating 
economical, environmental and social growth into its business strategies. By behaving 
responsibly from the outset through to the closure of a project, the mining industry can 
build a relationship of trust with the community. 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS IN MINING 
Rickard (1947) wrote that the term 'mine' has the same root as 'menace', both of which 
are derived from the Latin 'threat'. In this way, it can be conjectured that the threat was 
not only to the life and limb of miners of the time, but also to the environment. The 
beginning of environmental awareness in western societies is recorded as early as the year 
1306 when King Edward I of England introduced a proclamation forbidding the burning 
of coal in order to reduce atmospheric smoke near London (Jones, 1992). The mining 
treatise "De Re Metallica" published by Georgius Agricola in 1556, as translated by 
Herbert and Hoover (Agricola, 1950), contains a number of interesting sections dealing 
with the environmental perceptions of the population of that time vis-a-vis the mining 
industry. Three passages from Agricola's book I, quoted below, indicate that the 
environmental arguments surrounding the mining industry are much the same today as 
they were 450 years ago. 
The first passage could be considered as the anti-mining argument: "But beside this, the 
strongest argument of the detractors is that the fields are devastated by mining operations, 
for which reason formerly Italians were warned by law that no one should dig the earth 
for metals and so injure their very fertile fields, their vineyards, and their olives groves. 
Also they argue that the woods and groves are cut down, for there is need of an endless 
amount of wood for timbers, machines, and the smelting of metals. And when the woods 
and groves are felled, then are exterminated the beasts and birds, very many of which 
furnish a pleasant and agreeable food for man. Further, when the ores are washed, the 
water, which has been used, poisons the brooks and streams, and either destroys the fish 
or drives them away. Therefore the inhabitants of these regions, on account of the 
devastation of their fields, wood, groves, brooks and rivers, find great difficulty in 
procuring the necessaries of life, and by reason of the destruction of the timber they are 
forced to greater expense in erecting buildings. Thus it is said, it is clear to all that there is 
greater detriment from mining than the value of the metals which the mining 
produces"(Agricola, 1550, book I, page 8). 
Agricola notes what might be considered the pro-mining case: "lfwe remove metals from 
the service of man, all methods of protecting and sustaining health and more carefully 
preserving the course of life are done away with. If there were no metals, men would pass 
a horrible and wretched existence id the midst of wild beasts; they would return to the 
acorns and fruits and berries of the forest. They would feed upon the herbs and roots, 
which they plucked up with their nails. They would dig out caves in which to lie down at 
night, and by day they would rove in the woods and plains at random like beasts, and 
inasmuch as this condition is utterly unworthy of humanity, with its splendid and glorious 
natural endowment, will anyone be so foolish or obstinate as not to allow that metals are 
necessary for food and clothing and that they tend to preserve life?'' (Agricola, 1956, 
book I, page 14). 
Further, Agricola attempts to balance these two points as can be seen from the following 
quotation: "Moreover, as the miners dig almost exclusively in mountain otherwise 
unproductive, and in valleys invested in gloom, they do either slight damage to the fields 
or none at all. Lastly, where woods and glades are cut down, they may be sown with grain 
after they have been cleared from the roots of shrubs and trees. These new fields soon 
produce rich crops, so that they repair the losses which the inhabitants suffer from 
increased cost of timber. Moreover, with the metals which are melted from the ore, birds 
without number, edible beasts and fish can be purchased elsewhere and brought to these 
mountainous regions" (Agricola, 1950, book I, page 14). 
Ancient philosophers such as Seneca, Ovid and Pliny discussed the negative aspects of 
mining (Agricola, 1950). Later, social philosophers such as Henry Cornelius Agrippa, 
Edmund Spenser, John Milton, John Donne and Boruch Espinoza led the way in 
portraying mining and industrialisation in a negative light (Marcus, 1997). During the 
early 20th century, the British novelists Richard Llewellyn in "How Green Was My 
Valley'' (Llewellyn, 1997) and Alexander Cordell in "The Rape of the Fair Country" 
(Cordeli 1961), illustrated the depressing life of miners and steel workers of the late-
Victorian era and also described the negative effects of mining on the beautiful Welsh 
countryside. They were all helping to sow the early seed that would eventually flower 
into the birth of the current vigorous and politically active environmental movement in 
the latter part of the 1960s. 
Epps and Brett (2000) highlight three distinct phases of the mining industry in this 
century. The pre-1950 period is characterised by large international companies, based in 
the capitals of the colonial powers, exploiting_ mineral reserves within the dominions of 
their empires with little regard for the local inhabitants and simply imposing their own 
view of mineral rights and land ownership. There was neither mutual adjustment with 
local or traditional landowners nor an adversarial relationship, since local communities 
had no power to exercise against their all-powerful "conquerors". This period ended 
following the Second World War when a wave of nationalisation of mining operations 
commenced, extending to the mid 1980s. 
The last two decades of the 20th century have been characterised not only by 
globalisation, but also by a new sense of environmental awareness and social activism. In 
the 1980s and 1990s, world political and economic changes forced governments to turn to 
private capital once again to rejuvenate their mining enterprises. Immediately before these 
changes, however, the environmental movement, which commenced in the 1960s and 
1970s, significantly altered the public view of how mining projects should be evaluated 
and how governments' policies should be designed. This period highlighted both the low 
reputation and the environmental performance of an industry facing growing community 
expectations. The approach became focussed upon the perception that "economic 
development is to propose and environmental regulation to oppose" and that economic 
prosperity and environmental protection are supposed to result from a resolution of this 
conflict. Although initially driven by a strong public environmental consciousness, this 
conflict has now translated into the search for sustainable development. In its simplest 
terms, this is about the traditional environmental agenda being broadened to include 
social issues, bringing the environment, the economy and society together in one 
category, sustainability. This attitude is forcing an examination of the social dimension of 
the industry and a more efficient decision-making process that aims at cooperation 
between all interested parties, ensuring that everyone benefits. 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
The availability of natural resources to sustain economic growth has given increasing 
concern since the industrial revolution in the 18th century. Various countries, mainly 
European, have sought to solve this by expanding their borders subjugating many peoples 
in doing so. By the end of 19th century, natural resources had fundamental importance in 
terms of political affairs and military matters being competed for by imperialist nations. 
In the 20th century, natural resource issues were evident during the world wars. After the 
Second World War, reconstruction of the countries destroyed by war demanded enormous 
amounts of natural resources. The continuous development of science and technology, 
however, ensured that no supply crises occurred to impede the economic growth of the 
developed countries. 
In 1972, an unofficial group "The Club of Rome" reiterated concerns regarding the global 
scarcity of natural resources (Meadows, 1972). Scientific and technological advances, 
however, have continued to permit the enlargement of food and raw materials supply. 
Production diversification, better management of known natural resources and the 
discovery of new sources, generally with the development of long-distance transport 
systems have made economic integration and the availability of natural resources feasible. 
Nevertheless, the issue of how to reconcile economic development with natural-resource 
availability for further generations introduces the concept of sustainable development. 
Sustainable development is a grand ideal, about which a vast literature has rapidly 
emerged. The following discussion maps the historic events characterising the evolution 
of sustainable development. Among the most significant milestones were the first 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) in the United States in 1969, the Club of 
Rome in 1972, the World Conservation Strategy of 1980 (IUCM, 1980), the Brundtland 
Commission in 1987 (Brundtland, 1987) and the Rio Earth Summit and Declaration of 
1992. 
The Brundtland Commission first officially introduced the concept of sustainable 
development in 1987 in their report "The Common Future" (Brundtland, 1987). It was 
defined as "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs." This principle became the focal 
interest of the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development 
(UNCED) held in Brazil, June 1992 generally referred to as the Rio Earth Summit. The 
Brundtland Commission, along with the 1992 Earth Summit, marked a transformation in 
how national governments, policy makers, consumers and industry alike viewed industrial 
activity, trade and the processes of consumption and production. Several important 
agreements on sustainable development came out of the UNCED. These were: 
> "The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development", a political declaration 
signed by 182 Head of States, consisting of 27 principles. The first principle stated 
HToe human being is the centre of concern in sustainable development". 
> States have the sovereign right to develop their own national resources without 
endangering the environment of neighbouring countries. 
> "Agenda 21 ", a programme of agreed strategies for managing environmental and 
developmental matters. The programmes are divided into Social and Economic 
Dimensions, Conservation and Management of Resources for Development, 
strengthening the role of major groups and means of implementation. 
According to Carbon (1997), two important lessons can be summarised from these events. 
First, environmental protection and sustainable development are based upon a system of 
values. Whilst such values have common elements, they do not apply to every sociai 
cultural and economic situation. It is often helpful, therefore, to formulate values 
appropriate to a particular situation in order to determine suitable specific actions. 
Second, sustainable development requires action going beyond the requirements of 
regulatory control. Partnership between the entrepreneurs, environmental agencies and 
communities involved is better than confrontation. 
Sustainable development is multidimensional. The first dimension emphasises the 
sustainability of the natural environment, which includes both environmental quality and 
the stock of natural resources. The natural environment is an asset. As such, it provides 
life-sustaining and aesthetic "services": soil, air and water, necessary for all life forms, 
energy and mineral resources, essential to modem society, habitat for plant and animals, 
scenic vistas and so on. These services relate to physical sustainability. In addition to 
physical sustainability, however, the natural environment should be preserved for its own 
sake. 
The second dimension emphasises the economic sustainability of human living standards. 
Although difficult to quantify, a broader measure of human living standards should be 
adopted such as the Human Development Index of the United Nations Development 
Programme. This index incorporates gros~ domestic product, education, life expectancy 
and other factors related to economic development. Economic sustainability involves 
substitution of man-made capital for natural resources. According to Eggert (2000), an 
important issue arising from substitution is the extent to which it is possible to substitute 
man-made capital for natural resources. 
The third dimension emphasises social and cultural sustainability. It is the most difficult 
to measure and define because it involves what is fair or just, concepts over which even 
reasonable people may disagree. Eggert (2000) focuses this third dimension upon two 
major issues, distribution and process. An important concern is that the distribution of the 
benefits and costs of developing natural resources may not be fair, equitable, or just. 
Specifically, much of the benefit goes to the shareholders and to governments in the form 
of tax revenues, while associated costs are borne by the local community in the form of 
social disruption, environmental damage, or loss of cultural identity. 'Process' refers to 
how decisions are made and the role that various entities play within this process. 
Therefore, a general proposal for making the distribution of benefits and costs more 
equitable involves process. In this way, consultation with and involvement of all 
stakeholders in decision-making is defended, as it achieves outcomes which are socially 
and culturally sustainable. 
MINING AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
In 1986, the Brundtland report emphasised the importance of sustainability in every 
sector of development, particularly the industrial sector. Although the mining industry 
provides the basis of most industrial activity, the vital links between mining and 
sustainable development were not presented in this report. The first attempt to articulate 
what the concept of sustainability means in the context of mining and minerals 
development came in 1991 with the Berlin Guidelines on Mining and Development (U. 
N., 1992). Berlin Guidelines established criteria for assuring sustainable mining and 
defined the concept of "sustainable mining" as an efficient industry that seeks to 
minimise the adverse environmental impacts of its activities, especially in developing 
countries. The interdependence of economic development and environment protection, 
however, came in 1992, a conference on mineral resources development and the 
environment organised by the United Nations in New York (UNDTCD, 1992). Moreover, 
in Agenda 21, it was acknowledged that global indicators for mineral resource 
development must be among the fundamental indicators for sustainable development. 
Since the concept of sustainable development came to prominence there has been much 
debate on whether the mining industry can be a component of sustainable development. 
In a strict sense, mineral production is the quintessential unsustainable activity. Once the 
resource is extracted and used, it cannot be renewed. Therefore, not only does mining not 
contribute to sustainable development, it runs counter to the very principles of 
sustainability. 
Such a perspective, however, contains several misleading preconceptions. The concept of 
mineral reserves is dynamic; estimates at any time reflect the economic, technological, 
legal and political conditions of that time. Over time, as these conditions change, so too 
do reserve estimates. Eggert (1994, 2000) lists mineral exploration and development, 
technological innovation and recycling as factors by which mineral production has been 
shown to be more sustainable than at first appears. Through mineral exploration and 
development, new mineral resources have been replacing the reserves which mining 
depletes. By definition, mineral reserves are those that are known with a high degree of 
certainty of being profitably mined under prevailing economic, political and technological 
conditions. Generally, at or near existing mines, companies discover and develop new 
reserves that extend (or sustain) the life of these operations. During feasibility studies for 
a mineral resource discovery, usually a :fraction of the resource is delineated as reserve. 
Given the cost of developing reserves, it does not make economic sense to determine the 
complete size and quality of a mineral resource before mining begins. On a broader scale, 
exploration and development activities also sustain mineral production by leading to the 
discovery and confirmation of reserves at previously known or unknown mineral 
deposits. 
Mineral production can also be sustained via technological advances and better 
performance by the mining industry. Technological progress allows either technically 
difficult or uneconomic (known) mineral resources to be converted into reserves (Villas 
Boas, 1997). Such advances make feasible the development of resources at greater 
depths, of lower grade, or of greater metallurgical complexity. Furthermore, advances in 
exploration technology, associated with high prices over time, suggest that discovery and 
innovation together have more than compensated for the effects of depletion over the last 
half century (Lambert, 2001). 
In addition, political conditions at both international and national levels have an important 
effect upon mineral resources and reserves. The oil crisis of 1970s provides the best 
known example. The resultant high price of barrel of oil led to the search for new reserves 
and allowed known resources to tum into reserves. More recently, in Brazil, a proposal 
running in the Congress to permit mining in indigenous land has encountered strong 
opposition not only from the environmentalists, but also from international mining 
companies. The reason why certain international mining companies lobby against 
approval of this project is that the development of known mineral resources in indigenous 
land can lead to a drop in the price of many mineral commodities. In 1985, for example, 
the high production of Brazilian tin by informal miners in the Amazonian region reduced 
abruptly the tin price leading many mines to closure (Warhurst and Jordan, 1992). 
Recycling, although not making mine production itself sustainable, sustains the benefits 
provided by the material which mining supplies. Recycling is an important source of 
many metals and, recently, also of non-metallic materials such as cement and construction 
aggregates. As such, recycling can be considered an important element of a sustainable 
minerals policy (NRC, 1996; NRC, 1997; NRC, 2000). 
The concept of sustainable development for mineral resources should overcome the 
simplistic conception of a non-renewable, finite mineral resource and the view of global 
scarcity contained in the Club of Rome Report of 1972. The mineral industry cannot be 
considered non-sustainable, simply, because it is dependent on resources that are non-
renewable. Sustainable development, moreover, is not a one-dimensional concept. 
According to Hancock (1995), this thinking, associated with the prevailing argument that 
the environment and biodiversity are best served by preserving ever more land under 
some conservation designation distracts attention from the important issues of sustainable 
development. These issues are energy inputs, sequential use of land, disposal and 
recycling of end-products and closing the production-consumption cycle by focussing 
more upon high value quality production of longer-life products rather than quantity 
(NRC, 1996; NRC, 1997; NRC, 2000). 
Economic sustainability focuses upon maintaining or enhancing the economic well being 
of human beings. Using mineral reserves to sustain economic well-being is important for 
those local communities, regions within nations and entire nations for which mineral 
revenues are a significant share of the total output of goods and services. Tilton (1992) 
notes that the extent to which mineral production contributes to economic well-being 
depends upon three factors. First, mineral wealth must be developed; mineral reserves on 
the ground are a dormant asset. Second, to sustain the benefits of mining after mineral 
reserves are depleted, an appropriate portion of the profit must be invested in activities 
that will generate income or well being in the future, such as education, technological 
research and development and social infrastructure. Third, governments need to control 
the potential negative macroeconomic consequences of mining booms, sometimes 
referred as the "resource curse". 
The concept of sustainable development is that each generation should maintain the 
capital value of the resources that it inherits. For mineral resources, this can be done by a 
combination of exploration, technological advances, recycling and substitution to 
maintain the value of the stock of economic mineral resources and by substituting mineral 
reserve capital with man-made capital derived from mineral resource production. 
Mikesell (1994) envisages this capital being accumulated from annual depletion payments 
made for each mineral to make good any depletion in value of stocks as recorded in a 
nation's natural resource accounts. 
Sustainable development in the mining industry incorporates the following elements: 
), Finding, extracting, producing, adding value, using, re-using, recycling and, when 
necessary, disposing of mining industry products in the most efficient, competitive 
and environmentally responsible manner possible, utilising best available 
practices; 
), Respecting the needs and values of all resource users, and considering those needs 
and values in government decision-making; 
~ Maintaining or enhancing the quality of life and the environment for present and 
future generations; and 
), Securing the involvement and participation of stakeholders, individuals and 
communities in decision-making (NRC, 1996; Andrade, 1997; NRC, 1997; Villas 
Boas, 1997; Ackermann, 1998; Munchenberg, 1998; Eggert, 2000; NRC, 2000). 
The widespread public acceptance of sustainable development has had three major 
consequences in the mining industry. First, it has led to an expansion in the definition of 
environmental concerns to include social, cultural, economic and environmental impacts 
of mining projects on local communities from exploration through to post-closure (Clark 
and Clark, 1996; Miller, 1997; Munchenberg, 1998). At present, environmental concerns 
involve effects not only on the physical health of individual and on ecosystems; the focus 
has shifted to a more comprehensive view of human well-being and the rights of local 
inhabitants to determine the quality of their lives and those of the next generation. 
Second, sustainable development demands the consideration of economic development 
and environmental regulations from the very beginning of a proposed project. Third, it 
includes valuation at the project level of values based on moral and other subjective 
community considerations, rather than only traditional economic values (Cordes, 1997). 
These three elements are intricately interlocked, suggesting that sustainable development 
needs to be measured on a broader scale than at the level of an individual mine, factory or 
household site. The question for the mining industry then becomes one of maximising its 
contribution to sustainable development at this broader scale. In practical terms, this 
means maximising the environmental, economic and social returns gained from mineral 
resource development. The critical issue remains, however, the need to strike a 
sustainable balance. Simply maximising economic or social returns from resource 
development will not contribute to sustainable development. Progress under the three 
headings of environment, economy and society varies, with social concerns not being so 
well developed (Eggert, 1994; Warhurst, Macfarlane et al., 1999). 
International Context of Mining and Sustainable Development 
Global mechanisms have encouraged dialogue on matters related to mining and 
sustainable development. Different organisations have adopted measures for dealing with 
innovation, technology development, investment, market access and trade barriers, as 
well as the development of corporate national and international policies. Some examples 
come from the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Mines Ministries of 
Americas (CAMMA is the Spanish acronym), World Mines Ministries Forum, as well as 
the United Nations, the World Bank and mining associations. 
In 1995, the forum for Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) established an Expert 
Group on Mineral and Energy Exploration and Development (GEMEED) to discuss 
mining and energy exploration, as well as development issues in the Asia-Pacific region. 
Recently, GEMEED has included a specific focus on the sustainable development of 
mining. 
Since 1995, mines ministers and senior officials from countries in the Americas and the 
Caribbean (CAMMA) have been meeting annually to renew their commitment to the 
principles of sustainable development and to discuss ways of implementing Agenda 21. 
The commitments adopted include: work together on the adoption of sustainable 
development principles by the mining industry (CAMMA, 1997), recognise the value of 
stakeholders consultation (CAMMA, 1998) and adoption of mine closu:re plan 
requirements at the outset of a project as an element to enable mining to contribute to 
sustainable development while facilitating the existence of clear and stable conditions for 
achieving economic, environmental and social well-being (CAMMA, 1999; CAMMA, 
2000). 
The Role of International Organisations 
In the last two decades, international organisations (IGOs) have contributed to the 
evolution and refinement of the concept of sustainable development. According to Otto 
(2000), IGOs have, in effect, brought the sustainable development concept to centre stage 
and provided the impetus to governments to consider how the concept applies to their 
country and how resulting policies can be implemented. IGOs do not develop effective 
sustainable development regulatory systems, but they do shape public debate on 
sustainable development issues and influence the actions of not only governments but of 
all stakeholders. Ostensoon (2000) lists three important ways that IGOs contribute to the 
application of sustainable development. First, IGOs have supported the formulation of 
international standards, norms and guidelines. Second, IGOs have assisted the 
governments of developing countries in preparing and implementing legislation and 
administrative practices intended to promote sustainable development. Third, IGOs have 
contributed to the advance and dissemination of scientific and technical knowledge as 
well as of statistics, basic economic data and innovations in the area of environmental and 
socio-economic management. 
In general, since the beginning of the international environmental debate, the activities of 
the IGOs reflect the constant balance of material development interests and sustainability 
objectives. The outcome of this balancing act and the extent to which the objectives are 
successfully integrated into a holistic philosophy of development vary over time and from 
one organisation to another, depending mainly on its mandate. 
Otto (2000), notes that the support of specialised IGOs for governments in designing and 
drafting mineral regulatory frameworks has changed over the last decade. Some United 
Nations (UN) agencies, for example, have been disbanded or have experienced severe 
budget cuts. The UN Centre for Transnational Corporations (UNCTC) and the UN 
Department of Technical Cooperation for Development (UNDTCD) historically provided 
mining advisory services. UNCTC was dissolved in the early 1990s and UNDTCD has 
been incorporated into the Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) where its 
work on matters relating to mining have markedly declined. Other UN agencies such as 
the Commission on Sustainable Development (UNCSD), Environment Programme 
(UNEP), Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO), International Labour 
Organisation (ILO), Revolving Fund for Natural Resources Exploration (UNRFNRE) 
lack the mandate (the mining sector is usually accorded a very low priority), budget or 
legal staff to fill effectively the void left by the dissolution of UNDTCD and refocusing 
ofUNCTC. 
Otto (2000) adds, however, that other IGOs have replaced or are working together with 
the UN regarding mineral regulatory matters. Indeed, such matters have been largely 
restricted to efforts by the World Bank. World Bank support has been given, directly, 
through advisory services for countries drafting mining sector laws and, indirectly, by 
pressuring governments and companies to implement a broad range of "green 
conditionalities" as part of its lending practice (Goodland and Daly, 1995; World Bank, 
1996). 
Various aspects of mining and its impact on environmental and human health have been 
examined in a series of international fora. In 1992, The United Nations created The 
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) to ensure effective 
response to the commitments made at the United Nations Conference on Environment 
and Development and to monitor and report on implementation of the Earth Summit 
agreements at the local, national, regional and international levels. The CSD is a 
functional commission of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), with 53 
members (CSD, 1999). 
In 1999, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), together with the United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social affairs (DESA), sponsored an International 
Round Table on Mining and the Environment to review draft guidelines for mining and 
sustainable development, named Berlin II (NRMU, 1999). The Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) provides an important forum for 
member governments to address common problems, encourages cooperation and 
promotes integration of economic, social and environmental policies. Through 
programmes dealing with chemical management, pollution prevention and control and 
waste management, among others, the OECD has developed recommendations that affect 
national and international policies relating to the mining industry (OECD, 1998). 
The World Health Organisation (WHO) and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) 
also address social policy matters related to mining. An ILO Convention and 
Recommendation on Safety and Health in Mines was adopted in 1995 (ILO, 1995). At 
present, ILO has paid particular attention to the iron and steel industry, adopting more 
than 100 resolutions since 1946. In 1996, it focussed upon basic metal production and 
future consideration of the occupational health and safety issues associated with the 
smelting, refining and finishing of non-ferrous metal products. In 2001, a tripartite group 
of experts is expected to develop and adopt a Code of Practice on Safety and Health in the 
Non-ferrous Metals Industries that will provide specific guidelines for use throughout the 
industry. 
Some international networks have focussed upon the sustainable development of mining. 
The International Council on Metals and the Environment (ICME) is a good example. 
ICME concern for sustainable development focuses on promoting sustainable 
development policies and practices by firms engaged in the mining and production of 
metals, which will ensure the safe production, use, recycling and disposal of metals. The 
ICME charter does not attempt to describe how companies should implement its stated 
principles, but does provide a framework that individual companies should observe when 
involved in mining projects (ICME, 1994). 
It is important to note, however, that positions taken by leading coalitions such, as ICME, 
in most cases, are not binding  upon their members. Even if they are, there is no 
mechanism for monitoring whether a member is in compliance or not. Rarely do such 
industry-led coalitions, effectively act as police. Nevertheless, such coalitions play an 
important role in shaping the thinking of companies with regard to sustainable 
development issues. In addition, they fund dedicated research on key issues and promote 
discussion fora, which allow information and the successful strategies of company 
members to become known to others. Publications of industrial group statements also 
provide guidance to lawmakers, enforcement officers and courts regarding what defines 
phraseology such as "international best practice" which are regularly incorporated into 
mining statutes, regulations and agreements (Otto and Cordes, 2000). 
The Role of National Governments 
The role of national governments is essential to sustainable development. They are 
responsible for translating into practice the principles to which they have subscribed at 
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (The Earth Summit) as 
well as other conferences where resolutions on sustainable development have been 
adopted. National governments are challenged to develop policies, regulatory and fiscal 
frameworks to encourage innovation, increase productivity, trade and investment in an 
environmentally sound and socially responsible manner. Such policies should include the 
adoption of environment standards, guidelines for assessments and procedure rules. To 
face these challenges, governments should ensure that the resources, especially the 
technical expertise, necessary for implementation of policy are available (Davy, 1999; 
Ostensoon, 2000). 
Recommendations for governments enhance the sustainability of mining projects and 
address such aspects as legal frameworks, strategic planning in the allocation of 
concessions, management revenues, integration of environmental assessment and social 
assessment, partnership, monitoring and enforcement (Harries, 1998). Basically, the legal 
framework should ensure that social and environmental concerns are considered in the 
project planning and approval process. Governments should undertake strategic planning 
to guide the allocation of concessions, by identifying constraints on development. This 
prevents exploration companies from investing in areas where social and environmental 
matters would act as over-riding constraints to development and conflicts between 
companies and communities. A legal basis must exist for directing a proportion of project 
revenue to local developments and transparent tracking mechanisms are need where such 
systems exist. The management of revenues should promote social equity and alleviate 
poverty (Davy, 1999). 
The economic dimension of sustainable development is particularly important for mining 
and for mineral economies. The fundamental condition for sustained growth in a mineral 
exporting country is that the contribution of mineral exports to growth must be 
maintained over time, regardless of the capacity of the country to maintain its mineral 
production. What is required, however, is not the sustainability of the mineral exports that 
initially generate economic growth, but rather establishing and maintaining the macro 
conditions for sustaining growth. The macro-economic conditions required for sustained 
development in mineral economies include: preventing price distortions arising from 
inflation and real exchange rate changes that reduce incentives for production and 
investment in the tradeable sectors; maintaining the overall volume of investment 
required for growth by channelling the proper portion of mineral rents into productive 
investment; avoiding large and prolonged fiscal deficits while maintaining government 
expenditure for essential social services without impairing foreign and domestic 
investment; maximizing the resource rents available to the domestic economy; and 
managing external debt in a manner consistent with sustainable growth (Hancock, 1995; 
Ackermann, 1998; Harries, 1998; Cooney, 2000). 
Commitment of Mining Industry Associations 
Members of mining associations around the world, as well as other organisations, are 
involved in many voluntary initiatives that support sustainable development. Historically, 
such associations tended to take some defensive posture with regard to regulatory or 
popular moves which were perceived as a threat to the industry or to its profits. Although 
true to some extent, many of these associations now approach environmental and 
sustainable development issues in a proactive, rather than reactive manner. 
As a stakeholder group, mining associations have become focal points of dialogue 
between member mining companies, community groups and government. Initiatives in 
this direction have had a strong technical orientation with appropriate policies, guidelines 
and codes of best environmental practices clearly stated. In addition, training and 
technology transfer have becoming freely available so as to guide worldwide mining 
operations and to further the objectives of winning stakeholder support for industrial 
development. Such practices have been used by mining industry associations to accelerate 
the trends towards improved environmental performance and achieve sustainable 
development on the part of member companies (Miller, 1997; Epps and Brett, 2000; Otto 
and Cordes, 2000). 
In Australia, the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has developed the most 
comprehensive national mining industry code of practice. The council has policies on 
specific environmental issues, including multiple land use, trade and environment. To 
date, the Australian Minerals Industry Code of Environmental Management, launched in 
December 1996, is the only national mining industry code that calls for disclosure of 
environmental performance and for independent audits. Cooperation between MCA and 
the national Environmental Protection Agency resulted in the publication of the ''Best 
Practice Environmental Management in Mining" modules. These modules cover 
environmental management topics and comprise case studies of best practice (e.g. 
environmental impact assessment, environmental management system, tailings 
management and so on). Recently, the Council approved a scoping paper for development 
of a strategy for mine closure providing a framework for development of solutions to 
actual or potential environmental, social and safety problems with decommissioned mine 
sites in order to minimise long-term liabilities for member companies (MCA, 1997). 
In Canada, the Mining Association of Canada (MAC) released its Environmental Policy 
in 1989. Endorsement of this policy is a condition of membership of the Association. By 
1990, the Canadian Association released the MAC Environmental Policy followed by an 
Environmental Management Framework in 1996 (MAC, 1996). This details the principles 
and general guidelines for implementing a full Environmental Management System 
(EMS) to be adopted by all MAC members whether in Canada or abroad. Consensus on 
sustainable development principles amongst MAC members was evident by the end of 
1998 (Otto and Cordes, 2000). 
In Brazil, the Brazilian Institute of Mining (IBRAM) has an environmental policy to 
which members are encouraged to subscribe voluntarily . As in the case with the Minerals 
Council of Australia, IBRAM is now engaged, jointly with the National Department of 
Mineral Production (DNPM) on a taskforce to discuss the problems of mine closure in 
Brazil and propose regulations that deal with this issue (Miller, 1997). 
In the United States, the National Mining Association (NMA) has issued a code of 
practice under the title "Our Common Commitment". It consists of a statement of 
principles. Adherence to the code is not compulsory for NMA members, but peer pressure 
is considered to provide significant incentive for its endorsement by individual companies 
(Miller, 1997). 
As with international industrial organisations, mining associations face the difficulty of 
effectively policing their membership that can be considered a flaw regarding sustainable 
development issues. Nevertheless, whilst they may lag behind on enforcement, they lead 
the way in shaping the manner in which the industry regards and approaches sustainable 
development. 
Sustainable Development Actions of Mining Companies 
Environment issues and concerns have traditionally been viewed as a constraint to the 
mining industry (Belsky, 1992; Farrel, 1994). Nonetheless, the commercial benefits of a 
proactive approach to environmental management are becoming clear. At present, many 
mining companies are putting considerable effort into minimising the environmental 
impacts of their operations, before, during and after the development of resources. 
Increasingly, companies are investigating how they can make an overall positive 
environmental and social contribution at a local and regional level. In addition, there is a 
growing perception by mining companies that dealing with sustainable development 
issues in a manner acceptable to their stakeholders has become a commercial imperative. 
Self-regulation is being promoted as an efficient regulatory mechanism in many mining 
industries and mining associations, but is increasingly becoming incorporated into 
corporate environmental policy. According to Guerin (2000), the mining industry, by 
proposing different methods for achieving underlying environmental goals, affords the 
opportunity to gain exemptions from specific command and control requirements and an 
opportunity to show leadership when it comes to environmental matters. Self-regulation, 
via industry codes of practice and associated standards, are developed for many reasons. 
These include a desire by industry to reclaim the agenda-setting for their particular sphere 
of operation, often from other stakeholders. Self-regulation accepts existing legislative 
requirements as only the minimum standard, but largely implies no legal requirement to 
comply to anything additional. This has created concern among stakeholders. In its 
activities, however, the industry shows social responsibility. Furthermore, organisations 
adopting EMS and associated processes are commonly claimed by advocates to be more 
efficient and competitive, with a built-in marketing advantage in the long term. 
A special edition of the United Nations journal Industry and Environment (UNEP, 1998), 
describes a wide variety of voluntary private mining sector initiatives relating to 
sustainable development. To achieve sustainable development the mining industry is 
seeking to adopt and promote strong environmental stewardship over its day-to-day 
operations. Issues surrounding land use, access and tenure are being addressed while 
maintaining the balance between the rights and interests of all stakeholders. 
Shell and BP have recently announced initiatives which are clearly intended to transform 
them from "oil companies" into "energy companies", with a substantially greater focus on 
supplying energy from renewable sources. Both BP and Shell have estimated that 50% of 
electricity could be generated from renewable sources by 2050 and the companies are 
positioning themselves to benefit from this shift. This change and the ability to increase 
greatly the contribution of renewable sources to global energy needs, is only possible 
because these companies have been able to reinvest returns made from the extraction and 
use of oil, an example of how the use of a finite resource can give access to a renewable 
one (Munchenberg, 1998). 
In 1998, Placer Dome adopted a sustainable development strategy based on three building 
blocks. The first block is a corporate policy on sustainability. This was followed early in 
1999 by the second in which Place Dome gave a report on its own sustainability 
performance, which established benchmarks for measuring progress in achieving 
sustainable development. The third block consists of institutional partnerships, in 
particular with NGOs. Through these initiatives, earnings from mining have been 
converted into sustainable social returns for local communities. For example, as part of 
Placer Dome Asia Pacific's operations at Misima in Papua New Guinea, the mine 
company has worked with the local Misima communities to establish businesses which 
will continue to provide income for the communities after mine closure (Munchenberg, 
1998; Cooney, 2000). 
The Impact of Mine Closure on Sustainability and the Sustainability of Mining 
Projects 
Mining projects are of finite life. As such, the flow of direct benefits derived from mining 
is unsustained. On the other hand, some of the costs can extend beyond the life of the 
mine. Long-term mining costs include environmental (e.g., acid mine drainage), socio-
economic and cultural impacts. Indirect benefits, such as induced growth effects from 
infrastructure investments, may also continue after mine closure, but these are less 
obvious and are normally thought to be swamped by the long-term costs. 'The burden 
imposed on future generations who must cope with the cost of closed mines' seems, 
directly in conflict with the notion of sustainable development (Ackermann, 1998). The 
question today, is to assess whether a mining project has the potential given any 
necessary intervention by the state, at least, to maintain or improve the welfare of future 
generations. By doing this, mine closure acts as a crucial step in achieving the sustainable 
development, by minimising environmental, socio-economic and cultural burdens on 
future generations. 
Environmental impacts should be minimised by effective environmental management and 
actions from the beginning of a mining project through closure and the post-closure 
phase. The prospect of mine closure, however, often poses an alarming challenge for 
mining communities. To protect against a closure scenario that has the potential to 
severely damage, or even destroy, a fragile economy and a community's social structure, 
it is important that any company policies fully accommodate the socio-economic and 
cultural impacts which can result from mine closure (Clark and Clark, 1996). These 
include accepting full corporate responsibility for ensuring that the proper mitigating 
measures will be implemented by appropriate and properly supported entities irrespective 
of the timing or reason for mine closure. Therefore, it is imperative that these policies 
ittclude the community as an active partner in all phases of a mining project. With good 
planning and an empowered community, closure should not be feared, but anticipated by 
all stakeholders as the final stage of community programmes that have been planned from 
the commencement to culminate in the closure stage. 
CHAPTER 3 - MINE CLOSURE 
INTRODUCTION 
The terms closure, decommissioning and rehabilitation originated as a formal requirement 
for nuclear installations, but were soon extended to the uranium mining industry. 
Subsequently, these have been further expanded to encompass the rest of the mining 
industry (Campbell and Emery, 1995). Mining operations are fmite economic activities, 
which are usually relatively short-term. For a mining project to contribute positively to a 
region's development in any lasting way, closure objectives and impacts must be 
considered from project inception. Mine closure planning should be an integral part of a 
mining project's life cycle and must provide the methods and means to ensure that: 
> Future public health and safety are not compromised; 
> Environmental resources are not subject to further physical and chemical 
deterioration; 
> The post-mining use of a site is beneficial and sustainable in the long-term; and 
> Any adverse socio-economic impacts are minimised (Waggitt and McQuade, 
1994; Ontario, 1995; Sassoon, 1996; Sassoon, 1999; Sassoon, 2000; ANZMEC, 
2002; EPA. 2002). 
The concepts and standards surrounding mine closure are rapidly evolving in terms of the 
supposed scope and responsibility of the major interested groups, for example 
government, industry, impacted communities and other stakeholders such as non-
governmental organisations (NGOs), lending institutions and other components of civil 
society (Khanna, 2000). These issues are today much more demanding and stringent than 
they were just a few years ago and reflect changing public priorities and environmental 
imperatives. 
Mine closure characterises the permanent cessation of operations by a company at a mine 
or mineral processing site after completion of the decommissioning and rehabilitation 
process. Final closure is achieved when the completion criteria, an agreed standard of 
performance that demonstrates successful closure of a site, are met. Decommissioning is 
an intense part of the closure process, which begins near, or at, the cessation of mineral 
production and incorporates removal of unwanted infrastructure and services as well as 
the construction of specific closure components. Rehabilitation (reclamation) is the return 
of disturbed land to a stable, productive and self-sustaining condition, after taking into 
account beneficial uses of the site and surrounding land (Knoi 1999). 
In essence, mine closure is largely considered by industry and, until recently by most 
government, as predominantly an environmental issue (Ontario, 1995; Sassoon, 1996; 
Sassoon, 1999; Sassoon, 2000). This perception, particularly on the part of many 
governments is changing rapidly. The successful completion of a closure plan will be 
dependent not only upon adequate planning, but also the development of an effective and 
efficient approach to funding the closure. This will enable mine site rehabilitation and 
other environmental objectives to be realised while complying with government 
requirements and stakeholders' expectations. 
Then, to be comprehensive a mine closure programme should begin during the pre-
feasibility phase of a project and continue throughout operation to relinquishment of the 
lease. It should set clear objectives and guidelines, make financial provision and 
establishes effective stakeholder engagement leading to closure. A financial provision, an 
accrual based on a cost estimate of the closure activities, is the base for establishing a 
guarantee which should be lodged with the responsible authority to cover the estimated 
cost of closure in case of default by the company (ANZMEC, 2002), 
The comprehensive understanding of mine closure and ways to reduce the associated 
economic, environmental and social impacts is relatively new. The objective of this 
chapter is to evaluate how mine closure can be best designed by the mining industry in 
order to contribute to long-term sustainable development of the region. First, the key 
impacts to be addressed in mine closure planning are reviewed. Second, issues including 
planning, stakeholder involvement, financial provision, closure criteria and 
relinquishment are examined and their influence on the development of a comprehensive 
mine closure are discussed. 
KEY IMPACTS TO BE ADDRESSED IN MINE CLOSURE 
Today the scope of issues that are being considered in mine closure have expanded 
beyond the more traditional view of site rehabilitation. According to Intarapravich and 
Clark (1995) a comprehensive programme for mine closure would address the following 
six major areas of mining impact: 
~ Impact on physical resources; 
~ Impact on biological and ecological resources; 
~ Impact on alternate use values; 
~ Impacts on quality of life; 
~ Impacts on social and cultural values; and 
~ Impacts on sustainable economic development. 
The major impacts on physical resources are those associated with changes in the 
landscape ( open pit and shafts, waste piles, tailings dams, physical infrastructure and 
deforestation) and with water supply (acid mine drainage, metals, particulates) that 
require extensive treatment and rehabilitation to mitigate their environmental effects 
(EPA, 1995a; Marcus, 1997; NMA, 1998). A mining closure programme should eliminate 
or minimise such impacts based upon on the envisaged post-mining land use according to 
Robertson, Devenny et al. (1998). 
Biological and ecological impacts are perhaps the most difficult impacts to deal with a 
mining venture, at least in the immediate area of the mining operations, since mining 
activity normally displaces or destroys most biological and ecological resources 
individual species of flora and fauna, unique habitats, unique ecosystems and linked 
associations ofbio-diverse populations. Mitigation of these impacts is a long-term activity 
and requires the preservation of species, the recreation of former habitats and the non-
introduction of foreign species (EPA, 1995a; Marcus, 1997; NMA, 1998). 
The use of the land for mining activities, as well as much of the immediate surrounding 
area, precludes its use for other economic activities - an impact that is further perpetuated 
when mining areas are abandoned without appropriate closure. Even with comprehensive 
mine closure the rehabilitated land is often no longer acceptable for use patterns prior to 
mining. Therefore, it is essential that a mine closure plan be undertaken with alternative 
use in mind if its use is to be acceptable and sustainable. 
Major impacts on human health, safety and welfare may result from mining operations 
and persist if comprehensive mine closure is not undertaken (for example acid mining 
drainage, tailings dams instability, water and air pollution) (Orava and Swider, 1996). 
Particularly, health problems (silicosis, black lung, radiation exposure and metal 
poisoning) may persist after closure and need to be addressed (Barbour and Shaw, 2000). 
Impacts on the quality of life are primarily mitigated by the implementation and 
enforcement of appropriate health, safety and environmental standards during the life of a 
mine (ILO, 1995), by employing environmentally sound mine closure practices and by 
leaving in place a social welfare structure that can mitigate any long-term adverse impacts 
(Warhurst, Macfarlane et al., 1999). 
Impacts on social and cultural values occur often when mining operations take place in 
remote areas, normally regions without previous development activities and result in 
changes in the social structure and way of life of indigenous societies (McMahon, 1998; 
Lahiri-Dutt, 1999; Alberts and Grasmick, 2000; Dunn, 2000). The largest changes often 
are the transfer from an agrarian to urban lifestyle, changes to religions and beliefs, 
changes in the value and nature of indigenous lands, change in views and relations with 
the ecosystem and large inter-generational change in mores and values (Clark and Clark, 
1996; Davy, 1999). Central to mitigating or accommodating such impacts is government 
policy, legislation and regulations that ensure the minimisation of impacts from the start 
of the project; provide for the development and institutionalisation of community and 
local support to maintain traditional values; and appropriate rehabilitation practices which 
either allows a return to previous activities or provides alternative acceptable lifestyles 
(Warhurst, 1999). 
In the case of mine closure and post mine development, the issues of infrastructure 
maintenance and development, the provision of social services (in particular social safety 
nets for the transition period of mine closure and post-mine development) and alternative 
employment, shift from being the responsibility of industry to the responsibility of the 
national and subordinate levels of government policies (Warhurst, 1999). 
The mining project phases, the main mining actions plans and environmental 
management as well as closure activities commonly associated with each phase of a 
mining project life cycle are summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1 - Mining Project Phases, Planning, Environmental Management and 
Closure Actions 
Phases of a Mining 
Project 
Exploration 
Pre-feasibility study 
Feasibility study 
Development 
Production 
Closure 
Post-closure 
Mine Planning Action 
Exploration road construction 
Rock core drilling 
Geochemical analysis 
Geostatistical analysis 
Orebody evaluation 
Initial mine and minerals process planning 
Facilities sitting 
Scheduling 
Economic analysis 
Initial technology selection 
Plan of operations 
Technology selection 
Concept of final designs 
Costing and cost benefit analysis 
Investment brokerage 
Ore extraction 
Site clearing and grubbing 
Earth moving and surface water 
management 
Mine dewatering 
Utilities installation 
Building and infrastructure construction 
Ore extraction 
Size reduction 
Minerals processing 
Smelting and refining 
Maintenance and upgrade 
Facilities decommissioning 
Dismantling 
Decontamination 
Burial 
Removal 
Asset recovery 
Recycling 
Environmental Management 
and Closure Actions 
Environmental assessment 
Rehabilitation plan 
Exploration permit application 
Environmental baseline study 
Environmental assessment 
''Fatal flaw" analysis 
Initiation of permitting process 
Comprehensive EIA and review 
Mitigation planning 
Conceptual design for closure 
Reclamation and closure costing 
Closure fund design 
Installation of pollution control 
facilities 
General environmental 
management 
Construction phase reclamation 
and closure 
General environmental 
management 
Performance assessment/audit 
Monitoring 
Concurrent reclamation 
Final closure design 
Partial closure 
Partial bond release 
Implementation of closure plan 
Site cleanup 
Final reclamation 
Final impact assessment 
Post-closure planning 
Treatment 
Maintenance 
Monitoring 
Final bond release 
CLOSURE PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS 
Planning for closure involves integrating the closure design for the entire mine area, 
identifying the timing of the planning process, considering issues which relate to 
stakeholder involvement and consultation, financial provision and guarantee, completion 
criteria and relinquishment in order to implement a comprehensive mine closure 
programme (ANZMEC, 2002). 
Integration of other aspects of sustainable development, i.e. economic and societal 
interests, has not taken place to the same extent as the considerations for environmental 
issues (Clark and Clark, 1996; Carbon, 1997; Ricks, 1997; Munchenberg, 1998; Clark, 
Naito et al., 2000; Otto and Cordes, 2000; Sassoon, 2000). It can be argued that the 
considerations related to environmental issues are still at a fairly rudimentary level and it 
is therefore clear that much is still to be learned about the successful closure of mines and 
integrating the economic and social aspects (Ricks, 1997). 
In discussing the approach to mine closure and rehabilitation, Knol (1999) and Sassoon 
(2000) identified three main stages. There are no clear boundaries between these stages 
and they are often difficult to distinguish. The length of time for each stage can also not 
be generally defined as it is a site-specific issue, e.g. the active care stage may continue 
for a number of years or decades. These three stages are: 
1. The Planning Stage - rehabilitation plan should be established and integrated into 
the mine and environmental management plans or system at the earliest possible 
opportunity and regularly updated during the operating life of the project. 
2. The Active Care Stage - the active care programme immediately follows the 
cessation of activity in a specific area, i.e., the closure of a waste rock dump, or 
the total cessation of mining. 
3. The Passive Care Programme - the passive care programme is a period of 
sampling and monitoring designed to demonstrate that the active care programme 
has been successful and the 'walk-away' state has been achieved. 
It must be noted that moving from the active care stage to the passive care stage requires 
that there is not ongoing mechanical water treatment on the site, e.g. a lime treatment 
plant for acid drainage. Similarly, moving from the active care stage to walk-away may 
not be accomplished at all at mine sites where passive treatment, water monitoring and 
ongoing maintenance are required (Knol, 1999; Sassoon, 2000). 
The timing of planning for closure is detennined by a number of different factors and can 
influence the closure process itself. Design of a closure plan should start during the pre-
feasibility study. As new projects move forward to the development stage, initial 
reclamation and closure plans as well as estimates are typically adjusted to respond to 
regulatory requirements for mining permits and bonds. Following mine development, the 
body of experience grows as well as the amount of baseline information for planning and 
estimation (ANZMEC, 2002; EPA, 2002). On-going reviews of the closure objectives and 
design are necessary to allow for changes in local physical or socio-economic conditions. 
If planning is delayed, it may affect which mine closure objectives can be met. The lack 
of an up-to-date mine closure plan can result in severe environmental and economic 
consequences (Mudder and Harvey, 1998; Barnes, Hawthorne et al., 1999). 
The next sections are structured around a set of objectives and principles grouped under 
six key areas {stakeholder involvement, planning, closure cost and financial provision, 
:financial guarantee, closure criteria and relinquishment) of a comprehensive mine closure 
programme. 
STAKEHOLDER INVOLVEMENT 
It is generally agreed that, in principle, public involvement in mining-related decision-
making and management processes is an important factor in enhancing the legitimacy of 
the industry,. in developing public trust in the ability and desire of mining companies to 
conduct their business in an environmentally responsible manner, and in improving the 
quality of the decisions being made regarding environmental management (EPA, 1995d; 
Anderson, 1998; Hannan, 1998; McMahon, 1998; McMahon and Strongman, 1999; 
Alberts and Grasmick, 2000). 
In today's mining industry policy, community consultation has become a very important 
part of mining operations. This results from public concern and governments' 
encouragement and, in some cases, requirement for mining companies to discuss their 
plans and the environmental results of their activities. Whilst far from universal, the 
consultation process is moving towards a "cradle to grave" ( or exploration to closure) 
approach (WMI, 1994). More effective approaches to environmental management can be 
developed, and the public trust in mining enhanced, when the community and other 
stakeholders are fully informed and participate in the closure process' (Anderson, 1998; 
McMahon, 1998; Lahiri-Dutt, 1999; Alberts and Grasmick, 2000). 
In a comprehensive mine closure programme the process of stakeholder involvement 
includes stakeholder identification, effective consultation and targeted communication 
strategy. Identifying key stakeholders and interested parties and developing a good 
relationship with them, is fundamental to a successful closure process. The main 
stakeholders in the mining industry are the mining firm, the government, the creditors and 
insurers and the local community. To ensure that all mining phases evolve in a manner 
that is of benefit to all, it is necessary to take into account all stakeholders in the planning 
process so that views, interests and constraints encountered by each of them can be 
considered through a process of consultation and involvement (Ostensoon, 2000). 
The process of consultation should begin early in the mine life, preferably during the 
planning phase, and continue into the closure and relinquishment phase (Epps and Brett, 
2000). Consultation should not be on a selective basis, but should involve all parties with 
a stake in the project and the post-mining land use. Other parties, such as conservation 
organisations and other non-government organisations, may have an interest in the project 
and should be included in the consultation process. To be effective, communication must 
involve listening and feedback, as well as informing. Consultation is as a listening 
process, especially of people's needs, their fears and their feelings about threats and 
opportunities. It is about perceptions and reality (Kelly, 1995). It is about just negotiation 
and satisfactory results for all stakeholders. It is about social, economic and 
environmental issues of people's lives. Above all, it is about preservation of confidence 
and a sense of well-being for all stakeholders (EPA, 1995d). 
A targeted communication strategy should reflect the needs of the stakeholder groups and 
interested parties. Closure information distributed to stakeholders should be provided in a 
timely and coordinated manner, and when a response is requested, adequate time should 
be provided (WMI, 1994). This is particularly important when infrastructure is being 
retained for community use, where post-mining land use involves community input, or 
where the post-mining land use is different from the pre-existing land use (Alberts and 
Grasmick, 2000). Effective community relations demands that the corporation, its 
personnel and sub-contractors, have the capacity and desire to bridge the cultural and 
capacity gaps that often separate them from local communities {Dunn, 2000). 
PLANNING FOR CLOSURE 
Ontario Guidelines define the preparation of a closure plan before the development of a 
mine as "designing for closure" (Doran and McIntosh, 1995). The concept of design for 
mine closure, from the industry's point of view, should amalgamate two separate 
objectives. First, closed mine components must meet the defined completion criteria 
Second, the process of closure should occur in an orderly, cost-effective and timely 
manner. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure that rehabilitation and closure measures are 
effective over the long-term (ANZMEC, 2002). Based upon these objectives, a long-term 
view is necessary to identify processes or forces, which will come to act upon those mine 
components remaining after closure. The design and implementation of a closure plan 
must minimise or eliminate long-term risk of failure of components. Where such 
problems are inevitable, the plan should identify and provide for the necessary long-term 
maintenance. After closure, wherever practicable, there should be no ongoing 
intervention or operating activities other than periodic inspections and minimal 
maintenance. 
Design for a mine closure should address the following issues (Warhurst, 1999): 
)- What are the kinds of environmental and social problems that may continue or 
arise at the end of the life of the mine? 
>" How can these impacts be mitigated or avoided? 
> When should these problems be addressed in order to be most effective from an 
environmental, social and economic perspective? 
> Who should be involved in the process? 
Mine closure should not be an "end of a mining project's life", but should be integral to 
the ''whole life of the project" if it is to be successful (ANZMEC, 2002). The design of a 
closure plan must begin before mining commences and continue as an integral part of the 
mine planning process throughout the life of a mine (Warhurst, 1999; ANZMEC, 2002). 
Early consideration of closure issues, such as final landform stability and beneficial post-
mining uses, reduces the cost of rehabilitation and closure effort long after effective mine 
operations cease (Poling, 1998; Tuttle and Sisson, 1998). 
It is commonly expressed that planning for mine closure should start even before mining 
commences, see for example, Champigny and van Heerden (1995), Leiner, 
Hammerschmid et al. (1995), Boraussa (1996), Cowan (1996), Overholt and Downs 
(1996), Sassoon (1996), Clark (1999), Danielson and Nixon (1999), Knot (1999), Lima 
and Wathem (1999) and Warhurst (1999). In many cases, the decisions taken during the 
initial phases can affect the options available for eventual closure of the mine. Whilst 
these options should be evaluated during the environmental impact assessment process, 
they are not always integrated into the actual mine planning. If this early planning takes 
place, then subsequent activity for decommissioning and closure should focus upon 
revisiting and refining the concepts and proposals at regular intervals. Flexibility is the 
key word. It is rare for major operational changes not to be made during the life of a 
mine. Thus, it is critical that the decommissioning and closure plan can be reviewed and 
revised to take account of such changes. 
At least two types of closure plan will be required through the life of a mine; a 
Conceptual Closure Plan (for use during feasibility, development and detailed design) and 
the main Closure Plan (for use during construction, operation and post-operation). 
Conceptual closure plans form a statement of the intention to assure environmental 
mitigation by defining the rehabilitation and decommissioning related tasks necessary 
during mine operations and after closure that are feasible. Conceptual closure plans 
required to be submitted at the time of the mine permit process, should be able to 
demonstrate and ensure that closure is technically, economically and socially feasible 
without incurring long-term liabilities (Anderson, 1995; Brodie, 1998). The Conceptual 
Closure Plans should also include preliminary land use objectives and indicative closure 
costs to ensure that closure concepts are factored into final project design. 
The main closure plan comprises a number of subsidiary plans with detailed design 
drawings and construction specifications. These typically include: a rehabilitation plan, a 
decommissioning plan and maintenance and monitoring plans (Doran and McIntosh, 
1995; Knol, 1999; ANZMEC, 2002; Lima and Curi, 2002). In addition, closure plans 
should include contingency measures for temporary suspension of operations, not 
involving decommissioning and closure. In this way, a closure plan is seen as a dynamic 
document, which will be refined throughout the operational phase of the project. 
A key component of the Closure Plan is a commitment to progressive rehabilitation. In 
conjunction with an active research and trials programme, this may assist in minimising 
ongoing contamination and reduce final costs by confirming or modifying completion 
criteria and demonstrating that they can be met. Progressive rehabilitation allows best use 
of available personnel and equipment and should assist in minimising financial 
guarantees (Ontario, 1995; EPA, 1995e; Cowan, 1999; Sassoon, 2000). 
The decommissioning plan should be developed towards the final stages of an operation. 
As the exact date for ceasing production is rarely known, it is suggested that the 
decommissioning plan be developed 2 to 4 years prior to estimated cessation (Farrel, 
1993; EPA, 2002). Once established, it should be updated annually. The 
decommissioning plan should include details of the demolition and removal or burial of 
all structures not required for other uses; removal, remediation or encapsulation of 
contaminated materials; and the procedures for making safe and sealing, openings to 
underground workings (Quilty, Walta et al., 1991; Farrel, 1993; Bradburn and Perkins, 
1995; Asher and Bell, 1998; Bordley, 1998; Waggitt, 1998; EPA, 2002). 
The last aspect of a Closure Plan is maintenance and performance monitoring 
programmes, which should be designed to achieve and demonstrate that the completion 
criteria have been met. A plan for remedial action is need where monitoring demonstrates 
completion criteria are unlikely to be met. If progressive rehabilitation has been 
successful, with stabilisation and revegetation meeting completion criteria this last phase 
of closure may be shortened. Depending upon the criteria to be met, it is, however, 
unlikely to be less than 5 years in duration (EPA, 1995c; Jarvis, 1998). 
Mine Closure Plan Management and Implementation 
In theory, closure is the converse of commissioning, requiring similar skills levels, 
operational experience and motivation. The concept of conducting the operation safely, 
cost-effectively, on budget and on time remains fundamental to its success. Well-planned 
closure programmes consist of two distinct sequential phases; planning and 
implementation. According to Hordley (1998) coordinating these stages will result in a 
well-designed, systematic, safe and cost-effective mine closure. In the management and 
implementation of closure plans mining companies should take into account the 
accountability for plan implementation, the resources needed to assure conformance with 
the plan and on-going management and monitoring requirements after closure of the 
operation. The Plan should also include the management of social as well as 
environmental issues. 
Mine closure management should ensure that there is clear accountability and that there 
are adequate resources for implementation of the closure plan. A dedicated team structure 
reporting to a project manager, as well as well-established and clear roles and 
responsibilities are fundamental for the success of a plan (Dahlstrand, 1995; Werniuk, 
2001). Furthermore, adequate resources must be provided to assure conformance with the 
closure plan. Provisioning is designed to ensure that adequate funds are available to meet 
closure commitments. If estimates are inadequate, funds should be provided from other 
sources. The on-going management and monitoring requirements after closure should be 
assessed and adequately provided. A self-sustainable post-mining land use should be the 
main objective of all closure programmes. However, under some closure scenarios (such 
as the treatment of acid mine drainage) there may be a need to provide long-term, active 
monitoring of the closure site (Scales, 1991; Wemiuk, 2001). Thus, the post-mining 
management and monitoring requirements need to be assessed and adequate resources 
provided. In addition a closure plan should include a schedule of actions, responsibilities, 
resources, timeframes and guides for measuring progress and implementing any changes 
needed to the plan. 
The accountability for resourcing and implementing the closure plan should be clearly 
identified. The closure process will be enhanced if there is a dedicated team structure, 
reporting to a project manager. Roles and responsibilities need to be clearly established. 
A mine closure programme should be managed as a self-funding operation, complete with 
comprehensive business plan, including costs, revenues, profit/loss and cash flows. This 
plan should also include a schedule of actions, responsibilities, resources and timeframes 
(Bordley, 1998). The development of a business plan provides the basis for implementing 
the closure plan; measuring progress and highlighting any changes needed to the closure 
process. 
The implementation of a closure plan is a reflection of the status of mining project 
operations. Mine closure may be initiated in a number of different scenarios, including: 
planned closure, sudden closure, temporary closure and maintenance and monitoring 
(Knoi 1999). 
Planned closure involves the preparation of an initial conceptual closure plan from which 
a final closure plan is eventually developed. Such a final closure plan is based upon the 
current level of biophysical and socio-economic information, as well as mine planning 
and development details. As the project advances, the closure plan should be regularly 
updated and refined to reflect changes in mine development, operational planning and 
environmental conditions (Knol, 1999). 
In the event of sudden or unplanned closure, an accelerated closure process will need to 
be implemented. This involves the immediate preparation and implementation of a 
decommissioning plan, based upon the pre-existent conceptual closure plan, taking into 
account the site's non-operational status. One problem in this scenario is the availability 
of funds, where inadequate provision has been made or, in the extreme case, is totally 
lacking (Knoi 1999). 
Economic and operational circumstances may result in a temporary pause in mining or 
milling activity. A temporary shutdown of this nature is normally planned and assumes 
that the operation will recommence. The care and maintenance process involves the 
immediate preparation and implementation of a decommissioning plan, taking into 
account the potential for future operations at the site. Site remediation and works to 
prevent potential off-site contamination should be implemented as if for a final closure 
scenario. A temporary closure should always generate a review of the final closure plan, 
which will have to be implemented if circumstances remain adverse to the reopening of 
the operation (Knol, 1999). 
Monitoring and Maintenance 
Monitoring should be designed to demonstrate that completion criteria have been met and 
that the site is safe, stable and has achieved the land use objectives set during the planning 
process. Of particular importance is the development of support mechanisms for the 
maintenance and monitoring phase, when operational support (accounting, maintenance, 
etc.) is no longer readily available. In addition, the need for maintenance recognises that 
not all closure strategies will be initially successful. All closure situations are unique, and 
although past experience and good planning can minimise the risks of failure, some 
remedial activity will usually be necessary (EPA, 1995c; ANZMEC, 2002). 
Risk Assessment 
Risk assessment is an important tool in planning for mine closure. It encompasses a broad 
range of issues and approaches, which includes activities to prevent or mitigate damage or 
loss. Risk assessment should address: what can go wrong? How probable is it to go 
wrong? And if it goes wrong, what are the consequences? Two major advantages of 
applying risk assessment to evaluating mine closure options are the selection of practical 
and cost-effective remedial options. In planning for mine closure risk assessment can be 
applied in studies involving metals and the environmental risk in the aquatic environment 
(Kingery, Allen et al., 1992), risks associated with mine flooding for acid mine drainage 
control (Mavis and Coon, 1992), ranking hazardous waste sites (Johnson, Cothern et al., 
1992) and evaluation of potential risks on human health (Strohm and Markey, 1992). 
A risk-based approach to planning for mine closure should reduce both cost and 
uncertainty. Current trends in closure planning involve technical review and analysis of 
risk and cost benefit in both engineering and environmental terms (Belsky, 1992; Astill, 
1994; Bailey, 1994; Farrel, 1994; Swart, Pulles et al., 1998). The advantages of a risk-
based approach to closure planning lie in the quantification of subjective factors and the 
analysis of uncertainty related to both design performance and cost (Morrey, 1999). The 
objective of a risk-based approach is to reduce both cost and uncertainty. Risks most 
often considered in closure planning are those related to design failure and long-term 
liabilities. Other uncertainties associated with closure are related to technology, design 
and performance; regulatory standards and limits; regulatory agency acceptance and 
corporate preferences (Morrey and Van Zil, 1994). 
Typical Contents of a Closure Plan 
The development of a Closure Plan needs to take into account both the legal requirements 
and the unique environmental, economic and social properties of the operation. Outlined 
in Table 2 are the typical contents of a Closure Plan, which will vary depending on 
individual circumstances. 
Table 2 - Typical Contents of a Closure Plan, after ANZMEC (2002) 
1 - Introduction & Project Description 
Land tenure 
2 - Objectives of Closure 
3 - Baseline Environmental Data 
4 - Legal & Other Obligations 
Key statutes & regulations 
Responsible Authority 
Regulatory instruments 
5 - Stakeholder Involvement 
Stakeholder identification 
Community consultation 
6 - Risk Assessment 
Existing legacies 
Future risks 
Cost/benefit analysis 
7 - Closure Criteria 
8 - Closure Costs 
Financial Provisions 
Financial Guarantees 
9 - Closure Action Plan 
Human resources/responsibilities 
Progressive rehabilitation 
Decommissioning 
Remediation 
Geotechnical assessment 
Landform establishment 
Revegetation 
Aesthetics 
Heritage 
Health & safety 
Post-closure maintenance & monitoring 
Survey (remaining structures & areas of contamination) 
Documentation/reporting/records 
10 - Tenement Relinquishment 
Mine closure planning must integrate a number of concepts on a site wide basis, e.g. 
social aspects, physical and chemical stability including surface water management, the 
management of remaining process solutions, the selection and implementation of covers 
and the post-mine use of the infrastructure. Decisions on closure are based on the post 
mining land use and regulatory criteria. Comprehensive mine closure planning includes a 
number of elements: 
> A study of closure options, often a task commissioned to be carried out by 
consultants, covering the feasibility of all aspects of possible outcomes, not 
necessarily leading to the recommendations of a preferred option; 
> A consultative process involving local communities, regulators and others to 
determine the preferred long-term use for the mine and all associated lan.d; 
> A statement of closure objectives, which is the mining company's commitment 
to the outcomes of the closure and its activities. It may be drawn from the study of 
options but other factors such as regulatory requirements, community preferences, 
the precautionary principle and corporate culture may also influence the choice. It 
is the company's statement, after accommodating all inputs, of what it intends to 
> An estimate of closure costs, that is the cost of achieving the stated objectives 
produced by the other elements above. 
> A programme of studies and test work to confirm any assumptions inherent in 
the statement of closure objectives, to reduce the uncertainties surrounding some 
of the options for closure, and to investigate new technologies or socio-economic 
models. 
The first pass at this cycle takes place during the environmental impact assessment, but a 
regular review process for closure ideally leads to revisions or confirmation of closure 
objectives, costs and research needs. 
Closure planning must integrate all aspects of sustainable development, i.e. 
environmentai economic and social issues must be addressed in integrated closure plans. 
Such integrated thinking must become standard operating procedures throughout the mine 
life. A comprehensive approach is at this time a theoretical ideal to strive towards and 
much work remains to implement it universally. 
CLOSURE COSTS 
Closure costs should, wherever possible, reflect the real costs of closing a mining 
operation. They may include decommissioning and demolition; removal of infrastructure; 
remediation; sealing of underground openings; safety bunds and fences; landform 
reconstruction; maintenance and monitoring; retrenchment and relocation costs; social 
disruption costs; and administration and management. In addition, maintaining adequate 
financial guarantees is another item of cost for industry since most guarantees imply 
freezing a considerable amount of cash in some bond instrument. 
Due to the increased stringency in standards for environmental protection on and around 
mines, closure costs have a tendency to raise not only operating costs during production, 
but also capital costs at closure. The most expensive closure components relate to 
physical rehabilitation of mine disturbance and the elimination of long-term maintenance 
requirements and liabilities beyond closure (Morrey and Van Zil, 1994; Morrey, Van Zil 
et al., 1995; Morrey, 1999). On the other hand, closure costs may be reduced significantly 
if concurrent rehabilitation and partial closure of mine components are conducted during 
the operational life of the mine. 
Closure costs are divided in two parts: employee costs such as special retrenchment pay 
and additional costs such as retirement funds or pensions, and environmental costs 
including rehabilitation and environmental liabilities (MMSD, 2001). Closure costs are 
mine-specific and based upon an actual closure design using site-specific requirements. 
They can vary greatly considering the grade of site disturbance, location of the mine 
(remote or populated area), ore type, method of mining (e.g., underground or open pit), 
permit requirements and so on. Following, some closure costs available in the literature 
are presented to illustrate such a variation. These examples include mines that had a 
closure plan implemented and mines that were closed or are in closure process by the 
government because of company's bankruptcy. 
Equity Silver Mine in British Columbia ceased operations in 1994. Cost to operate ARD 
collection and treatment system was estimated at $1,1 million per annum and a financial 
guarantee established by provincial government was $25 million to pay for long-term 
treatment. According to Aziz and Ferguson (2002) total environmental expenditures since 
the discovery of ARD exceeds $20 million. At Sullivan Mine in British Columbia, closed 
in 2001, anticipated closure costs amounted $70 million. Long-term post-closure 
operating cost due to ARD is estimated at $1.28 million annually. Bonding to support 
these costs over 100-year period is estimated between $10 and $20 million (Werniuk, 
2001). At Polaris Mine (an underground zinc-lead mine on Little Cornwallis Island), 
scheduled to close in 2002, closure cost is estimated at tens of millions, a significant 
amount compared with the $250 million capital cost (Werniuk, 2001). At Elliot Lake 
Mines in Ontario, closed in 1996, total closure costs in 1 O years of closure work 
amounted C$100 million dollars (Payne, 2000). At Island Copper Mine in British 
Columbia, closed in 1995, Welchman and Aspinall (2000) reported an amount of 2. 7 6 
million of environmental performance bond required. According to Welschman and 
Aspinall (2000) the results of a concurrent rehabilitation plan and efficacy of the mine 
closure programme adopted were reflected in such a value of environmental performance 
bond compared to bonds up to $28 million imposed on other similar operations. At 
Ridgeway Gold Mine in South Carolina (US), closed in 1999 the cost estimated to 
perform the rehabilitation work was $15.5 million (Salisbury, 2000). The cost estimated 
for closing Aguas Claras Mine in Brazil to the closure plan is at $14 million. 
At Wismut Uranium project in the former German Democratic Republic, closure costs 
were estimated in $9 billion to be expended in 10 to 15 years starting in 1998 (E&Mj, 
1998). Summitville gold mine, opened in 1870's and closed in 1992 the company 
declared bankruptcy. Environment Protection Agency, Colorado Department of Public 
Health and the Environment initiated in 1992 the remedial activities under the authority 
of superfund. Mining company closure cost was estimated as $28 million, subsequently, a 
contractor estimate was $40 million and a Federal and State Government estimate were 
$100 million. Today costs exceed $200 million (Robinson, 2002). At Kam Kotia Mine 
(former copper/zinc mine in Ontario), declared bankruptcy in 1988 closure costs was 
estimated by provincial government at C$40 million (Werniuk, 2001 ). At Hope Brook 
Mine (an open pit and underground gold mine on the Island of Newfoundland), declared 
bankruptcy in 1999, closure costs was estimated at C$13 million (Werniuk, 2001). 
Wismut mines and Elliot Lake mines were former uranium mines. One reason, not 
considering site-specific conditions, for the smaller closure cost at Elliot Lake (C$100 
million) compared to Wismut mines ($9 billion) is that the closure and implementation 
planning at Elliot Lake had commenced several years before the reality of the 
deteriorating business climate for uranium become evident. On the other hand, at Wismut 
mines, closure programme was only initiated by the German government after the 
Germany unification. 
There have been few attempts to assess world mine site liabilities. The numbers differ 
widely, depending upon assumptions and definitions. However, some indication of 
magnitude of potential costs is provided with the purpose of showing the importance of 
planning and implementing mine closure to avoid environmental liabilities. The US 
Bureau of Mines classified sites by whether they presented 'environmental hazards'; 
estimated 28,000 sites on federal lands and estimated the clean up cost at US$ 4 to 35.3 
billion. The US Forest Service, on the other hand estimated 25,000 abandoned mines on 
its own land based on the classification "existing and potential environmental 
degradation." It estimated clean up costs at $ 4.7 billion. The Mineral Policy Centre 
estimated that there are 557,000 abandoned mines sites in the US and that it will cost $33 
to $72 billion to clean them up (MPC, 1993). In Canada, the Mining Environmental 
Neutral Drainage (MEND) estimates acid mine drainage clean up liabilities at C$3 to C$5 
billion (Weatherell and Feasby, 1997). In Australia, according to Harries (1997) such 
liability is estimated at US$0.9 billion. 
Closure costs cash flow 
Project evaluations are based upon Net Present Value (NPV). Any costs late in the life of 
a project (typically after 20 years) will not impact the present value and therefore the 
investment decision. The mining company could therefore commit to very high closure 
costs without it impacting the investment decision. However, the cash flow required to 
implement the closure plan may be so high that it could impact the viability of the 
company at that time. An example of this is at Polaris Mine where closure cost is 
significant compared to capital cost amount (W emiuk, 2001 ). 
Figure 1 illustrates three hypothetical scenarios of cash flow considering mine closure 
cost for a mining project. If the company operates in a regime in which there are no 
closure responsibilities, the cash flow scenario will follow the line CF 1. If the company 
has a closure responsibility but there has been no closure planning, the company may 
need to incur costs at the time of closure, which will affect the cash flow at a time when it 
is substantially reduced. The cash flow scenario will then follow CF2. An integration of 
environmental costs and planning for closure from the outset will spread these costs 
through the life of the project, thus, reducing the burden at closure. Concurrent 
rehabilitation allows closure measures to be integrated into daily operations. In this way, 
successful rehabilitation techniques are easily incorporated into the final closure plan and 
allow the discovery of "hidden defects" before ultimate closure. Adverse environmental 
effects are minimised. Additionally, the use of concurrent rehabilitation means that, as 
mine components become available for rehabilitation, they can be remediated with the 
advantage of reducing terminal closure liability. CF3 represents this cash flow scenario 
(Parrish, 1991; Warhurst and Noronha, 1999). 
Production Closure 
Figure 1 - Cash Flow Scenarios for a Mining Project, After Parrish (1991 and Warhurst 
and Noronha (1999). 
Figure 2, from Brodie et al. (1992), illustrates the planned closure cost requirements 
through the development, operation, closure and post-closure periods of the life cycle of a 
mine project or a mine component. The closure cost, at the start of the operation stage, is 
equal to the amount G. This corresponds to the environmental liability from the 
development stage of the mine, which is made up of overburden removal to expose the 
mineralised body, construction of waste dumps, tailings and infrastructure, opemng 
access and other operations needed to start mine production. If there is no concurrent 
rehabilitation through the operation stage of the mine, closure costs (line GI) rise to value 
I. When concurrent rehabilitation is effective during the operation stage, closure costs 
(line OH) total H. During the closure period, concurrent rehabilitation reduces the closure 
liability and closure costs decrease to value J, see the example of Island Cooper Mine 
(Welchman and Aspinall, 2000). In the post-closure phase, there are two potential 
scenarios. The first scenario occurs when maintenance and monitoring is required for a 
short period to demonstrate that closure objectives have been met, line JE. The other 
scenario, is characterised by a requirement for intermittent or ongoing activity, line JK. 
Treatment of acid mine drainage is a typical example of this situation (Scales, 1991; 
Wemiuk, 2001). 
End of Operations 
F __. A B C D E Development .,.41111----- Operation ----~ Closure ~ Post Closure 
Figure 2 - Planned Closure Costs Through a Mining Project Life. 
Cost Estimate 
Closure cost estimates are used by mining companies to provide funds for closure and by 
regulatory agencies to establish fmancial guarantee. A cost estimate should be developed 
from the closure plan. The accuracy of this estimate, however, will depend upon site-
specific information and data (Anderson, Orava et al., 1999). However, because of the 
complex regulatory systems and fmancial instruments that exist, closure costs estimation 
is a difficult issue for both mining companies and regulatory authorities. Experience 
shows that, eventual closure costs often exceed early estimates (Dahlstrand, 1995). As an 
example, see Summitville Mine "reclamation" (Robinson, 2002) and the closure process 
at Maria Preta Gold Mine in Brazil where final closure cost was 5.5 times more than the 
estimated cost (Junior and Sanches, 2002). Barnes et al. (1999) describe the Homestake 
Mining Company's experience with respect to factors that cause underestimation of 
closure costs which can be easily externalised for the mining industry. Usually, these 
factors relates to costs estimates based upon conceptual closure plans and estimates 
developed by companies with little experience ofrehabilitation and closure. 
Most mine companies fail to conduct adequate environmental investigation and research 
in developing detailed closure programmes. During the permit stage, regulatory agencies 
generally require mining companies to develop detailed environmental information. 
However, rarely does this environmental data collection continue to the extent required 
during the operation phase of mining. Economic performance considerations often delay 
the expenditure required for the collection and assessment of environmental data until a 
late stage of mining. Consequently, information is often inadequate for estimating, for 
example, groundwater recovery rates and quality, post-mine water quality, residual 
seepage quality, acid-rock potential and revegetation requirements. 
Another common flaw relates to closure cost estimate developed by mine planners with 
little experience of mine closure programmes. The glory and prestige associated with the 
development of a new mine are rarely present in the closure of those same mines. The 
tendency of mine companies is to employ their experienced mine planners in developing 
new mines rather than dealing with closure. Consequently, experience levels for mine 
pianners are heavily weighted towards new construction and mine operations. There is 
little emphasis upon planning for closure, because the importance of mine closqre is still 
not well understood. This lack of emphasis translates, unfortunately, to the low priority 
provided to this aspect and, in addition, reinforces the lack of experienced mine planners 
involved with closure planning. Furthermore, current management structures within most 
mining companies serve to perpetuate these flaws. Generally, closure planning is the 
responsibility of individuals and departments having, as their primary obligation, short-
term objectives. This management attitude results in long-term closure objectives being of 
secondary importance. 
Costing of fmancial provisions for closure should consider an estimation of the time to 
closure, an estimation of the period of post-closure rehabilitation and monitoring and 
determination of the annual costs of post-closure activities. Moreover, within the context 
of closure fund estimation, mine management may wish to consider contingent costs 
associated with unforeseen environmental liabilities. Often, the exposure to such liability 
arises because of design failure, changes in regulations or litigation. Experiences have 
demonstrated that most estimates are vulnerable to a number of factors that cause 
underestimation (Barnes, Hawthorne et al., 1999). 
According to Barnes et al. (1999), the three critical components for closure cost 
estimation are early and continuous cost estimate throughout the mine' s life; a regular and 
independent auditing of the closure plan and estimates; the establishment ofrehabilitation 
targets for each mining operation based upon cost estimates. At the development stage of 
a mine project, initial rehabilitation and closure plans and estimates are typically adjusted 
to respond to regulatory requirements for mining permits and bonds. Following 
construction, the knowledge of the site and the experience of personnel grow as does the 
amount of baseline information for planning and estimation. However, because of the 
dynamic nature of mining, there is often hesitation in developing detailed rehabilitation 
and closure designs until towards the end of active mining. Experiences advocate 
updating plans and estimates annually through the expected last five years of a mine life 
(Dahlstrand, 1995). 
Closure cost estimates must be based on an actual closure design using site-specific 
requirements; not on per area or mining rate basis. In some jurisdictions, it was common 
in the past to base the 'reclamation' cost on a unit of disturbed area because rehabilitation 
or reclamation of this area was considered the main issue (Da Rosa, 1999). Most of mine 
closure papers, however, clearly indicate that it is the 'closure' cost that is required for 
financial surety and not the rehabilitation cost (MMSD, 2001; ANZMEC, 2002; Lima and 
Curi, 2002). The mine closure design must include all elements of the site and not only 
the rehabilitation. Acid drainage concerns at a site may require special considerations 
such as active and or passive treatment. A complete closure design must be prepared to 
estimate the closure cost and it must be based on realistic assumptions about closure 
technologies and implementation, including the time it would take to complete at the 
mine site. Mine closure cost estimates are refined during the mine life as the final 
decisions about closure implementation, detailed land use issues, etc. become clear. 
FINANCIAL PROVISION 
Mine closure takes place when there is typically no return from the operation and there 
may be little value in the remaining assets. The objectives of providing a financial 
provision are to ensure that adequate funds are available at the time of closure and that the 
community is not left with a liability. A schedule for financial provision should be part of 
all closure plans. The amount provided for rehabilitation should be consistent with the 
degree of disturbance at any given time. The provision is typically accrued over the life of 
the operation, and may be varied to reflect changes in mine planning and operations. It is 
in the best interest of an active mining operation to develop and periodically review and 
update the closure plan and to modify its internal accrual process so that unexpected costs 
do not occur at the beginning of decommissioning. More emphasis is being placed not 
only on the internal accrual process but also on the external fmancial guarantee 
requirements. In order to reduce further public intervention into the accrual and security 
aspects of a mining operation, there needs to be a commitment to conduct these periodic 
assessments in a realistic manner (Mudder & Harvey, 1998). 
The relevance of closure costs for financial stewardship reporting purposes is recognised 
by the accounting profession. Generally accepted accounting principles and practice 
require companies to use the accrual basis of accounting to match revenues with 
associated expenses ~ 1994). According to PricewaterhousesCoopers (1999) 
international accounting practices for rehabilitation costs vary from no recognition of a 
liability to full recognition. There is no specific International Accounting Standard 
dealing with the costs of closing a mine, but this issue, and the recognition of provisions 
in general, is being addressed by International Exposure Draft E59 - Provisions, 
Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets and a number of very similar national 
exposure drafts. The three most commonly used methods are: the expense as incurred 
method, the incremental method and the full liability method. 
By using the expense as incurred method a mining company expenses all costs as they are 
incurred. A mining company can justify this by selling any fully written-down assets and 
re-work waste piles, slag heaps and tailings dams to provide cash surpluses at the end of 
the mine's life. In many cases this surplus offsets the cost of rehabilitation 
(PricewaterhousesCoopers, 1999). Alternatively, costs that were known to be incurred 
after the cessation of production are provided for in the concluding periods (say the last 5 
years) of productive operations when the costs can be determined with more certainty. 
PricewaterhousesCoopers does not recommend this method because it is not in 
accordance with the principles of the international framework. It also notes that this 
method has not been commonly used in recent years. 
With the incremental method a company can accrue closure costs by gradually increasing 
the provision over the life of the mine. The practice of estimating the future cost of 
rehabilitation and then building up to that cost over the life of a mine by making periodic 
provisions (the 'incremental' or 'rateable recognition') is adopted by many mining 
entities and grew out of conservative provisioning practices based on the matching 
concept. The main objective of this approach is to ensure that the full liability is accrued 
at the end of the life of mine and closure costs are allocated equitably to the periods of 
operation. The liability is often small, in particular in the early stages of mining, so only 
limited disclosures are generally provided. 
Using the full liability method, a mining company provides for the total present value of 
the future cost of repairing past damage and other related closure costs as soon as the 
commitment is incurred and the amount capitalised under this method is amortised over 
the life of the mine. This method is not in common use (PricewaterhousesCoopers, 1999). 
A slightly different method is used in strip-mining, where rehabilitation is required 
shortly after mining is completed in particular areas. In these cases you can make an 
accrual during production for the cost of rehabilitation of mined-out areas. If 
rehabilitation costs are incurred at a similar rate to production ( and not significantly in 
sum unpaid), a company can treat these costs as part of production costs when incurred. 
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE FOR MINE CLOSURE 
Increasingly, financial guarantees tend to be required for new mining operations to ensure 
sufficient funds for mine closure and post closure purposes. Similar guarantees are also 
being gradually required for mining companies already in operation. These securities are 
prescribed conditions of exploration and mining titles and are generally referred in the 
Mining Acts in relation to exploration licences, assessments leases and mining leases. 
Such empowering legislation was developed mainly in response to an accumulated legacy 
of derelict mined-out land and long-term environmental liabilities (Marcus, 1990; Miller 
and Eldon, 1991;Miller, 1998;DaRosa, 1999). 
Financial guarantees are quite separate from any internal accounting provision and should 
not in anyway counterbalance this provision. Financial guarantee is an instrument issued 
by a bonding company, an insurance company, a bank, or other financial institution (the 
issuer is called the "surety"), which agrees to hold itself liable for the acts or failures of a 
third party (Hayes, 1994). Financial guarantees are designed to protect the community 
from closure liabilities. Financial guarantee for mine closure and post closure is simply a 
guarantee that the closure plan will be implemented. It is for estimated costs only (Miller, 
1998; Da Rosa, 1999), not an insurance against incidents. 
This section deals with the determination of the amount of a closure guarantee, the most 
common financial instruments available to the mining companies to satisfy the regulatory 
agencies' current and anticipated requirements, characteristics, advantages and 
disadvantages pertaining to these instruments as well as the problems faced by mining 
companies and governments to implement such instruments. The most common 
instruments of financial guarantee available include trust funds, surety bonds, letters of 
credit, corporate guarantees and insurance. The mechanisms of arrangement a trust fund 
or of procuring a surety bond are beyond the scope of this section, as are the procedures 
of obtaining a letter of credit, purchasing insurance or providing a corporate guarantee. 
A closure plan serves as the basis for regulatory agencies' determination of the amount of 
the financial guarantee. A guarantee should reflect the cost of closure and be adjustable, 
up or down, to reflect changes in proposed closure plan. This cost will frequently be 
higher than the cost to the title holder, because, in the event of default by the operator, the 
state will not be able to use site's mine production equipment and personnel, with 
resulting marginal cost (Hollands, 1999). In practice, however, according to Nazari 
(1999), permitting agencies in the U.S. have commonly underestimated closure costs by 
failing to account adequately for permit violations, off-site pollution, administrative costs 
and inflation. 
The problems of implementing financial guarantees for mine closure include: 
governments' lack of familiarity with the use of financial surety; delays and high legal 
costs; lack of consistency across provincial/state governments with respect to the choice 
of financial surety instruments; absence of guidelines for applying the concepts of 
discounting, long-term obligations and calculating the amount of security required; 
unwillingness of government to recognise that a "softer" form of assurance may be 
appropriate in certain circumstances; and lack of equitable tax treatment of funds when 
funds are actually deposited for this purpose (Miller, 1998). 
Both government and mining companies, in every instance, need a detailed estimate of 
what it will cost to perform all required closure activities that will have to be produced. 
This estimate must be as accurate as possible since it will, in effect, form the basis for 
determining which instrument of providing financial guarantee are actually available to a 
given mining company. In preparing closure costs estimates, mining companies should 
determine the cost of rehabilitation at a time when the extend and manner of a mine' s 
operation would make closing the mine activities the most expensive. Government 
estimates should also consider the cost of hiring a third party to perform closure activities. 
In doing so, both government and industry will have anticipated the worst-case scenario. 
In the US federal guidelines prescribed in the Department of Interior's Office of Surface 
Mining and Reclamation (OSMR) handbook on bond calculations recommend 
determining closure bond amounts using the "greatest estimated closure costs for the 
permit term." According to the handbook closure guaranties should also include costs 
factors for the following items in Table 3 (US Department of Interior, 2000). 
Table 3 - Closure Guarantee Factors, after (Legislative Audit Division, 1997). 
Direct closure costs Calculated using conditions which represent the maximum 
closure cost. 
Indirect closure costs Contract preparation and administration costs for staff time. 
Calculated by project staff and site specific. 
Mobilization 1 to 5 percent of direct closure cost 
Contingencies Project uncertainties and unexpected natural events, 2 to 5 
percent of direct closure costs. 
Engineering and Design Redesign to reflect current conditions, 2 to 10 percent of direct 
costs. 
Profit and Overhead Contract profit and overhead not included in direct cost 
calculations, 3 to 14 percent of direct closure costs. 
Closure management Project inspection and supervision, 2 to 7 percent of direct 
closure costs. 
Table 4 presents the principles that should be followed for governments for developing a 
financial guarantee policy for mine closure. 
Table 4-Financial Guarantee Principles, after Da Rosa (1999) 
Closure costs Financial guarantees must cover the mine company's costs, both 
rehabilitation and the post-closure monitoring period. 
Liquidity All forms of financial guarantee should be reasonably liquid. 
Accessibility Financial assurance should be readily accessible, dedicated and only 
released with the specific assent of the regulatory authority, so that 
regulators can promptly obtain funding to initiate proper closure in 
case of operator default. 
Healthy guarantors Regulators must carefully screen guarantors' financial health before 
accepting any form of assurance. 
Public involvement Regulators must give the public notice and an opportunity to comment 
both before the setting of a bond amount and before any decision on 
whether to release a bond. 
No substitute Any financial guarantee should not be regarded as a surrogate for a 
company's legal liability for mine closure. 
Financial guarantee instruments 
Financial guarantee instruments may be, and are, chosen from a large number of options. 
Each specific instrument may be appropriate in a given situation or set of circumstances, 
depending upon the financial strength of the mining company, its history of 
environmental performance ("'track record"), the extent of the potential environmental 
liability and the time frame over which the liability is to be extinguished. An excellent 
guide to the economic consequences to companies of various bonding alternatives can be 
found in Hayes (1994). 
Miller (1998) and Anderson (1999) examined the various mechanisms of financial 
guarantee as well as the circumstances that influence the selection of these. The findings 
stress the importance of flexibility in the selection and application of the various types of 
bonding. There was no recommendation for one preferred instrument that could be a 
universal model. Table 5 summarises the characteristics, advantages and disadvantages of 
some of these instruments. 
Surety bonds were the most heavily instrument. However, currently there are few surety 
companies willing to underwrite bonds with closure requirements - an indication of the 
perceived risks involved. After the 11 th September of 2001 terrorist attack and bankruptcy 
process of big companies as ENRON Corporation, many of the security companies have 
declined to work with mining closure guarantees because of the highest risk involved 
(Carlton, 2002). This scenario has been previously anticipated by Belsky (1992), which 
stated that mining companies will face problems to get :financial surety for mine closure 
purposes. Surety companies are becoming more selective in their choice of clients. This 
implies higher premiums, higher collateral requirements, narrower coverage and low 
aggregate bonding limits for individual mining. 
In addition, new regulations have required extensive work to be done in order to properly 
close a mine and, as a consequence, closure costs are on the upswing. As closure costs 
rise, so do required :financial guarantee limits. And as bonding limits rise, the ability of 
both surety and mining companies to meet financial guarantee requirements diminishes. 
As a consequence, mining companies in the US are to pushing governments in accept 
self-guarantee based on company's assets. 
Table 5 - Financial Guarantee Instruments 
Types 
Surety bonds 
Letters of Credit 
Cash Trust Funds 
Insurances 
Self-guarantees 
Characteristics 
 Most heavily used 
instrument; 
 Used for at least two 
decades in US; 
 A premium is paid by the 
mining company to the 
underwriting institution 
that is the guarantee. 
 Similar to a surety bond; 
 The content of a LC 
should reflect the terms 
and conditions agreed 
between a company and 
the government with 
respect to a specific 
closure plan. 
 The funds must be 
structured in such a way 
as to give reasonable 
assurance that sufficient 
funds will be available to 
meet expected closure 
costs; 
 It is highly desirable that 
the income earned by the 
fund be tax protected 
until it is withdrawn. 
 Special form of surety 
bond; 
 The premium paid will be 
a function of the 
estimated closure cost 
with actuarial calculations 
to annual pay-out levels 
and the total amount of 
the insurance. 
 Also known as corporate 
guarantee or self-
insuring; 
 Based on an evaluation of 
the assets and liabilities 
of the company and its 
ability to pay the cost of 
closure requirements. 
Source: (Miller, 1998; Anderson, 1999) 
Advantages 
 The cost of getting it is 
relatively low; 
 Cost associated with 
putting it are expensed as a 
tax deductible item; 
 Once in place only a 
minimal amount of 
administration is required; 
 Many ways of initiating 
and releasing bonds trough 
phased implementation and 
phased release. 
 Low initial cost (about 1 % 
per annum of the face 
value; 
 Cost associated with 
opening a LC are expensed 
as a tax deductible item; 
 Once in place only a 
minimal amount of 
administration is required. 
 The company has control 
over its fund, since any 
surpluses created or earned 
should be returned to the 
company; 
 The company have the 
incentive to ensure sound 
management of the fund; 
 Are more visible and often 
better understood by 
government and the public 
than other alternatives. 
 May require smaller up-
front cash commitments 
than a cash trust fund; 
 Premiums would be tax 
deductible; 
 Less administration is 
required than with a cash 
trust fund. 
 Financial instrument of 
choice for a mining 
company. 
Disadvantages 
 Often a Letter of Credit is 
required to back up the bond, 
which makes it more 
expensive; 
 Its availability may be restrict 
by a company's credit and its 
environmental risk; 
 The full face value of the 
surety may be required. 
 Issued by a bank and usually 
for a larger sum of money 
than originally estimated for 
closure; 
 Fee paid to the lending 
institution to cover the 
transaction ( even if draw-
down does not occur); 
 The availability of a LC may 
be restrict by a company's 
credit and its environmental 
risk; 
 Issued for a period of one 
year - short-term solution for 
a long-term problem; 
 Reduction of the company 
borrowing power. 
 Great uncertainty about the 
size of the fund in view of 
the long time frame involved; 
 If large amount is required a 
transition period is necessary 
to allow time to the company 
to build up the required 
financial guarantee. 
 Initial premiums may be very 
high to ensure substance of 
the insurance; 
 In addition to premium 
amounts there could be taxes 
and insurance brokerage fees; 
 A new, not well tested 
guarantee instrument. 
 Require long history of 
financial stability and an 
annual financial statement 
prepared by accredited 
accounting firm; 
 Gaining access to assets may 
be problematic in the case of 
firms facing bankruptcy. 
The mining industry, however, should require that governments specify an approved 
selection of financial guarantee instruments and discuss with companies which 
instrument(s) are most appropriate to. the specific closure situation. The choice of 
instrument should recognise the age and duration of the total obligation, what has been 
spent to date and the relative risk of default. 
The different instruments should be distinguished on the basis of such circumstances as 
the following: 
Soft guarantees ( e.g. corporate guarantee) can be used where the risk of default is low; the 
closure plan and cost estimate is independent]y confirmed (i.e. the technical risk is low); 
the closure is of a short-term nature; and the company has appropriate fmancial strength 
to support the guarantee, such as an investment grade rating (Miller, 1998). 
Hard guarantees (e.g. letters of credit, trust funds) can be used where the risk of default is 
high; the timing of the closure is imminent; the closure must be continued over the very. 
long term and the company does not have an investment grade rating (Miller, 1998). 
COMPLETION CRITERIA 
An important issue during planning for closure is a thorough knowledge of the 
completion criteria. According to an OECD definition, completion criteria are  
performance indicators, which attempt to measure the distance from ambient conditions 
to a stated goal (OECD, 1998). Mine completion criteria are an agreed standard of 
performance that demonstrates successful cfosur.e of a site. Thus, it is vital that the post-
mining use is clearly identified and the socio-ecological conditions, which define this 
objective, are adequately described. In addition, as the ultimate post-mining use may take 
decades to be achieved, it is imperative that the completion criteria reflect the initial post 
project structure and trends, rather than projected end state. Completion criteria establish 
the actions required to meet the closure objectives as well as the post-closure monitoring 
and maintenance necessary to show the success of a mine closure programme. Criteria 
need to be established to enable closed-out sites to be returned to the State on an equitable 
and cost-efficient basis to both government and industry while ensuring long-term 
protection of the environment (WMI, 1994). 
Completion criteria are the basis on which successful rehabilitation is determined, and 
should be developed in consultation with stakeholders. This ensures that there is broad 
agreement on both the end land use objectives and the basis for measuring the 
achievement of that objective. It is commonly accepted that completion criteria need to be 
specific to the mine being closed and reflect the unique set of environmental, social and 
economic circumstances of the site (Hollands, 1993; Waggitt and McQuade, 1994; Jarvis, 
1998; Danielson and Nixon, 1999). Completion criteria should be flexible enough to 
adapt to changing circumstances without compromising the agreed end objective. This 
provides certainty of process and outcome (relinquishment of tenement when the 
conditions have been met). There should be an agreed process for the periodic review and 
modification of completion. criteria in light of improved knowledge or changed 
circumstance. They should be developed and agreed with all stakeholders and, where 
possible, should be quantitative and capable of objective verification . .Legislation on this 
matter should be non-prescriptive and based on agreed objectives and clearly understood 
by and acceptable to the industry as a minimum standard, which best practice should 
exceed wherever possible (Jarvis, 1998). 
As the agreed post-mining land use may take years. or even decades to achieve, a set of 
specific performance indicators should be developed to measure progress in meeting the 
completion criteria. Industry standards can be established at a national or regional level as 
a basis for the development of more detailed site-specific standards. Correctly chosen, the 
environmental indicators will show whether the ecological processes which will lead to 
successful rehabilitation are trending in the right direction. This will enable early 
intervention where trends are not positive. 
RELINQUISHMENT 
Despite the magnitude and complexity of mine closure, over time most operators will be 
able to satisfy their obligations under Federal and/or State regulations. The expectation is 
that the Responsible Authority will accept the operator's performance and release the 
surety, and accountability will revert to the State or a subsequent land owner. However, 
while it is one thing to expect to be released from mine closure obligations, it is quite 
another to expect to be discharged from further liabilities under broad environmental and 
civil laws (Williams, 1993). 
From the perspective of governments a responsible authority should be identified and 
held accountable to make the final decision on accepting closure. The Responsible 
Authority (usually State Department of Mineral Resources or equivalent) will make a 
judgement on the achievement of the agreed completion criteria after consultation with 
other involved regulatory agencies, including the future land controller. All release 
criteria are predicated on the prescribed or agreed post-mining land use. A sufficient 
period of time should have elapsed to demonstrate the stability of the site. For revegetated 
areas, this may require verification that the vegetation is, or is trending towards, a self 
sustaining status. Potential impacts on groundwater may also take several years of 
monitoring to establish or refute. The site should not endanger public health and safety, 
should alleviate or eliminate environmental damage, and allow a productive use of the 
land similar to its original use or an acceptable alternative. A site requiring active 
maintenance is unlikely to be acceptable to government agencies. Release of securities 
and bonds may be progressive, and reflect the progress of rehabilitation. To facilitate this 
process, governments may wish to consider additional incentives for timely completion of 
closure commitments. When the responsible authority has agreed to relinquishment of the 
site, the management and maintenance of the site would rest with subsequent owners or 
the State (Biggs, 2000; Clark, Naito et al., 2000; ANZMEC, 2002). 
It is advisable that records of the history of a closed mine site should be preserved to 
facilitate future land use planning. These records, while potentially of no further use to 
the company that once operated the site, are valuable to governments and potential future 
land users (and stakeholders). The retention of mine records is important because they 
provide a history of past developments, information for incorporation into state and 
national natural resource database and the potential to improve future land use planning 
and/or site redevelopment. Records are invaluable to any potential redevelopment of the 
site, particularly in assessing the suitability of proposed future land uses that are not 
consistent with the agreed future land use at the time of mine closure (Dahlstrand, 1995; 
ANZMEC, 2002). 
CHAPTER 4 - MINE CLOSURE POLICY, LEGISLATIONS AND 
REGULATIONS 
INTRODUCTION 
It is the purpose of this chapter to address the key components, particularly of policy, 
legislation and regulations, of government action that are required to ensure 
comprehensive mine closure and sustainable development following closure, The 
discussion begins with an overview of the Brazilian legislation pertaining to mining, the 
mining code, environmental laws and regulations applied to mining. Following, results of 
an analysis of some Plans for Rehabilitation of Degraded Areas (PR.AD) are presented in 
order to assess the quality and importance of these plans for a comprehensive mine 
closure programme. This is followed by an overview of mine closure policy, legislation 
and regulations in a number of selected countries and an assessment of the evolving 
nature of government responsibilities with regard to mine closure. This overview serves 
as a base to discuss the main problems facing mine closure in Brazil and to propose the 
increasing range of issues that must be accounted for in the Brazilian policy, legislation 
and regulations on achieving comprehensive mine closure and sustainable development. 
OVERVIEW OF BRAZil.IAN LEGISLATION GOVERNING MINING 
The mining industry in Brazil is very diverse in terms of type of ore produced and the size 
of the companies that are active in the sector. Mining industry contribution to country's 
GDP is about 2%, however, it rises to over 9% of GDP when the transformation of its 
primary products ifito metals and alloys, cement, ceramics, fertilizers, glass, chemical 
compounds, etc are taken into account (Chambers and Machado, 1999; DNPM, 1999; 
Machado, 1999; Neto, 1999). 
In Brazil, operating mines, producing about 80 mineral substances, are classified as large 
(run-of-mine higher than 1 million tons per year), medium (run-of-mine between 100 
thousand and 1 million tons per year) and small (run-of-mine b@tween 10 thousand and 
100 thousand tons per year) as shown in Figure 3 (Gurmendi and Barbosa, 1999). The 
Southeast region of Brazil contains 54.5% of the total mines, the rest being distributed in 
the four other regions. Minas Gerais State is the most important mining State holding 
50.6% of the largest mines and 46.5% of the medium ones. Considering the distribution 
by mineral substance of the large-scale mines, 44.9% relate to metals with iron ore mines 
representing 60% of them. Medium mines have a more diversified mineral substance 
distribution. The Southeast region (the most populated) contains 51.6% of the small 
mines. Seventy-two percent of these are for the extraction of materials for construction. 
Figure 4 shows the contribution of the mineral substances to the value of Brazilian 
mineral production. Iron ore represents 17.96% of the metallic minerals production (the 
second Brazilian exporting commodity) and oil 36.91 % of the energetic substances 
production. If oil and natural gas is not included, the importance of iron ore to the 
Brazilian mineral production value becomes higher than 28.0% (DNPM, 1999). 
Medium Mines 
SITT1II Mines 
Large Mnes 
 Large Mines 
D Medium Mines 
OSmall Mines 
Figure 3 - Size Distribution of Brazilian Mines (DNPM, 1999). 
Diamond and Energetics 
Non-metallic Gems Substances 
Minerals 0.12% 44.17%  Metallic Minerals 
29.81% 
Metallic 
Minerals 
25.90% 
D Non-metallic Minerals 
D Diamond and Gems 
 Energetics Substances 
Figure 4 - Contribution of Mineral Substances to Brazilian Mineral Production (DNPM, 
1999). 
Environmental Laws and Re2ulations 
In Brazit environmental protection is a matter of constitutiona1 1aw. The Brazilian 
Constitution of 1988 has an entire chapter dedicated to the preservation of the 
environment. Article 225, specifically, guarantees the right of all citizens to 'an 
ecologically balanced environment' and that both the government and civil society have 
the duty to preserve it for present and future generations. In the following section a 
chronology of the environmental policy and legislation developed in Brazil since the 
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in StockhoJm, Sweden, in 
1972 is presented. 
Chronology of the Environmental Policy and Legislation in Brazil 
1973 -The Federal Law 73,030 created the National Speciai Secretary o:fEnvironment, 
which after unification with other governmental bodies responsible for forestry and 
fishing beGa111e the Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Recuperation of Natural 
Resources (IBAMA). IBAMA is the executive agency of the Brazilian Ministry of 
Ertviroiifii.ertt, the Amazon artd w atet Resources. 
1980 - The Federal Law 6,803 established the concept of industrial zoning for areas of 
critical pollution. Such areas were then conditioned by approval of environmental impact 
statements (Kaufman and Moreland, 1993; La Rovere and d'Avignon, 1995; Parizotto, 
1995; Amaral, 1997). 
1983 = The Federal Law 6,938 established the national environmental policy and created 
the National Enviromnental Council (CONAMA) as art advisory agency iii the executive 
branch. With representatives from different government agencies, private sector and civil 
society (through NOOs elected on a regional basis), CONAMA is the forum in which 
Brazilian environmental policy is officially formulated. 
1986 - CONAMA established the regulation which fixed basic criteria and general 
guidelines for the environmental impact assessment process in Brazil through its 
"Resolution 001". Since then, submission of an environmental impact assessment (EIA) 
and its synthesis report on environmental impact (RIMA) have become obligatory for 
licensing and for projects involving substantial environmental impacts. The review, 
evaluation and approval of environmental impact assessments is the responsibility of the 
regional agency dealing with environmental planning in each state of the Brazilian 
Federation, as well as the issuing of corresponding licences (La Rovere and d'Avignon, 
1995; Amaral, 1997). 
1989 - A Federal Decree required companies to submit a Plan for Rehabilitation of 
Degraded Areas by mining activities as part of the licensing process. Mines operating at 
the time the 1989 Federal Decree became effective were also required to submit PRADs 
within a 180 day period. To date, PRAD is a chapter within an EIS. 
1998 - Federal Law 9,605 (Law of Environmental Crimes). Under this law 
administrative, penal sanctions and penalties for misconduct and activities that cause 
potentially harmful impact on the environment may be imposed on companies, directors 
and operators of companies as well as auditors, managers or legal agents, who, despite 
knowing about the crime, allow the misconduct instead of preventing it (ffiAMA, 1998; 
Carvalho, 1999; Onish~ 1999). 
The Mining Code 
Exploration and exploitation of mineral resources in Brazil are regulated in the Mining 
Code of 1967, The regulations and corresponding legislation. subject only to the 
amendments and innovations introduced by laws subsequent to the 1988 Constitution. 
The Min.mg Code defines deposits and mines, sets requirements and conditions for 
obtaining authorisations, concessions, licence and permit, explains the rights and duties of 
the holders of mining rights, regulates cases for the cancellation, forfeiture and rescinding 
of mineral rights and regulates other aspects of the mining industry. It also defines the 
competence of the specific government agency within the Ministry of Mines and Energy 
(MME) namely the National Department of Mineral Production (DNPM), with respect to 
the management of mineral resources and the supervision of mining activity, 
MME is the federal branch responsible for coordinating and formulating Brazilian 
mineral policy. It has under its jurisdiction the government agencies, federal public 
companies and regulating agencies, private and public joint stock companies. DNPM is 
the agency within MME that has the objective of planning and fostering the exploration 
and exploitation of mineral resources. DNPM actions are decentralized through its 
regional districts, with offices in the capitals of all the states of the federation. 
A mining licensing process runs in parallel in the DNPM and in the environmental 
agency. Once the legal and regulatory requirements are met and the BIA is approved by 
the environmental agency, the mining concession is granted by the Minister of Mines and 
Energy, through a Mining Rule, which grants the deed-holding company rights and 
obligations (IBRAM, 1992). 
Environmental Legislation Governing Mining Activities 
The fundamental principles governing the compatibility of mining activity with 
environmental protection are outlined in the 1988 Constitution, which defines the 
measures the government can take to achieve this objective and also the obligations of the 
mining company. Article 225 of the Constitution stipulates that it is the responsibility of 
public authorities to request a prior environmental impact assessment, to which publicity 
will be given, under the law, for any installation of work or activity which may be a 
potential cause of major environmental degradation'. Public authorities must also 'control 
the production, marketing and use of techniques, methods and substances which endanger 
health, quality of life and the environment'. 
As a result of such constitutional conditions, the exercise of mining activity in Brazil is 
subject to two specific government instruments of control, concerning the potential risks 
of damage to the environment as a result of mining. These are the Environmental Im.pact 
Assessment (EIA) and the Environmental Licensing (LA). Referring to mine closure, it 
only prescribes that whoever exploits mineral resources is obliged to rehabilitate the 
degraded environment, using a technical solution legally requested by the competent 
public agency' (DNPM, 2000). 
The EIA is required for obtaining an environmental licence to any activity exploiting 
mineral resources. The EIA requirement applies to mining projects of any mineral 
substance, unless for mineral substances of immediate use in civil construction such as 
sand, gravel, stone and other construction materials, when presentation of an EIA may be 
not necessary. In this event, the mining company must submit an Environmental Control 
Report (RCA), in accordance with the guidelines of the competent state environmental 
agency. 
Obtaining an Environmental Licence (LA) is obligatory for locating, installing or 
expanding and operating any mining activity subject to the concession mining system or 
licensing. Such licensing is regulated by Federal Decree No. 99,274 of 1990, which 
authorises the state environmental agency to issue and control the licences. The types of 
environmental licences required are named a Previous Licence (LP), an Installation 
Licence (LI) and an Operating Licence (LO) (IBRAM, 1992). 
A Previous Licence (LP) is awarded for the mining project's preliminary planning stage 
and contains the basic requirements to be met during the locating, installing and operating 
stages, in accordance with the municipa~ state or federal plans for use of soil. Such 
requirements must meet the regulations and standards present in the general guidelines for 
environmental licensing issued by the National Environmental Council (CONAMA), 
CONAMA Resolution No. 009 and No. 010 of 1990, for all mineral substances except for 
minerals for civil construction. In addition, the criteria established by the state 
environmental agenGy; in the sGope of its oompetenGe and area of jurisdiGtion, must be 
met if they do not conflict with those at the federal level. The Mining Plan and the EIA 
are technical documents requited for obtaii'iiii.g a Previous Licence, whose legal procedure 
is concurrent with the request for a mining concession. 
An Installation Licence (LI) authorises the start of a mining project implementation, 
according to the specifications in the approved Environmental Control Plan. An 
Operating Licence (LO) authorises, after necessary confinnation, the start of the licensed 
activity and functioning of its pollution control equipment and installation5; according to 
those provisions set out in the Previous and Installation Licences. 
:ESULTS OF THE PRADS ANALYSIS 
In Brazil, the basic obligation imposed on the mining concession holder, related to mine 
closure, is to rehabilitate the mined area according to Plan for Rehabilitation of Degraded 
Areas (PRAD) approved by the competent environmental agency. The rehabilitation 
requirement for PRAD uses the basic worldwide statement that the site must be left in a 
state suitable for, or appropriate to, the established or agreed final land-use. Generally, 
statutory requirements are generic and narrow. Those required for a PRAD state; "the 
PRAD must consider the suitable tec;:hnica1 $Olutie>n visualized by the mine cotnpany to 
rehabilitate the soil, eventually degraded by mining activity, for future use" (IBRAM, 
1992; DNPM, 2000). An approved PRAD can be reviewed or altered later, with the 
agreement of the competent environmental agency, to incorporate technological 
innovations or more suitable aliernatives because of the development of the mining work. 
In order to assess the quality and importance of the PRADs for mine closure purpose, 
twenty PRADs stored in the Environment State Foundation - Minas Gerais (FEAM) were 
lUlalyseg. First, PRADS were cc,mpl:fed to each other to verify the consistency of their 
contents and the methodology employed in their preparation. Second, PRADs for specific 
ore/type of mine were compared each other (i.e. PRADs of iron ore mines, gold mines, 
manganese ore mines, and aggregates). Finally. PRAD's contents were compared with 
typical contents of a closure plan to establish the similarities and differences between the 
plans. For the purpose of this study were chosen PRADs from mines in the early stage of 
closure. Following is a SUiiiiilaty of the main results obtained from this assessment. 
Most of the 1aqw mines in Minas Oen1.is Sta~, now in early closure, were already in 
operation before the enactment of the 1989 Federal Decree. Despite the good quality of 
environmental data available at some mines, the overall quality of the PRADs produced is 
questionable and many faults were observed on them. In general, these are related, firstly, 
to the lack of previous knowledge about ecosystems and rehabilitation practices. This 
glade it ~possible to conduct good surveys in the stie>rt ti~e required for tg.e elabol'atiott 
of a PRAD. Secondly, in 1989, mitigation measures were not described in detail. Indeed, 
fur new PRADs there is still no clear- institutional responsibility concerning fmancial 
resources n~eded for implementation of a mine site rehabilitation. Thirdly, most 
multidisciplinary teams of consulting firms responsible for producing PRADs rarely 
fullQw an interdisciplinary approach and, even now, are still not truly independent of 
project proponents, who sometimes try to minimise the cost of assessment by limiting its 
scope. Finally, in i989 there was no public participation due to various factors such as 
lack of time and a lack of organization on the part of civil society involved in the process. 
Most of these large mines are in the early stage of closure, therefore, it is expected that 
their PRADs could be used as guidelines for both mining companies and government to 
establish a mine closure programme. However, this is not the practise followed by both 
QperaQl'$ and the ggve:mment, Toe main reason i$ that due to laclc of finat1cial and human 
resources of the environmental agencies when PRADs were submitted, they were not 
analysed and are now stored in the state agencies. They have been used only as source of 
research especially for academic purposes. PRADs or mine closure planning cannot be 
done at one point in time and "'put on a shelf'. It is an ongoing, dynamic process, which 
may span many decades, during which many variables will certainly change, including 
the political context, legal systems and the nature of industry-specific legal controls. 
Hy complU'ing these PRADs it was possible to see the copy and paste process that many 
consultancy finns and consultants used on PRA.Ds' preparation. This process is evident 
when PRADs pr"Odueed from analogous mines, ores and regions are oompared. To.pies 
related to description and evaluation of impacts and proposed mitigation measures are 
quite similar. It oould be easily observed that most PRADs were perfunctory rather than 
thorough and not conducted on a site-specific basis. They were only prepared to comply 
with the law. Iii: addition, on the time PRA.Ds were prepared most of the compaii.ies did 
not have an environmental management system in place. In other words, most of the 
mines were not (most still not) designed and operated with focus on closure outcomes. 
The development of a Closure Plan needs to take into account both the legal requirements 
and the unique environmental, economic and social properties of the operation. Outlined 
below in Table 6; (column 1) are the typical contents of a Closure Plan; which vary 
gc:pendii}g og, igdividual circugistam:.:es. GQ\umn: 7 indicate$ tlte coptent$ simi~ties <"') 
and differences or absences (X) of a PRAD to a typical closure plan contents. 
Table 6 - A Comparison of Contents of a Closure Plan and a PRAD 
Closure Plan 
 Introduction & Project Description 
- Land tenure 
 Objectives of Closure 
 }3aseline nviroll1llental :Data 
 Legal & Other Obligations 
- Key statutes & regulations. 
- Responsibie Authority 
Regulatory instruments 
 Stakeholder Involvement 
- Stakeholder identification 
 Risk Assessment 
-. Existing legacies 
= Future risks 
- Cost/benefit analysis 
 Closure Criteria 
 Closure Costs 
- Provisions 
= Securities 
 Closure Action Plan 
-Humaii resources/responsibilities 
- Progressive rehabilitation 
- Decommissioning 
- Remediation 
- Geotechnical assessment 
- Landform establishment 
= Revegetation 
- Aesthetics 
-Heritage 
= Health & safety 
- Post-closure maintenance & Monitoring 
 Monitoring 
- Survey (remaining structures & areas of contamination) 
- Documentation/reporting/records 
 Tenement Relinquishment 
Following is a summary of the major points observed in a comparison between PRADs 
and closure plan contents. 
l - Objectives 
In general terms, PRADs objectives are quite similar to closure plan ones. Broad PRADs' 
objectives are to protect the environment; public health and safety by rehabilitating a 
mine site to a state suitable for an agreed post mining use. However, the means to reach 
these are quite different when contents are compared. 
2 - Stakeholder Involvement 
It is generally agreed that, in principle, public involvement in mining-related decision-
making and management processes is an important factor in enhancing the legitimacy of 
the industry, in developing public trust in the ability and desire of mining companies to 
conduct their business in an environmentally responsible manner, and in improving the 
quality of the decisions being made regarding environmental management (EPA, 1995d; 
Hannan, 1998; Alberts and Grasmick, 2000). Stakeholders are those parties with the 
potential to be affected by the mine closure process. They are distinct from Interested 
Parties, who have an interest in the process or outcomes of mine closure. Identifying key 
stakeholders and interested parties, and developing a good relationship with them, is 
fundamental to a successful closure process. The objective is to enable all stakeholders to 
have their interests considered during the mine closure process. Although some PRADs 
analysed make reference to community directly involved with the mine operation, in most 
of them the process of stakeholder identification and community consultation were not 
reported. 
3 - Risk Assessment 
A risk-based approach for mine closure planning should reduce both cost and uncertainty. 
Current trends in closure planning involve technical review and analysis of risk and cost 
benefit in both engineering and environmental terms. The advantages of a risk-based 
approach to closure planning lie in the quantification of subjective factors and the 
analysis of uncertainty related to both design performance and cost (Morrey and Van Zil, 
1994; Morrey, Van Zil et al., 1995; Morrey, 1999). The objective of a risk-based 
approach is to reduce both cost and uncertainty. No one of the PRADs analysed used a 
risk assessment approach. 
4 - Closure Criteria 
Due to the lack of closure criteria in Brazil, most PRADs do not specify nor mention a set 
of indicators that will follow to demonstrate the successful completion of the 
rehabilitation plan. Both Brazilian government and mining industry lack these criteria. 
5 - Closure Costs 
The objective of financial provision and guarantees for mine closure purpose is to ensure 
the cost of closure is adequately represented in company accounts and that the community 
is not left with a liability. Most of the PRADs analysed do not include rehabilitation cost 
estimation as well as do not demonstrate that a :financial provision has been provided. In 
addition, as the regulatocy system does not require any form of guarantee there is a risk of 
further liability to the community. 
6 - Closure Plan Action 
Most of the PRA.Ds analysed refer to mine rehabilitation only as a process of 
revegetation. Three PRADs, however, include in the action plan topics as human 
responsibilities, progressive rehabilitation, decommissioning, geotechnical assessment 
and landform establishment. On the other hand, most of them do not include a post-
closure maintenance and monitoring programme. 
7 - Relinquishment 
The final objective of a closure plan is to reach a point where the company has met 
agreed completion criteria to the satisfaction of the Responsible Authority. Despite the 
magnitude and complexity of mine closure, over time most operators will be able to 
satisfy their obligations under Federal and/or State regulations. The expectation is that the 
Responsible Authority will accept the operator's performance and release the surety, and 
accountability will revert to the State or a subsequent land owner. However, while it is 
one thing to expect to be released from mine closure obligations, it is quite another to 
expect to be discharged from further liabilities under broad environmental and civil laws 
(Williams, 1993). All release criteria are predicated on the prescnbed or agreed post-
mining land use. Therefore, as Brazil lacks closure criteria there is no mention about the 
relinquishment procedure on the PRADs analysed. 
In summary, in most nations mine closure programme, as detailed in an overall 
feasilibility study, a mining plan, an EIA or an environmental mining plan are normally 
preconditions for acquiring a mining license and de facto the most common means by 
which government ensure comprehensive mine closure. In Brazil, PRAD is part of the 
EIA process and by this one can understand PRAD as a conceptual closure plan. 
However, as demonstrated PRADs are far from this. 
MINE CLOSURE LEGISLATION AND REGULATION 
The concepts, definitions and issues surrounding mine closure are rapidly evolving in 
terms of the perceived scope and responsibility of the major interested groups, for 
example government, industry, impacted communities and other stakeholders such as 
non-governmental organisations (NGOs), inter-governmental organisations (IGOs), 
leading institutions and other components of civil society. The common theme of most of 
mine closure definitions is that rehabilitation of an area impacted by mining precludes 
further environmental damage and allows for alternative use. In essence, mine closure is 
largely regarded by industry and, until recently by most governments, as primarily an 
environmental issue. This perception, particularly on the part of many governments is 
changing rapidly. 
From the perspective of governments mine closure presents a complex mixture of 
environmenta~ socia~ economic and development issues. The government must ensure 
that (1) industry has adequately recognised and prepared for over the life of the mining 
enterprise and (2) that the closure plan is conducted to the satisfaction of the communities 
involved, other major stakeholders and government at all levels. Governments are now 
realising that they have the most direct responsibility for defining and ensuring 
comprehensive mine closure within the broader context of the issues of 'social and 
economic equality and sustainable development' (Miller, 1997; Ricks, 1997; Ackermann, 
1998; Cooney, 2000; Eggert, 2000; Khanna, 2000; MMSD, 2001). This recognition ofa 
broader context of mine closure has greatly expanded the scope of government 
responsibilities and needed actions. 
The perspective of the mining industry is normally somewhat less global than that 
required of government. Obviously, responsible industry does not see its role as being 
exclusive of the broader concerns addressed by governments but rather that its role is 
more specific to achieving the major mine closure objectives (Biggs, 2000). Clearly, the 
mine closure objectives set forth by industry are primary focused on achieving long-term 
mitigation of environmental impacts, land rehabilitation and on achieving a final release 
of liability for the site (MCA, 1997; Jarvis, 1998). These objectives are considered more 
focused than those of the local community. 
Communities coupled with a mine site and/or its support facility view the issues 
surrounding mine closure in the broadest context as they are most directly impacted by 
the actual closure of a mine and by the remnants ( open pit, underground openings, 
infrastructure, waste piles and tailings dams and social change) that will continue after 
closure. Although the communities concerns encompass those of government and 
industry, their priorities may vary considerable and be more heavily focused on the 
development of alternative modes of economic and social development that will replace 
those provided by a mine during its life (Anderson, 1998; Hannan, 1998; McMahon, 
1998; Lahiri-Dutt, 1999; McMahon and Strongman, 1999; Alberts and Grasmick, 2000) 
It is the purpose of the remainder of this chapter to review the key components, 
particularly of policy, legislation and regulation in a number of selected countries where 
government action are required to ensure comprehensive mine closure and sustainable 
development following closure. The author concludes with a series of recommendations 
for the government actions in Brazil, related to the development of appropriate policy, 
legislation and regulations for mine closure, which promote sustainable development. 
Comprehensive mine closure and all that it involves would basically be part of any 
mining enterprise, however, past history and present practices in many countries clearly 
demonstrate that this is not the case. Therefore, in many countries where mining is a 
major (sometimes only a minor) activity have put in place policies and legislation that 
provide for comprehensive mine closure. Compliance with these provisions is often a pre-
condition of acquiring a mining licence and de facto the most common means by which 
government ensures comprehensive mine closure. Table 7 summarises the provisions 
pertaining to mine closure required in Australia, Brazil, Canada, UK, South Africa and 
Table 7 - Provisions for Mine Closure in some Countries and their Respective 
Provinces, Territories and States, After (Clark, Naito et al., 2000). 
Country, State or EIA required Provisions for Guarantee Provisions for Provisions for 
Province before lease rehabilitation requirement abandonment non-compliance 
Australia 
New South Wales .../ .../ .../ ...J 
Northern Territory .../ .../ .../ .../ 
Quensland .../ " " "' ...J South Australia ...J .../ ...J " ...J Victoria " .../ " ,I ...J W estem Australia .../ ...J .../ .../ ...J 
Brazil ,I 
Canada 
British Columbia .../ .../ ,I 
Manitoba .../ .../ ...J 
New Brunswick ...J .../ ...J 
Northwest 
Territories 
...J .../ ,I ...J 
Nova Scotia ,I .../ ,I " ...J Ontario .../ .../ .../ .../ .../ 
Quebec .../ .../ 
Saskatchewan .../ .../ 
Yukon Territory .../ " South Africa 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Alaska .../ .../ ...J 
Arizona .../ .../ .../ 
California .../ .../ ...J 
Montana " " .../ ...J Nevada ,I ,I .../ .../ 
New Mexico .../ .../ ...J 
Utah .../ .../ ...J 
Washington .../ ,I .../ 
Most of the countries presented in Table 7 and/or their individual provinces or states have 
enacted and implemented actual mine closure laws, for example, the UK (Department of 
the Environment, 1996), most provinces of Australia (Brooks, 1997; ANZMEC, 1999; 
Clark, 1999; Biggs, 2000; Clark, Naito et al., 2000; ANZMEC, 2002; EPA, 2002) and 
Canada (Ontario, 1995; Overholt and Downs, 1996; Environmental Mining Council of 
BC, 2001; Manitoba, 2001a), South Africa (Richter, 1993; Champigny and van Heerden, 
1995; DME, 2000a) and some states of the US (O'Bryant, 1995; Smith, 1995; Jones, 
1996; Danielson and Nixon, 1999). In most of them, mine closure regulations occur either 
within the mining law or within specific environmental legislation that is applicable to 
mining. In the latter case the requirement is that and EIA or EIS be prepared for 
development projects that are anticipated to have great environmental impact (e.g., 
Brazil). 
Most of these closure systems incorporate three maxims: the polluter pays, which means 
that mining companies must be responsible for all clean-up costs; the precautionary 
principle, which means that it is imprudent to proceed with a development of a mine until 
the consequences of that development are clear; and sustainable development, which can 
be reached if the mining industry maximises the environmental, economic and social 
returns provided from the development of minerals resources. 
From Table 7 it can be observed that most nations have adopted guarantee (surety) 
procedures to provide for the appropriate closure of existing and planned mines. The 
requirement for guarantees to be posted is a key element in achieving comprehensive 
mine closure because it ensures that there will be adequate :financial resources available to 
the government, in case of failure or bankruptcy of the operator, to carry out closure 
successfully. Regardless of the approach or the requirements, however, mine closure 
plans vary greatly among and within individual countries, as do the requirements for 
bonding or other surety instruments to ensure that closure is considered in every detail. 
The process of closure, the release of company responsibility of a site and the rights of 
landowners and communities around the mine are all determined by legislative 
requirements. These issues are addressed differently in various countries. In general, most 
of the countries presented in table 7 the scope and nature of resulting mine closure issues 
have been quite similar as have been their responses at national and subordinate 
(province, state and territory) levels of government. 
Although there are many similarities at the national level and subordinate levels of 
governments there are many differences, particularly between the subordinate levels of 
government, in how to deal with the specific aspects of mine closure. The greatest 
differences are with respect to the level of specific policy and legislation that is in place 
for the abandonment and post-closure responsibilities. In cases oflarge-scale impact from 
abandoned mine, as an example of the Summitville Mine (CDPHE, 1998; Gobla, 1999), 
the national government is expected to provide the majority of financial and technical 
assistance for clean up. In the US this is undertaken under the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act - better known as the 
'Superfund' (Biggs, 1990). Another example regarding post-closure responsibilities is the 
liability issue in Australia, which differ considerably from province to province, as shown 
:in Table 8. 
Table 8 - Details of Liability in Different Territories, after (Waggitt and McQuade, 
1994; Clark, 1999) 
Territory 
New South Wales 
Liability 
The coalmine leaseholder remains liable. In the case of other 
mines, the landowner is liable. 
Northern Territories Once the mining company has renounced the site, liability rests 
with the land titleholder. 
Queensland 
South Australia 
Tasmania 
Victoria 
Western Australia 
Liability is with the landowner, but mining companies may be held 
liable under the Conservation Act if subsequent problems arise. 
Liability lies with landowner, unless another arrangement has been 
agreed at closure. 
Crown is liable after the discharge of corporate liability with the 
discharge oflease and closure. 
Liability rests with the landholder, but the mining company can be 
prosecuted if problems related to mining occur and additional 
cleanup is required. 
Liability lies with the landowner or Crown. 
Apart from Queensland and Victoria where liability lies with the mining company, the 
position during the mine operational phases over the rest of Australia is that liability falls 
on the landowner or leaseholder. In most instances at closure, the mining or mineral lease 
is relinquished or extinguished and the landowner, either state or private, resumes 
liability. 
According to Clark, Naito et al. (2000) the differences that do exist among nations and 
within subordinate levels of government are largely attributable to two major factors. 
First, the presence or absence of well-articulated national policies and priorities with 
respect to mine closure issues determines, to a large extent, whether or not subordinate 
government levels will feel obliged to develop their own policy and legislation. This is 
well-defined in Australia (Biggs, 2000; Clark, Naito et al., 2000; ANZMEC, 2002) and in 
UK the Department of the Environment has issued Mineral Policy Guidance Note 7 
entitled 'The Reclamation of Mineral Workings' as guidance to all local planning 
authorities for overall planning for mine closure (Department of the Environment, 1996). 
It is less well-defined in Canada and US. For example, coal mining in the US is covered 
by federal laws, while metallic mines are subject to state legislation (Danielson and 
Nixon, 1999). Second, the differing levels may also be a function of the continuing 
prevalence within parts of industry and government that issues of mine closure are 
primary related to, and cease, with rehabilitation (the Brazilian case). 
Although mineral resources are considered the property of the State, the responsibility for 
the enactment, implementation, monitoring and for ensuring compliance of specific mine 
closure policy and legislation is largely the responsibility of the subordinate levels of 
government may be either general or specific. As an example of the latter, the province of 
Ontario, Canada has drafted, under provincial Mining Act, the 'Mining Development and 
Closure Under part VII of the Mining Act' (Doran and McIntosh, 1995; Ontario, 1995; 
Boraussa, 1996; Cowan, 1996; Cowan, 1999). This Act deals in detail with all issues of 
mine closure. Similarly, the State of Nevada, US in 1998 enacted Nevada Administrative 
Statute NAS 519-A entitled 'Reclamation of Land Subject to Mining Operations or 
Explorations Projects' that covers a range of mine closure issues encountered over the life 
of a mining enterprise (Clark, Naito et al., 2000). 
Despite the variations in policy and legislation, the trend in all nations listed in Table 7 is 
most certainly toward developing a more comprehensive approach, at all levels of 
government, to ensure acceptable mine closure. These concerns are also shared by the 
mining industry by taking itself a more active role in defining satisfactory guidelines for 
mine closure. The most recent and comprehensive example of this is the issuance of the 
"Strategic Framework for Mine Closure" prepared by the Australian and New Zealand 
Minerals and Energy Council (ANZMEC, 2002). 
The Role of the Brazilian Government in Mining Closure 
The goal of any government and mining project should be to mitigate or prevent the 
impacts resulting from mining and upon closure to have put in place the necessary 
prerequisites for post-closure sustainable development (Clark, Naito et al., 2000). To do 
this it is imperative that government, industry and involved stakeholders work closely 
together from the earliest stages of a mining project ( exploration) to mine closure and 
beyond (Miller, 1997; Biggs, 2000). The responsibilities of the various actors involved in 
achieving sustainable development in a post-mining site and region are quite different. 
According to Clark and Naito et al. (2000) local communities have the first responsibility 
in achieving sustainable development, second is the national government which will have 
conflicting claims on its diminished resources and last, industry which will have 
discharged its responsibilities and will have left to undertake development elsewhere. The 
government, however, as the owner of the nations resources, has the primary 
responsibility to develop, implement and ensure compliance with an overall programme 
of activities that will provide for sustainable development during and after mine takes 
place (NRC, 1996; Harries, 1998; Davy, 1999). 
The scope and complexity of the considerations that the Brazilian Government must 
accommodate in developing a comprehensive mine closure policy and programme largely 
accounts for the fact that the country does not have provisions for mine closure in its laws 
as shown in the next section. 
Mine Closure Legislation and Regulation in Brazil 
National Department of Mineral Production (DNPM) is responsible for granting mining 
title and dealing with cases of abandonment, surrender, cancellation, forfeiture or 
termination of a mining claim. On the State level, the environmental agency requires an 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) that has included a plan for the rehabilitation of 
degraded areas (PRAD). However, this process does not ensure that a mine company's 
PRAD will be implemented, nor guarantee satisfactory site rehabilitation at the end of the 
mine life cycle, especially as cash balances are frequently negative at this stage. 
Legislation and the ability of the authority to implement legislation are central to drive 
mine closure practice. In Brazil, a mine closure legislation and regulatory system do not 
exist yet. At present, the Brazilian Department of Mineral Production, the Brazilian 
Institute of Mining (IBRAM) and some environmental agencies are working together on a 
proposal for legislation and regulatory system (Riter, 1999; Tunes, 2002). Considering the 
Brazilian environmental background provided early in this chapter, the main problems 
facing mining closure are: 
1 - Lack of legislation and regulatory system and general guidelines 
Brazil lacks co-ordination at the Federal, State and Local governments to deal with 
closure. This has caused confusion and a lack of a cohesive approach to managing the 
closure issues. There is clearly a need to identify which agency or level of government 
should be accountable and have the responsibility for dealing with mine closure issues. 
This was clearly identified on the X Brazilian Congress of Geology and Environment 
held in Ouro Preto on August 2002 where DNPM responsibilities for the mine closure 
process diverged from those of the Environment State Foundation (FEAM). There is a 
need for delegation of administrative responsibilities by one level of government to 
another and/or intergovernmental or interagency coordination of overlapping activities 
through agreements and memoranda of understanding. 
In Brazil, the BIA and the PRAD (required for mines operating before the law enactment 
in 1989) are the only documents required by the environmental agencies that relate to 
mine closure. However, even as a statutory prerequisite for the development of a mining 
project, their role in planning for closure are limited by the fact that in practice they are 
reactive, static and short-term in design. This is true especially for PRAD that does not 
take account of the evolutionary nature of mine development and fails to sufficiently 
integrate environmental considerations into mine planning throughout the project life 
cycle. 
2-Lack of Qualified Staff 
As a result of the Brazilian long-term policy of reducing the public sector's posts, 
agencies (particularly, DNPM and environmental agencies) lack competent personnel and 
do not have staff experienced with the nuances of mine closure issues. In addition such 
institutions lack reasonable level ofresources to deal with mine closure. 
3 - Lack of Closure Criteria 
A challenge facing regulatory agencies and the mining industry is a matter of generic or 
site-specific completion criteria. Generic completion criteria can assist on achieving 
consistency throughout the industry but the diversity of mining operations and 
ecosystems in many countries, states, provinces, regions or even sites demands site-
specific criteria. Although some regulatory systems have general criteria in place, as the 
system applied to coal mining in the US (US Government, 1993; Danielson and Nixon, 
1999), the mining industry and governmental agencies endorse the adoption of site-
specific criteria. Jarvis (1998) gives a good example of working together, Alcoa and 
governmental agency as well as public involvement and consultation process, on 
establishment and implementing site-specific closure criteria. 
Criteria for vegetation density and diversity, soil erosion rates and soil profile 
development, for example, are still not established in Brazil, although PRAD requirement 
exist since 1989. Such criteria form the basis for assessing success in rehabilitation, but 
are not, usually, prescribed or quantified. However, some broad guidelines do exist, 
principally those elaborated by the Brazilian Association of Technical Norms (ABNT) 
and adopted by environmental agencies. Examples include the ABNT norms for Design 
and Construction of Tailings Dams (NBR-13028, 1993), Design and Construction of 
Waste Dumps (NBR-13029, 1993) and Destruction of Cyanide in Effluents (NBR-13744, 
1996). 
4 - Lack of Financial Provision and Guarantee 
Most countries require a :financial guarantee attached to closure plan. This should provide 
a guarantee that rehabilitation plans will be completed should the proponent fail to do so 
through premature closing, :financial default or other causes. Financial bonds or 
guarantees are an essential element of the closure plan and licensing process (Miller, 
1998; Nazari, 1999). Obviously, :financial provisions need to be kept adjusted for changes 
in the operation or simply for inflation. Given the absence of mine closure programmes, 
in Brazil, there is no requirement for mining company to make any form of :financial 
provision that guarantees the implementation of the closure plan. In systems that require 
:financial guarantees, the cost of maintaining the guarantee and the advantages of lowering 
or terminating it are considered strong incentives for companies to begin the closure 
programme and to continue it in every detail (Anderson, 1999; Danielson and Nixon, 
1999). 
Steps for Achieving Sustainable Development Succeeding Mine Closure 
Following the recommended steps for achieving sustainable development often mine 
closure are presented. 
First, it is necessary to review all legislation that directly or indirectly affects on 
achieving comprehensive mine closure and provides for sustainable development. This 
would include either to amend or to put in place additional legislation, the mining law, 
environmental law, foreign investment, land use law, :financial law, water law, forestry 
law and indigenous people law to ensure comprehensive mine closure and sustainable 
development. Related to this should be the realisation that there is a growing body of 
international law in international treaties, conventions, declarations and codes of conduct, 
which can be used as guidelines to determine the obligations under international law for 
governments and the multinational industry, as for example, Kyoto Protocol, Basel 
Convention and Rio 10+. 
Second, future Brazilian government mine closure and sustainable development policies 
must be made to conform to the needs of the community during and after mining. Land 
use in mining area should provide for alternative land, for comparable use, to replace land 
lost to mining. Examples of land use conflict in Brazil regarding mining land occur in 
Mogi das Cruzes in the State of Sao Paulo with sand and gravel mines and in Vazante, 
Minas Gerais State with zinc mines. To the extend possible the rehabilitated mining area 
should allow for the continuation of the traditional economy of the area that developed 
before and during mining. 
Third, a legislative change for Brazil would be the requirement for industry to undertake 
social-cultural baseline studies, in conjunction with a process of community consultation, 
to develop a "Social-Cultural Impact Assessment" or "Social Impact Assessment (SCIA 
or SIA). The SIA would be similar to the EIA, however, should be emphasised that this 
requirement would not be carried out within a set of defined standards that industry must 
meet, but through participation in a process by which it is ensure that the concerns of all 
stakeholders for sustainable development are gathered and integrated into an overall mine 
project (Clark and Clark, 1996; Warhurst, Macfarlane et al., 1999). 
Fourth, the Brazilian government should require a programme of financial guarantees, to 
ensure all aspects of a mine closure plan are provided for. The importance, nature and use 
of financial guarantees, in providing for comprehensive mine closure have been discussed 
in detail by Miller (1991, 1998) and Da Rosa (1999) and can be summarised simply as the 
use of financial instruments (e.g., certificate of deposit, surety bonds, trust funds, letters 
of credit, cash) to guarantee that sufficient amount of cash are available to allow the 
implementation of closure should the proponent fail to do so through premature closing, 
financial default or other causes. 
Fifth, the Brazilian regulatory system should include monitoring and enforcement 
procedures. Monitoring and inspection are essential since the closure plan is closely 
linked to the methods of operations and the fmancial guarantee is dependent upon the 
plan, departures form the approved operation plan can have drastic impacts both on the 
feasibility of the closure plan and the cost of its implementation (Sassoon, 1999). In 
addition, where there is serious non-compliance with the statute, regulations, or permit 
conditions, the state mine closure agency staff must have the authority to issue an order 
requiring compliance and file an action in court to enforce the compliance order. Options, 
after hearing the parts involved, should include suspension or revocation of permits or 
closure plan approval, orders requiring specific corrective actions, forfeiture of the 
financial guarantee and imposition of significant fmancial penalties on the operator 
(Danielson and Nixon, 1999). 
A Proposed Framework for the Brazilian Mine Closure Programme 
Following a proposed framework to the Brazilian Mine Closure Programme is presented 
in Table 9. Exploration (which involves lower levels of impact and is often transitory in 
nature) and mineral processing are considered part of the broader mining function. While 
it is acknowledged that the focus of the framework should be primarily on improving 
closure related activities at operating mines, the principles are relevant to a broad range of 
activities. This framework, however, does not address the issue of abandoned mines. 
Historically, mine sites have not been rehabilitated to standards that would be considered 
acceptable today. While acknowledging the importance of this issue, it was considered 
more important to address existing mines in an attempt to limit future problems. The 
proposed framework for a mine closure programme is structured around a set of 
objectives and principles grouped under five key areas (legislation and completion 
criteria, planning and management, stakeholder consultation and involvement, financial 
provision and guarantee, and relinquishment), based on The Australian and New Zealand 
Minerals and Energy Council (ANZMEC) (ANZMEC, 1999; ANZMEC, 2002). These 
topics were exhaustively treated in Chapter 3. 
Table 9 - Framework on Mine Closure: Summary of Objectives and Principles 
Legislation and Completion Criteria 
Objective - to establish a clear legislation and a set of environmental indicators, which will demonstrate 
the successful completion of the closure process. 
Principles 
1. Legislation should provide a broad regulatory :framework for the closure process. 
2. It is in the interest of all stakeholders to develop standards that are acceptable to the majority and 
achievable. 
3. An agreed set of environmental indicators is required to demonstrate successful rehabilitation of a 
mine site. 
4. Completion criteria should be specific to the mine being closed and should reflect its unique set of 
environmental, social and economic circumstances. 
Planning and Management 
Objectives -to ensure the process of closure occurs in an orderly, cost-effective and timely manner and 
that there is clear accountability and adequate resources for the implementation of the closure plan. 
Principles 
1. Mine closure should be integral to the whole of mine life plan. 
2. A risk-based approach to planning should reduce both cost and uncertainty. 
3. Closure plans should be developed to reflect the status of the project or operation. 
4. Conceptual closure planning is required to ensure that closure is technically, economically and 
socially feasible. 
5. The dynamic nature of closure planning requires regular and critical review to reflect changing 
circumstances. 
6. The accountability for resourcing and implementing the closure plan should be clearly identified. 
7. Adequate resources must be provided to ensure conformance with the closure plan. 
8. The on-going management and monitoring requirements after closure should be assessed and 
adequately provided for. 
9. A closure business plan should include a schedule of actions, responsibilities, resources and 
timeframes. 
10. The implementation of the closure plan should reflect the status of the operation. 
Stakeholder Consultation and Involvement 
Objective - to ensure that all stakeholders have the opportunity to have their interests considered during 
the mine closure process. 
Principles 
1. Identification of stakeholders is an important part of the planning process. 
2. Continuous consultation with stakeholders should occur through the life of the mine. 
3. Effective consultation is an inclusive process which encompasses all parties. 
4. A targeted communication strategy should reflect the needs of the stakeholders groups. 
5. Adequate resources should be allocated to ensure the effectiveness of the process. 
Table 9 - Framework on Mine Closure: Summary of Objectives and Principles 
( continuation) 
Financial Provision and Guarantee 
Objective - to ensure the cost of closure is adequately represented in company accol.Ults and that the 
conmrunity is not left with a liability. 
Principles 
1. A cost estimate for closure should be developed from the closure plan. 
2. Closure costs should be reviewed regularly to reflect changing circumstances 
3. The financial provision for closure should reflect the real closure cost. 
4. Acceptable accounting standards should be the basis for the :financial provision. 
5. Adequate securities should protect the connnunity from closure liabilities. 
6. Financial guarantee is quite separate from any internal accounting provision and should not in 
anyway counterbalance this provision. 
Relinquishment 
Objective - to reach a point where the company has no :further responsibility for the site. 
Principles 
1. A responsible authority should be identified and held accountable to make the final decision on 
accepting closure. 
2. Once the completion criteria have been met, the company may relinquish their tenement without 
:further obligations. 
Source (ANZMEC, 2002; Lima and Curi, 2002) 
This framework for mine closure is intended to promote a nationally consistent approach 
to mine closure management in Brazil. Of course, it should not be the purpose of this 
framework to result in identical legislation in each State. Nevertheless, it should establish 
principles for mine closure that are agreed between regulating authorities and the mining 
industry, and which can be applied with greater consistency to the development of 
regulations by government and mine closure programme by industry. 
For the moment a working group formed by members of the Brazilian Mining Institute 
(IBRAM), environmental agencies, research centres and academics under supervision of 
the National Department of Mineral Production (DNPM) is investigating all the issues 
associated with mine closure. Success cases from other countries should be followed, as 
for example Australia, which culminated in the "ANZMEC Strategic Framework for 
Mine Closure". Brooks (1997) gives an account of the development process that took 
place within the Mining Council of Australia (MCA) and the consultation process that 
accompanied it. An account of the development process and more information is 
available on the following references (MCA, 1997; ANZMEC, 1999; Biggs, 2000; 
ANZMEC, 2002). 
In Brazil, mine closure is essentially an environmental issue and, therefore, is rarely 
integrated within the overall concept of sustainable development. In general, the 
evolution of mine closure policy and legislation lags behind the rapidly changing needs 
and demands of those individuals most impacted by mine closure. As a result, the role 
and responsibility of government, industry and stakeholders of all types is rapidly 
evolving as is the need for governments to develop and implement new policies, 
iegislations and programmes for achieving comprehensive mine closure and post-mining 
sustainable development. To achieve these objectives Brazilian government should 
undertake the following: 
> Review and revise existing national policies and legislation pertaining to provide 
for comprehensive mine closure and post-mining sustainable development; 
> Launch mine closure and sustainable development policies to conform to the 
needs of the nation, specifically to the community's needs, such as the provision 
for a "social safety net'' of support, required during and immediately after the 
transfer of responsibilities from the industry to government. This is clearly 
important in towns where the main income comes from the mining industry, such 
as Itabira in Minas Gerais State and many others; 
> Closure plans should have associated performance guarantees backed by financial 
surety instruments; 
> Requirements should be legislate for industry to make financial provisions for 
mine closure and post financial guarantee for closure plan implementation and 
post-closure monitoring and maintenance activities; 
> Requirements should be legislate for industry to perform social impact 
assessment, similar to existing requirements for EIA. 
Although there is no current regulation on mine closure in Brazil, the Brazilian mining 
industry today is at the forefront of environmental impact minimisation techniques. 
Numerous case studies provide excellent testament to the industry's rehabilitation 
expertise, see for example (IBRAM, 1992). However, taking the whole closure process 
into consideration they are far from excellence, see for example closure problems faced at 
Maria Preta Mine (Junior and Sanches, 2002) and Serra do Navio Mine (Amapa, 2000a; 
Amapa, 2000b ). On the other hand, a success process is expected at Aguas Claras Mine 
(the first big mine to be closed in South America) since its mine closure plan already 
became a reference in Brazil. 
The development and implementation of this framework will imply: 
1 - Changes in the Legislation and Regulatory System 
Legislation should provide a broad regulatory framework for the closure process. Closure 
related legislation should be non-prescriptive and objectives based, and should ensure that 
all reasonable and practicable measures are taken to protect and restore the quality of the 
environment. It should be clearly understood and accepted that the legislative 
requirements are the minimum standard required, which best practice should exceed 
wherever possible. Statutes are often proclaimed in response to bad practice, public 
outrage or some catastrophic failure. It is in the interest of all parties to avoid the 
introduction of reactionary and prescriptive legislation that so often follows such events. 
Future State and Federal legislation should be framed with the following objectives: 
> To provide a clear and transparent process; 
> To be accessible to, and to protect the interests of, stakeholders through effective 
consultation; 
> To be non-prescriptive and specify objectives to be attained; and 
> To have enforceable powers. 
Regulation to meet growing community expectations of environmental management is 
increasing all over the world. Most nations have established nationally, provincially and 
regionally consistent framework for environmental assessment of new projects and 
variations to existing projects, based on consultative agreements between the all 
s+..akeholders involved. Issues regarding mine closure are an important consideration in the 
assessment process for mining proposals. 
2 - Adoption of Closure Criteria 
The question as to what constitutes acceptable closure is often poorly addressed in 
environmental regulatory statements. The issue of what will happen if rehabilitation does 
not work is rarely addressed. The lack of completion criteria implies that, even though the 
rehabilitation programme has ended, the mine company will not be released from its 
obligations until rehabilitation in the broader sense has been achieved. This lack implies 
constant demands for further works until complete "rehabilitation" has been achieved. A 
particular concern for mining companies lies in the frequent requirement that some stated 
measure has to be met for a number of years. Therefore, efforts are need on the 
development of some general criteria in order to orientate government agencies and 
mining companies in preparing a closure. However, it is important to point that criteria 
for mine closure are site-specific and should be developed in agreement with the 
stakeholders. 
3 - Requirement for Financial Guarantee 
Financial guarantee is an effective instrument for enforcing environmental responsibility 
at closure (Miller, 1998). The imposition of a financial guarantee should not only remove 
the financial risk to the State of a mining operation, but should also provide an incentive 
for progressive rehabilitation during the life of the mine. In systems that require financial 
guarantee, the cost of maintaining the guarantee and the advantages of lowering or 
terminating it are strong incentives to begin closure programmes and to pursue them 
diligently. Partial release of the security as work progresses should be seen as a 
motivation for the company and an equitable reward for the work conducted (Hollands, 
1999). Therefore, it is important for mining companies to know that, when the agreed 
closure criteria are achieved, their financial guarantee can be terminated promptly and 
that a clear dispute resolution mechanism exists to resolve any disagreement on this 
subject and release the bond (Hayes, 1994; Danielson and Nixon, 1999). 
Financial guarantee, as an economic instrument, must be complemented by permitting, 
environmental assessment, inspection and enforcement, and education to be effectively 
implemented (Anderson, 1999). The permitting process is important because it clarifies 
the criteria for mine closure, impels planning for closure from the outset of mine planning 
and successfully ensures enforcement of closure criteria. Enforcement and inspections are 
also essential components of a fmancial assurance programme. The enforcement capacity 
of the regulator should be clearly and explicit defined. This allows all parties involved to 
be aware of the implications for the financial guarantee in case of permit violations or 
bankruptcy. Inspections require good communication between mining companies and 
regulators with the goal of identifying faults in the previous closure plan and problems 
during their formative stages. Early and periodic inspections, in addition help to anticipate 
problems that may occur only when mining has been completed. 
CHAPTER 5 - LIABILITY ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME FOR 
MINE CLOSURE PLANNING 
INTRODUCTION 
Environmental concerns and related liability issues often hinder the successful completion 
of a mine closure and so force remedial action in abandoned mine sites. Historically, the 
absence of sound environmental operations has resulted in an extensive legacy of 
environmental and socio-economic implications of mine closure. Residual environmental 
liabilities are a legacy of the mining industry's past mistakes including mine closure. This 
stigma has acted as a major impediment that retards a smooth release of rehabilitation 
bonds, the return of public land to government responsibilities or the transfer of the 
closed mine site to private or community ownership (Anderson, 1995). At present, the 
mining industry faces the challenge of controlling both environmental and legal liabilities 
associated with mine closure. 
Closure plans should present five categories of information, namely environmental 
characterisation; identification and description of operational components including 
infrastructure and utilities; potential closure issues and liabilities; selection of closure 
technologies and, finally, schedules and costs. Evaluation of the closure options, then, 
should be based upon assessment of effectiveness, potential liabilities and costs (Morrey, 
1999). 
The wide-ranging environmental and socio-economic implications of mine closure 
require the evaluation of liabilities from technical, environmental, social, financial and 
regulatory perspectives if they are to be effective. Trends in closure planning involve 
technical review, assessment and estimation of mine closures liabilities, risk assessment 
and cost-benefit analysis from both engineering and environmental perspectives. A 
liability assessment programme is a tool that uses operating as well as compliance records 
and environmental management procedures to assist the mining industry in planning for 
mine closure. A liability assessment for mine closure planning is an estimation of the 
measures necessary to meet closure objectives (Brodie, 1998). 
According to Brodie (1998), the practice of an environmental audit provides a useful 
guide for structuring a liability assessment programme. They have many similarities, 
except that the scope of a liability assessment is broader including, as it does, all mine 
closure objectives. The similarities lie in the fact that much of a liability assessment for 
closure planning purpose focuses on environmental impact control and mitigation. The 
difference, however, is that liability assessment must consider future changes which may 
occur at a mine site and provide rehabilitation measures to address long-term concerns. 
The focus of this chapter was the development of a new approach to mine closure 
planning based on audit procedures. This chapter presented a review of environmental 
audit and outlined the similarities of its objectives with those of a closure plan. These 
include prevention rather than clean up, identification of possible hazards to the 
environment and risks to safety, evaluation of environmental consequences, 
quantification of exposure, setting priorities, quantification of closure bonds and 
justification of expenditure. Based on these similarities a liability assessment programme 
for mine closure planning was prepared including the key elements required for an 
effective audit programme. The objectives and closure measures used as criteria for the 
liability assessment programme were based on the Rehabilitation of Mines: Guidelines 
for Proponents developed by the province of Ontario, Canada. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT- BRIEF IDSTORY AND DEFINITION 
Environmental audits originated in the United States in the 1970s and were adopted 
widely by the industry in the late 1980s. Originally, it was developed in response to 
exponential growth in environmental legislation and after a number of companies and 
managers in their individual capacities had been severely punished for causing 
environmental damage which led to a consequent increase in liabilities. 
Since the 1980s, however, environmental audits have developed as an internal tool to 
support an environmental management function, which goes much further than mere 
compliance with legislation. Companies wishing to prove to external parties that the 
organisation is environmentally trustworthy are also increasingly using environmental 
audits. It has been applied across the whole range of industrial and commercial activity, 
from the smallest workshops to the largest industrial plants (mines, refineries, chemical 
plants) and government service organisations. 
A number of bodies such as the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and the 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) have developed detailed definitions 
for environmental auditing. For its purposes, the International Chamber of Commerce 
defines an environmental audit as "a management tool comprising a systematic, 
documented, periodic and objective evaluation of how well environmental organisations 
perform" (ICC, 1986). The aim is to help safeguard the environment by facilitating the 
control of environmental practices and assessing compliance with company policies. 
The International Organisation for Standardisation defines environmental audit as "a 
systematic, documented verification process of objectively obtaining and evaluating audit 
evidence to determine whether specific environmental activities, events, conditions and 
management systems, or matters pertaining to them conform with audit criteria and the 
results are then communicated to the client" (ISO 14010, 1996; ISO 14011, 1996). 
Environmental audit has been defined in many other ways. There include: 
> Checking compliance with environmental regulations by single corporations or 
projects at single sites (Zirschky, 1990; Scaife, 1991; Berger et al., 1992). 
> Inventory of off-site emissions and on-site hazardous materials and assessment of 
risks (Turner and Ruffio, 1993). 
), Systematic checking of environmental monitoring data against impact predictions 
made during environmental impact assessment (Dipper et al., 1998; Wood, 1999; 
Wood et al., 2000). 
> Reviewing and evaluating corporate environmental management programmes, 
both public and private sector (Brownlow and Zines, 1995; Sinclair-Desgagne and 
Gabel, 1997). 
), Assessing adequacy of corporate management structures used to achieve 
compliance with environmental legislation (Priznar et al., 1992; Roig, 1995). 
> Examining financial and legal risks associated with past, present and future 
environmental management by other companies involved in mergers and 
acquisitions (Middendorf: 1991; Holliday, 1993; Brodie, 1998; Anderson et al., 
1999). 
The function of an environmental audit is to identify areas of non-compliance and long-
term liability, develop actions necessary to return to compliance and establish a 
timeframe for completion. An audit can be conducted for each environmental programme 
and cannot only establish on-site, but off-site liabilities as well. It attempts to review, to 
the detail the audit objective necessitates, the procedures, practices and management 
plans established for the environmental programmes. 
Environmental auditing is now common practice in the larger mining industry operations 
all over the world (Buckley, 1990; Middendorf: 1991; Scaife, 1991; Danni and Hardaway, 
1992; Holliday, 1993; Buckley, 1995; Braga, Filho et al., 1996; EPA, 1996; Eyre and 
Veranneman, 1999). Although the level of its application varies widely, it is accepted as 
essential to best practice environmental management in mining for both small and large 
operations. Recently, due diligence leading to successful acquisition of state owned 
mining companies in South America has required evaluation of both assets and liabilities 
(Kaufman and Moreland, 1993). However, liability assessment as a management tool for 
mine closure planning, the main focus of this thesis, has not previously been reported. 
Similar to an environmental audit, a closure plan is a tool of EMS. Proper development of 
a closure plan is dependent on recognising the principles of environmental auditing. 
These include prevention rather than clean up, identification of possible hazards to the 
environment and risks to safety, evaluation of environmental consequences, 
quantification of exposure, setting priorities, quantification of bonds and justification of 
expenditure. The following paragraphs focus on how these principles are related to mine 
closure and the potential use of environmental auditing techniques in operating mines for 
mine closure planning. 
LIABILITY ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME FOR MINE CLOSURE PLANNING 
Liability assessment has become a standard tool for property evaluation before a financial 
transaction and is normally conducted when transfer of property is anticipated between 
two parties. It is also used for refinancing or before a long-term lease agreement. Liability 
assessment has been used in the U.S. to establish innocent acquisition during purchase, 
takeover and merger and that due diligence has been observed in the transfer under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response and Liability Act (CERCLA). The financial 
community have also used it to protect themselves should a loan default result in 
foreclosure and the associated environmental liabilities of the property which follow 
(Ruchti and Francois, 1993; Anderson, 1995; Neale and Green, 1996; Anderson et al., 
1999). 
Frequently, because incidents and situations which result in environmental effects are not 
identified, there is a need for remediation of the impacts. Carrying out a liability 
assessment of a mine operation, even if it is qualitative, should enable us to introduce 
engineering or administrative controls so that the likelihood of the incident occurring is 
greatly reduced. A liability assessment can also allow mining companies to identify 
situations where there is some risk to the environment for a mine operation focusing on 
mine closure issues. For example, an assessment of a tailings dam may identify risks of 
seepage into groundwater, or failure of the dam which put at risk the community sited 
downstream of the dam. Contamination of groundwater or safety risk is therefore 
recognised as risks which need to be managed. By focusing not only on the likelihood of 
a release or failure, but also on the impacts, mining companies can gain some insight into 
the environmental consequences of the incident. In addition, this allows decisions to be 
made on prevention or remediation (Robertson, 1989; Anderson, 1995; White, 1996; 
Harries, 1997; Brodie, 1998; Gerlach, 1998). 
In some cases, particularly where good database of exposure information is available, it 
may not only be possible to quantify the exposure of sensitive species or humans to 
substance that may be released or that may remain on the site, but be assessed by these 
receptors. This will allow mining companies to determine the extent of the environmental 
or health effects and, therefore, the severity of risk (Kmenta, 1995; Neale and Green, 
1996; Harries, 1997; Jones, 1998). 
Once the liabilities from a range of situations and mine components are identified, it may 
be possible to rank these on the basis of exposure or consequences. Therefore, situations 
with the highest environmental liability can be given priority for action. In many cases, 
however, this cannot be done as little is known about the real liability of the situation or it 
is difficult to compare disparate liabilities (Harries, 1997; Jones, 1998). For example, if 
an assessment of a tailings dam showed that, in five years time, there was a high risk of 
contamination of groundwater used for stock watering and a high risk of generation of 
dust which could affect the quality of life in a nearby community, which of these would 
receive higher priority? 
By establishing the overall environmental liability from a mining operation, it may be 
possible to calculate the required expenditure to minimise the risk to an acceptable level. 
This level of expenditure can then be used to calculate the rehabilitation bond to be 
established for the operation. This bond could be reviewed at regular interval and, if 
actions are taken to reduce the subsequent liability and, therefore, the expenditure 
required, a reduction may be justified (Anderson, 1995; Harries, 1997; Jones, 1998; 
Anderson, Orava et al., 1999). 
Finally, clear and logical identification of the liabilities can assist a risk assessment and 
cost-benefit analysis essential in the justification of preventive or remedial actions. 
Without any presentation of the potential environmental consequences, justification of 
this expenditure may be difficult. 
Environmental liabilities can affect a company's earnings, profitability and long-term 
competitive position. In terms of mine closure, rehabilitation, maintenance and 
monitoring are examples of environmental liabilities. Rehabilitation of a mine site can 
represent a major liability and often requires the continuation of activities long after 
resource extraction and processing has ceased. Maintenance of environmental quality can 
represent a significant liability in terms of ongoing costs which may be incurred during 
the lifetime of a project and also after it has been completed. After the "closure" of a 
mining project, maintenance requirements may extend for many years, or even, 
indefinitely, especially where acid mine drainage, radioactive contaminants or other 
organic and inorganic pollutants are concerned. Once a mining project has been 
completed, monitoring may be required for many years in order to verify that 
rehabilitation and maintenance programmes are effective. 
Liability assessment for mine closure planning should include the key elements required 
for an effective audit programme. These determine how the audit should be conducted, 
from the earliest stages of planning through to conducting the assessment, documentation 
of the results in a written report and then a commitment to follow-up on audit evidence 
(Kane, 1991; Danni and Hardaway, 1992; EPA, 1996; ISO 14010, 1996; ISO 14011, 
1996; Melemore, 1996). Table 1 O summarises these elements. In the following sections 
the applicability of each of these issues included in Table 10 to liability assessment for 
mine closure planning is discussed. 
Table 10 - Key Elements of an Effective Environmental Audit Programme, 
After Melemore (1996) 
Commitment 
 Top management commitment 
Auditors 
 Proficiency 
 Due diligence 
 Objectivity and independence 
Conducting the Assessment 
 Objectives 
 Scope 
 Criteria 
 Procedures 
 Planned, organised and supervised on-site/field work 
 Documentation 
 Reporting 
Follow-up 
 Follow-up process 
Commitment 
Commitment by top management to comply with closure requirements, to follow up on 
assessment findings and to recognise and respect the independence of the audit function is 
essential for a successful liability assessment programme (Kosko and Causey, 1992; 
Kornreich, 1995). Without it, even the best organised audit programme with all other key 
elements executed in exceptional manner, cannot be successful. It is important that full 
management commitment from the highest levels explicitly supports a purposeful and 
systematic environmental audit programme in order to involve top and low staff of the 
company. Environmental auditing needs the strong endorsement and active support of top 
management which have to clearly communicate all the procedures together with the 
appropriate incentives. Such commitment must be demonstrated by, for example, 
personal interest and concern, the adoption of high standards, the allocation of 
appropriated manpower and resources, and the active follow-up of recommendations. 
Auditors 
In conducting a liability assessment, auditors must be proficient, exercise due 
professional care and be objective and independent of the audited entity. Proficiency 
refers to possessing the knowledge, skills and disciplines to match the objectives and 
scope of the audit. Auditor should have, through education or professional background, 
an understanding of the operations to be audited or be able to quickly come to an 
understanding of the operations at the site (Zirschky, 1990; EPA, 1996; Eyre and 
Veranneman, 1999). In addition, written and verbal communications, organisation, work 
planning and analytical skills are necessary qualifications of an auditor. Auditbrs must 
execute their task such that another competent auditor given the same audit objectives, 
scope and circumstances could duplicate the audit results (EPA, 1996). This element 
implies auditors will perform their role in a conscientious manner which is consistent 
with audit standards and insures sufficient evidence is collected to support audit results. 
Auditors must perform their role objectively and independently. Independence provides 
the foundation for assuring the audit results reflect an impartial assessment. These 
elements allow the auditor to provide management with an impartial and unbiased 
judgement of the mine's status. In addition, audited entities will tend to request and 
welcome future audits (EPA, 1996; Eyre and Veranneman, 1999). 
Team members must be impartial in their review of the facility's status. Frequently, the 
most knowledgeable individual for a given area is the manager or supervisor of the area. 
If the audit team member is such an individual, negative or deficient areas withln his own 
realm of responsibility must be accurately and impartially reported (EPA, 1996). 
Depending upon the size of the facility and the complexity of the operations, an audit 
team may consist of two to ten people (EPA, 1996). The audit team may consist of in-
house specialist, external consultants or a combination of both (EPA, 1996; Eyre and 
Veranneman, 1999). Company or internal personnel may be part of the audit team, as 
long as they can function independently of the entity being audited. Often corporate staff 
conduct audit, or the team is a combination of corporate professionals and those stationed 
at other facilities in the organisation. Outside consultants and specialists may serve as 
audit team members as long as they fully understand the audit purpose and protocols. 
Consultants may be requested to conduct the audit in its entirety. External personnel, 
however, may not be well suited to evaluate compliance with company policies and 
procedures. Outside audit teams or team members should be used if the facility is too 
small to stafL a team, facility personnel are too busy to perform the audit or are not 
qualified, management prefers an independent or more objective assessment, perceived 
anonymity by facilities may be compared for management consistency on corporate-wide 
issues. 
Professionals from a variety of disciplines may be effective audit team members. For a 
mine closure purpose audit team members should include mining engineers, 
hydrogeologists, environmental engineers, geotechnical engineers, geologists, 
environmental attorneys and environmental control managers, etc. Frequently an auditor's 
experience and expertise are more important that his educational background. "An auditor 
must be able to draw upon knowledge, experience and understanding of the best practice 
in their field of expertise" (Eyre and Veranneman, 1999). It is imperative that auditors 
know the federal, state and local regulations they will deal with in the audit. It is highly 
desirable for audit team members to have a primary and secondary expertise. This allows 
for more interaction among team members and a more conclusive end product. Also, such 
an audit team may divide work assignments if necessary. 
Objectives 
Providing the basis for mining companies to plan for mine closure is the primary purpose 
of a liability assessment programme. To be brought to a successful completion the 
programme should have objectives defined and agreed with the mining company from the 
very beginning (Kornreich, 1995; ISO 14010, 1996; ISO 14011, 1996). Within the 
context of the mine closure these objectives can be defined as: to identify potential 
liabilities at the mine site and anticipate closure liabilities; to review and evaluate the 
adequacy, viability and efficiency of corporate environmental management programmes 
to achieve the closure objectives; to cost estimate the measures for meeting closure 
objectives. 
Liability Assessment Scope 
The principle for defining the overall scope of an audit programme involves identifying 
subject areas, boundary location, performance criteria, and period of review and 
geography of sites (Diberto, 1995). The scope of an audit describes its extent and 
boundaries in terms of location and organisational activities, as well as the efficacy of the 
environmental management system in place (ISO 14010, 1996; ISO 14011, 1996). The 
scope of a liability assessment programme for mine closure planning should include all 
mine closure objectives and be flexible to accommodate the acknowledged concerns of 
the mining company (Brodie, 1998). 
The assessment can be separated into two phases dependent upon the extent of 
information, database and environmental management quality of the mining company. 
Phase 1 is non intrusive and determines, qualitatively, the potential liabilities of the mine 
closure process. Phase 2 is generally required to improve the level of accuracy of the 
estimates by quantifying mine closure liabilities. Phase 2 should check all activities 
previously considered during Phase 1, plus sampling, collection, measurement, 
assessment and characterisation of soils, rocks and water on site if necessary. In addition, 
measurement of dams and spillways, as well as identification of any meteorological, 
seismic and erosive events and processes of significance should be recorded. The 
combined results of Phase 1 and 2 can provide the necessary information for developing a 
mine closure plan, including timetables and costs. Clearly, the quality of the 
environmental data and technical reports determine the accuracy of the assessment. Thus, 
a good initial EIS, in conjunction with updated environmental and social data, and a well-
structured environmental management system and monitoring records can eliminate many 
Phase 2 activities. 
Table 11 lists the general protocol of a liability assessment for mine closure purposes. A 
review of documents and the following interviews with managers and site inspections 
should cover all items listed in Table 11. The documents to be reviewed should include 
the EIS; annual company reports; geotechnical, geochemical, biological and water quality 
technical reports; compliance records; mining plans, mining licences and environmental 
permits. 
Table 11 - General Protocol of the Liability Assessment 
History and Operating Plan 
Site history and prqject schedule 
Mine development rock, ore and concentrate management 
Overburden and waste rock disposal 
Milling process 
Tailings disposal 
Chemicals and fuel storage 
Buildings and infrastructure 
Water management 
Current Environmental Conditions of the Site 
Climate and Local Air Quality 
Geology, Mineralogy and Soils 
Topography 
Hydrology and Hydrogeology 
Water and Sediment Quality 
Plant and Animal Life 
Environmental Management System 
Environmental Laws and Procedures 
Environmental Policy & Guidelines 
Environmental Personal 
Environmental Budget 
Environmental Training 
Thirty Party Environmental Involvement 
Data Collection and Storage Systems 
Public Relations on Environmental Matters 
Staff Suggestion Schemes 
Emergency Response Procedures 
Site Security and Safety 
Documentation of Procedures 
Scope and Detail of Procedures 
Liaison with External Authorities 
Natural Disaster Planning 
Staff Training and Knowledge 
Rehabilitation Plan 
Plant, Equipment, Buildings and Infrastructure 
Mine Workings 
Water Management and Treatment 
Tailings and other Water Management Systems 
Disposal ofWaste Rock and Solid Waste 
Chemical and Fuel Storage Areas 
Hazardous Waste Storage and Disposal 
Progressive Rehabilitation 
Monitoring Programme 
Physical Stability 
Chemical Stability and Water Quality 
Biomonitoring 
Criteria for Liability Assessment 
The criteria should include any guidelines and best practice on mine closure matters, as 
well as corporate policy and environmental management system with which evidence 
collected during the liability assessment can be compared. A brief summary of potential 
control technologies for chemical stability is showed in Table 12. Tables 13 to 18 list 
general closure objectives and measures to be considered for each mine component as 
well as non-compliance with objectives (column 1) and measures (column 2) which must 
be indicated. These tables were based on published mine closure guidelines and related to 
open pits, waste dumps, tailings dams, landfills, buildings and equipment and water 
management facilities respectively (Ontario, 1995). With respect to these components, 
mine closure objectives and measures should ensure physical, chemical and biological 
stability, effective land use, secure environmental procedures and emergence measures to 
be taken in the event of a disaster. 
Closure measures for physical stability must address the deterioration of facilities 
remaining on a mine site after operations cease. Such facilities may be made of soil and 
rock, or such man-made material as concrete or steel. Therefore, potential structural 
failures caused by perpetual forces and dynamic events should be assessed. Many of the 
physical considerations pertaining to closure are the same as those that occur during 
mining operations. The differences, however, relate to the longer time span for which 
structures need to remain stable, fixed and immovable. The difference in time scale is 
likely to be an order of magnitude; a minimum of 200 years for closure, compared to 
approximately 20 years for operations. Thus, gradual changes in soil and rock conditions, 
coupled with changing groundwater status may dictate the need for a more conservative 
choice of design parameters to meet closure criteria. 
Pits, tailings dams and waste dump slopes need careful consideration for longevity. 
Although immediate static conditions may be satisfactory, long-term dynamic forces may 
suggest the need for extensive protective measures. Since gradual deterioration of 
materials can take place over time due to both physical and chemical weathering, 
conservative values of strength parameters should be selected. 
Chemical stability issues include acid drainage, leaching of metals and flushing of 
processing plant reagents or other chemicals. Generally, measures for control of chemical 
reactions and treatment of drainage must be specific to the source and contaminant type. 
Table 12 - Potential Control Technologies for Chemical Stability 
Technology Plant Acid Metal 
Agents Drainage Leaching 
Control of Reactions 
Conditioning of waste/removal of deleterious minerals X X 
Covers and seals for exclusion of water X X 
Covers and seals for exclusion of oxygen X 
Blending/base addition X 
Bactericides (short term only) X 
Change plant process, change reagents X 
Change plant process, add neutralising agents X 
Control of Migration 
Covers and seals to reduce infiltration X X X 
Controlled placement to reduce infiltration X X X 
Diversion of surface water X X X 
Interception of groundwater X X X 
Collection and Treatment 
Active treatment in chemical treatment plant X X X 
Passive treatment using wetland X X X 
Passive treatment using trench X 
Passive treatment using retention pond X 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Table 13 - Closure Objectives and Measures for Open Pit 
Issues Objectives (1) 
Physical Stability 
Safety Restrict access to 
hazardous areas; 
Emergency access 
Measures (2) 
Ditch and berm; 
Fence, and sign post, if necessary; 
Slope stabilisation; 
to water. Provides access to water. 
Slope Failure 
Chemical Stability 
Acid drainage 
and/or leaching of 
metals 
Land Use 
Productivity and 
visual impact 
Prevent deep seated Restrict access with ditch/berm and, 
failure, if practical; 
Control sediment 
release, if 
necessary. 
if necessary, fence and sign post; 
Revegetate or place riprap on 
slopes; 
Provide stable spillway and 
overflow channel. 
Meet water quality Flood control reactions; 
objectives by Cover to control reactions and/or 
controlling migration; 
reactions and/or 
migration. collect 
and treat. 
Return to original 
or approved use. 
Collect and treat. 
Backfill pit; 
Flatten slopes; 
Contour-blend with natural 
topography; 
Revegetate slopes; 
Rehabilitate for fish, waterfowl, 
wildlife habitat. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Non-compliance 
Table l4 - Closure Objectives and Measures for Water Management 
Issues Objectives (1) Measures (2) Non-compliance ~ 
Physical Stability 1 2 
Water datr:6 Ensure lcmg-tenn Monitor/maintain embankment 
stability with no indefinitely or breach; 
overtopping; Protect erodible slopes; 
Prevent erosion. Plug intake with concrete, plug decants 
and remove towers; 
Maintain operating spillway preferably in 
durable rock. 
Ditches Adequate flood Design for extreme events; 
capacity; Construct from materials suitable fur long-
Prevent blockage and tenn stability; 
overtopping. 
Prevent erosion Provide riprap protection; 
Define and provide fur long-term stability. 
Culverts Ensure maintenance Remove culvert and breach, otherwise 
free passage of water upgrade for design flood; 
under design flood Provide fur long-tenn maintenana:. 
conditions. 
Storage tanks Remove Drain, remove or knock down, fill, and 
cover. 
Pipelines Remove surface and Remove surface and large shallow pipes, 
large shallow pipes. plug pipes at depth. 
Chemical Stability 
Contaminated Meet water quality Drain, treat and discharge; or monitor and 
reservoirs objectives by treat indefinitely; 
controlling reactions Strip and dispose of contaminated soil in 
and/or migration, tailings basin or other approved location; 
collect and treat. Breach dam; 
R.evegetate. 
Land Use 
Dams Restore drainage Breach and restore to erosion resistant. 
patterns. 
Determine if Define means fur transfer of ownership. 
alternative use exists. 
Reservoirs Return to original or Maintain lake and transfer ownership, or 
approved use. drain and revegetate. 
Ditches Restore drainage Grade and establish vegetation. 
patterns. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Table 15 - Closure Objectives and Measures for Waste Rock and Overburden Piles 
Issues Objectives (1) Measures (2) Non-compliance 
Physical Stability 1 2 
Slope fuilure Avoid deep-seated Site selection to avoid low strength 
fuilure, large foundations; 
surface shnnps and Construct in lifts to achieve flatter slopes; 
sediment release. futernal drains to prevent water table rise; 
Covers and/or ditches to control water 
infiltration; 
Doze crest if required, or construct toe berm 
to flatten overall slope; 
Revegetate or establish riprap. 
Chemical Stability 
Acid drainage Meet water quality Underwater disposal to control reactions; 
and/or leaching of objectives by Pre--treatment-blending of alkali material to 
metals controlling mitigate acid drainage; 
reactions and/or Cover to control reactions and/or migration; 
migration; Collect Segregation of deleterious materials for 
and treat. controlled disposal or cellular pile 
construction; 
Regulate seepage quality to meet mine 
eflluent objectives with covers and/or 
retention pond prior to release; 
Collect and treat 
Land Use 
Productivity and Return to original Contour-blend with natural topography; 
visual impacts state or other Restore vegetation where practical. 
approved use. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Table 16 - Closure Objectives and Measures for Tailings Impoundment Systems 
Issues Objectives (1) Measures (2) 
Physical Stability 
Tailings surface Control dust; Establish erosion resistant cover of 
Other 
Chemical Stability 
Tailings and pore 
water 
Dams and 
structures 
Land Use 
Productivity of 
land and visual 
impacts 
Control water 
erosion. 
vegetation, soil, riprap or water. 
Factor or safety> Appropriate site selection and dam design; 
1.5 for static Stabilise embankments by constructing toe 
conditions with berm to flatten overall slope; 
erosion resistant; Riprap, vegetation or soil cover to control 
Overtopping erosion; 
protection. Increase freeboard and/or upgrade spillway 
to prevent erosion by overtopping in 
extreme events. 
Restrict access; Ditch/berm/fence to prevent erosion by 
Remove or motorised vehicles; 
establish long- Remove or pluwbackfill structures and 
term stability of decant lines through embankments; 
spillway, decant Design and construct diversions and 
towers and pipes. spillways for extreme events and long-term 
stability; 
Define and provide for long-term 
monitoring and maintenance; 
Avoid ongoing operation where possible. 
Meet water Flood to control reactions; 
quality oijectives Pre-treatment removal of deleterious 
by controlling material for controlled dispersal elsewhere, 
reactions and/or or blending with alkali material to mitigate 
migration; collect acid drainage; 
and treat. Cover to control acid reactions and/or 
migration using inert material or bog; 
Ditch to divert runoff; 
Meet water 
quality; Collect 
and treat. 
Do not construct with potential acid 
drainage or leachable materials; 
Decontaminate and/or remove acid 
generation or leaching materials. 
Return to original Rehabilitate by: flood, contour, cover, 
or approved use. revegetate, wetland. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Non-compliance 
Table 17 - Closure Objectives and Measures for Buildings and Equipment 
Issues 
Physical Stability 
Buildings, 
equipment and 
storage areas 
Chemical Stability 
Buildings, 
equipment and 
storage areas 
Land Use 
Buildings, 
equipment and 
storage areas 
Objectives (1) 
Control 
inadvertent 
access. 
Meet water 
quality criteria. 
Dispose of 
surplus 
chemical off 
site. 
One for each 
Measures (2) 
Decontaminate if necessary, disassemble 
and remove all equipment and buildings; 
Backfill excavations; 
Remove buried tanks; 
Restore natural drainage. 
Contaminated soils assessed on case-by-
case basis; Leave in place or excavate 
and dispose of in approved manner. 
Chemicals of all types to be recycled, 
returned to vendor, sold, or disposed of in 
an approved landfill site. 
Contour; 
Revegetate; 
Break and bury concrete; 
Restore natural drainage. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Non-compliance 
Table 18-Closure Objectives and Measures for Landfills and other Wastes 
Issues Objectives (1) Measures (2) Non-compliance 
Physical Stability 1 2 
Landfill and waste Control erosion. Provide erosion resistant cover; 
storage areas Stabilise slopes; 
Upgrade diversion structures fur 
appropriate maximum flood. 
Security Prevent Ditch/fence/berm and signpost where 
inadvertent remaining facilities are hazardous. 
access. 
Chemical Stability 
Landfill and waste Meet water Divert runoffwith ditches or covers; 
storage areas quality Relocate to controlled disposal facility. 
objectives by 
controlling 
reactions and/or 
migration; 
Collect and treat. 
Land Use 
Landfill and waste Return to Where possible blend to match 
storage areas original or topography and revegetate. 
approved use. 
Source: Adapted from Ontario (1995) 
Liability Assessment Procedures 
Whether or not written, the audit programme should be systematic throughout its 
planning, onsite and follow-up phases. Procedures may include a summary of the process, 
roles and responsibilities of those involved with the audit and checklists or guidelines. 
Explicit top management support and commitment to follow-up on liability assessment 
findings are essential for an effective programme. Arrangements should be made with the 
mining company to inform directors and managers of departments about the objective and 
the scope of the liability assessment. The objective is to guarantee company staff 
involvement in order to: 
> Provide the facilities needed to ensure an effective and efficient assessment 
process; 
> Appoint responsible and competent staff to accompany the audit, to act as guides 
to the site and to ensure other appropriate requirements; 
> Provide access to the facilities, personnel, relevant information and records as 
requested for assessment; and 
> Cooperate with the audit-team to allow the audit objectives to be achieved. 
The assessment process should collect evidence through interviews, examination of 
internal documents and reports as well as site inspections. Table 19 lists some issues 
which should be considered during the checking of reporters and site inspection of mine 
components in order to collect evidence on their status. In collecting evidence, due 
consideration should be given to environmental management and procedures, physical 
and chemical stabilities and post-mining use of the mine components. These data should 
then be compared with the established criteria. Nonconformity with these criteria or 
absence of sound procedures to cope with such evidence should be considered a liability 
in terms of mine closure. After assessment of each component, the findings should be 
discussed with unit managers to confirm present and projected liabilities. 
Table 19 - General Liability Assessment Issues for Mine- Components 
Units 
Open pit 
Processing plant 
Waste rock/overburden piles 
Tailings-management 
facilities 
Issues 
Slope and bench stability; gr-0undwater and rainwatcr management; 
security and unauthorised access; effects of drainage into and from 
the pit; reinstatement of haul roads; visual impact; pit filling, etc; 
Buildings-and foundations; mobile and fixed plant; clearrup-of 
workshops, fuel and-reagent areas; disposal of scrap and waste-
materials, etc. 
Slope.stability; effects of seepage on surface and groundwater; dust 
generation. visuatimpact,_ etc. 
Dam stability;changes in: tailings geochemistry; effects-of seepage 
past the dam and from the base of the impoundment; surface water 
management and discharge; dust generation fromexpesed beaches; 
access and security, etc. 
Water management facilities Dams_and reservoirs, settling. pounds, culverts, pipelines, spillways _ 
Landfill/waste disposal 
facilities 
Infrastructure 
or culverts; disposal of processing plant sludge; surface drainage of 
the site and discharge of drainage waters, etc. 
Hazardous waste containment; sewage treatment plant; prevention 
of groundwater contamination; prevention of illegal dumping etc. 
Power and water supply facilities;..access roads; transportation and 
supply depots, railway spur tin~ etc. 
These are shown as open ended by the- use of "etc" to -ensure that those conducting the 
assessment consider the likelihood of other issues arising orr a case-by-case basis: 
Considerable amounts of information should be provided before site inspections- take 
place. These typicallyconsistof: 
};,- Organisational charts; indicatingthose responsible for the management of the site-
or unit; 
};,- Site layout and a brief description ofoperations; 
};,- Regulatory information; 
).>- Copies of licensing and any notices of violations; 
).>- Listing of applicable legislation and relevant government bodies; 
},- Agreements with and directives-from regulatory bodies; 
};,- Copies of the EIS and Monitoring Reports; 
~ Chemicals management procedures;_ancl 
~ Environmentalemergence response (Scaife, 1991 ). 
Planned, Organised and-Supervised On-Site/Field Work 
To increase efficient and consistent accomplishment of the audit objectives, the onsite 
portion of the audit should be planned, organised and supervised. Planning_ encompasses 
the audit teader obtaining._ alevel of knowledge_ about field site sufficient to allow for 
securing the appropriate resources; timing, protocols, etc, f-or the audit. This can be-
accomplished through a pre-audit site visit, completion of a pre-audit-questionnaire and 
discussions with site personnel. 1liis procedure will allo..w-the team leader to organise the-
schedule-for the audit, assign issues to team members and provide team members pre-
audit information. .Supervisionincludes directing.the.efforts ofthe team, keeping theteam 
on-track and within the de:fined-audif.soope, objectives-andtime frame. 
The site visit should consist of a mnnber-of distinct operations; First, ameetinKshould-be 
held with the manager and senior staff to present ffie purpose, timing and methodology of 
the liability assessment, and to confirm the schedule-for the-site review~ Seeondly, on site 
interviews should be held with all appropriate- site operatives andjunior management.=.A 
site inspection should taKe place together with- inspection of records at this time.- The 
guideiables prepared in advance of the site visit, based on Tables 13-18, should be used-
to ensure that significantissues are not ignorectNon,;.compliancewith objectives (column 
1) and measures (column 2) should be indicated. Finally, a summary or brief report 
should be prepared focusing on conclusions; achievements and issues; This is presented 
and discussed in a final meeting with the manager or director, often described as a ''close-
out" mee111g. 
Documentation 
The audit programme must assure a process is in place. for- collecting, analysing, 
interpreting and documenting sufficient evidence-to aehieve audit objectives; The process 
typically includes observations,_ interview~ records_ review and recording_ results_ in 
working papers. The programme should also include clearly defined document retention 
guides consistent with the organisation's retention policy and procedures. 
Documentation of the information gathered during the assessment is required to 
substantiate the conclusions reached about the strengths and weakness of environmental 
management within the company and procedures to meet closure objectives. Working 
papers (field notes) should describe the conduct and results of the liability assessment, as 
well as containing all information_ needed to support the fin_dings. Gene.rally, working 
papers include three types- of information - a general background to the mine; 
descriptions of tire company environmental managc:,ment programme; actions taken to 
complete each step of the assessment. These working papers are necessary to prepare a 
liability assessment report, which is the key document related to the programme. 
Liability Assessment Report 
The liability assessment report should provide the management with information on the  
scope, objectives and results of the assessment, as well as emphasising thatthe company 
must initiate the measures needed t~ cope with the mine- closure- objeetivesi-The- repert-
should also include a discussion. of the assessment process, overview of the mining. 
company, an executive summary and a presentation of findings. It -may include 
recommendations for corrective action, butthis is subject to the audit programme design 
and the needs.ofthe company. 
Liability AssessmentFollow-up 
The full benefits of a liability assessment will not be realised if appropriate follow-up 
procedures are not in place and functioning effectively. The findings and 
recommendations. oftheliabilicy assessment must be converted into a mine closure plan 
complete with- a timetable, identification of responsibilities and estimated budgets. 
Effectively implemented, such a plan would reduce mine closure liabilities- and assist 
companies in meeting closure objectives. _ 
CHAPTER 6 - ANALYSIS OF THE AGUAS CLARAS MINE 
LIABILITY ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME 
This research project was designed to develop a new approach to mine closure planning 
based upon environmental audit procedures. The general methodology described in 
Chapter 5, however, would remain WI.proven without some attempts at its practical 
application, so-called "road-testing". Consequently, a case study was established to test 
the methodology. The Aguas Claras Mine in Minas Gerais State, Brazil is an iron ore 
open pit mine owned by Miner~es Brasileira Reunidas (MBR) which is just reaching 
the end of its economic life it was the case study. It is scheduled for closure in 2001. Thus 
in 1998 when fieldwork for this research project was undertaken, it was entering the mine 
closure planning phase. Consequently, with the cooperation of the company, the 
methodology developed here was tested on the mine. It was felt that the only way to 
demonstrate the validity of the suggested approach was a real case study where liability 
assessment would have to stand the scrutiny of mine closure planning and the meet the 
actual needs for a mine company. 
This chapter presents an analysis of the liability assessment approach adopted at Aguas 
Claras Mine by comparing with the theoretical method presented in Chapter 5. To begin 
the discussion the reasons for selecting Aguas Claras Mine as a case study following by 
an assessment of the top management commitment are provided. 
Aguas Claras Mine is in the process of closure. This was the first reason for the selection 
of this mine as a case study. The most important reason, however, is because Aguas 
Claras Mine is one of the biggest iron ore mine, it belongs to the second iron ore mining 
company in Brazil and its closure plan is expected by both government and industry to 
become a benchmark for mine closure activities in Minas Gerais State and Brazil. Other 
reasons for selecting Aguas Claras relate to the importance that the closure of this mine is 
for the mining industry since its characteristics are quite similar to other iron ore mines, 
which are reaching the end of their productive life in the region. Other motives include: 
~ Aguas Claras is the first big mine closing in the Iron Quadrangle, in Minas 
Gerais State, in Brazil and even in South America. 
};,, Like Aguas Claras Mine there are many other operating mines in Minas Gerais 
State that are reaching the end of their productive life and because lack of 
mine closure regulation do not have a closure plan. This, certainly, will turn 
Aguas Claras Mine closure programme a regional and national reference for 
other closure programmes. 
};,, The Aguas Claras Mine closure process parallels the discussion on mine 
closure in Brazil. It can be said that the Aguas Claras Mine closure process 
instigated such a discussion for a mine closure legislation and regulation in 
Brazil in both government and mining industry. 
At Aguas Claras Mine full commitment by top management to comply with closure 
requirements, to follow up on assessment findings and to recognise and respect the 
"independence" of the liability assessment for mine closure planning purpose was 
achieved. Top management commitment can be expressed through the issuance of a 
formal statement which commits the organisation to compliance with the auditing 
programme. MBR' s top management explicitly supported the liability assessment 
programme through personal interest and concern (by participating in the pre-assessment 
meeting, by allocating appropriate manpower and resources, by providing all 
documentation and information need, and by actively following-up of recommendations). 
Although MBR did not issue any statement, its most definitive exhibition of management 
commitment was achieved through provision the resources necessary to establish and 
implement the liability assessment programme, and through a meeting with site managers 
where the programme goals and objectives and how the results will be utilized. It is also 
important to report that just after MBR's top managers received the proposal for this 
study, they met with shareholders in Japan, when they were asked about the closure plan 
for the Aguas Claras Mine and the liabilities associated with such closure. In fact this 
event was crucial to induce such a commitment. 
After agreement by MBR to become involved in the liability assessment case study, a 
preliminary questionnaire was submitted to the company in order to obtain the 
information needed to establish the objectives and scope of the assessment. This 
questionnaire is presented in Appendix I. 
The liability assessment programme designed for the Aguas Claras Mine had to be 
sufficiently flexible to accommodate changes in emphasis based upon information 
gathered during the audit and to allow the effective use of resources. Following the key 
elements of the liability assessment programme developed for Aguas Claras Mine are 
analysed having as basis Chapter 5. 
Purpose and Objectives 
The purpose of this liability assessment was to assist l\IBR develop a closure plan for 
Aguas Claras Mine. In order to succeed, the liability assessment had the following 
objectives: 
~ To review and evaluate the adequacy of l\IBR's environmental management 
programme to achieve the closure objectives; 
~ To identify potential liabilities at closure of the mine; 
~ To estimate closure cost. 
To achieve these objectives the liability assessment programme follows the path of events 
recommended by the Institute of Chemical Engineers in their Slide Training Package E04 
- Environmental Auditing (ICE, 1986). The two first objectives were fully achieved by 
this research. l\IBR' s environmental management programme was evaluated and potential 
liabilities at closure of the Aguas Claras Mine were identified. They were documented in 
the report sent to the company and are present in Chapter 6. The estimate of closure cost, 
however, was not achieved by this research mainly because lack of data from the 
company since the post-mining use of the site was not yet defined, for example. 
According to l\IBR's information, the estimate closure cost is about 0$14 M. 
Liability Assessment Scope and Protocol 
The scope of the liability assessment programme was planned at the early stage in 
consultation with l\IBR staff and established after agreement with the company, as fully 
recommended (Thompson and Wilson, 1994; Brownlow and Zines, 1995; Roig, 1995; 
l l "7 
J.J. / 
Stans, 1995; ISO 14011, 1996). Mine management and staff were kept fully informed in 
order to guarantee the effectiveness of the liability assessment programme. The scope was 
established following the programme objectives in order to avoid time-consuming. 
Similar to Phase 1 environmental site assessment, the liability programme did not include 
sampling and analysis of the environmental media. Instead, the programme scope 
involved review of historical documentation and technical reports, review of regulatory 
records and on-site visual assessment of the mine components as a means of investigating 
closure liabilities associated with environmental concerns and mine management 
practices. 
Mining enterprises, generally, are divided into discrete units. The scope of the liability 
assessment for Aguas Claras Mine covered all mining facilities, as well as the 
environmental management system and operational practices of the mining company. For 
each unit applicable to Aguas Claras Mine, the assessment plan dealt with: those 
rnhabilitation measures already carried out, as well as those anticipated; the final use 
envisaged for each unit; the long-term environmental and security measures adopted. 
These were assessed under four different headings: post-mining use, physical stability, 
chemical stability and biological stability. The Aguas Claras Mine facilities assessed 
were: 
};a- The Pit and the Curral Mountain Range; 
)' Waste dumps; 
>" Tailings dams; 
)' Processing plant; 
)' Railway spur terminal; 
)' Water systems, sewer, oil and grease systems and chemical products; 
)' Buildings and infrastructure. 
Industry consistently uses protocols to facilitate systematic audits (see for example, Price 
Waterhouse LLP, 1995). These protocols present the plan for the auditor to follow in 
order to gain evidence about an organisation's environmental practice (Buckley, 1990; 
Brownlow and Zines, 1995; Kornreich, 1995; EPA, 1996; ISO 14010, 1996; ISO 14011, 
1996). At Aguas Claras Mine the general protocol followed is represented in Table 11. 
Informally, with l\IBR and audit team agreement, great emphasis was placed on visual 
inspection of the mine components. In addition, a review of the company environmental 
management, records and reports and interviews with mine managers, regulators were 
considered a priority. So as not to hamper initiative, no checklists were prepared nor no 
detailed list of instructions to be adhered to. Instead, tables were elaborated to provide a 
general guide for assessing each area of investigation. However, it should be noted that a 
detailed protocol provides a format for assigning specific tasks to individual members of 
a liability assessment team, for comparing what was accomplished during the assessment 
with the original liability plan and for summarising and recording the work in progress 
and work completed. Therefore, the approach used is not recommended where liability 
assessment team is rotated. In this case such an approach does not ensure consistency 
with the liability assessment process and reporting procedures. 
Audit Criteria for the Aguas Claras Mine Liability Assessment Programme 
The criteria for an assessment, as described in Chapter 5, were submitted to l\IBR for its 
agreement. In addition, details of l\IBR policy and environmental management system 
were included so that any evidence collected could be compared with these criteria as 
well. In this study was verified, the need for a better criteria development. Audit criteria 
must either already exist, or must be developed. At the Aguas Claras the audit criteria 
developed were taken from a general case of objectives and measures (Ontario, 1995) that 
must be included in planning for mine components closure. Although most of the criteria 
used were considered valid for the case study, there is a need for developed site-specific 
criteria based on current regulatory requirements and guidelines. Unfortunately, this was 
not possible because the lack of mine closure regulatory requirements and guidelines in 
Brazil. Therefore, site-specific criteria must be developed in order to avoid on-the-spot 
personal judgement (an audit in which auditors use this kind of judgment can no longer 
be called an audit) in topics not covered by criteria. 
Dates and Duration of Major Liability Assessment Activities 
The major assessment activities were conducted at Aguas Claras Mine in July 1998 and 
lasted nine days. Each aspect of the investigation took one day, but the preliminary 
arrangements, which included an initial presentation of the liability programme to MBR 
directors, the organisation of site visits and the collection and verification of documents, 
required two days. These activities included: 
).- Initial arrangements; 
 The Pit and Curral Mountain Range site inspection; 
 Waste dumps sites site inspection; 
 Tailings dams sites site inspection; 
 Processing plant site inspection; 
 Infrastructure and the railway spur line site inspection; 
 Water systems, sewer, oil and greases systems and chemical products site 
inspection; 
 Meetings with the environmental manager and the directors of the company to 
present and discuss the assessment findings. 
The liability assessment schedule and agenda were developed and logistics were arranged 
in consultation with the site and team members. 
Identification of Audit-team Members 
The author of this study led the liability assessment team with the assistance of two 
engineers ofMBR. Following are described the qualifications of the team: 
Team Leader Bachelor degree in mining engineering, Master of Science degree 
in mineral processing technology, Ph.D. student in Environmental 
Management. 
MBR member 1 Bachelor degree in geological and civil engineering, Master of 
Science in geotechnical engineering. Member of the geotechnical 
staff of MBR. 
MBR member 2 Bachelor degree in agronomy engineering. In charge of the 
rehabilitation programme of MBR. 
In conducting a liability assessment, auditors must be proficient, exercise due 
professional care and be objective and independent of the audited entity. Two members of 
the team were not independent of the MBR. Actually, they were inside members directly 
linked with the development of the Aguas Claras Mine closure plan. Inside personnel may 
be included as audit team members as long as the audit team lead is independent of the 
site (Melemore, 1996). The inclusion of these two members was beneficial since they 
created the appropriated tone so that the site people became as cooperative as possible. In 
addition, above all, these members possess the knowledge, skills, disciplines and 
understanding of the operations at the site to match the objectives and scope of the 
liability assessment proposed (Zirschky, 1990; EPA, 1996; Eyre and Veranneman, 1999). 
A potential problem exists when members of the team who are assigned to provide 
services to the site and earn the confidence of the site personnel are placed in the role of 
telling all they know in the liability assessment report (this was the case of the two 
members and they knew where most all of the problems were). Facility staff may 
perceive this a violation of their trust. However, with the open and committed attitude on 
the part of top and site managers as well as discretion by the team, this kind of problem 
was not experienced at Aguas Claras Mine. 
fa the author's point of view, a team combination of internal and external members is 
crucial for the success of a liability assessment for mine closure planning. While internal 
members can facilitate the liability assessment by stimulating site people cooperation and 
better knowing all site operations, an outside member can guarantee an independent and 
impartial assessment. More outside auditors should be considered when the company 
lacks qualified in-house personnel to perform audits or time constraints of qualified in-
house personnel. However, it should keep in mind that external auditors will not be as 
familiar with company operations as would inside auditors. The site history, 
organisational structure and operations will always be more familiar to inside auditors. 
Schedule of Meetings Held with Management 
The responsibility for making the appointments lay with the two MBR team members. 
This approach facilitated the meetings as well as reinforced top management 
commitment. The schedule, however, had to be sufficiently flexible to deal with day-to-
day operational constraints at the mine. 
Mine Site Interviews 
At the opening meetings with the site managers, the purpose, scope, procedures and 
follow-up process, as well as the expected output generated from the assessment were 
always reviewed. These meetings were important for sharing any special concerns about 
the closure process with the team. Most of the onsite aspects of the liability assessment 
were completed with a closing conference with the site manager to review and discuss the 
findings identified by the audit team. This was in the form of a verbal review of the 
assessment. No summary report was presented because of time constraints on the 
fieldwork. 
During site inspection, the auditors used a significant proportion of the time asking 
questions, engaging in discussion and conducting interviews with facility managers. In 
this assessment, the interviews were informal in nature. However, an important aspect of 
the assessment process was to follow some basic steps to obtain the information needed, 
which involved: 
~ Planning interview especially setting up the schedule, time and duration, as 
well as identifying the goal of an interview in advance; 
~ Ensuring an adequate amount of time to conduct the interview and to explain 
how the information would be used. Reassuring the interviewee that the 
purpose of the assessment was to uncover potential liabilities to assist in mine 
closure planning. 
~ Requesting a brief overview of the interviewee's job and facility history at the 
start of the interview; 
~ Writing a summary page just after the end of the interview in order to 
document it. 
Documents Reviewed 
Appendix 2 lists most of the documents reviewed during the fieldwork in 1998. They 
include technical reports, papers, thesis, corporate report, monitoring reports and 
environmental licences related to the Aguas Claras Mine. MBR provided the auditors all 
documents requested for supporting the liability assessment. In addition, copies of part of 
these were supplied by the company for preparation of the final report, submitted to the 
company in 1999, and for the writing up of this thesis. A review of these documents was 
important to know the history of the mine operations, the activities taken to solve 
operational problems which affected the environment, as well as to evaluate the 
implications of company's projects for the mine closure process. 
The Aguas Claras Mine Liability Assessment Follow-up 
Report follow-up is a crucial part of the audit process. Adequate follow-up actions are 
considered as one of the key factors in a successful liability assessment programme. The 
liability assessment findings, reported and analysed as prioritised recommendations to 
MBR, prompted the realization of a need for a quantitative assessment of the main 
liabilities and risk assessment. This will define the content of the final closure plan for the 
Aguas Claras Mine and the activities to be implemented to achieve an environmentally 
and socio-economically sound closure. 
MBR has contracted a consultancy company (Brandt Engenharia) to conduct the 
quantitative assessment in accordance with the report of this research. The scope of this 
study will include the quantification of areas of potential risk, current environmental state 
of the site as well as the study of potential post-mining uses for the site and a socio-
economic assessment of the region under the influence of the Aguas Claras Mine. 
MBR' s long-term development plan provides for increasing ore production from the 
current 28 to 32 million tonnes per year (Mtpy) by 2004. Most of the Aguas Claras Mine 
employees are being moved to other MBR operations, most of them within a radius of 
approximately 20 km between the municipalities of Belo Horizonte, Nova Lima and 
Itabirito. Although the company state that no negative socio-economic impact of Aguas 
Claras Mine closure is expected, since non-unemployment is expected, a socio-economic 
assessment has also been recommended to MBR to assist the company seek a sustainable 
post-mining use for the site agreed by all stakeholders. 
SUMMARY 
Table 11 provided the general protocol to be followed during the assessment and writing 
up of the liability report to the company. Table 12 was not used in the assessment since 
Aguas Claras Mine, according to pre-questionnaire information, does not have problems 
with acid mine drainage nor use hazardous chemicals in the ore processing. Tables 13 to 
18 were designed based on acceptable closure objectives and applicable measures to 
environmentally sound close open pits, waste dumps, tailings dams, landfills and 
disassemble and remove buildings, equipment and water management facilities from a 
mine site. At Aguas Claras Mine, these tables were used as guideline to carry on the 
liability assessment. As such, these tables were not meticulously followed. This approach 
was agreed between the auditors to accommodate the specificity of each mine component 
to be assessed, as well as changes in emphasis based on information gathered. 
Tables 13 to 18 and Table 19 proved to be very useful for the preparation of the site visit 
and discussion with site personnel about closure objectives and measures. Evidence 
collected during site visit were compared to Tables 13 to 18 to see if closure objectives 
and measures were in place and if MBR's environmental management could accomplish 
closure requirements. Nonconformity with the contents of these tables or absence of 
sound procedures to cope with such evidence was considered a liability in the terms of 
mine closure. After assessment of each component, the findings were discussed with unit 
manager to confirm present and projected liabilities. The findings from the case study are 
presented in Chapter 7. This chapter begins with a review of Aguas Claras Mine in the 
context ofMBR and the surrounding area. 
CHAPTER 7 - AGUAS CLARAS MINE LIABILITY ASSESSMENT 
PROGRAMME 
AGUAS CLARAS MINE IDSTORY 
The Aguas Claras Mine in Minas Gerais State is owned by Minera9oes Brasileiras 
Reunidas (MBR) of the Companhia Auxiliar de Empresas de Minera9ao (CAEMI). MBR 
is Brazil's second largest producer and exporter of iron ore, with gross sales, in 1998, of 
approximately US$431.9 million and a profit of US$36.9 million. In its operations in the 
States of Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro, MBR provides approximately 2000 direct jobs 
(MBR, 1998). 
Mining operations in the Curral Mountain, where the Aguas Claras Mine is located, date 
ftom 1904 when an Englishman, George Chalmers, established an iron ore mine there. In 
1973, MBR commissioned the Aguas Claras Project, mining hematite ore with an average 
iron content of 68%. Since the beginning of its operation until the liability assessment in 
1999, Aguas Claras Mine produced about 259 million tons of iron ore with an average 
iron content of 68% and a stripping ration of 0.6 tit. The iron ore deposit is composed of 
high-grade hematite, in both friable and compact forms, and has yielded iron products 
worldwide recognized by their quality. Before decommissioning is completed, Aguas 
Claras is expected to produce a further 5.5 million tons of iron ore, 2.8 million tons in 
2000 and 2.7 million tons in 2001 respectively, amounting to a total of 265 million tons 
iron ore at the closure. 
Figure 5 shows the annual run-of-mine (ROM), the ore processing plant production and 
the waste rock extraction of Aguas Claras Mine since its start up in 1973 until the 
projected closure in 2001. The mine reached peaks of 15.7 million in 1980 and 14.5 
million tons in 1981 for ROM and for the plant respectively. After a decline in production 
in 1984, the mine increased its production until 1994, reaching a second peak of 13.5 
million tons for the plant. Since then, a steady decline in production to an expected 2.7 
million tons of product in 2001 reflects the closure process at the Aguas Claras Mine. 
= 0 -~ 
= ... 
= .9 -(,j = "O 
0 ... 
1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 
I- ROM - Waste - Plant I 
Figure 5 -Aguas Claras Mine Production Between 1973 and 2001. Source MBR. 
Location of MBR Operations 
MBR mining operations are located in an area known as Quadrilatero Ferrffero (Iron 
Quadrangle) in the central part of Minas Gerais State, South-East Brazil. This area of 
approximately 7,000 km2, centred on Latitude 2015' South, Longitude 4330' West, is 
one of the largest iron-ore producing regions in the world. The Iron Quadrangle is a 
metallogenic province, with reserves of gold, silver, iron ore, manganese and bauxite. 
Aguas Claras Mine is located in the municipality of Nova Lima in the South range of the 
Curral Mountain which borders Belo Horizonte city, the capital of Minas Gerais State. 
Because of its position, the mine is considered an urban operation - it is sited 10 km from 
the centre of Belo Horizonte. Figure 6 gives the general location of MBR operations in 
Minas Gerais, 590 km from Guaiba Port in Rio de Janeiro. Figure 7 details MBR 
operations in the Iron Quadrangle including the main communities and towns under its 
influence. Plate 1 is an aerial-view of the Aguas Claras Mine in which can be seen the 
proximity to Belo Horizonte City. 
IRON QUADRANGLE 
BELO HORIZONTE CITY 
"STEEL "RAILWAY 
Figure 6 - General Location ofMBR Operations in Brazil. 
BELO HORIZONTE CITY 
Jardim Canada 
. AGUAS CLARAS 
Aguas Claras Railway Terminal 
 NOVA LIMA 
.& Sao Sebastiao de 
Aguas Claras 
- TAMANDUA 
.& Morro do Chapeu 
~ CAPITAO DO MATO 
BR-356 
GRAPIDC ESCALE 
Railway Terminal 
RIO DE JANEIRO RIO DE JANEIRO  
.._. OUROPRETO 
ITABIRITO 
Towne , Community.& , Conveyor belt - ,'Mine 
Figure 7 - Detail of MBR Operations in the Iron Quadrangle. 
Plate 1 - Aguas Claras Mine aerial view showing Belo Horizonte City, the pit, waste 
dumps Grota 2 and 3, the PFF dike and part of the J ambreiro Forest. (Plate Courtesy 
Environmental Setting 
MBR operations in Minas Gerais State lie in the transition zone between the tropical 
climates of the low latitudes and the temperate climates of the middle latitudes in Brazil. 
The vegetation consists of "cerrado" (similar to savannah) and forest, with agricultural 
land and urban developments. The general geomorphology of the area ranges from rolling 
hills to steep mountains and a variation in elevation from 800 to 1,700 m. Soils in the area 
have generally poor agricultural potential with poor nutrient content and are susceptible to 
erosion when vegetation is removed as they lack cohesion. Summers are rainy and 
winters are dry with a wet season from October to March and a dry season between May 
and August. Average annual precipitation is approximately 1,880 mm. Temperatures 
range from an average low of 16C to an average high of 29C. The average annual 
temperature is around 22.5C. Winds vary from 1.5 to 2.5 m/sec. and the average relative 
humidity is about 73 .1 percent (Brandt, 1999). 
There are numerous ephemeral and perennial streams in the area and the surface water 
quality is generally good. Two streams from Aguas Claras Mine are the Aguas Claras and 
the Criminoso, which receive all the effluent from the mine operations. Underground 
water is present at the mining site with the ore body acting as a confined aquifer. 
Although almost exclusively limited to the ore body, there has been intense dewatering 
since 1981 to permit mine operations. 
Tne Aguas Claras region supports a wide variety of flora and fauna reflecting the 
temperate climate. The Jambreiro Forest represents a significant portion of the remaining 
Atlantic forest and is located in the area of the mining operations. It has been designated a 
reserve by MBR and occupies an area of about 912 hectares from the total 1,400 ha of 
Aguas Claras Mine. Studies conducted in the Jambreiro Forest have revealed a rich flora 
with more than 400 different plant species; a fauna of small animals including monkeys, 
tamandua, capybaras and more than 100 different species of birds (MBR, 1998). The 
MBR' s Environmental Education Centre, managed by a non-governmental organisation 
in agreement with MBR, is located within the Jambreiro Forest. The Centre develops 
activities with primary schools from Belo Horizonte and Nova Lima on issues related to 
environmental preservation and sustainable development. 
The- urban environment is a strong component of the Aguas Claras Mine ecosystem. The 
Mine is located in the Nova Lima District and adjacent to Belo Horizonte City (Brazilian 
third largest city), the capital of Minas Gerais State. Belo Horizonte metropolitan area, 
which includes Nova Lima, has a population of 3,812,675 inhabitants in 1997, which is 
22,8% of the population of the whole State (IBGE, 1999a). The socio-economic effects of 
MBR operations, particularly of the Aguas Claras Mine, are clearly apparent in Nova 
Lima (pop. 59,457 in 1997) where economic prosperity is heavily dependent on revenues 
from the mining industry. 
Geology of the Aguas Claras Mine 
The Aguas Claras Mine is located in the Curral Mountain in the North-west comer of the 
Iron Quadrangle. Curral Mountain is one of the most prominent topographical features of 
the region, with maximum elevation of about 1,400 m above sea level. According to 
Franca (1997), the iron ore deposit is made up of a tabular shaped lens of high-grade iron 
ore ( about 68% iron on average), mainly in the form of :friable hematite, with a length of 
1,650 m and an average thickness of 250 m. Some lenses of medium hard to hard highly 
jointed hematite occur in the main iron ore body, usually parallel to the foliation. The 
hard hematite lenses can reach a thickness of30 m, occurring more :frequently in the NW 
portion of the mine. The joints are often filled by limonite or manganese. Figure 8 shows 
the geological section of the Aguas Claras Mine. 
Dolomite Phillitc 
Belo Horizonte City Nova Lima Town .---. 
Fecho do Funil Formation 
Hematite 
Quartzite and Phillite Formation 
Sericitic Phill ite Quartzite 
Figure 8 - Aguas Claras Mine - Geological Section. Source MBR. 
Dolomitic Itabirite 
AGUAS CLARAS MINE OPERATIONS, COMPONENTS AND FACILITIES 
The MBR' s production goals and ore commercialisation are the starting point for the 
overall mining planning of each of the company's mine. Aguas Claras annual mining plan 
is based on the plan of exhaustion of the ore deposit and is, in tum, the basis for a 
monthly plan. This is designed to address short-term production goals. Both annually and 
monthly mining plans contain information relating to the following subjects: mine 
development, projected ore and waste rock production, quantity and quality of the 
expected products to be transported by railroad, slope stability, drainage projections and 
dewatering well production estimates, equipment productivity, waste rock and tailings 
disposal, mine dewatering and areas to be rehabilitated. 
Aguas Claras Mine is an open-pit mine operated by conventional drill-blast-load-haul 
methods. Development and operations take into consideration parameters such as slope 
stability and rock mechanical characteristics, vibration, noise and dewatering systems. 
Slope stability and rock mechanical characteristics are the principal determinants in the 
pit development configuration as well the final pit geometry. Geometric characteristics 
such as overall and inter-bench slope angle, berm width and bench height in the mine 
varies according to the type of rock being excavated. 
Ofe, waste rock and overburden have been removed from the open pits by excavation 
with electric-and diesel-powered shovels and loaders. Ore and waste rock have been 
transported out of the pit by 150 tonne-capacity haulage trucks. Waste rocks and 
overburden are placed in waste dumps facilities located near the pit. 
At the time of the assessment, contractors were responsible for ore extraction and 
transportation, while MBR retained the responsibility for general mining planning, for 
waste rock extraction and for disposition in dumps. This is part of the MBR strategy for 
decommissioning the Aguas Claras facilities, during which mining equipment is being 
moved to other MBR mines that are in the early stage of production. 
Ag-uas Claras ore processing consists of crushing, screening, washing and separating ore 
products, based on size and metallurgical characteristics. Tailings materials from 
processing plant at the mine are thickened to recover process water and then conveyed by 
pipeline to tailings storage facilities. 
Ore products are transported from the processing plant by overland conveyer systems to 
the Aguas Claras railway terminal and then loaded onto dedicated trains for transporting 
to the Guaiba Port. The iron products from Aguas Claras Mine are sinter feed fines (SFF), 
pellet feed fines (PFF) and lump ore (LO). These products are exported to various 
countries in Asia, Europe, the Middle East and the Americas. 
Aguas Clams Mine Pit 
At el6sure, the Aguas Claras pit will have the following dimensions: 1,200m long, 800m 
wide and 250m deep. The maximum difference in level from the top of Curra Mountain 
to the bottom of the pit is 500m. The underground water level was intersected in 1986. 
During the site assessment, mining operations were 250m below the original water table 
level. It is expected that, at completion, about 350 million tons of iron ore and about 170 
million tons of waste rock will have been extracted from the pit. Slope configurations 
(angle and height) and the factor of safety for slope (FS > 1.3) have been designed and 
periodically checked with an emphasis on slope stability. The objective has been to 
achieve lower levels of slope instability in order to avoid production breakout, personnel 
accidents and destruction of equipment. 
Table 20 gives the pit geometry at Aguas Claras Mine. Geometric parameters include the 
overall slope angle and individual slope angles as well as berm width and bench height 
for each different face of the pit. The south and east sides are still being mined, therefore, 
the bench height of about 13m indicates an operation bench. Figure 9 shows the fmal pit 
state divided into geomechanical sectors with details of the overall slope angles on each 
face of the pit. Plate 2 shows a general aerial view of Aguas Claras pit from the top of 
Curral Mountain to the southeast. 
Table 20 - Pit Geometry at Aguas Claras Mine 
Aguas Claras Mine's Face Geometric Parameters 
Overall Angle Individual Berm width Benches' 
Slope Angle (m) Height (m) 
North 37 43 7 36 (final) 
South above the slope 4go 66 6 13 
South below the slope 44 60 6 13 
East Itabirite Dolomite 63 g70 6 13 
Northwest below the 
37 43 7 26 (fmal) 
Patrimonio Peak 
0 S'l 
N North Wa ll N 
Figure 9 - Geomechanical Sectors of the Aguas Claras Pit 
Plate 2 - General Aerial View of the Aguas Claras Mine Pit from the Top of Curral 
Mountain. The Curral Mountain ridge, at the bottom, is the boundary of the Belo 
Horizonte and Nova Lima counties. At top right is Nova Lima town. (Plate courtesy 
MBR). 
Waste Dumps 
At Aguas Claras Mine there are six waste dumps identified as "Grota" (valley) -2 -1, 0, 
1, 2, and 3. Approximately 73 million m3 of waste were disposed since the beginning of 
the operation. The dumps have been constructed by disposing of waste in layers 20m high 
pending final slopes being flattened to 1 V: 2H. The dumps have internal drainage systems 
constructed of hard rock blocks, while surface drainage consists of peripheral channels 
along the berms. Most of these dumps have a sedimentation pond upstream to receive the 
internal and external drainage. All waste dumps have instruments to monitor pore 
pressure and deformation. 
Tailings Dams 
Apart from iron, tailings from the Aguas Claras plant are composed of silica and alumina 
clay minerals in an average percentage of solids in slurry of 40% and average particle size 
of 0.01mm. An anionic flocculent (polyacrylamide) used in the thickening process also is 
present in the tailings. 
Aguas Claras Mine has two tailings dams. Tailings dam 5 is already filled, while the 
Grota 3 PFF dam still in operation. Tailings dam 5 has a storage capacity of about 
1 l,300,000m3, with the Grota 3 PFF dam of the order of 4,200,000m3 
Tailings dam 5 is located in the valley of the Aguas Claras creek. It consists of a 92m 
high and 400m axis length earth fill wall equipped with a spillway constructed in 
reinforced concrete with a drainage basin of 14,000,000m2 The main characteristic of the 
tailings dam 5 is the arrangement of cross dikes supported on settled tails. These dikes are 
equipped with a rock lined overflow spillway to allow supernatant water to pass to the 
lower (downstream) segment of the pond while retaining the settled tail in the upper 
segment. Two dikes Sm high were constructed to provide for additional tailings storage 
and, at the same time, to preclude an increase in the level of the settled tails at the location 
of the reclaim pumps. Reclaimed water from the pond is pumped for reuse in the plant. 
Plate 3 gives a general view of tailings dam 5. The cross-pond dikes that divide the pond 
into two sectors are shown at the centre of pond in Plate 3. 
The possibility of strain-induced liquefaction of the tails providing foundation support for 
the dikes and the hazard associated with a potential dike failure limited the construction 
of a third dike. This imposed a need for another tailing disposal area. An alternative 
location was the PFF (Pellet Fine Feed) deposit, located above the upper limit of the 
waste dump "Grota" 3. 
Plate 3 - Aerial View of Aguas Claras Tailings Dam 5. Cross-pond dikes are in the centre 
of the Plate. They divide the pond into two segments, the upper one for tails storage and 
the lower one specially for reclaiming water. (Plate courtesy l\1BR). 
The PFF dike, consisting of "canga" fill, was constructed in the beginning of the Aguas 
Claras Mine operation to provide temporary confinement for PFF ore. However, in 
February 1993, l\1BR implemented changes in this dike for tailings storage which 
included placing low permeability PFF ore on the outside of the dike and over its crest in 
order to increase the storage capacity of the PFF pond and installing a series of finger 
drains to provide drainage for the seepage water. Plate 4 shows an aerial view of the PFF 
dike as well as its position relative to the waste dump Grota 3. 
Plate 4 - Aerial View of the PFF Pond. Tailings are pumped from the processing plant to 
The PFF pond. (Plate courtesy 11BR). 
Ore Processing Plant 
The Aguas Claras iron ore processing plant is an old plant with an installed capacity, on a 
dry-weight basis, of 11 million tons of product per year. The main equipment is involved 
in crushing, screening, washing and filtering of ore products based on size and the 
metallurgical characteristics of the ore. Figure 10 shows the general mining and ore 
processing flowsheet at Aguas Claras. 
Process 
Water 
"ii'-' I , 
... -
In Pit Crushing 
System 
Tailings Dam 
Electric Drill 
Figure 10 - Aguas Claras Mining and Ore Processing General Flowsheet. 
Buildings 
Waste Dump 
Secondary Crusher 
Bucket Wheel 
Reclaimer 
The main buildings at the Aguas Claras Mine house the central offices for MBR. These 
include support personnel for development, human resources and finance, which serve all 
mines of MBR. In addition, there are health care facilities, a restaurant, changing rooms, 
laboratories, and truck scales, repair shops for heavy equipment and light vehicles, truck 
washeries, fuelling stations and lubricant bays occupying an area of about 14,000m2 
Plate 5 gives a general view of the operational buildings and ore processing plant. All will 
be demolished at the end of mine operations. 
Plate 5 - Aerial View of the Aguas Claras Main Facilities. Ore processing plant, heavy 
equipment garage, restaurant and operational offices can be clearly seen. These facilities 
will be demolished after the end of the operations and the area rehabilitated. (Plate 
Courtesy MBR). 
The proximity of the Aguas Claras Mine with Belo Horizonte makes entire area very 
attractive for urban development. In a previous study about possible post-mining use, the 
creation of an estate was proposed by MBR. This estate would occupy the flat areas of the 
mine as those shown in Plate 5. The pit, given topographical and hydrogelogical 
conditions, will be turned into a lake. This will be the main feature of the mine site. The 
state proposal, however, has receiving few priorities by the company since others 
alternatives uses for the site are being discussed. The development of a convention centre 
with hotels has received special attention since they imply in maintaining an economic 
activity for the area with minimal impact on the environment. 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
MBR operations are conducted in accordance with corporate policy as well as with 
regulations issued by the federal and state authorities. The environmental policy 
incorporates local, state and national laws and regulations, recognized international 
guidelines and accepted best management practices throughout the mining industry. Table 
21 summarises MBR's environmental policy. As such, MBR accepts responsibility for 
sound environmental management from exploration to closure of its mining projects. 
Table 21 - MBR's Environmental Policy 
 Accept environmental management as one of the main priorities of the company 
being an important factor in sustainable development. 
 Evaluate environmental impacts before initiating a new activity or project and 
during closure of any plant or work site. 
 Establish and maintain action plans for significant environmental risk situations. 
 Promote internal and external discussion of environmental issues activities 
related to MBR' s activities. 
 Minimise adverse environmental impacts in all projects and operations by the 
use of renewable energy, materials and resources. 
 Prepare, train and motivate MBR' s employees to conduct tasks in an 
environmentally responsible manner. 
 Adopt legal guidelines and regulations regarding environmental protection in all 
aspects of operation and demand the same from contractors and suppliers. 
 Participate in public and industry initiatives that support or develop programmes 
and policies of environmental awareness and education. 
 Support research that contributes environmental protection technologies. 
 Monitor the performance of environmental protection actions and ensure that the 
Executive is well informed on the matter. 
(Source, MBR, 1998) 
~IBR's Environmental Management System (EMS) is based on established company 
policy, Brazilian environmental regulations and international protocols. To follow its 
environmental policy, MBR has formed a management team that is accountable to the 
Director of Development Currently, the team has 26 employees on two supervisory 
boards - the Rural Areas Board and the Rehabilitation Board. Simultaneously, the 
environmental management team coordinates the activities of Environmental Follow-up 
Groups (Portuguese Acronym GAMA). The environmental management team is 
committed to coordinating and implementing environmental projects as well as 
facilitating increased environmental awareness at each of the MBR operations. Its 
functions include: 
 Lieensing new projects; 
> Coordinating with governmental agencies, non-governmental organisations 
(t,;fGOs), and neighbouring communities; 
)" Creating environmental education programmes; 
> Performing internal audits; 
)" Developing and enforcing the corporate environmental policy; 
> Operating the EMS. 
Rural Areas Board is in charge of a supervision of the rural properties. The board is 
overseen by a supervisor of rural properties (a forestry engineer), a property inspector and 
ten field personnel. This board is in charge of the following activities: 
 Obtaining deforestation permits for current mining operations; 
)" Providing security for mine operations; 
> Preventing forest fires; 
> Establishing private national preservation areas (Portuguese acronym RPPNs); 
};:- Conducting internal environmental auditing. 
Toe Environmental Rehabilitation board is overseen by a supervisor for environmental 
rehabilitation (an agronomy engineer), an agricultural technician, a chemical technician, 
an environmental sanitation technician and seven field assistants. Their responsibilities 
include: 
)- Monitoring water, air and noise parameters; 
> Implementing revegetation; 
> Conducting internal environmental audits. 
The Environmental Follow-up Groups (GAMA) are responsible for monitoring the 
performance of each operational unit's environmental programmes. GAMAs maintain 
environmental compliance through regular inspections, internal auditing and suggestions 
for improving existing environmental programmes. Each GAMA group includes 
representatives from different departments, who are chosen annually by the 
superintendent of the operation. The basic activities of GAMA include: 
> Bi-monthly monitoring of existing environmental programmes; 
 Regular facilities inspections; 
)> Proposing corrective and preventive measures; 
;... Maintaining compliance with regards to environmental and health and safety 
issues; 
}.- Promoting environmental awareness programmes in order to educate personnel on 
the need for environmental protection. 
The environmental management team also runs an annual rainy season action plan, which 
consists of a site inspection to identify critical areas and those at risk when threatened by 
continued rainwater during the rainy season. Areas are classified in terms of priority, 
according to the possible magnitude of the impact if no measures have been taken prior to 
the rainy season. 
Rehabilitation Programme 
MBR performs progressive rehabilitation at all of its mine operations with the objective 
of reducing erosion, physically stabilising areas of disturbance, improving the aesthetic 
appeal of the impacted areas and reducing closure liabilities. At Aguas Claras Mine 
rehabilitation activities include, apart from the decision of the final use of the site, the 
selection of remediation measures and further a plan of rehabilitation. The measures 
commonly adopted are: 
)> Revegetation by seeding and planting on pit slopes above the proposed lake level. 
 Flattening, grading, seeding and planting on all slopes of waste rock dumps. 
> Monitoring revegetation success on pit slopes, waste rock dumps and tailings 
dams. 
)- Maintenance of uncovered diversion berms to allow vehicular access during 
revegetation monitoring programme. 
> Implementation and maintenance of drainage systems on the upper berms and 
slopes of the pit. 
Monitoring 
A eomprehensive monitoring programme has been adopted by MBR at Aguas Claras 
Mine. The programme is designed to provide information for the periodic review and any 
necessary alteration to the management plan to ensure environmental protection. The 
main objectives are to assess the performance of the actions taken, as well as to 
demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements. It includes monitoring the stability 
of slopes, the quality of the air and of surface and groundwater, as well as noise levels, 
vibration control and rehabilitation success. 
Ptisms have been installed on the walls of the pit area, along the railway loop, on the 
waste dumps and the tailings dams to record position and detect ground movement. These 
are monitored monthly through a total station system to provide information on the 
stability of the slopes. High-volume monitors installed at several points around the 
industrial and pit areas are used to check air quality on a monthly basis. The monitoring 
points for water quality are also checked monthly. Two main points for water quality 
monitoring are located on the Aguas Claras stream, downstream of Tailings Dam 5, and 
on the Criminoso stream downstream of Dam 4. Surface water samples are analysed for 
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), oils and greases, 
Total Suspended Solids (TSS), electrical conductivity, ambient temperature, soluble iron, 
sediment solids, dissolved oxygen, soluble manganese, water temperature, pH, turbidity, 
t:olour and odour. Noise and vibration are monitored as necessary, for example, vibration 
is always measured when blasting is carried out near Corral Mountain. 
During the time of the site visit, in June 1999, a monitoring programme was being 
conducted to evaluate the overall revegetation success, as rehabilitated areas may require 
additional maintenance following the first growing season. This monitoring activity is 
conducted annually before the raining season starts and includes reseeding areas were 
initial vegetation establishment has been poor, the maintenance of fences and weed and 
fire control. 
DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS OF FINDINGS 
On site visit, interviews and a review of reports showed that geotechnical problems are 
the main concern during mining operations, as well as at mine closure. In addition, 
rehabilitation difficulties and security problems in deterring trespassers are present in 
most of the .Aguas Claras Mine components. 
The Mine Pit 
The .Aguas Claras Mine pit is the main feature of the area. At closure, the pit will be 
1,200m long, 800m wide and 250m deep. The maximum difference in level from the top 
of Curral Mountain to the bottom of the pit will be approximately 500m. Flooding is the 
closure option for the pit. A lake will be created by stopping the dewatering system, 
directing surface drainage to the pit or alternatively, pumping external water to accelerate 
the pit filling process. The later is a very expensive measure. The lake will have a depth 
of approximately 239m from an altitude of 866m to 1105m above sea level. Potential 
liabilities associate with the pit include slope instability in the Patrimonio Peak (northwest 
sector) and in the southeast sector, the quality of the water in the lake and the security of 
the area in deterring trespassers. The close proximity of houses from the northwest sector 
of the pit- a mere 500m - heightens the problem. A risk assessment of waves that can be 
generated because slope failure into the pit lake is recommended. 
The principal concern of the .Aguas Claras Mine geotechnical group with respect to the pit 
slopes is related to the south sector and, especially, to the northwest wall at the 
Patrimonio Peak where a major slope failure occurred in 1992. This extended over a slope 
height of approximately 240m, from the crest (1340m elevation) to the operational toe 
(11 OOm elevation) - a total displacement of about 2 millions tons of ore. The dislocated 
material ran 500m to the opposite wall, covering the pit floor with debris, burying the in-
pit crusher and damaging two trucks. The scars remain and, after geotechnical studies and 
consultancy reports, MBR have resolved to maintain the failure form as a final wall. The 
construction of berms and benches along the failure wall is technically feasible, but is 
prohibited because it requires earthworks in a conservation area. Technical solutions to 
improve the aesthetics of the wall are recommended. These include revegetation by 
hydroseeding and placing steel netting to contain rock displacements. 
The south wall of the pit also demands special care. This sector is the mine hanging wall 
and comprises a sequence from bottom to top of dolomitic and sericitic phyllites and 
quartzite. These rocks vary in consistency from very weak to strong, classes RO to R4 
according to the International Society for Rock Mechanics classification (Hoek and Bray, 
1977). The quartzite is an aquifer of importance to slope stability. Toppling failures were 
observed in that sector during site inspection indicating potential instability during lake 
filling, and observation which accords with the studies of Franca (1998b). Efforts should 
be made to estimate the need for continued pumping of the quartzite, as well as 
implementing a monitoring system for these slopes during lake filling. 
Rehabilitation activities in the pit involve mainly revegetation and improving surface 
drainage on the steep slopes. The revegetation process presents several difficulties due to 
the poor quality of the soil, steep slopes, erosion potential and the fact that the use of 
equipment is not generally feasible. Plate 6 shows how steep slopes have been 
successfully revegetated on the north wall of the pit. Several methods for revegetation 
were applied including hand seeding or hydro-seeding and fixing the grass turfs by using 
stakes or metallic nets. The need to use metallic nets was dictated simply by the difficult, 
steep slope characteristics. In addition, deep rooting species have been introduced to 
improve slope stability. 
Plate 6 - Steep Slopes Revegetation Process on the North Wall of the Aguas Claras Pit. 
An illustration of the lake to be created in the void and its position in relation to the 
Curral Mountain is shown in Plate 7. It is the mineralogical characteristics of the 
surrounding rocks of the pit walls that will influence the quality of the water in the lake. 
The most frequently used technique for lake reclamation consists of adding iron 
compounds, mainly hydroxides to precipitate and retain phosphorus in the sediments. The 
high iron content at Aguas Claras Mine greatly assists this process. According to the 
report by Sperling (1995), however, deep lakes are rare in Brazil and very little is known 
about the water quality at such depths in tropical latitudes. The most obvious liability is 
the possibility of poor or even minimal circulation within the water mass of the lake. It is 
essential to monitor this and a system should be established for doing so. If after lake 
formation, the monitoring reveals inadequate circulation, a mechanism for the removal of 
deep water will have to be constructed (i.e. a pipeline). The implications of this are wide 
and the potential long-term liability an unknown quantity. Consequently, a closure plan 
for the Aguas Claras Mine must address this issue by establishing a long-term monitoring 
and maintenance programme. 
The risk of accidents in the pit area is a potential liability. The north and northwest faces 
of the pit are easily accessible through Mangabeiras Municipal Park at Belo Horizonte 
and by many trails from the city. The maximum altitude from the top of the Patrimonio 
Peak to the bottom of the pit is 500m and the benches in these faces are 32m high. The 
risk of people falling in these areas is high. Therefore, a potential liability exists, 
especially considering the easy access to the locale and its attractiveness for sports such 
as mountain biking and walking. Consequently, fences and signposts must be erected to 
restrict access to the pit and an education campaign warning of the risks involved in 
entering the area should be mounted. 
Belo Horizonte City / 
Plate 7 - Planned Final Configuration of the Pit's Lake. The easy access to the lake 
through Mangabeiras Park, the altitude and the steep slopes make the locale a potential 
risk for people. (Plate Courtesy MBR). 
Plate 8 - Pit Lake Partially filled - Picture taken in March 2002. (Plate Courtesy MBR). 
Waste Dumps 
Each of the six waste dumps of the Aguas Claras Mine was inspected to assess potential 
liabilities and the measures needed to achieve closure objectives. At the time of the site 
visit for the liability assessment, the waste dumps Grotas -1, 0 and 3 had already been 
constructed and satisfactorily rehabilitated. Most of the Aguas Claras wastes dumps have 
been created as platforms on the sloped terrain and no signs of physical instability were 
observed. Assessment of the current situation of each dump has also taken into 
considerations the monitoring records. Waste rock from Aguas Claras Mine consists 
mainly of quartzite, basic intrusive rocks, phyllites and dolomitic phyllites, so they do not 
produce acid drainage nor do they have high metal leachability potential. 
Rehabilitation measures in the waste dumps include flattening, grading, seeding and 
planting on all fmal slopes followed by implementation and maintenance of surface 
drainage systems on the upper berms and slopes. The state the surface of these dumps 
varies from well-vegetated slopes to just-revegetated according to the age of the dump. 
Plates 9 and 10 show the rehabilitation process for the waste dumps. Plate 9, taken during 
the site visit in June 1999, shows the top of Grota-1 dump under construction and Plate 
10, sent six months later by MBR, shows waste dump construction complete and the 
development of the initial vegetation cover after. 
Two dams were constructed to precipitate solids from the Grotas drainage, one for Grota 
-2; the second for Grota - 3 also receives drainage from the PFF dike. Drainage from the 
other waste dumps is directed to Tailings Dam 5. These two sedimentation ponds are 
expected to remain as lakes when the mine ceases operations. Potential liabilities for these 
facilities are the degradation of water quality and dam structures, as well as security of the 
site. Attention should be paid to dam #8B regarding overtopping risk. Therefore, its 
spillway will have to be modified. 
The consequence of mine closure for these components is that they will be subject to 
degradation by human activities. Indeed, Plate 11, taken during site inspection, shows that 
this degradation has already started. Bottles and other rubbish in the lake illustrate the 
type of problem that already has been encountered. People from nearby communities 
frequently use the ponds for camping, swimming and fishing activities. These problems 
have been minimised by the intense security that has occurred on the site during the time 
that the mine has been in operation. Security measures, therefore, should be included in 
the closure plan to avoid such liabilities. 
Plate 9 -Top of the Waste Dump, Grota-1, under Construction at the Rim of the Pit. 
Plate 10 - View of the Waste Dump, Grota -1, Six Months after the Site Visit. (Plate 
Courtesy MBR). 
Plate 11 - Bottles and Other Rubbish Thrown into the Lake at the Sedimentation Pond. 
Tailings Dams 
The main concern of the Aguas Claras Mine staff was the physical stability of these 
structures. To collect evidence on this and other issues a visual inspection of all the dams, 
underdrains, ditches and spillways was made, technical reports were consulted and 
conceptual and construction details of the tailings dams were examined. There was no 
sign of gully erosion at the dam or at the water discharge point. There was no evidence of 
wind erosion, seepage stains or piping, bulging of slopes, sloughing of the crest on either 
dams or sediment ponds, vegetation growth or debris accumulating and blocking in the 
ditches and spillways - nothing untoward was detected. The concrete structure of the 
Tailings Dam 5 spillway, however, needed to be repaired in a few parts to avoid long-
term liability. These field observations confirmed the information gathered during 
interviews with MBR staff that the structures were in a stable condition. 
Jambreiro Forest borders Tailings Dam 5. Therefore, special attention need to be given to 
precautions against forest fires. Especially being close to an inhabited area, these must be 
expected to occur quite frequently. Fires do not, in themselves, pose a significant threat to 
the stability of the Dam 5. The loss of vegetation cover, however, may lead to accelerate 
erosion by wind and water, or the development of oxygen or water pathways along root 
holes through soil covers. Plate 12 gives a general view of Tailings Dam 5, the red 
rectangle showing a forest area that was affected by fire a few days before the site visit 
made in June 1999. Such fires are relatively frequent in the area because of the 
unauthorised access of people for walking, camping, fishing and hunting. 
Plate 12 - General View of the Tailings Dam 5. The area inside the red rectangle shows 
the after effects of the fire that occurred in June 1999. 
According to information gathered from staff interview, the most appropriate final 
scenario to Tailings Dam 5, would be a lake downstream of the cross-pond dikes 
followed by a revegetated beach upstream of the dikes. The necessary revegetation 
process does not appear to be a difficult task, given MBR rehabilitation's experience and 
the fact that Jambreiro forest surrounds the area, which facilitates the invasion of native 
plants. A closure plan for the Tailings Dam 5 should address the establishment of 
appropriate drainage on the site. The plan should ensure that all the water from the 
drainage basin flows along the rock lined overflow spillway from the dikes. This would 
avoid erosion of the settlement tailings and guarantee the success of the revegetation. 
The long-term disruptive nature of the continuous actions of erosion, physical weathering 
and biotic activity on the dams is a potential risk (Robertson, 1989). These forces, in 
combination, may frustrate the company's attempts to achieve long-term stability of the 
tailings dam. Without maintenance and care, physical failures are inevitable. 
The PFF pond will be completely drained at the end of the operation of the ore processing 
plant. This will considerably reduce the forces acting against the stability of the dike. The 
geotechnical characteristics of the tailings, such as size distribution (96% to 98% lower 
than 0.075mm), density in situ (2.9tlm3) and permeability (1.4 x 104 cm/sec) would act 
favourably to settle the sediments in the drained pond. As a security measure, however, 
given the risk of development of water pore pressure, the erection of any kind of building 
should be avoided in the area to minimise future liabilities. 
Long-term Stability Concerns for Waste Dumps and Tailings Dams 
Current design and construction technology are able to achieve stable structures over 
periods of at least 100 to 200 years. Such waste dumps and tailings dam structures, 
however, cannot be expected to last for all time. Therefore, their "failure" or degradation 
is not a priori unacceptable. The knowledge of how these degrade, over what time and 
the consequential rate of release of wastes, however, can help to extend their stability to 
an appropriate period extending to between 1 OOO and 2000 years into the future 
(Robertson and Clifton, 1987; Robertson, 1989). Therefore, the objectives for waste 
dumps and tailings dams closure planning must include considerations not only of 
environmental protection, aesthetics and post-mining use, but also of the action of 
disruptive forces. 
These structures are subject to two classes of disruptive forces - short duration extreme 
events such as flood, fires and earthquakes, which apply forces to the structure in excess 
of values for which they were originally designed and the slow, but perpetual, action 
forces which bring about deterioration, such as water and wind erosion, intrusion by 
roots, animals and man. 
Water erosion is probably the single most severe cause of mine waste instability. It can 
take the form of flood erosion of the diversion works, or sheet and gully erosion of the 
impoundment surface and embankment slopes. A substantial portion of total erosion 
occurs during extreme precipitation and floods events. At the Aguas Claras Mine, an 
examination of the projects of Tailings Dam 5, PFF Dike and sedimentation ponds 
demonstrated that they have been designed and constructed to accommodate the Probable 
Maximum Flood (PMF). The same was verified for their respective diversion structures 
e;onstructed with ample width and size to allow for partial blockage or sedimentation. 
Diversion works are extremely vulnerable to long-term instability, because flood flows 
generally exceed the values currently in common use for design. Therefore, is 
recommended that closure diversion works are designed to accommodate the PMF. 
Sedimentation accumulation in diversion structures is also anticipated at the Aguas Claras 
Mine. Thus, closure plan for these facilities must include a long-term care and 
maintenance programme. 
The Iron Quadrangle region is one of the highest in Brazil and, because of an average 
annual precipitation of approximately 1,880mm, is highly subject to intermittent erosive 
forces. The slow but perpetual water erosion process, therefore, should be a major long-
term concern for both waste dumps and tailings impoundments at the Aguas Claras Mine. 
Tailings and bare soil would result in excessive sheet and rill erosion, unless the soil 
QOntains a high percentage of coarse gravel. Discontinuous cover or periodic cover loss 
will result in unacceptable erosion rates. Therefore, good grass cover can do much to 
control this type of erosion, which will become insignificant with continuous forest cover. 
Rock waste is also effective in controlling erosion of these areas. Gully erosion is a major 
concern for the long-term stability of tailings dams. Current technology is inadequate to 
demonstrate the stabilising effect of forest cover. Riprap is the only proven demonstrable 
control measure for long-term gully erosion prevention. Dams constructed from coarse 
rock waste or with a layer of heavy riprap would be stable against long-term gully erosion 
(Caldwell and Robertson, 1986; Robertson and Clifton, 1987; Robertson and Skermer, 
19-88; Robertson, 1989). 
Whilst it is desirable to avoid the need for long-term care and maintenance after closure, 
it is questionable whether such an objective is technically or economically feasible. 
current understanding of long-term effects on stability is limited, as is the ability to 
design and construct for long-term resistance to both extreme events and perpetual 
effects. In the absence of maintenance, the risk of failure increases with time. In 
geological time, "failure" is a certainty. With maintenance, the resistance of a dam to 
failure can be maintained at a constant level. A more appropriate objective, therefore, is to 
achieve a condition at closure, for which the risk of failure and required level of 
maintenance is at an acceptably low level. 
A structural and hydraulic risks assessment should be considered. For hydraulic risks it 
should be considered overtopping, which can occur in the event of insufficient spillway 
capacity for the maximum probable flood. Two possibilities should be analysed. One is if 
the dam is going to be preserved with its water body under frequent monitoring. The other 
is if the dam is going to be decommissioned with no further control. Structural risks 
regards to the integrity of the dam. A methodology of analysis adopted by the USBR 
should be considered to assess these risks, which is based upon the performance of the 
dam, attested by monitoring results and field inspections. 
The Aguas Claras Ore Processing Plant 
The processing plant is old and, after transfer of the equipment to other MBR units or sale 
for recycling scrap, therefore, the entire structure will be demolished. There is no risk of 
contamination of the site, because the ore processing technology used does not employs 
hazardous chemicals. A closure plan for the plant should include, after demolishment of 
the structures, removing or burring of foundations and the site regrading to avoid long-
term liabilities on the site. Plate 13 is a view of the ore processing plant. 
Plate 13 - View of the Aguas Claras Ore Processing Plant. (Plate Courtesy MBR). 
Infrastructure of the Aguas Claras Mine 
All accesses and roads, regardless of its use, were inspected. In general, the roads were 
built without specific designs; excepting the mine haul roads and main accesses. Their 
conditions are usually excellent, with minor and localized problems, in most of the cases 
with respect to poor drainage maintenance. 
One of the main roads within the mine, named "Transgotonica", links the MBR central 
office to a subsidiary office near the operational site. Several cracks were observed in this 
structure during site inspection of the surface and downstream slope. These cracks are 
present at a point where the road was constructed over waste rock dumped during the 
commissioning of the mine and are a result of superficial movement from waste layer 
bedding. According to the MBR geotechnical team, these cracks do not require special 
attention regarding stability of the waste dump. Although the downstream slope is 
covered with rocks, erosion is evident in this area and its long-term effects can create 
unstable conditions. Measures to avoid this long-term risk and the aesthetic appeal of the 
area (Plate 14) must include the closure of the road, its regrading and revegetation. 
"Transgrot6nica" 
downstream road slope Grota-1 . 
Plate 14 - View of the Downstream Slope of the Transgot6nica Road where Cracks were 
Observed. 
There are drainage elements all over the area, ranging from water diversion structures 
along roads to peripheral channels on dam and dumps abutments. The latter were usually 
built with boulders, taking advantage of both the size of mine equipment and quality of 
the rock. These channels are over dimensioned and integrated to the surrounding 
environment that will pose no problems for closure and post-closure periods. MBR has a 
good programme to evaluate the drainage systems. The area is divided into eight 
hydrological basins and the drainage channels recalculated periodically considering long-
term performance. 
Most of the natural slopes at the vicinities of the mine are either intact or with minor 
interventions. The only exception is the slope besides the railroad loop, which has 
experienced two failures. The first, in 1972, occurred during excavation of the railway 
bed. Since then, the area is creeping, without significant displacement. In 1992 another 
failure occurred, involving a portion at the west side of the first failure zone. The area is 
partially rehabilitated, as can be seen from Plate 15, but it will reqmre further 
improvement to reach the equilibrium required for the future use. 
Evidence of downward movement ( creeping) of the upper slope, however, was present 
during the site inspection in June 1999 when several cracks were observed all long the 
cemented ditches in the area. Monitoring of slope movement has been in place, since just 
after the accident in January 1992, with frequent site inspections during the rainy season. 
At closure, the railway terminal will be dismantled, but due regard should be paid to the 
unstable slope. Although the moving slope is not considered by MBR a potential risk to 
public security, a passive care plan should be adopted and construction avoided in the 
area. 
Plate 15 - View of Loading Loop of the Aguas Claras Railway Terminal. The 
development of the railway created instability on the cut slope near the main entrance to 
the Mine. 
The MBR's Environmental Management System 
A competently prepared environmental management system (EMS) is a useful tool, which 
may assist mine management to meet both current and future environmental requirements 
and challenges. An EMS should provide a structured method offering management an 
improved view and control of the organisation's environmental performance to be applied 
from planning and exploration through to mine closure. The review of the EMS adopted 
by MBR was conducted to assess the ability of the system to support the company in 
achieving the closure objectives for the Aguas Claras Mine. 
Findings indicate that the environmental management team has a good knowledge of the 
environmental performance indicators used to measure progress towards achieving targets 
and the objectives of the rehabilitation. Unfortunately, no manual or tabulated lists with 
targets, objectives and regulations exist nor were environmental performance indicators in 
agreement with involved stakeholders. In the absence of these MBR would find it 
difficult to respond promptly to any demands placed upon it by the regulatory authorities 
and to reassure stakeholders about its ability to manage mine closure effectively. 
Measures adopted by MBR to close the Aguas Claras Mine started in the late 1980s with 
the Aguas Claras Village project - a joint proposal developed by MBR and Design 
Workshop, Inc. from Denver, Colorado, USA. The main idea was to create an urban 
settlement, as shown in Figure 11, so that minimal disturbance and maximum integration 
with the surrounding environment could be achieved. Although it could be adopted for 
the post-mining use the site, this project has not been proceeded with, as yet. The 
possibility that it could be developed, however, remains. Other alternatives, such as a 
convention centre, were still being studied at the time of the site assessment in 1999. An 
interview with MBR's Director of Development revealed that company strategy has been 
to overcome the concept of "designing for closure" by developing post-mining 
$Ustainab le use, rather than just a closure p Ian for the Aguas Claras Mine. 
AS CL~S VILLAGJ 
Rll1STIC CON$EPTION 
Figure 11 - Layout of Aguas Claras Village. (Figure Courtesy MBR). 
Two other measures that relate to the closure process have been taken. These were an 
analysis of the possible lake water quality conducted in 1995 and a simulation of the 
effects of the lake on pit slope stability. Individual members of the management team 
from MBR, however, were responsible for the decisions to adopt these measures, as a 
group to coordinate the closure process did not exist at the time of the site visit. 
Closure of a mine is a complex procedure involving and drawing upon a variety of 
different disciplines. Therefore, to ensure a successful closure of the Aguas Claras Mine, 
MBR should establish a closure team to focus on all demands of the closure process as 
well as to manage other projects such as the custodial transfer of the site. The Aguas 
Claras Mine Environmental Follow-up Group already has some experience in this field 
and their knowledge will serve as a guide in establishing a closure team for the mine. 
SUMARY OF POTENTIAL CLOSURE ISSUES AND LIABILITIES AT AGUAS 
CLARASMINE 
The closure issues and liabilities relating to the Aguas Claras Mine components are 
summarised in Table 22. It should be noted that the danger of slope failure appears to be 
common to each component. Measures to be implemented during closure in order to 
avoid physical instability and hazard to public health and safety for each mine component 
are suggested in Table 23. 
T~ble 22 - Summary of Main Liabilities at Aguas Claras Mine 
Mine Components and 
Open pit 
Patrimonio Peak 
Waste rock dumps 
Sedimentation ponds 
Tailings dam # 5 facilities 
PFF dike 
Liabilities 
Slope failure in the Northeast and South wall mainly 
during lake filling, long-term quality of water, 
security, wave effect in the in-pit lake. 
Slope failure, rock fall. 
Slope failure, long-term water erosion, and drainage 
systems failure. 
Over topping of structures, long-term water erosion 
on the dam slopes, drainage systems failure, and 
security. 
Long-term water erosion, over topping of structures, 
failure of spillway and diversion works, gully erosion 
on cross-pond dikes, security of the site. 
Slope failure, water erosion. 
Infrastructure (roads, Long-term water erosion on bare areas and roads, 
railway terminal, power lines) slope failure. 
EMS Absence of manuals or tabulated lists with targets, 
objectives and regulations; absence of environmental 
performance indicators in agreement with involved 
stakeholders. 
Table 23 - Closure Measures to Achieve Physical Stability and Public Security 
Mine Components 
Open pit and 
Patrimonio Peak 
Waste rock dumps 
S~dimentation 
ponds 
Tailings dam # 5 
facilities 
PFF dike 
Infrastructure 
(roads, load out loop, 
power lines) 
Physical Stability 
Prevent deep-seated failure 
particularly during lake filling. 
Revegetate on slopes. Install steel 
net to avoid rock displacement on 
Patrimonio slope.* 
Provide adequate surface water 
drainage.* 
Doze crest or construct toe berm 
to flatten overall slope.* 
Increase freeboard to prevent 
erosion by overtopping. 
Ditch, berm or fences to prevent 
~rosion by motorized vehicles. 
Increase freeboard and/or upgrade 
spillway to prevent erosion by 
overtopping. 
Ditch, berm or fences to prevent 
erosion by motorized vehicles. 
Re-concrete the spillway for long-
term stability. 
Establish a long-term monitoring 
and maintenance programme. 
Drain and contour the entire area. 
Remove culverts, barricades, 
approaches and stabilize. 
Rip compacted surfaces and 
establish vegetation. 
Restore drainage patterns. 
Remove unused power lines and 
transformers.* 
Buildings Decontaminate where necessary, 
disassemble and remove all 
equipment and buildings.* 
Backfill excavations. 
Remove buried tanks. 
Restore natural drainage. 
Public Security 
Provide emergency access to lake. 
Restrict access with fencing. 
Signpost. 
Restrict access to pond with ditch, 
berm or fence. 
Signpost. 
Restrict access to lake, slopes and 
spillway with ditch, berm or 
fence. 
Signpost. 
Follow specifications for 
maintenance and prevent 
inadvertent use. 
Discharge and lock all non-
essential power lines.* 
* Measures already implemented during site inspection in 1999. 
The most important component in terms of liability and custodial transfer is the pit and 
lake that will be created. As reported in Franca (1998b), the lake will have a positive 
impact on pit slopes. However, during pit filling, special attention should be given to 
ensure their physical stability. The situation at Patrimonio Peak is of great importance and 
is a potential long-term liability, since pit slopes will require monitoring and maintenance 
during lake formation. Special attention should be paid to the northwest sector - slope 
failures on Patrimonio Peak will undermine public confidence. Therefore, the stability of 
the pit and Patrimonio slopes requires that a closure plan for the mine includes an active 
care and maintenance programme especially, during pit filling. 
The time taken for the pit to fill is critical when considering implications for the stability 
of slopes. Preliminary studies by MBR suggest twenty years for complete formation of 
the lake. A more precise time scale should be determined and means to accelerate the 
filling of the pit should be better investigated. 
The long-term stability of Tailings Dam 5, with its cross-pond dikes and spillway, should 
be carefully considered. This should be based upon estimates of likely outcomes, taking 
into account the factors involved as well as past experience elsewhere in the world. For 
these structures, a good post-closure maintenance and monitoring plan should be designed 
with an emphasis on the future use of the area. The plan should not omit or underestimate 
the vulnerability of the area to erosion processes and should address the frequency of 
inspections and the necessary maintenance of the spillway, ditches and diversion works. 
There is no such thing as a ''walk-away" solution to such situations. There is, in fact, an 
ongoing permanent liability associated with them. The same programme should be 
applied to the PFF Dike, drainage systems of the waste dump and the sedimentation 
ponds. 
The size of the mine site and its proximity to populated areas make the security of the 
mine site a cause of concern to be considered for the period after closure. A closure plan 
for the Aguas Claras Mine must include a security plan to be followed in the post-mining 
The post-mining use of the Aguas Claras Mine area has not yet been determined. The first 
proposal for the area was the creation of Aguas Claras Village. Other proposals include 
an extension of Mangabeiras Park, an extension of Jambreiro Forest and a conference 
centre development. The last option has been studied by MBR directors along with others 
received from the business community for alternative economic utilisation of the area. 
Independent of the alternative land use, however, each different mine component has its 
own characteristics and limitations for post-mining use that have to be, separately, 
considered in a closure plan. 
T~ble 24 summarises the expected closure performance of each mine component that will 
have to be accommodated within any post-mining use of the area. These include physical 
issues such as demolition, re-profiling and revegetation, stability of slopes and dams, 
effective drainage systems and control; chemical factors including water quality, oil and 
grease clearance as well as the major question of the extent of the success of revegetation, 
which must be an intrinsic part of the closure plan. 
Table 24 - Expected Closure Performance at Aguas Claras Mine 
Components Targets 
Open pit/ Curral Mountain range's No deformation or erosion of slopes and benches; Water 
spur management system functioning effectively; Security 
arrangements functioning properly. 
Process plant 
Waste rock/overburden piles 
Tailings management facilities 
Water management facilities 
Landfill/waste disposal facilities 
Buildings and equipment 
Infrastructure 
Exploration areas 
Demolishment, Re-profiling and revegetation successful; 
Secure covering of foundations. 
No deformation or erosion of slopes; 
Acceptable drainage water quality and quantity; Adjacent 
groundwater quality acceptable; Successful revegetation. 
No deformation or erosion of dams; 
Efficient dam drainage; 
Acceptable tailings geochemistry; 
Effective management system for surface water; Acceptable 
surface and groundwater quality; Security arrangements 
functioning properly. 
Rehabilitation and revegetation successful; 
E...ffective surface drainage of the site. 
No deterioration in groundwater quality; cover secure; 
Successful revegetation. 
Demolishment, Re-profiling and successful revegetation. 
Re-profiling and revegetation successful. 
Successful reinstatement of drill and access roads. 
Suggested Risk Assessment 
Following there is a summary of the suggested risk assessment at the Aguas Claras Mine. 
Waste dumps 
> Failure of the overall deposit, considering the internal drainage working 
satisfactorily. 
> Failure of the overall deposit, considering the internal drainage collapsed. 
> Hydraulic Risks assessment considering the probability of occurring overtopping 
in the event of insufficient spillway capacity for the maximum probable flood 
> Structural Risks assessment considering the integrity's problem of the dam. 
> Wave effect in the in-pit lake. Although previous analysis of stability of slopes 
demonstrated that the risk of failure is negligible (Franca, 1998b) it is judge to 
assess the effect of a wave created by a sudden slope failure would make in the 
lake and on the lake spillway. 
> Lake induced seismology. Although previous seismological studies realized at the 
site have shown that the area low seismicity, typical of stable tectonic plate, five 
events were recorded, in locations more than a 100 km apart, with magnitudes 
between 4 e 4.5. 
Therefore, studies involving the following steps should be considered: 
> Tectonic characterization of the mine and surroundings, under the neo-tectonics 
point of view; 
> Characterization of seismicity in the area, with analysis of the recorded events; 
~ Geomechanics characterization of the area, to provide basis for analysis of the 
potential for occurrence of induced seismic events; 
> Design of a seismographic monitoring system. 
CHAPTER 8 
SUMMARY, RECOMMENDATIONS AND 
CONCLUSION 
MINE CLOSURE ISSUES 
The challenges facing the mining industry today are many. Foremost amongst them are 
the continuous search for new reserves, additional limitations on access and the difficulty 
of obtammg mining rights, ever more prescriptive environmental regulations and, 
potentially, the associated compliance costs. lfi addition, successful mifie closure is 
becoming a major preoccupation within the industry; as well as a measurement of 
performance by stakeholders. The pressure to be acceptable to all stakeholders is 
increasing and it is becoming an economic and social necessity to close a fiiiiie iii a 
responsible manner. 
Despite recent progress in the management of environmental issues; the mining industry 
has still encountered much criticism. Although. mmmg projects have positive nnpacts on 
society in the fofi:fi of jobs, taxes and regional development, there are (at least 
temporarily) negative impacts sm~h as noise, aesthetfos and environmental degradation. 
The long;;term or residual environmental and socio;;economic impacts after closure 
depend on tlie iiidiistfy' s attifude to Wards tlie so-called "triple bottom line" approach, 
which pays attention to financial and corporate, as well as environmental and socio-
economic concerns. Planning for closure ensures that long-term environmental and socio-
ecooomic effects of a mining project will be minimised. 
A closure plan, as an essential part of developing a mineral resource, is paramotiiit fu 
ensuring that mining companies embrace both the concept of sustainable development 
and the commitment to care for the environment. In the past, the life of a mine, however, 
has generally been understood to be the amount of ore reserve divided by the production 
rate. Toe concept of mine closure, on the other hand, extends the 1ife cycie of a mining 
project until completion of the closure. The main objective of a cost effective closure plan 
must be to reduce the need for and extent of post-closure activities. This is most effective 
when designed into the preaafeasibility study from the very beginning of a project. In 
doing so, provision fur rehabilitation activities can be set aside or utilized during the 
production phase when cash flow is positive. 
The overall objectives of mine closure programmes for both mining companies and 
regulatory authorities are to protect public safety and. health, minimise environmental 
damage, reach self-sustainability of the land after mining, minimise socio-economic 
nnpacts and reduce the risk of further enviroiimental liaoilities. Thus, closure 
programmes must address the mine components themselves, the surrounding 
environmental conditions and local socio-economic factors. The principal components of 
a closure plan are detailed project description, clear closure objectives, progressive 
rehabilitation measures, iong-term monitoring and maintenance plans and financiai 
insurance. 
Danielson and Nixon (1999) noted two great impacts on the mining industry in countries 
where regulatory clostife programmes have oeen implemented. One effect has been to 
encourage the spread of what is the minimum acceptable practice throughout the industry, 
something similar to a "floor of performance". Secondly, these programmes have pushed 
the newest ideas gr led tG the di-ssemi-nati<:m of best practice in the industry. These 
countries, however, still face issues that arise from the closure process such as the non~ 
flexibility of most requirements and the lo11g-tem1 responsibilities for the "dosed" min.e 
site. Mining, as a dynamiG proGess involving, for example, constant refmement of the 
understanding of the ore-body, changing definitions of reserves, development in 
technology and the prices of mifietal coiiiiiiodities requires a flexible and easily amended 
closure process. The uncertainty about the requirements that mining companies wiH have 
to meet in the long term is a critical issue since some of them may be imposed 
retrospectively. In addition, there is concern about perpetual maintenance, for example 
with respect to acid drainage, which affects the competitive capacity of the industry 
compared with others in countries where companies are not forced to address the issue, 
see for example, Williams (1993). Mining companies expect that once the steps outlined 
in a closure plan are :fulfilled, there will be no other major requirements. This clear 
understanding of long-term responsibilities allows companies to assign cost estimates 
with some confidence and, therefore, buiid it into their financiai pianning. 
A general tendency for mine closure legislation is to be outcome-based rather than 
prescriptive. Prescriptive regulations set minimum standards and neither encourage 
continuous improvement, nor give the mine manager the discretion to develop site-
specific solutions to rehabilitation problems. Codes of practice and guidelines are a 
preferred ''regulatory" mechanism. A challenge to be faGed by regulatory agencies and 
t.11.e mining industry is a matter of generic or site .. specific completion criteria. The former 
can assist ifi aclileVifig consistency thfougliotit the ifidustfy, btit ilie diversity of :tiiliiliig 
operations and. ecosystems demands site-specific criteria. 
Government agencies in a number of countries have adopted policies that require mining 
companies to provide an environmental financiai surety for mine ciosure purposes. 
Fmancial insurance provides a guarantee that rehabilitation plans will be completed 
should the proponent fail because of premature closing, financial default or other causes. 
In systems that require financial assurance, the cost of maintaining the guarantee and the 
advatuages of 1owern1g or tefifiifiatifig it are conSidered strong ificentives for companies 
to begin the closure programme and. to foilow it in every detail. 
A RECOMMENDED FRAMEWORK FOR MINE CLOSURE IN BRAZIL 
At present, the National Department of Mineral Production (DNPM), the Brazilian 
Mining Institute (IBRAM) and environmental ageneies are working together on the 
development of a regulatory mine closure system. IBRAM has recently prepared a 
proposal for fume closure. The p:telimmary document puts closure management in the 
hands of DNPM. There is a conflict of interests in this proposai, since I>NPM is also 
iesponsible for promoting the mining industry. This places the DNPM in the role of both 
public custodian and industry promoter - an indefensible position, since care for the 
environment is often seen to be in conflict with the profitability of the industry. 
Therefore, such incompatibility of functions should be avoided tl:rrough active 
participation of all stakeholders in the development of closure regulations. 
Tne importance of a mine closure programme, in Brazil, for both sustainable development 
and. the success of the industry requires a positive participation by the sector in 
developing a new regulatory system. The mining industry should take a leading role in 
environmental issues and commit itself to protecting the environment in which it must 
work. Nothing less than this combination of positive proposals and the commitment to 
adopt them will produce cost-effective closure programmes. This could give the industry 
a reasonable amount of control over its destiny, as increased legislation or regulation will, 
surely, be introduced. How rational will the regulations be? Progress will be made, if the 
industry partfoipates in the regulatory process on an ongoing basis and openly shows 
genuine concern for the closure issues. 
Mining concerns must propose regulations that minimise closure impacts. Failure to make 
real reforms in the past has resulted in harsh regulations in the present. The destiny of the 
mining industry is linked inextricably to the environmental and socio-economic issues of 
ciosure programmes. As a strategy for mine ciosure, the industry shouid take an 
aggressive role in the public regulatory arena and commit itself to reasonable and 
effective mine closure, More than a public relations offensive, the mining industry should 
take a position of leadership in closure issues and promote its considerable expertise for 
developing effective guidelifies and c:rite:ria for mine closure. 
In general, the mining industry has the experience and knowledge to deal with the 
environment. Therefore, a strategy of compromise based upon a consideration of a range 
of alternative options should overcome the barrage of criticism from militant 
environmentalists by challenging their confrontational approach. An active stance can 
engage and direct the attention of the media, while regulators are likely to be more 
tractable when mining is perceived as environmentally committed. There are some 
realistic criteria for fume closure; the fuming industry should seize the initiative and fuust 
propose them, by being open about its technology and liberal in sharing its knowledge 
and in disclosing all costs related to closure. Examples of such practices come from the 
Australian Mineral Industries Association (Tongway et al., 1997; Tongway, 1998) and 
Alcoa of Australia Limited (Jarvis, 1998). 
Bailey (1994) states "the risks associated with mine closure are particularly uncertain and 
have a potential to rise beyond expectation". Therefore, the goal of such an active strategy 
should be to create a compliance climate within which mining companies can operate. 
Frrst, such a strategy should provide a framework for the Brazilian mining industry to 
develop solutions to actual, potential or perceived environmental, safety and financial 
issues associated with mine closure. Properly planned and managed; it can result in an 
easing of the burdens and costs of compliance while decreasing the impact of mine 
closure. This should ensure that closure costs actually make a positive difference in 
environmental quality and sustainability of post-mining sites. Invariably, this approach 
will mean that costs will rise, but the question is by how much and what will be 
aGGomplished. Secondly, rationalising and standardising the permitting process and 
simplifying the construction, operating, decommissioning and rehabilitation processes, 
while enstififig that envitofifiiental requirements are uniroffii from region to region, yet 
allowing for variations on a site-specific basis, should be the outcome. 
CONCLUSION 
Mine closure is a challenge for both the industry and the regulatory system in many 
countries. This is certainly true in Brazil, where many long operating mines are 
experiencing closure and regulatory agencies are preparing to impose such legislation. In 
addition to the discussion and analysis of the Brazilian regulatory system concemifig 
mine closure, this study has focussed on the development of' a Liability Assessment 
Programme to assist operating mines in planning for closure. The field research was 
conducted at the Aguas Claras an MBR company mine of great importance in grnzil, 
which is scheduled to cease operating at the end of 2001. 
The Aguas Claras is a remarkable mine, particularly because of the high quality ofits iron 
ore and is unusual because of its proximity to an urban area, the city of Belo Horizonte. 
Throughout its operational life, the miiie has seen the growth of envitoiifiiental concern in 
Brazil, particularly after the introduction of' the regulatory requirement for BIA as part of' 
the licensing process, while its imminent closure has triggered a general debate about 
mine closure in Brazil. The Aguas Claras Mine has been a reference point in the debate 
between environmentalists and the mining industry. At the beginning of its operations in 
the 1970s, the vibration from blasting operations affected buildings in the Belo Horizonte 
neighbourhood. the prompt response of the company in changing the type of explosives 
and better blasting plans solved the problem and silenced its critics. Its mining operations 
in the Curral Mountain caused alterations to the line of the crest of the mountain and, in 
the early 1980s, resulted in a popular movement in Belo Hortzonte against the MBR 
activities. The movement also pressed for the preservation of the Curral Mountain, one of 
the most beautiful views :from the city. As a result, the Local Authorities declared Curral 
Mountain a patrimony of the Belo Horizonte City recognised by law. The activities of this 
pressure movement coincided with the environmental debate in Brazil and adversely 
affected the image of the company. In response, MBR invested in environmentai 
management and followed best practice in mining, as well as becoming more open in its 
dealings with the public and more involved with the community, The climax was the 
agreement between the Belo Horizonte City Council and MBR to restore the Plaza of 
Libeny, ilie most ifiipoffiint square ifi ilie city. MBR covered ilie costs and took 
responsibility for restoring and maintaining the plaza. Such an enlightened attitude was a 
benchmark for social involvement and other companies soon followed their example. 
Since then, MBR has embraced an ethical policy and has been increasingly successful, 
thus 'doing weii by doing good'. 
Public consultation and disclosure of actions have allowed stakeholders to be informed of 
and involved in MBR' s mining developments and operations. These actions have ensured 
tlie sustainability of MBR's activities ifi a region With a very sensitive envirofifiient and 
competing demands for land because of the proximity of urbanised areas. Today, MBR's 
decision to close the Aguas Claras Mine and the procedures being adopted highlight the 
company's environmental, sock>-eoooomic and cultural sense of responsibility. Recause 
of possible stability problems and visual impacts in the Patrimonio Peak and the likely 
public reaction, the company is leaving in situ approximately 90 million tons of iron ore, 
initially Gonsidered marginal, but now toohniGally and ooonomieally mineable, The 
decision to not carry out the licensing process to exploit this reserve was made to show 
the company's good faith and its desire not to compromise other MBR' s operations iii the 
region. The Aguas Claras closure wi11 also serve as a benchmark, because of the 
company's determination to achieve the mine closure objectives, which go beyond the 
provisions proposed in the imminent Brazilian regulations concerning mine closure. 
As noted by Robertson et al. (1998), custodial transfer ofland, post-mifiing, requires an 
extension of the concept of designing for closure and the development of a post-mining 
sustainable use plan, rather than a closure plan. MBR's aims in the Aguas Claras Mine 
closure process have been to achieve this objective. MBR, in addition to minimising the 
Habiiities associated with Aguas Claras Mme closure, has been actively participating in 
and spearheading leading efforts to implement mine closure practices in Brazil, by 
developing the custodial transfer process and seeking a sustainable post-mining land use. 
Liability assessment is a standard practice in business with such programmes having been 
used during acquisitions or mergers. The approach could also be used in the identification 
and costing of mine rehabilitation liabilities. This would altow companies to know the 
precise cost and benefits in order to establish whether the expenditure is justified (Brodie, 
1998). The programme developed in this research project and tested at the Aguas Claras 
Mine had; as its objective; assisting mining Mmpanies assess their own liabilities and 
develop mine closure plans both to meet statutory requirements and to establish suitable 
envrrofifiieiital mai:lagemertt objectives to close their operations in a responsible mafi.Iiet. 
Liability assessment can easily be accommodated by EMS for achieving a successful 
closure, particularly for companies with a well-advanced system, such as the major firms 
like MBR. In these companies, internal staff given suitable training or supplemented by 
consultants can conduct such a liability assessment. Planning for closure, in Brazil, is a 
very new matter to most mining companies. Therefore, such liability assessment would be 
very beneficial by providing the necessary information for closure planning. 
The liability assessment programme suggested to MBR and conducted on site identified 
the range of issues to be followed fur planning effective mine closure. Besides its overall 
role in assessing closure liabilities, the results of such a programme can also be used for a 
number of other important management requirements. These include negotiation with 
govemment agendes and the community affected. Therefott\ such an approach would 
improve the ability of the mihing company to comply with the level of legal and financial 
liability resulting from the conditions imposed by mine cloSute regulations and 
stakeholders expectations. 
The liability assessment is expected to help directors and managers demonstrate due 
diligence as well as recommending steps to be taken to ensure that all necessary 
management systems are in place to achieve closure objectives. Jn addition, in regulatory 
systems that require a closure plan and financial provision during the licensing process, 
liability assessments could be used to justify applications for tax deductions. Although 
not the case for MBR, this would be valuable for companies wanting to reduce financial 
assurance for mine closure. 
The programme developed during this research and implemented by MBR represents an 
important innovation in mine closure planning for operating mines in Brazil. To date, 
mines are subject o:fthis study-the Capanema Mine (an iron ore mine in Minas Gerais 
State) and the CLY Mine (a bauxite mine in Para State). Although it will undoubtedly be 
refined and expanded in the futllre, it does provide an appropriate framework for futllre 
development. Subjectivity in the assessment is one possible criticism of this initial 
approach. Thus, research mto the development of values to quantify the severity oflong-
term liability is one challenge for improving the programme. Improvements to reduce the 
le-..rel of subjectivity in the results will enhance confidence in cost estimates. The 
availability of data, the quality of the EMS in place, as well as better closure criteria are 
essentiai :for a more robust liability assessment programme. The rate o:f change in both the 
regulatory environment and public attitudes poses a challenge to mining companies with 
respect to mine closure. Establishing robust environmental management system~ 
supported by liability assessment, will place the industry in a sound position to meet this 
challenge. 
The situation with respect to mine closure is changing fairly rapidly at present. Research 
seminars, for example, are being held to explore the subject of closure planning. Thus, the 
findings of the Liability Assessment Programme conducted at the Aguas Claras Mine 
during this research were presented at the First lberoamerican Meeting on Mine Closure 
held in Spain in September 2000 (Lima et al., 2000). Subsequently, the Brazilian Mining 
Institute (IBRAM), represented at this meeting, promoted the First Seminar on Mine 
Closure, held at the Aguas Clatas Mme Site iii December 2000, cofifirtrtiiig the 
importance of the mine to current thinking about the closure process in Brazil. 
In the introduction to this thesis the hypothesis of using audit techniques for mine closure 
planning was outlined. The primary objective was to demonstrate the applicability of 
liability assessment for mine closure planning purposes. Toe Liability Assessment 
Programme conducted at the Aguas Claras Mine showed it to be a practical tool for use 
within an environmental management system in planning for closure. The company's 
decision to proceed to the next stage anq to carry out an assessment of the costs involved 
in :following the recommendations o:f this study confirms the value o:f the approach. The 
findings and recommendations of the liability assessment report are already assisting 
MBR in designing a closure plan that encompasses measures to minimise the 
environmentai socio-economic and cultural consequences of mine closure. In addition, 
the expectation is that the results will be converted into a closure plan for the Aguas 
Claras Mine complete with timetables, allocation of responsibilities and budgets. Thus, it 
is clear that this objective has been meet in full. 
The programme proposed to the company had also as an objective an estimation of the 
cost of closure. Given a lack of time and infom1ation, it was not possible to investigate 
this issue totally. Field observation and discussion with mine personnel showed that to 
achieve this objective a number of measures should be conducted at the site as a 
prerequisite to estimating closure costs. These measures included a topographical survey 
of areas to be vegetated, graded and contoured, a survey of buildings structure to be 
demolished and a survey of contractor costs. Therefore, such a costing would require 
more time in field aGtivities and personnel than the planned programme. In addition, laGk 
of mine closure criteria for both the company and the environmental agency acts 
unfavourable against making esthnates. This clearly indicates that further study of 
indicators of mine closure success is required. 
The second objective was to outline possible key elements of a comprehensive mine 
closure programme in Brazil. An examination of mine closure regulations in US, Canada, 
Australia and South Africa, presented in Chapter 4 was the basis for the proposed 
framework. A comparison of these countries with Brazil allowed this objective be 
achieved. The key element in this framework is the role that the mining industry should 
play ifi establishifig mifie closure regulations ifi Brazil. 
Suggestions for Further Research 
Thus, the research programme has been largely successful in meeting its objectives. From 
this work, however, certain issues have emerged that require investigation to resolve the 
additional ideas that have arisen, to explore new concepts and to provide further data. 
First, there has been a number of mine closures in Brazil in the last 10 years. An 
evaluation of the current situation at these closed mine sites themselves, as well as the 
long-term environmental and socio-economic implications of the closures, would serve 
two functions. The results of this research could assist regulators and mining companies 
in the preparation of mine closure regulations for Brazil, as well as planning for future 
mine closures. 
Secondly, there is a need for research jointly with the mining companies and 
environmental agencies to elaborate a list of indicators of successful rehabilitation. With 
these indicators, there is a need to develop a methodology to be followed by firms and 
regUlato:ry agencies to assess whether completion criteria have been met. This research 
should focus on solving two issues: Are the particular criteria used appropriate for 
assessing the rehabilitation? Are the criteria relevant to the desired end use and to the 
community? 
Thirdly, there is a need to consider closure implications in rapidly evolving technological 
areas such as tailings design and management for closureJ geotechnical hazards 
assessment and the geomorphological assessment of rehabilitated lands. Thus, advances 
m these areas can feed rapidly through into closure planning. 
There is a clear technical capability within the Brazilian mining industry to collaborate in 
such research areas. The academic research base is also present. Research in these areas is 
already being conducted in the School of Mines at the Federal University of Ouro Preto 
(UFOP), in Minas Gerais State, involving the Departments of Geology, Mining, Civil and 
Environmental Engineering. The introduction of mine closure issues into these research 
areas is feasible, since the university is pre--eminent in mining and geology teaching in 
Brazil, has an enviable reputation iii research and strong relationship with the miiiiiig 
industry. 
To date the author is running two research projects in the Mining Engineering 
Department within the Master Programme in Mineral Engineering. One involves the 
developing of a mine closure criteria database and the other, on financial guarantee to aid 
the government in developing and administering effective and practical financial 
guarantee policies. A questionnaire containing a number of specific issues about 
guarantees has been submitted to mining companies, environmental agencies and the 
DNPM. A paper with previous results of this research was submitted this month to 
Revista da Escola de Minas for publication. 
REFERENCES 
Ackermann, R (1998). "ls mining compatible with sustainable development? A World 
Bank perspective." ICME Newsletter 6(2): 1-4. 
Agricola, G. (1950). De Re Metallica. Translated from the first Latin edition of 1556 by 
Herbert Clark Hoover and Lou Henry Hoover. New York, Dover Publications. 638 p. 
Alberts, D. and M. K. Grasmick (2000). "Community involvement at Nicolet Minerals." 
Mining Environmental Management 8(2): 19-20. 
Amapa (2000a). A saida da ICOMI do Amapa. Projetos polemicos. Processamento de 
dados do Amapa. Govemo do Estado do Amapa. Information captured at 
http://www.amapa.gov.br/proj-polemicos.htm. 
Amapa (2000b ). Instala~ao da Mineradora Itajobi. Projetos Polemicos. Processamento de 
Dados do Amapa. Govemo do Estado do Amapa. Information captured at 
http://www.amapa.gov.br/ppol-itajobi.htm. 
Amaral, S. P. (1997). Environmental Management Initiatives in the Brazilian Oil 
Industry. Environmental Management Systems and Cleaner Production. R. Hillary. 
London, John Wiley & Sons: 259-266. 
Anderson, D., D. Orava, N. Garisto and M. Donahue (1999). "Liability transfer 
agreements." Mining Environmental Management 7(2): 14-16. 
Anderson, D. M. (1995). Management environmental liability during mine closure and 
post-closure utilization or property transfer. Jn: Mine Closure: Creating Productive 
Public and Private Assets, Nevada. 59-64 
Anderson, D. R., D. A. Orava, N. C. Garisto and M. Donahue (1999). ''Liability transfer 
agreements for the funding of mine closures using Monte Carlo simulations." CIM 
Bulletin 92(1028): 157-160. 
Anderson, K. (1998). Mining and communities: A discussion paper. Mining and the 
Community: Results of the Quito Conference. G. McMahon. Washington, D.C., The 
World Bank Energy, Mining and Telecommunications Department. EMT Occasional 
Paper No. 11: 57-68. 
Anderson, K. (1999). Using financial assurances to manage the environmental risks of 
mining projects. Environmental Policy in Mining: Corporate Strategy and Planning for 
Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. London, Lewis Publishers: 283-293. 
Andrade, J. G. (1997). "Desenvolvimento sustentavel na industria de minera9ao." A Terra 
em Revism(3): 47-52. 
ANZMEC (1999). Strategic Framework on Mine Closure. Canberra, The Australian and 
New Zealand Minerals and Energy Council (ANZMEC). 
ANZMEC (2002). ANZMEC Strategic Framework for Mine Closure, www.natural-
resources.org/ .. ./csr/docs/csr/. 2002. 
Asher, C. J. and L. C. Bell, Eds. (1998). Proceedings of the Workshop on Environmental 
Issues in the Decommissioning of Mine Sites. Brisbane, Australian Centre for Mining 
Environmental Research. 
Astill, M. J. (1994). Managing environmental risks - Legal requirements. In: 4th large 
Open Pit Mining Conference, Perth, The Australasian Institute of Mining and 
Metallurgy. 15-27 
Aziz, M. L. and K. D. Ferguson (2002). Equity Silver Mine - A case study. 2002. 
Bailey, P. (1994). A look at environmental risks to mine projects with special reference to 
the role of governments. Jn: 4th large Open Pit Mining Conference, Perth, The 
Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. 39-41 
Barbour, A. K. and I. C. Shaw (2000). Ecotoxicological impacts of the extrative 
industries. Environmental Policy in Mining: Corporate Strategy and Planning for 
Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. London, Lewis Publishers: 57-80. 
Barnes, H., T. Hawthorne and D. Willians (1999). "Estimation site closure costs - A 
critical tool for reclamation planning." 1999 Minerals Council of Australia 
Environmental Workshop: 83. 
Belsky, E. (1992). Factors affecting economic risks in mining: Focus on pollution 
insurance and bonding. Risk Assessment/Management Issues in the Environmental 
Planning of Mines. D. Van Zyl, M. Koval and T. M. Li. Littleton, CO, Society for 
Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration, Inc.: 143-147. 
Berger, R. S., J. H. Barkach and J. A. Bolin (1992). Conducting an environmental 
compliance audit. Jn: Fifteenth Annual Madison Waste Conference, Madison, 
Wisconsin. 29-40 
Biggs, B. (2000). Developing a national strategic :framework on mine closure. Jn: Mine 
Closure and Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Books. 139-
Biggs, F. R. (1990). "U.S. superfund mining sites: Impacts, issues and research." Acid 
Mine Drainage: Design for Closure: 487-495. 
BLM (1994). Preparation requirements and guidelines permanent closure plans and final 
closure reports. Document downloaded from 
http://www.nv.blm.gov/Minerals/Permitting/Guidance/Permanent_Closure_Plans.htm, 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Nevada State Office. 1998. 
Boraussa, M. J. (1996). "Ontario's mine closure plans: 1996 Revisions to Part VII of the 
Mining Act." Mine Closure Plans and Liability Issues: 13-58. 
Bosco, T. J., J.C. Hickey and J. H. Viellenave (1996). Environmental site assessment for 
property transfers: Adjusting the scope of phase 1 assessments to the environmental 
risk realities. Jn: Eco-Management and Auditing Conference, Leeds, Uk, The 
University of Leeds. 85-99 
Bradburn, R and D. Perkins (1995). "Decommissioning of the Brenda Mine near 
Peachland, British Columbia." Canadian Mineral Processes (CIM): 239-256. 
Braga, T. 0., N. F. Filho, S. G. G. Batistucci, M. 0. R. Montanhesi, S. S. Aluani and R I. 
Pamplona (1996). Auditoria Ambiental - Uma Proposta para Empreendimentos 
Mineiros. Sao Paulo, Instituto de Pesquisas Tecnol6gicas (IPT). 116 p. 
Brandt (1999). Miner~oes Brasileiras Reunidas (MBR) - Long-term Development Plan. 
Belo Horizonte, Brandt Meio Ambiente. 
Brodie, M. J. (1998). "Aquisitions and mine closure liability." Canadian Mining Journal 
119(4): 21-24. 
Brooks, D. R (1997). Towards a mine closure strategy for the industry. Jn: Proceedings 
of the MCA Environmental Workshop, Adelaide, Minerals Council of Australia. 591-
Brownlow, A. and D. Zines (1995). Environmental auditing: A basis for the design and 
implementation of an environmental management system. Jn: National Conference on 
Environmental Engineering. 13 9-143 
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future. New York, Oxford University Press. 
400p. 
Buckley, R (1990). Environmental auditing for the mineral industry. Jn: Pacific RIM 
Congress '90, May Gold Cost, Queensland, The Australian Institute of Mining and 
Metallurgy. 647-649 
Buckley, R (1995). Environmental auditing. Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment. F. Vanclay and D. A. Bronstein, John Willey & Sons Ltd: 283-301. 
Caldwell, J. A and AM. Robertson (1986). Geotechnical stability considerations in the 
design and reclamation of tailings impoudment. In: Geotechnical Stability in Surface 
Mining, Calgary. 1-5 
CAMMA (1997). Declaration of Arequipa, Annual Conference of Mines Ministries of the 
Americas. 
CAMMA (1998). Declaration of Buenos Aires, Annual Conference of Mines Ministries 
of the Americas. 
CAMMA (1999). Declaration of Caracas, Annual Conference of Mines Ministries of the 
Americas. 
CAMMA (2000). Vancouver Declaration, Annual Conference of Mines Ministries of the 
Americas. 
Carbon, B. (1997). "Sustainable development and the evolving agenda for environmental 
protection in the mining industry." UNEP Industry and Environment 20( 4): 10-13. 
Carlton, J. (2002). Financial surety creats crise for mining companies. The Wall Street 
Journal. 
Carvalho, C. G. (1999). Legislacao ambiental Brasileira - Contribuicao para um c6digo 
nacional do ambiente. Sao Paulo, Editora de Direito Ltda. 
CDPHE (1998). Reclamation of the Summitville Mine superfund site, Colorado 
Department of Public Healthy and Environment. 
Chambers, W. G. and I. F. Machado (1999). The economy and the mineral sector. The 
Mineral Economy of Brazil. USGS. Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Interior: 
20-32. 
Champigny, N. and R. J. van Heerden (1995). "Mine closure in South Africa." Mining 
Environmental Management: 25-26. 
Clark, AL. and J. C. Clark (1996). An integrated methodology for assessing the social 
and cultural impact of mining. In: Management of Comodity Resources in the Context 
of Sustainable Development: Social Impact of Mining, Geneva, Switzerland, 
UNCTAD/ITCD/COM.5. 60-65 
Clark, A. L., K. Naito and J. C. Clark (2000). Legal framework for mine closure. In: Mine 
Closure and Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Books Ltd. 
93-115 
Clark, I. (1999). Planning for closure: The case of Australia. Environmental Policy in 
Mining: Corporate Strategy and Planning for Mining Closure. A. Warhurst and L. 
Noronha. New York, Lewis Publishers: 441-454. 
Cooney, J. (2000). "Mining and sustainable development: The next steps." Mining 
Environmental Management 8(1): 19-20. 
Cordell, A. (1975). Rape of the fair country. London, Pan Books. 315 p. 
Cordes, J. A. (1997). "Mining and environment: Driving forces for change." UNEP 
industry and Environment 20(4): 25-28. 
Cowan, W. R. (1996). ''New directions for mine rehabilitation legislation in Ontario." 
Mine Closure Plans and Liability Issues: 121-140. 
Cowan, W.R. (1999). Planning for mine rehabilitation in Ontario, Canada. Jn: Mining 
and the Environment: Sudbury' 99. 645-649 
Cragg, A. W. (1998). "Sustainable development and mining: Opportunity or threat to the 
industry?" CIM Bulletin 91(1023): 45-50. 
CSD (1999). "About commission on sustainable development. United Nations sustainable 
development. Available on Internet at http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/csdgen.htm.". 
Da Rosa, C. (1999). "Financial assurances." Mining Environmental Management 7(2): 
10-13. 
Dahlstrand, A. (1995). "Closure concerns at Sonora mining's Jamestown Mine." Mining 
Engineering 47(3): 236-239. 
Daigneault, R. and L. Rosenstein (1996). "Mine closure plans in Quebec: The new 
requirements, one year later." Mine Closure Plans and Liability Issues: 59-80. 
Danielson, L. and M. Nixon (1999). Current regulatory approaches to mine closure in the 
United States. Environmental Policy in Mining: Corporate Strategy and Planning for 
Mining Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. New York, Lewis Publishers: 311-350. 
Danni, J. W. and J.E. Hardaway (1992). Design and implementation of an environmental 
audit program. Risk Assessment/Management Issues in the Environmental Planning of 
Mines. D. Van Zyl, M. Koval and T. M. Li. Littleton, CO, Society for Mining, 
Metallurgy, and Exploration, Inc.: 95-99. 
Davy, A. (1999). "Social responsibility and governments." Mining Environmental 
Management 7(1): 16-17. 
Department of the Environment (1996). Mineral Planning Guidance: The Reclamation of 
Mineral Workings. London, Stationery Office. 53 p. 
Diberto, M. (1995). "Environmental auditing." Chemical & Engineering News 73(25): 4-
Dipper, B., C. Jones and C. Wood (1998). "Monitoring and post-auditing in 
environmental impact assessment: A review." Journal of Environmental Planning and 
Management 41(6): 731-747. 
DME (2000a). Aide Memoire. Information captured at 
http://www.dme.gov.za/minerals/aide_memoire.html, Department of Minerals and 
Energy. 2000. 
DNPM (1999). Universo da minera9ao Brasileira - 1998: Produ9ao das 1553 minas do 
Brasil. Information captured at http://www.dnpm.gov.br/, Divisao de Economia 
Mineral, Departamento Nacional de Produ9ao Mineral (DNPM). Brasilia. 2000. 
DNPM (2000). Investidor guide's. Mining in Brazil. Basic information for the investidor. 
Information captured at http://www.dnpm.gov.br/. Departamento Nacional de 
Produ9ao Mineral (DNPM)., DNPM. 2000. 
Doran, J. R.R. and J. A. S. McIntosh (1995). "Preparation, review and approval of mine 
closure plans in Ontario, Canada.": 281-288. 
Dunn, W. J. (2000). "Beyond ''Beads 'n Trinkets": A systematic approach to community 
relations for the next millennium." CIM Bulletin(93): 41-45. 
E&Mj (1998). "Europe's biggest mine rehabilitation project." E&Mj: 40-42. 
Eggert, R. G. (1994). Mining and the environment: international perspectives on public 
policy. Washington, DC, Resources for the Future. 172 p. 
Eggert, R. G. (2000). Sustainable development and the mineral industry. Sustainable 
Development and the Future of Mineral Investment. J. Otto and J. Cordes. Paris, 
UNEP: 2.1-2.15. 
Environmental Mining Council of BC (2001 ). Addressing the crisis in compliance with 
environmental mining laws in BC, Environmental Mining Council of British Columbia 
and West Cost Environmental Law. 2002. 
EPA (1995a). Mine Planning for Environmental Protection, The Australian Environment 
Protection Agency. 2 7 p. 
EPA (1995c). Environmental Monitoring and Performance, The Australian Environment 
Protection Agency. 56 p. 
EPA (1995d). Community Consultation and Involvement, The Australian Environment 
Protection Agency. 28 p. 
EPA (1995e). Rehabilitation and Revegetation, The Australian Environment Protection 
Agency. 36 p. 
EPA (1996). Environmental Auditing, The Australian Environment Protection Agency. 
EPA (2002). Mine Decommissioning, The Australian Environment Protection Agency. 
Epps, J. and A. Brett (2000). Engaging stakeholders. Sustainable Development and the 
Future ofMineral Investment. J. Otto and J. Cordes. Paris, UNEP: 5.1-5.38. 
Eyre, J.M. and R.P.M. Veranneman (1999). "An introduction to environmental auditing 
of mining operations." Revista de Minas(l 7 y 18): 138 - 142. 
Farrel, T. P. (1993). Some considerations in planning for mine decommissioning. Jn: 
Environmental workshop: Australian Mining Industry Council, Dickson. 235-247 
Farrel, T. P. (1994). Quantifying and managing environmental :financial risk from mining 
operations. In: 4th Large Open Pit Mining Conference, Perth, The Australasian 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. 5-8 
Franca, P. (1998b). Post-mining pit lakes and slope stability - The Aguas Claras Mine 
example. In: Mine Planning and Equipment Selection 1998, Calgary, Balkema. 135-
Gerlach, J. (1998). Liability for mining damage under German law. In: Mine Planning 
and Equipment Selection 1998, Alberta, Balkema. 709-711 
Gobla, M. J. (1999). Summitville Mine site - Wide reclamation design. In: Tailings and 
Mine Waste '99, Rotterdan, Balkema, A. A. 797-806 
Goodland, R. and H. Daly (1995). Environmental sustainability. Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment. F. Vanclay and D. A. Bronstein. New York, John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd: 303-321. 
Greeff, J. C. (1995). Mine Closure: End or Beginning. In: 1 st Conference on Mining and 
the Environment in Zimbabwe, Harare. 40-50 
Guerin, T. F. (2000). "Self-regulation as an opportunity for sustainability." Mining 
Environmental Management 8(2): 16-18. 
Gurmendi, A. C. and F. L. M. Barbosa (1999). Structure of the Mineral Industry. The 
Mineral Economy of Brazil. USGS. Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Interior: 
58-84. 
Hancock, P. M. (1995). Mineral resource policy issues for sustainable development: 
corporate and national imperatives. In: PACRlM '95, Auckland, New Zealand, 
Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. 255-260 
Hannan, J. C. (1998). Community consultation issues in relation to mine closure. In: 
Environmental Issues in the Decommissioning of Mine Sites, Brisbane, Australian 
Centre for Mining Environmental Research. 95-101 
Harries, J. (1997). Acid mine draining in Australia: Its extent and potential future 
liability., Vancouver, Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Acid 
Rock Drainage. 1905-1013 
Harries, J. (1998). "Promoting sustainable development - A role for governments." 
Groundwork2(December, 2): 1-3. 
Hayes, C. (1994). "Reclamation Accounting and Practical Considerations in Funding 
Reclamation Obligations." Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Institutes 9( 40): 9 .1-9 .32. 
Hoek, E. and J. Bray (1977). RocK Slope Engineering. London. Revised Second Edition. 
402 p. 
Hollands, K. (1993). Lease relinquishment in NSW - Completion criteria. Jn: AMIC 18th 
Environmental Workshop, Canberra, Australian Mining Industry Council. 223-234 
Hollands, K. (1999). "Security deposits in NSW." Mining Environmental Management 
7(2): 17-18. 
Holliday, G. H. (1993). Pre-acquisition environmental auditing - An engineering 
perspective. Jn: Annual Rock Mountain Mineral Law Institute 39TH Conference,, 
Annual Rock Mountain Mineral Law Institute. Cl-Cl 7 
Hordley, S. (1998). "Gold Plant Decommissioning." Mining Environmental Management 
6(6): 23-24. 
IBAMA (1998). A Leida Natureza - Lei de Crimes Ambientais. Brasilia. 42 p. 
IBGE (1999a). Popula9ao - Contagem da Popula900, 1996. lnstituto Brasileiro de 
Geografia e Estatistica (IBGE). Information captured on 20/10/1999 at 
http://www.ibge.gov.br. 
IBRAM (1992). Mineracao e Meio Ambiente. Brasilia, Instituto Brasileiro de Miner~ao 
(IBRAM). 114 p. 
ICC (1986). ICC position paper on environmental auditing. Paris, International Chamber 
of Commerce (ICC). 
ICE (1986). Environmental Auditing - Slide Training Package E04, Institution of 
Chemical Engineers (ICE). 
ICME (1994). Development. environment and mining: enhancing the contribution of the 
mineral industry to sustainable development. Washington; DC, International Council 
on Metals and the Environment. 
ILO (1995). Safety and Health in Mines Convention, International Labour Organisation. 
2000. 
Intarapravich, D. and A. L. Clark (1995). "Performance guarantee shemes in the mineral 
industry for sustainable development: The case of Thailand." Resources Policy 20(1): 
59-69. 
ISO 14010 (1996). "Guidelines for environmental auditing - General principles." 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO): 1-4. 
ISO 14011 (1996). "Guidelines for environmental auditing -Audit procedures -Auditing 
of environmental management systems." International Organisation for 
Standardisation CTSO): 1-4. 
James, P. M. (2000). "The Triple Bottom Line: Key to Project Success." Natural 
Resources. Information captured on 03/07/2000 at http://www.natural-resources.org/: 
Jarvis, S. (1998). Development and Implementation of Completion Criteria. Jn: Worshop 
on Environmental Issues in the Decommissioning of Mines Sites, Brisbane, Australian 
Centre for Mining Environmental Research. 151-160 
Johnson, D. A., K. Cothern, R. Borden, S. Novack and S. P. Pavlou (1992). Statistical 
techniques in ranking hazardous waste site for risk management decisions. Risk 
Assessment/Management Issues in the Environmental Planning of Mines. D. Van Zyl, 
M. Koval and T. M. Li. Littleton, CO, Society of Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration, 
Inc.: 113-121. 
Jones, D. A. (1996). Mine closure regulations and activity: Nevada style. In: Tailings and 
Mine Waste '96., Colorado, Balkema. 21-27 
Jones, H. (1992). Evolution of Environmental Management - A West Australian 
Perspective. Jn: Environmental Issues and Waste Management in Energy and Minerals 
Production, Calgary, Balkema. 3-11 
Jones, M. C. (1998). Liability issues when decommisioning a mine. Jn: Proceedings of 
Workshop on Environmental Issues in Decommissioning of Mine Sites, Brisbane, 
Australian Centre for Mining Environmental Research. 29-35 
Junior, J. B. 0. and L. E. Sanches (2002). Desativacao da mina de ouro de Maria Preta -
Teo:filandia, Bahia. In: 10 Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia de Engenharia e 
Ambiental, Ouro Preto, MG, Associa9ao Brasileira de Geologia de Engenharia. 003MI 
Kane, R. (1991). Environmental auditing - Making mid-course corrections. In: 
Environmental Conference. 595-598 
Kaufinan, R and A. D. Moreland (1993). "The Environmental Risks in Brazilian 
Acquisitions." Environmentrisk(Special Supplement, March): 7-9. 
Kelly, J. (1995). Public perspective on mine closure. In: Mine Closure: Creating 
Productive Public and Private Assets, Nevada. 33-42 
Keyes, R (1992). Mine closure in Canada: problems prospects and policies. Coping With 
Closure: An International Comparasion of Mine Town Experiences. C. Neil, M. 
Tykkylainen and J. Bradbury. London, Routledge: 27. 
Khanna, T., Ed. (2000). Mine Closure and Sustainable Development. London, Mining 
Journal Books Ltd. 
Kingery, A. F., H. E. Allen and S. P. Pavlou (1992). Role of metal speciation in reducing 
bioavailability and environmental risk in the aquatic environment: Case studies of 
cooper and arsenic. Risk Assessment/Management Issues in the Environmental 
Planning of Mines. D. Van Zyl, M. Koval and T. M. Li. Littleton, CO, Society of 
Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration, Inc.: 103-106. 
Kmenta, J. (1995). "Assigning the Liability for Past Pollution: Lessons from the U.S. 
Mining Industry." Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE) 151(1): 
155-158. 
Knot, R. (1999). Planning for mine closure: Responsability of regulators, community or 
industry? In: 1999 Minerals Council of Australia Environmental Workshop. 69-82. 
Kornreich, L. D. (1995). "Planning tips for environmental audits." Environmental 
Management 57(1): 65-66. 
Kosko, G. S. and J. P. Causey JR (1992). Environmental auditing: Advantages and 
pitfalls. In: Environmental Conference, Richmond, Vancouver, Technical Association 
of Pulp and Paper Industry. 945-955 
La Rovere, E. L. and A. d'Avignon (1995). "Emerging Environmental Auditing 
Regulations in Brazil and Prospects for their Implementation." UNEP Industry and 
Environment 18(2-3): 11-14. 
Lahiri-Dutt, K. (1999). "What is the Community?'' Mining Environmental Management 
7(4): 26-27. 
Lambert, I. B. (2001). ''Mining and sustainable development: considerations for minerals 
supply." Natural Resources Forum(25): 275-284. 
Legislative Audit Division (1997). Review of hard rock mining reclamation bond 
requirements, Legislative Audit Division, Montana: 9. 
Leiner, C. H., K. P. Hammerschmid and I. F. Bell (1995). Environmental management 
plans to reduce mine closure costs. Jn: PACRIM'95,, Australasian Institute of Mining 
and Metallurgy. 333-338 
Lima, H. M. and A. Curi (2002). Mine closure principles. Jn: 10 Congresso Brasileiro de 
Geologia de Engenharia e Ambiental, Ouro Preto, MG, Associa9ao Brasileira de 
Geologia de Engenharia. 146MI 
Lima, H. M. and P. Wathern (1999). "Mine closure: A conceptual review." Mining 
engineering 51(11): 41-45. 
Lima, H. M., P. Wathem and P. R Franca (2000). Aguas Claras Mine Closure Liability 
Assessment. In: I Jornadalberoamerica sobre Cierre de Minas, Huelva, Spain. 77-85 
Llewellyn, R (1997). How green was my valley. London, Reader's Digest Association. 
438p. 
MAC (1996). Environmental management framework - A guide for member companies, 
The Mining Association of Canada. 2000. 
Machado, I. F. (1999). Environment and mining - Mining regulations, environment 
protection. The industrial mineral sector. The Mineral Economy of Brazil. USGS. 
Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Interior: 378-385. 
Manitoba (2001 a). Mine closure regulation 67 /99 - General closure plan guidelines, 
Manitoba Industry, Trade and Mines - Mines Branch. 
Manitoba (2001b). Mine closure regulation 67/99 - Mine closure guidelines: Financial 
Assurance, Manitoba Industry, Trade and Mines- Mines Branch. 
Marcus, J. (1990). "Mining environment - Financial assurances for mine closure - A 
discussion of the issues." E&Mj-Engineering and Mining Journal 191(8): El6-&. 
Marcus, J. J. (1997). Mining environmental handbook: effects of mining on the 
environment and American environmental controls on mining. London Imperial 
College Press, Singapore River. xxviii, 785 p. 
Martella, T. K. (1993). "The Environmental Site Assessment and What it Can 
Accomplish." Site Selection and Industrial Development 38(1): 153-155. 
Mavis, J. D. and R Coon (1992). Profile of risks associated with mine flooding for 
control of acid mine drainage. Risk Assessment/Management Issues in the 
Environmental Planning of Mines. D. Van Zyl, M. Koval and T. M. Li. littleton, 
Society of Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration, Inc.: 107-111. 
MBR (1998). Minera9oes Brasileiras Reunidas SA., Social Report. 
MCA (1997). Mine Closure: Towards a Strategy for the Australian Minerals Industry. 
Canberra, Minerals Council of Australia. 31 p. 
McArthur, D. R. (1994). Bell Mine closure plan. Jn: 181h British Columbia Mine 
Reclamation Symposium, Vernon. 118-133 
McMahon, G., Ed. (1998). Mining and the Community: Results of the Quito Conference. 
EMT Occasional Paper No. 11. Washington, D.C., The World Bank Energy, Mining 
and Telecommunications Department. 
McMahon, G. and J. Strongman (1999). "The Rise of the Community." Mining 
Environmental Management. 
Meadows, D. H. (1972). The Limits to growth: a report for the Club of Rome's project on 
the predicament of mankind. New York, Signet Books. 205 p. p., illus., 21 cm. p. 
Melemore (1996). "Elements of an effective environmental auditing program." Energy 
Week 1: 4-14. 
Middendorf, W. B. (1991). Environmental auditing: Protecting yourself from potential 
liability. Jn: Annual International Pittsburg Coal Conference. 424-427 
Mikesell, F. M. (1994). "Viewpoint: Sustainable development of mineral resources." 
Resources Policy 20(2): 83. 
Miller, C. G. (1997). "Mining and sustainable development: environmental policies and 
programmes of mining industry associations." UNEP Industry and Environment 20(4): 
14-17. 
Miller, C. G. and D. Eldon (1991). Financial Assurance for Mine Reclamation, 
Decommissioning and Post-closure Obligations. In: 2nd International Conference on 
the Abatement of Acidic Drainage, Montreal, Montreal Quebec: Environmental 
Drainage Program 1991. 127-143 
Miller, G. C. (1998). Use of Financial Surety for Environmental Purposes. Book 
downloaded on 28/02/1999 from http://www.icme.com/icme/:finsurety.htm, 
Internanitonal Council on Metals and the Environment (ICME). 55 p. 
Milson, J. and J. Purtill (1998). Implementation of Long-term closure Planning Strategies 
- A Gold Mine Case Study. In: 1998 Minerals Council of Australia Environmental 
Workshop,, Minerals Council of Australia. 217-226 
MMSD (2001 ). Mine closure - Draft working paper, International Institute for 
Environment and Development (IIED) - Mining, Minerals and Sustainable 
Development Project (MMSD). 2002. 
Morgan, A (1995). Bureau on land management's regulatory issues - Program on mine 
closure. In: Mine Closure: Creating Productive Public and Private Assets, Nevada. 21-
Morrey, D. R. (1999). Integrated planning for economic environmental management 
during mining operations and mine closure. Environmental Policy in Mining: 
Corporate Strategy and Planning for Mining Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. 
New York, Lewis Publishers: 243-256. 
Morrey, D. R. and D. Van Zil (1994). Including uncertainty in mine closure. In: 5th 
Western Regional Conference on Precious Metals, Coal and the Environment, Black 
Hills, South Dakota, Society for Mining , Metallurgy and Exploration. 1-11 
Morrey, D.R., D. Van Zil and J. W. Gadsby (1995). "Principal components of economic 
mine closure." lst-Coriferenceon Mining and Environment in Zimbabwe: 184-194. 
MPC (1993). ''Burden of Gilt -The Legacy of Environmental Damage from Abandoned 
Mines and What America Should do About it." Mineral Policy Center: 1-2. 
Mudder, T. arid K. Harvey (1998). "Closure Concepts." Minirig Environmental 
Management 6(6): 8-10. 
Munchenberg, S. (1998). "Is there a role for mining in sustainable development?" 
Groundwerk 2(2). 
Nazari, M. (1999). "Financial provision for mine closure." Mining Environmental 
Management 7(3): 14-15. 
NBR-13028 (1993). Elaboracao e Apresentacao de Projeto de Disposicao de Rejeitos de 
Bene:ficiamento, em Barramento, em Mineracao. Belo Horizonte, Associa9ao 
Brasileira de Normas Tecnicas (ABNT). 
NBR-13029 (1993). Elaboracao e Apresentacao de Projeto de Disposicao de Esteril, em 
Pilhas, em Mineracao. Belo Horizonte, Associa9ao Brasileira de Normas Tecnicas 
(ABNT). 
NBR-13744 (1996). Cianeto "Processos de Destruicao em Efluentes de Mineracao. Belo 
Horizorite, Associa9ao Biasileira de Nonnas Tecnicas (ABNT). 
Neale, R. C. and A. Green (1996). "Recent developments in environmental liability issues 
in Ontario." Mine Closure Plans and Liability Issues: 213-232. 
Neil, C., M. Tykkylainen and J. Bradbury, Eds. (1992). Coping With Closure: An 
International Comparasion ofMine Town Experiences. London, Routledge. 
Neto, J. S. C. (1999). Mineral legislation and investment policy. The Mineral Economy of 
Brazit USGS. Washington D.C., US. Department of Interior: 33-57. 
NMA (1998). Mining and our environment. Washingto~ D.C., National Mining 
Association {NMA). 28 p. 
NRC (1996). The Minerals and Metals Policy of the Government of Canada: Partnerships 
for. Sustainable-Oeyeleprilent. Ontario, Minerals and Metals Sector. Natural Resources 
Canada. 25 p. 
NRC (1997). Sustainable Development of Minerals and Metals. Prepared in connection 
with Canada's participation at the meeting of the United Nations Commission on 
Sustainabie Development. Available on Internet at http:www.nrcan. Ottawa, Natural 
Resources Canada. 17 p. 
NRC (2000). Minerals and Metals: Towards a Sustainable Future. A Canadian 
contribution to the land use dialogue at the Eighth Session of the United Nations 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/mms/sdev/future-e-pdf. Ottawa, Canada, Natural Resources 
Canada. 17 p. 
NRMU (1999). Report on the Iriternational Round table on Mining and the Environment -
Berlin II. Berlin, Gesellschaft, C. D., Natural Resources Management Unit. 104 p. 
O'Bryant, D. J. (1995). State regulatory programs and a BLM state office perspective. In: 
Mine Closure: Creating Productive Public and Private Assets, Nevada. 365-368 
OECD (1998). "Sustainable Development: A Renewed Effort by the OECD. Available on 
lfitefriet at http://www.oecd.org/publications/Pol_ brief71998/9808-eng.htm." OECD 
Policy Briet{No. 8). 
OECD (1998). Towards Sustainable Development - Environmental Indicators. Paris, 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 129 p. 
Onishi, E. Y. (1999). "Legisla9ao ambiental aplicada a minera9ao." Brasil Mineral(l 74): 
36-40. 
Ontario (1995). Rehabilitation of mines: Guidelines for proponents, Ministry of Northern 
Development and Mines. 
Orava, D. A. arid R C. Swider (1996). "Inhibiting acid mine drainage throughout the 
mine cycle." CIM Bulletin 89(999): 52-56. 
Ostensoon, 0. (2000). The stakeholders: Interests and objectives. Sustainable 
Development and the Future of Mineral Investment. J. Otto and J. Cordes. Paris, 
UNEP: 3.1-3.30. 
Otto, J. and J. Cordes (2000). Sustainable development and the future of mineral 
investment. Paris, UNEP. p. 
Overholt, D. H. and L. Downs (1996). "Mine closure plans in British Columbia." Mine 
Closure Plans and Liability Issues: 81-120. 
Parizotto, J. A. (1995). 0 Gerenciarnento Ambiental: Estudo de Caso de Cinco Empresas 
de-Minerayao-n<rBrasil. Rio de Janeiro, CNPq/CETEM. 131 p. 
Parrish, C. (1991). Environmental Compliance Costs in Mining. Environmental 
Management for the 1990's. D. J. Lootens, W. M. Greenslade and J. M. Barker. 
Littleton, Colorado, Society for Miriing, Metallurgy arid Exploration Inc: 69-78. 
Payne, R. (2000). Elliot Lake: A case study in mine closure. In: Mine Closure and 
Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Books Ltd. 53-55 
Petts, J. and G. Eduljee (1994). "Integration of Monitoring, Auditing and Environmental 
Assessment: Waste Facility Issues." Project Appraisal 9( 4): 231-241. 
Poling, G. W. (1998). "Island copper reclamation." Mining EnvironmentaI,Management 
6(6): 16-18. 
Price Waterhouse LLP (1995). The voluntary environmental audit service of U.S. 
Business, Compliance Management and Policy Group, Coalition for Improved 
Environmental Audits, Environmental Auditing Roundtab le, B.F. Goodrich, Eli Lilly 
& Co., Texas Instruments: 54-65. 
PricewaterhousesCoopers (1999). Financial reporting in the mining industry for the 21 st 
century. 
Prizna:r, F. J., R. Cogen, L. Farmer, D. Gruber, N. Larsen and R. Greenberg (1992). 
Environmental management systems - Audit standard. In: 85th Annual Meeting & 
Exibition, Kansas City, Missouri, Air & Waste Management Association. 1.:.7 
Quilty, J. A., R Walta and W. M. B. Carr (1991). Decommissioning of Leschenault 
Peninsula in: Annual Environmental Workshop - Minerals Council of Australia 1991, 
Perth, Minerals Council of Australia. 250-260 
Richter, C. (1993). A Legal update on mine closure. In: Colloquium: Mine Closure, 
Johannesburg, The South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. 1-13 
Rickard, T. A. (1947). The romance ofniining. Toronto, MacMillan Co. of Canada. viii, 
450p; 
Ricks, G. (1997). "Mining and sustainable development - Environmental considerations 
in mine closure planning." Industry and Environment 20(4): 21. 
Riter, J. (1999). Personal Communication. Brasilia, Departarnento Nacional de Produ'i)ao 
Mineral (DNPM). 
Robertson, A. M. (1989). Long-term Liability of Mine Wastes. In: Continuing Legal 
Education Seminar: Environmental Liability and Hazardous Waste Management. 
Paper d.ownioaded from http://www.infomine.com/rgroup/rgc/papers.htmi, Vancouver, 
B. C. 1-5 
Robertson, A. M. and A W, Clifton (1987), Design Consideration for the Long-term 
Containment of Tailings. In: 40th Canadian Geotechnical Conference, Regina. 345"' 
Robertson, A. M., D. Devenny and S. C. Shaw (1998). Post Mining Sustainable Use Plans 
Vs Closure Plans. In: 22nd Annual BC Mine Reclamation Symposium. Paper 
downloaded from http://www.infomine.com/rgroup/rgc/papers.html, Penticton, BC. 
Canada 
Robinson, G. M. L. (2002). The-myst:ery-of-Summitville Where did-all-the-money-ge? 
In: SME Annual Meeting & Exhibit, Phoenix, Society for Mining, Metallurgy, and 
Exploration, Inc. 78 
Roig, R. A. (1995). Eriviroririienfal management systems auditing: An overview of goals 
and methods. in: Air & Waste Management Association 88th Annual Meeting & 
Exibition, San Antonio, Texas. 1-6 
Ruchti, C. S. and J. Francois (1993). "Avoiding environmental liability." America's 
Textiles International (ATD 22( 4): 38.;40. 
Salisbury, D. (2000). Mine-closure-and~rehabilitatio~of-th~Ridg~way-M.ine. In: Mine 
Ciosure and Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Book Ltd. 
63;;72 
Sassoon, M. (1996). "Closure or abandonment?" Mining Magazine(August): 96-100. 
Sassoon, M. (1999). Effective Environmental Impact Assessment. Environmental Policy 
in Mining: Coorporate Strategy and Planning for Closure. A. Warhurst and L. 
Noronha. London, Lewis Publishers: 101-106. 
Sassoon, M. (2000). Environmental aspects of mine closure. In: Mine Closure and 
Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Books Ltd. 116-123 
Scaife, J>. H. (i991). Environmental management and the role of auditing - An Australian 
perspective. In: Environmental Workshop '91, Perth, Australia, Australian Mining 
industry Council. 104-115 
Scales, M. (1991). "Departing with Dignity." Canadian Mining Journal(May): 33-37. 
Sinclair-Desgagne, B. and R L. Gabel (1997). "Environmental auditing in management 
systems and public policy." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 
33(3): 331-346. 
Smith, E. (1995). RegulatQf)Land enviromnental overview A g-ell@ral-managei"s 
perspective. In: Mine Closure: Creating Productive Public and Private Assets, Nevada. 
25-31 
Smitli, P. and R. Hillis (1996). "BHP iron-ore protocol for mine closure." 96(1): 67-71. 
Sperling, E. V. (1995). Progn6stico Sohre Qualidade da Agua Ap6s Enchimento da Cava 
da Minera9ao de Aguas Claras - MBR. 
Stans, J. (1995). "Development of ISO standards for environmental auditing." UNEP 
Industry and Environment(April-September): 24-27. 
Strohm, B. C. and T. F. Markey (1992). Evaluating potential human health risks 
associated with a non-ferrous metals manufaeturing faeility. Risk 
Assessment/Management Issues in the Environmental Planning of Mines. D. Van Zyl, 
M. Koval and T. M. Li. Littleton, CO, Sociefy ofMining, Metallurgy, and Exploration, 
Inc.: 123-130. 
Swart, S. J., W. Pulles, R.H. Boer, J. Kirkaldy and C. Pettit (1998). "Environmental risk 
assessment as the basis for mine closure at Iscor Mining." Journal of the South African 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy 98(1 ): 1 "'6. 
Thompson, D. and M. J. Wilson (1994). "'Environmental Auditing - Theory and 
Applications.;' Environmental Management 18( 4): 605-615. 
Tilton, J. E. (1992). Mineral wealth and economic development. Washington, D.C., 
Resources for the Future. vi, 121 p. p. 
Tongway, D. (1998). ''Indicators: Measures of success.'; Groundwork2(1): 1-4. 
Tongway, D., N. Hindley, J. Ludwig, A. Kearns and G. Barnett (1997). Early Indicators 
of Ecosystem Rehabilitation on Selected Minesites. Jn: 22nd Annual Environmental 
Workshop, Adelaide, Minerals Council of Australia 
Tunes, M. R. (2002). Portatia No. 375, de 21 de agosto de 2002. Diario Oficial da Uriiao. 
Brasilia. 58-59. 
Turner, G. W. and R. M. C. Ruffio (1993). "Environmental auditing for nonpoint-source 
pollution-control in a region of New-South-Wales (Australia)." Water Science and 
Technology 28(3-5): 301-309. 
Tuttle, S. and R. Sisson (1998). Closure Plan for the Proposed Millenium Project. Mine 
Planning and Equipment Selection 1998; Singhal. Rotterdan, Balkema: 747-760. 
U. N. (1992). Mining and the environment - the Berlin guidelines: a study based on an 
International Round Table. United Nations. London, U.K., Mining Journal Books Ltd. 
UNDTCD (1992). Sustainable mining for sustainable development m developing 
countries. In: Mifieral Resources Development and the Ertvirohrhent, New Y otk. 3-8 
UNEP (1998). Industry and Environment 21(3). 
US Department of Interior (2000). Handbook for calculation of reclamation bond 
ari:ioiliits. liiromiatioii capfufed at http://WWW.6sfufe.g6v/directives/directive882a.pdf. 
2001. 
US Government (1993). Compilation of selected laws concerning minerals and mining. 
Report prepared for the use of the committee on natural resources. Washington, House 
Committee on Natural Resources. 
Villas Boas, R. c. (1997). '.f-ecl1oolo-gi~hallenges facedc_by the---:tilining and 
metallurgical sector in achieving sustainable development. In: Proceedings of the XX 
International Mineral Processing (IMPC), Aachen. 27--'38 
Waggitt, P. w. (1998). The Decommissioiiiiig and Reliaoilifation of the Naoarlek 
Uranium Mine. in: Environmental issues and Waste Management in Energy and 
Mineral Production,, 13alkema. 431-436 
Waggitt, P. W. and G. V. McQuade (1994). Mine close-out criteria - Present guidelines 
and future trends in Australia. In: 1994 AusIMM Annual Conference: Australian 
Mining Looks North, the Challenges and Choices, Darwiii, Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy, 407-410 
Warhurst, A. (1999). Planning for closure from the outset: Towards best practice in public 
policy arid corporte strategy for fuari.agiiig the environmental and social effects of 
mmmg. Env1ronmenta1 PoHcy m M1nmg - corporate Strategy and Plannmg for 
Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. London, Lewis Publishers: 497-502. 
Warhurst, A. and R. Jordan (1992). "The Bolivian mining crisis." Resources 
Policy(March, 1992). 
Warhurst, A., M. Macfarlane and G. Wood (1999). Issues ih the management of the 
socioeconomic impacts of mine closure, Environmental Policy in Mining: Coorporate 
Strategy and Planning for Closure. A. Warhurst and L. Noronha. London, Lewis 
Publishers: 81-100. 
Weathere11, C. J. and D. J. Feasby (1997). The Mining Environmental Neutral Drainage 
(MEND) program: A model for co-perative technology development. In: 28 the 
Annual Seminars and Simposium, PMI'97. 657-663 
Welchman, B. and C. Aspinall (2000). Island Copper Mine: A case historry. In: Mine 
Closure and Sustainable Development, Washington, DC, Mining Journal Books Ltd. 
56-62 
Werniuk, J. (2001). "Mines prepare for life after clostite - Back to nature." Canadian 
Mining Joumal(DeGember); 10-15. 
White, A. M. 8. (1996). Closure: An open and shut case? Is it that simple? In: Mine 
Closure Plaiis atid Liability Issues, Ontario, Ifisiglit Press. 141-152 
Williams, d-. (1993). "Closing a hardrock mine - Can you ever walk away'r Rocky 
Mountain Mineral Law Institutes (40). 
Withers, E. R. and W. S. Dubyk (1996). Property transfer audits performed. In: Eco-
Management and Auditing Conference, Leeds, uk, The University of Leeds. 343-357 
WMI (1994). En-vitotiiiiental issues group, Whitehorse Miniilg Initiative. 
Wolfe, l M, (1992), Mine closure in single-industry mining towns and the problems of 
residual activity. Coping With Closure: An International Comparison of Mine Towns 
Experiences. c. Neil, M. Tykkylaiiien and J. Bradbtify. London, Routledge: 192. 
Wood, C., B. Dipper and C. Jones (2000). "Auditing the assessment of' environmental 
impacts of planning projects." Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 
43(1): 21-47. 
Wood, G. (1999). "Post .. development auditing of EIA predictive techniques: A spatial 
ana]ytical approach." futiffia.Lof.EflvltofiliientalPJatifiifig ancLManagettieiit 42(5): 671-
World Bank (1996). The World Bank Participation Sourcebook. In: World Bank 
Erivirorifueritally Sustainable Development Proceedings Series, Washington, D.C., 
woridBank 
Zirschky, J. (1990). "Environmental audits - Common compliance problems." Water 
Environment & Technology(May): 44-47. 
APPENDIX I - PRE-AUDIT QUESTIONNAIRE 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
1. What is the type and size of the mining project? 
2. What are the operational components of the mine? 
3. What are the current conditions and uses of the site? 
4. What is the possible post-mining use of the site? 
5. Does the company have an Environmental Management System (EMS)? 
6. What are the potential impacts on human health and safety and the 
environment of the mining project? 
7. Is there a monitoring programme m place? What does the monitoring 
programme cover? 
8. Are there after care and rehabilitation programmes in place, in accordance and 
approved by a recognised body? 
9. How many mining components are going to be involved m the closure 
process? 
10. Have geochemical and geotechnical studies concernmg the engineering 
properties of soil or rock been performed? 
11. Have studies been made regarding stability analysis, considering both the short 
and long term? 
12. Are they available for consultation during site visit? 
13. Have studies concerning the hydrology (surface and ground water) of the mine 
site been made? 
14. Is there a social communication programme, which makes provision for 
liaison with the community involved, hearing their concerns and attempting to 
understand their problems as well as encouraging them to become familiar 
with mining operations? 
15. Does the company encourage and support liaison communities? 
16. Is there any sewer treatment systems installed? 
17. Is there any oil and greases treatment systems installed? 
18. Is site investigation carried out on a regular basis and records kept? 
MINING OPERATIONS 
1. What are the dimensions of the pit? 
2. What is the proposed post-mining use for the pit? 
3. What is the expected amount of ore and waste to be extracted from the pit? 
4. Has the mine instruments to control dust, noise and vibrations installed on the 
5. Has the mine instruments to control slope stability installed on the pit? 
6. Has studies concerning underground water been made in the pit? 
7. Who is responsible for operating and recording dust, noise and vibration 
controls? 
8. Is site investigation carried out on a regular basis and records kept? 
9. What will be done with mining equipment after closure? 
10. Have geochemical and geotechnical studies concernmg the engmeermg 
properties of soil or rock been performed? 
11. Have studies been made regarding stability analysis, considering both the short 
and long term? 
12. Have appropriated slope configurations (gradient and length) and the factor of 
safety of slopes (>1,2) been designed and checked? 
13. Is there a drainage system which collects the surface water on the slope, and is 
it connected to an external drainage network? 
14. What are the nature and quantities of wastes produced? 
15. How many tailings dams does the mine have? 
16. What type of tailings dam are they? 
17. What is the capacity of them? 
18. Have the tailing dams monitoring to control stability installed? 
19. What will be the final use of them? 
20. Have geochemical and geotechnical studies concerning the engineering 
properties of soil or rock been performed on the tailings dams? 
21. Have studies been made on the tailings dams regarding stability analysis, 
considering both the short and long term? 
22. How many waste dumps does the mine have? 
23. What is the capacity of them? 
24. Have any waste dump already been completed and rehabilitated? 
25. What is the process of construction of the waste dumps? 
26. Have the waste dumps monitoring to control stability installed? 
27. What will be the final use of the dumps? 
28. Have geochemical and geotechnical studies concemmg the engineering 
properties of soil or rock been performed on the dumps? 
29. Have studies been made on the waste dumps regarding stability analysis, 
considering both the short and long term? 
30. What will be the post-mining use of the processing plant itself and its site? 
31. Will the buildings be demolished and foundations buried? 
32. Will the demolition works be conducted by the company or by contractors? 
33. What will be done with processing plant equipment? 
34. What will be done with reagents and other chemical products from the 
processing plant? 
APPENDIX II- LISTS OF DOCUMENTS REVIEWED 
1. Aguas Claras Mine 1998 Mining Plan. 
2. Aguas Claras Mine Environmental Control Plan (PCA). 
3. Aguas Claras Mine Operating Licence issued by the Estate Environmental 
Policy Council (COPAM) in 1986. 
4. Bertachini, A. C., 1994, Hidrologia e Desaguamento da Mina de Aguas Claras. 
Anais do 8 Congresso Brasileiro de Aguas Subterraneas, Recife, Brazil. 
5. Brandt, 1999, "Minera9oes Brasileiras Reunidas - MBR: Long-Term 
Development Plan, Second Phase (1998 -2015)", Brandt Meio Ambiente, 50 p. 
6. Design Workshop, 1991, Aguas Claras Phase One Summary Report. 
7. Door, J. V. N., N. Herz, et al., 1960, Esboco Geol6gico do Quadrilatero 
Ferrifero de Minas Gerais, Brasil. Rio de Janeiro, Departamento Nacional de 
Produ9ao Mineral (DNPM): 120. 
8. Franca, P.R. B., 1997. Analysis of Slope Stability Using Limit Equilibrium and 
Numerical Methods, with Case Examples from the Aguas Claras Mine, Brazil. 
M.Sc. Thesis, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. 
9. Franca, P., 1998, Back-analysis of the Patrim6nio Slope Failure, Proceedings of 
the Seventh International Symposium on Mine Planning and Equipment 
Selection, Calgary, Canada, pp. 131 -134. 
10. Franca, P., 1998, Post-mining Pit Lakes and Slope Stability, The Aguas Claras 
Mine Example, Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Mine 
Planning and Equipment Selection, Calgary, Canada, pp. 135 -140. 
li. Golder, 1993, "Inspection of Waste Dump and Tailings Pond at MBR Mines 
near Belo Horizonte". Golder Associates, Technical Report, 12 p. 
12. Golder, 1993, "Review of Pit Slope Stability at MBR Operations". Golder 
Associates, Technical Report, 12 p. 
13. Golder, 1993, "The Relationship Between Pore Water Pressures, Strain, and 
Stability of the Cross-dikes at Inspection of Waste Dump and Tailings Pond at 
Aguas Claras Mine, Brazil". Golder Associates, Technical Report, 8 p. 
14. Golder, 1994, "Review of Pit Slope Stability at MBR Operations". Golder 
Associates, Technical Report, 36 p. 
15. Golder, 1995, "An Assessment of Measures to Assure Long-Term Stability of 
me fill at Grota No.3, Aguas Claras Mine, Belo Horizonte, Brazil". Golder 
Associates, Technical Report, 8 p. 
16. IBGE, 1998, "Economia - Industria". Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e 
Estatistica (IBGE), http://www.ibge.gov.br. 
17. MBR, 1998, Minera9oes Brasileiras Reunidas SA. Social Report. 
18. Sperling, E.V., 1995, Progn6stico Sobre Qualidade da Agua Apos Enchimento 
da Cava da Minera9ao de Aguas Claras - MBR, Technical Report. 
