Microsoft Word - Edited thesis for resubmission Jan 17.docx
Running head: Dementia within the Marital Sphere 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere - Discourse, Power & Knowledge 
Kerri. L. Walster 
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctorate in Clinical Psychology 
Department of Health and Human Sciences 
University of Essex 
Date of Submission: June 2016 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 2 
Abstract 
Introduction: This thesis completed a genealogical enquiry which considered 
how dementia has been conceptualised historically and contextually, plus the conditions 
that have allowed for the emergence of certain dementia discourses over others. It 
explored how dementia has generated biomedical, neuro, psychological, pharmaceutical, 
technological, charitable and academic forces that in turn, produce and maintain the 
power of these forces, plus the dominant biomedical model of dementia. It also examined 
the role of family and marriage in the context of dementia.  
Method: Drawing upon Foucaults work and discourse theory, professionally 
produced leaflets from dementia assessment clinics and NICE (2006) guidelines for 
dementia were examined. Secondly, participants with diagnoses of Dementia (PWDD) 
and their spouse were interviewed either jointly or separately (fourteen participants in 
total). Ten transcripts were analysed from a discourse theory perspective. 
Results: The document analysis presented various discursive themes, which 
corroborated the findings in the transcript analysis. From the transcripts, nine main 
discourses were identified. For instance, the feared fate constructed the inescapability of 
dementia in old age relating to dementia facts and figures. Pay no mind involved paying 
little attention to dementia and setting dementia talk aside. The biomedical truth of 
dementia depicted professional technologies as truths supporting the biomedical 
origins of dementia. Spouses with and without diagnoses of dementia tended to adopt 
dissimilar discourses, resulting in spouses monitoring and correcting PWDD and 
PWDDs resistance. Marriage discourses constructed the importance of marriage and the 
need to overcome trials and tribulations.  
Discussion: Unexpected findings in the data were strongly gendered discourses, 
plus, where spouses without dementia were positioned in the role of the informal 
professional yet also the confessing patient. Marriage discourses appeared to be 
complimentary in making marriage a natural sphere for caring. Biomedical discourse on 
dementia was effective in self-management of dementia signs and electing ethically 
bound spousal support, effective as a modern form of power where there are limited 
societal resources. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 3 
Contents 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 4 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 5 
4.03 How were discourses adopted complementary to the apparatus of power  
4.04 The biomedical truth of dementia  how may our understandings be  
4.05 Pay no mind a two fold collectivisation of gender and dementia?  
4.06 The feared fate and inanimate/dangerous dementia subject  scope for  
4.07 Sins & symptoms, knowing best and pay no mind  what other theoretical  
4.08 An unhelpful alignment of the person-centred model with biomedical  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 6 
Tables  & Figures 
Leaflet 1: Drugs to relieve behavioural & psychological symptoms in dementia  .. 214 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 7 
1. Introduction 
1.01 Chapter Overview 
This chapter follows a genealogical approach heavily influenced by Michael 
Foucault (Foucault, 1977). It aims to present some of the contingent moments that 
constitute contemporary understandings of dementia and the historical conditions of 
possibility that allowed for the emergence of certain dementia discourses over others. 
Here, discourse refers to sets rules, systems of thought, and procedures; it is viewed as 
incomplete, ambiguous and complimentary to forming and producing power, knowledge, 
action and material structures that in turn continue to uphold discourse1 (Foucault, 1991).  
Typical to genealogical enquiries, this chapter begins with a set of questions, 
problematising the concept of dementia while justifying the need for a critical 
consideration of its formation and functioning. It then includes the examination of the 
concept dementia through different time points to show how constructions of dementia 
are subject to prevailing models of thought, and change. Attention to the way various 
political sites, such as, psychiatry, psychology, legal, ethical and commercial, structure 
understandings and practices relating to dementia, are argued to be central. Marriage and 
family are considered to a lesser extent from a similar, social and historical perspective. 
In developing a genealogy, Foucault (1991) emphasised the need for an 
accumulation of source materials, as a way of critically assessing the complex 
circumstances that allow for discourse to form and fade. In this chapter there is an 
examination of primary data, including Alzheimers (1906) case study and his related 
publications, plus previous editions of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual criteria for 
diagnosing dementia. Likewise, secondary data is used, such as academic and 
professionals quotations from the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries regarding memory loss and 
disease (e.g. see, Berrios, 1987).  
It is notable that this genealogy is not a complete or historical tracing of a 
discourse; it is an attempt to construct an argument advancing a different view of 
dementia by isolating some principal scenes and roles. Many events upholding dementia 
discourse will not be accounted for in this analysis (Hook, 2007). Also, where this thesis 
follows Rawlinson (1987) and Hook (2010) models for the application of discourse 
analysis, how a discourse has arisen is the task of the genealogy (presented in chapter 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 8 
one); however, why it functions is chiefly encompassed in a subsequent analysis (chapter 
three). Chapter three includes the analysis of professional leaflets and guidelines, and 
interview data from spouse dyads when one spouse has a diagnosis of dementia. It 
considers the dominant and alternative discourses that are operational concerning 
dementia. The genealogical analysis is presented as follows.  
1.02 The Problem.  
For a number of years there has been a Political argument that elder adults are 
placing significant pressure on societal resources and health care budgets (House of 
Parliament, 2010, 2015). This is often related to epidemiology research presenting a 
growing population, people living longer and a high prevalence of disease among elder 
adults  amongst these diseases, of chief concern is dementia (e.g. Ferri et al., 2005; van 
der Flier, 2005). Epidemiology research is often juxtaposed with the argument that if 
welfare is not cut and public services are re-structured then this may result in the 
fragmentation of the National Health Care System. Robertson (1990) has described this 
as the bankruptcy hypothesis of old ageing where upcoming hoards of elderly deplete 
national healthcare budget through an apocalyptic demography (p. 429). While there are 
alternative representations of elder adults (i.e. stoic and heroic war survivors, earnest past 
workers, entitled to formal care, pension programmes and so forth) such images may be 
seen as contingent upon the societal demand elder adults are seen to place (Biggs & 
Powell, 2001). Limitless suggestions of a demand too great, particularly in the context of 
the proposed high dementia prevalence, may be seen to maintain a dominant discourse of 
disease, decline, burden, and dependency in old age.  
Despite Political arguments about the social cost elder adults generate (House of 
Parliament, 2015), increased utilisation and living longer but sicker arguments have been 
contested by a number of sources (e.g. Barer, Evans, Hertzman, & Lomas, 1987; Myles, 
1983; Roos & Shapiro, 1981). In the case of dementia, even if recognising individuals 
diagnosed with and treated for dementia may receive more health and social care support, 
it may be argued that this is generated by neuro, pharmaceutical, technological, 
commercial, and academic forces that gather to form a cognitive culture, which in turn, 
produces and maintains the power of the cognitive culture  explored further. 
Dementia has been constructed as a progressive and pathologically degenerative 
syndrome, affecting thinking capacities, particularly memory. Countless studies report 
that there is an increased likelihood of developing the disease above the age of sixty-five 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 9 
(e.g. see, Alzheimers Society, 2014)2. The most recent definition of dementia from the 
World Health Organisation (WHO) is: 
A syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a chronic progressive nature, 
in which there is disturbance of multiple higher cortical functions including 
memory, thinking, orientation, comprehension, calculation, learning capacity, 
language and judgement. Consciousness is not clouded. Impairments of cognitive 
function are commonly accompanied, and occasionally preceded by deterioration 
in emotional control, social behaviour, or motivation. This syndrome occurs 
particularly in Alzheimers disease, cerebral vascular disease, and in other related 
conditions (WHO, 2006, p. 42). 
As common, this definition aligns with a biomedical model of dementia, which 
categorizes signs and symptoms into meaning disease groupings. The task of medicine 
has always been the disappearance of disease. Correspondingly, disciplines of psychiatry 
and psychology (psy disciplines) have been occupied with the management of mind 
diseases (Rose, 2007). The concept of disease has been essential for the evaluation of the 
condition of the patient, and in the bringing about of a relationship between knowledge 
and the patient. Yet, there is ambiguity in all of this; does the disease exist as a collection 
of disturbances in the mind/body or as a result of medical activities and decisions that 
generate power for professionals? Is it a combination of both or something else entirely? 
Furthermore, dementia is reported to be the fourth leading cause of death amongst 
older adults in the UK (WHO, 2012). Worldwide, thirty six million people are presented 
to have the disease and twenty eight million people predicted to have the disease 
undetected (WHO, 2012). Figures such as by 2050, one hundred and fifteen million 
people will be diagnosed, are frequently cited and justify the arguments that dementia has 
reached an epidemic (e.g. see, Alzheimers Society, 2014). The estimates of the 
prevalence in the UK for of different types of dementia are: Alzheimers disease, 62%; 
Vascular dementia, 17%, Mixed dementia, 10%, Lewy Body dementia, 4%; Fronto-
temporal dementia; 2%, Other 5% (Alzheimers Society, 2014). However, are upwards 
dementia prevalence rates reflective of population trends, or is this the expansion of a 
diagnostic classification system with uncertain boundaries hidden in a discourse of 
medical certainty? 3   
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 10 
1.03 The Construct of Disease 
To begin addressing the above-mentioned questions, the role of medicine and the 
construct of disease will be explored. Foucault, (2010) in his work The Birth of the Clinic 
traced the historical origins of modern medicine. Although he did not give much attention 
to the construct of dementia, he studied the rise of clinical classifications in a particular 
time frame, within which knowledge and power are embedded. Foucault (2010) traced 
eighteenth and nineteenth century industrialisation and urbanisation, and he depicted that 
in order for a productive and docile workforce, legal, professional and academic settings 
began to effectively monitor social deviants, proliferating medicine, and the psy 
disciplines success. This was effective through a humanist and liberalist discourses of 
reform and remediation in asylums, clinics or communities.  
Coinciding with this, Foucault (2010) developed the concept, episteme, meaning a 
dominant understanding or school of thought in a particular given time or the 
possibilities of all knowledge, whether expressed in theory or silently invested a practice 
(Foucault, 2010, p.168). During the enlightenment, the signs and the surfaces of the body 
were thought of as fixed to the bodies interior system. The physicians task was to 
examine, probe, and spatialize the body to determine how visible signs marked inner 
states (Foucault, 2010). The body was represented as a visible anatomical map on which 
disease could be localised and disciplinary knowledges around the body could be co-
ordinated. This exposed the limits of existence and moulded the person into a singular 
and finite object to be known and controlled (Davis, 2004). 
Contrastingly, in premodern society, disease or conditions, such as poor memory, 
orientation, judgement and so forth (associated with dementia) were likely to have been 
viewed as mysterious forces, ranging outside of the body (Katz, 1996). Resolution was 
not the task of the physician alone; equally important was the unpredictable, external 
forces and the patients actions, implications being to balance humours, fluids, diet and 
improve ones sex life, or to resolve moral dilemmas (Dillmann, 1990). Canguilhem 
(1988) argues premodern medicine called for watchfulness and support from the healer, 
whereas modern medicine required a more activist orientation from the physician. 
According to Foucault (2010) there was a shift in episteme and a beginning to 
medicine as opposed to a series of progressive discoveries, which enabled medicine to 
pioneer and to appear as a neatly defined discipline. Medicine required exactitude, not 
just degrees or shades of knowing. Both fundamentalism (that is, testing theories, priori 
reasoning and hypotheses against observations) and normativism (interpreting specific 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 11 
types of social deviance from normality) were constructed to replace former, more 
intuition based, methods (Davis, 2004).  
By a realistic shift in which medical positivism was to find its origin, surface, 
hitherto a structure of the onlooker had become a figure of the one observed 
hence, the appearance that pathological autonomy assumed at the outset: that of 
an objective, real and last unquestionable foundation for the description of 
diseases (Foucault, 2010, p. 129).  
Foucault (2010) presents how science and medicine like history made use of 
particular rhetorical devices such as the notions of reality, neutrality and measurement, to 
present it in the best light. Under this historically located veil of objectivity, the 
biomedical nature of dementia is rarely open to challenge.    
1.04 Dementia Pre-Nineteenth Century: Broadly Defined Classifications 
Demence. Berrios (1981a, 1981b, 1987, 1992)4, an academic and a psychiatrist, 
has completed a series of works surrounding the conceptual history of dementia, 
including English, French, and German translations of texts from the seventeenth and 
nineteenth century (also see, Berrios & Hauser, 1988). In his work, he has argued that 
although the term dementia is often linked to Pinel in 1879, the Latin application of the 
word demens, meaning out of ones mind, and the adjectival application, both circulated 
prior to this. For instance, Berrios (1987) cites dementia as a passion of the minde, 
bereaving it into the light of understanding, when mans perceivance and understanding 
of all things is taken away in the late 1500s (Coslin, 1592) and folie, extravagance, 
egarement and alienation of spirit in the late 1700s (Sobrino, 1791) (pp.830-831). 
Nonetheless, in contrast to Berrioss interpretation that there is scientific consistency in 
understandings of dementia, through reviewing these cited sources of data, definitions 
before the nineteenth century appear to relate to a broad and undefined concept relating to 
the loss of mind or historical understandings of madness (e.g. see Porter, 2010). From a 
Foucauldian perspective, this is perhaps fitting with a period of thought where the 
medical frame was not the dominant or prevailing one; instead external forces would be 
seen to influence a change in spirit, as argued above.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 12 
Lethargie, Delirium & Stupor. The task of tracing the concept dementia is a 
difficult one, at odds with the infinite number of psychiatric classifications available to 
date. Nonetheless, few concepts common to this time were delirium, psychosis, lethargie, 
and stupor; conceptually dementia is linked to each of these (Berrios, 1981a; 1981b; 
1987). The following extract referring to Lethargie, a condition of significant 
forgetfulness, represents this: 
Lethargie is a notable forgetfulness of all things almost, that heretofore a man 
hath knowen: so that one often times forgetteth also his owne name, calleth 
anything by a wrong name, and beginning to speake, forgetteth what he had saide 
afore, and what hee meant to say after. This distempreture and weaknes cometh 
by some blow or sickness (Cosin, 1592; as cited in Berrios, 1987, p.830). 
Equally, the use of Delirium in the 1700s, which accounted for most presentations 
where the persons thinking capacity was affected, with and without fever, has been 
linked to dementia (Berrios, 1981). From a discourse perspective, delirium, lethargie and 
related constructs, may be thought of as expansive and broadly specified constructs  the 
definitions of what they were and what they were not do not appear to be particularly 
defined. Again, it is argued that was operational at the time; there was no imminent 
political need for a distinctly defined dementia. Notions of truth, certainty, accuracy and 
predictability, plus medicines diagnostic classification system were yet to emerge and to 
gain a societal purpose.   
In contrast, over a century later, Georget (1820) presented two parallel 
understandings of delirium: one resulting from general illness and another that was a 
disorder of intellect, personality, new ideas, and intelligibility which he argued should be 
differentiated. The syndrome delire aigu was described as a chronic disorder of intellect, 
personality, new ideas, and intelligibility and the syndrome sans fievre, a short term 
impairment of consciousness caused by fever (as cited by Berrios, 1981). This appears to 
be one of the first foundations for later nineteenth century distinctions, where the 
discursive formation of dementia was beginning to be shaped.  
In line with this, throughout the enlightenment, with a gradual emergence of an 
ontology5 (referring to a way of being, becoming or existing that becomes to be taken as a 
reality) that supported that the mind and body were separate and mechanistic entities was 
catalysed. This lead to the reasoning that medical practice ought to capture the internal 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 13 
nature of physically displayed disturbances. To use stupor to exemplify this, Willis 
(1684) described six conditions signified by this classification. 1) a hereditary condition 
one is born with; 2) foolishness by the mere declining of age; 3) bruising to the head 
such a as from a fall from a high place, 4) repeated drunkenness or use of opiates, 5) 
violent passions or vehement sadness; 6) a cruel disease inside the head such as, epilepsy 
(as cited in Berrios, 1987, p.831). Willis (1684) argued stupor, whether innate or acquired 
could not be cured. Similar to Georget (1820), Willis (1684) was one of the first 
physicians to begin to employ dichotomies, such as congenital or acquired, affecting the 
young or the old, temporary or permanent (Berrios, 1987). He was seemingly 
differentiating presentations into more defined boundaries.  
Further exemplifications of the importance of the emerging mind and body 
parallelism and its importance in shaping dementia practise, are presented in extracts 
from Cullen (1827) and DAumont (exact date unknown). Here, a change in intellect and 
behaviour (described as the disease demence) were associated with an imbalance in the 
interior body structures  the nervous system or fluids and the excitement in the 
brain: 
It is very possible that the state of the intellectual functions depends chiefly on 
the state and condition of what we call, nervous power, or as we suppose, a very 
moveable fluid a medullary substance of the brain and nerves, which in living 
and healthy man, is capable of being moved or  may excite at differing times in 
the same way as sleeping and eating it may depend on some inequality in the 
excitement if the brain (Cullen, 1827; as cited in Berrios, 1987, pp. 834-835). 
Demence is a disease resulting from abolition of the reasoning faculty. It must 
be distinguished from Fatuitas, Morosis, Stultitia and Stoliditas  Those affected 
by demence exhibit foolish behaviour and cannot understand what they are told, 
cannot remember anything, have no judgement, are sluggish and retarted [it] is 
difficult to cure as it results from damaged brain fibres or from a reduction in 
nervous fluids or old age (DAumont, exact date unknown, approximately the 
1870s, as cited in Berrios, 1987, p. 829). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 14 
In contrast to earlier mentioned concepts of dementia, in the above extracts, there 
is the objectifying of what dementia is, and what it is not, through the separation of the 
concept demence from mania and other concepts, and the identification of symptom 
clusters.  
The proliferation of medical knowledge.  
In Foucaults (1991) work Discipline and Punish, such objectification is argued to 
have justified and increased the need for disciplinary technologies, referring to various 
institutional, physical and administrative mechanisms and knowledge structures that 
govern the individual subject whilst enhancing and maintaining the rationality of power 
for organisational/institutional governing (see methodology). Jewson, (2009) argues 
medical statements became to be not just statements about the world but ways of relating 
to others in the world; they reflected and projected concepts of order and identity onto a 
network of relationships, which then constituted medical knowledge (Jewson, 2009, 
p.623). As dependent upon medical statements and networks, and the conditions of 
possibility in a given time and space, including the Poor Law Act, Social Survey and 
Almshouses, dementia entered in to increasingly defined and politically maintained 
boundaries. 
The Poor Law Act. In fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, there was a sharp increase 
in begging, vagrancy and food riots in England (Parker, 2005). Disorder emerged in 
society amongst the poor, leading to consideration on the distribution of resources. The 
government enacted several poor law rulings between 1531 and 1576, as much to effect 
the beliefs, attitudes and behaviour of working class people generally as it was to 
discipline or provide for those who received [its relief] (Parker 2005, p.62). Under this 
law a poor tax was endorsed which generated an income for three categories of people: 
children, able-bodied and the infirm  older adults are likely to have been grouped in to 
the latter two (Parker, 2005). Zarastsky (1986; as cited in Katz, 1990) argued that this was 
the start of classification discourses that emphasised types of persons rather than religious 
thought relating to the quality of the soul; classification was an effect of structural 
changes to methods of charity and legislative-rationalist perspectives.  
Almshouses. The Poor Law generated a tax, which supported the steady the 
development of almshouses or workhouses, where indoor relief, food, clothing, 
employment and medical care were provided for those without family support (Parker, 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 15 
2005). In the 1800s there was one almshouse in every town in the UK; the task was to 
reform criminals, mentally ill, unemployed persons and orphans, and elder adults. 
However, liberalist-humanitarian movements argued against the overcrowded and poorly 
maintained conditions in the almshouses (Parker, 2005). By the 1850s it was emphasised 
that not only did the almshouse fail to solve the problems of poverty and dependency, it 
perpetuated them. Their revised concept was to introduce established and specialised 
institutions and greater medical care with stricter supervision, the beginnings of an 
institutional explosion (Katz, 1996). This was also the time of the industrial revolution, 
where the population seemed to be reaching unprecedented sustained growth.   
The social survey. In response to the populations growth, in the 1800s the 
development of the social survey allowed for the collection of demographic information 
to monitor, and control, population trends (Bulmer, Bales, & Sklar, 1991). Statistics 
about the population were part of what Foucault described as bio-politics a new 
technology of power that exists on a different level and scale that makes use of very 
different instruments (Foucault, Rabinow, & Hurley, 1997). More than a disciplinary 
mechanism, Foucault's biopolitics acts as a control apparatus exerted over a population as 
a global mass (Foucault, Rabinow, & Hurley, 1997). This is the making of populations as 
a material process whereby people are divided into sources of economic productivity, 
objects of statistical measurement, and transgressors of social order (Katz, 1996). Jewson 
(1976) states the state became to increasingly rely on the advice of the scientific 
community when distributing resources. Medical investigators were able to assert their 
disciplinary interests over educational, institutional and professional sites.   
1.05 Dementia within Psychiatry 
A new classification system. Amongst others in the late eighteen hundreds, Emil 
Kraeplin, a German psychiatrist, critiqued disease classifications for not being distinct 
enough (Dillman, 1991). He argued that where prior distinctions had been made between 
acute and chronic diseases, these lacked empiricism, which had become part of the 
hegemonized discourse of medicine. The word hegemonized refers to a relatively fixed 
discourse that has come to be taken for granted and that arranges, and is arranged by, 
discursive structures (Howarth, 2000). Using the system of empiricism, Kraeplin 
proposed that for each disease, symptoms could be used as criteria to generate a 
classification system for patient diagnosis. The combining of separate disciplines, 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 16 
neuropathology and psychiatry, were assumed by Kraeplin to enable this, in allowing new 
methods and streams of research technologies with increasing rigor. Observation, 
measurement, experimentation and classification, as well as the influence of social factors 
discussed, present a complex array of conditions that allowed for the emergence of a 
discourse of a non-age related disease, dementia, discussed further. 
Alzheimers case study. Alzheimer, a close acquaintance of Kraepelin, wrote two 
papers on the case study, Auguste D. in 1906 and 1907, various clinical case notes and he 
presented a lecture 1911; these are considered as part of this genealogy (translations 
obtained from Alzheimer, Frstl, & Levy, 1991 & Maurer & Maurer, 2003). In 1901, 
Auguste D, a 51-year-old woman who was legally sectioned in a clinic in Frankfurt. She 
was described by Alzheimer as having jealous delusions about her husband who had left 
her for another woman, memory disturbance, disorientation, delirium and auditory 
hallucinations (Alzheimer, 1907; as cited in Maurer & Maurer, 2003, p.20). Alzheimer 
also uncommonly applied novel laboratory technologies (i.e. Nissl staining of brain cells, 
microscope) newly proclaimed to measure internal brain structures. He stated that in 
conjunction, clinical observation and brain measurement had enabled the distinction of a 
disease process different from other known diseases. These required further refinement 
and an inclusion in medical texts, ostensibly to support other clinicians to recognise and 
diagnose it: 
Numerous neurons, especially in the upper cell layers, had totally disappeared. 
Dispersed over the entire cortex, and in large numbers, especially in the upper 
layers. It was even possible to recognise these without staining, but they were 
more evident once stained. On the whole, it is evident that we are dealing with a 
peculiar, little-known disease process This fact should stimulate us to further 
study and analysis of this particular disease. We must not be satisfied to force it 
into the existing group of well-known disease patterns. It is clear that there exist 
many more mental diseases than our textbooks indicate We must reach the 
stage in which the vast, well-known disease groups must be subdivided into many 
smaller groups, each one with its own clinical and anatomical characteristics 
(Alzheimer, 1907; as cited in Maurer & Maurer, 2003, p.21). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 17 
Originally, Alzheimer stated his case study suffered from presenile dementia, a 
mental decline as a natural process of ageing. Other conceptualisations of dementia 
operated at this time, although it seemed that presenile definition of natural ageing was 
the most common conceptualisation (see, Berrios & Porter, 1998). Presenile dementia 
was a popular term amongst the emerging specialism of geriatrics. Geriatrics is a term I 
would suggest is an addition to our vocabulary to cover the same field, in old age, that is 
covered by the term paediatrics, in childhood considering senility and its diseases 
assign it to a separate place in medicine (Nascher, 1909; as cited in Berrios & Porter, 
1995, p.59). Yet, at this time, psychiatrys classification of dementia as a disease would 
have been functional: it would have separated it from other competing disciplinary fields 
and designate it to psychiatric study and practice. In line with this Alzheimer withdrew 
his initial case formulation and instead endorsed that the pathology exemplified was a 
different type of dementia, illustrated in the above extract. 
Differentiating presenile dementia and a pathological dementia. Alzheimers 
rationale to separate presenile dementia and dementia was the presence of brain plaques 
and tangles in dementia, proven by Auguste D.s cell staining measurements. Alzheimer 
also claimed that that this case could not be suffering age related degeneration and 
decline (presenile dementia) due to the age of onset change occurred  the case was aged 
fifty-one (Alzheimer, 1907; as cited in Maurer & Maurer, 2003). Alzheimer reasoned that 
where Auguste D. presented with language disturbances and spasticity, this too was 
uncommon to presenile dementia (i.e. where memory or cognition may be effected 
though not language). Thus, based on Auguste D. Alzheimer claimed the discovery of a 
new condition: an accelerated degenerative disease of the brain that cannot be attributed 
to specifically to any one age. It is worth noting here this is different from the 
contemporary definition of dementia as cited above, prevalent mostly above aged sixty-
five, including language difficulties (WHO, 2006). Also, in the extract below Alzheimer 
is shown to have specified that similar presentations occurred in old age, which should 
be labelled presenile dementia, but that these cases were not definitively a disease 
processes. He differentiated disease related presenile dementia or atypical cases, to 
further confirm or justify the distinct condition dementia that he had outlined.  
As similar cases of disease obviously occur in the late old age, it is therefore not 
exclusively a presenile disease, and there are cases of presenile dementia which 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 18 
do not differ from these presenile cases with respect to the severity of disease 
process. There is, then, no tenable reason to consider these cases as caused by a 
specific disease process. They are presenile psychoses, atypical forms of presenile 
dementia in order to avoid misdiagnosis it will therefore have to be the task of 
future research to collect a larger number of such cases  to substantiate their 
position with respect to presenile dementia on an even firmer basis (Alzheimer, 
1907; as cited in Maurer and Maurer, 2003, p. 32).  
Alzheimer goes on to report that there were multiple observations in the 
department of this non-age related disease causing accelerated decline, thus, it should 
not be too rare to establish the symptomology (Alzheimer, 1907; as cited in Maurer and 
Maurer, 2003, p. 32). Alzheimer worked with several psychiatrists: Bonfiglio, Fischer, 
Hbner, Myake, Perusini, Pick, Redlich and Sarteschi and Simchowicz (Maurer & 
Maurer, 2000). Yet, it appears that there were in fact only five other published papers 
referring to this new classification of dementia, and the listed colleagues reproduced 
Alzheimers case study in four of these papers; Perusing (1910) was the only separate 
case fitting with Alzheimers account of this new disease (see, Maurer & Maurer, 2003).  
Despite the sound empiricism that was supposedly representative of the 
psychiatric discipline, soon after this, a separate classification was embedded into 
Kraepelins taxonomy, in his book on the practise of psychiatry (Kraepelin, 2002). He 
labelled it, Alzheimers disease, defined as a non-age related form of cognitive 
deterioration through loss of brain matter (Kraepelin, 2002).  
1.06 Problems with the Discursive Formation of Dementia  
It has been presented that Alzheimer himself was not so certain of the category 
Alzheimers disease (Dillmann, 1990). Alzheimer (1911) later presented another case 
study that showed the symptoms of his formerly presented case, Auguste D., yet, the 
absence of neurofibrillary tangles (as cited in Alzheimer et al., 1991). Alzheimer 
concluded that internal changes within the brain could be very small, even with severe 
behavioural disturbances. This presented the question and dilemma, was dementia the 
result of normal ageing alone rather than a distinct or pathological disease as proliferated? 
Yet this did not receive much attention, why? 
Kraepelins proliferation of a relationship between mind and brain, a law-like 
parallelism, was significant. The precise relationship between the brain with the psychic 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 19 
functions was not known, yet Kraeplin assumed that it was law-like (Dillmann, 1990). 
The construction of the existence of organic disease provided the opportunity to have 
studied this parallelism	 justifying biomedical understandings and treatments, or certain 
rules, procedures, systems and discursive practises  the will to know (Foucault et al., 
1980). Kraeplin was emphasising mental disease had to be found in the brain and its 
functions, and that this needed to be approached through neuropathology, physiology and 
experimental psychology with qualitative and quantitative methods. Foucault has also 
discussed the gaze of the physician, and described how the physician originally used the 
scalpel to investigate the signs and surfaces of the body, followed by the microscope, to 
look at the body at a cellular level. The gaze went beyond the visible surfaces and the 
domains of observation with the use of new tools and branching disciplines (Hook, 2010). 
Despite the obvious ambiguities in the development of classifications such as 
Alzheimers disease from the sparse case studies mentioned, plus, social actors 
motivations, the medical discourse was not condemned to falsify its statements owing to 
its assumed precision and neutrality.  
Almshouses and institutions, as mentioned, faced difficulty  the homogenous 
grouping of inmates, where people of mixed ages and genders, resided together for 
disparate reasons, with far ranging conditions was problematised (Katz, 1986). The 
introduction of a precise classification system was a logical means to channel treatments 
and reduce long-term dependency on this system, which was particularly dominated by 
older adults (Katz, 1986). If presenile dementia was not designated as a disease, on a 
structural level, this would have prevented professionals deciphering diagnoses and 
support for elder adults. Berrios & Porter, (1998) have argued that the classification of 
dementia avoided being ageist or pessimistic by assuming all aged will become 
demented, however, as mentioned, it has gradually indicated that those who were aged 
may be more at risk of the disease justifying the medical gaze upon them.  
Linking back to statistics given on the increasing risk of developing dementia with 
age  dementia has gone from a relatively rare phenomenon (a few published case 
studies) to the forth most common cause of death in the UK and affecting thirty six 
million worldwide (WHO, 2012). Such an increase in figures undoubtedly presents the 
advantages, in the context for struggles in leverages and funds, the increase is not 
completely related to a pure disease matter. Sufficient channels of communication and 
funding influenced the knowledge and power of the discipline of psychiatry, allowing for 
clinical practise and research to coincide. There was a motivation to empower the psy-
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 20 
professionals as a means of ensuring bureaucratic order over the population. This 
generated professional struggles, while justifying the need for disciplinary technologies. 
This was an effective regime of power over the population.  
On the other hand, several sources have reported the disease related concept 
dementia did not become popular amongst clinicians until the 1980s when further 
technological developments were seen to verify the presence of plaques and tangles as 
more reliable sources of evidence. Epistemological positivism would become more 
firmly into the grips of power, sanctioning certain versions of reality, and political and 
ideological forces (see, 1.07). At this time (early 1900s) the biomedical discourse of 
dementia faced several challenges and rearrangements relating to conflicting studies and 
motives. Nonetheless, from this discussion, what may be inferred is that the biomedical 
discourse of dementia has been the inclusion of some possibilities and the exclusion of 
others, contingent to the social and historical constructions, open to change. 
1.07 Dementia within Psychology 
Technical apparatuses in Psychology. As depicted, medicine had once related to 
case-note taking and observations to understand the patient; the discourse of science then 
broadened. It included the ontology of a mapable world using numbers. During the 
nineteenth century, probability theory was applied to mental disorders, and measurement 
and statistics were applied to higher order functions such as memory (e.g. Esquirol, 1838; 
Pearson, 1978). Where there was the Kraepelin movement assuming correlations between 
molecular measurement and behaviour, within the emerging field of psychology there 
was an assumption that sensation correlated with subjectivity. Psychological laboratory 
assessments measured physiological variables such as pulse, perspiration, pupil size, 
muscle performance and so forth, which were assumed to relate to mental functions. Like 
psychiatry, psychology established a whole technical apparatus with its own rules and 
traditions, designating who was competent to speak and what objects can be spoken of 
(Rose, 2007). This was alongside a network of professional journals disseminating 
psychological research. At this time, it was not simply the establishment of a discipline 
of psychology, but of a psychological complex  a heterogeneous, regulated domain of 
agents and practices, discourses and apparatuses, which had definite conditions of 
existence and specifiable effects (Rose, 2007, p.6). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 21 
Individual differences. Psychology is considered to have had two movements: 1) 
the emergence of a scientific psychology through systematic observation and research, 
and 2) the concern with the subject rather than man-in-general  also described as 
individual differences. Similar to the argument placed above regarding psychiatry and 
dementia, Burt (1927) claims the success of these movements were linked to a number of 
practical concerns: 
this new field must be traced to the pressure of practical needs. The 
psychology of education, industry, and of the war, the study of the criminal, the 
defective and the insane, all depend on the sound analysis of individual 
differences; and the investigation of the more practical problems has already 
begun to pay back its debt, by furnishing fresh data of the utmost value to the 
mother science it aims at almost mathematical precision, and proposes nothing 
less than the measurement of mental powers (Burt, 1927; as cited in Rose, 2007, 
p.5). 
Intelligence theory and measurement. Standard texts in psychology relay 
pioneers of intelligence theory including, Galton, Spearman, Pearson, and so forth 
(Moser, 2008). Texts are often presented in a chronological order drawing upon a 
discourse of progression that usually simplifies events. For instance, strong debates 
occurred within the psychology discipline around the validity of g-intelligence, and the 
controversies of heredity and environmental intelligence. This did not allow for a smooth 
discourse on intelligence  it was not clear how it should be understood nor measured.  
Yet, often a seamless and complete discourse is offered, upholding a psychological 
discipline worthy of institutional and research funding.  
In relation to dementia, Jaspers (1910) used intelligence measurements to support 
the case to further classify dementia. Any failure in performance, whichever way it is 
assessed is called dementia. The concept therefore, is so wide, that, like other 
encompassing notions, is in danger of being empty of any real content (Jaspers, 2010; p. 
568). He argued that better tests and diagnostic classifications are needed to differentiate 
dementia. However, Jasper (1910) discerned that as well as in organic conditions, other 
mental health conditions can cause a failure of thinking. However, he is careful to 
differentiate an organic or disease specific dementia to align with and justify 
psychometric measurement: organic processes in presenile dementia, usual destroys in a 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 22 
far-reaching manner comprehension, speech, memory and the powers of organization 
(Jasper, 1910; p.568). Jasper (1910) discussed that for one to receive a diagnosis of 
dementia, both psychometric testing and a detailed historical and clinical history to 
consider individual variables, should be used. The psychology of the individual is shown 
here: the object is seen as both measurable and identifiable, but the object is constituted 
for and through psychology.  
Memory theory & measurement. In the early 1900s, the psychoanalytic 
movement added another dimension to forgetting. This was through the notion of a 
structural conscious and unconscious, whereby repressed material was seen to materialise 
in the form of emotional or behavioural disturbances. Through therapeutic intervention 
the unconscious memories were assumed to move into conscious, resolving inner 
conflict. At the same time, experimental research and phrenology emphasised the link 
between matter and function, in brain localization theories (see, Hacking, 1996). Broca 
and Wernicke were two scientists who worked upon associating parts of the cerebral 
cortex with written and verbal language use, distinguishing normal from abnormal 
memory (Hacking, 1996). Ebbinghaus (1850), in his book Memory, also described his 
development of a measurement of memory functioning, which he developed through 
experimenting on himself. This added another psychological ownership of memory, 
alongside intelligence (Katz, 2012).  
Another influential case for proliferating the field of psychology in relation to 
memory measurement was H.M. (Scoville & Milner, 1957). H.M. was one of ten patients 
who received an experimental partial frontal lobotomy (removing the hippocampus) 
aimed to resolve severe epileptic seizures. H.M. in particular, remembered experiences 
prior to the surgery, yet failed to retain any new knowledge after surgery. Later, detailed 
theories on the anterior hippocampus, hippocampus gyrus and basal ganglia were 
developed in relation to the encoding of new memory  (Dillman, 1990).  
1.08 Dementia in the Twentieth Century 
Violations to the rules of science. Drachman, (1974) influenced by psychology 
and localisation activities, completed a series of large-scale studies based on the 
hypothesis that Cholergenic neurones in the hippocampal structure were causal and 
indicative of dementia. He concluded that Cholergenic neurones could not be a reliable 
measurement for pathological degeneration, as behavioural presentations did not align 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 23 
with the level of brain pathology indicated. There was also a vast amount of conflicting 
and inconclusive evidence from smaller studies presenting high levels of atrophy in the 
hippocampus corresponding with dementia symptoms, while on the other hand, high 
levels of atrophy in the absence of dementia symptoms (Dillman, 1990). If engaging with 
the relatively formed argument of intelligence, this conundrum seems foreseeable, given 
not all brain capacities or abilities would be the same. Someone with a higher capacity of 
intelligence would be expected to show less behavioural disturbances with more neuronal 
pathology, and vice versa. This presented a problem with the mind and brain parallelism 
populated by Kraeplin in the attempt to establish psychiatry. 
Also, throughout in the 1960s and 1970s professionals were continuing to state 
their knowledge about what presenile dementia and dementia was in conflicting and 
opposing ways. One understanding was that presenile dementia related to any form of 
degeneration caused by mental disorders or alike; another was it related to a form of 
degeneration occurring in specifically in late adulthood and a further understanding was 
that presenile dementia was caused by arteriosclerosis (now known as vascular 
symptoms) supposed to progress to pathological levels in some cases, though this was 
expected in all older adults as part of general ageing (Dillman, 1990). It may be 
considered that at this particular time the discursive field relating to dementia was being 
rearranged in the context of competing knowledges and power struggles. There was also 
a series of impracticalities for professionals and researchers  violations to the rules of 
science regarding tests and measurements. In the twentieth century the biomedical 
construct of dementia was insecure and lacked hegemony. 
Smoothing over the controversy: The perceived truth effects of measurement. 
Firstly, where presenile dementia could relate to all numbers of disorders, this faded in 
the 1980s with the influence of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual- Third Edition (DSM-
III) shaping the practices of clinicians and their understandings. The DSM had come to be 
based on large epidemiology studies regarding the clinical course of patients used to 
support clinical practise in dealing with separate and distinguishable conditions. There 
was a shift from a unified view to a differentiated view to classify disease based upon 
clusters of signs and symptoms. Existing knowledge and classifications were made to 
bear on the diagnosis procedure of dementia. Patients began to be identified according 
categories, yielding a group of very diverse subjects into one homogenous group.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 24 
In addition, ability testing was distinguished more as a logical means of 
determining a diagnosis of dementia to permit reliable conclusion. This began to 
command a new field, clinical neuropsychology. A steady stream of pen and paper tests 
such as digit span, storage retrieval, free recall and word storage, were taken as a firm 
diagnostic criterion to indicate dementia, alongside professional committees, research 
journals and specialist trainings in neuroscience. On the following page, an extract 
presented in a table from the diagnostic statistic manual three (DSM-III) shows how these 
neuropsychological based tests almost blur the discrepancies around classifying this 
condition from normal ageing. In this table, it is evident that language difficulties are 
included into the classification of dementia, despite Alzheimers initial differentiation. 
Diagnostic criterion is based heavily upon pen and paper test outcomes e.g.  ability to 
copy three dimensional objects, assemble blocks and arrange sticks.  
Other proposed instruments were blood tests, x-rays, electrocardiogram and 
clinical evaluations, deemed to insure accuracy which required diverse branches of 
professional disciplines. Here, the incomplete nature of this discourse around dementia 
again appears to be smoothed over, through the perceived truth-effects of measurement 
and exactitude among the professions, securing their position.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 25 
Pragmatic adaptions  the DSM III revised. To highlight a few problems, not 
uncommon to critiques of the DSM: 1) the borders for what dementia is, or is not, are 
fuzzy  patients do not have to meet all criteria, therefore classified group members can 
be substantially varied yet still fit into the category; 2) there are a series of abstract terms, 
which lead to questions around subjectivity and inference, for instance, what is 
occupational disturbance and what determines personality? Is this not the choice of the 
clinician? 3) Despite the formerly presumed parallelism between the internal systems and 
the external presenting symptoms, it was argued earlier on in the text that in dementia 
physical symptoms could be excluded while specified symptoms could be present. Rather 
than epistemological positivism, the DSM and other developments at this time seem to 
have been developed according to what works. Another example of this is later addition 
to the diagnostic criteria (DSM-III revised) of mild, moderate and severe cases of 
dementia, as well as the option from a probable diagnosis, meaning that a clinician 
could diagnose probable dementia with the absence of repeated and time consuming 
measurements. These pragmatic additions were similarly added to the International 
Statistical Classification Manual 10th revision (ICD-10) (Huppert, Brayne, & OConnor, 
1994).  
1.09 Resistance and Bi-directionality to Dementia   
People with diagnosis of dementia. People with dementia and their spouses are 
likely to at times resist the dominant discourse that memory loss is linked to a 
degenerative disease. One means may be through evading professional encounters all 
together, in other words not confessing to the expert and avoiding institutional sites. Yet, 
scientific and professional vocabularies or jargon, revealing scores, averages, 
percentages, plaques and neuro-fibular tangles, are currently likely to restrict biomedical 
dementia discourse as open to the expert and closed to the person being spoken about  in 
a Foucauldian sense this may be explained as, the rituals of speaking, where sets of 
gestures, behaviours, signs and circumstances accompany a qualified speaker of discourse 
(see, Hook, 2007). This may have the effect of masking political, economic, legal and 
moral discourses, into a purely scientific one through the taken for granted assumption 
science is value free. This perhaps effectively results in a large proportion of the 
population being passive recipients of medical services, rather than active agents.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 26 
Professionals. Given this, why are professionals, in an informed position, with 
the ritual to speak, not resisting the biomedical discourse of dementia? 
Clinical psychologists have had long training in research methods at both 
undergraduate and graduate levels. They are therefore well placed to comment on 
poor scientific practices, but have seemed reluctant to do so. Conversations with 
colleagues suggest their ability to act as applied practitioners in their workplace to 
develop their understanding by undertaking research appears to have been lost, or 
very severely restricted Don't they have responsibility to develop effective 
therapeutic techniques? (Bender, 2014, pp. 54-55). 
Fragmentation of NHS healthcare. Currently in the UK there is a strong 
discourse problematizing the NHS, endorsing the need to tighten the health and social 
cares expenditure to enable free-health care. One outcome of this has been the justified 
fragmentation and privatisation of NHS services amongst politicians, supposedly 
ensuring best value for money services and a healthy competitive culture within a care-
based organisation. However, one perception is that this has resulted in a culture where 
organisations and workers are continually assessed and monitored by managers, 
commissioners and even patients and their families. Under complicated managerial 
regimes, concerning resource management and corporate objectives to cut spending, 
professional workers may internalize budgetary disciplines, as well as limited 
professional autonomy. This links to Foucaults (1988) notion of technologies of the self, 
where in order to function as an effective worker, professionals may need to work on 
themselves rather than challenging more structural regimes.  
This is a shift in the organisation and management of professionals in terms of the 
distribution of power and knowledge outlined previously, where the psy-disciplines were 
the primary power site maintaining bureaucratic order. Yet, caution is taken to 
oversimplify this matter. In particular, the psy-disciplines have a relationship with healing 
and self-interest. Genuine concern of psy-professionals to alleviate suffering goes hand in 
hand with achieving prestige, fund raising and so forth. The growing concept of dementia 
and its prominence, present shared and common interests amongst politicians, 
professionals, scientists, and the public alike, meaning resistance or bi-directionality 
towards the biomedical dementia discourse appears limited.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 27 
1.10 Person Centred Care 
The person centred model (PCM) - a shift in paradigms?  
Amongst dementia literature, it is often portrayed that in the last two decades 
there has been a shift in paradigms from a biomedical homogenisation of dementia to an 
emphasis on person centred care (Parker, 2005). The more recent paradigm is understood 
as focused on individual biography and subjective experience: person centred care 
involves knowing life history and individuals with dementia to shape and sustain a 
persons sense of self (Beard, 2004, p.416). It is also centred on notions such as including 
the voice of the service user, founded upon humanist and liberalist notions of 
individual. Within NICE (2016), as well as the medical basis for dementia, a person 
centred approach features heavily. Queries are, has there been a shift from one approach 
to another? What power effects does the discourse relating to person centred care 
generate to account for its success and prominence? 
As discussed within this genealogy, debates relating to the self and memory are 
not recent, and can be traced to unconscious memory theories in psychoanalysis, 
rendering a wealth of literature and art on the meaning of the self. Also, in the 1600s 
functions of memory were seen to be a guarantee of rational personhood, fitting with the 
enlightenment where the relationship between mind, and body was reordered with 
rational individualism and empiricism (Locke, 1995). In this sense, the discourse and 
importance of personhood is not new  it has functioned as an element in the emergence 
of a scientific discourse. At odds with this, Kitwoods (1997) work is often portrayed to 
be the starting point of person-centred care.  
Kitwood on Personhood. Kitwood (1997) illustrated how family members, 
particularly spouses, could begin to relate with PWDD in ways that endorse the PWDD 
withdrawal from social interaction. Kitwood (1997) related such social processes to the 
way dementia comes to be known and worked with by the ascriptions associated with it  
arguably a more novel and social constructionist epistemological position (refer to 
method). Nonetheless, within this framework Kitwood (1997) reasoned that where some 
cognitive decline was a socially produced and reversible, rementia, other cognitive 
decline was neuropathological and irreversible, dementia. Kitwoods theory works 
alongside the scientific discourse of pathology, rather than shifting away from it. This 
model has since been developed in health and social care practices and community based 
cognitive rehabilitation (J. Parker, 2005). Dementia person centred care treatment has 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 28 
branched into community care, co-ordinated by community nurses, occupational 
therapists, care workers, social workers, and voluntary, private and statutory agencies.  
Person-centred Therapies. Current and popular, person-centred interventions for 
PWDD include Reality Orientation, Reminiscence, Cognitive Stimulation and Life 
Review therapies. To exemplify one these, Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) appears 
to be a consists of fourteen, hour-long sessions running twice weekly in small groups. 
Activities include using money and word games, discussion of past activities and 
experiences usually with the aid of tangible prompts such as photographs. Spector, 
Woods and Orrell and colleagues (e.g. 2000; 2003; 2012; 2013; 2014) have argued that 
cognitive rehabilitation methods lead to improvement on PWDD cognitive testing 
performance, and their quality of life or life satisfaction ratings (e.g. see Spector et al., 
2003). Other studies, such as Ishizaki and colleagues (2002) presented only a one-point 
increase on the cognitive test though specified improvements in quality of life.   
Biggs and Powell, (2001) discuss the reflexive relationship between power and 
knowledge, where professional power is reinforced by the questions professionals ask and 
the data they collect (e.g. both cognitive testing and quality of life scores). This 
knowledge often progresses to a certain definition of the problem area that feeds back to 
stabilise the original formation of the problem itself - a biomedical understanding of 
dementia. In other words, the idea that cognitive improvement can occur through person-
centred rehabilitation is based on the argument that dementia is linked to complex 
structures in the brain, as professionals and scientific investigations purport. The 
administering of these treatments promotes the human sciences that define human 
subjectivity and creates PWDD as objects, through discourses that limit and give 
possibility. Correspondingly, Harper and Speed (2012) problematize the vagueness of the 
concept quality of life, and the individualising effect it has, accompanying medicalised 
understandings of distress. This obscures structural, political and social problems.  
Older adult abuse and policy. One argument relating to the success of the 
person-centred care model within dementia, it that it has also functioned in relation to 
policy created around the prominence of institutional and familial reports of abuse of 
older adults and more specifically PWDD in recent years (Acierno et al., 2010; Alexandra 
Hernandez-Tejada, Amstadter, Muzzy, & Acierno, 2013; Klein, Tobin, Salomon, & 
Dubois, 2008; OKeeffe, 2007). Within these studies, there are trends that abuse is largely 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 29 
under reported as it tends to occur in the older adults home, and/or within family 
contexts. According to a helpline in the UK sixty four per cent of older adult abuse 
occurred in the home, twenty three per cent in residential care and five per cent in 
hospitals (Hidden Voices, 2005; as cited in Neno & Neno, 2005). In 2002 the World 
Health Organization brought attention to the issue of elder abuse, and in 2006, the 
International Network for Prevention of Elder Abuse (INPEA) highlighted ways to 
challenge worldwide abuse (Rinker, 2009). In NHS settings, disproportionately high 
mortality rates have been found among elderly patients linked to a lack of basic standard 
care (Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust et al., 2013). 
Amongst several abuse related policies The Dignity in Care Campaign focuses 
upon zero tolerance of abuse and disrespect for older people (National Dignity Council, 
2016)6. It endorses a change in the culture of care services and places emphasis on 
improving the quality of care and the experiences of citizens in sites such as NHS 
Hospitals, community services, care homes and home support agencies. Also, Living Well 
With Dementia sets out the governments commitment to individuals with dementia and 
their family carers to ensure high quality care (Department of Health, 2009b). 
One the one hand it could be viewed that these policies are founded on the 
betterment of familial and institutional care for elder adults. On the other hand, it could 
be argued that such policies fit with a hegemonic discourse of cognitive decline, 
dependency, and the burdensome of older adults and PWDD maintaining the very 
positions of vulnerability and susceptibility to abuse purported. Exemplified policy also 
justifies endless reasons for professional intervention, relating to moral and legal 
foundations in society. For instance, within the rise of social work in the 1950s there was 
the view that some families will be able to bare the care of dependent family members, 
whereas others would require state intervention aside from the private sphere (Biggs & 
Powell, 2001). Scrutiny toward abuse is also likely to increase the technologies of the self 
in relation to family or spousal carers  they may better themselves as more 
compassionate workers.  
In sum, it is not that the person-centred model completely rejects a bio-medical 
model of disease as it is perhaps portrayed, and, perhaps more hidden aspect of person-
centred care is the rejection of institutional abuse.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 30 
1.11 Marriage and family 
Marriage and family have become structures so ingrained in society they often 
exist without debate or contention; one is raised to believe certain truths, views and 
opinions concerning marriage and family and are also often governed by these. As 
depicted in this genealogy up until now, epistemological positivism and subjectivity or 
individual differences have created a culture of individuality and subjectivity. Torrant 
(2011) contends that individualising knowledge of a subjects consciousness, sentiment, 
love, commitment and instincts that are embedded within marriage and family discourses, 
are political and ideological structures, explored further. 
In the 1600s, producing offspring was necessary for producing grain. In western 
countries and the US the average marital couple had over seven children (Parker & 
Aggleton, 2007). Marriage was reportedly dominant for survival purposes and in 
accordance with this, the act of matrimony was socially and spiritually celebrated. 
Although sexual activity between those of the same sex was documented at this time, 
once married, sexual acts outside of wedlock were condemned and punished (Parker & 
Aggleton, 2007).  
By the nineteenth century the family was construed as a means to form a 
satisfying and mutually enhancing relationship between man and women, creating an 
environment fit to nurture children (Parker and Aggleton, 2000). The family was 
seemingly disconnected from the public world of work and production, and was viewed 
as something existing within a private sphere. Panu (2009) depicts how influential 
institutions, such as the church, promoted marriage as the only morally acceptable way to 
perform. It has been argued by Zarastsky (1976) that sexuality outside of the marital dyad 
was associated with the acts the underclasses, in the context of an increasing middle class. 
The repressive hypothesis. Relative to this, Foucault (1998) has illustrated the 
notion of the repressive hypothesis, whereby common historical accounts portray a lack 
of, or a repression of, sexual discourse during the Victorian era. On the contrary, he 
argues that there was a discursive explosion on sexuality. As one means of illustrating 
this Foucault (1998) presents how there were extensive discussion on the 
inappropriateness of sexual acts with children, demonstrating one province of the vast 
range of speech on the order of sex at this time. Foucault adds that sex was dominated 
by technical and legal vocabularies, as well as scientific studies belied with the publics 
increasing obsession with sexual relationships and desire (Foucault, 1998). Sex, and in 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 31 
turn, family and marriage, were made into a public matter, forced into a discourse of 
something that society sought to control its influence over within the human body  a 
liberal apparatus. From the eighteenth century onwards, the apparatus of sexual activity 
was the interface that allowed the coupling of juridical law and mass population norms, 
producing importance and dominance of the coupling of alliance (e.g. marriage, kinship 
ties, transmission of names and possessions). The affective intensification of the family 
space through biopower, gave the family a modern form, while opening it up to an 
endless plethora of experts (e.g. doctors, educators, psychiatrists, priests and pastors) who 
would listen complaints of sexual suffering (Foucault, 1998).  
Individualisation & Industrialisation. Fitting with this, Beck and Beck-
Gernsheim, (2002) describe that after industrialisation, discourse around investing in 
relationships was as much as about material resources, as conjugal love. For instance, 
women, particularly the very elderly, single, or widowed women, were most likely to be 
poor (Hewitt, 1974; as cited in Philipson, 1982, p.12). Figures have presented that there 
was a gender imbalance in almshouses, including two thirds of women; whereas married 
couples were more likely to live above the poverty line (Philipson, 1982). Also, legal 
rights ensured an obligation between spouses, their children and their in-laws to care for 
family members. Namely, a condition poor law act was: public aid is denied to aid 
individuals with parents, grandparents, spouses, adult children, or grandchildren who are 
able to take them into their homes (Katz, 1996, pp. 1314). This presents how the 
conventional family came to be a political control and an economic regulation. 
Donzelot and Hurley (1997) report individuals were tormented by the family, 
through various forms of abuse, and at the same time, individuals were unable to live 
without family, through a structural dependency. The psy specialist furnishes a natural 
terrain for the resolution of difference in the regime through management of bodies and 
management of populations (Donzelot & Hurley, 1980; p.229). The family like other 
mechanisms of power ensured heterogeneous and contradictory elements of liberal 
governing presented themselves as coherent and natural (Denzelot & Hurley, 1980). 
Torrents point about ideologies of love and sentiment, which mask the political 
infrastructures of family and marriage, is fitting here. For example, until the Divorce 
Reform Act (1969), many couples were likely to have lived in the context of domestic 
abuse  after 1969 divorce rates rose considerably. Likewise, until 1973, it was very 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 32 
difficult for women to gain child custody when leaving unsustainable marriages (Thane & 
Filby, 2010). 
Counter discourses relating to marriage and family. Although not much 
discussion is designated to counter-discourses on the family unit in this subsection, these 
have been apparent and influential7. A fundamental example is discourses surrounding 
World War Two (WW2) regarding womens rights movements, indicating a questioning 
of the nuclear family roles, alongside the requisite for women to continue working (Panu, 
2009)8. Due to large number of men who died at war, structurally supporting forces 
upheld a resistance to a patriarchal society. Yet throughout the 1950s, governmental 
family agendas and a series of scientific research studies presented truth statements on 
discoveries that broken families were consequential to the social failure of children. The 
accusation against liberal mothering over-shadowed the complex mechanisms of social 
determinism and poverty while sustaining a neutral ideology of the family (Panu, 2009). 
Correspondingly, at this time, womens masculine behaviour was problematized and 
considered to lead to frustration, hostility, destructiveness, frigidity and mental illness. 
Likewise, men engaging in homosexual acts were pathologised (see, DSM I published in 
1952, American Psychiatric Association et al., 2008).  
In the 1980s and 1990s Silva, Roseneil and Mann, (1996) describe how there were 
increasing numbers of never married parents and single parents resisting hetero-
normative family formations, which created a moral panic. Various governmental 
policies and initiatives were developed to strengthen the family, in the form of crisis 
intervention programmes (e.g. counselling, substance misuse treatments, foster-care, 
adoption, child support enforcements). A discourse about unmarried mothers in which 
delinquent children, juvenile crime, masculinity crises, and social and educational failure 
were blamed upon them, effectively diverted attention from governmental responsibility. 
Foucaults (1997) conceptualization of power may be thought of here where he states that 
power comes from different sources and relates in complex ways. It does not work in a 
hierarchal sense, it works through a net power including different, connected channels 
apt when considering change around the discourses relating to marriage and family over 
time. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 33 
1.13 Dementia and Marriage  
Qualitative research on dementia and marriage. In the last ten years, possibly 
linked to post-structuralist research movements and the emphasis on the value of 
qualitative methodologies, there have been a large body of qualitative studies on carers of 
people diagnosed with dementia. Bamford and colleagues (2004) completed a systematic 
review finding those with dementias perspective were largely absent from the literature. 
Daniels and colleagues (2007) reported this was due to the assumption persons with 
dementia are unable to contribute due to their condition; also the social constructions of 
mental capacity is deemed to limit PWDD from providing informed consent to participate 
in research. There have been some studies relating to the PWDDs experience from a 
humanist perspective (see methodology 1.02): Steeman and collegues (2006) completed a 
review of qualitative findings on the subjective accounts of PWDD and presented 
multiple challenges (i.e. loss of thinking ability, problem solving difficulties, getting lost, 
forgetting names, and feelings of shame, guilt, uselessness and worthlessness). 
Nevertheless, samples tend to include individuals with early stages of dementia again 
relating to barriers such as strict research ethics requirement centred upon mental 
capacity.  
Few qualitative studies have examined dementia within the marital relationship 
(Beard, Sakhtah, Imse, & Galvin, 2012; Daniels et al., 2007; Hellstrom, 2005; Hellstrom, 
Nolan, & Lundh, 2007; Svanstrom, 2004). Amongst this data participants portrayed 
marriage was pertinent to managing dementia, and that spouses would actively try to 
maintain the continuity of their marriage through sharing joint perspectives and 
reminiscing on past times. Daniels et al (2007) uniquely adopted a narrative approach, 
presenting findings of spouses tendency to talk over the person with dementia and 
dominate the discussion, whereas, more commonly amongst these studies, Svanstrm and 
Dahlberg (2004) adopted a phenomenological method describing spousal experience 
(e.g. futility, hopelessness and homelessness).  
As common to most qualitative research, objectivity/applicability and scientific 
rigor are often used to evaluate the usefulness of studies; this may be argued that as an 
attempt to fit the method toward the dominant scientific paradigm. Nonetheless, 
limitations of research on dementia in couplehood described is that studies had limited 
applicability of data. Two were self-selective case studies (Hellstom et al., 2005; Daniels 
et al., 2007) and in Svanstrm and Dahlberg's study (2004) only five out of fourteen 
people participated. Apart from Hellstom, Nolan, Lundh (2007; 2005) all studies 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 34 
conducted one interview with spouses jointly, where talk in front of the spouse may be 
censored.  
Discourse Analysis (DA) is distinguished from other forms of analysis due to its 
central focus on power and knowledge, and the way these reciprocally influence social 
thought, action, organisations, systems and ideologies. Although the discursive approach 
has been used to investigate interactions in residential homes this has not been applied to 
the persons with dementia and their spouses or the marital sphere (Dijkstra et al., 2002). 
This qualitative interview study will be guided by a discourse analysis, which emphasizes 
the importance of recognizing the shaping effects of dominant discourses; in this case 
how people with dementia and their spouses are frequently subject to discourse, with or 
without awareness and how this may accord them certain speaking positions or ways of 
speaking, thinking and acting. At the same time, a discourse enquiry may focus upon 
times when dominant discourses or speaking positions are conflicted, replaced, resisted, 
co-existing or disappearing from spouses talk. Using an example from discussions in the 
chapter, the informal carer may replace the speaking position of the marital partner, or the 
older adult with the person with dementia. The PCM may substitute talk on biomedical 
notions of dementia, or as argued work together to hegemonize the latter dominant and 
historically located scientific discourse. In table 2, the specific research aims based on 
this methodology are listed.  
Table 2. Study research aims 
1. To consider the regularities and discursive patterns that can be discerned from 
the data, as well as discontinuity and deviances, giving significance to resistance 
and bi-directionality.  
2. To explore power and knowledge implications of dementia discourses for 
participants (e.g. disciplinary technologies, zones of power soul effects and 
the other, regimes of truth). 
3. To decipher the various speaking positions or ways of acting and thinking that 
are available for participants - in particular the positions that do not support the 
dominant way of thinking and conceptualising.  
4. At the same time, to explore the appearance, disappearance, replacement and 
co-existence of subjects (e.g. the marital role vs. carer role). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 35 
1.14 Chapter Summary 
This chapter discussed the political basis of the concept and practise around 
dementia and the social and historical conditions that have enabled dementia discourse to 
emerge in a more dominant and stable form. It discussed, current treatment pathways, 
such as person centred care, and the informal carer including implications this may have 
on the marital sphere. The following chapter explores the research methodology.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 36 
2. Methodology 
2.01 Chapter Overview 
This chapter begins with an exploration of the epistemological stance and 
theoretical orientation of this study, as these both influence the methodology. To support 
the discussion of complex notions and theory, examples from other chapters are 
embedded throughout the text to augment descriptions. This methodology details the 
research procedure, including ethical considerations, recruitment, the collection of data 
and the analysis.  
2.02 Research Paradigm 
Rationale for research methodology. This study has utilised a constructivist 
epistemology, which Parker (2014) explains represents a critical reflexive movement 
away from objective measurement, and an effort towards a socially mediated and 
historically situated study of action and experience. This research explores the dominant 
construction of dementia. It considered how this concept may be taken for granted or 
assumed to be something we know, plus the way that dementia is typically construed as 
a truth through the human sciences and other industries sustaining certain power and 
knowledge relations. As well as exploring historical processes, this study explores present 
language systems and practices in relation to dementia. Firstly, through the analysis of 
professionally produced leaflets from memory assessment clinics as well as professional 
guidelines and policy relating to dementia, and secondly through analysis of interviews 
completed with PWDD and spouses, to consider wider political processes but also the 
impact of discourse within the marital sphere. The study applies a critical orientation to 
understand the complex relationships surrounding dementia and the way dementias 
meaning is produced, considered further throughout this chapter. 
Epistemology. Epistemology has primarily been concerned with the assumptions 
that we make about what knowledge is, how we generate knowledge, what we know, and 
how we know what we know (Breakwell, Smith, & Wright, 2012). Within social 
sciences, amongst other fields, these questions have been debated; according to some 
epistemological positions these answers remain unclear (Gergen, 1985). In order to 
explain the rationale for a social constructivist position used in this study, three 
epistemological positions are considered: constructivism, humanism and objectivism9. It 
should be noted that categorising in such a way risks over-simplifying the nature and 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 37 
scope of knowledge; there are overlaps between the positions in research; and there are 
other positions which are not mentioned.  
Burr (2003) has explained that amongst the social sciences we have seen a gradual 
emergence of the constructivist approach to knowledge. This approach appears under a 
variety of rubrics, such as critical psychology, discourse analysis and post-structuralism, 
which all may be thought of as having social constructionism in common. According to 
Burr (2003) social constructionism can be seen as a theoretical orientation that brings 
about radical and critical research methodologies, which this study embraces. 
Constructivism proposes truth is not obtainable or measurable as it is created within the 
subjects interactions with the world. For instance, Gergen (1985) states that 
constructivism views discourse about the world not as a reflective map of the world, but 
as an artefact of communal interchange (p.266) 10. In viewing traditional understandings 
of dementia as an artefact of communal interchange, research studies that claim that there 
is an epidemic of dementia, and measurement tools that are used to diagnose dementia 
may be challenged; both are constructed in scientific communities. 
Researchers from a humanist epistemological position may describe social reality 
as a creation of individual consciousness (i.e. it is personal and subjective). As reality 
is an aspect of our minds, it is inevitably affected by our minds, therefore our attempts to 
understand any form of social reality must be grounded in peoples social experiences of 
that reality (Gray, 2014). They also propose that such understandings can be achieved 
through qualitative, rather than quantitative methodologies. This leads to the view: we 
must lay aside our prevailing understanding of phenomena social reality is too complex 
to be understood through the process of observation alone. We must interpret in order to 
achieve deeper levels of knowledge and self-understanding (Gray, 2014, emphasis 
added, pp.21-23).  
Nonetheless, some humanist researchers argue that observational data alone is 
valuable within the humanist epistemology, particularly within dementia research. Clare 
et al. (2008) claim that a number of ethnographic, observational studies provide rich 
subjective insights into the life of people with dementia, for instance in residential care 
homes or hospital units.  Also, most constructivist researchers would emphasise the point 
that we cannot understand phenomena (or the mind) except through discourse, rather than 
phenomena not existing. One example is the many research studies that attempt to 
understand the emotional experiences of PWDD and/or their spouses; these may be 
thought of as ways of constituting knowledge, together with social practices, forms of 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 38 
subjectivity and power relations which are maintained and produced through this way of 
understanding knowledge. The researchers individual consciousness is very much 
embedded within the dominant historical and cultural discursive frame, which inevitably 
affects interpretations drawn. Therefore, studying dementia discourse is a way of 
understanding power and knowledge, making apparent wider political processes that may 
otherwise be hard to notice.  
Although there has been a remarkable increase in the amount of published 
qualitative research in the field of dementia research  mostly from a humanist rather than 
constructivist epistemological stance  the objectivist position is still central in many 
respects. The objectivist epistemology assumes that through focusing our efforts on the 
method, a set of general laws and principles can be established to enable a close 
alignment with an objective truth or reality. Kerlinger (1973) explores four general ways 
knowledge is developed: through common sense or lay beliefs, expert opinion, priori 
testing, or through reasoned knowledge developed using scientific methods. The 
scientific method has been esteemed and is seen to subjugate other methods of knowing. 
It bases itself upon the assumption that through repetitive testing of hypotheses and 
controlled systematic processes, there is a survival of the fittest hypothesis.  
As discussed in the introduction, psychology, as a social science, has been 
affiliated to this understanding of knowledge, truth and reality. Part of this study has been 
to investigate psychologys relationship to dementia, and to examine how it has and may 
utilise experimental methods to solidify dementia as a distinct disease entity, 
overpowering alternative explanations. One clinical example is the commonly held 
assumption that through using the DSM-V criteria, a psychologically administered 
cognitive screening battery (multiple pen and paper tests), and informant reports (a 
spouse or family members account), a clinical psychologist can accurately detect and 
diagnose dementia. Problems with this are explored further in a discussion directly below 
regarding social constructionism as a theory. 
Social constructionism. Craib (1997) highlights variations between basic 
assumptions of social constructionism, partly due to the separation of the disciplines of 
sociology and psychology in the twentieth century. Although there is no one clear 
definition to capture the multiplicity of social constructionist ideas, Burr (2003) states we 
may think of social constructionism as having four tenets: 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 39 
1) A critical stance toward taken for granted knowledge and understandings of 
the world. Here, the idea of objective unbiased observations, and the categories and 
concepts that we use, are seen as being dependent on social and economic arrangements. 
For instance, the rise in those diagnosed with dementia could be seen as related to the 
societal structures in place (e.g. the current neuro, biomedical, psychological, charity and 
pharmaceutical industries that uphold dementia as a distinguishable and treatable entity, 
while maintaining their disciplinary and/or marketing foundations). In relation to 
psychology, supporting diagnostic understandings of dementia maintains the need for a 
clinical psychologists knowledge in society. Diagnostic procedures may be seen to 
remediate, correct, or restore, as per economic arrangements, ensuring an ordered 
population.   
2) A historical and cultural specifity in the ways we understand the world. For 
instance, this study has explored the political movement where the mind and body were 
considered to be separate yet representative systems. This became a catalyst for medical 
practices to identify the physical manifestation of internal disturbances e.g. where doctors 
used certain disciplinary apparatuses to make inferences about internal structures or 
mind/body diseases. To relate this to dementia, this concept came to represent substantial 
forgetting and the diminution of brain cells. Dementia had previously been clustered 
under the terms demens, and delirium, yet changed over time, according to the 
prevailing cultural understandings of the world (Berrios, 1987)  refer to genealogy for 
further detail.  
3) Knowledge is not gained from nature of the world as it really is; rather it is 
constructed socially between people. For instance, Alzheimers disease was a newly 
coined term added to Kraepelins taxonomy of disease classifications in the early 1900s, 
after his colleague Alzheimer produced two case studies combining new laboratory 
technologies (i.e. Nissl staining of cells, microscope) with clinical observations. The two 
constructed a non-age specific, abnormally progressive decline, labelled at the time as 
Alzheimers disease (Dillman, 1990). Rather than a discovery of dementia, protected 
hierarchical positions, tools and vocabularies constructed this discovery (see 
genealogy). Bearing this in mind, when using social constructionism, specific attention is 
paid to social interactions of all kinds, and in particular language. For instance, how may 
language be produced between marital partners when one spouse has a diagnosis of 
dementia? 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 40 
Lastly, 4) knowledge and social action are assumed to go together. 
Understandings are negotiated, and these could take a wide range of forms. Each 
construction can invite a different kind of action from human beings. To illustrate this, 
currently there are countless media descriptions of dementia being increasingly prevalent 
in old age. As one example, 850,000 people are currently suffering from dementia in the 
UK, with Alzheimer's disease being the most common type. The disease kills at least 
60,000 people each year  . This invites a vigilance toward indicators of disease in old 
age to survive or resist the fate of death, and diverse reactions from politicians, 
professionals, researchers, families, older adults and so forth. Descriptions and 
constructions in the world sustain some patterns of action (e.g. diagnosis) and exclude 
others (e.g. possibly a movement towards a non-medical approach). This is entangled in 
the self-interests of power groups leading to some groups in society having power and 
knowledge, and others who are subjugated. One example of this is where PWDD and 
spouses perhaps not able to question easily due to the sophisticated languages and 
professional tools these groups use. In other words practise of language formation, 
meaning the constraints and enabling functions of speaking, writing and thinking 
(Hook, 2010; p. 102).  
One aspect of this study has been to consider the way psychiatry is implicated; for 
instance, psychiatrists continue to prescribe pharmaceutical interventions for dementia, 
for which they receive various incentives (i.e. contracts from pharma, and a more 
privileged position within mental health care). Yet it is important not to position those 
with dementia and their spouses as inevitably oppressed  some people with dementia and 
their spouses would also view diagnosis and medication as important, here seen as 
illustrating how knowledge can produce multiple realities that stabilise power relations. 
Nonetheless, the premise that there are many different realities constructed within 
different historical and cultural contexts can be seen as problematic, as we have no way 
of judging between them (Burr, 1998). This leads to the position of relativism, where 
different constructions of the world can only be judged in relation to one another and not 
by comparison to an ultimate standard or truth. 
Ideology. Burr (1998) proposes a way of thinking about social constructionism 
and relativism is to draw upon the sociological notion of ideology. Ideology refers to a 
single or a dominant discourse with relative stages of formation, and multiple complex 
discursive relations that produce divisions and mutually exclusive categories Dolar 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 41 
(1999). One ideology may relate to scientifically produced truth. Burr (1993) 
deconstructs this by arguing that rather than truth, we may instead think about ideology as 
knowledge deployed in the service of power (p. 82). A version of events may be true or 
false, but it is only ideological to the extent that it is used by relatively powerful groups in 
society to sustain their position (Burr, 1998). In addition, Billig and colleagues (1988) 
discuss ideology explaining that our thought and its content are provided by wider, 
socially shared concepts and issues. We tend to think about these as dilemmas, which, 
implicitly, always have two sides. For instance, who is to blame for poverty, the 
individual or society? Billig and colleagues (1988) name these ideological dilemmas, 
referring to how ones thinking is shaped by prevailing ideologies in society. Ideologies 
therefore cannot be seen as logical and coherent or unified systems of ideas; rather, they 
are inherently dilemmatic. This is important regarding the point made about relativism, 
and standards or truth. Here truth is an ideology, a political formation that shapes how 
people relate or are socially positioned. 
In this study, although it was hypothesised that the person diagnosed with 
dementia or their spouse may exercise some degree of choice and resistance amongst the 
systems of ideas relating to dementia discourse that they use, it was also considered that 
there are discursively produced categories and divisions (dementia and non-dementia) 
upheld as truths. The PWDD and spouses may find it difficult, though not impossible to 
step outside the prevailing ideologies. Given this, the researcher of this study, who may 
also be, influenced by inherently dilemmatic meaning systems, contemplated the 
multifaceted outcomes of discourses employed by PWDD and their spouses, abstaining 
from claiming right or wrong standards or truths, in line with the epistemological 
approach taken.  
2.03 Methodological Framework 
This research is utilising Foucauldian Discourse Analysis (FDA), an approach to 
research that draws heavily upon Foucaults multiple works. Social constructionist ideas 
themselves may be thought of as being influenced by Foucault and other post structuralist 
thinkers, like Derrida and Saussure, discussed further.	 
Discourse Analysis. This methodological framework has broad and varying 
applications, across a range of disciplines. A general definition of discourse may be the 
investigation of language in use, with particular attention being paid to talk and texts, in 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 42 
their original contexts (van Dijk, (1997, p.33). More specifically, those in the field of 
linguistics and semiotics have described discourse as a shared and changing system of 
signs, symbols and codes, which allow various social practices (e.g. expressing ones 
ideas, the following of dress codes) (Saussure, 1986; Strauss, 1968). Marxist theorists 
may depict discourse as a much wider set of social practices and phenomena that have an 
economic basis and a political suprastructure; this leads to the differing positions of 
privilege and oppression within society (Howarth, 2000). The work of Foucault, Derrida, 
Zizek, Laclau and Mouffe, although varied and nuanced approaches, may be thought of 
as having in common post-marxist and post-structuralist approaches to discourse. This is 
the emphasis on how social structures are inherently ambiguous, incomplete and 
contingent systems of meaning. Foucault, in particular, was concerned with the way 
discourses are shaped by social practices and the way that social practices shape 
relationships and institutions (Howarth, 2000).  
Contemporary discourse theorists, such as Fairclough and others, developed an 
approach termed critical discourse analysis	thought of as studying discourse on a macro 
level. This includes the analysis of power in, for instance, political speeches  in order to 
show the repressive function of discourses towards minority groups (British Association 
for Applied Linguistics & Clark, 1990). This differs from Foucault who avoided seeing 
power as something repressive or possessed by another, although notably, it has been 
argued that Foucault considered micro and macro levels of discourse (e.g. Miller & Rose, 
2013; Hook, 2007). Foucault regarded power and/or micro and macro levels as 
relational, enacted between the subject and institutions, which could be, on varying 
levels, inventive and generative as well as adversative and unfavourable (Hook, 2010). 
Foucault stressed that we should assess everyday processes and rules through direct 
observations of talk and analyses of writing to draw conclusions about wider processes. 
This fits with the study rationale to examine professionally produced dementia leaflets 
and to interview people accessing memory clinics. Foucault also emphasised how we 
should examine systematized vehicles of thought, hereby accounting for more macro 
level analyses intertwined with micro. One example is the biomedical construct of 
dementia. From a Foucauldian perspective, the biomedical construction of dementia may 
be thought of as over determined and complimentary to producing and generating power-
effects for organisational, commercial, government, and medico-therapeutic systems. 
This influenced the study design to focus the way people with dementia and their spouses 
talk about their diagnoses, post diagnosis.   
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 43 
Although discourse theorists, Potter and Wetherall (1987) have studied discourse 
on a micro level, this should be distinguished from Foucaults work. Potter and Wetherall 
(1987) wrote a text, particularly influential in social psychology, that studied language 
and the way individuals use language in a performative and action orientated way. One of 
Potter and colleagues analytical resources was termed  interpretative repertoires where a 
central metaphor is used to represent a cluster of terms (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). They 
also utilised the term subject positions to consider how individuals are positioned 
through the act of discourse as a particular kind of person with different rights and 
prerogatives. This can be a helpful theoretical construct in discourse analysis and has 
been considered in this enquiry, how are PWDD and spouses positioned within dementia 
discourse?  
Nonetheless, Potter and colleagues approach also explored language minutely, as 
an entity for accessing individuals mental entities (Potter and Wiggins, 1996). Foucault 
used a vocabulary and understanding in his work that was anti-psychological (Hook, 
2010). Part of this included avoiding the idea of individual agent. Foucault saw the 
individual as something that had been advantageously created and maintained through 
disciplines such as psychology and law to facilitate types of control, action and 
normalisation. For example, when PWDD access psychology services embedded within 
memory clinics, they are interpreted through psychological explanations, through which 
subject-orientated descriptions are made. These descriptions may be thought of as a type 
of control that is constitutive of certain actions for the person diagnosed and others 
around them. Despite the individualising knowledge about PWDD concerning their 
human qualities and traits, in effect they are being homogeneously grouped within a 
domain of power and knowledge that assumes all individuals can be observed and 
influenced. This enhances the remits of control psychology, and other aforementioned 
organisations, structures and systems have. This calls for caution concerning 
individualised notions  discussed further below.  
Foucauldian Discourse Analysis (FDA). Using FDA, this research project will 
explore the different discourses that PWDD and their spouses draw upon and how each 
interviewee is positioned in relation to dominant or alternative discourses. FDA is an 
approach that has been developed using Foucaults various writing and lectures to 
extrapolate his unique means of analysing and understanding discourse. His techniques 
and concepts are particularly useful for the critical orientation to dementia taken in this 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 44 
study. Rawlinson (1987) has developed a FDA model to analyse the discursive processes 
within medicine and psychiatry. As dementia is considered a psychiatric construct, this 
may be thought of as a useful model for this research. Hook (2010) also provides a model 
for the application of FDA, highlighting some of the misconceptions in current research 
using this approach. Examples of this have been discussed in relation to Foucaults 
complex understandings of power, discourse and the individual. Another example may be 
the genealogical method Foucault developed, depicted below. Hook (2010) clarifies that 
this method of analysis is not a complete and historical tracing of a discourse, instead, it 
is a body of text constructing an argument to advance a different view of how the world 
is by isolating a some principal scenes and roles, whilst being sensitive to the fact that 
there are a multiplicity of events upholding and maintaining a discourse that will not be 
accounted for in the genealogical analysis (Hook, 2007, p.257).  
Genealogy. Foucault described genealogy as a form of history which can account 
for the constitution of knowledge, discourses, domains of object, which run their empty 
sameness throughout history (Foucault, Burchell, Gordon, & Miller, 1991, p.117). A 
genealogy may challenge the common sense view that dementia has always existed and 
that it is a truth. Foucault (1981) explained how the ideal of truth is a discourse in its 
self, developed through the philosophical and scientific disciplines. For instance, the ethic 
of knowledge that promises to give truth, which enforces that speech should appear 
simply as thought made visible by words (Foucault, 1981; p.65). In creating a 
genealogy, Foucault aimed to bring together notions of the past and the forgotten, along 
with the deliberately excluded (Hook, 2010). He aimed to present the divisions, 
fragmentations and contradicting knowledge, which functional and systematic 
organisations are designed to mask.11 Also, this method of analysis enables us to consider 
what knowledge may we resist (Dreyfus et al., 1983). 
To develop a genealogy, Foucault (1991) emphasised the need for an 
accumulation of source materials, as a way of critically assessing the complex 
circumstances that allow for discourse to emerge. For example, Behuniak (2011) used 
films featuring zombies to discuss biomedical perceptions of dementia and to argue that 
societal constructions of dementia have a political function12.  
Secondly, in forming a genealogy Foucault argued that attention should be applied 
to discourse, such as the process of concepts forming and fading (Dreyfus et al., 1983). 
Hook (2010) explains how exploring the different meanings or clusters in a discourse can 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 45 
present a network of elements that become fixed to enable an object of knowledge to 
attain its coherence. Powers (2013) describes elements smaller subparts of the discourse 
which are replaceable and always subject to shift/change. For dementia, elements may 
include the biomedical origins of disease, i.e. plaques, neuro fibular tangles, excessive 
degeneration and so on, that have obtained coherence yet remain at risk of being altered. 
Marriage may be thought of as having had elements that perhaps have altered or faded in 
some respects, particularly when considering the westernised dominance of marriage 
discourses fifty years ago (see introduction, 1.09-1.10).  
A third premise of a genealogy is a focus on events in a non-linear ahistorical 
process. The term ahistorical refers to Foucaults distrust of originary explanations that 
propose linear and successive discoveries. Instead, he proposed attention should be 
directed to the surfaces of emergence, referring to the particular complex events and 
circumstances that locate a discourse in a time and place (Hook, 2010). Rabinow (1986) 
also describes emergence as forces and struggles that wage against one another to gain 
strength and form, whilst struggling against external or internal elements that may act as 
oppressors to the dominant discourse. In accordance with this, this study has considered 
some of the contingent moments and struggles that surrounded the emergence of 
biomedical discourse of dementia and to a lesser extent the contingent moments 
surrounding family and marriage discourses, to show how they are upheld by political 
events, circumstances and forces.    
At the time of writing this thesis, there have been few genealogical enquiries 
within the field of ageing, these are limited to Alzheimers disease alone (Dillmann, 
1990; Robertson, 1990) or old ageing generally (e.g. Biggs & Powell, 2001; Katz, 1996). 
Disciplinary technologies. In Foucaults (1991) Discipline and Punish: The Birth 
of The Prison, disciplinary technologies are portrayed to have emerged after the 
sovereign era, in what he terms as the humanist era. He explains that between these time 
periods there was shift in the way that crime was perceived in society and the way that a 
punishment was carried out (e.g. torture and execution to imprisonment). Humanist 
reformists argued against inhumane treatment, supporting a more curative model of 
punishment that goes only so far as to preventing a person recommitting a crime. 
Foucault views this as the beginning of psychological knowledge being tied intimately to 
power  proto-psychological concepts of will, tendencies and dispositions were used to 
structure penalties (Hook, 2010). There was a dynamic co-investment of new forms of 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 46 
control, such as psychology and the law. Dreyfus & Rabinow (1982) add that disciplinary 
technologies and the notion of the problematic subject became powerful means of control 
where punishment remained out of sight, while exposing subjects to permanent 
surveillance. Disciplinary technologies involve technical skills, analytical procedures and 
professional vocabularies as means of codification and control, often mounted as 
change and betterment (Hook, 2010).   
Here we may consider the PCM of dementia that emphasises personality, life 
experiences and individualised approaches to dementia (see introduction). Within this, 
both professional vocabularies (e.g. dementia, relationship-centred care) and 
disciplinary technologies (e.g. the vocabularies and procedures of service managers, 
nurses, occupational therapists, psychologists, commissioners that codify and control 
dementia) can be seen as structuring the discourse and meaning of dementia as found in 
the PCM at the same time as guarding and reifying disciplinary technologies.   
Subjectification and objectification. Foucaults notion of subjectification is 
defined by Hook (2010) as a thoroughly individualising set of knowledge about a single 
person or subject. Foucault (1991) emphasised a flourishing of the disciplinary 
technologies (e.g. the practices of researchers, psy professionals, cell biologists and 
pharma, among many other structures and systems in a dynamic web of power), which 
account for the successful rise of an individualistic society. Objectification is the 
objectifying of the individualised subjects through means of watching, measuring and 
coding behaviour tendencies (Hook, 2010). Objectification increases the need for 
disciplinary technologies, and this increases subjectification processes to capture the 
deviant subjects and apply modes of modification and rehabilitation (e.g. cognitive 
stimulation therapy groups, cognitive enhancement drugs). The tools used to measure 
dementia effects may exemplify objectification: for example obtaining personal histories 
to judge the extent of behavioural abnormalities may illustrate subjectification. Both 
processes are considered to be areas of expertise, there is no other means of accessing 
truth, whether the person has dementia or not, without a reliance on, and a need for 
experts.  
Subjectivisation. Where an individual experiences himself or herself in terms of 
the individualising set of knowledge or subjectification constructed, this may be 
understood as subjectivisation. Hook (2010) states the speaking subject is subject to 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 47 
their speaking, and the subject of what is spoken demonstrating the reflexive loop of 
discourse (p.37). Rose (1996) explains subjectifisation is the process of becoming subject 
to a narrative, which becomes attached to the work of constructing an identity. This is 
bound to both language norms and psychological expertise.  Thus, a person with 
dementia may only experience themselves within the realms of language norms and 
psychological expertise (i.e. memory impaired, dementing, deteriorating).  
Other theorists have adapted Foucaults notion of subjectifisation as the differing 
subject-positions which individuals are accorded (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). Hook 
(2010) has argued that a closer fit to Foucaults notion of subjectifisation may be 
illuminated by the psychoanalytic and anti-humanist notion of the other devised by 
Lacan. The other is the sum-total of the symbolic domain (i.e. the laws, language and 
social structure etc.) which can provide a reference for how we are structured in the 
complex social relations that we are part of (Dolar, 1999). The other is crucial for 
accounting for the mechanisms of power and reflexivity. We ask: how am I seen by the 
other? What does the other want from me? What are the social values it holds most 
dear? Here we may consider the role of the marital partner without a dementia diagnosis, 
who may have had contact with professionals through their spouses/the PWDD diagnosis 
and treatment. The marital partner may be interpreted as confirming with the other (i.e. 
what do these professionals want from me? How am I seen?) and may shape themselves 
according to professional expectations and wider discourses around care.  
Soul effects. Not dissimilar to subjectivization, the soul as an evaluative and self-
regulatory process - a pre-emptive intervention, occurring prior to the act of any 
disobedience. Foucaults (1991) study of an architectural design of the Bentham prison 
led him to examine modern power (in an abstract and a concrete sense) and how the 
corrective involvement of various institutions produces soul effects, or docility and 
aptitude: 
An annular building; at the centre, a tower; [it] is divided into cellsthey 
have [windows] on the outside, which allow the light to cross the cell from one 
end to the other.  Place a supervisor in a central tower in each cell a madman, 
a patient, a condemned man, a worker or a schoolboy. By the effect of 
backlighting each actor is alone, perfectly individualized and constantly 
visible (Foucault 1991, p. 200). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 48 
The prisons circular shape and lighting, was understood to prevent prisoners from 
being watched and so they behave as if they are being watched continuously. Foucault 
(1991) explained this as the process of inscribing the self, resulting in our own 
subjectivity being disciplinary, as a permanent means of control. Although different 
disciplinary technologies are dissimilar and the zones where they are centred/enacted are 
not homogenous (e.g. prisons are different from classrooms) they work together to form 
disciplinary power. For example, Kitwood (1997) provided numerous case studies to 
show how subjects with dementia often monitor and check themselves in social situations 
(e.g. for repetition of speech, word errors) whereby the subject with a diagnosis of 
dementia may be thought to have inscribed the disciplinary gaze upon themselves, 
effectively maintaining order and control.  
Power and resistance. Foucault cautioned against stereotypical notions of power 
as something held, possessed, exchanged or governed, such as the Marxist repressive 
model of power (Foucault & Hurley, 1998). Foucaults notion of power is a relational 
force which has various complex manoeuvres and manifestations. It is seen as an 
invisible unity that is produced from one moment to the next, with the potential to be 
extended and perpetuated (Powers, 2013). However, within the discursive horizon there 
may be alternative discourses that can create a means of resistance and alternative 
speaking positions. An alternative discourse to the dominant biomedical discourse of 
dementia may replace perceived symptoms of dementia as part of a continuum of ageing 
effects that can occur in later life, while avoiding biomedical understandings of dementia. 
Resistance may also involve contesting the diagnosis or the pertained truth methods 
used to diagnose dementia. Resistance in its self may be thought of as a counter-power, 
challenging authority and subverting apparatuses of knowledge and power. This 
demonstrates the flow of power which Foucault explained using the term bi-
directionality- the opportunities for response and answering back. What this means is 
individuals do not control power, nor are they merely anonymous points of its 
application. Power is transmitted by and through those whom it comes to invest (Foucault 
1980; as cited in Hook, 2010). 
In terms of dementia, it may be important to avoid notions of people with 
dementia as being victims or repressed by others, most significantly avoiding the 
claim that spouses without dementia diagnoses repress their spouse with diagnoses. In 
Kitwoods (1997) work, he depicted how spouses without dementia could dominate the 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 49 
talk with the person with dementia, and out-pace them making it difficult for them to join 
the conversation. His work has encouraged efforts toward empowering people with 
dementia to align with a person-centred rather than biomedical identity. In relation to this, 
Foucault emphasised how notions of individuals breaking free of power, may be seen as 
liberalist notions enhancing the veil of the machinery (Hook, 2010). He claimed that in 
order to understand power, there is a need to attend to the interfaces between subjects and 
institutions or the day-to-day appearances of the apparatuses of knowledge and power, 
whilst avoiding notions of the individual agent  such as the spouse repressing or 
dominating the spouse with dementia (an individual level perspective).  
In this study, one of the chosen interfaces was memory assessment clinics in a 
host NHS trust. From here, professionally produced leaflets were selected and used as 
part of the analysis, in combination with professional guidelines (NICE, 2006). Another 
chosen interface was the marital dyad; marital couples, where one spouse has a diagnosis 
of dementia were recruited from the abovementioned host NHS trust. This substantiated 
to a two-part analysis. From this data, close attention was paid to how discourse (relating 
to dementia) was interdependent on macro level processes (i.e. the organisational, 
epistemological, technological, economic forces). 
Summary of FDA framework. In using this methodological approach, the 
relational aspects of power and knowledge can be assessed, which is a novel line of 
enquiry within the field of dementia research. FDA can examine how dementia is 
constituted through disciplinary technologies and apparatuses and how this in return 
constitutes the need for disciplines. The use of this method scrutinises how diagnostic 
practise around dementia perpetuates dominant discourses, whilst disqualifying others 
(e.g. as discussed the dominant biomedical model (BMM) of dementia may prevent 
alternative conceptualisations of dementia). It also considers the outcomes of these 
discourses in terms of action (e.g. soul effects, and subjectifisation). This research method 
views power not as something held or possessed, but instead uses notions of bio-
directionality to assess the flow of power in discourses. It enables an explanation of the 
historical and social circumstances surrounding dementia discourses and how these have 
altered and consolidated over time.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 50 
2.04 Method of Analysis 
Reflexivity. Theoretical reflexivity is often seen to be an important aspect of 
qualitative methodologies. It is a process by which researchers acknowledge the different 
ways in which their beliefs, assumptions and knowledge might influence the research 
process (Breakwell et al., 2012). Qualitative approaches to research have received 
criticism for unsystematic and subjective observations that cannot be replicated and 
reflexivity is often considered a way of facilitating more reliable findings. There are 
various frameworks that are developed in order to assess the quality of qualitative pieces 
of research (see Greenhalgh, 1997). However, these may be thought of as trying to 
emulate the quantitative exactness of natural sciences. Within Discourse Analysis there is 
often far less emphasis on qualitative techniques in relation to underlying assumptions 
about knowledge. Discourse is depicted as something that enables us to communicate 
with the world rather than to accurately represent it.  
Nonetheless, Willig (2013) has argued that how researchers engage with research 
material is influenced by their own experiences, and so there is a need to be reflexive in 
research. A reflective journal is one means to consider issues around reflexivity 
(appendix A), as well as combining data from different contexts known as triangulation. 
This study triangulated findings from four joint and six individual interview transcripts 
which encouraged a variation of talk between couples and individuals (Appendices B & 
C). It also used professionally produced dementia leaflets (Leaflet 1-13), and NICE 
(2006) professional guidance for dementia care. Research supervisors checked the 
analysis and verbatim quotes from interviews were included in the results chapter to 
illustrate the discourses.  
Researchers historical location.  Historical location refers to the researchers 
positioning in the history of their knowledge. In terms of Foucaults position on ones 
relation to knowledge, he seemed less concerned with critical reflexivity although argued 
that researchers are in effect, looking through a modern day lens leaving the risk of 
misinterpreting historical moments and events, and misinterpreting current relations. One 
example is where society is dominated by psychological knowledge and individualised 
understandings, the researcher could psychologise the data and find it difficult to think 
beyond the individual agent. Secondly, it is possible that the researcher may find it 
difficult to separate the study research findings from mainstream, universalising, internal 
and politicising trends, for instance, the lay understandings of empowering people with 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 51 
dementia discussed (Parker & Gordo-Lpez, 1999). In consideration of his own research 
location Foucault adopted the genealogical method to attempt to dismantle the individual 
subject as the primary vehicle of explanation (Hook, 2007; p.171). Genealogies by Rose 
(2007, 1985) have examined various types of psychologies to engage in a critical 
psychology, within a broader web of social power. Tamboukou and Ball (2003) argue 
that the researcher should shatter norms and certainties about what can and should be 
researched; interrogate how we define accounts of knowledge, truth and scientificity; 
recover silenced discourses; restore political dimensions by highlighting the centrality of 
power; and guard against the temptation to recognise oneself in the data analysed 
(Tamboukou & Ball, 2003). These methods have been used to guide the researcher 
throughout the data analysis, discussed further in chapter four. 
Ethical considerations.  There are various guidelines to support the researcher to 
attend to ethical issues raised by their study (e.g. British Psychological Society, 2009, 
2014). Particularly in relation to one of the spouses having a diagnosis of dementia 
consent to the research was carefully considered, as well as aspects of risk. This study 
also adhered to guidelines when: advising participants of the study aims through 
participant information sheet (Appendix I); seeking consent to contact them (Appendix J; 
obtaining informed consent (Appendix K); notifying the right to withdraw from the 
study; maintaining confidentiality and anonymity; and debriefing participants (appendix 
Ethics. This research received approval from the University of Essex Ethics 
Committee, received on 13th October 2015 (Appendix M), a National Research Ethics 
Committee, on the 14th July 2015 (Appendix N) and the host NHS Research and 
Development Department on the 2nd September 2015 (Appendix O). The research project 
had a co-sponsorship arrangement for legal and professional indemnity between the 
University of Essex and the host NHS trust (Appendix P).  
Participants for this study were recruited from one host NHS trust as patients who 
had received a diagnosis of dementia and their spouses. PWDD were recruited whilst 
attending Cognitive Stimulation Therapy, post-diagnosis.  This meant that clinicians were 
involved to support with any risks that may have arisen (e.g. disclosure of suicidal 
thoughts and so forth). Potential suitable participants attending this group who met the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria (Appendix L) were sent an information letter (Appendix 
I) from their clinician inviting them and their partner to take part in the research. The 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 52 
researcher did not have access to any of the potential participants personal data without 
prior consent, in line with the NHS data protection policy (NHS England, 2014). 
Participant information letters included the co-sponsorship organisations logos, the 
researchers and research supervisors contact details and information on complaint 
procedures. Information on the purpose and nature of the research, benefits, 
risks/burdens, confidentiality and right to withdraw were also detailed in the letters. The 
language used was intended to be accessible and invitational.   
The information letter was discussed verbally prior to any interviewing and 
participants were asked to provide informed consent (Appendix K). Participants indicated 
they had read and understood the information letter, had been given a chance to ask any 
questions and were aware of withdrawal procedures. Although there were no cases where 
participants were unable to understand the information sheet, the researcher drew upon 
NHS capacity assessment tools to support the consideration of this. While mental 
capacity may be considered a social construction, the National Research Ethics 
Committee and ethical guidance frameworks listed endorse full mental capacity is 
fundamental for the participant to understand what they were committing to in 
participating in research (dementia and marriage are both potentially sensitive topics).	If a 
case had arisen where the participant with dementia did not have mental capacity to 
consent, the researcher would have offered to rearrange the interview, or reinstated the 
participants right to withdraw from the study.  
As interview questions included the possibility of disclosures and safeguarding 
risks, participants were informed of confidentiality limits and whistle blowing procedures 
prior to providing their consent. They were aware that if a risk did become apparent, the 
researcher would encourage them to speak to their clinician, or alternatively, the 
researcher may contact a member of staff in line with confidentiality agreements. The 
British Psychological Society Code of Conduct (2009), and host NHS trust Prevention 
and Management of Violence and Aggression Work Policy were used as guidance 
frameworks in the research procedure.  
At the end of the interview participants had the opportunity to ask any questions 
and reflect on the interview process. All participants were offered a summary of the 
results or access to any published peer reviewed article; those interested in this offer were 
asked to sign a consent form agreeing for the researcher to store their preferred contact 
details at the University of Essex. Each participant was offered a voucher for the value of 
ten pounds funded by the researcher for their participation and as a thank you gesture.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 53 
Data management. Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed; these were 
stored on an encrypted, password protected memory stick. Transcripts were edited and 
contained no personally identifiable data to protect participants identities (Appendices B 
& C). Participants were made aware that the researcher was the only one with access to 
the recordings. The researcher used her personal laptop to analyse the data once it had 
been anonymised. These files were double password protected by a laptop password and 
an electronic file password. Participants consent forms were stored at the University of 
Essex in a locked filing cabinet. Once anonymised transcripts had been written, audio 
recordings were discarded. Prior to consent, participants were aware that quotations 
would be used in the write up of this thesis and possibly in a peer reviewed article. Where 
quotations were used from professionally produced dementia leaflets from GP/memory 
clinics (Leaflets 1-13), these were also anonymised to protect participants identities (e.g. 
XXX NHS Partnership Foundation Trust). 
McCosker, Barnard, & Gerber's (2001) interview protocol for sensitive interview 
topics was used to guide interview discussion, such as how to manage circumstances 
when the participant showed negative emotion. The researcher kept details of 
professional support services to give to participants if necessary. In one case, the 
researcher was informed of a PWDD having fleeting suicidal thoughts and low mood - 
this was openly discussed and no immediate risk concerns were identified, yet with the 
participants permission it was agreed that the interviewer would contact their lead 
clinician, after which the lead clinician contacted this PWDD to offer support. 
2.4 Procedure 
Fourteen leaflets were collected from four memory clinics in a host NHS trust, to 
combine with NICE (2006) professional guidelines for dementia. In addition, participants 
with a diagnosis of dementia (PWDD) and their marital partners, recruited from the same 
host NHS trust, were interviewed.  Out of seven marital dyads, four were interviewed 
together and three were interviewed separately meaning ten interviews were completed in 
total.  
Participants. Data was collected from seven PWDD and their partners, equating 
to a sample of fourteen. Participants ages ranged between seventy-three and eighty-eight, 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 54 
and the mean age was eighty. All participants described their ethnicities as White British 
and spoke fluent English. All the marital dyads in this sample were cohabiting; they 
married between the ages of nineteen and twenty-eight (with a mean of age twenty-three). 
The length of time together ranged from fifty-two to sixty-three years (with a mean of 
fifty-seven years of marriage).     
Five PWDD taking part in this study were female and two were male; the time 
since PWDD received their diagnosis ranged from five to thirty-six months, with an 
average of fourteen months. No one in this study had what would be characterised as 
severe stage  dementia in relation to the inclusion/exclusion criteria (Appendix L). Three 
participants had a diagnosis of Alzheimers disease; two had a diagnosis of Vascular 
Dementia; one, Parkinsons disease; and one, Lewy Bodies dementia. Table 3 provides a 
summary of these details, including fictitious participant names allocated by the 
researcher. The length of time since diagnosis is indicated as this presents how recently 
PWDD and their partners have been in contact with professionals.  
Table 3. Participants demographic data. 
Allocated 
Gender** Current 
Years of 
Education 
Length 
Married 
Married) 
Diagnosis 
(Time Since 
Diagnosis) 
Sebastian  m 86 9 63 (23) - 
Olive  f 84 16 63 (21) Alzheimers 
(12 months) 
William m 88 9 60 (28) - 
Marie  f 81 11 60 (21) Vascular  
(36 months)  
*Emma f 74 11 54 (19) - 
*Henry  m 75 16 54 (20) Vascular  
(14 months)  
*Florence  f 84 12 58 (26) - 
*Les  m 84 16 58 (26) Alzheimers 
(8 months) 
*Thomas m 80 18 52 (28) - 
*Betty  f 73 11 52 (21) Parkinsons 
(5 months) 
*James m 80 10 56 (24) - 
*Norah  f 76 10 56 (20) Lewy 
Bodys  
(9 months) 
Jack m 77 13 54 (23) - 
Ruby  f 77 12 54 (23) Alzheimers  
(12 months)  
* Interviewed as a dyad ** m: male and f: female 
Data collection. Leaflets were selected based on their availability and relevance 
to this research project. In terms of the form of documents chosen, leaflets, it was 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 55 
considered that this data may allow access to fairly lay talk in relation to dementia and 
ageing; leaflets were analysed alongside NICE (2006) professional guidelines for 
dementia to see how sources matched or differed. Original copies of the leaflets are 
included in appendices (Leaflet 1-13). NICE (2006) professional guidance for dementia 
are referenced and obtainable online.  
Concerning the interviews, for those who contacted the researcher and were 
willing to participate, a face-to-face interview was arranged. Interviews were all 
completed at an NHS base on working days to ensure other professionals were in the 
building. Telephone interviews were not an option. Both of these factors were related to 
the possibility of potential risk.  
In terms of the conducting the interview, four dyads were interviewed together 
and three were interviewed separately. This was to gain potential variations in talk on 
dementia, which may differ within and outside of the relationship. Generally, participants 
did not have a preference as to which type of interview they completed and choices were 
made around logistics such as time they had available (separate interviews tended to take 
longer partly because each participant waited whilst the other was being interviewed). 
Only one participant presented a strong preference to a joint interview due to concern 
about their communication.  
A semi structured interview guide (Appendix M) was used to facilitate the 
interview. During interviews, the researcher followed an approach of devils advocate 
whereby debate was promoted and the researcher offered opposite opinions to 
participants points coinciding with the complex formation of discourse and incomplete 
fragmented language systems (advised by Tanggaard, 2007). Tanggaard (2007) states that 
discourse studies using interviews can have a humanist frosting with a focus on 
experience; introducing alternative questioning and controversy, is a means to promote 
meaning making and offers a way of avoiding reciprocal or harmonious dialogue between 
the interviewees and interviewer. Research questions were designed to be broad and to 
provide opportunity for varying discussions.  
Interviews were conducted between December 2015 and January 2016. The 
longest interview lasted one hour and fifty-six minutes and the shortest, forty-two 
minutes. 
Transcriptions. Interviews were audio recorded using a Dictaphone and 
transcribed using a transcription guide (Appendix N). In writing transcriptions, 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 56 
participants exact words, pauses and stresses were included; words were added to 
provide further clarification, or omitted to protect identities (see transcription guide for 
details).  
Process of analysis.  FDA is a methodological approach to research that is based 
upon Foucaults various lectures and analyses (Hook, 2010). Foucault did not distinguish 
a clear procedure for his approach linked to his attempt to disassemble the discourse of 
truth. Howarth (2000) describes Foucaults work as consisting of an early and later 
phase; the researcher adopted methods from both to answer the research questions13. 
Powers (2013) has described a genealogy as the first step in research using FDA, 
followed by an analysis of how the discourse functions presently. Similarly, Rawlinson 
(1987) makes an important distinction stating that how a discourse has arisen is the task 
of the genealogy in the first stage of analysis, and why it functions should be 
encompassed in a second stage.  
The first stage of this research aimed to complete a genealogy to explain the 
historical and social circumstances of dementia discourse broadly. This used primary and 
secondary data to present fragments and divisions in the concept and practice surrounding 
dementia, while paying attention to disciplinary systems that uphold dementia discourse 
(see 1.1). The genealogy studied dementia as an umbrella term (previous researchers have 
completed genealogies focused on Alzheimers specifically, e.g. Robertson, 1990; 
Dillman, 1990). It began with a conceptual analysis of dementia in the 1500s and shifts to 
various key time points such as the 1900s and then the 1980s, by way of dismantling 
dementias seamless truth that runs through history. It also modestly considered family 
and marriage as part of the enquiry dementia in the marital sphere. This was to a lesser 
extent due to limited space and capacity. On the following page, table 4 presents 
questions used to guide the researcher in the genealogy.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 57 
The second phase of the analysis, presented in chapter 3, aimed to study the way 
dementia discourse functioned within professional leaflets and guidelines, and following 
this interview data. Interviews were with spouse dyads when one spouse has a diagnosis 
of dementia. Similar to the genealogy, there were a series of questions used to guide the 
researcher in the analysis of these sources, depicted in table 5 on the following page.  
Data analysis began with fourteen leaflets from memory clinics and NICE (2006) 
professional guidelines for dementia. Similar to other qualitative approaches, this data 
was read repeatedly, annotated and coded (Breakwell et al., 2012). Document titles, 
slogans, bodies of text, and images were used in the analysis. Appendix B presents the 
researchers notes and initial coding of three of the leaflets studied. For each leaflet, 
particular attention was paid to discursive patterns and themes, when the discursive 
pattern may be seen to deviate, or when talk was seen to resist a more dominant 
discursive pattern. Appendix C presents some of the patterns derived across the sources 
examined. Leaflets and NICE (2006) guidelines were chiefly considered together, though, 
how they contrasted or differed was also of interest.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 58 
As this document analysis was smaller than the successive interview analysis, it 
was more tentative; discursive patterns were considered, rather than inferring discourses. 
This analysis however, was used to corroborate the findings from interview data, and as 
such, more interpretations were made about the discourses functioning. This presents the 
inductive process of the analysis.  
Data analysis of interviews began during transcription phase. Here, the researcher 
wrote down interesting patterns such as the speaking positions that participants appeared 
to enact, or how data linked to broader political, cultural and social trends. As mentioned 
there were ten transcripts in total. Similar to leaflets, each transcript was read repeatedly, 
annotated and coded (appendix E & F). The researcher developed a colour co-ordinated 
key to support coding (Appendix D). This highlighted the researchers attention to topics 
such as what triggered involvement with institutional settings in the context of dementia, 
and how did talk construct the marital relationship. It also focused upon absences, 
resistances, subject positions, and other related discourse theory concepts. Analysis 
proceeded by distinguishing the way that power and knowledge may interact between 
subjects  how separate and joint interviews contrasted was of particular interest. The 
researcher examined relationships between discourses, counter-discourses, as well as the 
context in which discourse was situated	(e.g. see, Figure 1. Main discourses and their 
relationships toward one another, page 69).   
Qualitative data analysis software, NVivo, was initially used, though was found to 
be unhelpful given that it pools data together and reduces the distinction between joint 
and separate interviews, and participants generally. This diverges from the analytic 
approach where one considers divergences and irregularities closely. Therefore, data 
extracts copied into a word document and organised in a way that allowed for these 
distinctions (e.g. appendix G). Where Powers (2013) places emphasis on grids of 
specification (i.e. a systematic taxonomy of concepts constructed within a discourse 
which is used to place discourse elements into an ordered hierarchy) various discourse 
elements were mapped (appendices G & F) and diagrammatic presentations of these are 
illustrated in the results for each discourse (e.g. p.71).  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 59 
To the researchers knowledge this was the first FDA enquiry in this field combine such 
data. This study is also novel owing to the analysis leaflets and professional guidelines of 
relating to dementia, used to corroborate the interview analysis.   
2.06 Chapter Summary  
As discussed, this study has taken a social constructionist epistemological position 
and has drawn upon Foucaults work. This chapter has not focused on the limitations of 
Foucaults work, although the researcher acknowledges there are various critiques14. It 
has considered the reasons for taking a Foucauldian discourse approach, plus recruitment 
and ethical considerations. The following chapter presents the study results.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 60 
3. Results 
3.01 Chapter Overview 
This section describes the findings of a two-part analysis: firstly, the discursive 
themes, patterns, irregularities and deviances within, leaflets obtained from memory 
clinics, and NICE (2006) guidelines for dementia are discussed; secondly, the 
examination of discourse within ten transcripts from joint and separate interviews with 
spouse dyads where one spouse has a diagnosis of dementia. Here, the dominant and 
alternative discourses in relation to dementia are formulated, as well as forms of 
resistance, bidirectionality, and subject positions. Eight main discourses are described in 
total. Diagrams present the relationships between discourses and the interlinking elements 
or subparts within a given discourse. Throughout this chapter, theoretical interpretations 
are made drawing upon Foucaults work and discourse theory. 
3.02 Part One: Document Analysis 
Summary of the findings. The findings from an analysis of leaflets from memory 
clinics and NICE (2006) guidelines for dementia presented various discursive patterns 
and deviances in relation to dementia talk (See appendices; Leaflets 1-14). To summarise, 
one discursive theme amongst the sources was listings of statistics and symptoms 
commonly associated with dementia; here, dementia was often depicted as a biomedical 
disease. In addition, a subject position of a person with dementia at risk to themselves or 
others was a theme indicated in the data. These two discursive patterns appeared to 
produce fear, influencing people to seek professional support. Seeking professional 
support was rationalised by experts holding specialist knowledge and skills concerning 
dementia.  
Although a less apparent, across the documents, a pattern of resistance was an 
avoidance of professional care, and also, a minimising of dementia through grouping it as 
a physical condition alike to diabetes  this suggests a more treatable physical health 
condition with less cause for concern. Similarly, a discursive pattern was talk around 
PWDD independence, individuality and activity. The active and independent subject 
position constructed here may be seen to align with person-centred and community care 
discourses upheld by service-user, charity and liberation movements, and government 
policy  discussed further below.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 61 
A discursive theme professional tools, constructed GPs and spouses as 
supportive for people at risk of dementia, particularly in assisting them to access 
professionalism, expertise, and knowledge from more specialist professionals. Where 
there was no description on what treatments substantiated to in leaflets, there was detail 
in NICE guidelines. This may depict the way languages and tools professionals use are 
confined to scientific and professional communities. This upholds expertise and power in 
dementia systems or organisations, while limiting potential resistance from those with 
dementia diagnoses and others.  
A final finding was	the objectification (i.e. assessment, monitoring, coding) of the 
Carer or marital partner by an array of disciplinary technologies. For instance, the Carer 
was bound to an authoritative position to make legal decisions for the PWDD, and 
monitored in their ability to do so. The relation of the Carer was unspecified in the text  
the lack of specification may imply how the Carer is open to new constructions and 
representations according to socio-political needs.  
The discursive patterns recognized in document analysis are described in more 
detail below including extracts from sources. The analysis process is described in more 
detail between pages 56-59. Analytical coding for the document analysis can be seen in 
appendices B and C. 
Statistics and symptoms. This theme partly relates to listings of statistics and 
symptoms associated with dementia. It was apparent in most of the documents studied. 
Numbers were used to signify the extent of people affected by the progressive condition 
dementia, alerting the reader. Sources also highlighted how research/science was 
credible, progressive, and working towards cure and prevention for dementia. The 
following extracts exemplify this: 
There are currently 850,000 people living with dementia in the UK; there are 
around 6.5 million carers in the UK (Leaflet 14  [omitted] County Council, 
2015).  
based on innovative medical and progressive social research into the cure and 
prevention of dementia (Leaflet 11  Alzheimers Society, 2016a). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 62 
This discursive theme relates to a discourse drawing upon the ideology of truth in 
science and medical practice, upholding dementia as a tangible and observable entity. 
Fitting with this, there was a promotion of the need for individual and cultural 
awareness of the symptoms or signs associated with developing dementia. Enhanced risks 
of developing dementia in old age were portrayed, such as through images of older adults 
on the front of leaflets paired with the word dementia. Also, in several leaflets notable 
memory loss distinguished from the odd case of forgetfulness. As discussed in the 
introduction chapter, this discourse, constructing a biomedical characterization of 
memory loss, is upheld by social, ethical, scientific, commercial and professional forces, 
which work together in differing ways.  
Subject positions: inactive/active. In the documents analysed, subject positions 
were implied. For instance, supposed dementia symptoms aggression and disinhibited 
sexual behaviour in the excerpt below construct an active subject who may place others 
at some level of risk. This was similar in another leaflet that referred to admission to 
hospital. 
Many people with dementia experience difficulties with activities of daily 
living, self-neglect, psychiatric symptoms (for example, apathy, depression or 
psychosis) and out-of-character behaviour (for example, aggression, sleep 
disturbance or disinhibited sexual behaviour) (NICE, 2006). 
Admission for patients removed by police under court warrant under Section 135 
of the Mental Health Act 1983. Why am I in Hospital? It is believed you have a 
mental disorder and you need treatment and care. A magistrate has issued a 
warrant which says you can be kept here, even if you do not want to come 
(Leaflet 10  XXX Borough Council, 2016b). 
In opposition, listed signs of self neglect and difficulties with daily living 
construct a more absent and vulnerable subject who is potentially at risk to their self. In 
conjunction, a further leaflet promoted planning end of life care soon after diagnosis as 
mental functioning and capacity deteriorates (Leaflet 14  XXX Partnership NHS 
Foundation Trust et al. 2015).  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 63 
Despite the incongruence of the two subject positions regarding active risk or 
inactivity, it may be interpreted that both positions work together to produce fear and co-
ordinate action towards/within professional sites and organisations. This is arguably a 
political incentive to manage behaviours deemed as disruptive or unproductive within a 
westernised culture. Rabinow (1983) states how political problems, the need to maintain 
societal order plus manage limited resources, are often turned in to technical problems for 
the concentration of specialists. Specialists may be thought of as a whole coalition of 
primary investigators, including hospital settings, community agencies, legal 
professionals, charitable support networks, implicating directing and operating PWDDs 
care.  
Seeking professional support. Correspondingly, a clear discursive pattern from 
sources was continuous encouragements for those suspected of having dementia 
symptoms to seek professional advice early. This was constructed around warnings on the 
risk of memory loss increasing in later life illustrated in the excerpts below.  
If you are worried about your memory it is important to seek advice 
because, in some cases, memory problems are an early sign of a medical condition 
such as dementia (Leaflet 2 Alzheimers Society, 2016b). 
Should I be concerned about my memory? Its happened to all of us at some 
time or another. You cant put a name to a face. You forget where you put your 
keysyour car Most of the time such slips are a nuisance, rather than a sign of 
something more serious. But its worth seeking advice. (Leaflet 2  
Alzheimers Society, 2013). 
This may be seen to relate to Foucaults (1991) depiction of power, where media, 
government, professional, and charitable organisations depict the dementing mind, more 
and more people are constituted and constitute themselves as having dementia. 
An avoidance of professional care and a minimising of dementia. In contrast 
to the above finding, one leaflet (extract below) appeared to represent alternative 
discourse that downplayed or resisted cultural seriousness associated with dementia and 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 64 
old age mentioned above, alongside the need for contact with medical professionals. This 
was an irregular pattern in the documents studied. 
Your free NHS health check: helping you prevent heart disease, stroke, diabetes, 
kidney disease, and dementia The check helps to identify risks early. It is part 
of a national scheme to prevent the onset of these health problems. Why do I need 
this check? I feel fine ... I know what Im doing. How can the doctor help me? 
(Leaflet 8  Public Health England, 2013). 
This extract implied an opposing discursive theme minimising the distinct 
boundaries between what is normal and pathological, while challenging the usefulness of 
contact with professionals (e.g. how can the doctor help me?). Where this particular 
leaflet grouped dementia as being alike to kidney disease or diabetes, it suggests a 
discourse that avoids the construction of an age related mind disease, dissimilar to 
abovementioned themes. 
The material in the above quoted leaflet highlights the health check does not cost 
anything and it is not old age specific (e.g. this is a free health check to improve health 
in adults aged 40 to 75). The front cover image of a body with mechanic cogs inside 
presents a working body; text emphasises the purely precautionary aspect of the check 
and part of national scheme. In opposition to this, another leaflet presented cogs falling 
outside the mind and the word dementia, representing a broken mind (e.g. Leaflet 14 - 
XXX Partnership NHS Foundation Trust et al. 2015). The latter appears to reflect the 
more dominant discursive pattern across the analysed sources. 
Independence, individuality and activity. A further discursive pattern within 
documents was the need to maintain PWDD independence. Both Life Story work, a book 
about life events using memorabilia or photos, and Cognitive Stimulation Therapy, a 
group with various activities argued to keep the mind active, were talked about in leaflets 
and professional guidelines (NICE, 2006), for those with dementia diagnoses. As 
discussed in the introduction chapter, these may be thought to interact with person 
centred discourse; a movement promoting individuality and engagement in activities 
proliferated psychological therapies, service-user movements and large charity 
organisations. Recent policy and service initiatives aim to reduce health and social care 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 65 
costs and support community based care, often aligning with the person centred model of 
care in dementia (e.g. Department of Health, 2016a).  
One leaflet listed a multiplicity of products including stair lifts, walk in 
baths/showers, personal alarms, and travel insurance (Leaflet 9 - Age UK, 2016). Another 
stated, maintain your independence your families piece of mind by subscribing to 
monitoring and response services, less than 6 a week: for young and old alike 
(Leaflet 5  Helpline B, 2016). This included two images of elderly people with younger 
relatives/grandchildren, perhaps symbolising an active role in the family and resistance to 
the dementia subject positions discussed, i.e. at risk/a risk (Leaflet 6  Helpline A, 2016). 
Nevertheless, a divergence from talk on independence surrounded lack of safety, 
incapability and potential familial burden. For instance:  
Care Cameras  secure and private Has dad left the hob on? Worried about 
mum falling down the stairs? Caring for an elderly relative? Check they are safe. 
Just 1 per day (Leaflet 3 - Care Cameras, 2016). 
Professional tools. This document analysis found that the GP was constructed as 
an important gatekeeper who could refer for assessment and management from dementia. 
The spouse/relative was also accorded a subject position facilitating the professional 
decipher whether dementia signs are present, a quasi-professional role: 
"If you are concerned about the memory of someone close to you, encourage them 
to visit their GP (Leaflet 2 Alzheimers Society, 2016b). 
You might start the conversation by gently asking the person if they are feeling 
any different or struggling with anything (Leaflet 2 Alzheimers Society, 
2016b). 
The documents included information on how GPs would refer to array of professional 
specialisms and this could involve taking medication. For instance: 
 the anti-dementia drug memantine may be an effective treatment for 
behavioural and psychological symptoms... [it] may reduce the severity of some 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 66 
behavioural and psychological symptoms in dementia and help delay their onset 
(Leaflet 1 Alzheimers Society, 2016a). 
A discursive pattern was the specification that interventions were based on evidence, 
expert knowledge and high quality coordinated care as illustrated in the following 
extracts. 
Memory assessment services should be the single point of referral for all people 
with a possible diagnosis of dementia (NICE, 2006). 
GPs, community nurses and specialists ensure high quality coordinated care  
(Leaflet 14 - XXX NHS Partnership Foundation Trust, 2016). 
Where specialists specific tools (e.g. MRI and neuropsychological tests) were 
absent in the leaflets and only present in NICE (2006) professional guidelines, this may 
indicate the will to know (Foucault & Hurley, 1998). This is where certain social actors 
are deemed to have limited ability to speak on procedures, systems and discursive 
practices, such as biomedical tests and treatments constructed in scientific communities. 
Katz (1996) has labelled this as a gray industry, where commercial and industrial forces 
come to circulate and benefit from the biomedical discourse of dementia based on 
changes in the gray matter of the brain. This industry maintains scientific discourses 
amongst psy-professionals justifying their expert status, while ensuring practice around 
those suspected of dementia.  
Informal Carer or marital partner? Despite frequent mentioning of the Carer in 
analysed documents, the relational connection of the Carer to the PWDD was not 
specified. Generational statistics present that older adults within this generation are likely 
to be married15 - it may be inferred that a significant proportion of unpaid Carers are 
likely to be marital partners. Nonetheless, it was implied that all Carers have shared 
characteristics and activities, resulting in a collective grouping of those in the caring role. 
As demonstrated on the following page.  
Your carer is the person who provides regular unpaid help to support you to 
manage your daily life (Leaflet 7: [omitted] NHS Partnership Trust, 2016a).  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 67 
Within documents, promotion of Carers wellbeing, quality of life and so on (see below) 
was apparent. One example was the pledge to protect carers through carer assessments 
(NICE, 2006). This perhaps materializes as protective system around Carers, and those 
cared for, which may be traced to discourse on the management of risk, abuse or neglect 
within familial contexts amongst older adults:  
All caregivers are entitled to an assessment of their needs while they are 
supporting and looking after you. This is known as a carers assessment. (Leaflet 
7: [omitted] NHS Partnership Foundation Trust, 2016a)  
All carers are welcome to attend Inpatient Carers Group; a safe and 
confidential space to receive mutual support, a chance to reflect and receive 
guidance and advice (Leaflet: [omitted] NHS Foundation Partnership Trust, 
2016b). 
NICE (2006) guidelines set out responsibilities that a Carer must make when 
taking a decision on behalf of another, such as ensuring the decision is the persons best 
interests. The document states that at the point of diagnosis the PWDD and their carer [or 
marital partner] should: 
 seek a Lasting Power of Attorney a legal document that allows people to 
state in writing who they want to make certain decisions for them if they cannot 
make them for themselves, including decisions about personal health and welfare 
(NICE, 2006).  
This document legally ties the carer to make decisions on the persons behalf and binds 
them to a subject position of authority, expertise and responsibility16. This corresponds 
with (leaflet 6 - Pohwer of Attorney, 2016).  
In relation to these findings, Foucault (1997) argues that there is a complex inter-
play between presence (what you see, the visible) and absence (what you cannot see, 
what has displaced it within the frame)  this in turn, produces how the representation and 
a subject work. Thus, despite the absence of talk on the relation of the Carer or the 
marital partner, what you cannot see or what is not specified, works to produce the 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 68 
subject position of the Carer. Interventions directed towards the Carer exemplifies their 
objectification (e.g. their behavioural tendencies are watched, coded and measured), 
justifying the need for expert bodies to correct or influence any deviances, such as in the 
case of safeguarding concerns. As such, spouses as informal Carers, are subjected to 
processes of objectification, alike to PWDD.  
3.03 Results Part 2: Interview Analysis with Spouses and PWDD 
Summary of the findings. Here, the findings from ten transcripts (after separate 
and joint interviews with spouse dyads when one spouse has a diagnosis of dementia) are 
examined. The analysis of transcripts led to the recognition of eight main discourses in 
relation to dementia. The document analysis, where discursive themes and irregularities 
in relation to dementia talk were discussed, can be used to corroborate findings from the 
second phase of analysis. The discourses derived in the analysis were, 1) The feared fate 
constructing the inescapability of dementia in old age relating to facts and figures. 2) Pay 
no mind constructing PWDD individuality, through paying little attention to dementia. 
3) Making a case, an intellectual discourse that problematises the diagnostic construct 
of dementia. 4) The biomedical truth of dementia referring to the technologies (e.g. 
doctors, tests and medications) that allow the uncovering of truths, in this case the 
biomedical basis of dementia. The aforementioned two discourses were chiefly adopted 
by PWDD in interviews. In contrast, spouses primarily adopted the discourses in 
interviews: 5) sins and symptoms and 6) knowing best. Within these discourses the 
medical construction of dementia resulted in spouses monitoring, but also preventing and 
correcting changes in the PWDD behaviour in interviews in a quasi professional role. In 
addition, 7) valuing professionals constructed the importance of the expert body in 
dealing with dementia effects, as well as the branching out of multi-professional 
disciplines. 8) Marriage discourses related to the significance of marriage, in which trials 
and tribulations are overcome. Also, conflicting discourses, such as the counter-discourse 
its plain old ageing, where dementia was viewed as a normal part of growing old, were 
considered. Subject positions included the informal carer and the marital partner.  
These discourses are described individually between 3.04 and 3.11, with excerpts 
from participant interviews. Figure 1, illustrates relationships between discourses and	
Figures 2 to 12 present the sub-parts/elements within discourses. Appendices B present H 
series of documents to illustrate the inductive process of the analysis; the method, page 
56 outlines this process in further detail.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 69 
Relationships Between the Discourses 
Figure 1 is intended to guide the reader to consider how the eight discourses 
identified relate, connect or deviate from one another when reading this second part of 
analysis. It allows for a visual summary of the findings.  
Figure 1. Main discourses and their relationships toward one another 
Within the analysis, the biomedical truth of dementia was found to be a 
dominant overarching discourse in the data, thus, in Figure 1, this discourse is shown in a 
box shaded dark grey, positioned at the top of the diagram. As demonstrated in the 
introduction chapter, this discourse is based upon complex, historically and socially 
located forces. The biomedical truth of dementia was a central element in several other 
discourses. For instance, the white square boxes labelled the feared fate, sins and 
symptoms, knowing best and valuing multi-professionals represent main discourses 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 70 
in the data which were understood to be established through the biomedical truth of 
dementia. In turn, these discourses fed back to maintain the discourse, the biomedical 
truth of dementia, upholding its dominance as discourse. Double-headed arrows in the 
figure represent the circular relationship between aforementioned discourses.  
Within figure 1, the light-grey shaded boxes, labelled person centred model and 
pay no mind present discourses that were questionably overriding discourses to the 
biomedical truth of dementia. As discussed in the introduction chapter, person centred 
care is often depicted as a movement away from biomedical characterisations of 
dementia. The discourse person centred model and pay no mind were strongly 
associated. The dotted outline around pay no mind and CD? is used to illustrate the 
researchers questioning over whether pay no mind may be a counter-discourse. In 
particular, the uptake of this discourse amongst participants resembled opposition to the 
feared fate.  
On the other hand, this analysis also contended the possibility that the person 
centred model and pay no mind may be coordinated by the biomedical truth of 
dementia, while perpetuating dementias construction as a biomedical disease. This is 
discussed further below. These discourses may include subtle modes of differentiating 
and categorising a person diagnosed with dementia  the double-headed arrow linking to 
the biomedical truth of dementia indicates this. 
The discourses making a case and its plan old ageing, were presented in boxes 
with dotted outlines, and arrows pointing away from the biomedical truth of dementia, as 
they were deemed to be clear counter-discourses (e.g. CD) which challenge alternative 
discourses constructed from a biomedical viewpoint. 
The triangle shape in figure 1 demonstrates how marriage discourses/elements 
were not necessarily one coherent discourse. This may relate to how marriage discourse 
was dominant or unified at a point in time, including elements monogamy, romance, 
privacy, and so forth, however, that it is less cohesive at present. Nonetheless, the 
continued importance of marriage discourses/elements for the participants interviewed is 
symbolised by the grey shading of the triangle.  In particular, spouses assumed marital 
obligation enacting the discourses knowing best and sins and symptoms in the data  
arrows from marriage discourses to knowing best and sins and symptoms 
characterize the interactions between these discourses. 
The person centred model was deemed to have a circular relationship with 
knowing best, plus valuing professionals, as demonstrated by double-headed arrows in 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 71 
the diagram - each discourse sustained the others dominance or influence. These 
discourses were associated with corrective processes, such as preventing and supporting 
the PWDD abilities and their continuation in activity. This required spouses and 
professionals intervening. 
Although there were additional overlaps between the feared fate, sins and 
symptoms, knowing best and valuing professionals, not all links are represented in 
Figure 1, which was in attempt to maintain straightforwardness. Figures 2 to 11 depict 
more detail concerning the interconnections amongst discourses.   
It is notable that order of presented discourses in Figure 1 is not representative of 
the order of the following discussion on each discourse.  
3.04 The Feared Fate 
Figure 2 represents the construction of the discourse the feared fate. Figure 2 is 
described in more detail below and may be generalized to interpret subsequent figures 
(figures 2-11). 
Figure 2. The discourse the feared fate, associated elements & a counter discourse 
In Figure 2, the circle labeled the feared fate on the top of the diagram refers to 
the discourse in discussion. Connected directly below this, the chain of elements that 
construct the discourse the feared fate can be seen. In the methodology, it was 
considered how a discourse is made of a net of different clusters/meanings, referred to as 
elements (see method 2.2 & discussion 4.3).  In this case, the feared fate was considered 
to include three main elements or subparts: the feared/inanimate subject, high 
prevalence rates in dementia, and old age decline. Other discourses and their 
representative figures include more or less elements.  
Elements have varying but connected meanings upholding the discourse. In the 
feared fate for example, high prevalence rates in dementia incorporates facts and 
figures on the prevalence of dementia, and the feared/inanimate subject represents 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 72 
historical and cultural representations of dementia and madness, such as one becoming 
dangerous or lifeless when diagnosed with dementia. The third element, old age and 
decline relates to how ageing and disease were constructed as occurring hand in hand in 
the data. This cluster of elements all similarly hold predictions or likelihoods regarding 
dementia and evoke fear or alarm.  
In figure 2, aside to circle labeled the feared fate, there is a circle labeled, its 
plain old ageing. This circle has no connecting lines in order to show that it is a counter 
discourse (i.e. its plain ageing is directly separable and oppositional to discourse the 
feared fate whereby it challenges or changes the meaning of elements in the discourse to 
construct an alternative discourse). Drawing upon discourse theory, the competing 
discourse, its plain old ageing, may be more or less dominant at a particular point in time, 
and the chains of elements which form a discourse, such as the feared fate are 
frequently open to new representations and meanings.    
Although the feared fate was more prominent amongst spouses interview data, 
both spouses and PWDD demonstrated the use of this discourse. The elements within this 
discourse are described individually, in further depth below. 
Old age decline and dementia. The following extracts, amongst others, indicated 
that all older adults face physical and mental decline. With the extract from William, the 
question asked could be seen as a rhetorical question to illustrate a point rather than to 
elicit a direct answer  plus, the temporal reference to one day indicates that all 
mankind are faced with the fate of dementia when they reach a certain age. This discourse 
is contingent upon the element of dementia, without this it lacks the same severity  it is 
either a physical problem alone, or plain old ageing discussed further. The feared 
aspect of the discourse perhaps resonates with the unpredictability of when one will 
develop memory problems and how this unknown, yet publicised, fate will manifest. 
To illustrate this discourse further, participants were asked to elaborate on their various 
references to I should be like this, depicted below.  
Florence (Spouse):  What is it that they say old age doesn't come alone It brings 
problems. Physical problemsand Les hes developed these 
memory problems havent you?  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 73 
William (Spouse):  Yes, but how do you feel in dealing with these people like this? It 
must be disheartening to see people like this and to think that one-
day I should be like this? 
The feared/inanimate dementia subject. The feared fate was possibly based on 
the cultural postulation that certain behaviours, thoughts and actions, associated with 
dementia, are dangerous, or unwholesome to the constitution of the individual subject, as 
illustrated:  
Sebastian (Spouse):  I mean Ive got a very close friend  she used to come to [a 
psychiatric unit] (quietens voice) she was in a semi. They sent her 
at the bottom end of the warda secure ward.  
William (Spouse):  Ive got a sister in law, shes dead now, she had this dementia, so I 
know whats coming  A cabbage A vegetable 
Jack (Spouse):  I picture a dribblin old fella sitting in the corner of a nursing 
home Unable to converse, read, or communicate. Enjoy life 
That's what I think of dementia 
Betty (PWDD): I think theyre frightened in a way, I suppose we all are, that erm, 
that what is the unknown, I mean I know there is a lot of sort of 
things around now, literature, well more about dementia really 
Thomas (Spouse): Its the word dementia that frightens people if you wanna come 
down to the basics  
Drawing upon the genealogical analysis, people within dementia are appearing in 
public in new ways, as opposed to formerly being hidden from the public eye in asylums, 
private institutions and family or nursing homes. One argument is that this was before the 
science and biomedical industry became interested in dementia, and it was construed as 
senescence or old age. Although the subject who is unknown or dangerous, sent to the 
bottom end of a secure ward was present in the discourse of the feared fate, perhaps 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 74 
this also operates with a more contemporary and public dementia subject: someone 
lacking capability to think or act. This was illustrated with the use of inanimate objects 
(vegetables) and the imagery of dribbling. It also coincides with the document analysis 
concerning inactivity alongside activity. 
Moreover, in the following extract it was suggested dementia is something close 
to wickedness. There was ambiguity in the meaning here. It may concern the PWDD 
being subjected to wickedness, witchery or spell craft exercised by an individual or a 
group through secret knowledge. Alternatively, it may have indicated the individual with 
dementia as having potential to be wicked through their condition, associated with 
sinfulness and criminality. From this angle, the discourse the feared fate constructed the 
absence of what it is to be a both a moral, and a participating, citizen in contemporary 
society.  
Henry (PWDD):  I wont say its [dementia] wicked or anything like that but its 
erm, it very serious. Say having vascular dementia or something, 
which is terrible really isnt it. 
In these extracts, it may be construed that through labeling or confining the 
inanimate/dangerous dementia subject, there was a process of convincing, 
communicating and recognising ones own absence of dementia and so sanity, 
constitutive of action (discussed in further discourses).   
The prevalence of dementia. This element in the discourse the feared fate 
appeared to be mobilised by many population-based studies that emphasise the 
problematised case discussed in the introduction chapter, i.e. the growing population, plus 
people living longer, increases the prevalence of dementia. The requirement for action, 
policy, health care and progressive medical research were also built into the discourse of 
the feared fate, as a justification for serious concern. The following spouse dyad, Les and 
Florence, demonstrate this:  
Les (PWDD):  I mean Alzheimers and whatever er, its been mentioned in the 
paper in the last six weeks more than Ive ever heard it before 
it's a growing disease of the elderly population you know and they 
are trying to do something about it 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 75 
Florence (Spouse):  Yes I think its because more and more people are living longer 
arent they, so you hear more and more about it don't you? 
Also, as seen in the quotations below, the BMM and its associated knowledge and power 
positions (e.g. neurobiologists, researchers, psychiatrists and so forth), also uphold the 
discourse of the feared fate whereby it constructs dementia as a brain disease to be 
investigated and understood  comparable to the findings in part one of the chapter. This 
aspect of the feared fate overlaps with other discourses, and is elaborated in more depth 
in the biological truth of dementia (see, 3.05).  
Les (PWDD):  Some of these things showing up in people being investigated 
which may, probably, bring about some enzyme that can make to 
erm I havent put it very well-  
Florence (Spouse):  Oh yes Medical research, yes. 
What we can briefly see here is the professional vocabularies and the idea of 
scientific progress (i.e. future developments) protect the professions. Any gaps in the 
discourses relating to the biomedical basis of dementia were overlooked or smoothed 
over, as participants lacked access to this meaning system, some enzyme I havent put 
it very well. This corresponds with the analysis of documents, regarding the discrepancy 
of talk between NICE (2006) guidelines and leaflets regarding treatment. 
Counter-discourse: Its plain old ageing. This discourse symbolised resistance 
to the feared fate. As shown below by Jack (spouse), the cultural pairings of dementia 
with insanity or a lack of intelligibility are present in his talk, though rejected. An 
alternative discourse was drawn upon, where the signs and symptoms of dementia are 
everyday blunders occurring more frequently in old age. This offered different subject 
position for those with diagnoses  the aged adult. Similarly, as portrayed by Betty 
(PWDD), through the discourse of senility, the boundaries between the aged adult and 
the dementia subject became blurred. Others also drew upon this alternative discourse 
which is at odds with the dominant conceptualisation of dementia; illustrating individuals 
are not merely anonymous points of the application of power. This alternative discourse 
was indicated in the analysis of documents, though was apparent in only one of the 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 76 
sources which paired dementia and diabetes, constructing dementia less concerning 
physical health condition. 
Jack (Spouse):  their mother has got dementia but shes a perfectly intelligent 
women But I did notice last year that she told me the same thing 
twice, but so did I Ive probably told you several stories twice 
already But I don't attach any importance to that (.) Ive got an 
school friend who comes to see me every other week and Ive heard 
his stories over and over again  it doesn't mean youre a loony, 
only so many things you can talk about 
Betty (PWDD):  When you say Parkinsons it sounds much like old age Weve 
always said that with old age, you always say old age, but why 
should we have to say its Parkinsons when it might mean that its 
old age? You expect to have old age anyway 
3.05 Pay No Mind 
This discourse pay no mind symbolised that one should pay little attention, or 
give little concern, to dementia. It was enacted when participants described their interests, 
past and current roles, and experiences, thus preserving their individuality. It resembles 
with the discursive theme in part one of the results, Independence, Individuality, and 
Activity.  
Figure 3. Pay no mind, associated elements & complimentary discourses. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 77 
Although it was not included in description regarding Figure 2, in Figure 3 and 
some of the succeeding figures, the discourse in discussion is shown to interact with other 
discourses in the data using a dotted line. The circle plus the label/title of the discourse 
this connects has some significance to the meaning of the discourse in discussion. In 
addition, deviations from the discourse are characterised by a protruding line, such as 
with it's a stiff upper lip above.  
 As portrayed in the following extracts, pay no mind was drawn upon principally 
by PWDD and interestingly, female participants. One argument is that Pay no mind is a 
counter discourse to the feared fate, similar to its plain old ageing. However, through 
further analysis it is inferred that pay no mind may be intertwined with subtle modes of 
differentiating and categorising, controlling the inanimate/dangerous dementia subject, 
discussed further below.  
Preserving the individual. Preserving the individual is considered to be an 
important element in the discourse pay no mind. With the discourse the feared fate, an 
inactive, unresponsive, yet precarious, subject position was presented. In contrast, the 
following extracts, representing only a modest range of the obtainable excerpts, 
demonstrate how the discourse pay no mind incorporated talk on the self to preserve 
the individual, which ensued a move away from the inanimate/dangerous dementia 
subject.  
Norah (PWDD):  Im a NNEB [national nursery education nurse] 
Marie (PWDD):  Im a great gardener I love the way I have designed and laid out 
my garden, which I think is very nice, and in the past I have done 
designs for other people. Yes I am very interested in gardening 
Planning, laying it out, and anything to do with it. 
Ruby (PWDD): I quite like cooking What I do is  
Olive (PWDD):  I used to foster babies. New babies. I fostered straight from 
 them leaving the hospitals, until they had family with them  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 78 
Here, Norah (PWDD) talked about herself in the present tense as a nursery nurse, 
although retired; Marie (PWDD) shared her existing knowledge of gardening and Latin 
names of plants; Ruby, described her current skills in cooking and organisation; and 
Olive (PWDD) shared her past experiences of fostering babies. This discourse rested 
upon notions of competency, ability, and individuality, which surpassed dementia talk. It 
also brought familiar or former positions to the forefront: Henry (PWDD) and Marie 
(PWDD) typify this where they presented the subject position of the rational, active or 
supportive family member: 
Marie (PWDD):   and all the things we do with the schools and everything with my 
grandchildrens schools, its love- its lovely When I got to know the 
teachers at the schools they go to, thats lovely.  
Henry (PWDD):  Our grandson actually lives with us at the moment I think when 
you get older, um, you recognise difficulties along the way that 
youngsters don't necessarily do. And you know it does create a 
certain worry in your mind you know.  
The person-centred discourse. As discussed in part one of the results, one 
explanation for the permanence of the discourse pay no mind is that it is influenced by, 
or interacts with, the person-centred discourse of dementia. The person-centred discourse 
is proliferated through various disciplinary technologies, including psychological 
therapies, service-user movements and large charity organisations  the discourse has 
become increasingly dominant. In the introduction chapter, it was presented that although 
the person-centred model is usually proliferated as separate from the BMM, it was argued 
both may be understood as discourses that coincide and work in complimentary ways. 
The PCM posits that we should see the person with dementia as an individual, liberating 
them from their illness or abilities they may have lost. It argues that if the mind is 
stimulated it can have the positive effects on the brain, slowing down the disease 
progression of dementia.  
Betty (PWDD):  Well I have to be organised obviously, its its, its not easy for me 
to kind of do things kind of on the spare-[spare of the moment?]. 
But we do do lots of things you know Its so were were busy all 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 79 
of the time I dunno which is worse, er, or better, to be, we don't 
wanna be idle but perhaps we don't wanna be as er as busy as we 
are, because you cant tell if its working which way or the other 
In the quote on the previous page, Betty demonstrated how the discourse pay no 
mind may indicate a form of self-discipline and self-monitoring, to ensure one is 
performing enough activities and, as shown by other participants, that ones identity is 
unwavering. As discussed in the methodology, the other may also account for such 
mechanisms of power and reflexivity: the PWDD may ask how am I seen by the other? 
What does the other want from me? What are the social values they hold most dear?  
In sum, the talk on identity and individual differences, proliferated by disciplinary 
technologies, may also be construed as a form of subjugation and a way of exercising 
power that may prevent PWDD from moving from outside the fixed boundaries of 
individualisation, power and knowledge. 
Marriage discourses. Pay no mind mostly being enacted by females but also 
PWDD is a puzzling issue. To attempt an explanation may move theoretically into a 
different territory. One idea was that preserving the individual links to marriage 
discourses and gender relations, through a historical phenomenon. As depicted in the 
introduction chapter, in the 1900s, and for a significant period afterwards, many women 
had limited education and status within society. The sample reflected an education 
difference between men and women (see table 3 in the methodology for demographic 
details). Most of the study sample reflected the dichotomy where the women were 
formerly positioned in the home, rearing children, whereas the man was formerly 
positioned in the field of work. According to Foucault, this would not relate to a true 
distinction between gender per se but a means of controlling sexual activity, conduct and 
the economy. Various political infrastructures influenced these arrangements (see 
introduction chapter) where the human body became constituted by experts. It was 
considered that the pattern in the data seen in the discourse element preserving the 
individual, may be where women and PWDD have been silenced, or their experiences 
perhaps set aside  pay no mind then acts as a strategy to confront this situation/context. 
Dementia and femininity, correspondingly, could be associated with a subject position of 
feeblemindedness, resisted through a promotion of individual skill sets and attributes. It 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 80 
may represent a rejection of dominant discourses relating to gender, marriage and 
dementia. This will be considered further in the discussion.  
The discourse the feared fate. One final conjecture regarding the discourse pay 
no mind is that it engages with the feared fate; if one does not preserve the individual, 
the feared fate will happen and the inanimate/dangerous subject position will prevail.  
Deviation: A stiff upper lip. One deviation from the discourse pay no mind 
was the discourse the stiff upper lip, which constructed that one should remain firm to a 
purpose and continue with lifes happenings. For instance, Marie (PWDD) stated, It was 
a shock Yes (pause 3 seconds) I just, yes (laughs) carry on and get on with life as it is 
and I erm carry on. This discourse was not necessarily concerned with identity or the 
PCM, though did still resemble a form of self-discipline. Such stoicism is perhaps 
associated with post Second World War culture, as part of a public response to national 
events and moral indignation, as well as late Victorian values of sentiment and self-
control. 
3.06 Making a Case 
This discourse emphasised that dementia has not always been known as dementia 
(the element: dementia the origins). It also underlined that dementia is not always fitting 
as a diagnostic construct (the element: grouping signs: grouping people). Making a case 
is arguably an intellectual, or academic, counter-discourse resisting the BMM of 
dementia and contests the will to speak on dementia if one is not an expert. Making a 
case was confronted with opposing discourses concerning the PWDDs lack of 
awareness or the spouses or PWDD denial. This discourse was less common in the data, 
and again, it had more permanence amongst PWDD. One particular participant using this 
discourse was formerly a university lecturer, Henry (PWDD). Another participant, Ruby 
(PWDD), was a legal secretary while child rearing, and Jack (spouse) worked in 
journalism. This is not to draw upon Marxist notions of a suprastructure of privilege and 
oppression, but to indicate that this may have permitted access to contest or understand 
dementia discourse in a different way. Figure 4, on the following page, presents the 
elements in making a case, discussed further.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 81 
Figure 4. Making a case, associated elements, rejections & resistances. 
Dementia: the origins. Part of the discourse making a case was the element 
where the origins of dementia were questioned, in effect disassembling the discourse that 
presents dementia is a truth that has always been. This was demonstrated in the excerpt 
below from Henry (PWDD)  the time frame of a decade was used to construct the 
novelty of dementia. The participant enquired whether there was (or is) even such a 
thing as a brain disease affecting cognition. The phrase before speaking, well I have to 
say, signified that this argument is not often placed, or it faces resistance. Similarly, 
Ruby (PWDD) also exemplified dementia: the origins where she discussed a time when 
a different frame of thought focused on the practicalities in life. Although the extract 
below does not give weight to the full conversation, Ruby was exploring this as if to elicit 
information from the researcher; she was questioning dementia.  
Henry (PWDD):  Well I have to say, I feel that perhaps ten years ago there wasn't 
even such a thing as dementia 
Ruby (PWDD): I don't know because when I was young, you didn't come across 
dementia really. It wasn't something that I heard of or it wasn't 
something that was talked about, no, I think we were too engrossed 
in the practical things, we were doing er I don't remember 
anyone having memory problems really  
The element dementia: the origins was uncommon in the data. It was seen to relate to 
the discursive pattern a minimising of dementia discussed in part one of the chapter, 
which also had limited prevalence amongst sources. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 82 
Grouping signs? Grouping people? The second aspect of this discourse was the 
problematising of the diagnostic construct and its validity. As explored in the 
introduction, there is a theory that psychiatric knowledge and practice is able to 
distinguish groups of signs and draw a line between distinct diseases, such as sub-types 
of dementia. In contrast, through this discourse existing knowledge was brought to bear 
on people yielding a diverse group of subjects into one homogenous group.  As 
demonstrated by Henry (PWDD), the diagnostic signs of dementia and the participants 
signs were claimed to have a considerable gap. He questioned, the applicability of 
Vascular dementia defined by reduction in brain capacity, awareness, understanding and 
decline, in relation to himself e.g. I don't feel I am not aware. Through the discourse 
making a case Henry claimed that his presentation or influent speech was a weak 
distinguishing factor to accord this diagnosis.  
Henry (PWDD):  Well, particularly vascular dementia is a reduction in your brain, 
ability, whereas I can read something and understand what it I and 
listen to something and understand what that is, erm so Im not, 
erm in my view, I havent taken it and gone backwards but it 
seems to me that thats not the case, I don't feel that Im not aware, 
I get frustrated when I cant speak fluently but Im not- 
The dementia subject lacking awareness/insight. Other participants disputed this 
alternative discourse making a case impeded by the construction of the feeble minded 
dementia subject as depicted in previously discussed discourses. This subject position 
included a lack of awareness or judgement, and was restricted by the protected domain of 
scientific knowledge. Norah (PWDD) demonstrates this ontological bind. Ontology 
refers to ways of thinking and understanding according to what is around us, as well as a 
site for experimenting with explanations of reality which continually limit and define 
everyday existence. Norah pointed out that if she refutes the truth of dementia, this 
would be deemed by others as part of the signs and symptoms of dementia; she is 
experimenting with the spaces available for her to think about dementia, though 
seemingly finding herself in a bind through the limits of reality. In the extract presented 
on the previous page, Henry (PWDD), while drawing upon making a case, insinuates 
that it might only be his view. It appeared that he has limited authority to fully challenge 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 83 
scientific knowledge all together, but he is able to draw upon an individualised discourse 
based on his own position on the matter.  
Norah (PWDD):   I mean I I I wouldn't say full blown dementia. I cant say that. I 
couldn't believe it I cant be possible Which is the way I would be 
expected to think Yup  
In contrast, below, Henry (PWDD) presented bidirectionality to the above conflict; he 
appears to draw upon a discourse critiquing the expansion of the diagnostic system, 
resulting in positive outcomes for those in the privileged domain to diagnose. This may 
be thought of as being linked to critical academic arguments against the biomedical and 
human science disciplines, and diagnostic categorising: 
Henry (PWDD):  Im not being unkind but, if if if you're a doctor that erm, 
specialises in dementia, erm, it can become erm erm, a bigger 
area, because its been added.if you want to inform something 
that you want to do and that then in my eyes it can only be a good 
thing for doctors. Now I think youll understand what Im saying 
here My view is that its not always useful to have someone who 
can be physically ill with Parkinsons and someone else resident 
with their speech all manifested together. I don't like that policy. 
Resistances: in denial. In spouse dyads, where one spouse was seen to take up 
this discourse, the other spouse was seen to resist it. As shown in the following excerpts, 
Ruby (PWDD) constructed Jack (spouse) as not accepting her diagnosis of dementia, 
owing to denial. Jack was rejecting of this, he draws upon a psychological discourse of 
personality traits that are stable over time to construct a case against his wife having 
dementia. Although the two interviews are separate, this overlap of talk may represent the 
ebbs and flows of power and resistance that take effect within a marital sphere. 
Jack (spouse):  I mean, I don't, you will say Im in denial But I don't see any 
change in her at all Shes always been looo loopy I mean shes 
got a better memory than I have er ...I mean Im desperately trying 
to think of something that has changed in the last year  but I am 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 84 
honestly not in denial I have seen no noticeable change in her 
abilities or personality  
Ruby (PWDD):  Unfortunately my dear husband, he wouldn't accept it He said, 
youve always always been dizzy, absent minded and all the rest 
of it and he said of course theres nothing wrong  but I don't 
know if he will accept it now, now that it is for real, mmm.  
Within the extracts from Henry (PWDD) and Emma (spouse) shown below, the reverse 
pattern was presented: here, Emma constructed Henry as being in denial and lacking 
sensibility, whereas Henry drew upon making a case.  
Henry (PWDD):  (long sigh) well I don't think we want to bring vascular dementia 
into it do we? 
Emma (spouse):  [You mean that you don't want to  Youve got to realise that that 
is what it is and it could get worse couldn't it?  
Nonetheless, through making a case, rather than dementia being an unproblematic field, 
silent behaviours, habits and practices encompassing dementia are questioned.  
3.07 The Biomedical Truth of Dementia 
This discourse concerned three elements labelled truth techniques: the knowing 
doctor, measurements as proof and medication to slow down the progression in 
dementia. In this discourse science and doctors unique tools, languages and medical 
treatments upheld dementia, as a BMM disease. This relates strongly to discursive theme 
professional tools, as well as others discussed in part one. Figure 5, on the following 
page, presents the elements within the biomedical truth of dementia. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 85 
Figure 5: The biomedical truth of dementia, elements & rejections.  
The biomedical truth of dementia overlapped with many other discourses, and it 
was considered to be the uniting element for the discourses discussed in this results 
chapter (also see figure 1, 3.0). Through the process of analysis, the researcher drew upon 
Post Structuralist Discourse Theory (PSDT) to understand this  explored further in the 
discussion chapter. In brief, some schools of PSDT argue that there can be a privileged 
element around which other elements are centered, organised or clustered. This 
arrangement of elements may be seen to be contingent upon the privileged element, the 
biomedical truth of dementia. The cluster of elements secures a dominant ideology that 
science and doctors truth techniques discover and treat the biomedical basis of 
dementia. Some participants rejected the elements or truth techniques, reviewed below.  
Truth technique (I): the knowing doctor. Here, there was the construction of 
the knowing doctor  an educated, privileged and wise subject. The doctor, situated 
within a frame of legitimate knowledge, is entitled, and able, to gain capacity to truth, 
upheld by institutions, social structures and practice. This limited the free flow of 
discourse, such as what participants could and cannot say or understand. The knowing 
doctor may be seen, at times, to have replaced other systems of knowledge, such as 
making a case (3.03). This arrangement reinforced and renewed the BMM of dementia 
as central.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 86 
Sebastian (spouse):  we gr- we gradually got to a point where  you really ought to go 
and see a GP yaknow I mean if I couldnt understand half of 
what he said anyway, he [the doctor had all the information, a vast 
wad of it I was quite impressed actually Obviously very very 
bright  I said, have you the faintest idea what hes talking 
about? Nothing was comprehensible at all 
In the above extract, Sebastian (spouse) presented how it  got to the point where 
he and his wife required the speaking subject of the doctor educated, very bright and 
so on. They sought the knowing doctor to draw upon their legitimate knowledge to 
decipher if dementia was present or not. This was a discourse that supported the 
constraining, restraining and restrictive functions of the biomedical truth of dementia 
and the subject positions available for others. For example, participants appeared to enact 
the active patient subject position seeking a doctors advice yet portrayed a 
passive/compliant patient subject position concerning the knowledge of the disciplinary 
technologies. To exemplify this further:  
Emma (spouse):  But youve got to take what the doctors are saying Henry havent 
Henry (PWDD):  Well Ive seen doctor [omitted] two or three times and once or 
twice he said Ive lost two or three points but erm, you know that 
my my, for example, my oh what do you call it? My counselling 
assessment.  
As shown above, many participants discussed two or more doctors, multiple 
times, who assessed whether the PWDD had dementia or not. This did not appear to 
lead to deviations from the discourse or its embedded element the knowing doctor. For 
instance, it could be that the doctor is not capable of a clear or concise judgement, and 
devalued, but this was rarely the case in the data. One explanation is that the construction 
of the doctor is someone who seeks to uncover the objective truth through practises of 
rigor. An exception, in the excerpt below, is where Betty (PWDD) and Thomas (spouse) 
talk about multiple doctors being unclear, and they conclude that they are not ultimately 
convinced of the diagnosis made. This was partially resolved through the Consultants 
status and credibility that grounds the veracity of his/her statements, as opposed to the GP 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 87 
who offers just an opinion. This appeared to replicate the dichotomy between 
participants and doctors too, the former offering lay or more personal opinions and the 
latter offering credible and informed opinions.  
Betty (PWDD):  But it took a long time to receive a diagnosis and, I don't really 
think they know what it is 
Thomas (spouse):  There was three er, there was three separate opinions Hhh 
(laughs) Bettys doctor was not convinced she had Parkinsons and 
shes a very caring doctor isnt she? The Consultant thinks shes 
got Parkinsons Lewy Bodys the the er Hhh (laugh) Consultant 
here in this unit thinks shes got, Parkinsons with dementia, so we 
asked the co-ordinator to sort it out so that we knew, forgetting the 
personal doctor [the GP] as that was just an opinion. This is just 
between the two Consultants. 
Betty (PWDD):  Were still no absolutely convinced that it is Parkinsons.  
Rejection of the knowing doctor. As seen below Jack (spouse) rejected the 
knowing doctor, similar to Marie (PWDD). This is alike to the analysis of documents 
and the rejection indicated in one source (e.g. how can the doctor help me? in Leaflet 8 
 Public Health England, 2013). However, with the constraining and restrictive functions 
of the biomedical truth of dementia Marie, as an example, deemed herself unable to 
question doctors knowledge (though, this is presented as laziness). Despite her 
disagreement, she enacted a passive/compliant patient subject position, and drew upon 
the formerly mentioned discourse the stiff upper lip ([you] turn your back on it).   
Jack (spouse):  Well they said Alzheimers I mean everybody calls it Alzheimers 
but I don't know But that is what she says. She came back and she 
said oh Ive got Alzheimers but as I said I don't believe that. Its 
certainly not critical yet if it ever will be I don't know. 
Marie (PWDD):  I havent really said to the professionals I don't agree with it erm, 
I suppose I just accepted it and its just as time goes on, you 
suddenly think, Oh Well why do I agree with it? //  I: Mmm and 
why do you think that is? // Marie:  I think its laziness I havent 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 88 
really brought it up with my GP and, really, I tend to stay away 
from hospitals as much as possible (Laughs) sighs yes if its 
something that you don't agree with you turn your back on it. 
Truth techniques (II): measurements as proof. The tools and measurements 
that doctors, psychiatrists and psychologists used also secured the discourse the 
biomedical truth of dementia. These measurements are situated in a matrix of socio-
political arrangements, discussed in the introduction chapter. For example, psychology as 
a discipline was seen to proliferate experimental and observational methods and tests 
through epistemological positivism. Despite ambiguities in these measurements, they 
became a logical means to diagnose and treat dementia, plus became leverages for 
funding and professional status surrounding dementia. All participants mentioned various 
biomedical tools and tests, as demonstrated in the extracts below:  
Ruby (PWDD):  I had to you kno just, recognise things and answer questions or fill 
in the questions, on the, they were really easy questions, but yes 
there were things like that x-rays and things, well not x-rays but 
scans And that was erm, definite, that there was you know, 
problems, and anyway at the end of it all they said youve got, 
Alzheimers dementiayes I must say I was a bit taken a back 
when we had actual you know proof yes it had sort of shrunken, 
is that what it looks like? Mmm. I had got it. 
Florence (spouse):  He had a scan. Doctor [omitted] showed us the brain. You could 
see the scan yes, he showed us where there were changes. He had 
dementia.  
Similarly, Ruby (PWDD) constructed cognitive testing and the MRI scan as 
measurements proving dementia. These tools rely on the binary division between true and 
false, and normal and abnormal. Florence (spouse) demonstrated the limits in which 
people can speak, whereby the MRI is definitive, a representative map of reality that 
could not be questioned. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 89 
Rejection of these measurements are proof. In contrast, a few participants 
rejected the construction that measurements were definitive. Jack (spouse) drew upon the 
discourse its plain old ageing discussed formerly, blurring the binary of normality and 
abnormality. William (spouse) and Henry (PWDD) also rejected cognitive testing  it 
became a crude tool lacking objectivity.  
Jack (spouse):  These scans they took, I cant comment at all () there must be 
some diminutat dimunuatation no whats the word basically 
reduction in brain cells (.) what is the word (?) dimin- utation no 
that's not the word is it, but I mean what do you call normal signs 
of old ageing?  
William (spouse):  We saw the GP and it got, crude [He got a] thingy paper out 
[hand gesture of throwing a piece of paper on the side]  I mean 
it was very crude I mean at least I thought it was. And then we 
saw another GP, and he did the same thing 
Henry (PWDD):  Okay so it might be twenty-six or something  [test score] and hell 
say well it used to be twenty seven, and I think yeah okay 
(Laughs) 
Truth technique (III): medication to slow down the progression. One further 
element to the discourse the biomedical truth of dementia was medication. Knowledge 
of medication was limited to those who are skilled to understand types/names of 
medication, dosages and biochemistry. In line with this, participants implicitly conveyed 
that they did not fully understand how these worked or what they were (i.e. if that's the 
way to put it, .donesarapol or something). This constituted the need for expert 
bodies and pharmaceuticals, and was constitutive of the passive-compliant subject 
position, a recurrent pattern throughout this discourse.  
Sebastian (spouse):  [its] a very very good drug for slowing down the progression, 
you know, the processes in the brain that gradually deteriorate if 
that's the way to put it 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 90 
William (spouse):   it was very mild dementia and she recommended demepretzol, 
the drug, which Im sure youre very familiar with and she said ten 
milligrams 
Florence (spouse):  Yes but when he was when we saw doctor [omitted], and we got 
the results, he put him on a new drug, donesarapol or something?  
Rejection of medication to slow down the progression. Nonetheless, resistance 
was shown towards medication regarding side effects (e.g. below Olive, PWDD, states, I 
couldn't take the stronger one. No way). Pharmaceuticals became problematic in this 
resistance; Norah (PWDD) presented a dilemma involved in taking medication. She 
expressed that she did not know the rate of decline she may experience with the absence 
of medication, so her only option was to adhere to taking it.  
Olive (PWDD):  They gave me drugs, I cant remember the names, I had to take a 
drug for three weeks and then they were going to make it strong, 
and I couldn't take the stronger one. No way Well I was walking 
around all day with a bucket feeling sick, honestly I felt so bad.  
Florence (spouse):  He was put on five milligrams to start with and he had a course of 
that but he had some awful nightmares didn't you?  
Norah (PWDD):  I mean what good are these tablets why should I take them and 
them you got nothin that says when you wake up in the mornin 
that tablet will make you better But theres nothing wrong with 
me, that's the vicious circle  even the doctor came and said to me 
you know  you must take your tablet Everybodys been very 
nice but  
Dominant discourse. As follows, Thomas, a spouse, indicated that he would have 
resisted the biomedical truth of dementia had it not have been for the element of 
medication to slow down the progression in this discourse. This presented how the 
clustering of the discourses in the biomedical truth of dementia is key. As portrayed, 
one element or truth technique being contested (e.g. measurement tools) is often 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 91 
counteracted by another closely positioned element (e.g. medication or the knowing 
doctor), re-securing the dominance of this discourse and its power and knowledge 
relations. Although this was apparent amongst PWDD, it was more evident amongst 
spouses: the next discourse, sins and symptoms discussed, shows how spouses 
inscription of a biomedical discourse gave power to other discourses in the data. 
Thomas (spouse):  as we knew that the medication treated either condition it didn't 
really matter to us, whereas if theyd have been right well we 
have to do that particular medication for that particular symptom 
and its different to that one that would be more concerning  
3.08 Sins and Symptoms 
Sins and symptoms was a discourse primarily enacted by spouses, in which they 
provided significant lists of the PWDDs mistakes and diagnostic symptoms both 
subjectifyng and objectifying. As discussed in the methodology, subjectification involves 
individualising sets of knowledge about a subject as a means to regulate them as a single 
unit, whereas objectification is the watching, measuring and coding of subjects. As 
indicated sins and symptoms may be seen as one of the discourses in the data that was 
unified through the discourse the biomedical truth of dementia.  
Figure 6. Sins and symptoms, associated elements & complementary discourses. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 92 
Sebastian (spouse):  She got totally wound up today about this one thing and she has 
this great confusion And the other thing I don't know if this is 
normal, I mean shes not, by any matter of means a, racist, or 
anything of the sort But I know that remark she made on the 
phone to you about [a professional], which, I absolutely nearly 
died over To you about, the big fat lady I was sitting in the other 
room and I th I thought  what are you saying  I mean this is 
the sort of thing our son said to the neighbours when he was about 
two cor arent you fat  its things like that. I mean whether its 
all part and parce-  we were going to the shop and seeing 
something [and my wife says] oow much is it? and then HOW 
MUCH then theres this sort of explosion of disgust (laughs).   
Representative of this discourse, Sebastian (spouse) provided several sins in a short 
space of time, and the acts are constructed as if especially extreme, what are you 
saying, yet he denoted these as part and parc[el] of dementia. Also in the extract 
below from Florence (spouse), Less symptoms were also catalogued as dementia effects. 
In this extract, as typical of other joint interviews, the spouse without dementia 
questioned, havent you? as if making a micro-level exchange to negotiate how much 
subjectification and objectification could be made in the PWDDs presence: 
Florence (spouse):  One minute you can have something and the next minute you have 
lost it havent you? 
Les (PWDD):   Yeah yeah 
Florence (spouse):  Youll put something down somewhere and then you cant 
remember where it is. 
Les (PWDD):  (Sighs and laughs) there was something that happened this 
morning  
Florence (spouse):  What have you lost this morning? 
Les (PWDD):  I don't know we laugh after but at the time 
Interviewer:   Yeah at the tim-[ 
Florence (spouse):  [and he cant cope with paperwork 
Les (PWDD):  I go down the bank don't I? 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 93 
Florence (spouse):  Oh you go down the bank yes you don't get cash out though do 
you, with your card. He writes a cheque out and goes in and theyll 
give him the money 
Les (PWDD):  Oh yes its gradually got worse hasn't it? 
Florence (spouse):  Yes. 
Thomas (spouse):  Part of the symptoms is that Betty has a great fascination with 
time erm, what time is it, what day, what have I got to do today? 
Are very much part of her life, would you agree [Betty, PWDD]?... 
And that's one of the main manifestations of Parkinsons.   
The inscription of disciplinary technologies. The discourse sins and symptoms 
appeared to be contingent upon the spouses inscription of disciplinary technologies or 
the professionals techniques. The element the inscription of disciplinary technologies 
meant that the spouse acted as if under surveillance to oversee the PWDD. As indicated 
in the analysis of documents, the informal carer or marital partner, was objectified and 
subjectivised similar to the PWDD in their ability to perform as quasi-professional role. 
As one example, regarding their ability to make decisions on the PWDD behalf through a 
legal framework, Power of Attorney. In addition, where the spouse without the diagnosis 
of dementia had individualising knowledge of their spouses character (what is normal or 
abnormal) this appeared to facilitate them to recognise errors that others, or professionals, 
may not see:  
James (spouse):  If you look at it logically its self-explaining, to a greater extent, 
but if youve got Dementia, you havent got the capability of seeing 
it, and everybody just treats her as if she is a normal person. 
The spouses inscription of disciplinary power led to them seeing pathology 
within the PWDD presentation continuously; their talk was saturated by sins and 
symptoms. This focus replaced talk on the PWDDs individual attributes or abilities, a 
possible outcome of objectification processes. One enactment of this was where 
Sebastian, a spouse, focused heavily on sins and symptoms and then forgot his wifes 
former occupation. Other examples were spouses reference to PWDDs interests or 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 94 
attributes in the past tense, as if through objectifying the person becomes a dormant 
inanimate object.  
Sebastian (spouse):   oh my goodness me She used to run a playgroup that's what she 
did (Surprised) Id forgotten that she had in fact for several years 
been a guider a brown owl 
Thomas (spouse):  Betty [PWDD] was (tuts) was Is a very good cook. Has always 
been a very good cook  
A confession on behalf of the subject. A further illumination on this discourse 
sins and symptoms is that it is a form of confession. The confession is a western 
tradition or ritual assuming some production of truth, used in medicine, justice, family 
and marital relationships, and everyday life. Interestingly, this confession was from the 
spouse without dementia, on the PWDDs behalf; thus, alongside the inscription of the 
disciplinary power, there was the inscription of the dementia subject. The PWDD did 
not typically confess their own sins and symptoms or draw upon this discourse. 
However, the enactment of this discourse sins and symptoms was not necessarily a top 
down process. It was not the spouse having power over the PWDD neither the 
professional having power over the spouse, rather it seemed to be an attempt to reveal the 
hidden essence of dementia, as an object of science (other explanations are explored in 
more depth in the discussion chapter).  
A deviation from a confession on behalf of the PWDD was when spouses 
confessed themselves. Nonetheless, the more common pattern in the data was a 
confession on behalf of the PWDD. Both forms of confession may have been influenced 
by the construction of a confession as being something that elicits a sense of unburdening 
the sinning PWDD and themselves too.  
3.09 Knowing Best 
This discourse included the construction that the spouse knows what is best for 
the PWDD. As with the examined discourse above (sins and symptoms) knowing best 
also relied on a biomedical construction of dementia, and supported subjectification and 
objectification processes. While the former discourse was focused upon capturing or 
recognising deviances, knowing best focused upon applying modes of correction on the 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 95 
PWDD (e.g. including the elements preventing and correcting and keeping them 
going). 
Figure 7. Knowing best, elements & complimentary discourses. 
Preventing and correcting. Part of knowing best was the construction that the 
spouse may notice things the PWDD may not; an enactment of this was where the spouse 
took measures to correct or scaffold the spouse. Amongst many examples to illustrate 
this, the following three are provided:  
Les (PWDD):   What about [] (?) 
Florence (spouse):  Well []s your daughter dear () 
Interviewer:  Don't worry 
Les (PWDD):   Yes (laughs, embarrassed?) 
Florence (spouse):  You get muddled up don't you dear, with names and generations.  
Les (PWDD):   Saves traffic  
Florence (spouse):  (Correction) saves driving  
Les (PWDD):   you know saves driving[ 
Henry (PWDD):  I was talking to, oh god who was I talking to? My very good friend 
Emma (spouse):  [provides name]? 
Henry (PWDD):  Yes [], and erm, after Id spoke to him 
In the above excerpt, Henry (PWDD) may have been asking his wife to support 
him in the task of remembering a name. Alternatively, he may have been asking a 
rhetorical question to allow him a moment to think of the name. Nonetheless, Emma 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 96 
(spouse) enacted the discourse knowing best. Similarly, this is shown between Florence 
(spouse) and Les (PWDD), in the extracts previous to this. These examples present that 
knowing best could result in the position of the dementia subject where talk is 
obstructed, or rather the capable, communicative, rational subject, where talk is enabled. 
Thus, the discourse may generate an array of different outcomes: micro reactions between 
spouses, influenced by this discourse, may be more or less supportive to the PWDD at 
different times. 
As well as knowing best being demonstrated in joint interviews, in a separate 
interview, William (spouse) recalled a time when he prevented his wife, Marie (PWDD) 
from making a mistake in a supermarket: 
William (spouse):  Well now, it gets gradually worse, now as the time goes on. Well 
its I mean, when were shopping, she put some things on the list, 
she got some shampoo or something, er er I said, we got another 
bottle of shampoo cos we bought   
Taking caution to infer too much from the data, it did seem evident there was 
conflict with the discourse knowing best.  One example of this was provided by Emma, 
a spouse: being able to give him to word or to give him what hes trying to say or 
cant remember and I don't know what he cant remember This hints that the subject 
position the spouse founds himself or herself in, through preventing and correcting, was 
not necessarily a wanted one - parallel to the dementia related subject positions that 
PWDD were shown to resist. Where dominant discourses can politically organise day-to-
day conduct and subject positions, these can be difficult to negate. The extract on the 
following page demonstrates this further: 
Interviewer:   Are you okay? 
Les (PWDD):   Oh yes Im just thinking about tomorrow 
Interviewer:  Okay 
Florence (spouse):  Were best at doing it one day at a time erm. 
Interviewer:  Do you tend to get a bit worried about things that are coming up 
then Les in the future? 
Florence (spouse):  Yes Yeah very 
Les (PWDD):   Yeah I go off a bit  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 97 
Interviewer:  Well I guess its quite an adaptive thing to do if you know you might 
forget them then your brain is telling you that you need to 
remember it and is keeping it in mind so[ 
Florence (spouse): [And keeps looking at the calendar over and over again 
Les (PWDD):   Well I have to  
In the extract shown, despite the interviewers reframing of Less (PWDD) behaviour as 
adaptive, it was overlooked. Less behaviour was ostensibly fixed as being 
maladaptive  and he keeps looking at the calendar over and over again.  
Keeping them going. Correspondingly, keeping them going (an element in the 
discourse knowing best) engendered similar fixed subject positions. Keeping them 
going constructed PWDDs continuation of activities as significant; it incorporated the 
idea that if a person with dementia did not use their current capacity, they may worsen, or 
lose their ability altogether, conjoining with the feared fate.  
Thomas (spouse):  so Im the flower arranging chauffeur and bridge. Betty still 
places bridge every week, which is excellent I think for the 
memory, with the cards 
Betty (PWDD):  Yeah Im having trouble though  
Thomas (spouse): No Youre doing well you really are 
Betty (PWDD):  Hhh (sighs) 
William (spouse):  I don't think shes at all a hundred per cent but er I, I try and keep 
her going as much as I can  I mean I gotta big vegetable garden 
I have, I still dig this vegetable garden and, we have vegetables 
and I think youve got to keep doing something to keep interests 
and this why I try and try and I don't know how long it will last, to 
keep my wife going.  
As discussed in the introduction and part one of the results, currently, contextually 
and politically, there is, a requirement and responsibility for the spouse without dementia 
to adopt a more expert and intervening stance, or the role of an informal professional. 
Professional organisations, government policy and family arrangements are presently 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 98 
supporting this. Nonetheless, with the excerpts provided, one does question the outcomes 
of this discourse knowing best and whether they are the most conducive for the PWDD 
or spouse. The PWDDs opportunity to resist an activity seems limited, alongside the 
spouses opportunity to resist knowing best. One also questions, how former subject 
positions embedded within marital discourse then manifest? Knowing best presumably 
has some link to the point where PWDD was first coded, observed or diagnosed. The 
conflict between the informal carer and the marital partner are discussed further in 3.10. 
3.09 Valuing Multi-Professionals  
This discourse surrounded multi-professionals and their expertise. It embodied an 
adherence to their advice and a respect of their knowledge. It corresponds with document 
analysis concerning professional tools, where professionals were constructed as having 
specialist knowledge and skills to support  and treat individuals with diagnoses of 
dementia; this was valued and advocated by spouses, GPs and others. 
Figure 8.Valuing multi-professionals, elements & complimentary discourses. 
To distinguish this from the previous discourse knowing best, valuing multi-
professionals included the construction that there are some things only multi-
professionals can do. This interacted with the biomedical truth of dementia. Valuing 
multi-professionals related to treatments after diagnosis, and was not limited to the 
knowing doctor or medications to slow down the progression. This discourse may be 
seen to relate to the Enlightenment, which glorified the clinical gaze and exaggerated 
trust in the wisdom of the professional, at the same time justifying the expansion and 
branching out of disciplines. Within interview data, valuing multi-professionals was 
mostly enacted by spouses. One interpretation of this was formal knowledge was 
required to support spouses in their more informal professional role.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 99 
Thomas (spouse):  You havent mentioned to [the interviewer] about Parkinsons 
physiotherapy  
Betty (PWDD):  Oh yeah we gotta physiotherapist through somebody. Its not part 
of anything here its our own physio and shes done some, some 
maps, not maps, some papers, with exercises  
Thomas (spouse):  Well we try and do it two or three times every week, and then we 
er, she comes and sees Betty every three or four months to see 
how shes getting on  next time shell come to Betty and say now 
do it twelve times. 
Sebastian (spouse):  There seems to be a lot of back up in this area for the mentally 
impaired A great deal of back up And this has become very 
apparent since we left the clinic and she was first diagnosed so 
theres been a lot of actual contact if you know what I msean. 
Ruby (PWDD): Yes It is very good [Cognitive Stimulation Therapy]. Yes it is Its 
good fun and helpful.mmm and you can see how the memory lets 
you down mmm. 
James (spouse):  Yeah but were waiting to see the psychiatrist because you have 
people talking in your head you have to shut the doors don't 
Amongst the many multi-professionals mentioned in the data, the discourse valuing 
professionals showed a demand for, and a supply of, institutions to work with PWDD, 
beyond the spouses remits portrayed in knowing best and the doctor at diagnosis phase.  
Resistance to valuing professionals. The following extracts presented how 
spouses enacted the discourse valuing professionals when PWDD resisted it - 
bidirectionality was demonstrated by Betty, a PWDD and Thomas, a spouse. Likewise, in 
the following extract Florence, a spouse, encouraged Less attendance at the CST therapy 
group after he questioned its credibility. The emphasis on boost[ing] memory shows 
how professionals are constructed as counteracting the effects of dementia.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 100 
Interviewer:    what kind of recommendations did the nurse give you?  
Betty (PWDD):  I think that she was so busy that erm she couldn't really. 
Thomas (spouse): No She was fine Betty She was good on information on 
Parkinsons in a very practical way. 
Betty (PWDD):  Oh yes she was good but I was just thinking she could you know, 
there were things she could have told us. 
Thomas (spouse): She was a very very practical lady and she was very very well 
informed we learnt a lot from her because she is dealing with it 
on a day-to- day basis with people and she is very enthusiastic. 
Les (PWDD):  Well theres the first half hour of talking and theres a cup of tea 
and I think that's a waste of space I thought I was going to learn 
something They give you a card from a pack of cards and then 
they ask you what did you do when you were eight years old or 
summin like that  Im thinking somethings going wrong here 
Florence (spouse): [I think there are fourteen classes hes only been to two And I said 
theyre starting right at the beginning and theyll do different 
things each time and they try and boost your memory. 
The spouses apparent dismissing of the PWDD views connects with the point made 
earlier in 3.06; the contrast between participants, offering lay or more personal 
opinions, and the professional, offering credible and informed opinions. The PWDDs 
resistance is undermined perhaps through their positioning as a feebleminded subject  
they, unlike the spouse lack the ability for insight into the supposedly true value of 
professionals.  
Correspondingly, a pattern of resistance discussed in part one of the results, 
avoidance of professional care presented bidirectionality regarding 
uselessness/usefulness of seeking professional support. Although this related to seeking 
professional advice for the first time, it still indicated resistance regarding professional 
input. In the analysis of documents, spouses were accorded a role of encouraging PWDD 
to seek advice from professionals, counteracting resistance, concurrent with 
aforementioned findings.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 101 
Rejecting valuing multi-professionals. At other times both spouses and PWDD 
unmistakably rejected the discourse, valuing professionals, indicating the contestability 
of this discourse, in contrast to the biomedical truth of dementia. Multi-professionals 
practice, not including doctors, appeared to be more open to scrutiny and questioning 
from participants.   
Thomas (spouse):  She came home [from CST] last time and said oh I spent the 
afternoon throwing a ball (Laughs loudly)  
Olive (PWDD):  Oh we had nametags thats right [in CST]. I mean we couldn't 
remember their names anyway [with or without nametags] I mean 
our memories have gone a bit And then we had to throw a ball at 
each other God (laughs) I mean I could be at home doing ma 
knitting  
Norah (PWDD):  [CST] was like being at playgroup The children love it so why 
shouldnt we (laughs). // I: what do you make of it James? // James 
(spouse): What playgroup? (Laughs) 
Comparable to the discourse making a case, power and knowledge relations were being 
criticised within the resistance and rejection of the discourse, valuing multi-
professionals  dementia practises were problematised. 
3.11 Marriage Discourses 
Marriage discourses are presented separately here, although, they may be seen as 
elements that are no longer linked, as they did not appear to connect as one or more 
unified discourses.  This is possibly owing to elements moving and changing fluidly with 
no clear beginning or end, yet through a historical process where they no longer have the 
same permanency in peoples meaning systems. Nevertheless, the presence of these 
marriage elements in participants talk, as well as comparisons between then and now, 
suggested that they have influenced, and do influence, certain social bodies, discussed 
further. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 102 
Figure 10. Marriage discourses & complimentary discourses. 
Marriage is the right thing to do. This discourse constructed getting married as 
the right and expected thing to do and not getting married as being wrong or unexpected.  
Jack (spouse):  I think a lot of people who did in fact get married because they 
thought it was what they should do. That was the right thing to do.  
Sebastian (spouse):  It was a question of marriage and children and it got to the point 
one day where I said to the vicar one day, oh theres a marriage 
queue. I mean in our time, you were either in your late teens or 
early twenties, you were expected to get married and if you 
didn't then something was wrong  
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, in the nineteenth century the family was 
construed as a means to form a satisfying and mutually enhancing relationship between 
men and women, to create an environment fit to nurture children. Women and men were 
designated separate spheres, the male provider and the female nurturer. This was evident 
in marriage is right  demonstrated as follows:  
James (spouse):  The little lady always stayed at home and the man, earns and er, 
and thats what it amounted to but I guess thirty years ago or more 
women became more, imensified if that's the right word, and they 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 103 
wanted their own life, and if you go back in story books there 
wasn't many people like you [interviewer] It was men It was a 
mans world  
Emma (spouse): Henry has always been the provider.  
The above excerpts present how power is exercised within discourses in the ways it 
constitutes and governs subjects. For instance, it shows how influential and political 
apparatuses, religious, economic and so on, governed the doctrine of marriage and 
separate spheres, as being morally acceptable. Reconsidering the gendered discourse of 
pay no mind (3.03), this adds weight to the explanation  that the mainly female enacted 
discourse, where individuality was overtly promoted, was connected to social structures 
perhaps preventing scope for originality and female independence  similar to the 
relationship/pattern those with diagnoses of dementia. 
Forbidden sex outside of wedlock.  A further element was sexual intercourse is 
an act permitted through wedlock, which differed from dominant contemporary notions. 
As discussed in the introduction chapter, historically, sexual acts outside of the marital 
sphere were condemned and punished, as Jack demonstrated below. This was once 
upheld strongly by moral and legal frameworks. Also, William, a spouse, demonstrated 
how this discourse, forbidding sex outside of the marital dyad, ensures loyalty and trust.  
Jack (spouse):  I mean it [sex out of wedlock] was unthinkable Funny enough 
another girl she got into the pudding club as we called it and she 
went away to a convent to have the child and never saw the child 
again and that's what you did in those daysbecause of this child 
the family disowned her. You know the attitudes were totally 
different 
William (spouse): I mean Ive never gone out with another women or been with 
another women. She is my life 
Romance, loyalty and love. Coinciding with the above, and ideologies of love 
and sentiment, several participants recalled how they first met, and depicted their current 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 104 
loyalty towards their spouse. They would contrast this against the modern day absence of 
romance and marriage longevity. In the genealogy, ideologies of love and sentiment were 
argued to mask the political infrastructures and power within the marital sphere. 
Although several extracts exemplify this, two are presented:  
Jack (spouse):  I was walking back and it was the only time in my life I had a posh 
suit onumanyway, I met this girl. She had the most enchanting 
smile. I met her next in church and chatted her up I was then 
allowed to empty the barrows for her because it was very creepy in 
the woodlands. I went up because I just wanted to get to know her 
So on my horse I went it was a long time before we actually even 
pecked We just clicked and somehow we knew it was going to be 
permanent. 
William (spouse):  I said about going to the doctors... she says am I losing my 
memory I says I don't know I said look Ill look after you 
don't worry about that I am here and Ill look after you but Id 
do anything I could to help her because I told her I said you've 
been a very good friend to me and if I can look after you, now, I 
will do everything I can. 
Overcoming trials and tribulations. Demonstrated through this discourse was 
the normalisation of hardship, endurance and suffering, at certain times in the marital 
relationships. As mentioned in the introduction chapter, it was particularly difficult for 
people to seek a valid ground for divorce until the Divorce Reform Act (1969) presenting 
the structural influences once supporting this discourse.  Sebastian typified this. 
Sebastian (spouse):  I think whatever trials and tribulations youve had through the 
years you solider on through them, and eventually, its just 
discretion and stickability really. It seems the generation now days 
that stickability doesn't exist really. There are too many get outs.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 105 
Marriage problems: a private sphere. One participant explicitly stated the 
privacy of marriage, when asked how he and his spouse had found talking about 
difficulties in the interview it was explained: it is very much an individual private 
situation.  
We. All participants referred to one another as we at least one point in their 
interview, though commonly many times. The also conjointly told stories and answered 
for one another. Even concerning dementia treatments spouses referred to we as if 
they were both going through the treatment. This is fitting with marriage vows (religious, 
political and legal structures) that two bodies become united as one. We may be thought 
of as interacting on some level with sins and symptoms. The spouses confession and 
inscription of disciplinary technologies is a product of their united body with the PWDD, 
where they both have dementia. 
Resisting marriage: the right thing to do. Trials and tribulations and the 
private sphere worked effectively in regulating resistance to marriage discourse. Slight 
indications of resistance were shown, such as in the extracts below. Concerning the first 
extract, Thomas, spouse, explained that Betty, PWDD, tends to think of negative rather 
than positive outcomes relating to marriage. Interestingly he says, she will tell you what 
she thinks, although Betty did not then comment further on this, nor did many female 
participants take up the discourse marriage; the right thing to do. What is not said was 
possibly a rejection of the discourse in itself. 
Thomas (spouse):  Fifty-two years ago we got married Ill say it quickly as this is 
where Betty will tell you the glass is half empty as marriage is not.  
er // Betty (PWDD): (laughs) // I: (laughs) oh really. In what 
way? // Thomas: Nah shell tell you what she thinks anyway, but 
yes over fifty years ago 
In addition, marital difficulties tended to be avoided by female participants, conceivably 
through the governing effects of the discourse marriage the right thing to do. This is 
shown in the excerpt on the following page.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 106 
Marie (PWDD):  Weve never really I suppose its sad really but weve never 
really, how do we put it (hesitation) (#3) talked too much. Its just 
something that goes just goes along over the years I have 
sometimes thought (laughs) I don't think about it much otherwise-. 
// I: do you think that you might like to talk a bit more then? // 
Marie: Ohhh, I don't know. I dont really know. I don't know.  
In wedding vows, the groom promises to love, cherish, and worship, and the 
bride to love, cherish, and obey. The womens silence was ambiguous: it could be seen 
as having been constituted through the obeying subject, or through resisting this.  
3.12 Conflicting or Complimentary Discourses? 
 One reoccurring conflict amongst the discourses was between marital discourses, 
sins and symptoms and knowing best. As discussed the latter two were united by the 
biomedical truth of dementia and marital discourses. With sins and symptoms spouses 
monitored PWDDs symptoms: with knowing best the spouses would scaffold and 
support the PWDD to keep them going. Where at times the spouse acted as if under 
surveillance to oversee the PWDD this could be problematic. Firstly, the PWDD is not 
necessarily compliant to the spouses shift in subject position from a marital partner to an 
informal professional. Neither is the PWDD necessarily compliant to the subject 
position of the informal patient. The same could be said for spouses without dementia 
diagnoses. The following extract illustrates one example of how this resulted in 
pronounced tension and disagreement amongst marital partners, as well as 
bidirectionality. One example is presented below.  
Florence (spouse):  you get upset sometimes when youve got things wrong  
Les (PWDD):   well when you get on to me 
Florence (spouse):  you don't like it when I put you right do you. I try and do it nicely 
but  
Les (PWDD):   well youre never wrong are you 
Florence (spouse):  I am sometimes wrong and I admit it you never admit it () 
Well I suppose youknow when you get in a muddle with things and 
lose things and things like that, it does get very, does get a bit 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 107 
stressful at times. It does. I have to say. If I do put you straight in 
any way you say Im causing an argument. Its not easy.  
As discussed, the subject position the spouse or PWDD finds himself or herself in, 
through sins and symptoms and knowing best, was not necessarily a desired one, 
however, dominant discourses politically organise day-to-day conduct, through the state 
or established institutions making resistance to certain subject positions difficult.  
Secondly, within the marital discourses, males and females had been assigned 
gender specific roles. In these extracts, through knowing best there was a requirement to 
scaffold the partner in their day-to-day tasks. At times this was constructed as an all-
encompassing role, yet also an important and required one. Williams rejection of the task 
(no you do it) suggested some unwillingness to take on a more domesticated or 
typically female orientated role, alongside a will to keep his wife going. Other male 
participants presented this conflict, though mostly performed within the fixed boundaries 
of knowing best, which could be seen to supersede marital discourses. 
William (spouse):  And I try and get her involved, she says noo noooo you do it, you 
can do it and I say no, youre the expert, Im lear- Im the 
trainee, but I realise that its all going to fall on me Completely 
In a few years timeshes still got all this stuff in the machine and 
I hang it out and dry it and all this sort of thing  and I help her. 
Sometimes Ill do the ironing while she does the cooking and 
things like that  I never used to years ago but as I say I do 
more now 
Thirdly, with the marital discourses the spouses relationship is enacted as a 
private matter. With an array of professional bodies that surround the marital dyad, 
further conflict between discourse elements is shown  marriage is no longer private but 
viewed by professionals and confessed. In particular, several male spouses gave reference 
to getting angry or exploding; perhaps acceptable in the remits of a marital 
relationship though not an informally professional relationship? Despite these 
contradictory discourses, the spouse seemingly inscribed the professional gaze and ethical 
and moral codes/rules.  This is shown in the following extract where the interviewer, 
seemingly related to as a professional, was assured by the spouse that he had not been 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 108 
violent to the PWDD. This is an effective political regime, whereby, without any direct 
professional intervention, the spouse constitutes him or herself as the moral subject of his 
or her own actions and transforms themselves accordingly (e.g. I don't rage as much 
now). 
Sebastian (spouse):  it passes you see as long as you don't start shouting and saying 
women for goodness sake what the hell do you think youre doing 
OH FOR GOODNESS SAKE WOMEN you know, lift the lid up 
any have a look inside  I don't explode or anything like that, 
Im not violent.  
James (spouse):  Well I don't rage as much now. Its changed. // I: Rage? // James: 
Oh yeah youd be surprised, I ave no patience. I really don't and 
its one thing you need more than anything else is patience.  
 Although in some cases discourses did conflict, in others they were seen to 
complement one and other, particularly through constructions of loyalty and love, 
participants constructed that they were dedicated to doing all they possibly could for the 
PWDD  the informal professional subject is then enacted as a choice. Similarly, where 
many participants referred to we throughout their interviews, as if encompassing one 
body through marriage, one spouses problem (i.e. dementia effects) was the other 
spouses problem. The marital discourse at times worked alongside the construction of 
the spouses requirement and responsibility for the PWDD, or the intervening stance.  
3.13 Chapter Overview 
This chapter has presented an initial analysis of NICE (2006) guidelines for 
dementia and professionally produced leaflets from memory clinics, and it discussed the 
discursive themes, patterns and deviances in relation to this data. Also, from the analysis 
of ten interview transcripts from spouse dyads when one spouse has a diagnosis of 
dementia, eight main discourses have been explored as presented these are corroborated 
by the analysis of documents. The following chapter will, discuss findings further and 
revisit the rationale for this study in relation to the research aims. It will consider further 
research and clinical and service implications. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 109 
4. Discussion & Review 
4.01 Chapter Summary 
This chapter includes an appraisal of the research aims and summarises the study 
findings. Given that the results chapter considered each discourse separately drawing 
upon Foucauldian Discourse Analysis, this section gives less consideration to reviewing 
discourses in this way. The discussion has been structured based on a series of questions 
generated by the researcher that may be asked of the data, whilst drawing upon 
alternative theoretical models. The questions referenced here are embedded throughout 
the chapter, between sections 4.02 and 4.07. The chapter also offers clinical and research 
implications, and a critique on this study. 
4.02 Study Summary & Appraisal of the Research Aims 
At the time of writing this thesis, there are few genealogical enquiries within the 
field of ageing. The first study aim was to provide a genealogical enquiry concerning 
dementia, and not limited to Alzheimers disease alone (Dillmann, 1990; Robertson, 
1990) or old ageing generally (e.g. Biggs & Powell, 2001; Katz, 1992), as other authors 
have done. Given the relevance of marriage in relation to dementia and informal care, 
kinship and family were also explored in this thesis, albeit modestly.  
A second aim was to explore currently functioning discourse surrounding 
dementia. Corresponding with the second aim, critical enquiries in the field of dementia 
and recent political developments, as opposed to a more historical perspective, have been 
completed by Moser (2008) and Bender (2013). 
The first and second aims were based on the guidance given by Hook (2010), 
Powers (2013) and Rawlinson (1987): a discourse analysis should comprise of two 
platforms, how discourse has arisen, and how it functions. In both cases, a discourse 
analysis perspective was supportive of a critical engagement with the historical and/or 
political nature of dementia, i.e. how dementia has been a set as category with fixed 
boundaries which shape particular outcomes and actions.  
As discussed in the introduction chapter, there is a very limited body of qualitative 
research including interviews with PWDD and spouses available studies have been from 
a humanist epistemological position describing individual experience and selfhood 
(Beard et al., 2012; Clare, Rowlands, Bruce, Surr, & Downs, 2008; Hellstrom, 2005; 
Svanstrom, 2004). As argued, a humanist epistemology, whereby assumptions are made 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 110 
regarding agency and freewill, neglects the complex discursive inter-relationships that 
construct and organise knowledge and meaning, such as the individual viewpoint (see, 
4.08).  
To the researchers knowledge, this is the first discourse analysis study dementia 
study to analyse documents (leaflets and professional guidelines) and interviews (with 
spouse dyads when one spouse has a diagnosis of dementia). The study aimed to consider 
the discursive patterns and deviances in the different data sources. Where an analysis of 
documents is more common is discourse analysis, the lack of interview studies relates to 
this type of data collection being unusual to discourse analysis (interviews are often 
associated with hermeneutic, descriptive and naturalistic methods).  
This research utilised the concepts of resistance and bi-directionality, power and 
knowledge implications, zones of disciplinary power, the other, soul effects and so forth, 
as lenses to support the analysis (Hook, 2010). The various speaking positions enacted 
and rejected by participants in the data were also attended to. Appraisals of the research 
aim is discussed as follows: 
Research aim one. Addressing the first aim, this study explored dementia in the 
pre-nineteenth century when the psychiatric classification was yet to emerge. Amongst a 
modest array of broadly defined concepts common to this time, delirium, psychosis and 
lethargie were commonly used to describe what would now be considered dementia. The 
conditions that determined the proliferation of medical knowledge were contemplated, 
such as the Poor Law Act, almshouses, and the social survey. It was argued that 
populations were made into a material process of biopolitics, and that the state came to 
increasingly rely upon the scientific community, meaning disciplinary interests were 
asserted. Kraepelins proliferation of a disease classification system, and Alzheimers 
case study in 1906, where Alzheimers disease, a pathological disease of accelerated 
mental decline was categorized, was considered. At this time, dementia and its 
biomedical origins were patchy. This contrasts with the mainstream description of the 
moment when dementia was discovered. It was not until the flourishing of the industries 
and organisations including psychology and psychiatry, relating to the proliferation of 
intelligence theory/measurement and the DSM-V, that dementia became a more 
dominant discourse.  
To date, controversy has continued to be smoothed over and dementia is 
constructed as a separate and distinguishable condition from old age, in line with what is 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 111 
argued to be the growing ageing population. As mentioned, a growing population is hard 
to dispute, yet certain arguments have been placed against the apocalyptic case of hoards 
of elderly depleting social resources (see 1.02). Also, this study in effect fragments the 
epidemic of dementia repeatedly portrayed. Instead it places the view that the 
structuring of systems and organisations increasingly generate people diagnosed with 
dementia and dementia discourse constitutes those diagnosed. Moreover, a briefer review 
of marriage and family was considered. In particular, focusing on discourses constructing 
marriage as a means to regulate sexual activity, social conduct and to support economic 
arrangements. At times, the mainstream discourse on the importance of marriage and the 
traditional family unit have been contested  contingent moments where this occurred 
were briefly reviewed (e.g. in the 1950s, 1970s and 1990s). In addition, the 
introduction chapter questioned the portrayed progressive shift within the last decade 
towards the PCM and group therapy treatments. It was argued that the PCM works 
alongside the BMM to control older adults and the marital sphere in particular ways, 
elaborated further in the next section, 4.03.  
Research aim two. Regarding the second aim, this study reviewed NICE (2016) 
guidelines for PWDD, as well as professionally produced dementia leaflets from GP and 
memory clinics to distinguish the discursive patterns concerning dementia talk. In sum, 
statistics and warnings of a disease in older age, alongside health checks, just to be on the 
safe side, were seen to be directing people and their spouses toward professional sites 
concerning memory difficulties. The professionals, who were constructed to have 
sophisticated apparatuses and specialist knowledge, were seen as able to resolve the 
question of dementia. Support post diagnosis was more descriptive in NICE (2006) 
guideline as opposed to leaflets  this perhaps limited resistance from people without 
professional status concerning expertise. Subject positions constructed the PWDD as 
being active (e.g. aggressive, sexually disinhibited) and contrastingly, resembled 
their inactivity (e.g. end of life care).  The informal carer or marital was constructed as 
having a quasi-professional role, such a encouraging specialist professional involvement 
or making legal decisions on the PWDDs behalf.  
Following on from the data analysis described above, eight main discourses were 
identified in transcripts from interviews from seven PWDD and seven spouses. In total 
there were four joint, and six separate, interview transcripts. Discourses formulated were 
the feared fate, pay no mind, making a case, the biomedical truth of dementia, sins 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 112 
and symptoms, knowing best, and valuing professionals. Marriage discourses or 
elements were also explored, e.g. we, romance, trials and tribulations, and counter-
discourses, such as its plain old ageing. Substantial differences were found between the 
discourses PWDD and spouses constructed and enacted, plus, between discourses when 
spouses were interviewed together rather than separately. In particular, spouses drew 
upon the dominant discourse the biomedical truth of dementia. This was far less 
common amongst PWDD. This influenced subject positions encountered and enacted. 
Discourses in the interview analysis were largely collaborated in the document 
analysis. As one example, the use of statistics, signs and symptoms regarding dementia, 
which generated fear directing people to memory clinics, was strongly identified in 
leaflets and interview data.  
In the analysis of interview data, it was indicated that there was a two-fold 
socialisation to a group that one does not chose to be a member of (i.e. dementia and 
female gender type), linked to the enactment of the discourse pay no mind. The 
outcome of this arrangement may be to ensure that a certain version of the self is 
constructed, explored more in 4.05. One example is how female participants were very 
active in talk concerning their interests, experiences and skills (i.e. an enactment of pay 
no mind). The person centred discourse proliferating pay no mind was also seen to 
generate acts of self-discipline upon the PWDD; whereas, the BMM heavily influenced 
spouses acts, particularly in their monitoring and confessing of their partners dementia 
effects.  
Following the discussion on research aims, new theoretical insights will be 
considered to enrich understandings of the most noteworthy findings. 
4.03 How were discourses adopted complementary to the apparatus of power and 
the expansion of the neuro-hybrid? 
PWDD and spouses drew upon relatively different discourses and dissimilar 
subject positions, and this would be expected from a discourse perspective where 
participants draw upon a multiplicity of discourses (Burman & Parker, 1993). However, it 
was unforeseen that there would be such a division between spouses and PWDD. As 
mentioned, spouses tended to use dementia discourses united through the the biomedical 
truth of dementia and they inscribed the subject position of the informal carer (e.g. sins 
and symptoms, knowing best, valuing professionals). Yet, PWDD enacted the 
discourse pay no mind to the disease, promoting their individuality and capability 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 113 
associated with the PCM. It may seem that these discourses and subject positions are 
conflicting; does one not embody the PWDDs independence and the other their 
dependence? However, these discourses may be understood as complementary 
power/knowledge arrangements  governing and disciplining the PWDD and their 
spouse.  
In a similar vein, marriage discourses, sins and symptoms and knowing best 
were also considered to be unified discourses  particularly, the elements of romance or 
we, combined with the spouses monitoring to see things the PWDD cannot. These were 
argued to be productive and social-economic techniques of power.  
To explain these complicated arrangements further, the researcher refers to the 
Panopticon depicted in the introduction and method chapter (see 2.05 & 3.05). The 
Panopticon is an architectural description of the prison designed by Bentham. In its 
abstract sense, the Panopticon refers to the design of political institutions (e.g. medical, 
psy, religious, marital, legal, moral) that facilitate a discrete, affordable, dispersed and 
effective surveillance and control over individuals. Individuals are proposed to detect 
observation, even though it is impermanent, and they begin to govern themselves as if the 
observation is permanent.  
He who is subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes 
responsibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontaneously 
upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power relation in which he 
simultaneously plays both roles; he becomes the principle of his own subjection 
(Foucault, 1991, p.203). 
A further understanding that enriches Foucaults description of the Panopticon is 
neo-liberal governmentality (Rose, 1998). This is a specific mode of reasoning and 
governing bodies in a social system. This regime firstly brings about order through a 
self-monitoring, responsible, optimising and maximising subject. This holds the ideology 
of the free agent who speaks and acts liberally which works to mask the apparatus of 
power (i.e. made of groups, institutions, organisations, the state). Secondly, it is a 
political-economic rationality that strives to extend the ethic of the market logic to ever-
broadening spheres of life (Rose, 1998).  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 114 
[Neo-liberal governmentality is] an emergent pattern or order of a social system, 
arising out of complex negotiations and exchanges between intermediate social 
actors, groups, forces, organizations, public and semi-public institutions in which 
state organisation, amongst many others seeking to steer or manage these 
relations (Rose, 1999, p.21) 
Lastly, concerning the Panoptican, Hook (2010) has discussed the notion of the 
other (linked to Lacanian theory). Hook (2010) explains the other is crucial for 
accounting for the mechanisms of power and reflexivity. We ask: how does the other 
see me; what does the other want from me; what are the social values it holds most 
dear? 17 
Considering these theoretical stances in relation to the present findings, it may be 
conceived that spouses self-govern and monitor themselves as an informal care-giver 
refraining from non-professionally coded reactions (e.g. potentially abusive reactions 
anger and rage) to perhaps prevent the attraction of the observer he/she imagines to be 
there. Marriage (e.g. through love & loyalty, we & the right thing to do) becomes a 
natural terrain for informal acts of caring, and through the ideology of the free agent, 
they are chosen acts. With this, and the spouse keeping [their spouse] going, not all 
PWDD and spouses require direct state intervention, a political-economic rationality. 
Similarly, spouses with diagnoses of dementia self-discipline, ensuring their capability 
and preserving their individuality  through the person centred discourse. In doing so, 
they steer away from the potential confinement of a psychiatric unit or other more 
direct modes of care (see 3.02), potentially draining societal resources (1.01). These 
operations, on some level, remain opaque to the PWDD and spouses, which is why they 
perhaps work effectively.  
Within the frame of the Panopticon, the spouses confessing on behalf of the 
PWDD and inscribing the professional is a perplexing finding (3.06). One potential 
explanation using these models of thought is that despite the voluntary appearance of 
conformity, it is dependent upon lighter self discipline (e.g. the spouses inscription of 
professional to govern the self and the PWDD) to avoid heavier professional-
disciplining. In order to do this, spouses must understand the rules and recognise signs 
from supervisors or professionals through the mechanism of the other. The Panopticon 
requires rational actors, thus perhaps in this case spouses are seen to be more suited? As 
shown in the results, PWDD were inter-changeably positioned as dangerous and 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 115 
inanimate, or in denial and lacking-awareness. The branching out of professionals, 
organisations, institutions, depicted in valuing professionals (see 3.07) perhaps 
enhances the field of conformity, self-discipline, and the sharing of knowledge between 
spouses and professionals, beyond the remits of the state alone.  
Consistent with this, the introduction chapter presented the hybrid of neuro-
industries centred on dementia. In order for this to survive it must expand and open up 
new industries. Where dementia rates have expanded, alongside awareness and a 
dementia hyper vigilance (e.g. indicated in leaflets within the document analysis), this 
necessitates intervention from the professionals, whether directly or indirectly. Examples 
are the increasing use of medication, neurocognitive and MRI testing, charity support, 
and therapy groups pertaining cognitive improvement. What we are led to believe is that 
it is not that the supply of neuro-industries around dementia that creates their demand, 
rather the opposite  it is dementia itself.  
Similarly, the recent addition to the Diagnostic Statistical Manual- Fifth Edition 
(DSM-IV) of Mild Neuro-Cognitive Impairment (MNCI) expands the boundaries of 
diagnosis in relation to dementia (American Psychiatric Association, 2013)18. As 
illustrated in the extract below, MCNI is proposed to be a pre-condition that needs 
identifying. It is centred on psy-industries and the provision of their therapies, as well as 
relatives inscription of the professional to detect signs. This accords with the above 
reading of the data. Additionally, it clearly differentiates the pathological disorder from 
normal old age, through the dominant biomedical discourse. 
The diagnosis of MCNI in the DSM-5 provides an opportunity for early 
detection and treatment of cognitive decline before patients deficits become more 
pronounced and progress to the major neurocognitive disorder, dementia. Its 
inclusion in the manual will help clinicians develop effective treatment plans as 
well as encourage researchers to evaluate diagnostic criteria and potential 
therapies. Mild neurocognitive disorder goes beyond normal issues of aging. It 
describes a level of cognitive decline that requires compensatory strategies and 
accommodations to help maintain independence and perform activities of daily 
living. To be diagnosed with this disorder, there must be changes that impact 
cognitive functioning. These symptoms are usually observed by the individual, a 
close relative, or other knowledgeable informant, such as a friend, colleague, or 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 116 
clinician, or they are detected through objective testing (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2003; italics added to give emphasis). 
 Recently, a large amount of media attention has been given to research reporting a  
significant reduction in overall UK prevalence of diagnosed with dementia over the age 
of sixty five (Wu et al., 2016). This was a longitudinal study between two time periods  
1989-94 and 2008-11, where the prevalence rates of dementia is argued to have dropped 
from twenty to sixteen per cent in the UK. The researchers of the study conclude that 
fears of increasing dementia rates among may be wrong and claim this is a unique 
finding (Wu et al., 2016). However, this may reflect the expanding and ever-changing 
boundaries of the classification system. In the 1990s, clinicians may have been 
diagnosing probable mild stages of dementia which may now be seen as MCNI. The 
outcome is more people are accessing memory clinics.  
Furthermore, to broaden discussion regarding the above mentioned subject 
positions of inanimate or lacking-awareness, Robertson (1990) argues that dementia 
holds an ontological position of increasing helplessness, dependency and mental 
deficiency. Robertson (1990) supports this case with empirical studies on elderly, which 
present accelerated learned helplessness, mindlessness, disability and death after 
institutionalisation. She also argues there is so much talk and media publicity on people 
with dementia being victims, patients, depressed and in despair that the inevitable 
outcome is the self-inscription of this role (Robertson, 1990).  
Contra to Robertsons (1990) point on self-inscription, one argument relating to 
this thesis, is that through pay no mind PWDD were self-disciplining to steer away from 
mentioned subject positions, and thus were resisting self-inscription to this end. This is 
perhaps a power arrangement more fitting to a proposed time of austerity and budget cuts, 
plus policies regarding care in the home for longer (NICE, 2016; The Care Act, 2014). 
Some level of independence and capability for PWDD is required to avoid heavier 
professional intervention. Fitting with this, Cloud (2001) claims the rise of the psy-
disciplines is such an effective political strategy of capitalism, as descent is claimed in a 
discourse of individual responsibility. 
Nonetheless, as shown with the discourse making a case (see 3.05) PWDD 
adopted discourses that attempted to resist professional tools and interventions (lighter 
intervention such as a diagnosis). This problematises the view of people as empty, 
passive vessels subject to the omniscient powers of the psy and biomedical industry. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 117 
However, where some participants attempted to resist the political apparatus of power, 
there was a rejection from their marital partners and a reframing of the PWDD resistance 
as a form of mental deficiency inherent with dementia effects. In one case, the spouse 
without dementia who resisted professional tools and interventions towards his wife, the 
discourse of a psychologised grieving process was used instead. Difficulty with the 
discourse making a case may be reflective of policy (Mental Capacity Act, 2005; 
Lasting Power of Attorney, 2015) reviewed in the introduction. The PWDD and their 
spouse is implicitly or explicitly advised of the potential for fluctuating mental awareness 
in dementia and the need to be aware and proactive around this. In this case, the spouses 
are perhaps proactively reacting to the PWDD through the discourse of their limited 
capacity, with the legal obligation to ensure their decisions are in their best interests 
(MCA; 2005). That is, adhering to professional tools and interventions, and not 
deconstructing them as within making a case. Also shown in the genealogy, through the 
emergence of modernity, it has typified modes of ordering of the living being through 
science and its material processes. This too, results in the control of resistances or 
deviations relating to dementia.  
4.04 The biomedical truth of dementia  how may our understandings be 
improved by poststructuralist discourse theory? 
The biomedical truth of dementia was an important discourse through which 
participants took doctors statements and practises surrounding dementia to be a fixed 
truth (refer to 3.04). It was argued that this discourse worked to operate a range of other 
discourses, e.g. pay no mind, sins and symptoms, knowing best and valuing multi-
professionals. The biomedical truth of dementia also included the speaking positions, 
some already discussed (e.g. the knowledgeable and wise doctor, the compliant relative, 
and the person with dementia lacking insight). These categorisations appear natural, 
rather than contingent upon discursive practices.  
Although Foucaults genealogical approach enables us to scrutinise how particular 
discourses and objects, are scientifically, societally, and economically prioritised over 
others (see introduction chapter), certain schools of post-structuralist discourse theory 
(PSDT) may be seen to add another dimension. PSDT is centred on understanding  the 
semantic-material structure of a discourse. A drawback within the Foucauldian frame 
relates to describing the jigsaw puzzle arrangement of discourses in any given analysis. 
At times, aspects of PSDT were drawn upon to complement the exploration of dementia 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 118 
discourses in the latter stages. For instance, where the discourses consisted of sub-parts, 
these were labelled elements in the results chapter, more fitting with PSTD. 
Laclau and Mouffe (2014) discuss how it is ultimately impossible for a discourse 
to fix a web of meanings or signs into set positions, however, there are processes in which 
they can appear as if they are fixed through the constitution of nodal points. Nodal 
points organise the discourse around a central privileged signifier or reference point 
(Lacan & Sheridan, 2001). They bind together particular systems of meanings or chains 
of signification, assigning meanings to other signifiers within that discourse. For 
instance, iek (2008) provides the example of communism being the nodal point around 
democracy, state, freedom, which rearticulates them into a new meaning, different from 
those used in competing discourses. For iek, (2008) the nodal point or the word 
communism unifies the given field, and constitutes its identity. It is structured through 
articulatory practises, whereas, on its own, it lacks density. It acquires its meaning from 
the arrangement of other signs. In this theory, while nodal points are the elements that 
crystallise a discourse, other signs can be floating signifiers meaning discourses are 
potentially open to different ascriptions.  
In this case, the nodal point may be seen to be the biomedical medical truth of 
dementia, arranged with other signs: doctor, education, tests, MRI, medication, plaques, 
tangles, amyloid, memory. Through repeated articulation this discourse has established an 
apparent closure or a structured totality.  The floating elements around this nodal point 
can be seen to function in pay no mind (which is centred upon the person centred 
treatment of dementia), for instance, individuality, personhood are introduced and have 
the potential to restructure meaning. In a further discourse, valuing multi-professionals, 
the sign doctor, may become multi-professional accounting for nurse, physiotherapist, 
psychiatrist, etc. Though fundamentally, these discourses may be considered as centred 
upon, and crystallised through, the nodal point the biomedical model truth of dementia. 
The practices of articulation through which a given order is created and the meaning of 
social institutions is fixed are conceptualised  as hegemonic. This is where discourses 
reach the level of common sense, in that their origins and intrinsic contingency are 
forgotten (Laclau & Mouffe, 2014):What is at a given moment accepted as the natural 
order, jointly with the common sense that accompanies it, is the result of sedimented 
hegemonic practices (Mouffe, 2008, p. 4). 
Some schools of PSDT are perhaps more linked with structuralist language 
theories, contrasting with the relativist position Foucault, at times, aligned with. Foucault 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 119 
avoided reductionism, and inferences of causality or truth, the very political practices he 
critiqued. He states, if interpretation can never be completed, this is quite simply 
because there is nothing to be interpreted, for after all everything is already an 
interpretation (Foucault: as cited in Said, 1974 , p.28). In addition, discourses are not to 
be treated as groups of signs but as practices that systematically form the objects of which 
we speak (Foucault & Smith, 2002, p. 42). Nonetheless, and notably an 
oversimplification, the use of PSDT, as depicted above, is in a way breaking down signs 
to understand the way regimes of practices are held together, as well as to uncover the 
rules that inform this regime. In a purely relativist bind, this perhaps limits the potential 
of discourse to destabilise or stabilise particular discourses, by seeking to find which 
obstacles are able to be overcome? Or, how might links and formations within a 
discourse, re-emerge? This frame of thought is explored further in relation to the PCM of 
dementia in 4.08, and its potential to re-emerge.   
4.05 Pay no mind  a two-fold collectivization of gender & dementia? 
Perceptions from post-structuralist feminism & identity politics  
Unexpectedly, this study presented the finding that there were almost wholly 
gendered discourses, pay no mind and marriage discourses: the right thing to do, sex 
before wedlock, romance, loyalty and trust, and trials and tribulations. One 
interpretation was that within pay no mind, the preoccupation with interests, 
experiences and the self was a product of a two-fold experience of marginalisation and 
oppression, through the identity of 1) the dementia subject and 2) the women. The female 
participants silence towards marriage discourses was understood to resemble resistance  
speculations being, marriage is not the right thing to do, it was not a choice they had or it 
is not a topic they felt able to speak freely on. The spouses dismissal of the PWDDs 
rejection in valuing the professional and making a case was linked to a dismissal of 
the PWDD voice, credibility and insight. As mentioned in the analysis, the researcher was 
faced with a quandary, how does one describe this without falling in to the positivist 
binary of male and female, and marxist and feminist notions of identity oppression 
colluding in the very process of identity oppression? Yet, to disregard the permanence of 
the resistance from both females and PWDD would contest the ethics of research and the 
uniqueness of the findings. Other ways of discerning this finding are now offered: firstly, 
exploring Foucaults notion of biopolitics, and secondly, feminist post-structuralist 
identity politics.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 120 
To begin with, biopolitics, Foucaults (1998) The History of Sexuality highlights 
the contextually specific apparatus of power, tied to a host of disciplinary technologies 
and numerous and diverse techniques that control the bodies of the population19. Cotoi 
(2011) also explains, biopolitics is a machine for reinforcing and expanding the exercise 
of bureaucratic state power; it is an intervention of control on an exceptionally wide level, 
relating to governmental concerns about the characteristics of species. Linked to this is 
the development and reliance on the social survey, and the turn towards scientific 
communities to regulate bodies, such as through categorisations of dementia and sex, as 
depicted in the genealogy.   
To consider this complex notion further, in Herculine Barbin: Being the Recently 
Discovered Memoirs of a Nineteenth Century Hermaphrodite Foucault (1980) wrote 
about a person raised in a convent as a her, later found to have male and female sexual 
organs. Professionally rationalised, Herculine was  a he owing to Herculines sexual 
preference of other women and the ability to procreate through male genitalia. Similar 
to The Order of Things, Foucault (1994) presents how in different times and different 
spaces, particular to the emergence of modernity, human beings became a source of 
meaning and ordering, their essence to be discovered scientifically or through life 
sciences. From this angle, the taxonomy of living beings, applies to not only gender, but 
dementia too. Participants bodies are biopolitically ordered through the life sciences, 
according to state power. The significance of this is that participants are ordered through 
a much wider, and complex political process that limits the subject positions available. 
This helpfully reframes the overgeneralized oppressed notion mentioned earlier. The need 
to assert the self as being capable, important and individual counteracts homogenous 
and politically governed groups.  
In accordance with this, over the past decade, many influential feminist thinkers 
have expressed the idea that feminism needs to move beyond a politics of identity, 
concerning dismantling the essentialist binary of gender towards a post-identity politics. 
These arguments have been expressed in different ways but the apprehension is that the 
focus on identity reifies social difference resulting in a parochial politics of recognition 
that hinders participation in wider democratic debates (Burman, 1998, p. 513). 
Arguably, by relinquishing the preoccupation with gender identity, a space would be 
created for feminist theory and practice to attend to a wider politics of diversity where 
difference is understood as a resource rather than as an end in itself.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 121 
Correspondingly, an instrumental critique has been made by Brown (1994) who 
argues that identity politics all too often attributes an incontestable moral legitimacy to 
the idea of personal suffering where it is taken as irrefutable evidence of oppression and 
injustice. Not only is suffering far from being an automatic guarantor of social injustice 
but the persistent focus upon injury sets up a negative psychic dynamic that binds 
individuals and groups to their own subjugation and ultimately impasses the political 
imagination. In this case, through the above mentioned interpretation (a two-fold 
collectivization of marginalization and oppression), the researcher is potentially falling 
into the remits of the dementia subject and women as suffering, while binding them to the 
subjection and preventing alternative political movements.  
Zerilli argues that the relentless focus upon the subject question has obstructed 
thought regarding freedom and action beyond the assertion of identity (as cited in 
Burman, 1998). It focuses on I can rather than I will  a vicious circle of agency. 
Linking to Foucaults (1991) understanding of power (see methodology, 2.*) there is the 
assertion is that political actors do not know what they do, thus, it is not an effective 
regime to direct anger or action towards those oppressors or characterised enemies, who 
are potentially unaware . Instead, Zerilli encourages political action to be a future 
oriented, world-building practice that seeks to appoint unanticipated modes of being. 
Then, as a world-building practice, it should base itself not on the assertion of pre-given 
differences (gender or perhaps non-age associated decline), the what of identity, but a 
pursuit to establish the newly thinkable in terms of dementia and gender (the who of 
politics). She states that which cannot be proved like a truth or possessed like a 
substance, can only be practiced or enacted by present and future generations (Zerilli; as 
cited in Burman, 1998).  In sum, notions of biopolitics and post-identity politics may be 
seen as complementary theoretical notions, to support avoiding the binds of agency.  
4.06 The feared fate & inanimate/dangerous dementia subject  scope for 
exploring emotions? 
The feared fate was one of the most prominent discourses across both PWDD and 
spouses accounts, and across the document and interview analysis. It shaped dementia as 
a great concern, ensuing and justifying the biomedicalisation and differentiation of 
dementia. It was also embedded with epidemiological research studies or media talk on 
the apocalyptic case for older adults (e.g. its been mentioned in the paper it's a 
growing disease of the elderly population). 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 122 
In relation to the analysis of professional leaflets, sources listed symptoms of 
biomedical dementia symptoms supporting the uptake of memory assessment clinics. 
One leaflet stated, contact your GP, if you seek help sooner, you can get information, 
advice and support. The leaflet also constructed how spouses and families should 
monitor and assess peoples possible symptoms owing to the risks of developing 
dementia in late adulthood. The introduction to this thesis discussed Foucaults (1991) 
notion of the regime of truth where these facts are believed to coincide with a certain 
criteria and rigor, through the privilege means of science and research, or technologies of 
truth.  
To build upon this understanding, Moser (2007) states that facts matter  they 
are of concern or of importance and they are value loaded and charged matters (p.98). 
Feminist writers such as Haraway (1997) have presented the way that facts have built in 
normatives and justify certain objectifying practises (e.g. defining, controlling and 
monitoring dementia). Butler (1990) has also offered that natural realities, alike to 
dementia in this discourse, are mattering and produce particular power effects. Neither 
given stable nor closed, they rely on the continued enactment and re-enactment of 
situated practices (e.g. science, politics, technology, research and medicine). Using these 
descriptions then, the feared fate is a discourse that can be understood as hegemonised 
through materially and socially productive practices constitutive of spouses being hyper-
vigilant to any signs of change.  
Another understanding of the feared fate is that today society is no longer 
concerned with attaining something good but with preventing the worst (Beck, 1992). 
This has been coined by Beck (1992) as the not yet event as stimulus for action (p.34) 
or what Sontag (1989) has termed as the apocalypse from now on (p.53). In other 
words, it is an anticipation of the worst possible outcome and a production of the 
individual as an object, powerless to omnipresent forces. Sontag relates this to the AIDS 
movement in the 1980s and claims that this is a symptom of cultural and political 
malaise. She identifies the striking relevance of so many to envisage a far-reaching 
catastrophe.  
In leaflets, there was the advertisement of care-cameras understood here as 
surveillance techniques. This is consistent with the catastrophe embedded in the the 
feared fate, and the potential for the participant to be dangerous, where they need to be 
watched.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 123 
Moreover, Robertson (1990), in her genealogical analysis, argues that the 
construction of dementia as biomedical disease is reassuring as it envisages armies of 
professionals making visible and eliminating the real foundations of this disease. The 
alternative normalising of dementia, such as the discourse its plain old aging in this 
study, which was less apparent across participant data, leaves little hope of a cure. The 
feared fate, on a societal level, moves away from the possibility that the aged adult is 
collectively problematised and a burden on society, and upholds the organised task to 
combat dementia.  
Moreover, Behuniak (2011) states all too often negative perceptions of dementia 
are reduced to biomedical understandings as the enemy, and emotional responses to 
dementia are not given enough attention. He argues that these also have a political 
function. In this study, this gap is perhaps relevant to a Foucauldian approach that evades 
talk on emotions as a manufacture of individualising and psychologising procedures. 
Where Foucault gave significance to the micro, this avoids individual emotional reactions 
and experience.  
To widen the discussion in consideration of this critique, Behuniak (2011) 
explores scholarly and popular literature on dementia, and skilfully portrays how the 
problematic zombie dementia subject is a strongly embedded social construction of 
dementia. This exists through the emotions of fear and revulsion it evokes in people, 
motivating power relations, marginalisation and labelling. The zombie dementia subject 
is both a victim and a dehumanised monster. It also has links with other feared conditions 
such as cancer, tuberculosis, AIDS, leprosy because it commands fear before sympathy 
(Behuniak, 2011, p.71). Similarly, Fox (1989) describes that dementia conjures up 
images of a hideous, debilitating condition it is the disease of the century and the 
mind robber (p.58). Because the disdain is aimed at all individuals who share the specific 
feature, they become unwilling members of a stigmatised group (Schneider, 2005, p. 
474) as relevant in pay no mind and making a case.  
Congruently, as constructed through the feared fate  one does not have to go 
very far to find the dangerous/inanimate dementia subject, or to think hard about how 
this may generate fear and despair, whilst upholding the subject position or the defining 
and refining of dementia: 
Up to 75% of people with dementia may be affected by non-cognitive 
symptoms/behaviour that challenges. They are a leading cause of distress to carers 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 124 
and often lead to the institutionalisation of the person with dementia. Several 
studies have shown that acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may improve non-
cognitive symptoms  cost-effectiveness has not been established (NICE, 
2006).  
Similar to Behuniaks (2011) critique, Parker 2014 draws attention to how 
psychoanalytic theory is generally screened out from some discourse enquiries owing to 
concerns that it is based on the same ideological that structures as medicine, psychology, 
and psychiatry. Parker (2014) also states that psychoanalysis and discourse theory do not 
align when related to psychoanalysis political conservatism, and mainstream 
understandings of a particular time. However, one potentially intriguing notion from 
psychoanalysis to make sense of the feared fate is that it resembles a defense 
mechanism (or a strategy) used to protect participants from psychic pain, or from 
thoughts and memories that evoke pain (Parker, 2014). In this case, the constructed fact 
they that the PWDD or the spouse may face the inevitable fate of dementia, motivates the 
construction of the inanimate/dangerous dementia subject, as it produces dementia 
outside of themselves or their partner. This defense may be understood by certain schools 
of psychoanalytic thought as a projective identification, where the person expels 
unpleasant objects from their own minds into the minds of others (Parker, 2014). 
Consistent with this, among participants the inanimate and dangerous subject may 
be seen as a projection of their own [imagined or real] mental decline or potential to be 
pathologically destructive  in a sense then the feared fate is a self-protecting discourse. 
Enquiries regarding racism (e.g. Fanon, 2008; Lowe, 2007) have had a very strong 
political grounding using psychoanalytic processes. While bearing in mind ideological 
ties it offers an understanding of internally motivated processes and how they may 
constitute community, managerial and economic agendas. In the case of dementia, there 
are deep political implications from the fear evoked by the inanimate dementia subject, 
such as the spouses responsibility to self-discipline, confess, monitor, correct and keep 
the PWDD going.  
Considering this, Foucault makes a statement about the need to problematise 
normalised yet problematic societal divisions of man of reason and man of madness, or in 
this case, man (or woman) with dementia.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 125 
[people], through sovereign reason, act to confine their neighbors and 
communicate and recognize each other through. We must renounce the 
convenience of these terminal truths and never let ourselves be guided by what we 
may know of [dementia], even implicitly, it can play and organising role (1965, 
p. xi/preface).  
4.07 Sins & symptoms, knowing best & pay no mind  what other theoretical 
understandings are there regarding the finding of the confession? 
Following on from the above discussion regarding the absence of emotional 
discussions from a FDA perspective, the researcher returns to the discourse sins and 
symptoms and the confession.  
To review discussions up until now, sins and symptoms may be thought of as 
centred upon the biological truth of dementia (nodal point), by which, it is crystallised 
through the belief that there are visible and tangible signs of dementia that ought to be 
uncovered by others. This resulted in a process where spouses worked to discover the 
PWDDs dementia effects, exhibiting objectifying and subjectifying practices. An 
alternative account is to consider how the spouses confess not only their own sins, but 
also the PWDDs. 
Firstly, disparate to the biological truth of dementia, sins and symptoms is 
perhaps linked with elements of religious discourse, plus, popularised psychological and 
psychoanalytic discourses on the self. This is an historical discursive arrangement that 
produces the need for spouses to confess the truth (or dementia signs) to those in 
authority (e.g. the priest, GP, psychiatrist, psychologist, researcher). This is illustrated as 
follows: 
Medical metaphors have borrowed a lot from the religious metaphors of past 
centuries, where the 'sinner was described as a sick man' and the 'onset of illness 
stirred up anxiety, self doubt and guilt' within the individual afflicted with illness 
by observers around him or her. The sufferers of long-term illness were seen to be 
in a perpetual state of 'gracelessness (Millen & Walker, 2001). 
Guilt and doubt afflicted with dementia, and the graceless state associated with 
dementia, perhaps encourages spouses to confess PWDDs as well as their own. Sontag 
(1989) adds, this is even more fitting where illnesses, like dementia, are constructed as a 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 126 
mysterious or higher order force. In the results, a participant referred to dementia as if 
wickedness inflicted upon people by a higher power, supporting this stance. Likewise, 
Turner (1987) adds illness metaphors of the body have reflected a process of inwards 
looking, placing the individual and his/her illness on centre stage for others to see. 
To Nietzsche a confession is an act of slavery and self-punishment: man 
could never do without blood, self-torture and sacrifice (Neitzsche, as quoted in Grosz, 
1994, p. 131). Concerning the findings in this thesis, where spouses focus on PWDDs 
pathological changes, it may also be conceived of as an act of self-torture, through the 
discourse of loss and change in dementia, and thus, their spouse. In a sense they are 
mourning their spouse while their spouse is still alive. This perhaps links with the 
discourse the feared fate and the construction of the subject as no longer participating in 
life. Although the person may have a physical presence they are seen to have no presence 
in mind (e.g. a person with a diagnosis of dementia is constructed as a vegetable). 
Aquilina and Hughes (2006) add, people with dementia can be treated as already dead 
and as walking corpses to be both pitied and feared, despite their obvious signs of life 
(p.143). Likewise, Lushin (1990) has referred to people with dementia as ghouls and 
Cohen and Eisorfer (1986) describe dementia as death before death (as cited in 
Behuniak, 2011). 
A further speculation is that through self-abnegation, embracing moral codes, and 
professional understandings, the spouse is produced as a heroic and admired figure; the 
carer is often honored and pitied.  
Intriguingly, Nietzsche also depicts the confession as a product of memory, or as a 
refusal to forget from the confessor (Grosz, 1994; p.131)  this may be the case with 
regards to PWDD and their enactment of pay no mind. To elaborate further, Nietzsche 
explains memory works through the body to give meaning to reality, truth, and history; it 
enables social organisations and systems of law, so, in order for this to function, 
forgetfulness must be rejected (Grosz, 1994; p.131). Based on this conclusion, through 
pay no mind, where self-hood or individuality featured so heavily, PWDD may be 
constructing their memory and a certain version of their person, that sets dementia aside. 
It could be that PWDD are in effect providing a confession that manifests in a different 
way to spouses I am. Drawing upon psychoanalysis, as referenced to earlier in the 
discussion (Parker, 2004), this mode of confessing may also be considered as a defense 
mechanism from PWDD, where they dispel the I cannot aspect of themselves.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 127 
4.08 An unhelpful alignment of the person-centred model with biomedical model? 
Policy, research and clinical implications  
The PCM is often seen as a movement away from the medicalisation of dementia 
towards apolitical subjectivity. Nonetheless, it is argued in the genealogy, the PCM has 
been crafted alongside the medical model  in effect hegenomising and expanding upon 
the biomedical truth of dementia. The biomedical truth of dementia is seemingly what 
Laclau and Mouffe have described as the dominant horizon of social orientation and 
actions. This arrangement of elements and nodal points, in a particular context, yields 
substantially effectual outcomes and webs of power relations. From this approach then 
the following question arises: did the PCM begin with legitimate potential to counteract 
the dominant biomedical paradigm? Has it somehow lost its original radical 
prospective, by being consumed through the political infrastructure and various social 
actors establishing PCM and so called treatments?  
If using PSDT then, a signifier is allocated a certain meaning in one discourse and 
may be given another meaning in a different discourse, and since signs derive their 
meaning from their relation to one another, with the PCM and its uniting element as the 
biomedical truth of dementia, there is potentially scope for intervention. Any discourse 
is constituted as an attempt to dominate the field of discursivity, to arrest the flow of 
differences, to construct a centre (Laclau & Mouffe, 1985: p.112). Every hegemonic 
order is susceptible of being challenged by counter-hegemonic practices which attempt to 
disarticulate it in order to install another form of hegemony. (Mouffe, 2008: p.4). 
When two or more antagonistic discourses (in other words two potentially 
opposing discourses that could come into conflict) compete for hegemony, conflicting 
demands are made upon social identities, relationships and systems of knowledge and 
beliefs. Antagonisms may be visible through the presence of elements that are articulated 
in different ways by opposing political projects. This may potentially be the biomedical 
truth of dementia and the PCM of dementia as one articulation  the picture as it seems 
currently. The alternative could hypothetically be where the PCM of dementia is 
supplemented with elements from making a case and/or its plain old ageing, or a more 
deconstructive understanding of dementia, while biomedical elements are placed outside 
of this discursive arrangement of elements  here, the PCM is no longer inter-dependent 
on the biomedical.  
The PCM model of dementia may be determined, albeit temporarily, through 
hegemonic interventions or concerted efforts to re-articulate discourses and achieve the 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 128 
dominance of one particular perspective, thus reconstituting unambiguity (Laclau, 1993). 
To do this, hegemonic projects will need to construct and stabilise the nodal points that 
structure social orders by articulating elements into one unambiguous set of meanings 
(Laclau & Mouffe, 1985). A further research project may give more of a focused 
opportunity to study the potential for the re-articulation and stabilising of the PCM of 
dementia with a different nodal point, or to consider the potential to supersede the 
dominant discourse of the biomedical truth of dementia. This project however, indicates 
the potential for innovative critical thinking around developing new or alternative 
meaning systems and social positions for PWDD and their spouses.  
Nonetheless, one cannot help but think that the above discussion and point is 
perhaps ambitious and detached from the historical material structures within the political 
context of dementia where there are vast political interests. Fitting with this inclination, 
Chouliaraki and Fairclough (2007), have argued that, in emphasising the contingent 
nature of discourses, Laclau and Mouffe overestimate the ability of social groups to bring 
about change through the rearticulation of elements into new social orders. 
What is brought to mind as a topical example that may be difficult to change is 
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST), a treatment stimulating the mind and 
emphasising the individual that is repeatedly evidenced to be slowing down the 
magnitude of disease in dementia (see Spector et al., 2003). In the NHS trust this study 
has recruited from alone, the number of CST groups offered to participants has increased 
fourfold in the last two years. In valuing professionals, the participants certainly were 
not valuing CST (five quotations from separate participants: it's a waste of space; oh I 
spent the afternoon throwing a ball (laughs); I mean god, I could be at home doing ma 
knitting; CST was like being at playgroup, the children love it so why shouldnt we). 
Sabat & Harr (1993), Cheston & Bender, (1999) and Parker (1995) have argued the 
PCM has dominated the minds of service providers and health and social contexts. The 
idea that cognitive improvement can occur through person centred rehabilitation 
programmes is founded on the argument that dementia is linked to complex structures in 
the brain, built upon a whole episteme of promoting science and the humans sciences. As 
we have seen alternative social actors to PCM are often restrained by the will to speak. 
Nonetheless, Glynos, Speed & West, (2015) from a post-structuralist discourse 
perspective, discuss the radical reform of the NHS between 2010 and 2013. This reform 
is highly relevant here, as Cognitive Stimulation Therapy groups and early identification 
and thus management of dementia may be seen as cost effective products of 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 129 
organisational and economic restructuring, replacing individual therapy or 
institutionalisation with substitute ways to regulate PWDD and their spouses, amongst 
other groups. The NHS reform was Politically proposed to be related to pragmatic 
concerns about the market logic and the need for competition and profit to avoid 
fragmentation of the NHS (Glynos, Speed & West, 2015). Many opposing arguments 
about the threat to welfarism and democratic values, among others, were marginalised 
and the reform continued with its objectives intact. To very roughly summarise, the 
current coalition were able to use the idea of integration to accelerate privatization, 
competition and market based principles in the NHS (Glynos, Speed & West, 2015). This 
discourse study is helpful in relation to Dementia practice which may be thought of as 
based on Political interests, pragmatic concerns and social actors positions, contingent 
upon discourses. It is a way of enabling research, policy and political movements that 
challenge this.  
In addition, as depicted in the introduction, the biomedical discourse on dementia 
was shown to not really take presence until the 1970s, when differentiated subtypes of 
dementia were increasingly proliferated and tools of measurement became more 
established. This shows that dementia has not always been a hegemonic discourse and is 
open to reshaping once again. Particularly in making a case, several participants drew 
upon aspects of this argument, recalling how dementia had not always been construed as 
a truth and/or a social problem in their lifetime. This is fitting with the conceptual 
analysis in the genealogy where dementia was perhaps conceptualised medically as 
delirium, or in almshouses as infirmness. Foucault (1980) indicated that resistance and 
freedom can be more effective from those groups of people, dementia subjects who 
have encountered power relations associated with dementia. "There are no relations of 
power without resistances; the latter are all the more real and effective because they are 
formed right at the point where relations of power are exercised; resistanceexists all the 
more by being in the same place as power (Foucault, 1980; p.142). Thus, not only 
research and political movements may challenge dominant dementia discourses, people 
with dementia and their spouses may also do this. 
In the discourse making a case participants questioned the behavioural 
symptoms of the diagnostic construct and the few/limited symptoms they had, juxtaposed 
with the very broad group of dementia patients they fell amongst through labelling. In the 
extract below, regarding counter discourses, Foucault (1991) discusses how rules are 
essentially empty signifiers, and their meaning/representation can be reshaped. For 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 130 
PWDD enacting the discourse making a case they reversed the meaning of the 
DSM/dementia diagnoses, reformed this, and used this to reject the ideology of science 
and the BMM of dementia.  
Rules are empty in themselves, violent and unfinalised; they are impersonal and 
can be bent to any purpose. The successes of history belong to those who are 
capable of seizing those rules, to replace those who had used them, to disguise 
themselves so as to pervert them, invert their meaning, and redirect them against 
those who had initially imposed them so as to overcome the rules (Foucault, 
1991; p.151).  
The arguments made may be considered as an exchange of knowledge too, through 
streams of psychiatry, social workers, doctors, researchers, who have also problematised 
dementia. The discourse making a case appears to be a re-articulation of academic 
arguments, through privileged points of intersection, one being the university: 
The university and the academic emerge, if not as principal elements, at least as 
exchangers, privileged points of intersection the multiplication and 
reinforcement of [universities] power effects as centres in a polymorphous 
ensemble of intellectuals who virtually all pass through and relate themselves to 
the academic system (Foucault, 1977; as cited in Tallack, 2014, p.74).  
On a final note, returning to hegemony, given that when discourses successfully 
become hegemonic, the social practices they structure can appear so natural that members 
of a society fail to see that they are the result of political hegemonic practices; one 
intervention may then be to make this more apparent to the social groups. One example 
here is perhaps non-medically organized peer groups for PWDD/spouses (as opposed to 
biomedical based CST groups). Counter-hegemonic practices may occur naturally 
through every day talk and practices working to challenge and transform existing 
discourses, or they may be deliberate and strategic through interest groups as a struggle 
for discursive dominance (Grant et al, 1998). In peer groups, many participants may 
critique their diagnosis regarding their own or their spouses case (e.g. he was put on 
drugs, five miligrams to start with, but her had some awful nightmares). In medically 
structured therapeutic interventions, one can imagine there is little scope to share and 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 131 
convene these adversities produced via the biomedical and psy disciplines, whereas in a 
peer based interest group outside of these setting, alternative social actors may deliberate 
wider issues such as the pharmaceutical industry and fear evoked by dementia working to 
dismantle the discourse. This may be organized by community-based projects and drivers 
as opposed to clinic based drivers. It may be centered on a critical movement away from 
the dominant and politically governed biomedical paradigm of dementia. 
In terms of policy, Robertson (1990) argues, we need to be moving away from 
individualised solutions, national policies ought to be addressing structural factors, 
fragmented often diagnostic (though not much beyond this point) service measures. The 
main thrust of these interventions has been to create and fund professional agencies and 
organisations to monitor and manage older adults, literally and figuratively making 
dementia everyones business (as we have seen with spouses without dementia). 
Robertson (1990) also states so much goes in to talking about the needs of older adults 
through professionals, that money does not go on older adults needs. Professionals, are 
benefiting from and proliferating these individualised notions, colluding in the wittingly 
or unwittingly creation of this structural dependence (Robertson, 1990; p.439).  
Perhaps there is room for targeting this at a professional level too?  Bender 
(2013), publishing in the Division of Clinical Psychology, may be one example of this 
and this may facilitate those at the site of power professionally to question their 
engagement with mainstream practices. Is it helpful to be encouraging masses of older 
adults through memory clinics and testing them? What are the benefits of early diagnosis 
if treatments are so absent? Has psychology been caught up in the will to know 
themselves in not fully comprehending pharmacological workings? Can we think more 
creatively, outside of the clinic or CST groups?  
This research highlights a complex network of groups and relations, and considers 
ways of offering opportunities for resistance. For instance, applying post structuralist 
discourse theory and discourse theory to present the discursive fields of formation and 
their potential for change and contestation, as well as exploring the scope for influencing 
policy, professionals and community non-medical projects that may shape critical stance 
towards dementia discourse and allow for more flexible and varying speaking positions. 
It also illustrates how power is not negative it can also be a necessary and productive 
force in society (Gaventa, 2003):  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 132 
The interventions are going on, and power seeps through various crisscrossing 
capillaries in the social body: heterogeneous networks of actors and technologies; 
new fields of knowledge like social sciences, economy, management or the 
sociology of governance; old micro-fields of power and expertise that are being 
connected in new ways (Catoi, 2011, p.111). 
4.09  Conclusion & Critical Reflections  
This research has contributed to a generally under-researched field. It began by 
problematising dementia as an increasingly prevalent disease that may result in societal 
catastrophe and a depletion of its resources. Beginning with a genealogical enquiry, some 
of the contingent moments where certain dementia related discourses were examined. In 
this process, caution was taken regarding empowerment movements towards people 
with dementia and informal carers as  these could implicitly control and regulate them. 
Analsysis of NICE (2006) guidelines for people with dementia, their carers and 
professionals, and dementia-focused leaflets from memory assessment clinics supported 
the analysis of currently functioning dementia talk; as well as fourteen interviews with 
PWDD and spouses (separate and joint). Data was analysed from a FDA perspective and 
related discourse theory, revealing competing and conflicting discourses, as well as 
deviances and resistances.  
Among the most thought-provoking findings, marriage was seen to compliment 
the political apparatus of the BMM of dementia; it was deemed to be a natural sphere for 
care acts and constructed dependency in dementia. Similarly, spouses and PWDD were 
found to perform certain acts, enacting dominant discourses, ensuing self-governance 
and/or professional inscription. This was argued to be a political economic rationality of 
neo-liberal governmentality. One example of this was where spouses controlled acts of 
aggression; this was construed as an alignment with professional codes of relating.  
This enquiry attended to marital friction/bidirectionality that may be 
consequential of subject positions spouses and PWDD enacted and rejected. To illustrate, 
where spouses were seen to monitor and correct PWDD, PWDD were understood to 
answer back, and vice versa. It was discussed that seemingly fixed subject positions 
(informal carer) were not the most conducive for PWDD and their spouses.  
Also, this thesis explored different theoretical orientations to complement and 
contest the Foucauldian perspective taken to analyse the results: in particular, theory 
concerning gender and dementia identities. The appraisal of theory, plus the difficulty 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 133 
of how we may support new discursive horizons and acts concerning dementia has been 
considered.  
Critical reflections are embedded throughout this thesis, though particularly in the 
discussion chapter. What has not yet been mentioned is the consideration over the 
inclusion/exclusion in the genealogy, and the decision to account for breadth rather than 
depth (e.g. BMM, PCM, carers and marriage are each critical enquiries in their own 
rights). It is proposed that a more focused enquiry, with a smaller time frame (e.g. 
1990s-2016) and fewer topics (e.g. carers, dementia) would be valuable to the field. In 
the genealogy, little attention was given to the separate subcategories of dementia; 
arguably this is an important distinction to make. The first rationale was to avoid the 
positivist frame of categorisations: second, where most genealogical enquiries have 
focused on Alzheimers disease, this enquiry offered something novel.  
Given limited space and time, it is acknowledged that perhaps not enough 
attention was given to the nuances of politics influencing discourses (e.g. political 
movements such as Thatcherism and the turn to marketisation, Blair and the turn to 
communitarianism and social inclusion). Originally ambitions were to include recent 
house of parliament discussions, and party speeches on dementia, which, during the 2015 
general election, unsurprisingly was a topical issue. This would have offered interesting 
discussion and insights, particularly applying PSDT. This is perhaps another opportunity 
for a discourse analysis.  
An interesting Foucauldian enquiry to old age by Biggs and Powell (2001) lends 
itself to some discussion on Politics concerning social welfare, and rather than the hybrid 
of industries, it focuses specifically on social work. Nonetheless, it is argued that the 
researchers background in clinical psychology has facilitated discussions on the tools and 
treatments deployed relating to this discipline too.  
Problems with the methodology, as indicated previously were that at times 
Foucaults work ensues a relativist standpoint to understanding discourse20. In the 
complete rejection of realism there is no way of knowing whether something has any 
level of truth or not. As such, the researcher did choose to interpret and speculate 
concerning the meaning of discourses and the arrangement of signs within them through 
an inductive and two-part process of analysis; recommendations were also made.  
At times the methodological approach created points of tension, for example in 
how best to describe sub-discourses (later explained as elements using PSDT). Where the 
researcher did draw upon PSDT, this was with limited acquaintance to the different 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 134 
schools of thought of more contemporary discourse theories and so their complexity may 
have been overlooked. The researcher engaged with critiques that Foucauldian study of 
discourse, from some angles, can be seen to belong more to a meso or macro-level than to 
a micro-level (Jaeger, 2007). As such, in the discussion new theoretical insights were 
deliberated (e.g. regarding emotions and psychoanalytic theory).  
A common buzz term used in the field of qualitative research is 
objectivity/applicability and scientific rigor, yet this is argued that these terms are social 
constructions and applying them is discernibly an attempt to fit the method toward the 
dominant scientific paradigm. Nonetheless, the use of original sources of data in the 
genealogy, the sample size, the mixed method (joint/separate interviews), excerpts from 
documents and interviews in the results chapter, on some level align with these 
constructions of quality. In addition, the researcher made efforts to ensure critical 
reflexivity (i.e. keeping a field diary, developing an audit trial, having supervision when 
deriving the discourses) and undertook a comprehensive course on discourse theory to 
support the method. The study findings are not necessarily repeatable and do not make 
claims to be, but they are applicable to people accessing memory assessment clinics 
currently.  
This research was conducted through the NHS as opposed to a community-based 
sample. This was in order to seek people who had encountered the psys, who had a 
probable diagnosis of dementia. It was also to support ethical research (e.g. the interviews 
to be conducted in a clinical environment with a sound risk protocol to support the 
likelihood for emotive responses or disclosure of risks). Nonetheless, PWDD and spouses 
outside of this setting may have presented very different findings, with potentially more 
or less resistance to mainstream practices surrounding dementia; the analysis of 
documents, although modest, perhaps supports applicability of finding to other 
groups/contexts.  
On the occasions where potential participants who had not wanted to partake in 
the study contacted the researcher, they were asked why this was. The reasons were 
health difficulties, being a private person and adverse experiences of the NHS in the 
diagnosis phase. The researcher may conclude that these findings have applicability to the 
people accessing treatment in the trust the study recruited from  some indication of 
scope for service provisions and policy that has been mentioned. Efforts will be made to 
circulate these findings to the NHS trust and participants who have specifically requested 
publications.   
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 135 
Where this study has made interpretations, it is acknowledged that another 
researcher, with different cultural experiences and theoretical assumptions would have no 
doubt made different interpretations (Burman & Parker, 1993). This study recognises that 
it is a construction in itself and is not an absolute truth. The critique of neutrality and 
unbiased research within the field of qualitative research has been a source of influence 
here.  
One reason interview analyses from a Foucauldian perspective are absent in the 
field of dementia, although some genealogical analysis have been completed, is perhaps 
interview analyses can be reproached for being artificial or co-produced with the 
researcher. Fixed positions maybe co-produced through the context of a research 
interview, discussed further below.  
Where interview analysis has been adopted by other discourse related methods 
this may be critiqued for psychologising (e.g. Potter & Wetherell, 1987). Willig (2013) 
has informed against analysing very personal accounts from a discourse perspective for 
ethical reasons, claiming that accounts from, in this case PWDD and their spouses, were 
provided in good faith and the interviewer, is not necessarily interested in the spouses 
experiences as it is not focal to the analysis. Foucaults approach however arguably 
focuses on discursive resources available to participants while viewing them as 
potentially powerful subjects constructed and constituted through discourse. 
Critical Reflexivity. Throughout this thesis, the researcher has engaged 
reflexively. For instance, how the researchers beliefs, assumptions and knowledge, might 
influence the research findings have been studied. The researcher was aware of the 
circular processes in research involving power and knowledge, whereby the questions, 
interpretations and conclusions drawn within research can define and sculpt patterns of 
interaction and further research. Regarding the latter, Biggs and Powell (2001) discuss an 
example regarding quality of life particularly apt concerning dementia research: 
research studies on quality of life have had a spiralling effect, generating more and 
more research on this topic, alongside power for professionals, while reinforcing the 
importance concept quality of life. This demonstrates how the questions researchers ask 
have a direct link to the data they collect.  
One example of reflexive practise in this research was concerning gender identity 
 this has become a highly politicised issue (Burman, 1998). In the data, the pattern of 
silence regarding marriage discourse amongst female participants was deemed to be 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 136 
interesting by the researcher. It was deliberated whether this may relate to subject 
positions female participants had previously enacted and/or continued to enact. For 
instance, participants had discussed that in the past females had tended to reside at home 
with the children whilst males went to work. Here, the researcher considered how 
interpretations drawn regarding this could reify predefined gender roles. By emphasising 
or problematizing how women were silent in the interview, it might further abstract or 
sculpt the position of the silent female. The researcher also considered the modern 
cultural viewpoint perhaps influencing her interpretations of the findings; that is, 
supporting the liberation of females, while inherently assuming marginalisation or 
oppression. Similarly, where the inclusion/exclusion criteria were used to recruit marital 
partners, the researcher considered her role in pre-constructing gendered subject positions 
prior to the interviews commencing, again predefining or influencing findings.  
Working with these issues, the researcher listed the research findings (i.e. the 
pattern of silence amongst female participants), though, was also open with the reader 
about the dilemmas, questions and potential pitfalls encountered (e.g. on page 119 the 
researcher questions, how does one describe this without feminist notions of identity 
oppression? and discussed this accordingly). Additionally, to guide the researcher, new 
theoretical understandings, such as post-structuralist feminist theory, were introduced into 
the discussion. This supported some written debate regarding gender identity, and 
allowed the researcher to consider this topic carefully. Although only one example is 
illustrated here, other examples requiring critical reflexive practice could equally be 
discussed here. 
To assist reflexive practice more generally, the researcher attempted to maintain a 
social-historical view regarding, the use of social categories, and understandings 
emerging and changing, rather than an essentialist viewpoint. The researcher also 
considered language and interaction within wider social and political contexts and 
systems, rather than on individual level. A field diary was kept to support a critical 
engagement concerning the researchers assumptions (appendix A). Lastly, regular 
supervision with supervisors invited other viewpoints when developing findings.  
Personal Reflections. In this thesis, the ethics of the analysis and the write up of 
the results was an obstacle I faced. Hearing the emotional grapples and experiences of 
participants (e.g. thoughts of suicide in one case, see method) I naturally wanted to both 
support and honor these personal experiences. One example of this is shown in the results 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 137 
chapter (3.06 knowing best) where I reframe a participants difficulty forgetting short 
term issues, though not long term, as potentially adaptive, on a rare occasion stepping 
outside of the research frame as faced with this personal tension. Many participants asked 
my advice about their condition during interviews, I was often positioned as an expert 
with the will to speak depicted in the data (e.g. the biomedical truth of dementia and 
valuing professionals). My attempts to resist this position in line with research guidance 
(e.g. BPS, 2009) at times felt as if I was being unfair to participants. Reluctance was also 
taken in writing this thesis concerning issues relating to spouses as the informal carer: I 
would question can I really say this? I was aware the potential to dismiss spouses 
efforts and kinship; as well as physical and cognitive changes involved in dementia. 
Given that my grandmother and grandfather are also faced with dementia in their 
marriage, in which I hold huge regard and admiration for them, as well as my role as a 
clinical psychologist in training, where I have worked closely with adults of an older age, 
and professionals and organisations who make genuine efforts to support 
PWDD/spouses, this pressure was exacerbated. On the other hand, this position has 
motivated and determined me to step outside of the data towards a meso/macro level 
approach. I deliberated over the possibility of completing a project critiquing 
psychological and psychiatric regulating practices towards this client group. As such, I 
made use of my training, my reading and supervision to contribute a potentially useful 
and controversial study to the field of dementia. As Foucault (1965) states: 
My role, and that is too empathic a word, is to show people that they are much 
freer than they feel, that people accept as truth, as evidence, some themes that 
have been built up at a certain moment during history, and this so called evidence 
can be criticized and destroyed (p.10).  
Through the process of conducting this research I have been cautiously critical of 
the healing discipline I am associated with and its power/knowledge relations. I will 
continue to question taken for granted assumptions and endeavor to contribute further 
critical discourse research to the field. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 138 
References 
Acierno, R., Hernandez, M. A., Amstadter, A. B., Resnick, H. S., Steve, K., Muzzy, W., 
& Kilpatrick, D. G. (2010). Prevalence and Correlates of Emotional, Physical, 
Sexual, and Financial Abuse and Potential Neglect in the United States: The 
National Elder Mistreatment Study. American Journal of Public Health, 100(2), 
292297. http://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.163089 
Aguirre, E., Spector, A., Streater, A., Burnell, K., & Orrell, M. (2011). Service users 
involvement in the development of a maintenance cognitive stimulation therapy 
(CST) programme: A comparison of the views of people with dementia, staff and 
family carers. Dementia, 10(4), 459473. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1471301211417170 
Alexandra Hernandez-Tejada, M., Amstadter, A., Muzzy, W., & Acierno, R. (2013). The 
National Elder Mistreatment Study: Race and Ethnicity Findings. Journal of Elder 
Abuse & Neglect, 25(4), 281293. http://doi.org/10.1080/08946566.2013.770305 
Alzheimer, A., Frstl, H., & Levy, R. (1991). On certain peculiar diseases of old age. 
History of Psychiatry, 2(5 Pt 1), 71101. 
Alzheimers Society. (2013). Worried about your memory? I remember that day as claer 
as can be... but its a struggle to recall what I did in the morning. Alzheimers 
Society. 
Alzheimers Society. (2014). Dementia UK: Second Edition Update. Retrieved May 22, 
2016, from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/270904426_Dementia_UK_up 
Alzheimers Society. (2016a). Affected by dementia? Were here to helo: If youre 
affected by dementia or worried about your memory call the Alzheimers Society. 
Alzheimers Society. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 139 
Alzheimers Society. (2016b). Drugs used to releive psychological and behavioural 
symptoms in dementia. Alzheimers Society. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2003). Mild Neurocognitice Disorder. Retrieved 
January 1, 2016, from 
http://www.dsm5.org/Documents/Mild%20Neurocognitive%20Disorder%20Fact
%20Sheet.pdf 
American Psychiatric Association (Ed.). (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders: DSM-5 (5. ed). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publ. 
American Psychiatric Association, & Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics. (2008). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual, mental disorders. 
Aquilina, C., & Hughs, J. (2006). The return of the living dead: agency lost and found? In 
J. C. Hughes, S. J. Louw, & S. R. Sabat (Eds.), Dementia: mind, meaning, and the 
person. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. 
Bamford, C., Lamont, S., Eccles, M., Robinson, L., May, C., & Bond, J. (2004). 
Disclosing a diagnosis of dementia: a systematic review. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 19(2), 151169. http://doi.org/10.1002/gps.1050 
Barbin, H. (1980). Herculine Barbin: being the recently discovered memoirs of a 
nineteenth-century French hermaphrodite. New York, NY: Pantheon Books. 
Barer, M. L., Evans, R. G., Hertzman, C., & Lomas, J. (1987). Aging and health care 
utilization: New evidence on old fallacies. Social Science & Medicine, 24(10), 
851862. http://doi.org/10.1016/0277-9536(87)90186-9 
Beard, R. L. (2004). In their voices: Identity preservation and experiences of Alzheimers 
disease. Journal of Aging Studies, 18(4), 415428. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaging.2004.06.005 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 140 
Beard, R. L., Sakhtah, S., Imse, V., & Galvin, J. E. (2012). Negotiating the Joint Career: 
Couples Adapting to Alzheimers and Aging in Place. Journal of Aging Research, 
2012, 112. http://doi.org/10.1155/2012/797023 
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: towards new moderninity (trans. Mark Ritter). In Theory, 
culture and society (p. 271). London: Sage Publications. 
Beck, U., & Beck-Gernsheim, E. (2002). Individualization: institutionalized 
individualism and its social and political consequences. London; Thousand Oaks, 
Calif: SAGE. 
Behuniak, S. M. (2011). The living dead? The construction of people with Alzheimers 
disease as zombies. Ageing and Society, 31(01), 7092. 
http://doi.org/10.1017/S0144686X10000693 
Bender, M. (2014, January). [Review of The ethics of complicity?: clinicl psychologists 
and the contemporary dementia narrative, by Division of Clinical Psychology], 
Ethics Collumn(253), 5256. 
Berrios, G. E. (1981a). Delirium and confusion in the 19th century: a conceptual history. 
The British Journal of Psychiatry, 139(5), 439449. 
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.139.5.439 
Berrios, G. E. (1981b). Stupor: a conceptual history. Psychological Medicine, 11(04), 
677. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700041179 
Berrios, G. E. (1987). Dementia during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: a 
conceptual history. Psychological Medicine, 17(04), 829. 
http://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700000623 
Berrios, G. E. (1992). V.A. Kral and senescent forgetfulness: an affair to remember. 
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 2(3), 253. http://doi.org/10.1016/0924-
977X(92)90095-P 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 141 
Berrios, G. E., & Hauser, R. (1988). The early development of Kraepelins ideas on 
classification: a conceptual history. Psychological Medicine, 18(04), 813. 
http://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700009740 
Berrios, G. E., & Porter, R. (1998). A history of clinical psychiatry: The origin and 
history of psychiatric disorders. (Vol. 31). London: Athlone Press. 
Biggs, S., & Powell, J. L. (2001). A Foucauldian Analysis of Old Age and the Power of 
Social Welfare. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, 12(2), 93112. 
http://doi.org/10.1300/J031v12n02_06 
Billig, M., Condor, S., Edwards, D., Gane, M., Middleton, D., & Radley, A. (Eds.). 
(1988). Ideological dilemmas: a social psychology of everyday thinking. London; 
Newbury Park: Sage Publications. 
Breakwell, G., Smith, J. A., & Wright, D. B. (2012). Research Methods in Psychology. 
Retrieved from 
https://nls.ldls.org.uk/welcome.html?ark:/81055/vdc_100025509529.0x000001 
British Association for Applied Linguistics, & Clark, R. (Eds.). (1990). Language and 
power: papers from the Twenty-Second Annual Meeting of the British Association 
for Applied Linguistics, held at Lancaster University, September 1989. London: 
Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research for British 
Association for Applied Linguistics. 
British Psychological Society. (2009). Code of ethics and conduct. Retrieved January 1, 
2016, from 
http://www.bps.org.uk/system/files/documents/code_of_ethics_and_conduct.pdf 
British Psychological Society. (2014). Code of human research ethics. Retrieved January 
1, 2016, from 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 142 
http://www.bps.org.uk/system/files/Public%20files/code_of_human_research_ethi
cs_dec_2014_inf180_web.pdf 
Brown, L. (1994). Subversive Dialogues: Theory in Feminist Therapy (First). London: 
Basic Books. 
Brunet. (2013). Screening and early diagnosis., 21(3), 2224. 
Bulmer, M., Bales, K., & Sklar, K. K. (Eds.). (1991). The Social survey in historical 
perspective, 1880-1940. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Burman, E. (1998). Deconstructing Feminist Psychology (first). London: Sage 
Publications. 
Burman, E., & Parker, I. (1993). Discourse analytic research: repertoires and readings of 
texts in action. London; New York: Routledge. 
Burr, V. (2003). Social constructionism. London; New York: Routledge. 
Canguilhem, G. (1988). Ideology and rationality in the history of the life sciences. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. 
Carabine, J. (2001). Constituting sexuality through social policy: the case of lone 
motherhood 1834 and today, 10(3), 291314. 
Cheston, R., & Bender, M. (1999). Understanding dementia: the man with the worried 
eyes. London; Philadelphia: J. Kingsley Publishers. 
Chouliaraki, L., & Fairclough, N. (2007). Discourse in late modernity: rethinking critical 
discourse analysis (Transferred to digital printing). Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ. 
Press. 
Clare, L., Rowlands, J., Bruce, E., Surr, C., & Downs, M. (2008). The Experience of 
Living With Dementia in Residential Care: An Interpretative Phenomenological 
Analysis. The Gerontologist, 48(6), 711720. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/geront/48.6.711 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 143 
Cloud, D. L. (2001). Laboring under the Sign of the New: Cultural Studies, 
Organizational Communication, and the Fallacy of the New Economy. 
Management Communication Quarterly, 15(2), 268278. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0893318901152006 
Cotoi, C. (2011). Neoliberalism: a Foucauldian perspective, 1(2), 109124. 
Craib, I. (1997). Social Constructionism as a Social Psychosis. Sociology, 31(1), 115. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0038038597031001002 
DAmico, F., Rehill, A., Knapp, M., Aguirre, E., Donovan, H., Hoare, Z.,  Orrell, M. 
(2015). Maintenance Cognitive Stimulation Therapy: An Economic Evaluation 
Within a Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical 
Directors Association, 16(1), 6370. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2014.10.020 
Daniels, K. J., Lamson, A. L., & Hodgson, J. (2007). An exploration of the marital 
relationship and Alzheimers disease: One couples story. Families, Systems, & 
Health, 25(2), 162177. http://doi.org/10.1037/1091-7527.25.2.162 
Davis, D. H. . (2004). Dementia: sociological and philosophical constructions. Social 
Science & Medicine, 58(2), 369378. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-
9536(03)00202-8 
Department for Constitutional Affairs (Ed.). (2007). Mental Capacity Act 2005: Code of 
Practice (2007 final ed.). London: TSO. 
Department of Health (2007). Putting People First: A shared vision and commitment to 
the transformation of adult social care. Retrieved March 3, 2016, from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130107105354/http://www.dh.gov.u
k/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_
081119.pdf 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 144 
Department of Health (2008). High quality care for all  NHS next stage review. 
Retrieved March 3, 2016, from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/22
8836/7432.pdf 
Department of Health (2009a). Dignity in Care Campaign. Retrieved March 3, 2016, 
http://www.dignityincare.org.uk/_library/Opinion_Leader_Final_Report_to_DH.d
oc.pdf	
Department of Health. (2009b). Living well with dementia: A National Dementia Strategy 
(Social Care/Partnership Working No. 11198). Retrieved from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/16
8220/dh_094051.pdf 
Department of Health. (2016a). The Prime Ministers challenge on dementia 2020. 
Retrieved April 20, 2016, from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/41
4344/pm-dementia2020.pdf 
Department of Health. (2016b, January). Policy paper: Joint declaration on post-
diagnostic dementia care and support. Retrieved March 3, 2016, from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dementia-post-diagnostic-care-and-
support/dementia-post-diagnostic-care-and-support 
Dolar, D. (1999). Where does power come from? New Formations, (35), 79-92. 
Donzelot, J., & Hurley, R. (1997). The policing of families (John Hopkins paperbacks ed). 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 145 
Drachman, D. A. (1974). Human Memory and the Cholinergic System: A Relationship to 
Aging? Archives of Neurology, 30(2), 113. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1974.00490320001001 
Dreyfus, H. L., Rabinow, P., & Foucault, M. (1983). Michel Foucault, beyond 
structuralism and hermeneutics (2nd ed). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Fanon, F. (2008). Black skin, white masks (New ed). London: Pluto-Press. 
Ferri, C. P., Prince, M., Brayne, C., Brodaty, H., Fratiglioni, L., Ganguli, M.,  
Scazufca, M. (2005). Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus study. 
The Lancet, 366(9503), 21122117. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)67889-0 
Foucault, M. (1965). Madness and Civilization: A history of insanity through the age of 
reason (first). London; New York: Pantheon Books. 
Foucault, M. (1991). Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison (Reprint). London: 
Penguin Books. 
Foucault, M. (2010). The birth of the clinic: an archaeology of medical perception (1. 
publ., reprinted). London: Routledge. 
Foucault, M., Burchell, G., Gordon, C., & Miller, P. (Eds.). (1991). The Foucault effect: 
studies in governmentality: with two lectures by and an interview with Michel 
Foucault. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Foucault, M., & Hurley, R. (1998). The will to knowledge (Amended reprint). London: 
Penguin Books. 
Foucault, M., Martin, L. H., Gutman, H., & Hutton, P. H. (Eds.). (1988). Technologies of 
the self: a seminar with Michel Foucault. Amherst: University of Massachusetts 
Press. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 146 
Foucault, M., Rabinow, P., & Hurley, R. (1997). The essential works of Michel Foucault, 
1954-1984. London: Allen Lane. 
Foucault, M., & Smith, A. M. S. (2002). Archaeology of knowledge. London: Routledge. 
Fox, P. (1989). From Senility to Alzheimers Disease: The Rise of the Alzheimers 
Disease Movement. The Milbank Quarterly, 67(1), 58. 
http://doi.org/10.2307/3350070 
Gergen, K. J. (1985). The social constructionist movement in modern psychology. 
American Psychologist, 40(3), 266275. http://doi.org/10.1037/0003-
066X.40.3.266 
Glendinning, S. (2011). Derrida: a very short introduction. Oxford; New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Glynos, J., Speed, E., & West, K. (2015). Logics of marginalisation in health and social 
care reform: Integration, choice, and provider-blind provision. Critical Social 
Policy, 35(1), 4568. http://doi.org/10.1177/0261018314545599 
Greenhalgh, T. (1997). How to read a paper. Papers that report diagnostic or screening 
tests. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 315(7107), 540543. 
Grosz, E. A. (1994). Volatile bodies: toward a corporeal feminism. St. Leonards, NSW: 
Allen & Unwin. 
Hacking, I. (1996). Memory sciences, memory politics. In P. Antze & M. Lambek (Eds.), 
Tense past: cultural essays in trauma and memory (pp. 6785). New York: 
Routledge. 
Harper, S., & Speed, E. (2012). Uncovering Recovery: The Resistible Rise of Recovery 
and Resilience, 6(1), 925. 
Haraway, D. J.  (1997). Modest witness: Feminism and technoscience. London: 
Psychology Press.	
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 147 
Harwood, R. H. (2012). Dementia for hospital physicians. Clinical Medicine, 12(1), 35
39. http://doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine`.12-1-35 
Hellstrom, I. (2005). We do things together: A case study of couplehood in dementia. 
Dementia, 4(1), 722. http://doi.org/10.1177/1471301205049188 
Hellstrom, I., Nolan, M., & Lundh, U. (2007). Sustaining `couplehood: Spouses 
strategies for living positively with dementia. Dementia, 6(3), 383409. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1471301207081571 
Hook, D. (2010). Foucault, psychology and the analytics of power. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
House of Parliament. (2010). The ageing population: Key issues for the 2010 Parliament. 
Retrieved May 22, 2016, from 
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/key-issues-for-the-new-
parliament/value-for-money-in-public-services/the-ageing-population/ 
House of Parliament. (2015). Key issues for the new Parliament 2015. Retrieved May 22, 
2016, from http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/key-issues-
parliament-2015/ 
Howarth, D. R. (2000). Discourse. Buckingham [England]; Philadelphia, PA: Open 
University Press. 
Huppert, F. A., Brayne, C., & OConnor, D. W. (Eds.). (1994). Dementia and normal 
aging. Cambridge; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 
Ishizaki, J., Meguro, K., Ohe, K., Kimura, E., Tsuchiya, E., Ishii, H.,  Yamadori, A. 
(2002). Therapeutic Psychosocial Intervention for Elderly Subjects With Very 
Mild Alzheimer Disease in a Community: The Tajiri Project: Alzheimer Disease 
& Associated Disorders, 16(4), 261269. http://doi.org/10.1097/00002093-
200210000-00008 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 148 
Jaeger, H.-M. (2007). Global Civil Society and the Political Depoliticization of Global 
Governance. International Political Sociology, 1(3), 257277. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-5687.2007.00017.x 
Jaspers, K. (1910). Eifersuchtswahn: Ein Beitrag zur Frage: Entwicklung einer 
Persnlichkeit oder Proze? Zeitschrift fr die gesamte Neurologie und 
Psychiatrie, 1(1), 567637. http://doi.org/10.1007/BF02895947 
Jewson, N. D. (2009). The disappearance of the sick-man from medical cosmology, 
1770-1870. International Journal of Epidemiology, 38(3), 622633. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyp180 
Katz, S. (1996). Disciplining old age: the formation of gerontological knowledge. 
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. 
Katz, S. (2012). Embodied memory: aging, neuroculture, and the genealogy of mind., 
(4(31)), 114. 
Kerlinger, F. N. (1973). Foundations of behavioral research (2d ed). New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston. 
Kitwood, T. M. (1997). Dementia reconsidered: the person comes first. Buckingham 
[England]; Philadelphia: Open University Press. 
Klein, A., Tobin, T., Salomon, A., & Dubois, J. (2008). A Statewide Profile of Abuse of 
Older Women  and the Criminal Justice Response (The National Institute of 
Justice (NIJ) funded No. 222459) (p. 93). US: Department of Justice. Retrieved 
from https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/222459.pdf 
Kraepelin, E. (2002). Clinical psychiatry: a textbook for students and physicians, 
abstracted and adapted from the 7th German edition of Kraepelins Lehrbuch der 
Psychiatrie, (electronic resource). EBSCOhost &  Diefendorf, A. R. 1871-1943. 
Lacan, J., & Sheridan, A. (2001). crits: a selection. London: Routledge. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 149 
Laclau, E., & Mouffe, C. (2014). Hegemony and socialist strategy: towards a radical 
democratic politics. London; New York: Verso. 
Locke, J. (1995). An essay concerning human understanding. Amherst, N.Y: Prometheus 
Books. 
Lowe, F. (2007). Colonial Object Relations: Going Undergroud Black-White 
Relationships. British Journal of Psychotherapy, 24(1), 2033. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-0118.2007.00061.x 
Maurer, K., & Maurer, U. (2003). Alzheimer: the life of a physician and the career of a 
disease. New York: Columbia University Press. 
McCosker, H., Barnard, A., & Gerber, R. (2001). Undertaking Sensitive Research: Issues 
and Strategies for Meeting the Safety Needs of All Participants, 2(1). 
Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust, Great Britain, Parliament, & House of 
Commons. (2013). Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public 
Inquiry. London: Stationery Office. 
Millen, N., & Walker, C. (2001). Overcoming the stigma of chronic illness: strategies for 
normalisation of a spoiled identity. Health Sociology Review, 10(2), 8997. 
http://doi.org/10.5172/hesr.2001.10.2.89 
Miller, P., & Rose, N. S. (2013). Governing the present: administering economic, social 
and personal life (Nachdr.). Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Moser, I. (2008). Making Alzheimers disease matter. Enacting, interfering and doing 
politics of nature. Geoforum, 39(1), 98110. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2006.12.007 
Mouffe, C. (Ed.). (2008). Art as a public issue: how art and its institutions reinvent the 
public dimension. Rotterdam: NAi Publ. [u.a.]. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 150 
Myles, J. F. (1983). Conflict, Crisis, and the Future of Old Age Security. The Milbank 
Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and Society, 61(3), 462. 
http://doi.org/10.2307/3349868 
National Dignity Council. (2016). Dignity in Care Campaign. Retrieved March 3, 2016, 
from http://www.dignityincare.org.uk/About/Dignity_in_Care_campaign/? 
Neno, R., & Neno, M. (2005). Identifying abuse in older people. Nursing Standard, 
20(3), 4347. http://doi.org/10.7748/ns2005.09.20.3.43.c3964 
NHS England. (2014). Data Protection Policy (pp. 112). NHS England. Retrieved from 
https://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/dpa-policy-1.pdf 
NICE. (2006). Dementia: supporting people with dementia and their carers in health and 
social care. Retrieved January 4, 2016, from 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg42/chapter/Introduction 
Office of the Public Guardian. (2013, June). Lasting Power of Attorney. Retrieved 
January 1, 2016, from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/make-a-
lasting-power-of-attorney 
OKeeffe, M. (2007). UK study of abuse and neglect of older people: prevelance survey 
report (Government Pubication). UK: London: National Centre for Social 
Research. 
Orrell, M., Aguirre, E., Spector, A., Hoare, Z., Woods, R. T., Streater, A.,  Russell, I. 
(2014). Maintenance cognitive stimulation therapy for dementia: single-blind, 
multicentre, pragmatic randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 204(6), 454461. http://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.113.137414 
Panu, M. (2009). Contextualizing family planning: truth, subject, and the other in the 
U.S. government. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 151 
Parker, I. (2014). Discourse dynamics: critical analysis for social and individual 
psychology. Retrieved from http://alltitles.ebrary.com/Doc?id=10832506 
Parker, I., & Gordo-Lpez, . J. (Eds.). (1999). Cyberpsychology. New York: Routledge. 
Parker, J. (2005). Constructing Dementia and Dementia Care: Daily Practices in a Day 
Care Setting. Journal of Social Work, 5(3), 261278. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1468017305058935 
Parker, R. G., & Aggleton, P. (Eds.). (2007). Culture, society and sexuality: a reader 
(Second Edition). London; New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
Poole NHS Foundation Trust. (2013). Hospital price list 2013/2014. Retrieved April 3, 
2016, from 
https://www.poole.nhs.uk/pdf/Poole%20Hospital%20Private%20Patient%20Price
s%202013_14%20IS.pdf 
Porter, R. (2010). Madness: a brief history (Nachdr.). Oxford: Univ. Press. 
Poster, M., & Laclau, E. (Eds.). (1993). Power and representation. In Politics, theory, and 
contemporary culture. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Potter, J., & Wetherell, M. (1987). Rawlinson's Three Axes of Structural Analysis: A 
useful framework for a Foucauldian Discourse Analysis. Aporia, 5(1), 6-12. 
Powers, P. (2013). Discourse and social psychology: beyond attitudes and behaviour. 
London; Newbury Park, Calif: Sage Publications. 
Public Health England. (2013). Free NHS health check: helping you prevent heart 
disease, stroke, diabetes, kidney disease, and dementia. Public Health England 
Publications. 
Rawlinson, M. C. (1987). Foucaults Strategy: Knowledge, Power, and the Specificity of 
Truth. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 12(4), 371395. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/jmp/12.4.371 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 152 
Richardson, J. T. E., Richardson, J. T. E., Potter, J., & Wiggins, S. (1996). Discursive 
psychology. In Handbook of qualitative research methods for psychology and the 
social sciences (pp. 7390). Leicester: British Psychological Society. 
Riggins, S. H., & Van Dijk, T. A. (Eds.). (1997). Political discourse and racism. In The 
language and politics of exclusion: others in discourse (pp. 3364). Thousand 
Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications. 
Rinker, A. G. (2009). Recognition and perception of elder abuse by prehospital and 
hospital-based care providers. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 48(1), 
110115. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.archger.2007.11.002 
Robertson, A. (1990). The Policies of Alzheimers Disease: A Case Study in Apocalyptic 
Demography. International Journal of Health Services, 20(3), 429442. 
http://doi.org/10.2190/C8AE-NYC1-2R98-MHP1 
Roos, N. P., & Shapiro, E. (1981). The Manitoba longitudinal study on aging: 
Preliminary findings on health care utilization by the elderly., 644657. 
Rose. (2007). Psychology as a social science. Presented at the BIOS Centre for the Study 
of Bioscience, Biomedicine, Biotechnology and Society, Department of 
Sociology: London School of Economics and Political Science. 
Rose, N. (1985). The psychological complex: psychology, politics and society in 
England; 1869 - 1939. London: Routledge & Paul. 
Rose, N. (1998). Inventing our selves: psychology, power and personhood (1. paperback 
ed). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Sabat, S. R., & Harr, R. (Eds.). (1993). The construction and deconstruction of self in 
Alzheimers Disease. The British Journal of Social Work, 23(4), 416418. 
Said, E., & Foucault, M. (1974). An Ethics of Language. Diacritics, 4(2), 28. 
http://doi.org/10.2307/464989 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 153 
Saussure, F. de, Bally, C., Sechehaye, A., & Riedlinger, A. (1986). Course in general 
linguistics. LaSalle, Ill: Open Court. 
Schneider, D. J. (2005). The psychology of stereotyping (Paperback ed). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Scoville, W., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal 
lesions, (20 (1)), 1121. 
Silva, E. B., Roseneil, S., & Mann, K. (Eds.). (1996). Unpalatable Choices and 
Inadaquate Families: Lone Mothers and the Underclass Debate. In Good enough 
mothering?: feminist perspectives on lone motherhood (pp. 191210). London; 
New York: Routledge. 
Sontag, S. (1989). AIDS and its metaphors. London: Penguin Books. 
Spector, A., Davies, S., Woods, B., & Orrell, M. (2000). Reality orientation for dementia: 
a systematic review of the evidence of effectiveness from randomized controlled 
trials. The Gerontologist, 40(2), 206212. 
Spector, A., Thorgrimsen, L., Woods, B., Royan, L., Davies, S., Butterworth, M., & 
Orrell, M. (2003). Efficacy of an evidence-based cognitive stimulation therapy 
programme for people with dementia: Randomised controlled trial. The British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 183(3), 248254. http://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.183.3.248 
Steeman, E., de Casterle, B. D., Godderis, J., & Grypdonck, M. (2006). Living with 
early-stage dementia: a review of qualitative studies. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 54(6), 722738. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2006.03874.x 
Strauss, G. (1968). Human Relations1968 Style. Industrial Relations, 7(3), 262276. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-232X.1968.tb01080.x 
Streater, A., Spector, A., Aguirre, E., Hoe, J., Hoare, Z., Woods, R.,  Orrell, M. (2012). 
Maintenance Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) in practice: study protocol for 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 154 
a randomized controlled trial. Trials, 13(1), 91. http://doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-
13-91 
Svanstrom, R. (2004). Living with Dementia Yields a Heteronomous and Lost Existence. 
Western Journal of Nursing Research, 26(6), 671687. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0193945904265920 
Tamboukou, M., & Ball, S. J. (2003). Genealogy and ethnography: Fruitful encounters or 
dangerous liaisons. Dangerous encounters., (17), 136. 
Tanggaard, L. (2007). The Research Interview as Discourses Crossing Swords: The 
Researcher and Apprentice on Crossing Roads. Qualitative Inquiry, 13(1), 160
176. http://doi.org/10.1177/1077800406294948 
Thane, P., & Filby, L. (Eds.). (2010). Unequal Britain: equalities in Britain since 1945. 
London; New York: Continuum. 
The Guardian,  a. (2016, February 18). Unpaid carers cant keep on plugging gaps in the 
NHS and social care: More people need care than get it, and the gap is growing. 
Support for family carers is vital. The Guardian. Retrieved from 
http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/18/unpaid-carers-gaps-
nhs-social-care-act 
The Stationary Office. (2014). The Care Act: Chapter 23. Retrieved January 1, 2016, 
from http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/23/contents/enacted/data.htm 
The World Health Organisation. (2012). WHO member states disease and injury regional 
mortality estimates, 20002012. Retrieved May 22, 2016, from 
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/estimates/en/index1.html 
Torfing, J. (1999). New theories of discourse: Laclau, Mouffe, and Zizek. Oxford, UK; 
Malden, Mass: Blackwell Publishers. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 155 
Torrant, J. P. (2011). The Contemporary Family and its Representations. In J. P. Torrant 
(Ed.), The Material Family (pp. 132). Rotterdam: SensePublishers. Retrieved 
from http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/978-94-6091-630-4_1 
Turner, B. S. (1987). Medical power and social knowledge. London; Beverly Hills: Sage 
Publications. 
Van der Flier, W. M. (2005). Epidemiology and risk factors of dementia. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 76(suppl_5), v2v7. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2005.082867 
Willig, C. (2013). Introducing qualitative research in psychology (3. ed). Maidenhead: 
Open Univ. Press. 
World Health Organisation. (2006). Neurological disorders: a public health approach. 
Retrieved May 22, 2016, from 
http://www.who.int/mental_health/neurology/chapter_3_a_neuro_disorders_publi
c_h_challenges.pdf 
Wu, Y.-T., Fratiglioni, L., Matthews, F. E., Lobo, A., Breteler, M. M. B., Skoog, I., & 
Brayne, C. (2016). Dementia in western Europe: epidemiological evidence and 
implications for policy making. The Lancet Neurology, 15(1), 116124. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00092-7 
Young, R., & Foucault, M. (Eds.). (1981). Part One. The Order of Discourse (Chapter 3). 
In Untying the text: a post-structuralist reader (pp. 4879). Boston: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
iek, S. (2008). The sublime object of ideology (Nachdr.). London: Verso. 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 156 
End Notes 
1 To elaborate on discourse, Foucaults definition and study of discourse may be thought 
of as an attempt to restore materiality and power to what has remained the 
largely linguistic concept of discourse (Hook, 2001; p.522). For instance, 
Foucault (1981) states in every society the production of discourse is at once 
controlled, selected, organised and redistributed by a...number of procedures (p. 
52). Foucaults definition of discourse may be thought of as containing a micro 
and macro level which interact relationally to one another. The micro concerns, 
the finest capillary levels of power that is at more precise localised levels, 
usually institutional interfaces e.g. memory assessment clinics may be a good 
example (Hook, 2007; pp. 63-64). The macro, systematized vehicles of thought 
or knowledge, which are over determined and complimentary to producing and 
generating power-effects for organisational, commercial, government, and 
medico-therapeutic settings (Hook, 2007, p. 65-67).  
2 For those aged sixty-five, one in fourteen are diagnosed with dementia; for those aged 
eighty, one in six are diagnosed with dementia. See, Alzheimers Society. 
Dementia UK: Update (PDF Download Available). (2014). Retrieved May 22, 
2016, from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/270904426_Dementia_UK_up 
3	The analysis in this thesis has in no way intended to ignore distress experienced by 
people with diagnoses of dementia (from here onwards referred to as PWDD) or 
their marital partners; or to dismiss professional or social organisations efforts to 
alleviate distress; it is a contribution towards supporting these efforts from an 
alternative angle.   
4 Berrios (1981a; 1981b; 1987; 1992) work is not written or understood from Foucauldian 
discourse perspective, and is adapted for this genealogy/thesis. His works are 
argued to be particularly useful and thorough given the multiple translations from 
different languages and sources, which would go far and beyond the scope of this 
thesis with time restraints. Berrios (1981a; 1981b; 1987; 1992) does not account 
for the power and knowledge relations involved in psychiatry as a political 
discipline. He also argues demence is a stable concept that readily maps onto 
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 157 
contemporary understandings of dementia, whereas, the opposite has been argued 
in this thesis (Berrios, 1987).  
5 A description and a critique of ontology can be found in Levinass (1998) essay, Is 
Ontology Fundemental? Levinas described the philosophical foundations of 
ontology, which have given the notion a fundamental place in revealing the 
disclosedness or opening of being in relation to dominant horizons of being (e.g. 
Heidegger). Nonetheless, Levanas (1998) epistemologically critiques how 
understanding being is a way of being at the same time, which has become 
dominant in certain schools of thinking, perception, knowledge and language.  
6 Other policies not mentioned in relation to the role of the informal carer applicable to 
the context of dementia, may include: Putting People First: A shared vision and 
commitment to the transformation of adult social care (Department of Health, 
2007). High quality care for all  NHS next stage review, (Department of Health, 
2008). Dignity in Care Campaign (Department of Health, 2009a).  
6 The concept of the baby boom has been used to describe a boost in birth rate after the 
Second World War in predominantly western countries and the America. This was 
between the 1940s and 1960s. This is also sometimes understood as a time when 
there was a rejection of more traditional family values (e.g. Panu, 2009). Those 
diagnosed with dementia in 2016 between ages sixty and eighty may be born 
within or around this time frame, and may be described as baby boomers. 
7 It is important to note that this is not to present counter-discourses as being more or less 
correct than other, whereby falling into a liberal frame of freedom, choice and 
progression, it is rather to highlight that there is complex web of competing 
discourses that have been taken up by subjects in a particular social contexts. 
8 Divorce rates rose dramatically from the 1960s to a peak of 14.2 per 1,000 married 
people but declined slightly to 12.9 per 1,000 in 1998 (Office for National 
Statistics, 2000). 
9  The use of the term constructivism and constructionism can be seen to be used 
interchangeably by different researchers in the field; where some people may 
define constructivism as being separate from social constructionism, the former 
being more interested in how human beings make sense of social phenomena and 
thus, create social phenomena (it incorporates more of the individual level), for 
others like Burr (2003) the terms are more tightly linked.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 158 
10 Discourse, as defined by Foucault, refers to: ways of constituting knowledge, together 
with the social practices, forms of subjectivity and power relations which inhere 
in such knowledges and relations between them (Hook, 2010). Discourses are 
more than ways of thinking and producing meaning. 
11 Rawlinson (1987) also helpfully clarifies a genealogy: [It] reveals that the 
epistemological and the political, knowledge and power, are ineluctably 
intertwined, so that truth is not so much discovered  as if it lay ready made in an 
objective reality patiently awaiting to articulate the voice of science  as produced 
according to regular and identifiable procedures that determine in any given 
historical situation what it is possible to say, who is authorised to speak, what can 
become of an object of scientific enquiry, and how knowledge is to be tested, 
accumulated and dispersed (p.372). 
12	Behuniak (2011) uses films is analysed from a discourse perspective however is not 
strictly a genealogical analysis. The illustration is to highlight that genealogies do 
not just include policies or written forms of data. 	
13 Although an oversimplification, Foucaults early work focused on how historical, 
cultural, organizational factors are interrelated with dominant or prevailing 
discourses (e.g. exploring madness and medicine). He illustrates the episteme 
referring to particular periods of thought. For instance, after the Enlightenment, 
there became a category of man and an arrangement of disciplinary technologies 
as discussed that was a shift in thought. Foucaults later work may be thought of 
as a more intricate problematizing of the complex relationship between of power 
and knowledge, as well as a turn towards individual subjectivity ability for 
resistance (see Howarth, 2000; Hook, 2007). Nonetheless, some authors contest 
this and state Foucault was always concerned with subjectivity and there is not 
such a distinct divide as often depicted (e.g. see, Cook, 1993).  
14 For a concise overview of critiques on Foucaults work see Kelly, M. G. (2010). The 
political philosophy of Michel Foucault. Routledge (pp. 124-148). 
15	Matrimony may be thought of as being strongest for a particular generation.	Figures 
(Office for National Statistics, 2012) present marriage was highest amongst adults 
above the age of sixtyfive. Where people are living longer, the rate of those 
married over aged sixty-five increased by approximately 25% between 2011-12.  
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 159 
Divorce was more common in those aged 20-40 years. Age UK presented that in 
2012 among men in their late 60s, 3,520 remarried and among women 1,990 
remarried (in relation to widowing of a prior spouse though in few cases divorce). 
This presents the tradition and discourse surrounding marriage is important for 
this generation of older adults. 
17 Simon (2005) depicts a similar account relating to the other: Not only does the 
panoptic machine make one visible but it also hides the operations (the motives, 
practices and ethics) of the supposed viewer, to know one is being seen without 
being able to see carries with it an uncertainty that becomes a source of anxiety, 
discomfort and terror Who is watching? Why are they watching? What will 
they do? (p.5) 
18	The expansion of the diagnostic criteria (e.g. between 1952 and 1994 respectively the 
Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM) grew from 130 to 886 pages, and diagnostic 
categories tripled (Blashenfield & Fuller, 1996). 
19 The Birth of Biopolitics, a course delivered by Foucault on this subject, was 
translated in English only in 2008. This is probably one of the reasons why two of 
the most powerful contemporary accounts of neoliberalism are more recently 
formulated (e.g. Rose, 2006). Prior to this work Harvey (*) discussed the 1970s 
and Fordism  the pact among nation state, corporate capitalism based on mass 
production, consumption and democracy  and post-Fordism, characterized the 
emergence of entirely new sectors of production, new ways of providing financial 
services, new markets, and, above all, intensified commercial, technological, and 
organizational innovation, giving rise to a vast surge in employment and entirely 
new industrial groups. 
20	Foucault does direct clear critique towards medicine, human sciences and psychiatry. 
